@@@@@


doc= 21968


Perkins, Sir Christopher (1542/3-1622), diplomat, was born in Berkshire, most likely at Ufton Court. Little is known about his family background except that he described himself as a 'near kinsman' of Francis Parkins in his petition to acquire the latter's recusancy fines in 1599 ('Salisbury MSS', 9.76). According to the Winchester College lists, he was twelve when he was admitted in 1555. 
In 1596 Perkins explained to Sir Robert Cecil, principal secretary, that he had been educated first at Winchester and then at the University of Oxford. It is commonly believed that he attended New College because of its traditional connection with Winchester, but there is no evidence to support this. Perkins graduated BA on 7 April 1565. Presumably about this time he decided to leave England for religious reasons. He entered the Society of Jesus in Rome on 21 October 1566. After completion of his Jesuit noviceship in 1569, he studied philosophy at the Roman College. He was transferred to the Jesuit college in Dillingen in Germany to study theology in May 1572. He was ordained priest in Augsburg in April 1575. The Jesuit Henry More, the first historian of the order in England, claimed that Perkins 'heard theology at Dillingen with sufficient profit to get himself employed on occasion as assistant lecturer to James [Gregorio] of Valentia at Ingolstadt' (More, 33). In early 1579 Perkins was teaching philosophy at the University of Ingolstadt, but by November, then stationed at the Jesuit college in Innsbruck, he requested permission to work at the English College in Rome. 
The Jesuit mission to England opened with great fanfare in April 1580. Years later, Robert Persons recalled that he and William Allen deemed Perkins fit for the mission. With the approval of the father-general of the order, Everard Mercurian, they wrote to Perkins about this assignment. To their astonishment, Perkins replied: 'that he would go willingly; but that if he went it would be advisable that he should have dispensation from the Pope for certain things, as, for example, to go to the Protestant churches and to take in a good sense the oath of the Queen's ecclesiastical supremacy and other like things.' Persons and Allen attributed the reply 'to the simplicity of the people with whom he [Perkins] lived, or to the little information he possessed about English affairs' and clung to the hope that he would eventually embark on the mission ('Memoirs', 101). As late as 16 June 1581, Persons, now in London, still expected Perkins's imminent arrival. 
The reasons for Perkins's departure from the Jesuits are unclear. In July 1580 Peter Canisius, father provincial of southern Germany, complained about his troublesome behaviour and made it clear that he would not welcome him back into his province if he left for Rome. Perkins set out for Italy none the less. On 30 September he was in Milan on his way back to Germany (whether he had already visited Rome is not known). In November he found the doors of the Jesuit community in Hall near Innsbruck closed to him: Canisius had carried out his threat. Over the next year Perkins wandered from college to college in the Jesuit province of the Rhineland. On 14 October 1581 he was dismissed from the society. According to the official register in the 'Archivum Romanum Societatis Iesu', he requested dismissal, but Persons contended Perkins was expelled because of 'bad conduct' ('Memoirs', 101). 
After leaving the Jesuits, Perkins resided in Venice and Rome. There is no evidence that he had abandoned either his priesthood or his allegiance to the Church of Rome. Indeed, his good standing is implicit in his successful intervention in the case of William Cecil, grandson of William Cecil, Lord Burghley, the lord treasurer. Most likely between July and November of 1585, Cecil visited Rome where he encountered problems with the Inquisition. A. F. Pollard blamed 'an indiscreet expression of protestant opinions', but Godfrey Goodman and Anthony Wood claimed that he was a victim of vindictive exiles at the English College seeking revenge for Burghley's role in the execution and imprisonment of Catholics ('DNB'). In some unexplained way, Perkins interceded, despite his later claim that he too was in peril in Rome because he professed himself the queen's 'faithful servant', and accompanied Cecil back to Padua and not to England as many suggest (Wernham, 2.449). Cecil, however, did carry with him a manuscript written by Perkins in Venice about the Jesuits. Unfortunately the pamphlet was never published and no extant copy has been identified. While he was on the continent, Perkins acquired a doctorate from an unknown university. 
By October 1588 Dr Perkins was communicating with Sir Francis Walsingham, principal secretary, and serving as his informant. He was engaged on business 'in behalf of the Queen's subjects' and had been received, apparently at Elbing, 'as coming from the Queen of England'. He informed Walsingham that he was about to leave for Poland. In reply to the secretary's query about returning to England, Perkins considered his religion a hindrance: 'the laws as to it he cannot approve, though he admires the political institutions and would enjoy them, but will not be a judge or disturber of the laws of religion' ('Salisbury MSS', 3.411). He abhorred the Spanish faction among English Catholics but had not abandoned Roman Catholicism. More likely he stressed his aversion to the Spanish faction because of suspicions generated about him by the alchemists Sir Edward Kelley and Dr John Dee. 
Perkins met Kelley and Dee in Prague. In June 1589 Kelley accused him of being a papal emissary and of complicity in a plot to assassinate Elizabeth I. In his diary Dee recorded that on 5 August Edmond Hilton departed for England 'with my letters to disclose the treason of Perkins' ('Private Diary', 31). By September Perkins had returned to England, perhaps to defend himself against their accusations. On 21 September the privy council instructed John Young, bishop of Rochester, to receive into his custody 'one -- -- Perkins, a student heretofore in Oxford, a man learned and a Doctour of the Civill Lawe' ('APC', 18.136). On 12 March 1590 Perkins wrote to Walsingham that he hoped that Kelley would 'deal sincerely' with him, a hope that lacked solid foundation if Kelley followed 'the counsel of his friends and ghostly fathers the Jesuits'. Moreover, Perkins produced in his defence a letter from Sigismund III Vasa, king of Poland (ironically a fervent supporter of the Society of Jesus and the Counter-Reformation), and anticipated that Burghley 'would lend his assistance to deliver the innocent from the malicious practice of common enemies' ('CSP dom.', '1581-90', 653). By 9 May he had been exonerated and was granted $300 for a journey to Poland and Prussia on the queen's service. Perhaps, at this time, he demonstrated his innocence by conforming to the Church of England. 
Throughout the early 1590s Perkins served on numerous diplomatic missions: special ambassador to Poland, Denmark, and the Hanse cities (May 1590 - July 1591); to the empire and various German states (April-September 1593); and to Poland (December 1594 - June 1595). Periodically he begged for preferment 'to some living without cure', so that he could continue to serve the queen ('Salisbury MSS', 4.583). However, such preferment was not offered. With no more income than the annual stipend of 100 marks promised in December 1591, Perkins suspected that the government discriminated against him, despite his years of service and loyalty, because of his foreign education and his former Catholicism. 'Some endeavour to insense that I am no great matter by birth, other that I am moved by the dregs of superstitious Papistical impressions' even though, as he claimed on 14 December 1597, he had renounced Catholicism 'as soon as he could judge thereof' (ibid., 7.516). Through the intercession of the Cecils, he secured the deanery of Carlisle in 1596. According to Goodman, Perkins anticipated a quiet life in the country but 'being all alone and having no employment, he became melancholy, for remedy whereof he did resolve to come up to London' (Goodman, 1.331). 
On 20 February 1597 Perkins was admitted a member of Gray's Inn. On 16 September, presumably through the intercession of Cecil, he was elected MP for Ripon, West Riding of Yorkshire. He was returned from the same district in 1601. He continued to serve as special ambassador to Denmark (and made the journey three times in the final years of Elizabeth's reign: May-June 1598, September-December 1598, and March-July 1600) and as the government's principal adviser on mercantile matters with the Baltic countries. Two aspirations were eventually achieved: he was appointed master of requests extraordinary in 1598 and Latin secretary on 21 August 1601. 
James VI and I increased Perkins's annuity to $100 and, on 23 July 1603, knighted him in Whitehall. In James's first parliament in 1604 Perkins was returned as MP for Morpeth, Northumberland, again through the influence of Cecil. On 20 March 1605 he was admitted commoner of the College of Advocates. After years of acting as deputy to Sir Daniel Donne, Perkins succeeded him as master of requests in 1617. 
Goodman, More, and Wood claimed that Perkins, on the basis of his friendship with Richard Bancroft, archbishop of Canterbury, helped formulate the oath of allegiance to 'determine' the loyalty of Catholics after the Gunpowder Plot of 1605, a concern that earlier lay behind his refusal to serve on the English mission unless he could take an oath to his queen. Despite Persons's accusation that Perkins exercised the 'office of Inquisitor against Catholics' ('Memoirs', 101), the latter had little involvement in the persecution of his former co-religionists. He served on parliamentary committees concerned with penal laws, examined at least one Jesuit priest, William Wright, after his arrest in 1607, and discussed religion with Sir Tobie Matthew and Francis Walsingham (alias John Fennell), as they abandoned the Church of England in favour of the Church of Rome, but there is no record that he betrayed Catholics, lay or clergy. None the less, Catholics spread rumours that he was an 'atheist' and 'given wholly to gluttony and lechery, to feasting and women' ('Salisbury MSS', 14.42), or, in the case of Matthew, that Perkins was homosexual: 'Now this Sir Christopher Perkins loved music very much, and had a boy whom he was yet suspected to love more' (Matthew, 70). 
On 5 November 1617 Perkins married Anne, daughter of Anthony Beaumont of Glenmore, Leicestershire, and widow of James Brett of Hoby, Leicestershire. She was the sister of Mary Villiers, countess of Buckingham, the mother of George Villiers, duke of Buckingham. Goodman attributed this strange marriage to ambition. However, Perkins married her on the condition that he was not obliged to pay her debts. This clause so outraged Buckingham that he vowed that Perkins would rise no higher. Perkins did not -- but whether that was because of Buckingham's intervention or Perkins's old age is not known. Suggestions that Anne was his second wife because of the mention of a 'Lady Parkins' in 1611-12 seem to be unfounded ('CSP dom.', '1611-18', 107). It is highly doubtful that the wife of Perkins would have sent a daughter to a Roman Catholic convent on the continent at that date. 
Although not a rich man, Perkins was not penurious in his final years. Brian Levack evaluated his annual income to be at least $450, with two manors and investments in various mercantile operations. Perkins's will was dated 30 August 1620. According to Goodman, he left his wife as little as possible so that 'he might revenge himself on the kindred' (Goodman, 1.335). Anthony Bright was his heir and sole executor -- and the recipient of a small estate. Other beneficiaries were Westminster Abbey and the poor of the parish, Gray's Inn, Doctors' Commons, the Clothworkers' Company, and the University of Oxford. He mentioned no relatives but the children of his sister and his wife. Perkins died at the end of August 1622 and was buried on 1 September on the north side of the long aisle in Westminster Abbey. Commenting on his death, John Chamberlain wrote that Perkins 'was said to be a papist, or Jesuit, a doctor, a dean, a master of Requests, a knight, and what not' (Birch, 2.332). 


@@@@@


doc= 21969


Perkins, Henry (bap. 1777, d. 1855), book collector and brewer, was baptized on 2 January 1777 at St Swithin London Stone, London, the son of John Perkins (1729/30-1812) and his wife, Amelia, widow of Timothy Bevan. John Perkins was the chief clerk of the Anchor Brewery in Southwark, which he was credited with having saved from demolition during the Gordon riots of 1780 by a judicious offer of porter to an angry mob. The following year, in partnership with his wife's Quaker relatives David Barclay, Robert Barclay, and Sylvanus Bevan, he bought the business for some $135,000. It was of this sale that Dr Johnson commented, 'we are not here to sell a parcel of boilers and vats, but the potentiality of growing rich beyond the dreams of avarice' (Cockes and Cook, 16). Johnson's friend Hester Thrale (later Piozzi), the wife of the brewery's late owner, Henry Thrale, gave assistance to Perkins with the purchase, and in 1790 she arranged for the celebrated Samuel Parr to tutor two of Perkins's sons -- almost certainly Henry and his younger brother 
The brewery continued to prosper and, as if in defiance of Hester Thrale's remark, the Perkins brothers spent much of their wealth on the accumulation of rare and valuable books. Henry, who was a fellow of the Linnean, Geological, and Horticultural societies, began collecting in the early 1820s, when he was resident at Springfield, near Tooting, Surrey; later, about 1836, he moved to Hanworth Park, Middlesex. His agents were John and Arthur Arch of 61 Cornhill, London, and his most significant bulk purchase was of items from the collection of John 'Dog' Dent (1750-1826). Perkins's library was not notably extensive, but it included two copies of the Gutenberg 'Bible' (one paper, one vellum); a first edition of the Latin 'Bible' (1462); a Coverdale 'Bible' (1835); the first four Shakespeare folios; several works from the press of Caxton; and some fine illuminated manuscripts, among them John Lydgate's 'Sege of Troy' ('c'.1425). Perkins had married Susannah Latham on 2 April 1803; they had one son and three daughters, and she apparently predeceased him. He died at Dover on 15 April 1855, whereupon his eighth share in the brewery and his books passed to his son, Algernon ('bap'. 20 December 1808). After the latter's death in 1870, the library was dispersed; the 865 lots in the sale (held on 3-6 June 1873) raised nearly $25,000, the largest amount hitherto realized for a collection of its size. One commentator, writing in 1892, ventured that it was 'in certain respects the most valuable ever brought together' (Kearney). 
Frederick Perkins's collection was larger but less distinguished: its chief ornaments were the first four Shakespeare folio editions (not to be outdone by his brother), and a number of separate plays in quarto, including six first editions. A fifteenth-century copy of Chaucer's 'Canterbury Tales' and several illuminated manuscripts also featured. With his wife, also named Susannah, whom he had married before February 1803, he had at least one son, Frederick Oswald Perkins ('bap'. 8 May 1804), who succeeded to his interest in the brewery. Perkins died at his residence at Chipstead Place, Kent, on 10 October 1860; the subsequent book sale of 2086 lots, held on 10 July 1889, raised $8222 7's'. 


@@@@@


doc= 21970


Perkins, John (d. 1545?), legal writer, is said by Wood to have been 'born of genteel parents' and to have studied grammar and logic at Oxford (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.147), though whether he had any direct evidence for these assertions is unclear. If the Master Walbeiff whom Perkins referred to as his old master may be identified as John Waldboeuf, an official in Brecknockshire, then an origin in south Wales seems likely. Perkins was admitted to the Inner Temple about 1518, when he was assigned a chamber in 'Le Lane Syde', and called to the bar in due course. There is nothing to suggest that he had much to do thereafter with the affairs of the inn, which in 1530 discharged him from all offices except those of steward and reader, and in 1539 sued him for outstanding dues. In fact he never did read and did not become a bencher (as stated in some sources), and no contemporary evidence has been found of the extensive practice claimed for him by Wood. Indeed, there was a rumour -- which Perkins felt obliged to deny as a slander in 1537 -- that his 'heels was turned upward' in Westminster Hall twenty years earlier (TNA: PRO, SP 1/115, fol. 110'v'), a punishment meted out to dishonest attorneys rather than barristers. 
Certainly by the later 1530s Perkins was residing and practising in Oxford, where he became a thorn in the side of the university and Osney Abbey. In his later years he became mentally unbalanced. He wrote a long letter to Cromwell in 1537 proposing a means of suppressing the northern rising by a combination of espionage and terror, such as killing women and children, and a scheme for dissolving and remodelling on secular lines the colleges at Oxford and Cambridge, each of which would be required to do away with academical dress and raise and maintain a contingent of archers and halberdiers. A flimsy accusation of treason and unmentionable vices which he simultaneously flung against two local abbots led to imprisonment, banishment from Oxford, and an end as obscure as his beginning. Bale said he died in 1545, and Wood conjectured (probably wrongly) that he was buried in Temple Church. 
Despite his disturbed professional and personal life, Perkins was a household name for generations of law students by reason of his little book on land law, called 'Perkins' Profitable Book', which first appeared (in law French) in 1528 under the Latin title 'Perutilis tractatus magistri Johannis Parkins interioris Templi socii'. A manuscript version in the British Library (Hargrave MS 244), fairly copied but lacking the last page or two, seems to be more or less coeval with the first printing. There were three further editions in French, and then an English translation in 1555 ('A Verie Profitable Booke Treating of the Lawes of this Realme') which went through seventeen editions or reprintings before 1660, was again reprinted in 1757, enjoyed a Dublin edition in 1792, and reached its final form in a new edition (called the fifteenth), with notes by Richard J. Greening of the Inner Temple, in 1827. There is a different English translation by Gilbert Trobridge, admitted to the Middle Temple in 1594, in the British Library (Harley MS 5035). The English versions are divided into eleven chapters (dealing with grants, deeds, feoffments, exchanges, dower, curtesy, wills, devises, surrenders, reservations, and conditions) and 845 numbered sections. The 'Profitable Book' was intended as a kind of supplement to Littleton's 'Tenures', dealing chiefly with points of conveyancing which were not to be found in Littleton, and it does not therefore have the coherence or elegance of Littleton's great work. It nevertheless has a thoughtful jurisprudential preface, is clearly written, and was considered authoritative. Coke praised it as witty and learned, though in 1600 William Fulbeck offered the more severe opinion that 'it might be wished that he had written with less sharpness of wit, so he had discoursed with more depth of judgment' (Fulbeck, 72). 


@@@@@


doc= 21971


Perkins, Joseph (bap. 1657), poet, was baptized on 6 May 1657 at Slimbridge, Gloucestershire, the son of George Perkins. He matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 16 July 1675, and graduated BA in 1679. After this his career must be reconstructed from his works. 
Perkins became a chaplain in the navy, and sailed to the Mediterranean in the 'Norfolk' under Admiral Edward Russell (afterwards earl of Orford). He was cashiered for having, it was alleged, brought a false accusation of theft against a naval officer, and his response was a series of publications in 1697. 'Capellanus regiae cuiusdam navis' (1697) set out the terms of his grievances in verse, and he also published several Latin elegies, including the one he had written in 1694 for the death of Admiral Russell from illness, the occasion for which had been spoiled when Russell unexpectedly recovered. At the same time he published three texts with links to Tunbridge Wells: an open letter remonstrating with the church authorities, 'who denied him the use of the pulpit there', a poem composed extempore on a musical contest at Tunbridge Wells on 9 July 1697, and a Latin poem celebrating the ladies who accompanied Queen Anne on her visit there in the same year. 
In the succeeding years Perkins printed various further sermons and elegies. In 1707 another burst of publications included a collection of poetry: 'The Poet's Fancy, in a Love-Letter to Galatea, or any other Fair Lady, in English and Latin'. He also printed a sermon, on the title-page of which it is claimed that Perkins 'heard the voice of an angel or spirit speaking to him two several times, in one night'. 
Perkins's last known work is an elegy on the death of Thomas Ken, published in Bristol in 1711. He styled himself the White Poet and the Latin Laureate, but seems to have been largely unsuccessful in his quests for patronage. 


@@@@@


doc= 21972


Perkins, Loftus (1834-1891), mechanical engineer, was born on 8 May 1834 in Great Coram Street, London, the son of Angier March Perkins (1799-1881), engineer, and his wife, Julia Georgiana Brown. Probably apprenticed in 1848 to his father, in 1853-4 he went to New York to practise on his own account. (Jacob Perkins ['see under 'Perkins, Angier March], Loftus's grandfather, had come from New England and the Perkins family was still numerous in that area.) After returning to England he remained with his father until 1862, then spent four years in business at Hamburg and Berlin, designing and executing heating installations for buildings in various parts of the continent. He again returned to England in 1866 and entered into partnership with his father, trading as A. M. Perkins & Son, a style which continued until his father's death. 
Perkins inherited his grandfather's inventive brilliance, plus a greater appreciation of the practical difficulties involved in high-pressure engineering. He took out a large number of patents, the first, in 1859, relating to a steam engine designed to operate at 600 lb per square inch. His 1872 patent for gunmetal piston rings was a most important advance for engineering. By 1874 the British army had fifty-six of Perkins's horse-drawn mobile steam ovens to feed troops on the march; these were known to the soldiers as 'Polly Perkins'. His commercial baking ovens based on his steam heating system, 'the stopped-end tube', were widely used in bakeries. In 1871-3 Perkins made successful trials with a tractor powered by high-pressure steam, and at the 1873 International Exhibition in London he demonstrated his noiseless road engine which travelled at 8 m.p.h. His 70 ton yacht 'Anthracite', driven by engines working with steam at 500 lb pressure, travelled across the Atlantic and back in 1880, consuming only 25 tons of coal. In 1883 Mrs Perkins launched the steamship 'Express' on the Thames; 160 feet in length, with a Perkins 800 hp quadruple compound engine and speed of 14 knots, it was licensed to carry 677 passengers on the river and 345 at sea. Many engineers came to inspect it. 'Express' was later sold for midnight sun cruises in Norway, proof that high-pressure steam was both safe and economical. 
Perkins's experiments in refrigeration led him to design and patent in 1888 his Arktos cold chamber, suitable for preserving meat and other foodstuffs. It functioned entirely without moving parts or valves by what is now known as the automatic ammonia absorption system. This was his last major achievement, and the long hours through which he nursed it to perfection contributed to the breakdown of his health. Perkins became a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1861 and of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1881. His wife, Emily Patton ('b'. 1837/8), came from New York; their sons Loftus Patton Perkins ('b'. 1867) and Ludlow Patton Perkins (1872-1928) joined their father in business. The firm passed from family control after Perkins's death and subsequently amalgamated with Joseph Baker, Sons & Co., as Baker Perkins. Perkins died on 27 April 1891 at his home, 148 Abbey Road, Kilburn, London, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 1 May. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 21973


Perkins, William (1558-1602), theologian and Church of England clergyman, was born at Marston Jabbett in the parish of Bulkington, Warwickshire. His parents, Thomas and Anna, both outlived him. While his father's vocation is unknown, the family apparently had sufficient means to enrol William in June 1577 as a pensioner at Christ's College, Cambridge. He graduated BA there in 1581 and proceeded MA in 1584. 
Perkins's early adulthood at Cambridge was apparently marked by moral laxity and dissipation. Indeed, one possibly apocryphal story has it that he reformed his life after hearing a Cambridge woman say to her child, 'Hold your tongue, or I will give you to drunken Perkins yonder' (Haller, 64). Some have speculated that during his years of undergraduate debauchery Perkins may have fathered a daughter out of wedlock, but the rumour cannot be confirmed; there is also speculation regarding his youthful flirtation with astrology, an encounter which may explain his vehement opposition to astrology in his mature years. But although scholars disagree as to the nature of Perkins's reformation of life, it is generally acknowledged that probably between 1581 and 1584, and concurrently with his taking up of the study of theology, he made a religious decision which shaped his future vocation within the Church of England. 
Perkins was recognized as an able and popular advocate of that Calvinist doctrine common among 'the group of moderate Puritans' in Cambridge, 'a spiritual brotherhood' which included his tutor and lifelong friend, Laurence Chaderton, and Richard Greenham. His particular version of Calvinism was similar to that of such second-generation continental Calvinist theologians as Theodore Beza, Girolamo Zanchi, and Zacharias Ursinus, who 'faced with a resurgent Rome, were concerned to weld the protestant case into a coherent and self-consistent whole' (Lake, 'Moderate Puritans', 218-19). 
Employing a style which modern historians have described as 'denunciatory', Perkins preached first and briefly to the prisoners in Cambridge gaol, and soon after as lecturer at St Andrew's Church, where large numbers of scholars and lay people assembled to hear him. Thomas Fuller reports that 'his sermons were not so plain but that the piously learned did admire them, nor so learned but that the plain did understand them' (Fuller, 'Holy State', 81). He also records how Perkins 'would pronounce the word 'Damne' with such an emphasis as left a dolleful Echo in his auditours ears a good while after' (Merrill, xvi). The protestant polemicist Samuel Clarke describes Perkins's ministry in Cambridge as 'a burning and a shining light, the sparks whereof did fly abroad into all the corners of the kingdom' (Clarke, 'Generall Martyrologie', 23). 
Perkins is frequently described as a 'puritan' or a 'moderate puritan'. Indeed, Collinson describes him as 'the prince of puritan theologians and the most eagerly read' (Collinson, 'Elizabethan Puritan Movement', 125). Yet the term 'puritan' should not be applied without some qualification. Perkins was perhaps the most significant English theologian of his age. And while his theology was generally representative of a Calvinist scholasticism or orthodoxy that elevated the doctrine of election and placed particular emphasis on the religious experience of the individual -- doctrinal positions which have been equated with 'puritanism' by some scholars -- it has also been demonstrated that 'between 1560 and 1625 the doctrine of predestination was accepted without question by virtually all of the most influential clergymen in England, puritan and nonpuritan alike' (Durston and Eales, 7). Although Perkins, along with other theologians who have been described as 'moderate puritans', raised a version of predestination common among Calvinist theologians to a central position, his thought transcends narrow doctrinal labels. It is more credible, following Peter Lake, to understand Perkins as a 'moderate puritan' in the light of his ecclesiology. Lake observes that 'the core of the moderate puritan position lay neither in the puritan critique of the liturgy and polity of the church nor in a formal doctrinal consensus', but 'in the capacity, which the godly claimed, of being able to recognize one another in the midst of a corrupt and unregenerate world' (Lake, 'Moderate Puritans', 282). Perkins's writings in such works as 'A treatise tending unto a declaration whether a man be in the state of damnation or in the estate of grace' ('c'.1588) and 'A Graine of Musterd-Seede' (1597), often reflect precisely such an understanding, though his ecclesiology also recognized the historical problem that the visible church consists of both elect and reprobate. 
As a fellow of Christ's College, where he taught from his election in 1584 until he resigned his fellowship at Michaelmas 1594, Perkins exercised considerable influence. Through lectures and writings he helped establish the boundaries for a moderate churchmanship that rejected the extremes of separatism and nonconformism, and especially the opinions of those sectarian branches of English protestantism which had Anabaptist, chiliastic, and millenarian tendencies. Yet he also became a powerful advocate for protestants whose theological convictions were in conflict with anti-puritans within the Church of England, as is apparent in his defence of Francis Johnson, a fellow of Christ's College who was imprisoned because he favoured a presbyterian form of church polity. Perkins's resentment over Archbishop John Whitgift's repression of puritanism -- the primate used subscription in an attempt to enforce unity in the Church of England and strenuously resisted forms of protestantism which encouraged presbyterian structures of ecclesiastical government -- emerges clearly in the preface to 'Armilla aurea' (1590). 
Despite Perkins's criticism of what he termed 'corrupt' and 'idolatrous' Roman Catholic influences on its worship, he remained a devoted defender of the essential doctrines and liturgical practices of the Church of England. He raised critical objections to certain of these latter; for example, in a sermon preached at Christ's on 13 January 1587 he objected to such practices as kneeling at the reception of the eucharist, and had to answer to the vice-chancellor and other officials for his remarks. On the other hand, some historians have argued that Perkins 'was as powerful an apologist for the Anglican Church as Richard Hooker' (Merrill, xvii), even though Hooker directed his arguments against presbyterians while Perkins reserved his fiercest criticisms primarily for Catholicism. However, Perkins's attitude toward the Church of England was perhaps more complex than this comparison admits. Although he was undoubtedly cautious in public statements about the latter's liturgy and discipline, especially in light of the criticism he received after his confrontation with the vice-chancellor over the eucharist, he remained tenaciously supportive of the puritan movement within the church, and was deliberately less helpful than the prosecution seems to have wished when he was called as a witness in the 1590-91 trial of puritan ministers. When asked about meetings of puritans to discuss the 'Book of Discipline', he recalled clearly that those present had discussed whether the 'Book of Discipline' was consistent with the word of God, but he said he had no recollection of the identity of anyone who was actually present at the discussion. 
Although Perkins was conversant with the thought of John Calvin, Martin Luther, Philip Melanchthon, and William Tyndale, his theology was more profoundly indebted to the Calvinist scholasticism of Pietro Martire Vermigli, Theodore Beza, Girolamo Zanchi, and Caspar Olevianus. His theological method also reveals a considerable reliance on Peter Ramus, whose approach to logic was characterized by an intentional bifurcation of subjects. The influence of Ramus on Perkins is given vivid visual expression in charts like the one appended to 'A Golden Chain, or, Description of Theology' (1591), illustrating the main points of religion and their interconnection, although it must be added that such charts also reveal a marked similarity to the approach of Theodore Beza who, while he ardently opposed Ramus, nevertheless represented the broad outlines of his theology in the form of a similar chart in his own 'Summa totius theologicae'. 
Perkins's moral theology, as expounded in 'A Discourse of Conscience' (1596), addresses both the puritan preoccupation with the individual Christian's need to gain an assurance of election and the writer's concern for the social as well as individual aspects of Christian morality. Rejecting the notion that the human conscience is interior to the individual, Perkins instead places it between God and the individual, thus showing that he understands the conscience as that place where God strives with human beings in order to give them an apprehension of his judgement upon their actions. Perkins followed the 'Discourse' with a fuller treatment of moral theology, 'The Whole Treatise of the Cases of Conscience', published posthumously in 1606, in which he returns to a scholastic approach to casuistry, distinguishing, for instance, between mortal and venial sins, and providing tools to determine the degree of one's moral culpability. Porter, indeed, maintains that Perkins's reputation rests primarily on his casuistry; he is: 'at one with the medieval moralists and with such godly pastors as Lancelot Andrewes, George Herbert and Jeremy Taylor in the resolve 'to educate the individual conscience in the way of holiness and to educate the social conscience in the way of justice'. (Porter, 288)' Commenting upon Perkins's 'Cases of Conscience', Louis Wright observes that Max Weber could have found in Perkins evidence that 'Calvinism produced a hospitable milieu for the development of the capitalistic spirit' generations earlier than the examples Weber drew from English puritans such as Richard Baxter (Wright, 182). 
The genius of Perkins's work did not lie in its originality -- his theology represents a conventional recital of Calvinist scholasticism in virtually every respect. His gift lay rather in bringing to a broad audience a variety of theological and moral issues, popularizing essentially technical discussions, and therefore, as Fuller observed, humbling 'the towering speculations of philosophers into practice and morality' (Fuller, 'Holy State', 81). In Perkins's own words, 'Theology is the science of living blessedly for ever' ('Works', 177); for him, theology was in every respect a practical study. 
In 1597 Perkins's polemical influence spread throughout Europe following the publication of 'A Reformed Catholike'. Perkins argues in this treatise that the term 'reformed Catholic' properly conveys the posture of the protestant. His purpose, he writes, 'is to show how near we may come to the present Church of Rome in sundry points of religion and wherein we must ever dissent' ('Works', 521). Although his arguments are unrelentingly anti-Roman, they led William Bishop, titular bishop of Chalcedon and author of 'Reformation of a Catholike Deformed by W. Perkins' (two parts, 1604-7), to say that he had 'not seene any book of like quality, published by a Protestant, to contain either more matter, or delivered in better method' (Merrill, xvii). 
Perkins's 'De praedestinationis modo et ordine' (1598), while positively received by most Calvinists, drew fire from Jacob Arminius, the controversial Dutch Reformed theologian and opponent of the Calvinist doctrine of predestination, who charged Perkins with returning protestant theology to scholasticism. Nor was Arminius satisfied with Perkins's treatise 'God's Free Grace and Man's Freewill' (1602). His refutation of Perkins, completed in the year of the latter's death, takes issue not only with the Calvinist interpretation of predestination which Perkins taught, in which God by immutable decree before creation has arbitrarily elected some for salvation and condemned the rest, but also his doctrine of limited atonement which, following Beza and other Calvinist scholastics, taught that Jesus Christ did not die for all humanity, but for the elect alone. Such controversies did nothing to hinder the dissemination of Perkins's writings abroad. They were usually translated into Dutch, German (as much for circulation in Switzerland as in Germany itself), and Latin, sometimes into French and even Czech. This process continued into the last quarter of the seventeenth century, when a number of his works appeared in Welsh. 
The list of students influenced by Perkins reads like a who's who of seventeenth-century Calvinism. William Ames, probably his most important pupil, embraced the more extreme elements of puritan thought and eventually left England for the Netherlands, where he took up the post of professor of theology at Franeker. As J. D. Eusden observes, while 'Amesian theology reworked much of the old and explored areas not entered by his respected teacher' (Ames, 4), Ames's theology none the less reflects both the practical aspects of Perkins's moral thought and the latter's doctrine on such issues as predestination. John Robinson, the founder of congregationalism in Leiden, extended Perkins's influence when he published his own catechism there. Other heirs of Perkins's thought included the elder Thomas Goodwin, Paul Baynes, Samuel Ward, later master of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, the poet Phineas Fletcher, Thomas Draxe, Thomas Taylor, James Ussher, the celebrated archbishop of Armagh, and his close friend Richard Montagu, master of Sidney Sussex and later bishop of Winchester. His practical and theological works (many of which were first published only after his death) remained popular in England throughout the seventeenth century. In the words of William Haller: 'No books, it is fair to say, were more often to be found upon the shelves of succeeding generations of preachers, and the name of no preacher recurs more often in later Puritan literature' (Haller, 65). 
Perkins's writings are notoriously lacking in autobiographical statements, and it is difficult to glean from contemporary sources a reliable picture of the company he kept. He knew the Yorkshire puritans Sir Thomas and Lady Margaret Hoby, and the dedications of his books suggest that he was acquainted with Edward Russell, seventh earl of Bedford, Valentine Knightley, whose father, Sir Richard Knightley of Fawsley, was a leading figure among the Northamptonshire godly, Robert Beale, clerk of the council, Sir Edward Denny, who in 1626 became first earl of Norwich, Sir William Peryam, chief baron of the exchequer, and Margaret Clifford, countess of Cumberland. But there is nothing in them to explain Perkins's relationships with those to whom these dedications were given. 
A portrait of Perkins hangs in the combination room of Christ's College; he looks heavy-faced, and his right hand is visibly maimed. It is known that he married Timothye Cradocke of Grantchester on 2 July 1595, and that together they had seven children, three of whom died in childhood. Immediately after his marriage Perkins resigned his fellowship, and largely for that reason almost nothing is recorded of the last seven years of his life, though his theological output continued unabated. He died in Cambridge on 22 October 1602, aged forty-four, after suffering intensely for several weeks from the stone. James Montagu preached at his funeral, which took place three days later, on 'Joshua' 1: 2 -- 'Moses my servant is dead'. Perkins was interred in St Andrew's Church at his college's expense. In his will he bequeathed 10's'. apiece to his father, mother, and each of his siblings, and left his small property in Cambridge to his wife, who subsequently remarried. His library was purchased by William Bedell, a pupil of Perkins who in 1629 became bishop of Kilmore and Ardagh. 


@@@@@


doc= 21974


Perley, Moses Henry (1804-1862), entrepreneur and naturalist in Canada, was born in Maugerville, Sunbury county, New Brunswick, on 31 December 1804, the son of Moses Perley and his cousin Mary, who were of an old Welsh family which had settled in Massachusetts in 1630. His father died before his birth. His mother took him to Saint John, New Brunswick, when he was very young and he went to school there, spending much of his free time with the local native people, in whose welfare he took a keen interest. On 6 September 1829 he married Jane, the daughter of Isaac Ketchum; they had eight children and took in two orphans. In 1828 he became an attorney and in 1830 was called to the bar, but soon entered business, particularly lumbering and coalmining, in which he was not conspicuously successful. Perley was critical of those who sought to restrict American investment in New Brunswick, and was accused in turn of being too pro-American. 
Perley's knowledge of the area and interest in native people led to his being appointed honorary commissioner for Indian affairs at some point between 1839 and 1841, and in reports of 1842 and 1843 he protested against squatter encroachment on their lands, recommending that the crown hold these lands in trust and encourage them to settle in villages where education and health services could be provided. The native people of New Brunswick elected him 'chief over all' in 1842, and he frequently visited their settlements dressed in native clothes. Perley sharply criticized the 1844 'New Brunswick Indian Act'. The act enabled the government to sell wide tracts of native land, ostensibly for their benefit, but Perley, quite rightly, feared it would enable squatters to hold on to their land. Although he did his best to safeguard the interests of the native people after the passing of the act, he found that public opinion, squatter intransigence, and government indifference all conspired against them. 
Perley continued to practise law and to cultivate his business interests, and by 1840 he was an authority on the province's natural resources. In 1843 and 1847 he was made New Brunswick emigrant agent for the provincial and British governments respectively, and as such supervised the arrival of and helped immigrants, many of whom arrived sick and destitute. His knowledge of the country prompted the government to turn to him for reports on timber resources (1847) and fisheries (1849) and to help negotiate the reciprocity treaty between the United States and the British North American colonies. In 1855 he was appointed fisheries commissioner to enforce the reciprocity treaty, and he also continued as emigration officer until 1858. In 1861 he bought a share in the 'Colonial Empire' newspaper, which advocated intercolonial free trade and union. Perley became ill in the summer of 1862 on board the 'Desperate' while inspecting the fisheries, died on board on 17 August, and was buried at Forteau, Labrador. As well as his many government reports, he left works on natural history and Indian legends, and, as founder of the Natural History Society of New Brunswick and an ichthyologist of note, laid the foundation of natural science in the province. 


@@@@@


doc= 21975


Perne, Andrew (1519?-1589), dean of Ely and college head, came from a family of minor Norfolk gentry with lands around Pudding Norton and was born in the village of East Bilney, the son of John Perne. He retained strong but troubled connections with what in Elizabethan times he was to call 'that great disordered diocese' of Norwich (Inner Temple Library, MS Petyt 538/47, fol. 494). He entered St John's College, Cambridge, and took his BA in 1539 and his MA in 1540, with the BTh following in 1547 and the DTh in 1552. In 1540 he was elected a fellow of St John's, but shortly afterwards migrated to Queens', where he served successively as bursar, dean, and vice-president, learning those managerial and political skills which he was to apply so effectively in a Cambridge career which included no fewer than five terms as vice-chancellor. He secured a number of parochial livings in Norfolk and Cambridgeshire, became a prebendary of Westminster in 1552, and dean of Ely in 1557. Perne was a fixture in Cambridge for more than fifty years, and seems to have regarded his deanery, which he may have visited only on the occasion of the annual audit and for somewhat meagre hospitality, as a sinecure (which technically it was). Unfortunately the good things which Perne did for his university have figured less prominently in his posthumous reputation than the ambidexterity with which he responded to the drastic religious changes and reversals of successive Tudor regimes and reformations. 
As early as 1549, Perne had abandoned belief in transubstantiation. Evidently he was regarded by the protestant Edwardian ascendancy as one of themselves and was made one of six royal chaplains who were to divide their time between preaching at court and in the country. Although he began by opposing him, it seems likely that Perne, along with the future Archbishop Edmund Grindal, grew close to the famous Strasbourg reformer Martin Bucer who occupied the regius chair of divinity, and to whom he would, posthumously, play Judas. At the first convocation of Mary's reign, Perne again spoke against transubstantiation, earning a rebuke from the prolocutor to which the future Bishop John Aylmer responded with a defence of free speech. But Perne soon made his peace with the Marian regime, subscribing to articles which included a very explicit endorsement of the Catholic doctrine of the eucharist. He was the preferred candidate of Bishop Stephen Gardiner for the mastership of Peterhouse, to which he was elected in 1554. As vice-chancellor he served on a royal commission to inquire into heresy in Cambridge, but was not involved in any cases which led to burning at the stake, at least not the burning of any living persons. More notoriously, he was implicated as vice-chancellor in the macabre proceedings in which, in order to lift an interdict from the university church, the bones of Bucer and his colleague, the Hebraist Paul Fagius, were exhumed and burnt in Cambridge market, following an oration in which Perne had denounced the great reformer and his doctrine, a speech which the martyrologist John Foxe described as 'a shameful railing' (Foxe, 'Acts and Monuments'). According to Foxe, Perne in private deeply regretted his unconscientious conduct on this occasion. What is more certain is that Perne owned Foxe's 'Acts and Monuments' in the 1576 edition, and that there is a hole burnt in the middle of the page which tells this story. In 1560, with Elizabeth on the throne, the university passed a grace restoring Bucer and Fagius to their degrees and other honours. The presiding vice-chancellor was again Perne. 
In 1564 Elizabeth made a celebrated visit to Cambridge. Although Grindal, now bishop of London, was one of a small committee in charge of the arrangements, he was unable to prevent the choice of Perne to preach before the queen in King's College chapel. He told William Cecil that he hoped that Perne would not be well received, 'his apostacy being so notorious' (BL, Add. MS 35831, fol. 184). However, the sermon, on obedience to the higher powers, was a success. But later in the week Perne allowed himself, uncharacteristically, to be wrong-footed. In a theological disputation before the queen on the proposition that scripture carried more authority than tradition, Perne, who argued for tradition, was provoked by an outspoken attack on the Roman church as 'a shameless whore' by his opponent, Matthew Hutton, master of Pembroke College and regius professor, not only to assert the subordination of scripture to the church, but to insist that although it was not faultless, the Church of Rome was the most enduring of churches, from which the Church of England derived the essence of its doctrine and liturgy, not a meretricious whore but 'apostolica et matrix ecclesia' ('an apostolic church and our mother'; Collinson, McKitterick, and Leedham-Green, 9). Perne's library reveals the reading which informed these views: great folios of the fathers, extensively annotated, Thomas Aquinas and other scholastics perhaps not so closely read. Perne had to explain himself to Archbishop Matthew Parker, and not even the queen was best pleased. Perne was removed from the list of court preachers, and, apparently, from the number of those thought fit for a bishopric, which is no doubt why, although Archbishop John Whitgift recommended him for a mitre in 1584, he remained master of Peterhouse for the rest of his days. 
In a constructive exchange of views with John Feckenham, formerly abbot of Westminster, Perne suggested that Feckenham could hardly find fault with the 'Book of Common Prayer' without condemning his own mass book and other Catholic liturgies, since these were its sources. Was Perne a crypto-Catholic, a church papist? The Jesuit John Gerard alleged as much. Perne was rector of the Cambridgeshire parish of Balsham, where many of the leading men adhered to the mysterious and eclectic sect of the Family of Love. It appears that Perne knew all about their familism but did nothing, may even have felt at one with the familist strategy of keeping to themselves their true beliefs. In a letter to the lord chancellor, Sir Christopher Hatton, he advised a policy of pure equity, not respecting 'this or that profession, protestant, papist or puritan' (Westminster Abbey muniments, MS Book 15, fol. 86'v'). 
Perne's ecumenical latitude kept the peace in Peterhouse, where it became a legend that in his time, Peterhouse men who became Catholic martyrs were hurried to the scaffold by Peterhouse judges after interrogation by Peterhouse inquisitors. The great 'parliament man' Thomas Norton, too much of a hot protestant to be religiously sympathetic, believed that there was 'not a better master for the helping of his house' than Perne (BL, Add. MS 48023, fol. 47). Not until the First World War would enrolments match the Perne years. The university was harder to manage, especially in the mid-1560s and early 1570s, when direct action by the younger dons against the supposedly 'popish' ceremonies retained in the Elizabethan church was followed by the presbyterian, anti-episcopal ideology advanced by Thomas Cartwright and his many supporters. Perne, together with his protege Whitgift, initially a hot protestant whom he had protected in Mary's reign and whom he seems to have turned into a conformist, was the principal architect of new university statutes (they would remain in force until 1853) which restored discipline and replaced a kind of academic democracy with an oligarchy of the heads of houses resembling the constitution of Venice, a republic in which Perne himself regularly served as doge. 
As such, Perne was a fierce and effective defender of the interests of the university against all comers, especially the town and the county. Perne's membership of the commission of the peace for Cambridgeshire proved to be a short-lived experiment. On one occasion he rather pointedly sent copies of the charter and statutes of the university to its chancellor, Lord Burghley, as a reminder of its privileges. But his relationship with Burghley was usually constructive, if formal, and twenty-four of the thirty letters from Perne which are known to survive were addressed to him. Perne was discretion itself, remembered even by his bitter enemy Gabriel Harvey for his 'grave and most eloquent silence' ('Works of Gabriel Harvey', 2.302). When Perne read in his great folio edition of St Ambrose about uncharitable parsimony, he wrote in the margin 'R. Eliz.', but for his own eyes only. When Archbishop Parker on his deathbed proposed to write to the queen accusing Burghley and his brother-in-law Sir Nicholas Bacon of robbing the church, Perne advised against it. Among his other good deeds, it seems to have been Perne who devised the project which secured the solvency of Oxbridge colleges at a time of price inflation: an act of parliament requiring that in all leases of college property one third of the rent should be paid in kind, the so-called corn rent. Cambridge also had Perne to thank for the scheme later implemented as Hobson's Conduit, which brought water down from Trumpington to cleanse the fetid King's Ditch. He was dedicated to building up the university library, and was a predatory observer of the book market and a cultivator of potential donors. Perne was a reader, not a writer, and he published nothing. But he took care of 'Ecclesiastes' and the 'Song of Songs' for the version known as the 'Bishops' Bible'. 
In his last years, Perne was often at Lambeth as Whitgift's guest, and it was there that he died on 26 April 1589, suddenly, but not too soon to avoid the cruel fate of satirical vilification in the anti-episcopal Marprelate tracts, which not only dubbed him Old Andrew Turncoat but hinted at a homosexual relationship with the archbishop. This might not have happened if he had not, somewhat earlier, made enemies of Gabriel Harvey, who in 1593 would blacken his character as 'hypocrisy incarnate' in 'Pierces Supererogation', and of Harvey's friend Edmund Spenser who put him into the 'Shepheardes Calender' as the worldly-wise Palinode. Thomas Nashe rallied to Perne's defence, no doubt on the grounds that my enemy's enemy is my friend. 
Perne had died a wealthy bachelor, and in his will (in which he took his leave of 'this slippery earth' -- Collinson, McKitterick, and Leedham-Green, 93) he generously remembered his brothers, brothers-in-law, nephews, and other more remote kin, as well as his college. He was buried in Lambeth parish church, where a monument was erected to his memory by his nephew, Richard Perne. But a more abiding monument is his library, much of it still preserved in Peterhouse. This was one of the largest private libraries of its day, the collection of a man of wide and diverse interests, who was perhaps more interested in medicine, cartography, and civil engineering than in theology, and of a connoisseur who valued the beauty of books and who set them off with a little museum of 'curiosities' to be shown to visiting VIPs. His panel portrait, also in Peterhouse, has been restored to reveal the inscription, in Greek, of what he called his 'posy', 'Ephesians' 4: 15, 'Speaking the truth in love'. 


@@@@@


doc= 21976


Perne, Andrew (c.1595-1654), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Thomas Perne. He was educated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1618 and proceeding MA in 1621, and was ordained a priest on 4 June 1622. From 1622 to 1627 he was fellow of St Catharine's College, where Richard Sibbes was the master; it was there he placed his conversion to the cause of true religion. In 1627 he was appointed to the rectory of Wilby in Northamptonshire by the patron, Thomas Pentlow. There is scant information concerning his family. With his wife, Mary, he had at least two daughters. 
Perne became one of the leading clerical members of an influential puritan community centred on Northampton. As an evangelical Calvinist he made the main thrust of his ministry to awaken the elect saints to self-awareness by preaching the word: 'love to Christ, an earnest desire to encrease his Kingdom, pitty and compassion towards poor soules, a violent thirst after their salvation, and a burning zeale for the honour and glory of God were the motives that put him upon this worke. (Ainsworth, 39)' The opposite of this vision of true religion was popery, and in the decade before the civil war he was a prominent leader of Northamptonshire opposition to government policy, which he regarded as 'Popish' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/251/25). He was reported to have 'complained much of the overfloweings of Popery every where in this land, & wished or hoped, that God would raise up a standard to hinder it' (ibid.). His preference for preaching twice every Sunday led in 1633 to an interrogation by Bishop Augustine Lindsell of Peterborough -- who denounced him as a 'hollow pillar of Puritanisme' (ibid.) for refusing to conduct a catechism class in the afternoon (as required by the 'Instructions to Preachers' issued that year) at the expense of his second sermon. He was also accused of ceremonial nonconformity. About 1635 he was reported to the ecclesiastical courts for not publicly reading the 'Book of Sports', which puritans regarded as anti-sabbatarian, and in August 1640 for attending a meeting at The Swan inn in Kettering to co-ordinate opposition to the bishops' war and the revised 'Book of Canons'. 
Perne was chosen in 1643 one of the representatives from Northamptonshire to the Westminster assembly. He preached four sermons before the Long Parliament -- including one on the occasion of a public fast, 31 May 1643, which was published as 'Gospell Courage, or, Christian Resolution for God and his Truth', and another on 23 April 1644 at the 'thanksgiving' for Sir Thomas Fairfax's victory at Selby. In 'Gospell Courage' Perne recognized that the civil war had both secular and religious causes but that the latter were more important. The Caroline regime had repressed the godly and true religion by discouraging preaching, stifling discussion of predestination, and permitting anti-sabbatarianism. The kingdom had degenerated into idolatry: 'the Popish language of Priests and Altars, and the superstitious bowing and gestures were brought in under a pretence of Authority' (Perne, 25). In these circumstances it was the duty of the people to be 'peremptory' (ibid., 15) in defence of their beliefs. When the sermon was delivered a vote of thanks was proposed by the puritan MP Sir Christopher Yelverton. 
On 11 July 1643 Perne was admitted as vicar of St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, the previous incumbent James Marsh having been sequestered; six months later, on 14 January, Perne was readmitted on Marsh's death. In 1645 he was recommended by Robert Baillie as one of a number of eminent ministers who might give 'good satisfaction' as personal chaplains to Charles I (Paul, 120). Although Perne was officially established in 1646 as presbyterian minister at St Dunstan's, his relations with this most consistently radical of city parishes did not run smoothly, and in 1647 he resigned after controversy surrounding disputed churchwarden elections. 
Perne died at Wilby on 13 December 1654 and was buried in the chancel of the church there. His funeral sermon, published in 1655, was delivered by his friend and former curate, Samuel Ainsworth, who claimed to have been converted by him. Perne was survived by his wife, Mary, who probably died in 1663. 


@@@@@


doc= 21977


Perrers, Alice (d. 1400/01), royal mistress, was probably the daughter of Sir Richard Perrers of Hertfordshire, who was imprisoned in 1350 and outlawed in 1359 following a land dispute with the abbey of St Albans -- a fact which may explain the extreme hostility towards her of Thomas Walsingham, the St Albans chronicler, who claimed that she was the daughter of a thatcher, and that she had no physical beauty, but gained her hold over the king through sorcery and the blandishments of her tongue. It has also been claimed that her father was a Devon weaver. Having served for some time as lady in waiting in the household of Queen Philippa (died 1369), Alice seems to have become Edward III's mistress around 1364: their son John was of age to be married in January 1377, and to accompany the earl of Cambridge on his Portuguese campaign of 1381-2. It was also in 1364 that the merchant and courtier Richard Lyons (died 1381), later to become her friend, was ordered not to interfere with Alice's going where she wished on the king's business or her own. 
It was not until after the queen's death, however, that her relationship with Edward III became public. During the last decade of the king's life Alice received numerous favours from the king in the form of wardships and marriages, grants of land, and jewels. In 1371 she was permitted to buy the royal manor of Wendover for $500, and in 1373 was given a selection of Queen Philippa's jewels. She also exploited her position to the full, accepting gifts from courtiers and others eager to curry favour with the king, and engaging in a series of enfeoffments-to-use and other land transactions with them, in the hope of protecting her acquisitions following Edward's death. Walsingham records that the abbot of St Albans, who was engaged in a property dispute with Alice, was advised in 1374 that she 'had such power and eminence in those days that no-one dared to prosecute a claim against her', and thus decided to abandon his suit until circumstances were more propitious ('Gesta abbatum', 3.228). 
In 1375 Edward held a tournament at Smithfield at which Alice was exhibited to the Londoners as the Lady of the Sun. Such disregard for conventional morality did not pass without criticism, however. Langland, in his 'Piers Plowman', is thought to have based his figure of Lady Meed -- a personification of venality -- on Alice, and in the Good Parliament of 1376 the speaker of the Commons, Sir Peter de la Mare, accused her of relieving the exchequer of $2000 or $3000 a year without profit to the realm. Walsingham added that the Dominican friar whom she employed to weave her spells over the king was apprehended at her manor of Pallenswick (Fulham) during this parliament, and brought before the king. The rolls of parliament merely record that an ordinance was passed forbidding women in general, and Alice in particular, to prosecute their quarrels in the royal courts 'by way of maintenance' ('RotP', 2.329). As a result, she was told to absent herself from court and to desist from such practice in future, under pain of forfeiture and banishment from the realm. 
During the Good Parliament it also emerged that Alice was not a single woman -- as the king, when so informed, claimed to believe -- but was married to Sir William Windsor. Windsor, a Westmorland knight, had been appointed as royal lieutenant in Ireland in 1369, but was recalled in 1373 following complaints about the harshness of his rule there. He was reappointed in 1374, only to be recalled again in 1376, once more in the face of vociferous Irish opposition. It was probably during his stay in England in 1373-4 that he and Alice were married -- they certainly engaged in financial transactions together at this time -- and it may be that she had a hand in his reappointment. 
Alice's absence from court, if it was effective at all, was not prolonged. On 22 October 1376 she received a pardon from the king, and she remained with him until his death. In January 1377 her son by the king, John Southeray, was married to Mary, half-sister of Henry, Lord Percy, and on 17 June, four days before Edward's death, the king granted him a satin coat of arms. Walsingham claimed that she sat with the king until his voice began to fail, then seized the rings from his fingers and fled. Alice's moment of truth had now arrived. In November 1377 all those who wished to sue her for offences against the king and people were encouraged to bring their petitions to parliament. John of Gaunt, the king's son, presided at her trial, where she was accused on two counts: first, that in November 1376, after the council had ordered Sir Nicholas Dagworth to go to Ireland to investigate the charges against Windsor, she persuaded the king to countermand the order on the grounds that Dagworth was an enemy of Windsor; second, that she had persuaded the king, in May 1377, to grant a full pardon and a gift of 1000 marks to Richard Lyons, who like her had been attacked in the Good Parliament. Alice maintained her innocence on both counts, but was convicted and sentenced to banishment from the realm and forfeiture of all her goods and lands, including those with which she had enfeoffed others to her use, although this last clause, on account of its enormity (for such lands were normally regarded as exempt from confiscation), was not to be adopted as a precedent, but only 'for such an odious thing in this special case' ('RotP', 3.12-14). On 3 December orders were issued to seize her lands. The resulting inquisitions reveal that she held properties in at least fifteen counties; it was also claimed later that following her conviction she had secretly passed jewels worth $20,000 to Windsor to prevent their being seized. This may be an exaggeration, but jewels worth over $3000 were certainly recovered from her after her arrest. 
The remaining years of Alice's life were largely devoted to trying to recover as much as possible of what had been lost in 1377, a task in which she was initially aided by Windsor. He petitioned the parliament of October 1378 for a reversal of the judgment against her, and was given leave to pursue his suit. Apparently she had not left the realm, for when, following another petition from Windsor, her sentence of banishment was revoked on 14 December 1379, she was simultaneously pardoned for having remained in England, as was Windsor for having harboured her. On 15 March 1380, in return for a promise of military service to the crown, Windsor was granted some of the lands which Alice had forfeited in 1377, but the process of recovery was a slow one, and his death on 15 September 1384 brought new problems, for not only did he die in debt to the crown, but he had enfeoffed all his lands, including those which had once belonged to Alice, to a group of trustees, to be disposed of after his death according to his last wishes. Alice claimed that he had intended her to have the lands, but the trustees asserted that he had nominated his nephew, John Windsor, as his beneficiary. 
Her struggle with John Windsor dominated the rest of Alice's life. She submitted numerous petitions to parliament, and succeeded in 1393 in having Windsor committed briefly to Newgate gaol, but he was soon released. It was to little avail: she recovered only a few small properties, such as the manor of Gaines in Upminster (Essex), where she resided during her later years. Her will reveals her enduring bitterness: dated 15 August 1400, it bequeathed all the lands which John Windsor, or others with his consent, had 'usurped', to her daughters, Joan and Jane, 'for that I say, on pain of my soul, he hath no right to these, nor never had' (Nicolas, 153). She asked to be buried in Upminster church, Essex, leaving her manor of Gaines in Upminster to her younger daughter, Joan, and her remaining lands to be divided between Jane and Joan. What became of her son, John Southeray, is not clear. In 1380 he had been divorced by Mary Percy, who claimed never to have consented to their marriage, but after the Portuguese campaign of 1381-2 no more is heard of him; he probably died soon after. Since Alice's marriage to Windsor was certainly childless, the likelihood is that all three of her children were Edward III's, for there is no good evidence for the assertion that she had earlier been married to Sir Thomas Narford. Joan married Robert Skerne, a lawyer from Kingston (Surrey) -- their memorial brasses may still be seen in All Saints' Church there -- and Jane married Richard Northland. Alice died in the winter of 1400-01, her will being proved on 3 February 1401. 


@@@@@


doc= 21978


Perrin, Jean Baptiste (fl. 1767-1798), tutor and educational author, was born in France. He travelled to Dublin, where he settled and worked as a French teacher. He taught private pupils in their own homes and was often employed for several months at a time as a resident tutor in gentry families keen to master French. In the preface to 'La bonne mere' (1786) he advertised his fees for teaching French as 2 guineas for eight lessons, plus 2 guineas for entrance or enrolment. 
Perrin was a prolific author of educational books, particularly on the French language, nearly all of which were first published in London by the bookseller Bedwell Law. By 1770 he had five works to his name, each of which addressed different aspects of learning French, such as pronunciation, syntax, verbs, personal pronouns. His earliest work seems to have been 'Essai sur l'origine et l'antiquite des langues', which was published anonymously in 1767. As outlined in 'The French student's vade-mecum' (1770), Perrin's method promised the student rapid results, and he unashamedly advised his readers how to cut corners and thereby avoid 'long and constant application to the rules of syntax and practice' (preface). He astutely compiled a volume of French conversations (with a parallel translation into English) on topics that would appeal to his teenage readers, such as trips to Vauxhall Gardens, buying a lottery ticket, going to hear a fashionable preacher, shopping in London's West End, and even playing a game of cricket. Like the majority of his works 'The elements of French conversation, with new, familiar and easy dialogues, each preceded by a suitable vocabulary in French and English' (1774) proved popular, and reached its twenty-first edition in 1820. An Italian edition, in which the dialogues were also translated into Italian, was published in Naples in 1814, although without the dialogues on cricket. His other publications include a French grammar, which he dedicated to Lord Lyttelton, a new edition of Louis Chambaud's French-English dictionary, and a collection of moral dramas, 'La bonne mere' (1786), which he dedicated to Queen Charlotte. 
Perrin married an Irishwoman whose maiden name was Daly and they had at least one child, Louis Perrin, a judge, who was born at Waterford in 1782. Perrin became involved in Irish patriot politics and on 26 April 1784 was elected an honorary member of the Sons of the Shamrock. He was a nationalist by the mid-1790s and apparently supported the plan to invite republican France to invade Ireland. In his later years he lived at Leinster Lodge, near Athy, co. Kildare, a house on the estate of the second duke of Leinster and formerly the home of Lord Edward Fitzgerald, who died in 1798; the house had been used for United Irish meetings leading up to the rising of 1798. It is not known when Perrin died; he was buried at the old church at Palmerstown. 


@@@@@


doc= 21979


Perrin, Louis (1782-1864), judge, was born at Waterford on 15 February 1782, the son of Jean Baptiste Perrin (fl. 1767-1798), a teacher and author of school textbooks, and his Irish wife, whose maiden name was Daly. Perrin's father was born in France, but settled in Ireland, where he taught French to the Irish gentry. Perrin was educated at home and at the diocesan school at Armagh. On 7 November 1796 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he gained a scholarship in 1799 and graduated BA in 1801. During the court trial in which his fellow student and friend Robert Emmet was sentenced to death, he rushed forward to embrace the prisoner when the verdict was announced. Perrin studied mercantile law and was called to the Irish bar in Hilary term, 1806. In April 1815 he married Hester Connor Stewart; they had seven sons. 
Perrin's father had been a supporter of nationalist ideals and Perrin soon distinguished himself as an uncompromising reformer, as well as an able barrister. When Watty Cox, the proprietor and publisher of 'Cox's Magazine', was prosecuted by the government for libel in 1811, three defence lawyers -- Daniel O'Connell, Isaac Burke Bethel, and Perrin -- were hired, but the case was in effect conducted by Perrin who, though the most junior of the four, was clearly able. He was also junior counsel, in 1811, in the prosecution of Edward Sheridan, Thomas Kirwan, and the Catholic delegates, for violating the 'Convention Act'. In 1832, he became a bencher of King's Inns, Dublin. 
Perrin was a whig in politics, supported Catholic emancipation, and acquired the sobriquet of 'Honest Louis Perrin'. On 6 May 1831 he was elected MP for Dublin. He was unseated in August and returned for Monaghan on 24 December 1832, displacing Henry Robert Westenra, the previous tory member. At the next general election he was elected for the city of Cashel, on 14 January 1835, but he resigned in the following August in order to take his seat on the bench. At the bar Perrin was one of the recognized heads of the protestant liberal party, which advised and co-operated with Roman Catholics. While a third serjeant and MP Perrin wrote a report on the inquiry into municipal corporations, which was used as the foundation for the 'Irish Municipal Reform Act'. 
Perrin was made third serjeant on 7 February 1832. He later became first serjeant (from February to April 1835) and then attorney-general (29 April 1835). He was appointed a puisne justice of the king's bench, on 31 August 1835; and in the same year he became a privy councillor. He was remembered as an able and upright judge. 
Perrin resigned on a pension in February 1860, and moved to Knockdromin, Lusk, near Rush, co. Dublin, where he frequently attended the petty sessions. He died at Knockdromin on 7 December 1864, and was buried at Rush on 10 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 21980


Perrinchief, Richard (1620/21-1673), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Gabriel Perrinchief, a joiner of St Botolph, Aldersgate, London. He entered the school at Christ's Hospital, London, on 15 April 1625, aged four, and matriculated as a sizar at King's College, Cambridge, in the Lent term of 1638. He graduated BA from Magdalene College, Cambridge, early in 1642, proceeded MA in 1645, and was elected to a fellowship at Magdalene at some time thereafter. He was ordained deacon and priest at Lincoln on 3 July 1646 and ejected from his fellowship in 1650. In 1656 he was admitted by the triers to the rectory of Middleton in Hampshire. His first published work was 'Nuntius a mortuis', published in Paris in 1657 and in London two years later. Between the two editions he published in 1658 a version in English, 'A Messenger from the Dead, or, Conference... between the Ghosts of Henry the 8. and Charls the First'. King Charles, 'the most moderate, and the most innocent' of Henry VIII's successors, was seen as the victim of the working out of divine providence punishing the sacrilege and tyranny of the Tudor sovereign to the third and fourth generations (p. 18); it concluded with Charles resolutely asserting his commitment to the Church of England. 
Perrinchief dedicated 'The Syracusan Tyrant... with some Reflexions on the Practices of our Modern Usurpers' (1661) to Thomas Wriothesley, earl of Southampton; this book was republished in 1676 as 'The Sicilian Tyrant'. In both editions an engraving showed 'Tyrannus', in the form of Oliver Cromwell dressed in dubious antique armour, being crowned with a laurel wreath by 'Perfidia' and 'Crudelitas'. Perrinchief was made rector of St Mildred Poultry, London, in 1661, to which the parish of St Mary Colechurch was annexed in February 1671. He was employed by the bookseller Richard Royston to finalize ''Basilika': the Works of Charles I' (1662) after the original editor, William Fulham, was incapacitated by smallpox. ''Basilika'' contained a biography of Charles I, which Perrinchief wrote with the aid of materials supplied by Silius Titus. This biography was republished as 'The Royal Martyr' in 1676. 
Perrinchief proceeded DD from Cambridge on 2 July 1663; his dissertations were published in 'Potestas ecclesiae' (1663). In 1664 he published 'Samaritanism', an argument against 'Comprehending, Compounding, and Tolerating Several Religions in one Church'; a 'Revised' and 'Enlarged' edition of this title appeared in 1669. On 3 November 1664 he was made a prebendary of St Peter's, Westminster Abbey, and on 2 August 1667 he was installed as a prebendary of St Paul's Cathedral. He was also sub-almoner to Charles II. On 7 November 1666 he preached a sermon before the House of Commons which attacked those who denied that the plague was the result of divine punishment. In 1667 he published 'A Discourse of Toleration' to refute the arguments of John Corbet's 'A Discourse of the Religion of England', and in the following year his 'Indulgence Not Justified' was published. On 29 March 1670 he was collated to the archdeaconry of Huntingdon. In February 1672 John Evelyn heard him preach at Whitehall in the presence of the king on 'Acts' 17: 31, and in September of the same year he heard him preach to the royal household in Whitehall on 'Ephesians' 5: 2. 
Perrinchief's will, dated 26 August 1673, five days before his death, expressed the desire to be buried as near as possible to his wife, who had been buried in Westminster Abbey two years earlier, on 15 June 1671. Under the terms of this will he bequeathed his divinity books to the library of Westminster Abbey, and gave $100 to Christ Church Hospital. He also made bequests to his 'worthy and good Friend' Dr John Dolben and to his 'very good friends' Dr William Clarke, dean of Winchester, and Mr Pocock, rector of Long Ditton in Surrey. He appointed Clarke and Pocock as executors of his estate and asked that they should use any money left after his debts had been settled to purchase 'some Impropriation or part of some Impropriation in some Great Markett Towne' in Huntingdonshire. If this did not happen within three years he nominated new executors who were to distribute the money to 'Prisoners for debt or others That by these Badd tymes have fallen to decay' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/343, fol. 86'r'- 'v'). He died at Westminster on 31 August 1673, and was buried two days later 'within the South monument door' (Chester, 181) of Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 21981


Perring, John Shae (1813-1869), civil engineer and surveyor, was born at Boston, Lincolnshire, on 24 January 1813. He was educated at Donington grammar school, and then articled, on 28 March 1826, to Robert Reynolds, the surveyor of the port of Boston, under whom he was engaged in surveying, in the enclosure and drainage of the fens, in the improvements of Boston harbour and of Wainfleet haven, and the outfall of the East Fen, in the drainage of the Burgh and Croft marshes, and other works. In 1833 he moved to London, where he worked with various engineering establishments. 
In March 1836 Perring went to Egypt, under contract with Galloway Brothers of London, as assistant engineer to Galloway Bey, then manager of public works for Mehmet Ali, viceroy of Egypt. One of the first undertakings on which Perring was engaged was the construction of a tramway from the quarries near El Mex to the sea. After the death of Galloway he became a member of the board of public works, was consulted on the Nile Embankment, advocated the establishment of stations in the desert between Cairo and Suez to facilitate overland transit, and was employed in constructing a road in order to carry out this scheme. 
From January to August 1837 Perring was employed assisting Colonel R. W. H. Vyse and others in carrying out a survey of the pyramids at Giza, and in the production of plans, drawings, and maps of these monuments. He had already published, in 1835, a number of pamphlets, 'On the engineering of the ancient Egyptians'. During 1838 and 1839 he explored and surveyed the pyramids at Abu Roash, and those further south, including Fayyum. His contributions to the history of Egypt and the pyramids are described in a major work in three parts, 'The Pyramids of Gizeh', which was published in 1839. Perring's work is also referred to in a later publication by Colonel Vyse, 'Operations Carried on at the Pyramids of Gizeh in 1837' (3 vols., 1840). Perring, before leaving Egypt, made a trigonometrical survey of 53 miles of country near the pyramids. The value of these researches, all made at Colonel Vyse's expense, are fully acknowledged in C. C. J. Bunsen's 'Egypt's Place in Universal History' (5 vols., 1854) where it is stated that they supplied the names of six Egyptian kings until then unknown. 
Perring returned to England in June 1840, and on 1 March 1841 entered upon the duties of engineering superintendent of the Llanelli railway docks and harbour. In April 1844 he was associated with the Manchester, Bury, and Rossendale Railway, which he helped to complete; after its amalgamation with other lines he was, from 1846 until 1859, resident engineer of the East Lancashire Railway. He was subsequently involved with the Railway, Steel, and Plant Company, was engineer of the Ribblesdale Railway, and constructed the joint lines from Wigan to Blackburn. He was also engineer of the Oswaldtwistle and other waterworks. Finally, he was one of the engineers of the Manchester city railways. He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers on 6 December 1853, and in 1856 became a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. He died of a stroke at his home, Broom Mount, Cheetham Hill, Manchester, on 26 January 1869. He was survived by his wife, Elizabeth Millard Perring. 


@@@@@


doc= 21982


Edward Perronet (1721-1792), Independent minister and hymn writer, was born at Sundridge, Kent. He was educated at Sevenoaks School and entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1741, though he did not graduate. Having joined Charles Wesley in 1746, he endured 'rough treatment' at Penkridge, Staffordshire, but continued with him on his tour of the north (1746-7). He married Duriah Clarke (died 1792) at St Bartholomew-the-Great, London, on 10 September 1748; the couple had no children. Perronet preached with John Wesley in 1749, supported him in his misery after Grace Murray rejected him, and was attacked by critics of Methodists at Bolton. By 1750 difficulties caused by Perronet's independent-mindedness were becoming apparent. He and his brother Charles refused to preach where Wesley requested, although they remained committed to his message. 


@@@@@


doc= 21983


Perronet, Vincent (1693-1785), Church of England clergyman, was born in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, on 11 December 1693, the third and youngest son of David Perronet (1664-1717), a surgeon, and Philothea Arther, first cousin to the countess dowager of Dartmouth. Perronet was descended from a well-to-do Swiss family. His father had been born in Chateau d'Oex, then in the canton of Bern, and had come to England in 1680, being naturalized on 20 March 1708. A cousin, Jean Rodolphe Perronet (1708-1794), later achieved celebrity in France as the engineer of thirteen bridges, including the Pont de Neuilly and the Pont de la Concorde in Paris. 
Vincent Perronet's mother had been brought up by Sir Philip Howard, uncle of the earl of Carlisle. Probably because of her connection with Lord Carlisle, Perronet was educated at St Bees School in Cumberland and the Queen's College, Oxford, from which he matriculated in December 1714 and graduated BA in 1718. On 4 December 1718 he married Charity (1688-1763), daughter of Thomas and Margaret Goodhew, at St Mary Magdalen, Old Fish Street, London. They had twelve children, the first of whom, Daniel, was baptized at St James's, Clerkenwell, on 2 October 1719. In the same year Perronet was ordained and began a nine-year curacy at Sundridge, in Kent. In 1724 he graduated MA from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. Four years later he became the vicar of Shoreham, Kent, where he remained for the rest of his life. 
From childhood onward Perronet experienced terrifying dreams, visions, mystical conflicts, and spiritual distress. He received some comfort from reading John Locke's 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding', which ensured that his religious outlook was never divorced from rational thought. He saw in Locke 'the most affectionate regard for truth, sound morality and divine revelation', and defended him first against the Anglican divine Joseph Butler in his 'A Vindication of Mr Locke' (1736), and then in 'A Second Vindication' (1738) against the dissenter Isaac Watts. 
In 1744 Perronet was introduced to John Wesley by Henry Piers, a friend and fellow clergyman. Perronet, like other members of his family, had initially considered the Methodists a threat to the established church. Though increasingly attracted by Methodism, Perronet refused to embrace the movement before he had received a full statement about its origin and purpose. This Wesley famously set out in a letter of 1748, published as 'A Plain Account of the People called Methodists' (1749), and thus began Perronet's lifelong friendship with the Wesleys and his support for Methodism through the pulpit and the press. 
By the late 1740s the Wesley brothers had been excluded from preaching in many Anglican pulpits. Perronet's decision to allow them to preach in his church went against the wishes of his parishioners, and on the first occasion Charles Wesley spoke he was protected from missiles by Perronet's son Charles (1723-1776). Other members of the Perronet family also supported the Methodists. His eldest daughter, Damaris (died 1782), became a Methodist class leader and a mainstay of the Shoreham Methodists. Another daughter, Elizabeth, married William Briggs, a class leader and John Wesley's book steward in 1749. 
Perronet's connection with Methodism appears to have lessened his interest in philosophy, and his published works between 1745 and 1767 reflect a theology of grace and an advocacy of religious life as exemplified by Methodist teaching. From the beginning of their friendship the Wesleys looked to Perronet for guidance in personal as well as theological matters. He took part in the Methodist conference of 1747 which discussed the difficult subject of the doctrine of entire sanctification. In 1748 he encouraged Charles Wesley in his love for Sarah Gwynne and subsequently became a trustee of their marriage settlement. John Wesley, after his failed pursuit of Grace Murray, consulted him in 1751 about marriage and was advised to marry, though there is no indication that Wesley's disastrous union with Marie Vazeille can be blamed on Perronet. 
In January 1770 Perronet was visited by Selina, countess of Huntingdon, who described him as 'a most heavenly man, with the most lively piety joined with the profoundest humility' (Seymour, 1.317). Later that year John Wesley outraged Huntingdon's followers by purging Methodist preaching of an association with Calvinism which, in Wesley's opinion, played down the necessity of holy living. Perronet, appalled as he was at the fury of the Calvinists' personal attacks, nevertheless tried to judge the matter on the truth it proposed, as he had done in his earlier defence of Locke. He distinguished the false belief (often laid at the Methodists' door) that a person could build up merit with God because of his good works from the scriptural command to do them simply as the inevitable concomitant of a Christian life. 'With regard to the merit of good works... I could not conceive how an unprofitable servant could merit anything from a holy God. But then... Christ came to purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works... though even our best works can have no merit in them. ('Arminian Magazine', 253)' In later life rheumatism (possibly rheumatoid arthritis) left Perronet painfully disabled. From the end of 1778 he never left his home, though he continued to preach there every Sunday morning. With his wife and ten of his children now dead, Perronet was cared for by his granddaughter Elizabeth (Betsy) Briggs, daughter of Elizabeth. John Wesley continued to visit Perronet, whom in 1783 he found 'full of love'. In these years of confinement Perronet pursued his favourite subject, the application of scripture prophecies to the second coming of Christ and to the natural events in which he saw signs of the impending end of the world. 
On 7 May 1785 Perronet became ecstatic in contemplation of the glorious happiness to come, and two days later died at the Shoreham vicarage in his sleep. He was buried at Shoreham on 14 May. Betsy, who later married Peard Dickinson, Perronet's curate, wrote a memoir of her grandfather which was published in the 'Methodist Magazine' (1799), interspersed with her husband's reflections on Perronet's character. Dickinson spoke of Perronet's manly piety, Christian courtesy and hospitality, cheerful and sweet disposition, fervour of spirit, simplicity of manners, and frankness and generosity of temper. Those who knew him delighted in this happy, holy man whom Wesley called a 'saint'; an anonymous verse among the Perronet manuscripts ends 'Men loved in thee the image of their Lord'. Yet as his second son, Edward ['see below'], looked back over his father's life, he also saw an 'unwearied toil' with only 'minute gains' (Perronet, 198). Dickinson was similarly of the opinion that 'the success, which he ardently wished for, did not follow his labours' (Briggs and Dickinson, 161), at least in Shoreham. It was his decisive influence on the Wesleys, and therefore on Methodism, which gave Perronet's life historical importance. His reason, affection, and loyalty steered them through difficulties caused by their own characters and by religious opposition. 
One of only two children to outlive their father, 
By then many Methodists who had been refused sacrament by clergy were asking to receive it from their own preachers. To accede implied a separation from the church which the Wesleys were determined to avoid. Nevertheless by 1755 Edward and his brother had administered the sacrament, believing that their calling gave them the right to do so, and that the Wesleys' opposition was a denial of their liberty to act according to their conscience. In 1756 Perronet published 'The Mitre', a ferocious attack in verse on the Church of England. The notes to the verse constitute a valuable theological commentary. Perronet claimed that the sacrament of the Lord's supper was not a priestly rite, and that a handful of private individuals, or a single family, could celebrate it as had the early Christians. 
The disagreement over 'The Mitre' further worsened relations with the Wesleys. In November 1756 Charles Wesley wrote of Perronet: 'I love both him and Charles, and the whole family... but must we, therefore, suffer this madman to cast firebrands down and to tear our whole flock to pieces?... at Canterbury I saw our Sacrament Hymns, which Ted has scratched out and blotted, hardly leaving twenty entire lines... his own soul can never recover while he wanders from house to house in such a lounging way of life. Therefore let him go home to his wife, and do as much good and as little harm as he can at Canterbury. (C. Wesley to J. Wesley, 16 Nov 1756, Tyerman, 'Life and Times', 2.254)' Thus Perronet's connection with organized Methodism came to an end. For a short time he preached in the Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion until his open aversion to the established church led to his becoming the minister of an Independent congregation. 
Little is known of Perronet in later life, though he is said to have become the editor of a local newspaper in which he censured and ridiculed 'those whom he thought enthusiastic supporters of Church and State' (Smith, 1.209). He published, anonymously, collections of hymns and poems in 1756, 1782, and 1785, of which the last, 'Occasional Verses', was the most important. It contains his enduring memorial, the great hymn 'On the Resurrection' ('All hail the power of Jesu's name'), which has a place in most English-language hymnbooks; many other poems which reflect the Calvinist-Arminian quarrel also deserve recognition. 
Edward Perronet probably separated from his family after the affair of 'The Mitre', and apart from $10 for 'mourning' for him and Duriah, he was excluded from Vincent Perronet's final will because he had inherited his sister Damaris's property at Wandsworth. The Wesleys continued to think affectionately of their former supporter. 'Where is your Uncle Ned?', Charles asked Betsy Briggs, 'I retain all my old love for him and trust he will be given at last to his blessed father's prayers' ('Journal of the Rev. Charles Wesley', 2.284). Perronet died at Canterbury on 2 January 1792 and was buried six days later in the south cloister of Canterbury Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 21984


Perrot, George (1710-1780), judge, was baptized on 24 June 1710 at Barwick in Elmet, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the second son in the family of eleven children of the Revd Thomas Perrot -- prebendary of Ripon and rector of Welbury in the North Riding of Yorkshire, and of St Martin-in-Micklegate, York -- and his wife, Anastasia, daughter of the Revd George Plaxton, rector of Barwick in Elmet. He went to Westminster School in 1722, was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1728, and was called to the bar in 1732. In 1742 he married Mary ('c'.1702-1784), daughter of William Bower of Bridlington, Yorkshire, and widow of Peter Whitton, lord mayor of York in 1728. They had no children. 
In May 1757 he was elected a bencher of the Inner Temple, and in 1759 was made a king's counsel. On 16 April 1760 he opened the case against Laurence Shirley, fourth Earl Ferrers, on trial in the House of Lords for murder. On 24 January 1763 he was created a serjeant-at-law and appointed fourth baron of the exchequer. He was taken ill in Maidstone, Kent, during the Lent assizes in 1775, and retired from the bench on 15 May 1775 with a pension of $1200 a year. 
Perrot moved to Pershore, Worcestershire, where he had extensive estates, including the River Avon from Tewkesbury to Evesham, and there he died on 28 January 1780. A monument was erected in his memory in the parish church at Laleham, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 21985


Perrot, Sir James (1571/2-1637), politician, was probably born in Munster, the third (but sole illegitimate) son of Sir John Perrot (1528-1592), lord deputy of Ireland, and his mistress, Sybil Jones of Radnorshire. His father owned the Haroldston estate, near Haverfordwest in Pembrokeshire, but James may have spent his boyhood at Westmead in Carmarthenshire, one of Sir John's lesser Welsh properties. On 29 May 1584, shortly before Sir John's departure for Dublin to take up office as Ireland's lord deputy, Perrot was recognized by his father, who granted him full rights of inheritance. Six years later he confirmed these rights by a second conveyance after discovering that the first had been legally flawed. 
Perrot matriculated at Jesus College, Oxford, aged fourteen on 8 July 1586 but did not graduate. He received a sound classical education, publishing in 1600 a short treatise on Greek philosophy, 'The First Part of the Consideration of Humane Condition'. After leaving university he is said by Anthony Wood to have travelled abroad for a few years. He entered the Middle Temple in January 1591. The following year witnessed the imprisonment, attainder, and death of his father. His family's fortunes were rescued by the queen's favourite, Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, whose sister had married Perrot's sole surviving half-brother, Sir Thomas Perrot. The latter was restored by statute to his patrimony in March 1593, but died without male issue in February 1594, leaving James as heir to the Perrot estates. Despite the conveyances of 1584 and 1590, James's illegitimacy impeded his smooth succession. For the next fifteen years he was locked in a series of legal battles, first with Sir Thomas's widow, who was ultimately bought off with an annuity, and then with his erstwhile ally, Thomas Perrot of London, a descendant of a younger brother of Perrot's paternal grandfather. James ultimately triumphed, but the ordeal caused him to fall back on a deeply held religious faith; about this time he composed a series of prayers to help him through his 'adversities', which he later published (NL Wales, J. Perrot, 'An Invitation unto Prayer', 1624, preface). 
In 1596 Perrot wrote a tract aimed at discouraging soldiers and scholars from settling abroad, where they might plot invasion. Entitled 'Discovery of Discontented Minds', it was dedicated to Essex, to whom Perrot continued to look for protection despite his dispute with the earl's sister. In the following year Perrot was returned to parliament for Haverfordwest, but played no recorded part in its activity. Appointed to the Pembrokeshire bench in November 1598, he successfully petitioned to become its chairman in 1601. In January 1599 he sought permission to accompany Essex to Ireland, but the earl evidently declined his offer of service, although he helped Perrot to several stewardships of crown lands in south Wales which had previously been held by Perrot's father. Perrot took no part in Essex's abortive rising, nor does he appear to have sought election to the 1601 parliament. An esquire of the body at the funeral of Queen Elizabeth in April 1603, he was knighted by James I a few months later. About this time he married Mary (died 1639), daughter of Robert Ashfield of Chesham, in Buckinghamshire; they had two daughters, neither of whom reached adulthood. In March 1604 he was once more returned to parliament for Haverfordwest. On 5 May he made his first recorded speech in the house, 'a long and learned discourse touching matters of religion', which the underclerk described as 'very good' ('JHC', 1547-1628, 1.199). 
In the summer of 1605, while parliament was in recess, Perrot renewed his offer of service in Ireland, where his brother-in-law Sir Arthur Chichester was the new lord deputy. However, he did not take ship, as he was elected mayor of Haverfordwest. During the second and third sessions of parliament Perrot earned a reputation at Westminster for godly protestant zeal; he took almost no recorded part in the union debates of 1607. Following the prorogation of July 1607, he at last travelled to Ireland from where, in June 1608, he conveyed to London Robert, fourth Lord Delvin, who was suspected of treason. On his return to Ireland he was given command of a company of foot; he was subsequently assigned to guard the border town of Newry, where he styled himself 'governor', apprehending and killing several rebels, for which he was commended to the English privy council. At the beginning of 1610 he offered to help plant escheated lands in Ulster with protestant settlers, but the reconvening of the English parliament caused him to sell his captaincy and return to Westminster, where he took little interest in the great contract but continued to seek reform of the church. 
Following parliament's dissolution Perrot became deputy vice-admiral for Pembrokeshire under William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke, a major landowner in south Wales and leading privy councillor, who shared Perrot's firmly protestant outlook. Early in 1614 Pembroke helped persuade the king to summon a new parliament, arguing that a fresh assembly would remedy James's desperate financial condition if in return the king offered parliament various bills of grace, which had been laid before the Commons in 1610. Once at Westminster, sitting again for Haverfordwest, Perrot initially avoided the contentious issue of impositions, but instead spoke in favour of the grace bills, presumably at Pembroke's behest. However, on 3 June he reacted angrily to the king's threat to dissolve parliament unless the Commons debated supply rather than impositions. Declaring that the royal need for impositions stemmed from James's squandering of $70,000 each year on pensions to courtiers, he warned that if royal overspending was not curbed it would be pointless to vote subsidies. When parliament was dissolved four days later the council summoned him to explain this outburst. Possibly thanks to Pembroke's influence, Perrot was merely detained in London for a week, while several others who had delivered inflammatory speeches were committed to the Tower. Nevertheless, in August 1615 Perrot was struck off the Pembrokeshire bench. 
By 1619 Perrot was engaged in a project to continue the official history of Ireland from 1584, where it then ended, to 1608. He hoped to shed light on the nature of the Irish problem to enable English governments to avoid the pitfalls of their predecessors. Compiled from official records, Perrot's 'The chronicle of Ireland' was dedicated to Pembroke but, being never entirely completed, went unpublished in its author's lifetime. Re-elected for Haverfordwest in December 1620, Perrot displayed the virulent anti-popery which was his hallmark. He complained that the penal laws were being laxly implemented, and in February and March 1621 he spearheaded the attack on the exchequer official responsible for collecting recusancy fines, Sir Henry Spiller, for enriching himself at the king's expense. However, in seeking to gather incriminating evidence in the records of the exchequer Perrot neglected to obtain the signatures of his fellow committee members to his search warrants, thereby enabling Spiller to complain to the house. Subsequent attempts to have Spiller investigated proved futile. Perrot's hostility to popery resurfaced on the final day of the parliamentary sitting (4 June), when he delivered an impassioned speech on the imperilled state of the Palatinate. He reminded his listeners that at the beginning of the parliament James had pledged to spend his own life and that of his son in the defence of the Palatinate. Now, when continental protestantism faced extinction, was it therefore not appropriate, he asked, that members of the Commons should follow James's lead by declaring that unless the elector had been restored to his possessions by the time parliament reconvened in November, they 'would be ready to adventure the lives and estates of all that belong unto us, or wherein we have interest, for the maintenance of the cause of God, and of his Majesty's royal issue' (Nicholas, 1.169)? The effect of this speech was electric. Members cheered and waved their hats, a gesture which, as Edward Nicholas recorded, 'had scarce ever been seen in parliament' (ibid.). After the din subsided the Commons drafted a declaration along the lines proposed by Perrot. This so pleased the king that he had the text translated and sent abroad. 
Perrot was among the first to revisit the palatine question when parliament reassembled. On 26 November he argued that war against Spain was affordable despite a slump in the cloth trade, but he may have harmed his case by suggesting that subsidy-payers should not contribute less than they were rated. Two days later Perrot, whose fears for the fate of true religion abroad were exceeded only by his anxiety for the state of protestantism at home, regaled the Commons with lurid tales of the increasing boldness of England's Catholic community. In his eyes the growth in popery stemmed from a lax enforcement of the penal laws and a failure to prevent Catholics from sending their children abroad to be educated. Perrot clearly believed the new-found boldness of the papists to be closely connected to the negotiations for a Spanish bride for Prince Charles. On 3 December he proposed that the house should petition James to abandon the Spanish match, recalling the king's earlier pledge to match his son 'for the glory of God, his church and the realm' (Nicholas, 2.270), which would be broken if the prince married a Catholic. His views were widely shared in the Commons, which accordingly called upon the king to marry his son to a protestant. James was so incensed at this invasion of his prerogative that he reproached the house by letter, whereupon Perrot lamented that the king had been misinformed and that 'our religion is not so safe as we desire it to be'. Five days later the parliament was adjourned, never to reconvene. 
Shortly after the parliament broke up Perrot was named to a commission to inquire into the ecclesiastical and temporal affairs of Ireland. Members of this commission may have received their places as punishment for their role in the final stages of the 1621 parliament, but Perrot undoubtedly welcomed the opportunity to help remould Irish institutions and may even have volunteered his services. He arrived in Dublin in April 1622, and in July he and Sir Francis Annesley were assigned counties Cavan and Fermanagh. His task completed, he returned to England at the beginning of 1623, when James rewarded him by restoring him to the Pembrokeshire bench. In 1623-4 he served a second term as mayor of Haverfordwest, ordering the bells rung in October 1623 to celebrate the safe return from Spain of Prince Charles. His mayoralty coincided with the summons of the last Jacobean parliament, and -- since mayors could not return themselves -- he was technically ineligible for election. However, he evaded parliamentary censure by getting himself elected for Pembrokeshire rather than Haverfordwest, in the process defeating John Wogan of Wiston, who had represented the shire in the previous two parliaments. On taking his seat Perrot reiterated his concern at the lax treatment of recusants and underlined his reputation for puritan fervour: notably he was one of just five members who, on 13 May, were required to alert Archbishop Abbot to the contents of Richard Mountague's recently published 'A New Gagg for an Old Goose', which highlighted the allegedly Catholic elements of Anglicanism. However, he probably astounded many of his colleagues on 27 April, when, during a debate on recusant officeholders, he admitted that his wife of more than twenty years was a papist. Perrot played no noticeable part in the impeachment of Lord Treasurer Middlesex, perhaps because one of his relatives was employed in the latter's service, but he did join the attack on Lord Keeper Williams, who had declared himself opposed to war with Spain. 
Perrot's antagonism of John Wogan in 1624 returned to haunt him in 1625, for at the general election in that year Wogan, employing a variety of underhand practices, defeated him in a contest for the county seat. A despondent Perrot appealed to the Commons for redress. However, the matter remained unresolved at the August dissolution. When a new parliament was summoned in 1626 Perrot endeavoured to revive his earlier interest at Haverfordwest, but he discovered that the seat was no longer his for the taking. His long-standing local rival, the crypto-Catholic Sir Thomas Canon, who had filled the seat in 1625, was unwilling to make way for Perrot. In mid-January Perrot reported Canon to the government for electoral malpractice, and set out for London apparently confident of victory. However, when parliament assembled in February he was left once again without a seat. In despair Perrot considered a belated resumption of his military career in Ireland, but by mid-April he was once again in the Commons, almost certainly as member for Camelford, replacing the previously elected member who had been found to be incapable of sitting. Perrot undoubtedly owed his seat to Pembroke, who may have hoped that he would participate in the parliamentary assault on the royal favourite, the duke of Buckingham. Perrot, however, was more interested in defending true religion and in reiterating his concern at the writings of Richard Mountague, now a royal chaplain. 
Some time in 1626 Perrot published an account of his father's rule in Ireland; he considered returning there but over the summer he was kept busy collecting the forced loan in Pembrokeshire. He returned to Westminster once again in 1628 as member for Haverfordwest. In the chamber he highlighted the threat of popery at home, drawing particular attention to the presence of Irish troops at strategic points along the south coast and of Catholic officers among the companies in Ireland. He played only a modest role in the debates which culminated in the formulation of the petition of right, but he supported the petition and hoped that the king would accord it the force of law. Unlike many in the house he professed not to desire Buckingham's ruin but merely a reduction in his power, an expression of relative moderation which reflected the rapprochement between the favourite and Pembroke which had existed since July 1626. During the 1629 session Perrot accused bishops Richard Mountague and William Laud of holding Arminian opinions, for by now he was convinced of the existence of a high-level conspiracy to subvert the fundamental doctrines of the Anglican church. In his final parliamentary speech (23 February) he warned his colleagues that 'the enemies of our religion are in agitation to break this Parliament' (Notestein and Relf, 236). 
Following the dissolution Perrot became embroiled in a lengthy dispute over his vice-admiralty accounts with Sir Thomas Canon. In 1630 he published his 'Meditation and Prayers on the Lords' Prayer and Ten Commandments', which had been circulating in manuscript form for at least two years. He served as mayor of Haverfordwest for the last time in 1633-4, and died at Haroldston on 4 February 1637; he was buried in the chancel of St Mary's, Haverfordwest. In his will, dated 26 January 1637, he bequeathed the bulk of his property to Herbert Perrot of Moreton-on-Lugg in Herefordshire, with whose family he claimed kinship. Following the death of Perrot's widow on 9 May 1639 Herbert's claims were unsuccessfully disputed by Perrot's nephew, John Laugharne of St Bride's, in Pembrokeshire. Perrot's works also included 'A discourse of lawes', a 58-page unpublished treatise dedicated to Charles I, and a life of Sir Philip Sidney. 


@@@@@


doc= 21986


Perrot, Sir John (1528-1592), lord deputy of Ireland, was born between 7 and 11 November 1528, probably at Haroldston in Pembrokeshire, the principal seat of the Perrot family since its acquisition in 1442. He was possibly the youngest of the three children of Thomas Perrot (1504/5-1531), landowner, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1511- 'c'.1586), daughter of James Berkeley (died 'c'.1515) of Thornbury, Gloucestershire, and Hilton, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Susan (died 'c'.1521), widow of William Vele. His sisters Jane and Elizabeth married, respectively, William Philipps of Picton and John Price of Gogerddan. 
Contrary to the popular and oft-quoted myth (the origin of which may be attributed to the work of Sir Robert Naunton), Perrot's mother was never a mistress of Henry VIII and he, consequently, was not the king's bastard son. His parents' marriage was arranged at great cost by Maurice, Lord Berkeley, who had purchased the wardship and marriage of both Mary, his niece, and Thomas Perrot two years after the death of Thomas's father, Sir Owen, in December 1521. Upon their marriage, some time after Thomas came of age in August 1526, and contingent on the will of Maurice, Lord Berkeley, the considerable sum of 500 marks was settled on the young couple. Like his father (Sir Owen died aged forty-one) and elder brother (Robert died aged eighteen in 1522), Thomas died tragically young, aged twenty-six years, on 19 September 1531. 
Within a year of the death of his father, Perrot's mother had married Sir Thomas Jones (died 1559) of Llanegwad and (from 1546) Abermarlais, Carmarthenshire, who then settled at Haroldston. The marriage (the second for both) produced five children, the eldest of whom, Sir Henry Jones (died 1586), formed a particularly close relationship with his half-brother Perrot. Having acquired his stepson's wardship in February 1533, Jones set about the task of managing the Perrot estates and seeing to his ward's education and upbringing. We know little about Perrot's early life apart from the fact that he was brought up in a large household of ten children (his stepfather having two daughters from a previous marriage) and which seems to have been cosmopolitan in culture and religion and bilingual in speech. His Welsh-speaking stepfather patronized the bards, one of whom, Dafydd Fynglwyd, composed a poem (probably in the late 1530s or early 1540s) in praise of a clearly young Perrot, and, despite his own strong adherence to the Catholic faith, procured his stepson a place at the cathedral school at St David's, then in the care of the protestant bishop William Barlow. Here Perrot was introduced to what became a lifelong attachment to the protestant faith, and he also developed his flair for languages, becoming fluent, on his own admission and by the reports of contemporaries, in French, Spanish, Italian, and Latin. 
Aged eighteen Perrot proceeded to London where his stepfather's connections at court (he was groom of the chamber in 1513 and gentleman usher in 1532) secured him a place in the house of William Paulet, Lord St John, later first marquess of Winchester and lord treasurer of England. Here, in the company of Henry Neville, sixth Lord Bergavenny, and John de Vere, sixteenth earl of Oxford, Perrot completed his formal education. However, he soon gained an unenviable reputation for violence which, added to his arbitrary disposition, ensured a turbulent apprenticeship. He twice fell out with Neville, with whom he brawled once so violently that they reportedly broke glasses 'about one another's ears' so that 'blood besprinkled... the chamber'. It was to a fracas, in which he was injured, with two yeomen of the guard when going 'into Southwarke (as it was supposed to a place of pleasure) taking but a page with him' (Perrot, 'History', 26) that Perrot owed his introduction to Henry VIII. Unfortunately, owing to the king's untimely death, a promise of preferment never materialized, though Perrot need not have worried, for his connections were such as almost to guarantee him a place at the court of Edward VI. Besides the influence of his stepfather and of his patron, Paulet, who as lord president of the council may have been instrumental in securing Perrot's election to parliament (for Carmarthenshire) on the death of Sir Richard Devereux in November 1547, his uncle Rhys or Rice Perrot (died 1571) was reader in Greek to the young king. Knighted by King Edward within a week of attaining his majority on 17 November 1549, Perrot had evidently aligned himself with John Dudley, earl of Warwick -- with whose eldest son, Ambrose, he established a lifelong friendship -- in the 'coup d'etat' against Protector Somerset. In February 1550 Perrot's stepfather formally relinquished his interest in his stepson's estates though it was not until May that process had been completed. The attractions of the court and the distractions of London life conspired to delay Perrot's first step into local administration and it was not until September 1552 that he was pricked, succeeding his cousin John Perrot (died 1569) of Scotsborough, near Tenby, as sheriff of Pembrokeshire. 
As a result of his connections at court and his perceived skill in knightly exercises, in May 1551 Perrot accompanied the lord chamberlain, William Parr, marquess of Northampton, to France to negotiate a marriage between the teenage King Edward and the infant daughter of the French king, Princess Elizabeth. Perrot's reckless courage and passion for the hunt attracted the attention of a grateful king, Henri II, whom he saved from a life-threatening encounter with a wounded boar. Declining an invitation and generous pension to serve the French king, Perrot returned to England having enhanced his reputation for gallantry but denuded his purse of funds. At home his profligacy continued unabated and within a short time he found himself in considerable pecuniary difficulties. In a letter to a friend Perrot admitted to his reckless spending on 'the tilt and other toys I am ashamed to tell' (BL, Harley MS 5992, fol. 9). Forced to mortgage part of his Pembrokeshire estates to meet debts, reported by his biographer and son Sir James Perrot (1571/2-1637) to have been between $7000 and $8000, Sir John is said also to have sought the aid of a sympathetic King Edward, who persuaded the council to grant him a minimum $100 per annum from concealed lands which he might discover. The king's generosity notwithstanding, salvation for Perrot came in the shape of his mother and stepfather who between them made over a number of properties in Pembrokeshire, some of which were held in dower. 
Marriage, too, may have eased the burden of debt inasmuch as Perrot could expect his bride, Ann, to be well provided for, she being the daughter of Sir Thomas Cheyney of Shurland, Kent. Tragically, his wife died in September 1553 while giving birth to a son, Thomas (died 1594), who survived briefly to succeed his father in 1592. Unusually for the time, Perrot remained unmarried for some ten years until in 1563 or 1564 he took as his second wife Jane (died 1593), daughter of Hugh Prust of Thorry, Devon, and widow of Lewis Pollard (died 1563) of Oakford, Devon. Together they had three children, a son, William (died 1587), and daughters Lettice and Ann. An active libido ensured that further children were born to Perrot in less legitimate circumstances, of whom the following are known: Sir James, John ('b'. 'c'.1565), Elizabeth, and an unnamed daughter. 
Cheyney's influence served Perrot well, and it was his father-in-law who, as lord warden of the Cinque Ports, ensured his return as member for Sandwich, Kent, in the Marian parliaments of 1553 and 1555. Unsurprisingly, the Marian restoration was not to Perrot's liking. The fact of his being a protestant did not at first militate against him with Queen Mary, who: 'did favor hym very well, and would say that she did lyke exceedinge well of hym, and had a hope he would prove a worthy subject but that (as hir words were) he did smell of the smoake, meaninge thereby his religion. (Perrot, 'History', 36)' However, he soon fell foul of the new regime. In January 1554 he clashed with the servants of William Somerset, third earl of Worcester, for which he was briefly imprisoned in the Fleet. Soon after he refused a commission by William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, to hunt down his co-religionists in south-west Wales, preferring instead to risk the wrath of the government by sheltering heretics in his home at Haroldston. Among those who had cause to thank Perrot for his protection were his uncle Rhys, Laurence Nowell and possibly his brother Alexander Nowell, and an otherwise unknown Mr Banister. Sure enough Perrot was denounced by a neighbour, Thomas Catherne of Prendergast, and was again briefly imprisoned in the Fleet. Undeterred, he continued to live dangerously by aligning himself with the opposition in parliament, resulting in another violent quarrel with Pembroke when the latter objected to his support of Sir Anthony Kingston and Sir Edward Hastings, closely followed by his arrest in April 1556 on suspicion of complicity in the Dudley conspiracy. 
Lack of evidence and court connections saved Perrot from a longer spell of imprisonment, or worse, in the Fleet, but even he came to realize that the government was fast running out of patience and he out of luck. He thought it best to remove himself from the kingdom and, having made up his quarrel with Pembroke, he set sail with the earl's forces for France. Pembroke's earlier magnanimous gesture in supporting Perrot's suit for the castle and lordship of Carew, which won the queen's approval, and the fact of his younger son Sir Edward Herbert's friendship with Perrot, did much to heal the rift between them, but it was to be their service together at the siege and capture of St Quentin in July to August 1557 which set the seal on their reconciliation. On his return from military service Perrot was plunged yet again into bitter dispute with Catherne whom he took, after breaking into his house, into custody at Carew Castle. Both were summoned to appear before the council in June 1558 where Perrot was found to be at fault having 'exceeded his commission and misused himself'. After a brief period in the Fleet, Perrot was released on condition he agreed to be bound over in a recognizance of $200 to keep the peace. 
Mary's death in November 1558 proved fortuitous for Perrot. A commission convened in September to investigate Catherne's accusations against him was allowed to lapse and on the accession of Elizabeth he was freed from yet another prison sentence, this time in the Marshalsea, to which he had been committed for non-appearance at court on an attachment for debt. Elizabeth favoured him, and as a mark of her trust he was appointed to be one of the four gentlemen chosen to carry the canopy of state at her coronation. In a remarkable series of appointments between 1559 and 1562 -- which included the stewardships of the manors of Carew, Coedra, and Narberth, the constableship of Narberth and Tenby castles, the gaolership of Haverfordwest prison (1559), election as mayor of Haverfordwest (1560), and by 1562 'custos rotulorum' of the county borough of Haverfordwest and vice-admiralship of the coast of south Wales -- Perrot consolidated his hold on the government and administration of Pembrokeshire. In addition to investing Perrot with profitable crown offices, the regime also showered him with grants of land and advowsons in south-west Wales and elsewhere in England. His commissionership in 1561 of concealed lands (principally those formerly belonging to the priory of Haverfordwest) added considerably to his own landed wealth but inevitably brought him into conflict with his neighbours, whose titles were thus challenged, and among those pursued was his old adversary Catherne. Perrot's relentless pursuit of power in Pembrokeshire during the 1560s and 1570s made him very unpopular and gave rise to an anti-Perrot faction which attempted to block, and not without a little success, his progress. In 1572, while Perrot was away in Ireland, they wrested control of the town of Haverfordwest from him and succeeded in having their man, Catherne's son-in-law Alban Stepney, elected to serve the borough as its MP. However, in the face of Perrot's increasing wealth and influence (he counted Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, Thomas Radcliffe, earl of Sussex, Sir Henry Sidney, and Sir Francis Walsingham among his friends and patrons), it never amounted to more than a rearguard action. Never shy of resorting to law to browbeat his enemies into submission, Perrot is said by his contemporary the antiquarian squire of Henllys, George Owen, to have ruined a number of gentlemen in the process of prosecuting, and being prosecuted by, them. 
Although not the regime's first choice for service in Ireland to head the newly created presidency of Munster, Perrot's growing political and administrative experience, added to his rugged individualism and uncompromising approach to resolving problems, was thought fit for the task of settling this disturbed region of the realm. Plagued by rebellion since 1569, led by James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, the province had first to be pacified before its reformation and plantation could properly begin. Offered the post in December 1570, Perrot reluctantly accepted, and in February 1571, in the company of his friend Thomas Butler (Black Tom), tenth earl of Ormond and (since 1559) treasurer of Ireland, he set sail for Waterford. On taking the oath before Lord Deputy Sidney, who departed Dublin for home within weeks of Perrot's being sworn in, the president made haste for Cork. Perrot continued the reign of terror initiated in Munster by his predecessor Sir Humphrey Gilbert, and in the space of two years he dispatched to the gallows over 800 rebels. But fitz Maurice proved to be a resourceful opponent and, hampered by lack of resources and manpower, Perrot took fully two years to bring the rebel to heel. Constant campaigning took its toll on Perrot, who complained in a letter to Walsingham that for every white hair he had brought over with him he could now show sixty. Dissatisfied with the level of support given him by the privy council, and angered by accusations of dishonesty and malpractice in his seizure of a Portuguese merchantman, the 'Peter and Paul', laden with valuable spices (for which a Parisian grocer attempted to sue him in court), Perrot took his leave of Ireland in July 1573. 
Since he had left Ireland without permission, Perrot's enemies fully expected the queen to issue a severe and public reprimand, but none came. Pleading ill health as an excuse for not returning to Munster, though the queen wished him to do so, Perrot retired home to Carew. In a letter to the queen's chief secretary, William Cecil, Lord Burghley, Perrot declared that it was his intention 'to lead a countryman's life and to keep out of debt' ('CSP Ire.', '1574-85', 62). His retirement from public office had lasted a little less than eighteen months when in September 1574 Perrot was appointed to the council in the marches of Wales. In Pembrokeshire too he was busy consolidating his power, being joined by his son and heir, Thomas, whom he invested with the house and manor of Haroldston not long after the latter attained his majority. Serving consecutive terms as mayor of Haverfordwest (1575-7) finally put paid to the anti-Perrot faction, the scale of whose defeat can best be appreciated by the fact that of the thirteen mayors elected in the fourteen years after Perrot's mayoralty (1577-91), all but three can be closely connected either with him or with his son Thomas. 
Perrot's years at home, during which time he attended court infrequently, were well spent inasmuch as he busied himself with enlarging and better managing his estates. However, not everyone appreciated his agricultural improvements, nor the means he employed to increase significantly his income from his estates. Accusations of rack-renting, encroachments, and enclosures were upheld by his biographer and son Sir James who, while admitting that his father 'was somewhat complained of in his life-time', said that he had nevertheless 'improved his lands to a high rate' and in mitigation stated that 'there are none of his tenants but would be glad to takes leases thereof now, and pay somewhat more for it' (Perrot, 'History', 22). That Perrot did maintain 'the part rather of a nobleman than of a knight... in retinue, in house-keeping and in all other respects' (ibid., 21) is made manifest by the fact that he was able to take thirty-four servants kitted out in his livery, sporting the family's distinctive crest (namely 'parrot with pear in claw'), to serve him in Ireland. Of greater and lasting significance in respect of Perrot's public demonstration of his wealth and power were his ambitious building projects which involved the conversion of the medieval castles of Laugharne (granted him by the queen in 1575) and Carew into mansions of some architectural pretension. That neither was fully completed by the time of his death owed more to his political difficulties after 1590 than to any loss of interest on his part. Nor had he overreached himself financially, a more prudent man than in his youth; in April 1590 he managed to raise $1500 from current rents alone. Not without good reason did contemporaries credit him with being wealthy, but they tended also to exaggerate his riches. 
It was a restless Perrot -- he had been badgering the privy council for some months with ideas on how Ireland might be better governed -- that was called upon once again to serve the crown in a martial capacity, but this time at sea. In August 1579 he was given command of a squadron of ships and entrusted with the task of intercepting and destroying any Spanish or pirate vessel appearing off the southern coast of Ireland. Taking his son Thomas with him, Perrot cruised offshore for some weeks, occasionally putting into port and spending time ashore at Baltimore, Cork, and Waterford. At Waterford they met Perrot's successor as lord president of Munster, Sir William Drury, who shortly before his untimely death knighted his son, and Sir William George and Sir William Pelham. 
Thinking that the danger of invasion had passed and with the closing of the season, in mid-October 1579 Perrot turned for home, but as he did so he came across a notorious pirate called Deryfold whom he determined to apprehend. Perrot gave chase and overtook his quarry near the Flemish coast, after which he made for the Thames. Unfortunately, his ship ran aground on the Kentish Knocks and as he and his companions struggled to cope with the storm that threatened to break up their vessel they prepared to die. As Perrot's: 'nearest followers and friends came to take their last farewell of him, amongst the rest his son Sir Thomas was one to whom he said 'Well Boy, God bless you and I give you my blessing. I wish to God that you were ashore and the Queen's ship safe then I should care the less about myself.' (Perrot, 'History', 114-15)' In fact Perrot, his son, and shipmates were spared when their ship, on the advice of Deryfold, righted itself and they sailed into the Thames and on to Greenwich Palace. Calls for his arrest on charges of misconduct and failure in his mission were ignored by the queen who reacted sympathetically to Perrot's request that Deryfold be pardoned for his exceptional and life-saving seamanship. However, such gallantry was viewed with suspicion by his enemies who had not long before accused him of trafficking with pirates in Welsh waters. Attempts by his successor as vice-admiral of south Wales, Sir William Morgan of Pen-coed, and his deputy, Richard Vaughan of Whitland, to have Perrot arrested and charged came to nothing. Although Perrot cannot be declared entirely innocent in respect of his dealings with pirates, the extent to which he has been credited with becoming involved with them has been exaggerated. 
In 1584 the call for Perrot's services once again echoed within the walls of the court. The queen, determined to deal effectively but cheaply with Ireland, was sufficiently impressed by Perrot's treatise of 1581 on the better government of the island to offer him the opportunity to put his ideas into practice. Service in Ireland, that graveyard of reputations of which the wise steered clear, called to the ambitious, and, through a combination of his own ego, the queen's flattery, and the prestige that came with the position and influence of the lord deputyship of Ireland (and despite the earnest advice of his stepbrother Sir Henry Jones not to go), Perrot was seduced into accepting the appointment on 17 January 1584. Five months later, on 21 June, he arrived in Dublin where he received the sword of state from the chancellor, Adam Loftus. Perrot began his work with energy and enthusiasm, setting off on a tour of the country within days of his arrival. His aim was to see and to be seen, to overawe both native and Old English with a public demonstration of royal power which he hoped might foster a healthier respect for English law. He established his provincial presidents in Connaught and in Munster, Sir Richard Bingham and Sir John Norris respectively, sought, and was offered in Connaught, the submission of native Irish leaders, and prepared for the subjugation and plantation of Ulster. 
Perrot was less an administrator than a soldier, and when an opportunity arose to take to the field against an invasion of Scots, acting in concert with a dissident Irish leader, Sorley Boy Mac Donnell, he did not hesitate. Perrot, together with the earl of Ormond and Donough O'Brien, earl of Thomond, hastened to meet the incursion in Ulster only to be disappointed to find the Scots departed. Nevertheless, he determined on the pacification of the region and took the submission of Turlough Luineach O'Neill, together with his only son as hostage. But his chief purpose was in evicting the Mac Donnells from their territory along the Antrim coast. A three-day siege of Dunluce Castle in September 1584 resulted in its fall and the capture of much booty, particularly valuable pieces of which he presented to Walsingham, Lady Walsingham, and Lord Burghley. Frustrated at his failure either to apprehend or assassinate Sorley Boy Mac Donnell, Perrot questioned the commitment of those around him. 
Perrot's ambitious projects for Ireland -- reforming the revenue system, the plantation and shiring of Ulster, the enforcement, and in some areas introduction, of English law, and the foundation of a university in Dublin -- largely failed. His failure to get Poynings' law suspended, and to heal the differences between the Gaelic Irish, the Old English, and the New English, meant that his parliament (1585-6) and most of its intended legislation had to be abandoned. On the other hand, his military campaigns proved rather more successful and though he was forced, on the outbreak of war with Spain, to reach an accommodation with Sorley Boy Mac Donnell, Perrot had largely pacified Ireland. His four years in Ireland proved to be a mixture of some achievements, bitter disappointments, increasing ill health (he was suffering kidney- and gallstones), and a growing fear of dying in that 'slimy country'. It was a crestfallen Perrot who wrote to Walsingham informing him of the death of his second son, William, in July 1587 and asking to be relieved of his duties as lord deputy. In his final months in office Perrot was displaying signs of a more violent and tempestuous disposition, resulting in several brawls with his ministers and in utter frustration on Perrot's part, expressed in oaths. He had alienated former friends and supporters such as the earl of Ormond, who resorted to his usual practice of undermining the position of serving lord deputies at court, and Secretary Sir Geoffrey Fenton, who at first had found him 'affable and pleasing' but had since changed his opinion. Worse still, he had quarrelled with his provincial presidents, Bingham and Norris, and had made avowed enemies in Chancellor Loftus, Treasurer Sir Henry Wallop, and marshal Sir Nicholas Bagnal. Nevertheless, when he handed on the sword of state to his successor, Sir William Fitzwilliam, the latter was compelled to admit that he left the country in a state of peace. 
Perrot returned from Ireland in July 1588 with his reputation intact, quite a feat in the Elizabethan period, and within days had been appointed lieutenant-general of the three south-west shires of Wales under Henry Herbert, second earl of Pembroke, and entrusted with the task of organizing their defence in the face of a possible Spanish invasion. Before the end of the year Perrot had secured his election as member for Haverfordwest and as he prepared to attend the opening of parliament, on 4 February 1589, he was summoned by the queen, who confirmed his appointment to the privy council. This proved to be the high point of his career for, unbeknown to him, the foundations of his position and influence at court were soon to be undermined. As early as 25 March 1589 Thomas Widebank wrote to Walsingham that he had had his audience with the queen immediately after Sir John Perrot had left her: 'what had passed he knows not, but he found her out of tune' ('CSP dom.', '1584-91', 584). The agenda for their discussion concerned the queen's request for a bill against the embezzling of her armour and weapons which, for some unknown reason, had caused them to fall out. 
Perrot's Irish service, and continuing influence in directing Irish affairs, as revealed by the council book entry 'Lord Buckhurst, Sir John Perrot, Mr. Fortescue did sit to hear Irish causes' ('APC', 18.76), proved to be the catalyst for his enemies to bring him down. Perrot's successor as lord deputy, Sir William Fitzwilliam, came to resent his influence on Irish affairs within the privy council which he believed might end in his own disgrace. To exacerbate the situation an increasing number of Irish nobles, and even members of the Irish council, were either ignoring or bypassing Fitzwilliam and writing directly to Perrot. A disgruntled Fitzwilliam wrote to his patron Burghley, 'My credit and service is already in the balance and cannot stand long overthrown' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/147, no. 35). 
Unsurprisingly, by October 1589 resentment had turned to open hostility as the two men traded insults, with Perrot alleging bribery and corruption on the part of Fitzwilliam. In February 1590 Fitzwilliam hit back hard when he accused Perrot of treason, in that he had consorted with known traitors, notably Brian O'Rourke and Sir William Stanley, and conspired with the king of Spain to remove the queen, for which he expected to be granted Wales! The queen ordered an investigation which made slow progress, mainly on account of the dubious quality of the evidence and the general unreliability of the chief witness for the prosecution, an Irish ex-priest called Denis O'Roughan. Nothing daunted, Perrot's accusers persisted and the case against him gathered momentum, particularly so after the death of his patron Sir Francis Walsingham in April 1590. By the end of the following month Perrot was placed under house arrest at Burghley's Strand residence while the charges were further investigated. A clearly distraught Perrot wrote to a friend, 'I do here... grow to utter contempt and no thing hath so much hurt me as wind whispered in corners' (Evans, 220-21). This whispering campaign soon turned into an avalanche of calls for his head. He was formally charged in December 1590 and in March 1591 he was removed to the Tower. 
More than a year elapsed before Perrot's trial, and in a letter written in December 1591 he complained that his memory was becoming impaired through grief and close confinement. Eventually, on 27 April 1592, he was tried at Westminster on a charge of high treason before the court of queen's bench. According to the indictment he was charged with using contemptuous words about the queen, helping known traitors and Romish priests, encouraging the rebellion of O'Rourke, and lastly, writing treasonable letters to Philip of Spain and the traitor Stanley. The prosecution concentrated upon the first charge, in which the evidence of Perrot's former secretary Philip Williams, who now served Fitzwilliam in the same capacity, proved decisive. The following remarks were attributed to the accused: '
Stick not so much upon Her Majesty's letter, she may command what she will, but we will do what we list 

Ah, silly woman, now she shall not curb me, she shall not rule me now 

God's wounds, this it is to serve a base bastard pissing kitchen woman, if I had served any prince in Christendom I have not been so dealt withal 
(Bodl. Oxf., MS Willis 58, fols. 247-8, 263-305; Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 299, fol. 477)' Perrot, who was extremely agitated throughout his trial, did not deny that he might have spoken the words attributed to him but he resented the interpretation placed upon them. In spite of a spirited defence, and to his utter astonishment, Perrot was found guilty and condemned to death on 26 June 1592; thereafter he languished in the Tower awaiting his fate. Even towards the end Perrot never believed that he would be found guilty, much less executed. He took comfort from the fact that the queen had stayed judgement against him on six occasions. However, unbeknown to him the architect of his downfall was no less a man than Burghley who, before and throughout the trial, presented himself in public as a friend and ally but in secret wrought his destruction. 
Perrot's last will and testament, dated 3 May 1592 (an earlier will made in August 1584 is still extant), is over three pages long and, in reality, is nothing more than a vindication of his conduct and an appeal for mercy; none came. Perrot died on 3 November 1592 and was buried on 10 November in the church of St Peter ad Vincula within the Tower. He died before sentence could be carried out or, as seems likely in view of the crown's favourable treatment of his family, before the queen could issue a pardon. Certainly, his widow was granted Carew for a term of years and his son Sir Thomas was, with the active support of his brother-in-law Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, restored in blood to the family's estates in March 1593, less than four months after the death of his father. Despite the long accepted story of his natural death, there are grounds for believing that Perrot may in fact have been poisoned; this lends credence to the idea that his pardon was imminent since his enemies could ill afford to risk his wrath upon release. 
Contemporaries were not slow to offer reasons why Sir John Perrot fell from grace and died in the ignominious way that he did. Naunton, who had married his granddaughter Penelope, suggested that it was in part due to the fact that he was 'a person that loved to stand too much alone, and on his own legs' (Naunton, 44). Perrot's son Sir James was more direct, stating that he was, 'more apt to give offence unto great ones than to creep or crouch unto them which in the end procured his ruin' (BL, Add. MS 4819, fol. 118b). It is generally agreed that Perrot's choleric nature and haughty pride, combined with the envy and competition of others, contributed to his downfall. He was too blunt and arrogant a man, 'as far from flattery as from fear' (ibid.), to fit easily into the polite ways and manners of the Elizabethan court. His scornful dismissal of Sir Christopher Hatton as someone who had made his way to the queen's favour 'by the galliard' reveals much about the attitude of the man. The words of one who knew him well, Sir Francis Walsingham, might perhaps serve as a fitting epitaph: 'It cannot be doubted that Sir John Perrot's intentions and purpose... were very honourable, but his course has not been agreeable to our humour. He might have lived in better season in the time of King Henry VIII, when princes were resolute to persist in honourable attempts, whereunto [Perrot] must be content to conform himself as other men do. (ibid.)' 



@@@@@


doc= 21987


Perrot, John (d. 1665), Quaker schismatic, was born in Ireland. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' suggested that he may have been a descendant of one of the illegitimate sons of Sir John Perrot (1528-1592), lord deputy of Ireland; however, his name does not seem to appear in the nineteenth-century account of the family by Edward Barnwell. It was also claimed that he was a blacksmith from Sedbergh although this too has since been discounted. 
Perrot was living 2 miles outside Waterford when, in 1655, he became a Quaker following a convincement by Edward Burrough; Perrot's wife and children were noted as still living there in 1659. Like many other early Quakers, Perrot had previously been a Baptist. In 1656 he was active as a Quaker missionary in Ireland, preaching in Limerick, where he was imprisoned twice in April, and in Kilkenny, where he was also incarcerated. He also suffered a spell in gaol in Dublin in May 1656, during which he wrote a work -- never published -- against the 'loathsome Abominacons' of lawyers (Carroll, 4). On his return to Kilkenny he intervened on behalf of a large group of imprisoned Irish Roman Catholics who were facing deportation, successfully gaining them their freedom. For his efforts in Ireland Perrot was described by Burrough -- himself expelled from the country early in 1656 -- as 'Eminent in the nation' (Ingle, 198). Among the most prominent figures who knew Perrot at this time was the physician and friend of Samuel Hartlib, Benjamin Worsley, the surveyor-general of forfeited estates in Ireland; Perrot corresponded with Worsley and sought financial support for him for his later mission to the Mediterranean. 
On 17 August 1656 Perrot experienced a vision at Cathrelagh: 'The word of the Lord came unto me... saying... behold I the Lord who have chosen thee from amongst men, doe Send thee into a farr country having given thee a sharpe Instrum[en]tt to thresh upon the Mountaines of Turkey. (Carroll, 9)' At some point after this he left for England where on 25 December he signed one of the many petitions seeking the mitigation of the sentence of James Nayler, the Quaker who had notoriously re-enacted Jesus's entry into Jerusalem at Bristol in October. It is not known whether Perrot ever met Nayler, but as a letter of Perrot's written in early 1657 describes Nayler's 'agents' as 'creeping upon their Bellyes' and Martha Simmonds as 'their Miserable Mother', it is clear that he was not sympathetic to Nayler's views (Carroll, 10). During his stay in England Perrot spent periods in London and the west country. 
In May or June 1657, with the full support and financial backing of the Quaker movement, Perrot embarked on a mission, with five others, to the Ottoman empire to convert the sultan and to Rome to convert the pope. His companions were Beatrice Beckley, Mary Prince, Mary Fisher, John Luffe, and John Buckley. They reached Leghorn via Lyons on 6 August 1657, and after holding services there for two weeks and meeting with the local Jewish community -- using Latin as a common language -- they were examined by the Inquisition. While in Leghorn, Perrot wrote 'Immanuel, the Salvation of Israel', which was published in London the following year. Following an interview with the local governor on 17 August, the group sailed for the island of Zante, just off the Turkish coast, on 20 August. Shortly after their arrival there on 6 September, the party divided. One group, including Fisher and Beckley, headed for Crete, while Perrot and Buckley travelled overland, via Corinth and Athens, to the island of Negroponte (Evvoia) and to Smyrna, where the group was to reunite. In Athens Perrot wrote 'To All the Baptists', later published in 1660. The two men also preached in the city on 27 September and debated with two Greek priests. They were held for a time at Negroponte where, during that same month, Perrot wrote 'An Epistle to the Greeks', later published in 1661. The two arrived in Smyrna (now Izmir) very late in 1657, the rest of their group having been there since 18 November. The English consul, learning of their plans to meet with the sultan, advised them to turn back; shortly afterwards all but Mary Prince left Smyrna for Venice, but weather forced them to return to Zante. Here the group again divided: Fisher and Beckley travelled on to Adrianople (where they would meet the sultan) via the Peloponnese; Buckley headed for Constantinople; and Perrot and Luffe sailed to Venice, intending to reach Jerusalem. 
After enduring treacherous weather (two passengers were killed during an electric storm) and the hostility of both crew and other passengers, Perrot and Luffe arrived in the Gulf of Venice on 25 February 1658. Disembarking on 22 March, the two men were quarantined in the leper colony of Lazzaretto for forty days. In total the men spent only about six or seven weeks in Venice, during which time they met with members of the Jewish community; Perrot also either had a meeting with the doge or sent him a document of some sort, which formed the occasion for 'To the Prince of Venice' (1661), which Perrot wrote at this time. On 7 May they left for Rome, arriving at the city on 6 June and taking up lodgings in the Piazza Farnese. Perrot intended to meet with the pope, and so approached Thomas Courtney, a Jesuit and the English confessor in St Peter's Basilica; Perrot was referred to the pope's chaplain, John Crey, a fellow Irishman to whom Perrot explained his purpose 'as an unfolded sheet upon a smooth floor' (Carroll, 24). Two days later Perrot was arrested at his lodgings and interrogated by the city governor, who promised him 'a sudden, fair and public Tryal' (Carroll, 25). Luffe too seems to have been imprisoned at this time. After a week Perrot and Luffe were transferred to the Inquisition prison, where they were held for a further eighteen weeks. Upon further interrogation, Perrot was deemed mad and was taken to the 'Pazzarella', or 'Prison of Madmen'; here both men were held in solitary confinement. By the end of 1658 Luffe was dead, officially from starvation through fasting although other evidence suggested that he may have been hanged -- by one account, upon the orders of the pope himself. 
Perrot spent three years in the Pazzarella in squalid conditions. He was chained by the neck for the first few days, and then by the ankle for the next fourteen weeks. He reported being regularly tortured -- including being beaten with a pizzle, presumably in the belief that the insane could be beaten into sense. Support and sympathy came from Quakers in England, some of whom travelled to Rome to intercede on Perrot's behalf; George Fox himself expressed approval of Perrot's work in 1658. Eventual release came in late May or early June 1661, following the intervention of two other Quakers, Jane Stokes and Charles Bayly. The ill-fated mission prompted two Catholic accounts in the later 1660s -- one by the German Jesuit Theodore Rhay, the other by Cosimo de' Medici's secretary, Lorenzo Magalotti -- both of which record the story of Perrot and his companions with extensive refutation of their theology. 
Perrot wrote numerous letters and works during his imprisonment, many of which were published after his release in 1661. The most notable were 'Battering Rams Against Rome' (1661), a detailed account of his sufferings at the hands of the Roman Catholic authorities, dedicated 'To the tender, moderate, Roman-Catholick reader' (sig. A2'r'), and 'A Sea of the Seed's Sufferings, through which Runs a River of Rich Rejoycing' (1661), an extraordinary series of contemplations and songs in a variety of poetic forms, totalling some 1448 lines. The latter, a significant and unusual example of radical religious writing, indicated that Perrot was well read and familiar with poetic technique, and in its sublimation of his experiences of torture and abuse into a spiritual allegory built out of natural imagery (especially about the sea), the work bears some comparison with Milton's 'Paradise Lost'. However, it was an unpublished letter sent from Rome that caused the most immediate sensation within the Quaker movement; in it Perrot argued that -- contrary to Quaker practice -- men should not remove their hats during prayer. 
After a journey through Italy and France that saw Bayly imprisoned in Bourg-d'Ault for confronting some local priests, Perrot returned to England by late July and arrived in London in mid-August. Fox met with him at once in a series of meetings aimed at tempering Perrot's increasingly divergent Quaker views. Perrot was accused of financial extravagance during his mission in the Mediterranean, and his writings, especially his poetry, were regarded as an offence to the principle of plainness; moreover, Fox and other prominent Quakers saw Perrot's stance on hats as vain and lacking in humility, but, as St Paul had indicated that women should cover their head when praying, they found it difficult to oppose Perrot's argument without undermining the traditional Quaker hostility to social forms or appearing fundamentally inequitable. Undaunted, Perrot spent the next few months preaching in London, Canterbury (where he was imprisoned in September), and East Anglia; at some point before the following summer he also made a brief trip to Ireland. However, despite some support from Isaac Penington, Edward Burrough, and John Crook among others, leading Friends were unrelenting in their disapproval of Perrot: his enthusiastic preaching, his growing popularity particularly with women Friends, and even his Rabbinic-like beard reminded them uncomfortably of Nayler. It was averred that he had taken on his ministerial role too soon, a point underlined when Perrot began to hold his own meetings in London which only helped to enhance his reputation as a schismatic. It is also possible that Fox in particular feared Perrot's continuing influence over Quaker Mediterranean missions, for which Perrot continued to find funds for the support of Friends, especially if they had been imprisoned, and acted as mediator between Quakers and Italian Roman Catholics. A meeting between Perrot and senior Quaker figures in London on new year's eve 1661 prompted a final breach. By the time that Perrot was arrested and imprisoned in Newgate in June 1662 for attending a Quaker meeting at the Bull and Mouth in London, he had been roundly condemned by the Quaker leadership. 
In return for his release, Perrot agreed to become a voluntary exile in Barbados. He left England with the strong disapproval of Fox, especially after his advocacy of unity among nonconformists -- a view sustained by the clustering of several Perrot followers in Barbados. In the summer or autumn of 1663 Perrot visited Maryland and Virginia, where Quakers had been active since 1656, but was rejected by the Friends there who had possibly received warning letters from Fox. In Virginia Perrot advocated following no set or regular times for meetings but only as the spirit willed. In early 1664 he returned to Barbados and on 10 May the governor, Thomas Modyford, appointed him a captain. Thereafter, Perrot was famous for wearing a splendid satin coat and a sword though, more importantly, he received at the same time a 300 ton ship for transporting immigrants to Jamaica. In Barbados and Jamaica he then worked as a court clerk and, despite remaining a Friend, accepted payment for extracting the oaths that the Quakers refused to give. By this time Perrot had become firmly convinced of universalist principles (the belief that redemption is extended to all humankind), but the paper war with Fox continued unabated while others alleged that Perrot had renounced his faith for the sake of profit. Perrot continued to publish occasionally and became associated with Robert Rich, another Quaker separatist and sometime follower of Nayler who had emigrated to Barbados in the immediate aftermath of the Nayler affair. It may be that Perrot fell ill early in 1665 as he was certainly thinking of his death at that time; this finally occurred between 30 August, when he drew up his will, and 7 September 1665, when it was proved. In his will he mentioned a wife, Elizabeth, and two children. However, it was not until the following year, with the publication by eleven senior Quakers in May of the 'Testimony from the brethren', the recantation of several leading Perrot supporters at a London meeting hosted by Fox, and the establishment of regular monthly and quarterly meetings across the Quaker movement as a whole, that the Perrotian controversy was effectively quelled. 
After Perrot's death Rich collected Perrot's letters to Fox and others, and these were published just after Rich's death as 'Hidden Things Brought to Light' (1680). 


@@@@@


doc= 21988


Perrot, Robert (c.1478-1550), church musician and land speculator, was the second son of George Perrot, gentleman, of Haroldston, near Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire, and Isabel Langdale of Langdale, near Scarborough, Yorkshire. He was born at Hackness, immediately neighbouring Langdale. Of his education and musical training nothing is known, though an early connection with Oxford is rendered conceivable through the possibility that Robert Parret, organ player in 1474-5 of All Saints', Oxford, was of his family. For a suitably talented younger son of gentry stock a career in church music was perfectly honourable in pre-Reformation times, and between Michaelmas 1504 and Michaelmas 1506 Perrot was appointed a lay singing-man of the choir of King's College, Cambridge, and remained so until June 1509. At Michaelmas 1510 he was admitted master of the choristers of Magdalen College, Oxford, where his duties were to train the singing-boys and direct all performances of polyphonic music sung during the chapel services; he did not undertake the duties of organist, which were discharged by a separate individual. On 28 April 1512 he was appointed cantor and master of the lady chapel choir at Durham Cathedral, but chose not to accept; a certain streak of financial opportunism may be perceived in his exploiting this offer merely to negotiate better terms for his remaining at Magdalen. 
As a musician Perrot enjoyed much distinction. During 1507-8 he obtained the Cambridge degree of bachelor of music (a non-residential degree generally conferred for expertise in composition), and in February 1516 he supplicated the University of Oxford for admission to the doctorate. This was granted, conditional upon his composing a mass and a companion piece of sacred music. There is no record of the degree having been conferred, and it is probable that Perrot did not proceed; never was he accorded the title 'Doctor' in the Magdalen archives. At Michaelmas 1529 he added to his duties those of chapel organ player. His career at Magdalen appears to have been entirely uneventful, his appearances in the surviving records being of only the most routine kind. No compositions have been preserved. 
During 1531-2 Perrot undertook an extraordinary change of occupation. He surrendered his office of master of the choristers, retaining among his chapel duties only those of organist, which -- evidently as merely a hobby occupying him for but a few hours per week -- he retained for the rest of his life. He ventured upon a new career as a financial agent and speculator in landed property, especially properties formerly mendicant and monastic. Through this he achieved such prosperity that by 1543 he was among the wealthiest of Oxford's taxpayers, dwelling in a large house adjacent to Magdalen College known until the nineteenth century as Perrot's House. Of his first wife, Joan, nothing is known. By 1505 he had married his second wife, Alice Gardiner ('c'.1487-1557), the daughter of a minor family of Berkshire/Oxfordshire gentry; they had seven sons and six daughters. Having made his will on 18 April, he died aged seventy-two 'or thereabouts', at Oxford, probably at his home, on 20 April 1550. He was buried in the north aisle of the parish church of St Peter-in-the-East, Oxford, where once stood a memorial window depicting 'Robertus Porret, Bacalaureus Musices', kneeling at his devotions. He bequeathed numerous properties and leases, all located in Oxford and its immediate vicinity. 
Perhaps through lack of sympathy with the Edwardian Reformation, Perrot made no bequest to Magdalen College. However, the restoration of Catholicism under Mary I gave his widow the opportunity in 1555 to found in his memory exhibitions for two poor scholars, and both an annual obit and twice-weekly intercessory prayers in the college chapel. In recognition of Robert's service as master of the choristers, special financial provision was made for the attendance of the boys and their master at his obit, and stringent penalties upon the college attended any failure to pay. In consequence of the abolition of the Latin service (1559), the terms of Alice Perrot's provisions had eventually to be reformulated. She had died on 1 May 1557, and it seems entirely likely that Magdalen College's annual 'May morning' observance by the choristers and their master on top of Magdalen tower, picturesque and now very celebrated, has its origin in a post-Reformation secularization of Alice Perrot's memorial benefaction for her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 21989


Perrott, Sir Richard, second baronet (1716-1796), army officer, was reportedly born in Shrewsbury, Shropshire, the eldest son of Richard Perrott of Broseley, Shropshire, and his wife, Rebecca, the daughter of J. Wyke of Wacton Court, Herefordshire, and was probably a descendant of the church musician and land speculator Robert Perrot ('c'.1478-1550). Reliable information on Richard Perrott is sparse: the few sources provide the following account. He succeeded his uncle Sir Robert Perrott, first baronet (created 1 July 1716), diplomatist, in 1759. He was present at the battle of Culloden (16 April 1746) in personal attendance on William Augustus, duke of Cumberland. Later he entered the service of Frederick II of Prussia, served in the Seven Years' War (1756-63), and was awarded the order of the Red Eagle. In October 1758 Frederick appointed Perrott lord high admiral with authority to establish a fleet, but the British government vetoed the appointment. Frederick used him in secret negotiations and awarded him the order of the Black Eagle, and Louis XIV created him a baron. In 1770, during the Wilkite disturbances, Perrott brought up the loyal Flint address and was thanked by the king. His support for the latter led to a mob demolishing his house at Gloucester View, Park Lane, London, and burning its costly contents in front of it. He was awarded a medal, a grant of the manor of Cheslemore, and other marks of royal approbation. On 3 March 1782 he married Margaret Jemima, the daughter of Captain William Fordyce, gentleman of the bedchamber to George III, and the great-grandniece of Archibald Campbell, first duke of Argyll. Their son Edward Bindloss Perrott succeeded as third baronet at Perrott's death in 1796. The baronetcy became extinct on the death of the sixth baronet, Sir Herbert Charles Perrott, on 15 February 1922. 
In 1770 the scandalous and polemical 'The Life, Adventures, and Amours of Sir R -- P -- ' was published anonymously in London. It criticized the duke of Grafton for making 'such a wretch' as Perrott his 'newly created favourite' and alleged that Perrott was an adventurer of obscure origin, a thief, confidence trickster, and heartless reprobate, who was briefly in the slave trade. It also said that he befriended a rich widow, cheated her, and seduced and left pregnant both her and her daughter; the former went mad and the latter died in a workhouse. Attempting an elopement, he took 'some rather alarming liberties' with his victim, so she rejected him. Exploiting his baronetcy and Prussian knighthood to impress the gullible, after further cheating, attempts to marry heiresses, and 'breaches of honour and hospitality', he became Grafton's protege through a mistress, a Sadler's Wells rope dancer. The biography of 1770 may have been 'an ebullition of private malice' ('DNB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 21990


Perry, Charles (d. 1780), traveller and medical writer, studied medicine at Leiden and graduated from Utrecht on 5 February 1723. Between 1739 and 1742 he travelled in France and Italy, and in the Middle East he visited Constantinople, Egypt, Palestine, and Greece. On his return he published a 'View of the Levant, particularly of Constantinople, Syria, Egypt and Greece in which their antiquities, government, politics, maxims, manners and customs... are described' (1743). This was an important early work on Egypt; it contained much interesting information particularly on Upper Egypt, which until then was relatively little known. The handsome volume was illustrated with thirty-three fine plates engraved by George Bickham the younger, a noted contemporary engraver. In the preface Perry admitted to having bought some representations of the carvings, though he did verify their accuracy in person. The scale plans of various temples were, however, his own work. The work was dedicated to John Montagu, fourth earl of Sandwich, whom he had met in the Levant; he, like Perry, made something of a name for himself as a traveller and antiquary, bringing back new information from the region. Through Sandwich, who evidently continued to notice Perry after their return, Perry's volume attracted a large and distinguished list of subscribers. In it he described a mummy which was later acquired by Richard Cosway, and then by Thomas Joseph Pettigrew, who in turn described it in his 'History of Egyptian Mummies' (1834). Perry's 'View' was translated into German and reissued in English. 
Perry practised as a physician in Norwich and perhaps Canterbury after his return to Britain in 1742, and both before and after his visit to the Middle East published extensively on medical subjects, particularly on spa waters. Perry died in 1780 and was buried at the east end of the nave of Norwich Cathedral. His elder brother was buried in 1795 near to him. 
This Charles Perry has been often confused with a second Charles Perry (1698/9-1730), physician, who was born in Norwich and baptized there in the church of St Peter Mancroft on 23 October 1699 and was the younger son of John Perry, a Norwich attorney, and his wife, Francis. He spent four years at Mr Pate's school in Norwich and four years following at Mr Tuke's school at Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire. On 28 May 1717 he was admitted at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, as a pensioner, was a scholar in 1717-22, and graduated MB in 1722 and MD in 1727. He was a junior fellow of the college from Michaelmas 1723 to his death. He practised in Norwich and Cambridge. His will was dated 4 March 1730 and was proved at Norwich on 18 December 1730. In it he expressed his wish to be buried with his father in St Peter Mancroft, Norwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 21991


Perry, Charles (1807-1891), bishop of Melbourne, was born on 17 February 1807, the third son of John Perry of Harlow, sheriff of Essex and shipbuilder, and his second wife, Mary ('nee' Green). After Harrow School (1819-23) Charles followed his brothers to Trinity College, Cambridge; he graduated BA (1828) with first-class honours as senior wrangler, seventh classic, and first Smith's prizeman. He began legal studies at the Inner Temple in London in 1828 but returned to Trinity after his health collapsed in 1831; he had already qualified for a Trinity fellowship in 1829 and he graduated MA in 1831, and was a tutor between 1832 and 1840. 
Perry's assiduous attendance at Trinity College chapel reflected a strong maternal religious influence, and later his introduction to wider evangelical circles helped to clarify his religious uncertainties. Perry sought ordination and was made deacon by Bishop J. H. Monk of Gloucester on 16 June 1833; he was ordained priest on 26 November 1836 by Bishop J. Allen of Ely. To academic duties Perry added pastoral enterprise: he bought the advowson to St Andrew-the-Less, Cambridgeshire, and built two churches -- Christchurch, Barnwell (1839), and St Paul's New Town (1842), of which he became the first vicar in 1845. In 1840 he resigned his Trinity fellowship to marry Frances (1815-1892), daughter of Samuel Cooper, a Hull merchant. They married on 14 October 1841; there were no children. 
Perry advocated the Church Missionary Society (CMS) and better theological education within English universities; this attracted attention, and Lord Grey, then colonial secretary, followed the recommendation of the CMS secretary, Henry Venn, to nominate Perry to the new see of Melbourne. Archbishop Howley agreed, and Perry was consecrated in Westminster Abbey on 29 June 1847, along with William Tyrrell (Newcastle, New South Wales), Augustus Short (Adelaide), and Robert Gray (Cape Town). Perry was installed in St James's pro-cathedral on 28 January 1848, and his letters patent designated Melbourne a city and made his territorial jurisdiction coterminous with Victoria (which was given self-government in 1851). The population of his diocese was 43,000, and half was Anglican, served by three clergy. Perry's extensive use of lay readers attracted criticism but it helped to remedy severe shortages of clergy and funds. 
Perry's legal training soon gauged the limits of applying the English established church's laws, which he had inherited along with the religious pluralism of the new British settlement. Exercising his potentially despotic powers as a colonial bishop rendered him vulnerable to criticism by ardent local democrats. In urging fellow bishops and home authorities to modify the church laws, he argued that the Anglican laity warranted a greater (if unaccustomed) share both in parochial appointments and in their denomination's wider government. Here he disagreed with his metropolitan, Bishop Broughton of Sydney, but found a strong ally in Bishop Selwyn of New Zealand. Six Australasian bishops met in Sydney in October 1850 to promote greater colonial church self-government, though they disagreed on how to achieve it. Accused of Erastianism, Perry recommended that colonial church constitutions be based on imperial or local legislation rather than on consensual compact alone. After the Commons rejected Archbishop Sumner's 'Church Regulation Bill' (1853), Perry incorporated its provisions into a bill exclusively for the Church of England in Victoria. It passed Victoria's legislative council in November 1854, and Perry and his wife then brought it to England, where it received royal assent on 12 December 1855. The bill became a model, giving many Australian and Canadian dioceses a legislative autonomy that still kept them an integral part of the Church of England, fully sharing in its standards of faith, order, and discipline. 
During Perry's episcopate, responsibility for education in Victoria shifted from church to state. Perry disliked the state system, which minimized religious education, yet he recognized how rival denominational schools misused scarce resources. Personally preferring a voluntary system for supporting both clergy and schools, he publicly conceded that the survival of Anglican parishes and schools depended on state aid. Victoria abolished state aid between 1872 and 1875; many Anglican elementary day schools closed. Perry's own diocese, with its active synod, at first struggled for financial survival, but then grew solidly, and his greatest contribution to education in Victoria lay in establishing Melbourne grammar school (1849) and Geelong grammar school (1857) to train young male colonial leaders in sound liberal learning and the Christian faith. Perry also encouraged the foundation of Trinity College at Melbourne's university in 1860. 
The discovery of gold in August 1851 transformed Victoria (its population increased tenfold between 1850 and 1860) and reinforced Perry's drive for church self-government to help the church to adapt. Acclimatization had limits, and Perry's churchmanship and sense of Anglican order frustrated his laity's wish to co-operate with the presbyterians in sustaining ministry in a vast rural hinterland. By 1869, however, the diocese warranted subdivision, its 113 clergy, 162 churches, and 75 parsonages reflecting wider support than state aid or Perry's pocket could ever have given. The bishopric of Ballarat goldfields became financially viable, and Perry and his wife left for England in 1874, ostensibly to help choose its new bishop. Samuel Thornton was appointed. In 1876 Perry resigned the Melbourne see, and helped to find his own successor, James Moorhouse, and to consecrate him on 22 October 1876. 
In 1878 Perry became Bishop Selwyn's successor as prelate of the Order of St Michael and St George. He was also appointed a residential canon of Llandaff Cathedral and was an active CMS vice-president and a committee member of both the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge; between 1874 and 1888 he regularly and earnestly advocated colonial and evangelical viewpoints at church congresses. His upbringing and later evangelical conviction made him abhor 'Romanism' and regard Anglo-Catholic ritualism as corrupting, opposed to the literal meaning of the articles and the prayer book, contrary to law, and subversive of church unity and growth. Concerned for the reformed Catholic, or protestant, character of his former diocese, his attempts to impose doctrinal tests on potential successors angered Archbishop Benson and other nominators in 1886. Never obscurantist, Perry's sermons openly discussed biblical criticism and scientific issues, and seeking an informed clergy he had helped to found Ridley Hall, Cambridge, in 1881, and chaired its council, submitting its new members to doctrinal tests. 
Perry's church statesmanship regarded respect for court-interpreted church law as the necessary bond of Anglican unity and integrity. Accordingly he opposed Bishop Gray of Cape Town in 1869 in the latter's determination to flout privy council decisions by appointing a successor to Bishop Colenso in Natal. However, his adamant doctrinal and ecclesial convictions made Perry unpopular and isolated, and his strong intellect and opinions went unmatched by force of personality. His stern exterior nevertheless concealed affection and a willingness to sacrifice personal interests for higher goals. Scrupulously impartial, he rarely nursed bitterness, and his moral example remained unquestioned. 
Perry died on 2 December 1891 at his home at 33 Avenue Road, Regent's Park, London, and was buried three days later at Harlow, Essex. His widow Frances died exactly twelve months afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 21992


Perry, Francis (d. 1765), engraver, was born at Abingdon, Berkshire, and apprenticed to a hosier, but, showing some aptitude for art, he was placed first with one of the Vanderbanks, and afterwards with Richardson, to study painting. Having made no progress in this he became clerk to a commissary, whom he accompanied to Lichfield, and there made drawings of the cathedral, which he subsequently etched. Eventually he devoted himself to drawing and engraving topographical views and antiquities, working chiefly for magazines. He engraved two views of the cloisters of St Katharine by the Tower for Dr A. C. Ducarel's paper of 1790 on that church in Nichols's 'Bibliotheca Topographica Britannica', 'A Collection of Eighteen Views of Antiquities in the County of Kent', and portraits of Matthew Hutton, archbishop of York; of Dr Ducarel, after A. Soldi; and of Dr Thomas Hyde, after Cipriani. 
Perry is best known, however, for his engravings of coins and medals, which he executed with great neatness and accuracy. The sixteen plates in Ducarel's 'Anglo-Gallic Coins' (1757) are by Perry, and he also worked for the numismatist Thomas Snelling. In 1762 he began publication of a series of gold and silver British medals, of which three parts, containing ten plates, appeared before his death and a fourth posthumously. In 1764 he exhibited with the Free Society of Artists his print of Dr Hyde and a pen-and-ink view at Walworth. Perry had the use of only one eye and habitually etched on a white ground, which facilitated his working by candlelight. Though painstaking and industrious he could only earn a precarious living. At the time of his death, on 3 January 1765, he was unmarried and living in Carter Lane, south of St Paul's Cathedral. He was buried in Bunhill Fields on 7 January. His prints, coins, and medals, and some china were auctioned on 8 April, his estate being administered by a cousin. 


@@@@@


doc= 21993


Perry, George Frederick (1793-1862), composer, born at Norwich, was the son of a turner, an amateur bass singer who took part in the annual performance of an oratorio at the cathedral under John Christmas Beckwith. Through Beckwith's instrumentality Perry became a chorister in the cathedral choir. His voice, if not refined, was powerful, and his musical talent very marked. After leaving the choir he learned the violin with Joseph Parnell, a lay clerk of the cathedral; piano with Parnell's son John; harmony, it is supposed, with Bond, a pupil of William Jackson, organist of Exeter Cathedral; and composition with a clever amateur, James Taylor. On 3 August 1817 his overture to 'The Persian Hunters' was performed at the Lyceum Theatre, London. 
About 1818 Perry succeeded Binfield as leader of the band at the Royal Theatre at Norwich, then an institution enjoying a considerable reputation. While still resident in his native town he wrote an oratorio, 'The Death of Abel' (text by George Bennett of the Norwich Theatre), which was first performed at one of the Hall concerts in Norwich, and afterwards repeated in London by the Sacred Harmonic Society in 1841 and 1845. Shortly after his appointment to the theatre he wrote another oratorio, 'Elijah and the Priests of Baal', to a text by James Plumptre, which was first performed in Norwich on 12 March 1819. In 1822 Perry was appointed musical director of the Haymarket Theatre in London, where he wrote a number of operas. One of them, 'Family Jars' (sometimes called 'Family Quarrels'), a farce to a libretto by J. Lunn, was produced on 26 August 1822. Another, 'Morning, Noon, and Night', a comedy with a libretto by T. J. Dibdin, was first performed, with Madame Vestris in the cast, on 9 September 1822. 
From opera, however, Perry soon turned again to oratorio, and on 30 February 1830, at the Hanover Square Rooms, he produced 'The Fall of Jerusalem', the text compiled by Edward Taylor (1784-1863) from Henry Hart Milman's poem. While still holding his appointment at the Haymarket, he became organist of the Quebec Chapel, a post he resigned in 1846 for that of Trinity Church, Gray's Inn Road. 
When the Sacred Harmonic Society was founded in 1832, Perry was chosen leader of the band, and at their first concert, on 15 January 1833, the programme contained a selection from his oratorios 'The Fall of Jerusalem' and 'The Death of Abel'. Perry assiduously supported this society, and during his sixteen years' connection with it was never absent from a performance, and only once from a rehearsal. In 1848 Joseph Surman, the conductor, was removed from his post, and Perry performed the duties until the close of the season, when he severed his connection with the society on the election of Michael Costa to the conductorship. 
In addition to the works already mentioned, Perry wrote an oratorio, 'Hezekiah' (1847), a sacred cantata, 'Belshazzar's Feast' (1836), and a festival anthem with orchestral accompaniment, 'Blessed be the Lord God of Israel', for the queen's accession (1838). His thanksgiving anthem for the birth of the princess royal ('The Queen Shall Rejoice', 1840) was performed with great success by the Sacred Harmonic Society, the orchestra and chorus numbering five hundred, Maria Caradori-Allan being the solo vocalist. He also wrote additional accompaniments to a number of Handel's works and made piano scores of several more. Some of his works were published in London. Perry died of bronchitis on 4 March 1862 at 4 Great Marylebone Street, London, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 
Perry's undoubted gifts enabled him to imitate rather than to create, and his musical style was based chiefly on that of Haydn as exemplified in 'The Creation', with other elements borrowed from Handel and Mozart. His fluency proved detrimental to the character of his work. It is said that he was in the habit of writing out the instrumental parts of his large compositions from memory before he had made a full orchestral score, and he frequently composed as many as four or five works simultaneously, writing a page of one while the ink of another was drying. 


@@@@@


doc= 21994


Perry, George Gresley (1820-1897), ecclesiastical historian, born at Churchill in Somerset on 21 December 1820, was the twelfth and youngest child of William Perry, an intimate friend and neighbour of Hannah More. He was educated at Ilminster under the Revd John Allen, and in 1837 he won a scholarship on the Bath and Wells foundation at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. In 1840 he graduated BA with a second class in 'literae humaniores'. His scholarship would have entitled him to a fellowship at Corpus in due course, but meanwhile a vacancy occurred in the Wells fellowship at Lincoln College, for which Perry was the successful competitor, Mark Pattison, who was then just beginning his intellectual reform of the college, strongly pressing his claims. He graduated MA in 1843, and was ordained by the bishop of Oxford: deacon in 1844 and priest in 1845. He held for a short time, first, the curacy of Wick on the coast of Somerset, and then that of Combe Florey, near Taunton; but in 1847 he returned to Oxford as college tutor at Lincoln, which office he held until 1852. During the last year of his fellowship occurred the memorable contest for the rectorship, described with such painful vividness in Pattison's 'Memoirs'. In this contest Perry took a leading and characteristically straightforward part. It was he who first told Pattison that the junior fellows wished to have him for their head, and from first to last he supported Pattison heartily. 
In 1852 Perry accepted the college living of Waddington, near Lincoln, and there he remained to the end of his days. He entered upon his duties on Low Sunday, 1852, and the next October married Eliza, sister of George Salmon, at one time provost of Trinity College, Dublin; it was a most happy union. They had three sons and four daughters, five of his children surviving him. His wife died in 1877. 
The life of a country clergyman suited Perry. He was always fond of country pursuits, understood the minds of country people, and could profitably employ the leisure which such a life afforded. He attended well to his country parish, and also threw himself heartily into the work of the diocese, which showed, as far as it could, its appreciation of him. In 1861 Bishop Jackson made him a non-residentiary canon and rural dean of Longoboby; in 1867 his brother clergy elected him as their proctor in convocation; and they continued to re-elect him (more than once after a contest) until he voluntarily retired in 1893. In 1894 Bishop King appointed him to the archdeaconry of Stow, which he held until his death. 
Perry's parochial and diocesan work still left him time for study, which he used for the benefit of the church. The earliest work which brought him into notice in the literary world was his 'History of the Church of England' (3 vols., 1860-64). Its fairness and accuracy were at once recognized, and its value was increased by the fact that it was the first general history which included the then unfashionable period of the eighteenth century, previous historians, as a rule, having stopped short at the revolution of 1688. In the 1860s he published several minor works and in 1868 short lives of Henry Hammond and Robert Boyle. In 1872 came a book which greatly enhanced his reputation, the 'Life of Bishop Grosseteste'. His intimate knowledge of the University of Oxford and also of the diocese of Lincoln, with both of which Grosseteste was so closely connected, made the task a labour of love to him, and enabled him to carry it out successfully. This was followed in 1879 by an equally good 'Life of St Hugh of Avalon, Bishop of Lincoln', though of course he had here to come into competition with the 'Magna vita' (Rolls Series). His 'History of the Reformation in England' (1886), written for the 'Epochs of Church History' series edited by Mandell Creighton, gave scope for the development of Perry's most characteristic merits -- his power of condensation and of seizing the salient points of a subject, his fairness, and his accuracy. Moreover, although Perry was a competent all-round historian, the Reformation period was that with which he was most familiar. The volume ranks among the best of the series. The same merits are found in his larger publication, 'The Student's English Church History' (3 vols., 1878-87). He also left two posthumous works. One was the 'Diocesan History of Lincoln' for the series published by SPCK. This he took up after the death of Edmund Venables, and incorporated in it the work which Venables had done. It was not published until after his death, in 1897; but he lived just long enough to correct the final proofs. The other was the 'Lives of the Bishops of Lincoln from Remigius to Wordsworth', written in collaboration with J. H. Overton and finished by the latter for publication in 1900. Perry was also a contributor to periodical literature and to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. He died on 10 February 1897 in his rectory, and was buried in Waddington churchyard. A tablet to his memory in Waddington church and a window in the chapter house of Lincoln Cathedral were erected by public subscription. 


@@@@@


doc= 21995


Perry, Henry (1560/61-1617), linguistic scholar, was born at Greenfield, Flintshire. Through his father, Harri Owen, he was descended from the Tudor family of Penmynydd, Anglesey, and could trace descent from Llewellyn ap Gruffudd, last native prince of Wales (died 1282). His name is also given as Parry, and he was possibly the elder brother of Robert Parry, rector of Llanfair Pwllgwyngyll (1603). He matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, on 20 March 1579, aged eighteen, graduated BA from Gloucester Hall on 14 January 1580, and proceeded MA on 23 March 1583 and BTh from Jesus College on 6 June 1597. He is recorded in Bishop Rowlands' register as holding the degree of DTh in 1601, but there is no corroboration of this. After leaving the university about 1583 he spent some years abroad and married for the first time, but little is known of him until he returned to north Wales as chaplain to Sir Richard Bulkeley of Baron Hill, near Beaumaris. After his first wife's death he married about 1600 Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Vaughan, gentleman, of Beaumaris. Through Bulkeley's influence he secured a succession of benefices in Anglesey -- rector of Rhoscolyn (21 August 1601), of Trefdraeth (3 December 1606), and of Llanfachraeth (5 March 1614). On 6 February 1613 he was installed as a canon and prebendary of Bangor Cathedral. 
The lexicographer John Davies describes Perry as a man very skilled in languages who worked towards the compiling of a Welsh dictionary, but his only published work was 'Egluryn ffraethineb' ('The elucidator of eloquence'). Published in 1595, this was a pioneer work in Welsh on rhetoric which drew on earlier work by William Salesbury and treatises by English writers of the period. The thirteen poems which preface this edition, variously in Greek, Latin, English, and Welsh, show the esteem in which Perry was held by his contemporaries. A second edition, with omissions, was published in 1807 and reprinted in 1829. A reprint of the original was published in 1930; the introduction (in Welsh) by G. J. Williams contains a valuable assessment of Perry's work. 
Perry had a daughter from either his first or his second marriage who married Thomas Maurice, curate of Llangristiolus, Anglesey, and they were the parents of Henry Maurice, Lady Margaret professor of divinity at Oxford. Perry died some time before 30 December 1617, when a successor was appointed to his prebend. His widow, Elizabeth, married William Owen, his successor as rector of Llanfachraeth. 


@@@@@


doc= 21996


Perry, James (1756-1821), journalist, was born James Pirie at Aberdeen on 30 October 1756, son of a joiner and house builder. He was educated at Gairloch Chapel, at Aberdeen high school, and at Marischal College, Aberdeen, where he matriculated in 1771, but three years later his father's business failed and he had to leave without a degree to earn his living. 
Perry spent a year in the office of a local advocate, and may have worked as an assistant in a draper's shop in Aberdeen before attempting a career on the stage with a company led by Tate Wilkinson. There he met Thomas Holcroft, who later was a close friend. He gave up this venture, possibly as the result of an affair with an actress, but more probably because of his broad Scots accent which, he was warned, would not be understood south of the border. He nevertheless moved to Manchester, where he spent two years as a clerk in the office of a cotton manufacturer. During this time he read books to educate himself and spoke in debates at a local literary and philosophical society. 
In 1777 at the age of twenty-one Perry moved to London to try to break into the literary world. According to Thomas Holcroft, he hoped to 'get a place in some counting house, or public office' (Holcroft, 1.211), but the friends to whom he bore letters of recommendation were slow in helping him. He passed the time in writing short essays and pieces of poetry which eventually attracted the notice of one of the proprietors of the 'General Advertiser', who offered Perry a post as writer and parliamentary reporter at a guinea a week, with an extra half-guinea for helping with the 'London Evening-Post'. He devoted himself enthusiastically to his work and in 1778 he was sent to Portsmouth on a special assignment, to cover the proceedings at the court martial of Admiral Augustus Keppel over his conduct in the naval battle of Ushant. This was his opportunity and he took it eagerly. He sent in to London daily for six weeks reports which reputedly sometimes ran to a length of eight columns, and raised the circulation of the paper to several thousands a day, making his reputation as a thorough reporter with a clear and lively style. He also published anonymously several political pamphlets and poems, and became a well-known speaker at several London debating societies. By his own later account, the younger Pitt and Lord Shelburne were so impressed that they offered to help to bring him into parliament, but Perry's political sympathies lay elsewhere. He had grown up in a period when, after the cases surrounding the activities of John Wilkes, the press was fighting fiercely for the freedom of reporting and comment against government attempts to restrict it, and he supported their campaigns. His attitude was confirmed by his growing admiration for Charles James Fox as the champion of popular liberties. Henceforward he never wavered in his allegiance. 
Parry's first editorial venture was the conduct of the 'European Magazine', which was founded in January 1782 for a partnership of London booksellers. Twelve months later the same proprietors offered him the editorship of the 'Gazetteer' on the death of its previous editor. He made his position clear at the outset, stipulating that he 'was to be left to the free exercise of his political opinions, which were those asserted by Mr Fox' (Christie, 338). The paper's readers were soon left in no doubt: in the autumn of 1783 he declared that it was to be 'the Paper of the People' -- echoing Fox's title of 'the Man of the People'. Political news was prominent from the start. Perry employed two assistants to enable him to provide the fullest, earliest, and most accurate available reports of parliamentary debates, rivalling and soon surpassing the feats of William 'Memory' Woodfall of the 'Morning Chronicle', who was said to have produced his extensive reports alone and from memory, as note-taking by reporters in the gallery was forbidden by both houses. Perry was also one of the originators of the 'leading article' in which the editor commented at length, and in his case from the Foxite viewpoint, on the news of the day. 
Perry did not stop at political news. He recognized that endless columns of parliamentary debates could deter the general reader who might not be committed to politics, and he determined to make the 'Gazetteer' an all-round newspaper, catering for all tastes, literary and social as well as political. Consequently he reduced the amount of space devoted to advertisements, the lifeblood of most newspapers, and increased the proportion of news content. This policy, however, alarmed his proprietors, and it was probably due to disagreement over this, rather than the purchase of the paper by some tories, that Perry decided to leave in November 1790, although he was still negotiating for the purchase of a half-share of the paper and a partnership. His ambition was to own and control his own newspaper, and he saw his opportunity to purchase, in partnership with James Gray, another young Scot and parliamentary reporter, the once-dominant but now ailing 'Morning Chronicle' which Perry's own superior parliamentary reports had forced into decline. Through the good offices of two booksellers who negotiated for them, Perry and Gray were able to buy the 'Morning Chronicle' for a mere $210, and to raise a further $1000 for working capital, partly from Ransome's bank. They were provided with an office at 474 Strand, on the corner of Lancaster Court by St Martin-in-the-Fields, by the duke of Norfolk, one of Fox's friends. The paper was clearly intended to be the mouthpiece of the Foxite whigs, and in return for their substantial subsidy Perry was able to give a larger proportion of space to political news to serve the party's interest. 
The moment was propitious, for the outbreak of the revolution in France, which was thought by many Englishmen at the time to be in imitation of the English revolution of 1688, the anniversary of which they had been celebrating, had created a voracious appetite for news. In the summer of 1791 Perry himself went to Paris, accredited to several of the French leaders of the revolution as a 'deputy' from the English Revolution Society. He stayed for almost a year, providing the fullest reports of the proceedings of the constituent assembly and the events of the revolution. However, as matters became more extreme and the mob more violent, sympathy in England evaporated and the whigs themselves became divided. Perry followed Fox in maintaining sympathy for the revolution, but Burke rallied the right wing and centre of the party to the 'cause of order' and the reaction against radical ideas, fearing the spread of revolution to England. As Fox's rapport with the party leaders diminished, so they became less favourable towards the 'Morning Chronicle', and at the instance of Portland and Fitzwilliam, both influenced by Burke, the party's subsidy to the paper was withdrawn. The increasingly radical tone of Perry's articles convinced them that he and Gray were paid agents of the French national assembly, employed to introduce revolution on this side of the channel. 
The government also became concerned at the tone of the 'Morning Chronicle''s reports from France, and in 1793 a prosecution was instituted by the attorney-general following the printing of an advertisement for a meeting of the Society for Constitutional Information in Derby in July 1792. After some delay owing to difficulties in empanelling a special jury, the case was finally heard by Lord Chief Justice Kenyon on 9 December 1793 and the defendants were charged with seditious libel. As with other notable 'state trials' of this period, they were represented by Thomas Erskine against the attorney-general, John Scott (later Lord Eldon), and were acquitted after lengthy deliberation by the jury. 
The trial nevertheless marked a decline in the 'Morning Chronicle''s popularity. Interest in Perry's reports from Paris had helped by December 1793 to raise its circulation from barely enough to keep it afloat in 1790 to a position where, according to Joseph Farington, it had made a profit over the year of about $6000 (Farington, 'Diary', 1.115). Burke, who was campaigning against its influence, referred to its 'amazing' circulation ('The Correspondence of Edmund Burke', ed. T. W. Copeland and others, 10 vols., 1958-78, 6.451). After the trial, and principally no doubt owing to the swing of opinion in England against the French Revolution and the outbreak of war with France in February 1793, the circulation declined. At the same time Gray's health gave way, and a rival journalist, Daniel Stuart, purchased the 'Morning Post' and built it up as another leading opposition paper, with more moderate political views. A further blow fell in 1797 when the government, determined to hamper the expression of dissident views, and partly also to raise extra revenue, increased the newspaper stamp duty, which helped to restrict circulations. The average daily issue of the 'Morning Chronicle' in March 1797 was little over 1000. 
However, the 'Morning Chronicle' was too well established as a leading London daily newspaper to succumb entirely to these difficulties, and Perry survived. This was largely due to the paper's reputation for accurate and responsible reporting in general, and there was still a public for a paper whose views were critical of Pitt's regime. It was important that the paper was well written and that Perry had recruited a staff and contributors of high literary calibre. They included at various times Richard Porson, professor of Greek at Cambridge, the poet Thomas Campbell, Coleridge, Sheridan, Thomas Moore, Charles Lamb, and William Hazlitt, together with James Mackintosh, David Ricardo, J. R. McCulloch, and John Campbell, later lord chancellor of England: several of these were fellow Scots and personal friends. He was concerned for the moral reputation of the paper, and he avoided vulgarity and political abuse in an age when newspapers and newspapermen in general had a low reputation in these respects. According to one unnamed contemporary thirty years after his death, he was 'a thorough gentleman, who attracted every man to him with whom he was connected' (Hunt, 2.105-6). 
The 'Morning Chronicle''s circulation recovered from the low point of 1797, which was the worst year of the war for the country in general, and during the next decade fluctuated between 3000 and 4000 copies (its readership in an age when people shared newspapers because of the high stamp duties would have been several times that number). The profits from advertisements were crucial to the paper's financial success. They rose from about $3000 in the first decade of the nineteenth century to $12,400 in 1819 and it has been calculated that out of an average profit of $200 per week in 1815, $150 represented a personal profit to Perry (Asquith, 'Advertising', 706-7). 
In 1798 Perry had another brush with the law. He appeared before the House of Lords on 22 March for allegedly libelling the house, and despite pleading that he had not seen the offending article before publication he was sentenced to three months in Newgate. His incarceration was not onerous: he gave several parties to his friends in the prison and on his release he was presented with a silver-gilt vase at a party in the London tavern. On a third occasion in 1810 he was acquitted over a paragraph copied from Hunt's 'Examiner' against the prince regent. 
Perry's financial position was stable enough for him to contemplate matrimony, and on 23 August 1798 he married Anne Hull (1773-1815), 'a woman of pleasing manners and intelligent countenance' (Holcroft, 2.180); they had eight children, including Sir Thomas Erskine Perry and Anne Horatia (died 1855), who married the diplomatist John Crawfurd (1783-1868). Anne Perry died in February 1815 after having resided for some time at Lisbon to recover from consumption, only to be carried off by pirates on her voyage back to England and kept prisoner in Africa for several weeks. She died at Bordeaux after her release and on her way home. Perry had saved her life on 26 December 1798 when her clothes caught fire; he put out the flames with his hands, burning them badly. 
After Pitt's resignation in 1801 and the peace of Amiens in 1802, the Foxites recovered some of their reputation and popular support, which helped the 'Morning Chronicle' to prosper. When they came briefly into office in 1806 Perry was given a place as a commissioner with a salary of $600, but their efforts to secure him a baronetcy were unsuccessful. He seems to have been relieved to give up the post when his friends lost power in 1807 and though he continued to support them, they began to lose faith in his efforts. Henry Brougham accused him of being too favourable towards the prince regent rather than following the party line of support for the cause of Princess Caroline, and of cutting down political news in their favour in order to preserve his advertising revenues. Perry was a newspaperman first and a politician second, and his energies were devoted to maintaining the paper's reputation and circulation by the quality of its reports rather than to scoring political points. During the Peninsular War he printed reports based on Wellington's dispatches before they even reached London by official channels, from a secret source at the duke's headquarters -- probably Colonel Willoughby-Gordon, one of his staff. He was also alleged in 1818 to have been supplied with foreign intelligence by the duke of Kent on the continent. 
In 1817 Perry's health forced him into semi-retirement and he gradually handed over the management of the paper to John Black, one of his assistants, who became editor after Perry's death. He underwent several painful operations and never fully recovered. He died on 5 December 1821 at his house at Brighton. His income at the end of his life was $12,000 a year and his paper's circulation was steady at 4000. When it was sold after his death it fetched $42,000. Perry also owned several properties in and around London which were valued at $130,000, a substantial fortune by contemporary standards. He was buried near one of them at Wimbledon church on 12 December, and the members of the Fox Club subscribed to a memorial to him in the church. 
Perry was one of the most notable journalists of the age when the newspaper press was becoming established as a force in the country, and he did much to make it so. He was a lively companion, 'full of fire and energy' (Gordon, 241), honest and trustworthy, kindly and convivial. He lived a full social life, belonged to several clubs, and entertained at his house a wide circle of writers, artists, and politicians. Mary Russell Mitford remarked that he was 'a man so genial and so accomplished that even when Erskine, Romilly, Tierney and Moore were present, he was the most charming talker at his own table' (L'Estrange, 3.254). He has been described as 'the first journalist to gain general social acceptance among the upper classes' (Asquith, 'Advertising', 721) and he did much to establish journalism as a respectable profession. Brougham wrote in 1821 that 'he was very faithful, and far superior to the ordinary tribe of newspaper folks' (Aspinall, 304). In 1805 he wrote: 'I have never deviated from the principles of Whiggism and never outraged the decorums of private life.' It might be a fitting epitaph. 


@@@@@


doc= 21997


Perry, John (1669/70-1733), hydraulic engineer and writer, was born at Sinklow farmhouse in Rodborough, Gloucestershire, the second eldest son of Samuel Perry (1638?- 'c'.1690) and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Sir Thomas Nott. He joined the Royal Navy in his teens and was commissioned lieutenant in April 1689. While serving with the 'Montague' in January 1690 he lost his right arm after remaining at his post for over an hour with an undressed wound during combat with a French privateer off Ushant. Over the next two years Perry designed a dry dock for large ships at Portsmouth Dockyard, constructing a powerful engine to pump water from it, and made a technically proficient dam gate which was tested in August 1691. Although the results are not clear, his efforts secured him the captaincy in February 1692 of the 'Owner's Love' fireship, whose activities he described in eleven letters to the Navy Board. 
After sailing to the West Indies early in 1693 under Admiral Sir Francis Wheler, Perry transferred to the 'Cygnet' fireship attached to the 'Diamond', a frigate commanded by Captain Wickham, his superior officer. Cruising near Cape Clear on 20 September 1693, the 'Diamond' was attacked and captured by two French privateers and Perry surrendered the 'Cygnet'. On 30 April 1694 both captains were sentenced by court martial to ten years' imprisonment and a $1000 fine for dereliction of duties. At the Marshalsea prison Perry wrote 'A Regulation for Seamen' (1695), advocating the replacement of impressment by registering men as naval and merchant seamen for a maximum year's paid service followed by immunity from recall. In an appendix to this pamphlet, in his July 1694 petition to the Board of Admiralty, and in his court martial evidence (ADM 1/5254), he defended his actions on the 'Cygnet': Wickham's swift capitulation and failure to signal orders had left him with no alternative but to surrender. Pardoned and acquitted by the lords justices in June 1697, he immediately designed a dry dock for Flushing port. In April 1698 Lord Carmarthen and the navy's surveyor-general introduced him to the visiting tsar of Russia, who recruited him for hydraulic engineering projects. Perry made a verbal agreement with the Russian ambassador for an annual salary of $300, his expenses, and a bonus for each work completed. Arriving in Holland with the tsar on 26 April, he spent a week studying Dutch technology before travelling to Moscow. 
Perry's first assignment, at Astrakhan, was to build a canal between the rivers Volga and Don to link the Caspian with the Black Sea. He surveyed a new cut through dry land, and work on the Volga-Don Canal continued for three years. Hampered by a shortage of materials and manpower, it was finally halted by war in 1701. Perry was recalled to Moscow and appointed comptroller of the Russian maritime works. His next two projects centred on Voronezh: first between 1702 and 1703 he built a dam across the Voronezh River, above its junction with the Don, with a lock and draw-doors to float warships onto the bank for reconditioning. Then, between 1704 and 1705, he constructed a large lock further upstream, rendering the river navigable for even larger ships into the Don. While laying the foundations for his locks and sluices, he made an improved version of his Portsmouth pump to overcome problems of spring flooding. Perry's proposal (BL, Add. MS 37359, fols. 132-5) for dry-docking and rot-proofing different classes of ships at Voronezh was initially approved and he carried out a survey in September 1706. In October that year Charles Whitworth, Britain's envoy to Russia, forwarded a similar scheme adapted by Perry for the British navy (BL, Add. MS 37359, fols. 136-7 and 37355, fol. 133) to the Admiralty in London, via the secretary of state (ADM 1/4091, fols. 89-95). During 1710 Perry prospected a canal to link the rivers Neva and Volga so that corn and timber could be shipped from Kazan to St Petersburg. His proposed route followed the great lakes and interconnecting riverways, with a 3 mile cut which he proposed for the river watershed between lakes Onega and Beloye, down to the River Sheksna flowing into the Volga at Rybinsk (BL, Add. MS 37359, fols. 248-52). The project faltered when Perry's petition for salary arrears was blocked by unreasonable conditions and dire threats, resulting in his departure from Russia at the end of June 1712 under the protection of Whitworth, then ambassador-extraordinary and -plenipotentiary, without 'Money, Pass or Discharge', as he explains in his book, 'The State of Russia, under the Present Czar' (1716, 55). Widely read and translated into several European languages in numerous editions (1717-36 and 1871), this uniquely influential work is of great interest in reflecting the contemporary views of a foreigner directly engaged in Peter the Great's attempts to reform and Westernize Russia. Written originally in hopes of employment and redress for thirteen years' unpaid Russian service, which he describes in detail, Perry's wide-ranging account paints a vivid picture of Russian life, dynamically contrasting the tsar's progressive, expansionist aims with the reactionary opposition of bureaucratic officialdom, the Orthodox church, and a corrupt nobility. 
In 1716 Perry secured a contract to stem the breach in the Thames Embankment at Dagenham with a scheme characterized by innovative use of dovetailed piles. Perry's book 'An Account of the Stopping of Daggenham Breach' (1721), graphically describes his epic feat of engineering and his outstanding technical success in surmounting two breaches, caused by a storm and by a negligent watchman, between 1716 and 18 June 1719, when the tide was finally removed from the levels. The $15,000 granted him by parliament in 1721 for additional costs barely covered his expenses. Moreover, in February 1725 the House of Lords upheld a chancery ruling that Perry should pay William Boswell, the previous contract holder, $1720, and costs, for his disputed use of materials from Boswell's abandoned Dagenham works. Perry's precarious financial position induced him to write four petitions to the privy council for a captain's half-pay allowance and for $456 surplus money for the Dagenham fund, referred respectively to the Admiralty and Treasury in April 1725 (TNA: PRO, PC 1/4/9, 1, 3, 5, 7), but evidently without success. 
In 1724 Perry moved from London to Rye, where he was appointed engineer to the planned new harbour works; his proposed works there were partly executed, but suspended for lack of funds. His more ambitious consulting and contracting engineering work for Dover harbour is evidenced by his 1718 survey, extensive correspondence (1722-4) with the duke of Dorset, lord warden of the Cinque Ports, and the Dover harbour commissioners, as well as by his detailed and costed reports, proposals, maps, and assignments (BL, Add. MS 42075, fols. 43-52). 
Perry spent over eighteen months in Dublin between 1713 and 1726, planning to improve its harbour. Despite an offer to work for a foreign prince he renewed his proposals during 1721 on the recommendation of an Irish House of Commons' harbour committee, revisiting Dublin in 1725 at Lord Carteret's invitation, when he carried out a further survey for the port's ballast office with Thomas Burgh, surveyor-general of the ordnance, costing the projected works at $13,001. He published an account in his Dagenham book, three pamphlets (1721 and 1725), and his map of Dublin Bay and harbour, reproduced in Gerry Daly's 'Early Maps from the Dublin Port Board Collection' (Dublin port and docks board, pp. 5, 7-8). Nevertheless nothing tangible seems to have resulted from his endeavours, and Perry continued to be perilously short of money. 
In 1727 Perry was paid for his recommendations to make the Yorkshire Ouse navigable as far as York. From 1724 until 1729 when he settled in Spalding, Lincolnshire, as engineer to the Adventurers of Deeping Fen, Perry issued reports and published proposals in 1725 and 1727 for draining the fens. On 16 April 1730, when nearly 6000 acres of fenland were conveyed to him for financing his enterprises, Perry was elected an honorary member of the Spalding Gentlemen's Society. 'Some account of the works done by Captain Perry' (1796), a substantial and fully indexed manuscript by its treasurer, Thomas Hawkes, documents more of Perry's activities during his last years. He died, unmarried, aged sixty-three, on 11 February 1733 and was buried two days later in Spalding's parish church where he was commemorated by a monumental inscription. An exceptionally able engineer, with views ahead of his times, Perry stands out for his indomitable spirit and resilience. 


@@@@@


doc= 21998


Perry, Sampson (1747-1823?), radical and newspaper proprietor, was born at Aston, near Birmingham; nothing is known of his parents. Perry trained as a physician and practised as a surgeon in Aldersgate Street, London, in the 1760s and early 1770s. He claimed to have invented a cure for kidney stones, which he marketed as Adams Solvent. Perry published 'A Disquisition' on bladder and kidney diseases (eight editions, 1772-95), with 'Observations' and 'Further Observations' in 1789, and a dissertation on venereal diseases in 1786. He joined the East Middlesex militia in 1765, rising to lieutenant in 1777, surgeon in 1778, and captain in 1780. Though sympathetic to the American cause, on two occasions during the American War of Independence he raised volunteer companies to face the threat of invasion. 
In early 1789 Perry and Jonathan King became the proprietors of 'The Argus', a new, moderate opposition newspaper. In 1792, as sole proprietor, Perry introduced a more radical stance, associating with the London Corresponding Society (LCS) and publishing contributions by Thomas Paine, John Horne Tooke, Maurice Margarot, and Jonathan King. Perry faced several prosecutions for libel on the government between June and September 1792, and was twice sentenced to a term of imprisonment. He continued to edit 'The Argus' from prison, and his release was followed by further prosecutions for libel. An article, arguing that the House of Commons did not represent the people, led to a warrant's being issued for his arrest. Perry left for France in late September 1792, to avoid prosecution, was tried for libel in his absence, and found guilty in December. He was outlawed and his property seized in January 1793, and a $100 reward offered for his capture. 
Perry considered emigrating to America but, through Paine, had many connections in Paris and soon became closely involved with emigre groups. He gave evidence at the trial of Jean-Paul Marat and was called to give evidence at the trial of the Dantonists on their connections with the English whigs, though the defence witnesses were not heard. With other enemy aliens Perry was arrested in August 1793 and gaoled for fourteen months. He believed he was lucky to have escaped execution and on his release in late 1794 he remained in Paris for a further five months. He returned clandestinely to Britain in early 1795 but was betrayed to the authorities and arrested on the charges of 1792. He was imprisoned in Newgate until the change of ministry in 1801. There he detailed his persecution by the government in the pamphlet 'Oppression!!! The Appeal of Captain Perry... to the People of England', published in 1795. That year he wrote his most substantial work, 'An Historical Sketch of the French Revolution', published in two volumes in 1796. Perry relaunched 'The Argus' as a magazine in early 1796, and in the same year published 'The Argus... a Political Miscellany'; the following year he published a pamphlet, 'The Origin of Government, Compatible with, and Founded on the Rights of Man', in which he set out the objectives of the LCS. He had come close to death with gaol fever in 1796, and on his release in 1801 he wrote for a variety of radical periodicals. Around 1809 Perry became joint proprietor of 'The Statesman', an independent newspaper, which he made more radical. He was forced to sell his interest in the paper about 1812 because of the cost of cross-suits for libel, in 1811, with Lewis Goldsmith, editor of the 'Anti-Gallican Monitor'. 
Perry's first wife, details of whom are unknown, died in 1813 and later he married again. He continued to publish radical articles but was declared an insolvent debtor. He probably died in prison on 4 July 1823, of a ruptured artery, apparently just before he was to be released. His property was seized but his third wife, Barbara, and seven children were supported by a public subscription raised by a group of Perry's old radical friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 21999


Perry, Stephen Joseph (1833-1889), astronomer, was born on 26 August 1833 in London, the son of Stephen Perry, a steel pen-nib manufacturer of Red Lion Square, Holborn. As an infant he was seriously ill with inflammation of the brain, and his mother died when he was seven. He was educated by the Benedictines, first at Giffords Hall, Suffolk, then at St Edmund's College, Douai, in France. There he developed a vocation for the priesthood, and he went to the English College at Rome for his theological studies. His sister, who was in a convent, had lent him a life of St Ignatius to read, and this may have reinforced his decision to enter the Society of Jesus on 12 November 1853. In 1856 he went to Stonyhurst College for training in philosophy and physical science. His mathematical ability led to his being appointed assistant to Father Weld in the observatory; he matriculated in 1858 at the University of London, studied mathematics for a year under Augustus De Morgan, then went to Paris for training in higher mathematics and natural philosophy. On his return to Stonyhurst in 1860, he was appointed professor of mathematics and director of the observatory, but as he was obliged to spend the three years previous to his ordination, on 23 September 1866, at St Beuno's College, north Wales, followed by the Jesuits' customary two years' probation, he resumed his former duties only in 1868. He was a very able lecturer who usually illustrated his talks with lantern slides, and he was in constant demand to address not only learned societies, but artisans and working men in several towns and cities of northern England. 
During the course of an exceptionally adventurous life, Perry 'undertook more astronomical expeditions than any man now living' ('The Observatory', 13, 1890, 64). Terrestrial magnetism was another of his enduring interests, starting with his first magnetic surveys in France in 1868 and 1869 and in Belgium in 1871. His results, with magnetic data from Stonyhurst, were presented to the Royal Society, which elected him a fellow on 4 June 1874 -- one of the few Catholic priests to be thus honoured; he later served on its council. 
Perry was elected to the Royal Astronomical Society on 9 April 1869 and led its party sent to observe the solar eclipse of 22 December 1870 from San Antonio, near Cadiz, but cloud frustrated his intended work with the spectroscope. His next journey was to Kerguelen Island, in the Southern Ocean, to observe the transit of Venus across the sun's disc (8 December 1874). Again cloudy skies marred the value of both observations and photographs. The expedition remained a further five months in this desolate place in order to obtain its exact latitude, but on the way home Perry disembarked at Malta and was received by the pope at Rome. Despite being prone to seasickness, Perry led the party observing the second transit of Venus on 6 December 1882 from Madagascar, where they were favoured by good weather. Poor conditions again impeded his spectroscopic work during the solar eclipse of 19 August 1886, seen from the West Indies; the expedition to Pogost on the Volga, for the solar eclipse of 19 August 1887, was also fruitless, as dense cloud obscured the skies. 
Perry's most valuable work was undoubtedly in the field of solar physics. He was quick to make use of two new scientific techniques: photography and spectroscopy. In 1879, with John Couch Adams of Cambridge and Charles Pritchard of Oxford, he served on a physics committee set up to secure a complete daily record of the sun's disc by photography. From 1880 he made daily drawings of sunspots, and was able to confirm Schwabe's postulated eleven-year sunspot cycle, as well as the correlation of sunspot activity with solar prominences, magnetic storms, and aurorae. In the field of general astronomy he found time to study planetary and lunar occultations and comets; these activities were in addition to his obligations to attend to his religious offices and to his daytime teaching. 
In 1866 the Board of Trade selected Stonyhurst as one of the seven principal meteorological stations in Britain. The observatory was provided with photographic self-recording instruments, and it contributed its results both nationally and to local newspapers. Perry was a member of the Meteorological Society and on its council. The parliamentary commission of 1883 investigating water supplies also drew on his rainfall records. 
Perry's last expedition was to French Guiana, for the solar eclipse of 21 December 1889. A similar expedition was dispatched to Angola, the intention being to see if the shape of the solar corona changed during the two and a half hours between its sighting at the two stations. Unfortunately this question was unanswered, as the Angolan sky did not clear. Perry was camped on one of the Salut Islands, where dysentery was rife in the nearby convict settlement; he contracted the ailment, which soon developed into gangrene of the bowel. Despite his severe illness, he managed to command operations during the 120 seconds of totality, even taking a few photographs. Afterwards he collapsed, and his mind began to wander. His colleagues took him on board ship, and he died six days later, on 27 December 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 22000


Perry, Sir Thomas Erskine (1806-1882), judge in India and politician, was born at Wandlebank House, Wimbledon, Surrey, on 20 July 1806, the second son of James Perry (1756-1821), proprietor and editor of the 'Morning Chronicle', and his wife, Anne (1773-1815), daughter of John Hull of Wilson Street, Finsbury Square, London. He was educated at Charterhouse and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1829. In 1827 he had been admitted to Lincoln's Inn, but after his graduation he went instead to Munich and attended the university there. 
Upon returning to England in the early part of 1831 Perry joined the reform agitation. He became honorary secretary of the National Political Union of London and founded the Parliamentary Candidate Society, which aimed to promote reform by encouraging 'the return of fit and proper members of parliament'. He was an ardent supporter of the ballot, not because he put great store by popular opinion, but because he saw it as society's best means for avoiding political intimidation and coercion. At the general election of December 1832 Perry unsuccessfully contested the seat of Chatham. 
In May 1832 Perry left Lincoln's Inn for the Inner Temple, whence he was called to the bar on 21 November 1834. Though he joined the home circuit, he appears to have devoted himself to law reporting. With Sandford Nevile he published 'Reports of Cases Relating to the Office of Magistrates Determined in the Court of the King's Bench' (1837) and 'Reports of Cases Argued and Determined in the Court of the King's Bench, and upon Writs of Error from that Court to the Exchequer Chamber' (3 vols., 1837-9). He jointly wrote four more volumes of the latter work with Henry Davison in the years 1839 to 1842. 
Having lost the greater part of his fortune by the failure of a bank in 1840, Perry turned to his friends in the government for assistance and was appointed a judge of the supreme court of Bombay and, on 11 February 1841, was knighted at Buckingham Palace. Two months later he was sworn into his judicial office at Bombay. His early months in India were marred by the death of his first wife, Louisa (1813-1841), only child of James M'Elkiney of Brighton and a niece of Madame Jerome Bonaparte, whom he had married in 1834. Louisa died at Byculla on 12 October 1841 and was buried in St Thomas's Cathedral, Bombay. 
In May 1847 Perry was appointed chief justice in the place of Sir David Pollock and continued to preside over the court until his retirement from the bench in the autumn of 1852. For the ten years prior to 1852 he also served as president of the Indian board of education. His liberalism and his enthusiastic advocacy of educational and employment opportunities for Indians made him popular with the small but articulate community of Western-educated Indians in Bombay, and upon his departure they contributed generously to the fund collected in his honour; the $5000 thus raised was, at his request, devoted to the establishment of a Perry professorship in law at Elphinstone College. His Indian experiences inspired several publications, including 'Cases Illustrative of Oriental Life and the Application of English Law to India Decided in H.M. Supreme Court at Bombay' (1853) and 'A Bird's-Eye View of India' (1855). 
Upon his return to England Perry wrote several letters to 'The Times' under the pseudonym Hadji advocating the abolition of the East India Company. In a by-election in June 1853 he unsuccessfully contested Liverpool, but in the following May was returned for the Liberals at Devonport, which borough he continued to represent until appointed to the Council of India in 1859. On 6 June 1855 Perry married Elizabeth Margaret, second daughter of Sir John Vanden Bempde-Johnstone, bt, and sister of Harcourt, first Lord Derwent. 
As an MP Perry frequently addressed the house on the imperfections of the East India Company's government of India. He condemned the annexation of Oudh and, despairing at the repetition of history, argued that Lord Dalhousie, like Wellesley fifty years before him, had both exaggerated the misgovernment of the king of Oudh and ignored the extent to which his difficulties were attributable to conditions forced on him by the British. Perry accepted the essentially despotic nature of British rule in India, but hoped nevertheless for a display of benevolent liberalism from the British. He repeatedly called for the employment of Indians in the higher levels of the government service. 
Perry also advocated improved property rights for married women, deprecating as unjust and injurious the rules of common law by which the personal property and earnings of a married woman accrued to her husband. On 14 May 1857, as chairman of the civil laws committee, he brought in a bill to amend the law of property as it affected married women; it was afforded a second reading, on 15 July, before being forced off the parliamentary timetable by the 'Divorce Bill'. 
On 8 August 1859 Perry was appointed a member of the Council of India, in which post he remained for over twenty years. His liberalism was undiminished, although he always tempered his enthusiasm for projects of public good with an eye to their cost. By the early 1880s he was instructing Lord Ripon, whom he greatly admired, that it was his duty as viceroy to prepare Indians for self-rule; it might, Perry conceded, seem a utopian project but it was undeniably a noble one. 
In November 1881 Perry's health began to fail and he retired from the council early in the new year. A few months before his death the queen approved his admission to the privy council, but he was too ill to be sworn in. He died at his residence, 36 Eaton Place, London, on 22 April 1882, aged seventy-five. His second wife, Elizabeth, survived him for over thirty years; she died on 11 April 1913. 


@@@@@


doc= 22001


Perryn, Sir Richard (bap. 1723, d. 1803), judge, was baptized in the parish church of Flint on 16 August 1723, the son of Benjamin Perryn (died 1761), merchant, and his wife, Jane ('bap'. 1701, died 1781), eldest daughter of Richard Adams, town clerk of Chester. He was educated at Ruthin grammar school and matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 13 March 1741, but did not take a degree. He had been admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 6 November 1740 and migrated on 27 April 1746 to the Inner Temple, where he was called to the bar on 3 July 1747. On 30 November 1752 he married Mary (1721/2-1795), daughter of Henry Browne of Skelbrooke, in the West Riding of Yorkshire; they had several children, including Richard, who became rector of Standish, Lincolnshire, and John and James, both of whom became army officers. 
A character of Perryn published during his lifetime stated that 'it is well known that he was held 'cheap' by the great Contemporaries with whom he practised' (Rede, 178), but in 1769 he was described by an attorney as 'one of the ablest Draftsmen attending the Chancery Barr' (Lemmings, 183n.) and in 1770 he was one of the busiest barristers in both the court of chancery and on the equity side of the exchequer. On 20 July 1770 he was appointed vice-chamberlain of Chester. He became a king's counsel on 28 January 1771, and also joined the bench of the Inner Temple in that year. He was made a baron of the exchequer in succession to Sir John Burland on 26 April 1776, and was knighted on the same day. 
As a judge in criminal cases Perryn seems to have been inclined to ameliorate the law's harshness, although he could be severe when he felt normal process was evaded. When he was one of the judges at the trial of the hapless Dr William Dodd, for forgery, in February 1777 he complained of 'too great and an improper lenity to the prisoner at the bar in not putting him on the footing of other prisoners' by permitting him to avoid transferral to Newgate prison until the day before, contrary to the rules of sessions ('Old Bailey Proceedings', 106). By July 1778 he was living in Twickenham, where Horace Walpole recorded that he was robbed at his own door; Walpole also said that one of Perryn's sons was imprisoned for debt in that month. In his charge to the grand jury of Sussex at the Lent assizes in 1785 he commented on Martin Madan's 'Thoughts on Executive Justice with Respect to our Criminal Laws, Particularly on the Circuits' (1785), which had inveighed against the widespread practice of reprieving capital convicts from execution. Perryn was reported as saying that leaving them to hang 'would be making our laws like 'Draco', which, from their severity, were said to be written in blood' (Madan, 26), and made critical observations on the number of capital crimes in the statute book. He presided at the two trials of the Baptist preacher William Winterbotham for seditious words, held at Exeter in July 1793. The juries appear to have been strongly prejudiced against the defendant, and he was found guilty on both occasions, although at the second trial Perryn pointed out deficiencies in the evidence for the prosecution and stated that he was not convinced of Winterbotham's guilt. When the counsel for the defence argued in mitigation before the court of king's bench they reflected critically on Perryn's report of the trial for allegedly leaving out much of the evidence. 
Perryn retired from the bench on 28 June 1799, and died at his home in Twickenham, Middlesex, on 2 January 1803. He was buried on 10 January in 'the new burial-ground' in Twickenham. In private life he was said to have been 'very much the Gentleman, and Man of Fashion; perfectly easy in his deportment, and amiable in his manners' (Rede, 179). 


@@@@@


doc= 22002


Persall, John (1633-1701), Jesuit, was born on 23 January 1633, a member of an old Catholic family and a native of Staffordshire. He studied humanities at the Jesuit college at St Omer (1648-53) and entered the Society of Jesus at Watten on 7 September 1653 under the name John Harcourt. After study at the Jesuit college at Liege and teaching at St Omer he was ordained about 1666. From about 1668 he taught philosophy at Liege, was professed of the four vows on 2 February 1671, and taught theology at Liege from 1672 to 1679. By 1683 he was a missioner in the Hampshire district of St Thomas. Two sermons of his, preached before James II and his queen in 1685-6, were subsequently published on royal authority, and reprinted in 1741. The first, preached in the chapel at St James's on 25 October 1685, used Christ's healing of the ruler's son ('John' 4) to address the sickness of the sinful soul and the means of cure. The second, preached at Windsor on Trinity Sunday, 30 May 1686, suggested in passing that heresies arose through failure to observe the principle 'That God can reveal more than we can understand' ('Catholick Sermons', 2.266) and discussed the doctrine of the Trinity as an object of faith, love, and imitation. He was appointed one of the preachers in ordinary to James II and lived in the Jesuit college which opened in the Savoy, London, on 24 May 1687. Following the revolution of 1688 he escaped to the continent but appears to have been in Ireland during the time of James II's residence there. In 1694 he was declared rector of the Jesuit college of higher studies at Liege. He was appointed vice-provincial in England in 1696, and in that capacity attended the fourteenth annual congregation of the society held at Rome in the same year. He was again a missioner in the London district from 1699. The date of his death is usually given as 9 September 1701. 


@@@@@


doc= 22003


Perse, Stephen (1547/8-1615), physician and benefactor, was born in either 1547 or 1548, the son of John Perse, landowner, of Great Massingham, Norfolk. He was educated at a school in Norwich before being admitted, aged seventeen, as a pensioner of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 29 October 1565. He graduated BA in 1569, and proceeded MA in 1572 and MD in 1581. Perse was elected to a fellowship of Caius in 1571 and, at university level, was elected to the 'caput senatus' in 1589. He was ordained deacon and priest of Peterborough on 7 May 1573. 
In 1582 Perse was implicated in a dispute between the master of Caius, Thomas Legge, and a majority of the fellows. Legge was accused of advancing Catholicism, maladministration, and acting without the consent of the fellows. Perse was held up as an example of the master's favouritism, having been allowed by Legge, without consultation, to change from a divinity to a medical fellowship and back again, and then to study medicine while holding a divinity fellowship. He was among those who supported Legge, and served alongside him and his successor as college bursar intermittently between 1586 and 1614. In 1603 he contributed to a collection of verses by members of the university celebrating James I's accession, 'Threno-thriambeuticon'. He also composed the verse which was to be inscribed on his tomb. 
Perse practised medicine in Cambridge, but it was as a result of investments in property and moneylending that he built up a personal fortune, which at the time of his death included $600 in property and leases, $10,000 in good debts, and over $3,000 in 'desperate debts' (CUL, university archives, records of the vice-chancellor's court, probate records, Perse's inventory, 1615). In his will he set out a scheme whereby small sums of money were to be lent out to local tradesmen, the interest so generated to be used in support of his charitable causes. The scheme fell through, but is illustrative of the connection Perse made between investment and charity. Two yeomen from Haddenham, Berkshire, who brought an unsuccessful petition against Perse for demanding excessive repayment between 1611 and 1613 in the court of chancery, seem to have viewed his efforts less favourably. 
Perse died on 30 September 1615 and was buried in the college chapel. He and Legge were commemorated in effigy in near identical tombs. By a will dated 27 September, Perse divided his estate between charitable causes and his family. In one of the few clues as to his religion he named Valentine Carey, dean of St Paul's Cathedral and a noted supporter of the established church, as one of his executors. His will provided for the foundation of a free grammar school in Cambridge for local boys. It also established six fellowships and six scholarships at Caius, as well as the construction of a new building for the college, roads, and almshouses for local poor. Caius still celebrates Perse in an annual feast in his honour. Bequests to Mrs Ellvin, describing her as his 'mother-in-law', have given rise to the misapprehension that Perse was married. However, by the terms of his fellowship, he was required to remain celibate; and it is more likely that the expression was contemporary usage for stepmother. 
Perse's will was precise, distributing a fixed income according to a rigid formula without regard for inflation. The master and fellows of Gonville and Caius, the administrators of the trust, became the sole beneficiaries of the increasing surplus which eventually developed, while the school itself was decaying by 1805. A chancery suit brought against the trustees in 1837 was heard by Henry Bickersteth, Baron Langdale, master of the rolls, who as a Perse fellow himself in 1830 drew attention to the iniquities of the scheme and paid back the excess he had received as a result. His judgment resulted in a new scheme for distribution of the trust's income, while further reform in 1873 resulted in the foundation of the Perse School for Girls in 1881. The school became a highly successful establishment as a result and moved to Hills Road in 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 22004


Pery, Edmond Sexton, Viscount Pery (1719-1806), speaker of the Irish House of Commons, eldest son of Stackpole Pery ('c'.1688-1739), Church of Ireland clergyman, of Stackpole Court, co. Clare, and his wife, Jane Twigg, daughter of William Twigg, archdeacon of Limerick, was born in Limerick on 9 April 1719. The family originally came from Brittany and rose to prominence during the reign of Henry VIII. Edmond was educated at Trinity College, Dublin (1736-9), and was admitted as a student of the Middle Temple on 30 June 1739. He was called to the Irish bar in Hilary term 1745 and quickly achieved distinction within the profession. In 1751 he was elected MP for the borough of Wicklow. Initially he acted with the government, aligning himself with the administration of the duke of Dorset, and followed the party line by voting for the altered money bill on 17 December 1753. 
The journals of the Irish House of Commons reveal Pery's activity in promoting the interests of Ireland, in particular the city of Dublin, of which he was a common councillor. On 7 January 1756 he presented heads of a bill for the encouragement of tillage; on 28 February heads of a bill for the improved supply of corn and flour to the city of Dublin; and on 2 March heads of a bill to prevent unlawful combination to raise the price of coals in the city of Dublin. Most of his measures gradually found their way into the statute book, but at the time he experienced considerable opposition from government, and at the close of the session of 1756 he thought himself justified in opposing the usual vote of thanks to the lord lieutenant, the duke of Devonshire. On 11 June 1756 Pery married Patty (died 1757), youngest daughter of John Martin of Dublin. They had no children during their brief marriage. 
In the 1756/7 parliamentary session Pery took part in the attack on the pension list, and, in order to secure proper parliamentary control of the revenue of the country, he supported a proposal to limit supply to one year, with the object of insuring the annual meeting of parliament. During the mid-1750s Pery virtually single-handedly agitated the issues that were to become central to patriot concerns during the late eighteenth century. As a result he was regarded in some quarters as the embodiment of the 'new' patriot opposition. The fact that he declined the prime serjeantcy, the third law office of the crown, enhanced his credibility and popularity. However, he declined it not because of patriotic interest but from an 'undeserved friendship' with the first earl of Belvedere, who was in a sulk with Dublin Castle (Emly (Pery) MS T/3087/16). In 1757 he published anonymously his 'Letters from an Armenian in Ireland', which contains some interesting and valuable reflections on the political situation. 
Pery displayed great interest in the prosperity of his native city, and secured a grant of $27,000 from the government between 1755 and 1761 for construction in Limerick. In 1760, when Limerick was declared to be no longer a fortress, he was instrumental in causing the walls to be levelled, new roads to be made, and a new bridge and spacious quays to be built. At the general election of 1761 he was returned unopposed for the city of Limerick, which he continued to represent in successive parliaments until his retirement in 1785. On 27 October 1762 he married his second wife, Elizabeth Handcock (1732/3-1821), widow of Robert Handcock of Waterstown, co. Westmeath, and eldest daughter of John Denny Vesey, first Baron Knapton, and Elizabeth Brownlow. They had two daughters: Diana Jane, who married Thomas Knox, and Frances, who married Nicholas Calvert of Hunsdon, Hertfordshire. 
In 1761 Pery had had a serious illness, but on his return to parliament he resumed his place as the dominant opposition figure. He was the 'de facto' leading spokesman of the 'flying squadron' -- a group of patriot and independent-minded MPs who voted according to issues and were not averse to supporting measures sponsored by the administration if they perceived them to have some merit. During the parliamentary session Pery recommenced his onslaught on the pension list. An amendment to the address, moved by him at the opening of the session in October 1763, opposing the view that the 'ordinary establishment' included pensions, was adopted by the house, and was the means of wresting a promise from the government that no new pension should be granted on the civil list 'except upon very extraordinary occasions'. During November 1763 when debate commenced in the committee of supply Pery took the lead in challenging the administration's economic policies and sustained a critique of the national debt. He graphically highlighted the deterioration in the kingdom's finances by comparing the current national debt of $520,000 with the situation in the late 1740s, when the Treasury ran a surplus. But all the efforts to obtain an unqualified condemnation of the system ended in failure. 
In the early winter of 1769 Pery was prominent in successfully opposing the main money bill on the grounds that it had originated not with the Irish House of Commons but with the British privy council. When the House of Commons adopted the usual face-saving formula of reintroducing the same money bill as a measure of its own, he proposed or was associated with successful amendments. In 1770 efforts were made by Pery and other patriots concerning the need to unite all the opponents of the administration to act as 'an Association'. However, these came to nothing. Then, when parliament reassembled after its long prorogation in February 1771, Pery carried an amendment to the address to the king which Lord Townshend described, in an official dispatch, as 'an artful justification of what the House voted last session, and a fresh, though indirect, assertion of their [sole] right to originate Money Bills' (R. A. Roberts, ed., 'Calendar of Home Office Papers of the Reign of George III', 1770-72, 216-22). 
On the resignation of John Ponsonby, Pery was elected speaker of the Irish House of Commons on 7 March 1771. He had not been the choice of most patriots: Henry Flood and other independents lobbied on behalf of another candidate. However, it had been an avowed ambition of Pery since at least 1767. He did not, as was usual, affect to decline the honour conferred upon him, but on being presented for the approbation of the crown he admitted that it was the highest point of his ambition, and that he had not been more solicitous to obtain it than he would be to discharge the duties of the post. On 1 May he was sworn a member of the privy council. 
It is unclear to what extent Pery's election as speaker changed his political course. From 1771 until his retirement from the house, he was speaker and as such had only limited opportunities for public pronouncements on political subjects. However, during the next session, on 19 February 1772, the house was equally divided on a motion censuring an increase in the number of commissioners of the revenue, a measure which was vital to Townshend's policy. Pery gave his casting vote in favour of the motion. 'This', said he: 'is a question which involves the privileges of the commons of Ireland. The noes have opposed the privilege: the noes have been wrong; let the privileges of the commons of Ireland stand unimpeached, therefore I say the ayes have it. (Grattan, 1.109)' Again, he was a source of great embarrassment to the succeeding administration, in the course of which he delivered in December 1773 his most outspoken presenting speech of all, in which he expressed the hope 'that the restrictions, which narrow and short-sighted policy of former times, equally injurious to Great Britain and to us, imposed upon the manufactures and commerce of this kingdom, will be remitted' ('Journals of the Irish House of Commons', 9, 1773-8, 74). In March 1774 he made a further, unscheduled speech in the house that was designed to widen the definition of what was a money bill, and so extend the authority of the House of Commons at the expense, almost certainly, of the British privy council. The bill which he endeavoured to define as a money bill was a bill amending the 'Tontine Act' passed earlier in the same session, the amendment being designed to make it easier for English capital to participate in the Irish tontine. It is clear that Pery warmly espoused the House of Commons view that the British privy council had no power to amend money bills, even when its amendments did not alter the level of tax. 
After the general election of 1776 the administration exerted itself to get Pery re-elected speaker, holding a two-day session of parliament purely for that purpose and returning to it three people who sat for those two days only and were raised to the peerage as soon as their votes for Pery were cast. However, there is no suggestion that any pledge of good behaviour had been forthcoming from Pery. Indeed, his conduct as speaker of the 1776 parliament was very far from that of a ministerial hireling, particularly over free trade in 1779, and the constitution of 1782 which resulted in Ireland's legislative independence. In 1778 he travelled to England to press for concessions over free trade and had some success in clarifying the issue for doubting and suspicious ministers. 
Pery was re-elected to the speakership in 1783 and played an active part in opposing Pitt's commercial propositions of 1785. These were an attempt to rationalize the laws governing trade between Great Britain and Ireland by reducing or eliminating tariffs. His original enthusiasm for the commercial arrangements waned visibly as it emerged that the resolutions were seen to threaten the legislative autonomy of the Irish parliament. Pitt's resolutions were simply unacceptable and opposition MPs began to bond together in what Thomas Orde (Irish chief secretary) termed 'murmurs and cabals' led by Pery, who 'with more warmth than usual declaimed against your propositions as unions to Ireland and intended to force this country into a rejection of them' (Kelly, 'Prelude', 145). Pery's discontent derived from his conviction that the changes Pitt had introduced represented 'a departure from the system of reciprocity which is the professed principle of the intended settlement' (NL Ire., Bolton MS 16351, fol. 23). The actions of Pery, who, Orde claimed, furnished Grattan 'privately with materials for discontent and remonstrance' and 'make[s] up perpetual doses of poison and puts some of it into almost every man's mess', combined with rumours of the unhappiness of other MPs with the terms of the arrangement, underlined the importance of the administration's search for concessions to appease the growing opposition (NL Ire., Bolton MS 16358, fols. 106-8, 223-8). Pitt worked on a compromise, and although Pery gave no firm indication that he supported the arrangement he did keep in close contact with the government and regularly suggested amendments. Pery's absence during the debate of the 'Commercial Bill' in the Irish House of Commons during August 1785 has to be taken as an indication of his disapproval. 
Pery's retirement followed closely on the abandonment of Pitt's commercial propositions after their near defeat in the Irish House of Commons. For some time prior to this, Pery, who was now sixty-six, had been negotiating with the government over the terms of his retirement from the speakership. However, his decision to resign the chair on 4 September 1785 in the immediate aftermath of the rejection of the 'Commercial Bill' shocked Dublin Castle. In recognition of his service he was granted a pension of $3000 p.a. and raised to the peerage by the title of Viscount Pery of Newtown-Pery in the county of Limerick. 
Predictably, Pery was strongly opposed to the union. The impression that Pery's opposition was not uncompromising, as quoted in Lecky's 'History of England' (8.295), was a probably somewhat optimistic interpretation of his sentiments by Dublin Castle. Before the start of the 1799 session of parliament, when the union was first introduced, it was at Pery's Dublin house that the anti-unionists met to discuss tactics. He ultimately voted against the act. 
Pery died at his house in Park Street, London, on 24 February 1806 and was buried in the Calvert family vault at Furneaux Pelham, Hunsdon, Hertfordshire, on 4 March. He was survived by his widow, who died on 4 April 1821, and by his daughters, who inherited his personal property; the family estate, worth $8000 p.a., descended to his nephew, Edmond Henry Pery, earl of Limerick. His papers were later catalogued and published by the Historical Manuscripts Commission. 
Pery's contemporaries' reactions concerning him ranged from veneration to contempt. In particular, his critics disputed his superiority over the attractions of patronage and power. However, his surviving correspondence establishes his reputation as a statesman and as a great Irishman. He was unquestionably one of the most influential members of parliament from 1751 to 1785. During the twenty years prior to his election to the speakership he had generally followed an individualistic course, judging questions on their merits and glorying in the fact that he was not a party man. He was of course looked to for leadership but this was largely a matter of spontaneous deference to his ability. He always worked to diminish what was bad in legislation and increase what was good. He was the only Irish politician of the second half of the eighteenth century who continued to strike a balance between government and opposition, and he was in effect a 'patriot' in power. Yet it must be recognized that Pery crucially entered the Irish House of Commons at just the right time. Nearly all the causes which he espoused -- an Irish 'Habeas Corpus Act', a limitation in the duration of parliaments, annual parliamentary sessions, a change in the tenure of judges, the modification of Poynings' law -- came to fruition during his time as an MP. Nevertheless, Pery was undoubtedly one of the leading political figures of eighteenth-century Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 22005


Pery, Edmond Henry, first earl of Limerick (1758-1844), politician, was born on 8 January 1758 in Ireland, the only son of William Cecil Pery, first Baron Glentworth of Mallow (1721-1794), Church of Ireland bishop successively of Killala and Limerick, and his first wife, Jane Walcott. He was educated by a private tutor before entering Trinity College, Dublin, in 1773, but did not take a degree. He trained at Lincoln's Inn from December 1775. He travelled on the continent to France, Italy, and Germany (1777-9) and on 29 January 1783 married Mary Alice Ormsby (1762/3-1850), only daughter and heir of Henry Ormsby and Mary Hartstonge. 
In 1786 Pery entered the Irish House of Commons as member for the county of Limerick. He retained this seat until 4 July 1794, when he succeeded to the Irish peerage on the death of his father. Though of overbearing manners he was a successful politician. His political importance and his success were largely due to his family connections and location. He was the heir not only of his father but also of his uncle, Edmond Sexton Pery, speaker of the Irish House of Commons, who was noted for his 'head well filled with Machiavellian brains' (Bodkin, 202). His second asset was the Pery family's interest in Limerick city and county. He closely attached himself to the protestant ascendancy party, which dominated the government after Lord Fitzwilliam's recall in 1794. For his services to the government he was made keeper of the signet in 1795, and in 1797 clerk of the crown and hanaper. On the outbreak of the rising of 1798 he raised a regiment of dragoons for service against the rebels at his own expense. He strongly supported the chancellor, Lord Clare, another co. Limerick magnate, in furthering the scheme for a union between England and Ireland. He spoke frequently on its behalf in the Irish House of Lords, and did much to obtain the support of the influential citizens of Limerick. In return for these services he was created Viscount Limerick in 1800, with the promise of an earldom, and was one of the twenty-eight temporal lords elected to represent the peerage of Ireland in the parliament of the United Kingdom after the legislative union had been carried out. 
Limerick continued to exercise political influence after the union, for Limerick city, which had previously returned two MPs to the Irish parliament, now returned one to the imperial parliament. It a was county-borough constituency comprising both burgesses and freeholders, and the Perys controlled the freeholders. On 11 February 1803 he was raised to the dignity of earl of Limerick in the peerage of Ireland, and on 11 August 1815 he was made a United Kingdom peer, with the title Baron Foxford. Subsequently Limerick resided mainly in England. He took a prominent part in Irish debates in the House of Lords and steadily opposed any concession to the Irish Catholics. He died on 7 December 1844 at Southill Park, near Bracknell in Berkshire, and was buried on 23 December in Limerick Cathedral. Barrington described him as 'always crafty, sometimes imperious, and frequently efficient', and added, 'He had a sharp, quick, active intellect, and generally guessed right in his politics' (Barrington, 2.122). He was succeeded in his titles and property by his second grandson, William Henry Tennison Pery. 


@@@@@


doc= 22006


Peryam, Sir William (1534-1604), judge, was the eldest son of John Peryam (died 1572) and his wife, Elizabeth, a daughter of Robert Hone of Ottery St Mary, Devon. He was born at Exeter and was a cousin of Sir Thomas Bodley. His father, a man of means, was twice mayor of Exeter, and his brother, Sir John, was also an alderman of that town and a benefactor of Exeter College, Oxford. William Peryam was educated at Exeter College, Oxford, and at Clifford's Inn. He was elected fellow of Exeter on 25 April 1551, but resigned on 7 October and sat for Plymouth in the parliament of 1563. In 1553 he joined the Middle Temple, where his arms are placed in the hall; he was called to the bar in 1565, became a serjeant-at-law in Michaelmas term 1580, and on 13 February 1581 was appointed a judge of the common pleas. 
Peryam was thrice married: first, to Margery, daughter of John Holcot of Berkshire; second, in or before 1574, to Anne, daughter of John Parker of North Molton, Devon; third, in or after 1593, to Elizabeth Neville (1541-1621), a daughter of the lord keeper, Sir Nicholas Bacon. He left four daughters, of whom the eldest, Mary, was married to Sir William Pole (d. 1635) of Colcombe, Devon, on 20 July 1583, and Elizabeth to Sir Robert Basset of Heanton-Punchardon, Devon; Jane married Thomas Poyntz of Hertfordshire; and Anne, William Williams of Herringstone, Dorset. 
Peryam was frequently in commissions for trials of political crimes, particularly those of Mary, queen of Scots, the earls of Arundel and Essex, and Sir John Perrot, and was a commissioner to hear causes in chancery. He was knighted in 1592. In January 1593 he was promoted to be chief baron of the exchequer, in which court he presided for nearly twelve years. On 9 October 1604 he died at his house at Little Fulford, near Crediton, Devon, and was buried at Holy Cross Church, where there is a tomb effigy; he had bought large estates in the neighbourhood. He had also built a 'fayre dwelling house' at Credy Peitevin or Wiger, which he left to his daughters, and they sold it to his brother John. A picture, supposed to be his portrait, and ascribed to Holbein, is in the National Portrait Gallery, London; another portrait, with a view of a country house, is at Exeter College, Oxford. Peryam's widow, in 1620, endowed a fellowship and two scholarships at Balliol College, Oxford, out of lands at Hambleden and Princes Risborough in Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 22007


Peryn, William (d. 1558), prior of St Bartholomew's, Smithfield, and theologian, was connected with the Perins of Brockton in Shropshire, a family which itself originated in Derbyshire. He became a Dominican early in life, and was educated at Blackfriars, in Oxford, where his presence was recorded in 1529, and again in 1531, the year in which he was ordained. He then went to London, where he was a vigorous preacher against heresy. He also served as chaplain to Sir John Port. Following the declaration of the royal supremacy in 1534 he went into exile, but returned in 1543, when he supplicated for the degree of BTh at Oxford. He also became a chantrist in St Paul's. Early in 1547 he preached in favour of images. Following the accession of Edward VI, however, he is said to have recanted on 19 June 1547 in the church of St Mary Undershaft, but soon went into exile once more. After several years in Louvain he returned to England in 1553, when he was made prior of the Dominican house of St Bartholomew in Smithfield, the first of the religious houses to be founded by Queen Mary. On 8 February 1556 he preached at Paul's Cross, while Sir Thomas Sampson, priest, did public penance in a sheet and bearing a taper, for having had two wives. Henry Machyn records this and other sermons that Peryn delivered in London. 
Peryn published three books. During the latter part of Henry VIII's reign he published a work entitled 'Thre Godly Sermons of the Sacrament of the Aulter' (1546), sermons that had originally been preached in the hospital of St Anthony in London. This work is dedicated to Edmund Bonner, bishop of London, and in a preface that conceals the extent to which his material was borrowed from John Fisher's 'De veritate corporis et sanguinis Christi in eucharistia' the author explains that he has compiled the sermons: 'in homely and playne sentens, by cause that I have cheflye prepared them... for the unlearned. And the veryte (beyng delectable and bewtifull of herselfe) nedeth not, the gorgius ornamentes, of eloquens. Also the matters of our fayth, hath moche lesse nede of rethoricall perswacyons, havynge theyr grond, and fundacyon, upon the infallyble veritie, of goddes holy worde. (sig. *iii'v')' He also published 'Spirituall exercyses and goostly meditacions, and a neare waye to come to perfection and lyfe contemplatyve' (1557), which was based on the 'Exercitia theologiae mysticae' of Nicolaus van Ess, and dedicated to two English nuns in exile. A book close to the heart of the Catholic martyr Margaret Clitherow, it was reprinted at Caen in 1598. There is also record of a third work, 'De frequenter celebranda missa', of which no copy survives. Peryn died in 1558, and was buried in St Bartholomew's on 22 August, at the high altar. 


@@@@@


doc= 22008


Peshall, John (1718-1778), antiquary, was born John Pearsall at Hawn, Shropshire, on 27 January 1718, the eldest son of Thomas Pearsall (1694-1759) of Eccleshall, Staffordshire, and his wife, Anne (died 1770), daughter of Samuel Sanders of Ombersley, Worcestershire. He matriculated from Pembroke College, Oxford, on 15 April 1736 and graduated BA (1739) and MA (1745). He worked for a time as a schoolmaster in Highgate and was ordained. On 12 July 1753 he married Mary, daughter and coheir of James Allen, vicar of Thaxted, Essex, and Anne Peers. They had three sons and one daughter. Although he had been preferred to the living of Stoke Bliss in Herefordshire, he spent much of his time in Oxford, where he was active as a county JP and in the philanthropic activities around the city. In or shortly before 1770 (probably after his mother's death on 6 July 1770), he assumed the baronetcy (created in 1611 but which had become extinct in 1712 on the death of the third baronet) and changed his name to Peshall, styling himself sixth baronet. In 1770 he was listed among the subscribers to the Radcliffe Infirmary and in 1772 he laid the foundation-stone for the new workhouse. He was among the most active of the paving commissioners from its inception in 1771 until 1775. 
Peshall wrote 'The History of the University of Oxford to the Death of William the Conqueror' (1772), a short pamphlet of thirty-two pages, which traced the foundation of Oxford from druidical times to the Norman conquest. He also edited Anthony Wood's 'Antient and Present State of the City of Oxford' (1773) from the manuscript in the Bodleian Library, with additions of his own, and dedicated it to the mayor and aldermen. He preserved the structure of a topographical, parochial survey and the extensive lists of monumental inscriptions and material from parish registers, but his interest in the contemporary improvements initiated in recent years is also reflected in the effusive introductory description of the town and the inclusion of a history of the Holywell Music Room by William Hayes. Peshall died on 9 November 1778 at Halesowen, and was buried at Hawn. He was survived by his widow, whose will was proved in 1801. After his death Richard Gough wrote to John Price, Bodley's librarian, asking him to inquire after Peshall's collections towards the history of Oxford, but it is not known what their subsequent fate was; Gough did not, apparently, trace them. 


@@@@@


doc= 22009


Pestell, Thomas (bap. 1586, d. 1667), Church of England clergyman and poet, was baptized on 9 October 1586 at St Martin's, Leicester, the eldest of five children of Thomas Pestell, tailor, and Sarah Fawkoner (died 1610), who had married the previous April. He matriculated from Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1602, graduated BA in 1606 and proceeded MA in 1609. Two years later he was presented by Sir Thomas Beaumont to the rectory of Coleorton, Leicestershire. Probably in 1612 he married Sarah Carr (died in or after 1647), daughter of an Essex clergyman, thereby 'disappointing' a Mistress Stacy and initiating a lengthy feud with her family. The Pestells' eldest son, 
Over the next decade Pestell published 'The Good Conscience' (1615) and two assize sermons which castigated the love of money and the oppression of the poor, 'Morbus epidemicus, or, The Churles Sicknesse' (1615), dedicated to Beaumont, and 'The Poore Mans Appeale' (1620), dedicated to Sir Henry Hobart, chief justice of common pleas. In 1615 he became chaplain to Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex, and may have written the Spenserian 'Coleorton Masque' performed in 1618 to celebrate the wedding of Essex's sister. About this time he was mocked in a verse letter by Edward Catlin for the enthusiasm with which he sought the patronage of Elizabeth Hastings, countess of Huntingdon, through whose influence he also became vicar of Packington in 1622. Regarding himself as 'a poor retired Vicar in an obscure angle of the Countrey' he published nothing more until persuaded by Alderman James Ellis of Leicester to issue a sermon preached at an ordinary visitation of the town; 'Gods Visitation' (1630) was dedicated to his friends the mayor, recorder, and corporation. In 1633 he produced two elegies for the countess of Huntingdon, and his work must have had a wider currency since in 1636 he acknowledged Queen Henrietta Maria's appreciation of his poetry. 
Pestell was a controversial figure, capable of arrogance and even violence. By 1633 he had been accused of ecclesiastical irregularities before the court of high commission by Joseph Johnson and one of the Stacy family, but charges against him in the 1640s point to at least a degree of conformity in the previous decade, and Pestell was acquitted, although ordered to apologize to his patrons and pay damages to others. His credit was sufficient to gain him a royal chaplaincy: between 1641 and 1644 he appeared on the monthly rota for September. 
Pestell's two older sons followed him into the ministry. Thomas the younger matriculated from Christ's College, Cambridge, on 29 August 1628, moved to Queens' College, graduated BA in 1633, and proceeded MA in 1636. He may have written the Latin play 'Versipellis', performed at Queens' in 1632, as well as other writings usually attributed to his father. William matriculated from Queens' in 1631, graduated BA in 1634, and proceeded MA in 1638. In or before 1644 Pestell resigned the Packington and Coleorton rectories to Thomas and William respectively, remaining as curate in the former parish. 
The villages were at the heart of civil-war engagements in Leicestershire: Pestell's house was apparently looted eleven times. In April 1646 he and his elder son were charged before the parliamentary committee, on the accusation of Johnston and Stacy, among others, with a variety of offences including officiating according to the prayer book, employing scandalous curates, keeping hunting beagles which damaged neighbours' property, and living in the royalist garrison at Ashby-de-la-Zouch. Both denied many of the charges and the younger Thomas explained his presence at Ashby as necessitated by his being chaplain to the earl of Huntingdon. None the less, they were sequestered, and Thomas senior was ejected from Packington by soldiers; William suffered the same fate at Coleorton in 1652. Several times imprisoned, Pestell senior was dependent thereafter on charity, assuming the pointed pseudonym Perditus. Both he and Thomas the younger contributed to 'Lachrymae musarum' (1649), in memory of Henry Hastings, Lord Hastings, and the father went on to write prefatory verse for Edward Benlowes's 'Theophila, or, Loves Sacrifice' (1652). His 'Sermons and Devotions Old and New' (1659), published 'as an oblation of gratitude to all such of the nobility, gentry and clergy as retain the noble conscience of having ministred to the weak condition of the author, now aged 73', also contained a discourse on duels. In 1658 he had acquired the patronage of Sir Justinian Isham, and the following year he became vicar of St Mary's, Leicester. 
At the Restoration Pestell became rector of Lutterworth, Leicestershire, and confrator of Wigston's Hospital, Leicester. He died there about 30 June 1667 and was buried in the chapel there on 2 July. Thomas Pestell the younger was restored to Packington in 1662, became rector of Markfield on 1 October 1677, and died in 1690. William was restored to Coleorton in 1660, published 'A Congratulation to his Sacred Majesty' (1661), and became rector of Ravenstone, Leicestershire, in 1667. He died in 1696 and was buried at Coleorton on 31 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 22010


Thomas Pestell (1613-1690), was born at Coleorton on 1 May 1613; their other children included William (1615-1696), Margaret, Mary ('bap'. 1623), Lettice ('bap'. 1627), and Walter ('bap'. 1628). 


@@@@@


doc= 22011


Peter (d. 1085), bishop of Lichfield, was a chaplain of William I, and custodian of the see of Lincoln in 1066. When Leofwine, the last Anglo-Saxon bishop of Lichfield, resigned in 1071, Lanfranc committed Lichfield to the care of Wulfstan, bishop of Worcester, for two years. Lanfranc finally consecrated Peter to the see in May 1072. 
In 1075, at a synod held by Lanfranc in London, a decree was passed which allowed Peter to remove the see of Lichfield to Chester. There he made the church of St John's his cathedral church, instituting a dean and canons. The see was situated at Chester only until 1102 when Peter's successor, Robert de Limesey, returned it to Lichfield. However, some of the canonries inaugurated by Peter remained there until 1541, when the modern see of Chester was created. The Latin continuation of text A of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' relates that, in 1076, Peter was sent by Lanfranc to assist the archbishop of York in certain consecrations. Peter died in 1085 and was buried at Chester, being the only bishop of the earlier foundation who was interred there. A lead seal matrix bearing the legend 'SIGILLVM PETRI CESTRENSIS EPISCOPI' ('the seal of Peter, bishop of Chester'), which was found at Chester during excavations in 1967-9, may give a contemporary representation of Peter. 


@@@@@


doc= 22012


Blois, Peter of (1125x30-1212), letter writer and ecclesiastic, was born into a Breton family of minor nobility in or near Blois. Various nephews and other members of his family are mentioned in his letters, but only two are significant in his life: his brother, Guillaume, who became a monk and abbot in Sicily, and wrote plays and poems, and an uncle or cousin, Pierre de Blois, who was Peter's first tutor, wrote poetry, and became learned in Roman law. 
Since Blois was not a cathedral town in the twelfth century, it had no school that could provide education at an advanced level. So Peter, having briefly visited Paris ('Epistolae', ep. 240; 'Later Letters', ed. Revell, no. 5), went to the school attached to the cathedral at Tours in the early 1140s, probably with Pierre de Blois as his personal tutor. Here he studied under the great master Bernard Silvestris, who taught literature and the art of writing, particularly letter-writing. Peter records that Bernard required him to learn by heart the letters of Hildebert, archbishop of Tours (died 1133), and advised him to avoid myths and fables and to concentrate on history ('Epistolae', ep. 101). His later works show that in the main he followed this advice. As part of his course Peter also studied poetry, and (according to his own account) wrote lascivious verses in his youth and poems on moral and contemporary issues in later life (ibid., ep. 57). None of his early, and only about ten of his later, poems have so far been satisfactorily identified, despite attempts to add to their number. 
After his literary education in Tours, Peter went to Bologna, where he studied Roman law, having the later archbishop of Canterbury Baldwin (died 1190) as his tutor, and Umberto Crivelli (afterwards Pope Urban III) as one of the masters whose lectures both he and Baldwin attended ('Later Letters', ed. Revell, no. 10n.). During these years he developed a great admiration for Roman law; but, to judge from his description of himself as being violently attracted and mentally inebriated by 'the secular law, wantoning in its glorious panoply of words and its elegant urbanity of speech' ('Epistolae', ep. 26), he admired its verbal grandeur more than its legal doctrine. Consequently it is not surprising that when in 1186 his knowledge of Roman law was tested in the papal court, he was badly beaten, and this disappointment was one cause of the change in his outlook which will be examined later. 
From the study of Roman law Peter turned to theology, and this caused him about 1155 to move from Bologna to Paris. On his arrival he wrote the letter to his former master mentioned above, regretting the change and adding that he still read his Roman-law texts for recreation. However, an emended version of this letter made about thirty years later mentions Roman law and lawyers with great acerbity. 
Peter continued his studies in Paris until 1166, supporting himself (like many other advanced students) by taking pupils, among whom were two sons of Jocelin de Bohun, bishop of Salisbury ('Epistolae', ep. 51). One of these pupils, Reginald Fitzjocelin (died 1191), after encountering opposition in which Peter played the part of sympathetic observer (ibid., ep. 30), was consecrated bishop of Bath in 1174. 
Although Peter has left few details of his Parisian studies or of the masters under whom he studied, his later works show him to have been familiar with all three of the main styles of theological study current at Paris during these years -- the allegorical interpretation in which Richard of St Victor was pre-eminent; the historical matter of the 'Old Testament', which Peter Comestor organized; and the systematic and analytical study of doctrine, in which Peter Lombard was supreme. The historical facts and allegorical interpretations of the 'Bible' alone are conspicuous in Peter's works until the last decade of his life, when his letters show that he had preserved analytical theological notes of his Parisian years which he used in answering some of the questions of his correspondents ('Later Letters', ed. Revell, no. 37). Overall, therefore, there is abundant evidence that Peter's studies at Tours, Bologna, and Paris embraced comprehensively the literary, legal, and theological sciences of his day. His only problem was to find employment commensurate with the long labour of laying the foundations. 
By 1165, while supporting himself by taking pupils, Peter was looking round for a career in the world of government. He had an uncle who was bishop of Perigord, whom he tried, without success, to interest in his future ('Epistolae', ep. 34). He also had hopes -- which he never entirely abandoned -- of getting a substantial canonry at Chartres. (He did in fact get canonries at both Rouen and Chartres but they provided little or no revenue; ibid., epp. 128, 130; 'Later Letters', ed. Revell, nos. 6, 13.) So, for a career, he had to look elsewhere, and his first serious opportunity arose in 1166 from the premature death of King William of Sicily, who left as his heir a young son aged twelve in the care of his widow, Margaret. She was a member of the family of the counts of Perche, and -- surrounded as she was by Sicilian barons who had opposed her husband on several occasions and from whom she could hope for no support -- she wrote to her French relatives, and particularly to Rotrou, archbishop of Rouen, for help. As a result of this appeal, a band of French adventurers and relatives was gathered to help the widowed queen in the government of Sicily and of course to promote their own interests. Peter and his brother Guillaume both joined them. 
In the end no fewer than thirty-seven adventurers were collected, and they arrived in Sicily in September 1166 ready to take over the administration of a country with a unique combination of Arab, Norman, and Sicilian people, of whose habits and expectations the newcomers knew nothing. For a very short time all went well: Peter became tutor to the young king and keeper of the royal seal, and his brother became abbot of Santa Maria di Maniaci near Maletto ('Epistolae', epp. 46, 66, 93). But the whole enterprise had very frail foundations, and in the autumn of 1168 most of the newcomers were driven out by the local baronage. Peter was lucky to escape with his life on a ship which took him to Genoa, whence he made his way back to northern France determined never again to move if he could stay in his native land (ibid., ep. 90). 
Despite its failure, this unlucky initiative proved to be the beginning of Peter's future career, for Archbishop Rotrou, who seems to have been the cause of his going to Sicily, began employing him to write letters. This brought him into the ambience of Angevin politics in the last stage of the conflict between Henry II and Archbishop Thomas Becket, which was largely conducted as a war of letters. Since this was Peter's speciality, he was soon engaged as a letter writer, first on behalf of Archbishop Rotrou, and then in association with his old pupil Reginald Fitzjocelin, who was one of Henry II's main agents in conducting his case against Thomas Becket, and who -- as a result of royal influence -- was elected bishop of Bath in April 1173. In view of his association with Henry II's campaign against Thomas Becket, Reginald had a very stormy passage in getting his election ratified ('Epistolae', ep. 30); but this was finally achieved, and shortly afterwards Peter got his first steady employment as chief letter writer and later chancellor in the household of Richard of Dover, Thomas Becket's successor in the archbishopric of Canterbury (elected June 1173 and consecrated April 1174). Peter would greatly have preferred to stay in France, but there were many more administrative posts available in England, so he had reluctantly to settle down in a country whose language he never managed to learn (ibid., ep. 160). Of course even his employment at Canterbury was only for the lifetime of the archbishop, but greater security came in 1182 when, a vacancy in the archdeaconry of Bath having occurred, Reginald Fitzjocelin made Peter his archdeacon. Thus, at the age of about fifty-five, Peter at last had a position that gave him security for life; and, while he was a member of the archbishop's staff, the archdeacon's work could be done by a deputy. 
Peter now had a stimulating position at the heart of Angevin government, and it was a further satisfaction that, besides his skill in letter-writing, he had begun writing remarkably vivid treatises in which he brought the biblical teaching of the Parisian schools to audiences both of clergy and of laity. In particular his two short works on the conversion of St Paul and the transfiguration of Jesus sufficiently impressed the exceptionally literate Henry II for him to ask Peter to write something specially for him. Thereupon Peter wrote his 'Compendium in Job', in which -- writing in his moments of leisure between (in his words) 'camps and courts' -- he drew on Gregory the Great's 'Moralia in Job' and the sermons of St Bernard to urge the king to bear his trials with fortitude in the confident expectation of a happy ending. 
In many ways these were the happiest days of Peter's life. He was busy as the official eulogist of Angevin government after the disasters of the rebellion of the king's sons and the catastrophe of Thomas Becket's murder, and he started writing an account of Henry II's reign which he called 'De praestigiis fortunae' ('The deceptions of fortune'), which he mentions more often than any of his other works. When he was writing this work he evidently thought that Henry II was going to triumph over his misfortunes and thus prove the deceptiveness of fortune. As will become evident, this hope was itself to prove deceptive as Henry collapsed under the weight of his misfortunes, and Peter's laudatory work has not survived. 
Meanwhile, although he lamented the horrors of the itinerating court with its bad food, uncertain lodgings, and execrable drink ('Epistolae', ep. 14), Peter was basically content. He was twice at the papal court, in 1169 and 1179. On one of these occasions, probably in 1169, he wrote in the pope's name an 'Instructio fidei catholicae' ('Instruction in the Catholic faith') for the Muslim sultan of Konia, which Matthew Paris a hundred years later thought a sufficiently important example of learning elegantly presented in the service of Christendom to be transcribed in full into his chronicle. His visit in 1179 gave him a rather different claim to fame: he borrowed money which he failed to repay and the pope's letter to the archbishop of Canterbury on behalf of the creditor found a permanent place in the code of canon law issued by Gregory IX in 1234 ('Liber Extra', 3.22.3). In short, during the years 1174-84 Peter was at the centre of Angevin government in its most prosperous days, and he was in touch with the greatest men and events of his time. 
In the full flood of his prosperity Peter wrote a letter, which can be dated between 1182 and 1184, to his namesake and old tutor, in his most grandiloquent style: 'I rejoice with all my heart in our identity of name... Our writings have carried our fame throughout the world so that neither flood nor fire nor any calamity nor the passage of time can obliterate our name' ('Epistolae', ep. 77). It is evident from this boastful effusion that Peter already looked on writing, and more particularly letter-writing, as the occupation most likely to bring the fame that he ardently desired, and this helps to explain his next enterprise. 
In February 1184 Archbishop Richard died, and Peter's future was once more uncertain, for -- if the new archbishop did not employ him -- he would have no excuse for not descending to the local duties of a rural archdeacon. So these were anxious months for him. According to his own account the king offered him the bishopric of Rochester, which was vacant from August 1184 to July 1185, but what he most dearly desired was fame, and he used the period of uncertainty and leisure between the death of the old and the appointment of a new archbishop to consolidate his claim to fame by making a collection of his letters which he dedicated to the king ('Epistolae', ep. 1). 
Peter's collection was different from earlier letter collections of the eleventh and twelfth centuries in that it was made for general circulation by the writer himself in mid-career, and therefore it was available for the author's addition of new letters and changes in the texts of earlier letters in accordance with his changing views or aims. The aim of the collection was ostensibly to teach the art of letter-writing, but in fact, as is evident from his letter to his namesake mentioned above, his real aim was to make himself known to future generations. It is very likely that the first collection which he made in 1184 already contained many alterations in the texts that had actually been dispatched, and he went on correcting and making omissions or additions to the texts until about 1202, after which he seems to have lost interest in the collection amid other occupations. 
In association with this collection, Peter wrote a brief manual on the art of letter-writing. Only one copy of this has survived (CUL, MS Dd.9.38) and its authenticity has often, though almost certainly wrongly, been denied. At all events, though the manual won few if any readers, the letter collection became one of the most widely distributed works of the twelfth century. 
By the time the collection had been made and the short manual written, Peter's months of leisure were brought to an end by the appointment of the new archbishop in November 1184. From Peter's point of view the king's choice of an archbishop -- and it was most emphatically the king's choice and not that of the Canterbury monks -- could not have been happier for Peter: it was Baldwin, bishop of Worcester, who had been his friend and tutor in Bologna and who at once appointed Peter as his main legal adviser and letter writer. The position opened up more interesting prospects than ever before with -- most unluckily as it turned out -- more emphasis on his legal learning than his epistolary skill. Baldwin was a much more active man than his predecessor, and he at once undertook to build new headquarters near Canterbury for his staff. Moreover, with the death of Henry, the most rebellious of Henry II's sons, in 1183, it seemed as if a new order of governmental growth and peace was about to begin, with Peter at its hub, writing his triumphal account of Henry's reign. The reality however turned out to be very different. 
For Peter and the new archbishop, as also for Henry II and western Europe generally, things began to go wrong almost at once. At the local level, it was necessary to get papal consent for the new archiepiscopal headquarters. The monks of Canterbury, who were enjoying unprecedented prosperity as a result of the offerings of the huge numbers of pilgrims to the tomb of their new martyr, Thomas Becket, were violently opposed to the archbishop's project as tending to the diminishment of their influence in his counsels. Moreover they could afford to employ an outstanding Roman lawyer, a certain Pillius, to conduct their case at the papal court. So, after protracted preliminary tussles between the archbishop and the monks, Peter was obliged to go to the papal court to answer the objections of the monks to the archbishop's plans, and he spent the months from March 1187 to January 1188 on this mission, travelling through northern Italy with the papal court. 
These months are very fully documented in the letters that the monks' representatives at the papal court sent back to Canterbury (Stubbs, 'Epistolae Cantuarienses'). They show Peter spending several weeks at Verona arguing the archbishop's case against Pillius, and being defeated all along the line. Then, when the papal court moved from Verona to Ferrara in October 1187, Peter rode with Pope Urban III, his old professor of Roman law, and tried a last plea, reminding the pope that he and Baldwin had been fellow students under him at Bologna ('Epistolae', ep. 152). This attempt at lobbying so incensed the pope that he had a heart attack and died next day. This of course delayed Peter's defeat, but he had never had any prospect of success. After the rapid election of a new pope, Gregory VIII, he had to spend a further three months itinerating with the papal court until at Pisa -- shortly before Christmas -- Pope Gregory also died. A new pope, Clement III, was then elected, and Peter spent a further month suffering the long ignominy of inevitable defeat before his return to England. 
These tribulations helped to destroy Peter's earlier regard for Roman law. A small symptom of this can be seen in the alterations that he made in the old letter of thirty years earlier which he had written when he had just come from Bologna to study theology in Paris ('Epistolae', ep. 26; for the two versions, see Wahlgren, 72-80). In its original form it is full of praise for Roman law; but, as revised about 1190, praise has been replaced by recriminations against Roman lawyers. This change is symptomatic of a painful personal experience. But much more important, even for his own future, was the stream of news that arrived at the papal court while Peter was in attendance. First there was the news of the defeat of the crusading army at Hattin in July 1187, followed by the martyrdom of the French leader Renaud de Chatillon, and finally by the fall of Jerusalem on 2 October. In a brief businesslike letter, which he did not include in his letter collection, Peter reported the arrival of news of these disasters to Henry II, and Roger of Howden, who was at the royal court, put it in his chronicle. 
These events destroyed Peter's confidence in the state of Western Christendom; and he was further shaken when he got back to France to find that the struggles of Henry II and his sons, which had seemed to have been successfully concluded ten years earlier, had now reached their fatal climax leading to the despair and death of Henry II on 6 July 1189. 
This combination of disasters changed his whole picture of the safety and stability of western Europe and of Henry II as a successful ruler, and for the next few years he directed all his literary energies to new themes: a hagiographical work on the life of Renaud de Chatillon; a dialogue between the abbot of Bonneval and Henry II about the causes of the disasters of the time; and a passionate plea for a concentration of all the energies of Christendom on a new crusade. These themes fill most of Peter's writing in the period 1188-9; and they culminated in his setting out at the end of 1189, closely followed by the archbishop of Canterbury, among the first of the English contingent on the third crusade. They travelled with Richard I as far as Sicily, and then they pressed on to join the crusading army at Tyre while the king stayed in Sicily to await the arrival of his mother, Queen Eleanor, with his destined bride, Berengaria of Navarre. 
Within a month of their arrival at Tyre, the archbishop died, on 20 November 1190, and this left Peter no alternative but to find his own way back to England. He returned to Sicily, which he reached at about the same time as Eleanor of Aquitaine who had brought Richard's bride. The marriage took place on 12 May, and Queen Eleanor left Sicily at once. Peter probably travelled with her through Italy and France; then, while Eleanor stayed in France, he went on and arrived back in England in the autumn of 1191. 
At first it seemed likely that Peter would continue as the principal member of the new archbishop's staff, for on 27 November his old friend and pupil Reginald Fitzjocelin was elected archbishop. This prospect, however, was destroyed by Reginald's death within a month of his election, and there was a long vacancy at Canterbury until December 1193 when Hubert Walter, the most efficient of the administrators available to Richard I, became archbishop of Canterbury. He sometimes consulted Peter on particular points during the next few years, but he never gave him a position in his household. Consequently, Peter was in danger of being reduced to the necessity of having to perform his duties as archdeacon, for which he had always employed a deputy ('Epistolae', ep. 157). 
Peter seems to have sought employment with Queen Eleanor, for he wrote three letters in her name to the pope protesting against King Richard's imprisonment in Germany in violation of his immunity as a crusader; and two more on the same subject, one to the pope in the name of the archbishop of Rouen, and another in his own name to the archbishop of Mainz, with whom he had shared lodgings when they were students together in Paris, urging him also to write to the pope ('Epistolae', epp. 144-6, 64, 143). But if he hoped for employment with Queen Eleanor, his hopes were dashed, and he had to look elsewhere. 
One possibility was Odo, bishop of Paris, to whom he wrote in 1197-8 seeking a position in his chapter ('Epistolae', epp. 127, 160). Another possibility was Geoffrey, an illegitimate son of Henry II and archbishop of York from 1191 to 1212, with whom he clearly had some short-lived position about 1199, and to whom he dedicated a life of St Wilfrid, which was seen in the sixteenth century by the antiquary John Leland but is now lost. Nothing came of this. So he had to face the fact that there was no further role for him in the world of politics, and he found solace in new intellectual and spiritual interests. 
As a first step Peter seems to have contemplated making a revised edition of his letters with many theological additions culled largely from recent Parisian theology. Two contemporary manuscripts of his letter collection with these additions have survived which exemplify this ill-conceived plan (LPL, MS 421, and Milan, Biblioteca Ambrosiana, MS C. 103 sup.). But the additions clearly made the letters unreadable, and they have not been found in any other copies of the letter collection. 
Much more successfully, Peter began to take a new interest in the spiritual life of the Cistercians and Carthusians and in theological and devotional questions. These interests led to a new series of works: 'On friendship', 'On penance', 'On confession', 'On faith', 'On the episcopal office'. In substance none of these works was original, but to all of them he brought a new style and new illustrative quotations. In particular, his 'Tractatus de fide' ('On faith') was based on Archbishop Baldwin's 'Liber de commendatione fidei'; and his treatise 'On friendship' was an elaboration of the work of the Cistercian Ailred of Rievaulx, to which Peter added many classical quotations. He also rewrote two ancient saints' lives: his life of St Wilfrid, already mentioned, and a life of St Guthlac of Crowland, giving both of them a modernity of style and spiritual outlook. 
This whole body of work testifies to the changing direction of Peter's thoughts; but, so far as his immediate future was concerned, his most significant step was to dedicate his work 'On friendship' to an old acquaintance in the royal household, William de Sainte Mere-Eglise, who became bishop of London in 1199 (for the dedication, see 'Later Letters', ed. Revell, no. 78). 
Whether as cause or effect, this dedication is associated with the new bishop's offering Peter the archdeaconry of London, which he accepted. This of course was not promotion, but it fitted well with his new range of interests by giving him a position in which he met a continuing flow of people who went to London on business and with whom he discussed many theological problems. The letters that he wrote as a result of these discussions generally have no merits as examples of epistolary style and he never added them to his letter collection; but they have a great interest in disclosing the extent to which the problems discussed in the schools had become part of the mental equipment of large numbers of clergy in every level of the ecclesiastical hierarchy. These new interests seem also to have stirred in him a search for a deeper religious experience, and he wrote three letters to Pope Innocent III protesting against the lack of warmth in the language of the mass ('Later Letters', ed. Revell, nos. 1-3). So, even though he had now lost his position at the centre of government which had provided the opportunity for writing many of his earlier letters, he was fully occupied probing more deeply into theological and devotional problems as he sank into a quiet old age. 
Like many clergy, Peter spent some time in France during the great interdict from 1208 to 1213 when the normal activities of the church were suspended and clergy in administrative positions were footloose. This seems once more to have renewed his hope of settling down at Chartres. He may even have died there for his death was recorded both at Chartres and at Rouen; but, wherever he died, his death was known in London in February 1212, and must have taken place shortly before this date. 
All Peter's works, whether letters, sermons, or treatises, had the same general purpose of bringing the learning of the schools to bear on religious and practical affairs of every description, and it is this that gives a lasting interest to nearly everything that he wrote. 
Peter was certainly prodigiously fluent, and he had a ready command of most areas of the scholastic learning of his day. As evidence of his fluency he claimed that he could, and at least sometimes did, write four letters simultaneously, dictating three and writing the fourth with his own hand. This of course is not impossible, but its literal truth is placed in doubt by its reflecting a skill possessed by Julius Caesar, as reported by Pliny and repeated by John of Salisbury ('Policraticus', 5, chap. 8), from whom Peter, who never hesitated over appropriating other men's learning, probably borrowed it. After all, the great schools of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries came into existence to make the learning of the past available for the needs of the present; and, in being a great appropriator, Peter of Blois was carrying out this plan. 
The only direct evidence about Peter's poetry comes from three of his letters. In an early letter ('Epistolae', ep. 12) he asks a nephew to send him the 'versus et ludicra' that he had written when he was (presumably as a student) at Tours. Thereafter no more is heard about his verses until, in a letter (ibid., ep. 57) in the second recension of the collection of about 1190, he writes to a friend who, having entered a religious order and suffered a good deal of boredom, asked Peter to send him some of his amatory poems. In his reply, Peter acknowledged that he had written such poems in his youth, but he attached to his letter only a few verses in his later, more mature style. A few years later, in revising his letter collection after his return from the crusade, as well as adding several new letters, he added to 'epistola' 57 a few more poems of serious religious instruction or indignation at the captivity of Richard I on his return from the crusade ('Epistolae', 1127-36). 
The existence of the poems attached to 'epistola' 57 has naturally raised the question whether there are others that can be identified, and there are certainly a few. In particular two poems (published by Braunholtz in 'Zeitschrift fur Romanische Philologie', 1927) in praise of wine may safely be added; and, most unexpectedly, there are a few lines ascribed to 'that excellent letter writer ['dictator'] Peter of Blois', in a German polemical work ('Chronica regia Coloniensis') written in the neighbourhood of Cologne about 1206. Three poems in the 'Carmina burana', attributed to Peter of Blois by the editors in 1930 on grounds of similarity of language and style, may also be added as borderline cases. 
So are there any more additions that can be made? This is a question that has occupied scholars for many years. The greatest stimulus in provoking a search for new poems was the publication in 1925 of the poems of Gautier of Chatillon, a contemporary of Peter of Blois and one of the great poets of the twelfth century, who in one of his poems mentions Peter of Blois as one of the four most accomplished poets of the time. But which Peter of Blois was he referring to -- the letter writer or his namesake and tutor? The failure to answer this question properly is one reason why the additions suggested by various eminent scholars and finally and most lavishly of all by Peter Dronke are either certainly or probably not by the letter writer. It must however be added that the last named scholar has provided by far the best texts of some of the letter writer's authentic poems. 
The interest in Peter of Blois after his death was almost entirely centred on his letters, which continued until the seventeenth century to have readers who appreciated their style, their widely ranging quotations from classical authors, and their vivacity. Through these claims on their attention, Peter's letters would have taught their readers skill in observing the prose rhythms which were required in correctly written letters. The papal curia was by far the most important source of authoritative letters at the time when Peter made his first collection of letters, and the stylistic rules for papal letters, including the elaboration of strict rules of prose rhythm known as the 'cursus', had been stabilized at the papal court at the time when Peter was writing his early letters. He outlined them in his treatise on letter-writing and he observed them in his letters. Indeed one reason for the lack of success of his very jejune theoretical work may have been that the rules could be learnt much better from his letters themselves, where, besides the rules of 'cursus', the reader would find examples of careful structure and the use of convincing authorities. In brief, while teaching the rules of letter-writing as an essential tool of government, Peter's letters also made interesting reading for times, such as meals, when short texts were called for; and many found in them pleasure as well as instruction. Even as late as the seventeenth century, when the practical utility of the medieval rules of letter-writing had become obsolete, the first serious editor of his letters, J. Busaeus, in 1601 in his preface recommended them 'for their vivacity of expression and their wealth of doctrine'; and their next editor, Pierre de Goussainville in 1667, echoed these words. 
So, in the mid-seventeenth century, Peter of Blois's letters were still being read as living literature; but by its end, both the rules he exemplified and the subjects that made his letters interesting had lost their power of eliciting admiration, and the nineteenth-century scholars who re-edited or reprinted Peter's letters did so solely for their historical information, and they blamed them for not giving more. 
It should be added that Peter was also an indefatigable writer of sermons. These too he collected, and they show his total recall of the text of the 'Bible'. But they lack the variety of themes that made his letters famous, and they never had more than a very modest circulation. 


@@@@@


doc= 22013


Hibernia, Peter de (fl. 1239-1266), natural philosopher, was probably of Anglo-Irish origins, a member of a family that had settled in the Norman kingdom of Sicily. Little is recorded of the events of his life, and that little has in the past been obfuscated by scribal and exegetical errors confusing him with his contemporary and near namesake, the jurist Peter de Isernia. There can be no doubt that it was the latter whom Frederick II, probably in 1224, invited to become professor of civil law at the University of Naples. It has been plausibly argued that Peter de Hibernia trained in the natural sciences at Oxford, and in logic at Paris, and it is possible that he joined the Franciscans at their Bologna convent, but nothing certain is known of his career until the period 1239-45, when, as a master at the University of Naples, he taught logic and natural philosophy to the young Thomas Aquinas. Aquinas later referred to an opinion of his former master, when commenting on the 'Sentences' at Paris. Peter came to enjoy a high reputation at Naples. The proem to a 'determinatio' which he delivered before King Manfred, some time between 1258 and 1266, describes him as 'the jewel of masters', while to Rabbi Moses ben Solomon of Salerno, who a few years earlier discussed with him proposals for a Latin translation of the 'Guide for the Perplexed' of Maimonides, Peter was 'a wise Christian'. 
Three of Peter de Hibernia's philosophical works are known to survive, his 'determinatio' before Manfred, and commentaries on the 'Perihermeneias' and 'De longitudine' of Aristotle. Three other attributions have been rejected. Heavily influenced by Averroes, though not to the extent of accepting the latter's heterodox opinions, Peter's commentaries show him to have been a man of wide reading, especially in Arabic and Jewish sources, and some independence of mind. A striking characteristic of his philosophical work is its lack of reference to Christian doctrine -- just a single allusion to Jesus' bloody sweat, as proof of his humanity. A few eccentricities like a belief that barnacle geese are hatched from trees notwithstanding, Peter was a natural philosopher of impressive learning and depth, and a master of the form of commentary that combined exposition ('lectio') with discussion of disputed or difficult points ('quaestiones'). His analysis of the 'Perihermeneias' probably influenced that of his famous pupil. Thomas Tanner records that Peter de Hibernia, whom he describes as the author of theological quodlibets (not known to survive), apparently died at Naples. This seems likely enough, but neither the place nor the date of Peter's death is now capable of demonstration. 


@@@@@


doc= 22014


Roches, Peter des (d. 1238), administrator and bishop of Winchester, was a native of the Touraine in north-western France, sprung from the same knightly dynasty, centred upon Chateau-du-Loir, as Guillaume des Roches (died 1222), seneschal of Anjou and one of the leading figures in the government of Philip Augustus, king of France. 
Peter des Roches first appears in April 1197 as witness to a charter of Richard I of England, issued at Tours, and thereafter it was in Tours and the adjoining region that he built up a substantial collection of benefices, being appointed prior of Loches, dean of St Martin's at Angers, and treasurer, effectively head, of the great collegiate church of St Hilaire at Poitiers. According to the chronicler Roger of Wendover, in his youth des Roches had been better versed in how to lay siege to a castle than in preaching the word of God, and it is apparent that this distinctly secular, military reputation continued to mark him out in the eyes of his contemporaries. As a leading member of the chamber, the household financial department of King John, he crossed to England after the loss of Normandy in 1203, and was rewarded with a rich haul of benefices, including the churches of Cave, Hales, Kirby Misperton, and possibly Dartford, a prebend and the office of precentor in Lincoln Cathedral, and a perpetual vicarage at Bamburgh. In April 1204 he was granted the right to dispose of prebends and rents within the vacant see of Chichester, and following the death of Bishop Godfrey de Lucy in September 1204, was proposed as the king's candidate for the vastly wealthy see of Winchester. His election received the assent of a majority of the Winchester monks, but was opposed by the archdeacons of Winchester and Surrey who sought to promote Richard Poor (died 1235), dean of Salisbury, the son of a former bishop of Winchester, Richard of Ilchester (died 1188). In the spring of 1205 the election dispute was carried to Rome where, after protracted and costly litigation financed on des Roches's behalf by the king, the pope was persuaded to confirm des Roches's election and to consecrate him as bishop on 25 September 1205. The temporalities of his see were restored to him on 24 March 1206 and two days later, on Palm Sunday, he was enthroned as bishop in Winchester Cathedral. 
Peter des Roches resumed his activities at court, where between 1206 and 1214 he served in effect as head of the king's chamber, responsible for expenditure on castles and military operations, and for the entertainment of diplomatic envoys from France, Spain, and the papal court. A satirical poem written during these years describes him as 'The warrior of Winchester, up at the exchequer, keen on finance, slack at the scriptures' (Wright, 10-11). The circumstances of his election in Rome had led to the issue of papal letters, exempting des Roches from suspension or excommunication by any ecclesiastical authority save that of the pope. The intention appears to have been to assist des Roches in a mission, sponsored by the pope, to secure the payment of 'Peter's pence' by the English church. The mission itself proved abortive, but des Roches's letters henceforward afforded him a unique degree of independence from the jurisdiction of the archbishops of Canterbury. There is no evidence that he ever made a formal profession of obedience to Canterbury, and between 1208 and 1213, when England was placed under interdict by the pope, des Roches was one of only two English bishops who remained in attendance at the court of the excommunicate King John. As a keen huntsman and a considerable patron of the arts, he can be ranked among the inner circle of John's friends, involved in the exploitation of the Jews, the collection of royal taxation, and the denial and sale of justice. From 1212 at the latest John entrusted des Roches with the custody of his eldest son and heir, the future Henry III, who thus grew up in the bishop's household. 
In 1206 des Roches accompanied the king on a brief expedition to Poitou, and in 1211 he was set to command part of the army sent against the Welsh. As a Frenchman and an extremely wealthy bishop he gave patronage and support to a group of his fellow aliens, the knights Peter (I) de Maulay (died 1241), Engelard de Cigogne, and the various kinsmen of the king's mercenary commander, Girard d'Athee (died 1213), whose foreign background was to make them mistrusted by the native English baronage. In his episcopal household he retained a large number of Normans, Poitevins, and his own fellow Tourangeaux. In 1213 he served as 'de facto' royal chancellor, and in February 1214 was appointed as the king's chief justiciar, to govern England during John's disastrous expedition to Poitou. It is a measure of his pre-eminence in government during the months that followed that he should have had his own close roll to record his acts. As justiciar he was to be accused of favouritism towards his fellow aliens, and he undoubtedly played a part in the collection of the controversial scutage demanded from those who refused to serve in person in Poitou, in the promotion of various royalists to vacant bishoprics and abbeys, and in the worsening relations between royal government and the city of London. As such his actions helped speed the outbreak of civil war. As regent justiciar in 1214 des Roches also made an unsuccessful bid to obtain promotion to the archbishopric of York, while the king suggested that he accept translation to the bishopric of Durham, an offer des Roches refused. 
During the ensuing civil war des Roches supported the king against the barons. Following the issue of 'Magna Carta' on 15 June 1215, to which he stood witness, he was deposed as justiciar in favour of the Englishman, Hubert de Burgh (died 1243). Thereafter he was active in attempts to have the charter repudiated by the pope, and himself imposed papal sentence of excommunication upon the rebels, and pronounced the suspension of the archbishop of Canterbury, Stephen Langton (died 1228), at Dover in September 1215. During the war Winchester itself was seized by the rebels, but from his base at Taunton in the west country des Roches lent financial and military support to the crown. He served as one of the executors of King John, and attended the coronation of his former ward, Henry III, at Gloucester on 28 October 1216, playing a leading role in the ceremony. In the aftermath he was entrusted with the continuing care of the nine-year-old king. At the battle of Lincoln on 20 May 1216 it was des Roches who commanded the royal crossbowmen and who, through a daring reconnaissance, discovered a blocked-up gate which served as the royalists' point of entry to the city. He took many prisoners in the battle, and is said to have extracted heavy ransoms from them. In September 1216 he was one of the first royalists to enter the city of London, to accept the rebels' surrender of the Tower of London. Thereafter he resumed his activities at the royal exchequer and in the king's household, taking charge of the county of Hampshire as sheriff and of several royal castles and forests. Perhaps angered at the royalists' failure to impose a harsher settlement on the defeated rebels, he refused to contribute to a tax intended to fund an indemnity to the departing army of Louis of France, and within the next few years his exploitation of his custodies as sheriff and forester, his patronage of his fellow aliens, and his strained personal relations with Hubert de Burgh and the other leading members of the minority council, placed him in an increasingly isolated position. In 1220 he attended the second coronation of Henry III, at Canterbury, but thereafter he appears to have decided to set out on crusade, having been nominated by the pope as archbishop of Damietta. 
As a preliminary act of piety, in the spring of 1221 he undertook a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. In the bishop's absence Hubert de Burgh staged an attack upon des Roches's principal allies, the aliens Falkes de Breaute (died 1226) and Peter de Maulay. Maulay was deprived of his offices as constable and sheriff and briefly imprisoned, accused of plotting with Bishop Peter to deliver up England to the French. The accusations were dismissed on des Roches's return from Spain, but none the less the bishop never recovered custody of the boy king, Henry III, and in the winter of 1221, following the collapse of the fifth crusade, his plans to journey to the Holy Land had to be indefinitely postponed. Des Roches now sought to recover the initiative at court by having the pope declare the end of Henry III's minority, in advance of Henry's twenty-first birthday. Letters to this effect were obtained in Rome in 1223, but in the ensuing crisis it was de Burgh and Archbishop Langton who used the letters against des Roches, forcing the latter to relinquish custody of Hampshire and its royal castles. In company with other veterans of John's reign, including Ranulf (III), earl of Chester (died 1232), des Roches briefly toyed with the idea of rebellion, staging a Christmas court at Leicester in December 1223 in deliberate opposition to the king's court held at Northampton. In the event, however, des Roches and the opposition capitulated, and in the following year joined forces with de Burgh against Falkes de Breaute and the few remaining rebels who had garrisoned Bedford against the crown. Des Roches was henceforth excluded from the king's inner counsels. Accounts were demanded from him for his time as sheriff, and in 1227 he was fined the considerable sum of $500 in return for acquittance from all his past debts to the exchequer. In June or July 1227 he set out for the Holy Land in company with William Brewer, bishop of Exeter (died 1244). 
On crusade he sided with the emperor Frederick II against the local church hierarchy and the pope. He is said to have acted as leader of the English contingent on crusade, and to have played a major role in the refortification of the crusader castles of Sidon, Ascalon, and Jaffa, while in March 1229 he was one of the crusaders permitted to enter Jerusalem, recently won back to Christian rule through diplomatic rather than military means. In Jerusalem he is said to have assisted the emperor in rebuilding the city's fortifications, including the Gate of St Stephen and the Tower of David. Criticized by the patriarch of Jerusalem for his overt support for the emperor, and briefly suspended from office by the pope, des Roches followed Frederick II back to Italy in May 1229, arriving at the papal court about 22 July. Thereafter, at San Germano and Ceprano, he helped to negotiate a peace treaty between the emperor and the pope. He spent much of the next two years in residence at the papal court, and it was not until July 1231, after an absence of nearly five years, that he returned to England. 
In des Roches's absence Henry III had grown increasingly impatient with the style of government favoured by his chief minister, Hubert de Burgh. A mounting crisis in royal finance had been compounded by costly and unsuccessful campaigns in France and in Wales. Des Roches is said to have urged the king to adopt a new financial strategy, advocating a stronger, more autocratic approach to government. The king spent the Christmas feast of 1231 as des Roches's guest at Winchester, and in the following month des Roches was readmitted as a baron of the royal exchequer. With de Burgh's position in decline des Roches obtained promotion for his kinsman, Peter de Rivallis (d. 1262), who in the summer of 1232 was rapidly advanced to a series of royal offices and the custody of numerous valuable estates. In July 1232 de Burgh attempted to halt this process, obtaining the issue of royal charters guaranteeing him in possession of his office as justiciar. However, probably through des Roches's influence, de Burgh was shortly afterwards accused of complicity in a series of attacks upon foreign clergy in England, and after 28 July 1232 was stripped of office. It was des Roches, acting in company with Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke, who headed the subsequent purge of de Burgh and his supporters from court, and the promotion in their stead of a group of men who had last held office in the years of des Roches's ascendancy before 1223. During this same period the chroniclers allege that des Roches urged the king to make war on his disobedient barons, to emulate the example of the emperor Frederick II, and to return to the style of government favoured by King John. De Burgh was imprisoned at Devizes, and in the first few weeks of 1233 des Roches's henchman, his nephew Peter de Rivallis, was promoted as royal treasurer in place of Walter Mauclerk, bishop of Carlisle (died 1248). At the same time, probably at des Roches's prompting, the king began to overturn a large number of royal charters, supposedly guaranteeing lands and offices in perpetuity to de Burgh and his supporters. 
However, one of the victims of this purge, Gilbert Basset (died 1241), who was a close associate of Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke, rebelled in the spring of 1233, forcing the Marshal to take sides with him against des Roches. As a result the country was plunged into nearly a year of civil war. The role of des Roches in these hostilities is difficult to assess. Although undoubtedly responsible for the advancement of his own, personal, satellites at court, and although in attendance upon the king on a near daily basis, his influence never extended to the possession of any court office. Although he may have urged the king to make war upon the rebels, there is no evidence to substantiate the claim, made by Roger of Wendover, that des Roches was involved in a plot to murder Richard Marshal. The Marshal died fighting in Ireland in April 1234, by which time des Roches had already been banished from court. The vast cost of the civil war, compounded by the financial incompetence of Peter de Rivallis and by heavy expenditure on alliances in Brittany and Poitou intended to further the king's ambitions to reconquer his lost continental lordship, had led Henry to repudiate des Roches's counsel, and instead to incline to the policies now urged on him by Edmund of Abingdon (died 1240), the newly elected archbishop of Canterbury, and the other English bishops. 
At the start of April 1234 des Roches was ordered to leave court and to meddle no more in political affairs. Over the next few weeks his chief agent, Peter de Rivallis, was stripped of office, and was forced eventually to stand trial before the king. Des Roches was allowed to retire relatively unscathed, and in the spring of 1235 sought relief from his problems in England by a further series of adventures abroad, joining Pope Gregory IX ('r'. 1227-41) and the emperor Frederick II in a campaign against the Roman commune. His relations with the emperor were soured by letters, sent by King Henry, warning Frederick against des Roches, while the pope is said to have favoured him only out of greed to obtain access to des Roches's vast wealth. In 1236, following representations from the pope, he received licence from Henry III to return to England; he is said to have arrived back about 29 September, broken in health, and one of his first acts was to draw up his will. During the last eighteen months of his life he was appointed to preach a crusade for the rescue of the Latin empire of Constantinople, helped quell disturbances at Oxford against the papal legate Otto, and, ironically, is said to have urged the king to favour his native barons against the newly introduced alien, Simon de Montfort (died 1265). Des Roches died at his manor of Farnham on 9 June 1238. His heart was buried at nearby Waverley Abbey, his body in Winchester Cathedral, in a tomb still marked by a black marble effigy. 
For more than thirty years Peter des Roches exercised an influence over the Plantagenet court second only to that of the king. In general he appears to have favoured government through arbitrary royal will, as practised by King John. Such strong rule became increasingly unpopular in the new atmosphere brought about by 'Magna Carta' and the prolonged minority of Henry III. As an alien exiled in England des Roches sought to keep alive the king's ambitions to reconquer the lands in France lost to the Capetian monarchy after 1203. However, it is not only as a politician but also as a diocesan bishop and as a patron of the religious that he deserves to be remembered. It was during his years as bishop that a new form of written record, the Winchester pipe rolls, was introduced to accounting procedure on the episcopal estates. Under his care the income of his estates was raised from some $1500 to more than $3000 a year. Building work at Winchester Cathedral, on the newly commissioned retrochoir, was continued, while des Roches himself supervised work at the royal castle of Winchester. He appears to have been the first bishop of Winchester to issue diocesan statutes, heavily influenced by the Lateran Council of 1215, and it was under his protection that the first band of Dominican preachers reached England in 1221. As a patron of the religious orders des Roches has few rivals in the thirteenth century. On his own initiative he founded Premonstratensian abbeys at Hales in Worcestershire and at Titchfield in Hampshire, an Augustinian priory at Selborne, and two Cistercian houses, at Netley in Hampshire and at Clarte Dieu, near his birthplace in the Touraine, funded after 1238 through bequests made in his will. In addition he presided over the refoundation of the hospital of St Thomas at Southwark, the re-establishment of the crusading hospital and order of St Thomas of Acre in the Holy Land, the introduction of the Dominicans to Winchester before 1234, and the establishment of a 'domus Dei' or hospital at Portsmouth. 
From his vast wealth Peter des Roches patronized hermits and anchoresses, and distributed large quantities of alms to the poor. The Winchester pipe rolls record his purchase of jewels, spices, and articles of precious metal, the bishop's devotion to hunting, and his patronage of a large number of clerks and knights, active on the fringes of the royal court. His episcopal household included several scholars, the poet Henry d'Avranches (died 1262/3), the celebrated Master Elias of Dereham (died 1245), and at least one and possibly two future bishops, Master Eustace de Fauconberg, bishop of London (died 1228), and Ralph Neville, royal chancellor and bishop of Chichester (died 1244). Ironically, given his French upbringing and the fact that his alien birth was to prove so unpopular in England, des Roches appears to have been a keen patron of the Anglo-Saxon saints. He commissioned verses from Henry d'Avranches, intended to support the claims of Winchester in a dispute with Dorchester Abbey over possession of the relics of St Birinus. He also continued the remodelling of the east end of Winchester Cathedral and the refurbishment of the shrine of St Swithun. In 1231 he returned from crusade with a foot relic of St Philip, still preserved at Winchester at the time of the Reformation, and a book by William of Tyre on the marvels of the East which he gave to the chronicler Matthew Paris. Although the monks of Winchester are said to have found des Roches 'as hard as rocks', a pun upon Peter's name, he is known to have confirmed them in possession of tithes from their estates, and to have willed them property after his death. His will financed obituary celebrations across England and in the cathedral church at Tours. Des Roches also bequeathed a substantial estate in stock and seedcorn, to be held by the bishops of Winchester in perpetuity. 


@@@@@


doc= 22015


Aigueblanche, Peter d' (d. 1268), bishop of Hereford and royal councillor, was descended from the family of Briancon, holders of the lordship of Aigueblanche (Savoie) in the Tarentaise or valley of the upper Isere, dependants of the counts of Savoy. 
The names of Aigueblanche's father and mother are unknown, and he himself is unrecorded before his appearance in 1237 as a clerk, possibly the treasurer of William of Savoy, bishop-elect of Valence and uncle of Queen Eleanor of Provence. In March 1238 he was presented by the king to the church of St Michael-on-Wyre in Lancashire, and following the death of his patron, William of Savoy, in 1239, he took up permanent residence in England. In April 1240 he was in receipt of an annual fee from the king of $20, and from July he served as keeper of the king's wardrobe. 
Having in July 1240 been granted a prebend at Hereford, on 24 August Aigueblanche was elected bishop, a promotion at Hereford due entirely to royal favour. However, since Hereford was not a wealthy see, later that year the king attempted unsuccessfully to have him elected to the far richer bishopric of Durham. On 23 December 1240 he was consecrated bishop of Hereford at St Paul's Cathedral in London, by the archbishop of York and the bishop of Worcester acting in the presence of the papal legate Otto. The king supplied him with many precious gifts, including use of the archbishop of Canterbury's house at Lambeth for the feast of his consecration, a jewelled mitre valued at $82, venison and victuals for his feast, game and rabbits with which to stock his episcopal estates, and a loan of $300. Over the next few months, moreover, Bishop Peter received a series of royal charters, awarding him market privileges, rights of free warren, and timber within the king's forests. Although he had relinquished his position as keeper of the king's wardrobe, he remained active in royal service, and in August 1241 accompanied the court to Shrewsbury, where he participated in a peace settlement with the Welsh. That autumn the king failed once again to have him translated to a richer see, this time that of London. 
In November 1241 Aigueblanche was involved as papal judge-delegate in the king's dispute with the bishop of Bath and Wells over the patronage of Glastonbury Abbey, and in March 1242 he was sent overseas, at first to Poitou, to prepare for the king's proposed expedition there, and then to Provence, where in July 1242, at Tarascon, he sealed the marriage treaty for an alliance between Richard of Cornwall, Henry III's brother, and Sanchia, a daughter of the count of Provence and sister of Queen Eleanor. By August he was once again in Poitou with the king. As a Savoyard he was inevitably brought into contact with the king's uncle, Boniface of Savoy, elected archbishop of Canterbury in February 1241, but absent and unconsecrated for several years thereafter. By 1243 Aigueblanche was acting as chief agent of the absentee archbishop-elect. At Easter 1244 he was summoned to Dover to greet Boniface on his arrival in England, charged by the pope with the duty of delivering the archbishop's pallium and with receiving Boniface's oath of fealty. 
Throughout this period Aigueblanche was frequently commissioned by Pope Innocent IV to grant benefices to favoured alien and royal clerks, and to act as papal spokesman to the king. As a result he became embroiled in a long-standing dispute between the pope and Henry III over the king's harsh treatment of William of Raleigh, bishop of Winchester. At Reading in the spring of 1244, and again at Westminster, he is said to have delivered stern rebukes to Henry, demanding a reconciliation with Raleigh, and threatening a sentence of interdict against the king's private chapel. In the summer of 1245 he attended the general council held by Innocent IV at Lyons, while by the early months of 1246 he was in Savoy, acting as an agent of Henry III in the process by which Count Amadeus was persuaded to render homage to the king for various of his alpine lordships. Thereafter he returned to England, where he had been charged by the pope with a commission to collect the first fruits of vacant churches on behalf of the financially embarrassed archbishop, an unprecedented tax which stirred up resentment against both Boniface and Peter. Until Boniface's return to England in 1249 Peter continued to serve as his principal deputy, with a supervisory role over the Canterbury estates. 
For much of 1246 Aigueblanche was active in the diocese of Hereford, securing the return of manors and churches alienated by his predecessors, serving as papal commissioner in the collection of subsidies for the forthcoming crusade, and issuing a series of statutes enforcing residence upon the clergy of prebendal churches. In September 1247, and again in November 1249, he went on missions to France, and on the latter occasion he travelled on to the papal court, to serve as royal proctor in matters touching the crusade. Aigueblanche himself took the cross at about this time, probably early in 1250. He appears to have spent much of the next two years with the pope or in affairs overseas, including a prolonged series of hearings, completed at Sens in 1251, intended to clarify the circumstances of Henry III's marriage to Eleanor of Provence, by proving the irregularity of an earlier contract of marriage which had been negotiated but not finalized between Henry and Jeanne, the heir of Ponthieu, before 1236. Since Jeanne had later married Alfonso, king of Castile, it may well be that these hearings were intended to ease the way for a marriage between Henry's and Eleanor's son Edward, and a Castilian princess, duly negotiated by Aigueblanche at Toledo in a series of embassies between 1253 and the spring of 1254. 
In his absences overseas Aigueblanche appointed proctors to administer the diocese of Hereford, including an alien named Bernard, prior of Campagne in Gascony. This foreign domination of his see appears to have been bitterly resented, and in the course of a long-standing dispute between the bishop and chapter of Hereford over their respective temporalities, eventually settled in the chapter's favour, the summer of 1252 witnessed a serious outbreak of violence in Herefordshire, in which Aigueblanche's own life was threatened, his and his supporters' barns were burned, and Prior Bernard was murdered before the high altar of Hereford Cathedral. In February 1253, to protect him from further attacks, Aigueblanche was promised access to the royal castle at Hereford whenever he should ask for it. In the same year he was among the bishops and magnates who sealed a solemn sentence upholding 'Magna Carta', and at much the same time is said to have unsuccessfully petitioned the English clergy to grant an aid to the king. 
In June 1253 Aigueblanche accompanied Henry III's expedition to Gascony, and from there headed embassies to Castile to arrange for the marriage of the future king, Edward I. In October 1253 it was Peter who solemnly held the king's hand as Henry III swore an oath to confer Gascony upon his eldest son. In the following month he received royal letters of safe conduct as envoy to the papal court, and he seems to have remained with the new pope, Alexander IV, at Naples, for much of the spring of 1255. There he negotiated a notorious arrangement whereby the pope confirmed a grant of the kingdom of Sicily to Henry III, originally made by Innocent IV in 1254, to serve as an apanage for Henry's younger son Edmund. In return, Henry was not only to conquer Sicily and to eject its ruler, King Manfred, but also to repay all the expenses already incurred by the papacy in warfare against Manfred, estimated at the huge sum of 135,000 marks of silver. 
To cover the costs of his embassy, and to begin the payment of the enormous debt now owed to the pope, Aigueblanche raised loans at the papal curia from the merchants of Florence and Siena, against which, as security for repayment, he pledged the future proceeds of a tax of a tenth imposed by the pope upon the English church since 1252. In so doing, and to the great outrage of the English clergy, he employed a series of blank schedules that had been sealed by the clergy and handed to him to use in his negotiations with the pope, but whose contents were left to Peter to complete according to his own discretion. Monastic chroniclers are unanimous in their assertion that the signatories to these letters had received no warning that their letters would be used to raise loans, let alone to raise loans for such a doomed venture as the conquest of Sicily. This, more than anything, was to mark out Peter as the most hated alien bishop in England. Something of the extravagance of his arrangements can be gauged from a bond, issued at Naples in April 1255, by which the merchants of Siena accepted 10,000 marks of gold from Peter in return for their surrender of a crown, regalia, and various jewels previously pawned to them by Frederick II. All told, 'the Sicilian business', was to bankrupt Henry III, and to stir up a storm of protest from his English subjects. 
Aigueblanche must take at least part of the blame for this fiasco, although it should be noted that he was acting merely as an agent of the king, that the bishops and clergy had freely agreed to seal the blank charters that he was later accused of misusing, and that his pledging of future tax revenues merely imitated an arrangement of September 1254, whereby the king had financed Peter's own expenses at the papal court by raising loans from the merchants of Florence secured against the proceeds of the clerical tenth within the sees of Hereford and Worcester. On his return to England in 1255 he found himself an object of hatred among bishops and barons alike. Despite his own attempts and those of the papal envoy Rostand to collect the tenth in England and Ireland, resistance was widespread and impassioned. Aigueblanche returned to the papal court as the king's envoy in November 1255, and in September 1256 was once again sent to Gascony. There, in April 1257, he was empowered to conduct negotiations over breaches of the Anglo-French truce. When the archbishop of Bordeaux fell ill that same year, Aigueblanche is said to have made no secret of his desire to succeed him, but, like an earlier request from the king in 1254 that Peter be translated from Hereford to Lincoln, this came to nothing. By 1257 Aigueblanche was suffering severe discomfort from a polypus in his nose, for the treatment of which he is said to have travelled to Montpellier, home to a major medical school. 
With the outbreak of baronial rebellion, in the early summer of 1258, Aigueblanche's manor of Lydbury was attacked by the bailiffs of John (II) Fitzalan of Clun. As chief author of 'the Sicilian business', he was not surprisingly excluded from royal counsels, and between July and November 1258 was summoned to render accounts for his receipts from the papal tax. Pleading illness, he failed to cross to England, but he had returned to England by June 1259, and in that month and again in November was engaged in peace negotiations with the Welsh. In November 1261, with the resurgence in the king's personal power, he was appointed one of three royalist representatives set to adjudicate on the baronial programme of reform, and in the following year, together with Leonardo, precentor of Messina, he was appointed by the pope to resume the collection of money still owing from the Sicilian affair. 
With the drift towards civil war Aigueblanche was singled out as a target for baronial reprisals. His houses, parks, and warrens were attacked before February 1262, and for a time he was himself barricaded within the city walls of Hereford. In the same year he was active against the Welsh, and wrote to the king of his inability to prevent attacks. In February 1263 he was asked to surrender Hereford Castle to a new royalist constable. In the same month he was expected to attend Henry III in Paris. On 7 June 1263 he was forcibly seized in Hereford Cathedral by Roger of Leybourne, Roger de Clifford, John Giffard, and other marcher lords. From there he was carried off, with various of his canons and clergy, to imprisonment at Walter de Baskerville's castle of Eardisley. The temporalities of his see were plundered by the barons. The date of his capture was later accepted at court as the official commencement of civil war. Aigueblanche himself was released following representations to the parliament of September 1263, although not until Archbishop Boniface had absolved the barons from any guilt in the affair. 
In September, Aigueblanche crossed with Henry III to Amiens, where he is said to have been instrumental in stirring up French indignation against the barons, and where in January 1264 he witnessed the judgment issued by Louis IX, entirely quashing the baronial programme of reform. Thereafter he remained overseas throughout the period of civil war. His lands remained in baronial hands, and in June 1265 he was sent a fierce rebuke, no doubt dictated by the barons, demanding that he return to his diocese on pain of the sequestration of his temporalities. In August, following the royalist victory at Evesham, he and his canons received letters of protection, and he was subsequently promised the repayment of money seized by the previous custodians of his lands. None the less, various of his manors, including Bishops Castle and Lydbury North, continued to be withheld by the royalist John Fitzalan, while others were effectively detached by the Welsh. In February 1267 he received further letters of protection, presumably to go overseas to Savoy, where he is found at Aiguebelle in April. 
The final months of Aigueblanche's life are shrouded in obscurity, but his will, drawn up at Sugwas in Herefordshire on 26 November 1268, demonstrates that his death, on 27 November, took place in England. Despite the terms of his will, requesting burial at Aiguebelle in Savoy, the bishop's body was buried in Hereford Cathedral, beneath a magnificent carved tomb and effigy, perhaps of foreign workmanship, from which it was exhumed in 1925. The canons of Aiguebelle later exhibited a rival tomb, with a fifteenth-century bronze effigy which was destroyed at the Revolution. But there can be little doubt that this monument was the result of later wishful thinking. His will, which survives, assigns most of his estate to the collegiate church at Aiguebelle which he had founded in the 1250s, and to which, on 21 April 1267, he had granted statutes modelled upon those of Hereford Cathedral. It also reveals the extent of his property holding in France. Until 1254 he had held the small Cluniac priory of Innimont in the diocese of Belley, perhaps through the influence of Archbishop Boniface. In 1254 Aigueblanche had exchanged Innimont for the priory of Ste Helene-du-Lac in his native Tarentaise, augmented by Boniface in September 1255 with an assignment of the castle and lordship of Ste Helene-des-Milleres. In 1267 these secular rights were willed to Peter's nephew and namesake, the lord of Briancon. In addition Aigueblanche disposed of houses in Lyons and Paris, and willed property and money in France to various hospitals and monasteries in the Tarentaise. His glossed 'Bible' was to be sold to clothe the poor, while his obituary was celebrated as far afield as Geneva. 
During Aigueblanche's lifetime, as early as 1252, he had assigned the Hereford churches of All Saints and St Martin to the hospital of St Anthony at Vienne near Lyons. Many of his nephews and kinsmen had already obtained prebends and offices within Hereford Cathedral, where they continued to form an identifiable Savoyard faction as late as the 1290s. Matthew Paris, one of his sternest critics, accuses Aigueblanche of 'fox-like cunning', claiming that 'his memory exudes a sulphurous stench' (Paris, 'Chron'., 5.510). In reality, despite his supposed inability to speak the English language, Peter was a reasonably conscientious bishop and diocesan, who rebuilt and enriched the temporalities of his see, confirmed churches to the religious, and enforced residence upon the canons of his cathedral. His gifts to the chapter included part of the manor of Holme Lacy and the church of Bockleton, while throughout his episcopate he obtained regular gifts of timber from the king, used in an ambitious programme of new building at Hereford Cathedral, in the completion of the presbytery and a new north transept. Neither his property disputes with his chapter, nor his nepotistic advancement of his own kinsmen were in any way exceptional by the standards of the time. Less defensible is Aigueblanche's political career, where he undoubtedly played a part in widening the breach between king and barons, and where his negotiations over Sicily can be regarded as at best foolhardy and at worst thoroughly dishonest. 


@@@@@


doc= 22016


Savoy, Peter of, count of Savoy and 'de facto' earl of Richmond (1203?-1268), magnate, was the sixth or seventh son of Thomas (I), count of Savoy (died 1233), and Marguerite, daughter of Guillaume (I), count of Geneva. He was later said to have been born at his family's castle of Susa in 1203. 
As a younger son Peter was intended for a career in the church, and it is as a clerk that he is first recorded, in 1224. By 1226 he was a canon of Lausanne, where in 1229 he was appointed to administer the vacant see, probably in the unfulfilled expectation of his being elected bishop. By 1233 he was probably contemplating the abandonment of his clerical career, for through the agency of his brother William, bishop of Valence, he was then betrothed to Agnes (died 1268), the second daughter of Aymon (II), lord of Faucigny, with the promise of all the Faucigny lands except those already assigned to an elder sister. The marriage took place in 1238. This represented a major expansion of Savoyard influence to the south of Lake Geneva. Peter's attempts to establish a new power base in the western Alps, combined with an aggressive policy towards the neighbouring lords of Geneva, led to a bitter war, and in the winter of 1236-7 Peter was ambushed and briefly taken prisoner. But with family assistance the count of Geneva was worsted, and forced to promise the surrender of various castles and an indemnity of 20,000 marks. In 1237, following the death of his brother Amon, Peter succeeded to an apanage in the Chablais and the Valais, which in turn led to a fierce struggle against the pope and the local ecclesiastical authorities. This dispute may have contributed to the decision of Peter and his brothers to welcome the emperor, Frederick II, to Turin in 1238, and from there to assist in the imperial campaign of reconquest in Lombardy. 
By this time the Savoyard ruling family had already obtained an unprecedented position in international affairs, not least through the marriage of Peter's niece Marguerite to Louis IX of France in 1234, followed in 1236 by the marriage of another niece, Eleanor, to Henry III of England. Various of Peter's kinsmen, including his brothers William and Thomas, count of Flanders from 1237, had already established contacts with the English court, and it was in an attempt to emulate their success that Peter himself sought a meeting with Henry III. In 1240, following a brutal armed assault upon the city of Lausanne which failed to secure the election of his brother Philippe as bishop, Peter made his way to England, where he arrived about Christmas. Thereafter, for the remainder of his life, he was to divide his time and his energies equally between his estates in Savoy and a new-found position at the English court. In England he was afforded an extravagant welcome, and was knighted by the king at Westminster on 5 January 1241. Shortly afterwards his brother, Boniface of Savoy, was elected archbishop of Canterbury. 
In May 1241 Peter was granted the lordship of Richmond in Yorkshire. He appears as a member of the king's council, hearing legal disputes from May 1241, and in September 1241 was granted custody of the heir and lands of William (V) de Warenne, earl of Surrey, and of the castles of Lewes, Pevensey, and Canterbury. This was rapidly followed by custody of Rochester Castle and the Cinque Ports. Native resentment against his promotion was smoothed by Peter's undertaking to surrender Dover, Rochester, and Canterbury castles, and in January 1242 it was Peter who delivered the king's offer of concessions to the barons assembled in parliament. In the same month he received the Sussex honour of Aigle, together with Pevensey Castle, in custody for the next ten years, subsequently transformed into a hereditary fief. Throughout his time in England he appears deliberately to have refrained from claiming the title of earl, describing himself merely as lord of Richmond, perhaps as a sop to baronial opinion. 
Peter returned to the continent from June until September 1241, on a mission from Henry III to the barons of Burgundy, and was in Savoy again by December 1241, perhaps to recruit supporters for Henry III's forthcoming campaign in Poitou. In the meantime his previously tense relations with the king's brother, Richard, earl of Cornwall, were eased by Richard's decision to marry yet another of Peter's nieces, Sanchia of Provence, sister of Queen Marguerite and Queen Eleanor. In February 1242, to prepare for the arrival of the English expeditionary force, Peter was sent to Poitou, where he narrowly escaped ambush. He travelled on to Provence, finalizing the arrangements for the marriage of Richard of Cornwall. From Provence he made his way to Savoy, where he resumed the military struggle against Geneva that was to preoccupy him for the next ten years; he secured the strategic lordships of Arlod and Gruyere, and in December 1242 obtained more favourable terms from a marriage negotiated earlier between his daughter Beatrice and Guiges (VII), 'dauphin' of the neighbouring province of the Viennois. By the summer of 1244, through a combination of military threats, diplomacy, and purchase, he had effectively imposed his lordship over the entire Pays de Vaud. 
Peter then returned to England, where in July 1244 he served as royal spokesman to the clergy in parliament, and in the following year led a major contingent against the Welsh. In February 1246 he was granted a house in the Strand outside London, the origins of the Savoy Palace and, later, the hotel. Having returned briefly to his homeland, in February 1247 he was back in England, bringing with him two Savoyard heiresses, married to Edmund de Lacy, earl of Lincoln, and to Richard, son of the late Hubert de Burgh, one-time earl of Kent, marriages that are said to have bred discontent among the native English baronage. Throughout this period Peter's income from his English estates, together with loans from Richard of Cornwall, served to fund yet further additions to his lordship in Savoy, where in 1248 he was able to purchase the fortified town of Vevey. In October 1249, while still abroad, he was appointed to treat with Louis IX for an extension of the Anglo-French truce, and in the same month was granted custody of Rye Castle and the honour and castle of Hastings, formerly held by the counts of Eu. In 1250 he once again set out for Savoy, 'en route' negotiating a further prolongation of the truce with France. While overseas he successfully put down an outbreak of resistance from the lord of La Tour-du-Pin and from his principal rivals, the house of Geneva, obtaining custody of half a dozen of the count of Geneva's most strategically important castles, in theory pending the payment of an indemnity of 10,000 marks, in practice for life. 
Peter then returned to England briefly in March 1251, and then became intimately involved in the negotiations for Simon de Montfort's withdrawal from Gascony and in the decision to award the duchy to the Lord Edward, Peter's nephew, rather than to Richard of Cornwall. Throughout this process he served as a staunch supporter of Simon de Montfort, helping to smooth the anger of the king. In August 1251, with his father-in-law on the point of death, he was officially invested with the lordship of Faucigny, used thereafter to tighten his grip over the entire Pays de Vaud as far north as Fribourg and Bern. This process culminated in 1255 in a request from the citizens of Bern and Morat that Peter act as their protector, followed by Peter's award of charters to the two cities, saving whatever loyalty they might owe to the emperor as overlord. In this way, in little more than a decade, backed by the financial resources made available to him from England, Peter had effectively annexed the whole of western Switzerland as a Savoyard fief. 
Meanwhile, during one of his occasional visits to England, in November 1252 Peter was appointed keeper of the honour and castle of Tickhill during the Lord Edward's minority, and in the same month became embroiled in the dispute between his brother, Archbishop Boniface of Savoy, and Aymer de Lusignan, bishop-elect of Winchester, that was to escalate into a full-scale factional struggle between the king's Savoyard and Poitevin-Lusignan kinsmen. In the following year he took the cross, being promised the enormous sum of 10,000 marks towards the expenses of his proposed crusade, and receiving a substantial advance payment of 5500 marks in cash so that he might settle his affairs in Savoy. This was accompanied by the award of various lands and wardships, including custody of William de Vescy, who was to be married to a Savoyard heiress at the discretion of Peter and Queen Eleanor. 
In July 1253 Peter took charge of various charters relating to the Lord Edward's lands and to the appointment of Eleanor as regent in the event of the king's death, and in the following month accompanied Henry III's expedition to Gascony. There, over the next year, he served as a leading diplomatic adviser, closely involved in the negotiations for the marriage of the Lord Edward to Eleanor of Castile, and in the king's bid for Sicily, intended as a portion for Henry III's younger son, Edmund. Having spent much of 1255 in the Alps, completing his conquest of Bern, by November 1255 he was back in England, passing 'en route' through Gascony to give counsel to the Lord Edward. In the following year he was once again appointed to negotiate with Louis IX of France, and thereafter, no doubt because of his experience in papal and imperial politics, was asked to join in discussions over 'the Sicilian business'. 
In the summer of 1256 Peter was once again in Savoy, besieging the cities of Turin and Asti whose citizens had in the previous year captured and attempted to ransom his brother Thomas, since 1253 recognized as count of Savoy. He did not return to England until November 1256, at which time the king issued a notorious order, forbidding any writ prejudicial to Peter to be issued by the chancery. In January 1257 he was sent overseas, probably to negotiate the release of his brother Thomas. He was back in England by April 1257, and in the following month, acting together with Queen Eleanor, purchased the wardship of the heir to the Ferrers earldom of Derby, for 6000 marks paid to the Lord Edward. Thereafter he continued to play a part in negotiations over Sicily, and in June 1257, together with Simon de Montfort, travelled to Paris for discussions with the French. 
With the outbreak of baronial rebellion in the spring of 1258, far from being proscribed by the English barons, Peter joined his other Savoyard kinsmen in a sworn conspiracy against Henry III's Lusignan half-brothers, and in May 1258, at Paris, sealed a provisional draft of the peace treaty with France. In August he advised the barons on their negotiations with the papacy over Sicily, and was sent north, to Scotland, in an effort to prevent disturbances on the northern march. He was subsequently appointed to the council of fifteen that was set to oversee reform. In January 1259 he was sent by the baronial council to greet Richard of Cornwall on his return from Germany, in an attempt to reconcile Richard to the programme of baronial reform. That summer he was in France for the final settlement of Anglo-French disputes under the treaty of Paris. Over the next few months he appears to have crossed and recrossed from France to England on at least two occasions. 
By this time Peter had become disenchanted with Simon de Montfort, over Montfort's attempts to exploit the negotiation of the Anglo-French treaty for private interest. As a result he faced attempts by Montfort to secure his removal from the council. In February 1260 he once again set out for Savoy, where, in his absence, his local representatives had continued to make territorial gains at the expense of the neighbouring lords of Geneva and Sion. In 1260 Peter led a successful campaign against the castle of Charousse, obtained various new lordships through pressure placed upon the bishop of Sion, and began the fortification of various outposts in the region of Bern. These had been conceded to him by Richard of Cornwall as king of the Romans in the previous year, and included the lordship of Yverdon on Lake Neuchatel, where Peter set about the building of a castle. He did not return to England until November 1260, when he rejoined the royalist campaign to suppress baronial reforms, perhaps at least in part because baronial inquiries had threatened various of Peter's own interests in Sussex. 
In March 1262 Peter received royal licence to demise Richmond freely after his death, and in June he agreed an exchange with the Lord Edward, surrendering his estates in East Anglia in return for Edward's lordship of Hastings. In July 1262 he accompanied the king to France. He seems to have travelled on to Savoy, where he is to be found in June 1263 at the time of his recognition as count of Savoy in succession to his nephew Boniface, the son of his eldest brother, Amadeus. In the process he effectively usurped the rights of his other nephews, the sons of his brother Thomas, who had been promised the succession to Savoy, but whose military power was no match for Peter's. Thereafter, although he returned briefly to England in November 1263, Peter was increasingly preoccupied with his alpine lordship. During his absence in 1263-4 his English lands were attacked in the opening stages of the baronial revolt led by Simon de Montfort. Peter remained an exile from England throughout the ensuing civil war, although for at least part of this time he is to be found in attendance upon Queen Eleanor in northern France, engaged in attempts to raise money and military support for the king. Since 1259 he had faced the threat that the honour of Richmond would be permanently wrested from him and conferred upon its rightful heir, John of Brittany, who had been reconciled to Henry III under the terms of the Anglo-French peace of 1259. 
With the baronial defeat at Evesham in 1265 Peter's lands were restored, but in May 1266 Richmond was once again seized and conferred upon John of Brittany. Peter himself seems never to have abandoned his claim and he continued to grant charters conferring parts of the Richmond estate, although he made no certain return to England after 1263. From 1265 he was engaged in warfare against Rudolf von Habsburg in the Alps, ended by a treaty negotiated at Lowenburg on 8 September 1267. In May 1268 he drew up a final version of his will, and he died at Pierre-Chatel on 16 or 17 May after a long illness. He was buried in the family abbey of Hautecombe on 18 May 1268. He willed his estates at Faucigny, together with detached portions of the ancestral Savoyard lands, to his only daughter, Beatrice, 'dauphine' of Viennois, and his English estates to the sons of Thomas of Savoy, with the exception of the Savoy Palace which he conferred upon the monks of the Grand-St Bernard, and Richmond, which Peter intended for Queen Eleanor. In practice, Eleanor and the Lord Edward proved the principal beneficiaries of his entire English estate. He was succeeded as count of Savoy by his younger brother Philip (died 1285). Peter's widow, Agnes, died shortly after him on 11 August 1268. 
From 1240 onwards Peter had shuttled ceaselessly between England and Savoy. However, it was Savoy that appears to have remained closest to his heart. In England he made only a handful of awards to the religious, for the most part simple confirmations of land, although he did attempt to relocate and rebuild the chapel of Pevensey Castle. By contrast, in Savoy he was a generous monastic patron, and it was Savoyards who headed his household, even for his English estates. His principal achievement lay in the conquest of western Switzerland, ensuring that ever afterwards French rather than German would be the language of the western Swiss cantons. The administrative reforms that he instituted there, modelled in part upon the highly centralized government that he and his officials had observed in England, did much to lay the foundations of the later Swiss state. It was Peter who established a fixed financial office at Chambery, and who, by means of a series of statutes enacted after 1263, transformed the administration of law and justice. Here, ironically, he may well have learned from the reforms attempted by Simon de Montfort and the other baronial rebels against Henry III. In England he is best remembered for his part in the early promotion of the Lord Edward, for his status as a property owner, and in particular for his acquisition and the consequent renaming of the future Savoy Hotel. Although an alien, and therefore suspect to the native English baronage, his activities in 1258-9 serve as a reminder that the baronial rebellion of those years was directed more against the narrow clique of the Lusignans, than against the aliens 'en masse'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22017


Peter the Wild Boy (c.1712-1785), curiosity, was found in 1725 in the woods near Hamelin, about 25 miles from Hanover. In the words of contemporary pamphleteers, he was observed 'walking on his hands and feet, climbing trees like a squirrel, and feeding on grass and moss'. In November 1725 he was taken to the house of correction at Celle, and in the same month was presented to George I, who was visiting Hanover. Peter then escaped and took refuge in a tree, which had to be cut down before he was recaptured. In the spring of 1726, by the king's command, he was brought to England and, according to contemporary accounts, was exhibited to the nobility. The boy, who appeared to be about fourteen years old, was baptized and committed to the care of the physician and satirist John Arbuthnot. Attempts were made to teach Peter to speak, without success. The question of how Peter came to be in the woods was fiercely debated in chapbooks and pamphlets. There was also much speculation about what sort of creature had nurtured him; possible animals included a sow, wolf, and bear. 
Jonathan Swift, who arrived in London at about the same time, wrote to Thomas Tickell that Peter 'hath been half our Talk this fortnight' (16 April 1726, 'Correspondence', 3.128). Swift also wrote a satirical pamphlet, 'It Cannot Rain but it Pours', which commented on London's fascination with the boy; Arbuthnot and Daniel Defoe provided similar investigations in their 'The Most Wonderful Wonder' (1726) and 'Mere Nature Delineated' (1726). Some of the more bizarre features of Swift's description, including Peter's neighing to express joy, were later applied by James Burnett, Lord Monboddo, for his theory of human development in 'Of the Origin and Progress of Language' (1773-92). Monboddo compared the wild boy with an orang-utang -- a species which he famously regarded as an uncivilized type of human being. 
Following the death of Queen Caroline, who had taken an interest in Peter's education, he was boarded with a farmer, Mr Fenn, at Berkhamstead, Hertfordshire, with a crown pension of $35 per annum. He grew up strong and muscular and was able to do manual labour under careful supervision. Each spring he would wander away from the farm. In 1751 he walked as far as Norfolk, where he was apprehended as a vagrant and committed to the Norwich city bridewell. After his release he was given a brass collar which was inscribed 'Peter the Wild Boy, Broadway Farm, Berkhamsted'. He returned to the farm where he was visited by Monboddo in 1782, and where he died on 22 February 1785 ('GM', 236). He was buried at St Mary's, Northchurch, Hertfordshire. Research in 2011 indicated that Peter may have been affected by the genetic disorder Pitt-Hopkins syndrome. 


@@@@@


doc= 22018


Peter, David (1765-1837), Independent minister and ecclesiastical historian, was born at Aberystwyth, Cardiganshire, on 5 August 1765, the son of David and Margaret Peter. When he was seven years old his father, who was a ship's carpenter, moved to New Quay, Cardiganshire. He received his early education at the school of Evan Davies, Troed-y-rhiw, and later with the Revd David Davies of Castellhywel. His father, who was a churchman, wished him to become a clergyman. However, under the influence of the Revd Benjamin Evans of Tre-wen, Peter joined the Independents, and in March 1783 became a member of the church at Penrhiw-galed. In August 1783 he entered the Presbyterian Carmarthen Academy at Rhyd-y-groes and by the following year was keeping a school at St Ishmaels, Carmarthenshire. During this time he began to preach at Penrhiw-galed and in August 1786 he enrolled as a student at the Swansea Academy. In October 1789 he was appointed assistant tutor to the Revd William Howell at this institution, a position he resigned in 1792, in order to take the pastorate of Lammas Street Church, Carmarthen, where he was ordained on 8 June. The academy at Swansea was dissolved in 1794, but in the following year it was re-established at Carmarthen, and Peter was appointed president. He held this office, in conjunction with his pastorate, until his death. Peter married twice: his first wife was Sarah Lewis ('b'. 1755), 'nee' Llywelyn, a widow from Carmarthen, whom he married in October 1795; after her death in 1820 he married Charlotte Nott ('c'.1783-1834) on 18 July 1822. 
Peter was highly regarded as an evangelical preacher who found great success in his ministry at Carmarthen. He was responsible for translating Samuel Palmer's 'Protestant Dissenters' Catechism' (1803), but he is best known as the author of 'Hanes crefydd yng Nghymru' (1816), an account of Welsh religion from the times of the druids to the beginning of the nineteenth century. The book, which shows fairly wide reading and is free from sectarian bias, remained for many years the main history of religion in Wales. Peter died on 4 May 1837 at Carmarthen and was buried at the Lammas Street Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 22019


Peter, William (1788-1853), poet and writer, was born at Harlyn, St Merryn, Cornwall, on 22 March 1788, the eldest son of Henry Peter (died 1821), an army officer, and his wife, Anna Maria, youngest daughter of Thomas Rous of Piercefield, Monmouthshire. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 27 January 1803, and graduated BA on 19 March 1807 and MA on 7 December 1809. On 12 January 1811, he married Frances (died 1836), only daughter and heir of John Thomas of Chiverton in Perranzabuloe, Cornwall; they had ten children. 
After living for a few years in London, where he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 28 May 1813, Peter returned to his native county and settled on his property, which had been greatly increased by his marriage. He became a JP and deputy lieutenant for Cornwall, and was prominent among the country gentlemen who campaigned for electoral reform. When the close boroughs in Cornwall were abolished by the first 'Reform Act', he was invited to stand for the enlarged constituency of Bodmin, and was elected on 11 December 1832. He sat until the dissolution of parliament on 29 December 1834; but the enthusiasm for reform had then died away, and he did not stand again. His political interests are reflected in 'Thoughts on the Present Crisis' (1815), a memoir of Sir Samuel Romilly in an edition of his speeches (1820), and 'A Letter from an ex-M.P. to his Late Constituents' (1835). 
Peter shortly retired to the continent to read, and to enjoy the company of, and to translate, German authors. His translations included Schiller's 'William Tell' (1839), and 'Mary Stuart' (1841). His own poetry includes 'Sacred Songs', paraphrases of selected psalms (1828), 'Poems by Ralph Ferrars' (that is William Peter, new edn 1833), and some specimens in Griswold's 'Poets and Poetry' (1875 edn, 240-43). 
In 1840 Peter was appointed British consul in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. His first wife had died on 21 August 1836 and in 1844 in Philadelphia he married his second wife, Sarah King (1800-1877), daughter of Thomas Worthington of Ohio and widow of Edward King, son of Rufus King of New York. She was described as 'one of the most distinguished women in American society', the founder of a school of design for women at Philadelphia. 
Peter's compilation 'Specimens of the Poets and Poetry of Greece and Rome', by various translators (1847), was well received. He died in Philadelphia on 6 February 1853 and was buried in the churchyard of St Peter there, where a monument to his memory was erected by a number of the leading citizens. 
Peter's eldest son, John Thomas Henry Peter, fellow of Merton College, Oxford, died in July 1873. The third son, Robert Godolphin Peter, formerly fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge, became rector of Cavendish, Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 22020


Peterkin, Alexander (1781-1846), writer, was born on 26 March 1781 at Macduff, Banffshire, the fifth of eight children of William Peterkin (died 1792), minister of the chapel of ease there, and his wife, Isabel Irvine (died 1810). After education at the parish school in Ecclesmachan, Linlithgowshire, to which his father was translated in 1787 after a brief ministry in Leadhills (1785-7), Alexander went on to attend classes at Edinburgh University, where he studied law. In 1803 he enrolled in the first regiment of Royal Edinburgh volunteers. Peterkin married, on 20 December 1807, Charlotte Giles, with whom he had two sons and five daughters. After training in the office of a writer to the signet, Peterkin qualified as a solicitor before the supreme courts and he began his professional career in Peterhead some time before 1811. In 1814 he was appointed sheriff-substitute of Orkney. Peterkin developed a great interest in the affairs of Orkney and his antiquarian researches resulted in the publication of 'Rentals of the Ancient Earldom and Bishoprick of Orkney' (1820) and 'Notes on Orkney and Zetland' (1822). However, it was not his views on Orkney's past, but his reflections on its present circumstances, that proved so offensive to many, and the latter work provoked an indignant response in the form of a 'Vindication of Orkney' (1823). This railed against his depiction of landowners as tyrants and the system of agriculture as barbarous, concluding 'remove all its egotism and malevolence against Orkney, and you expunge all its contents' (Traill, 56). The reaction culminated in his dismissal as sheriff-substitute in 1823. Peterkin was not disposed to let the matter rest, and raised an action of damages against Samuel Laing of Papdale and James Baikie of Tankerness as the persons he held responsible for the libels which led to his dismissal. The action ground on inconclusively for years. From 1824 to 1826 Peterkin published the 'Orkney and Zetland Chronicle' from Edinburgh, 'a very able but short-lived magazine, extending only to nineteen numbers' (Hossack, 109), with the aim of winning the parliamentary vote for Shetlanders. 
Peterkin now combined journalism with legal work and was connected with newspapers in Belfast and Perth. From 1833 to 1835 he edited the 'Kelso Chronicle'. He distinguished himself as the editor of 'The Booke of the Universalle Kirk of Scotland' (1839) and with 'The Records of the Church of Scotland' (1838) and 'The Constitution of the Church of Scotland as Established at the Revolution, 1689-90' (1841). As a spirited controversialist, Peterkin advanced the views of a 'whig of 1688'. His special expertise in ecclesiastical history and law was naturally drawn upon during the years of conflict that preceded the Disruption in the Church of Scotland in 1843. He opposed the claims of the non-intrusion party throughout and acted as agent for the seven suspended ministers in the presbytery of Strathbogie. 
Among Peterkin's earlier publications were an edition, with biographical sketch, of Robert Fergusson's 'Works' (1807) and a reprint, with critical preface, of James Currie's 'The Life and Works of Robert Burns' (1815), in which he took issue with Currie's view of Burns's supposed over-indulgence in alcohol. Peterkin died at his home, 27 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, on 9 November 1846. His elder son, 


@@@@@


doc= 22021


Alexander Peterkin (1814-1889), was successively editor of the 'Berwick Advertiser', sub-editor of the 'Edinburgh Advertiser', and on the staff of 'The Times', from which he retired about 1853 on health grounds. 


@@@@@


doc= 22022


Peters, Charles (1695-1746?), physician, was the son of John Peters of London, where he was born. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 31 March 1710, and graduated BA in 1713 and MA in 1724. 
Richard Mead encouraged Peters to study medicine, and lent him a copy of the rare first edition, printed at Verona in 1530, of the Latin poem by Hieronymus Frascatorius entitled 'Syphilis, sive, Morbus Gallicus', which has provided a scientific name for a long series of pathological phenomena. Peters published an edition of 'Syphilis' in 1720. It is a quarto finely printed by Jonah Bowyer at the Rose in St Paul's Churchyard, and has a portrait of Frascatorius engraved by Vertue for frontispiece. The contents of the dedication to Mead show that Peters was more occupied with literary than with scientific questions, for the only allusion he makes to the contents of the poem is to offer emendations of three lines. He is said to have graduated MD at Leiden in 1724, but his name does not appear in Innes-Smith. 
Peters was elected a Radcliffe travelling fellow on 12 July 1725, and graduated BM and DM at Oxford on 8 November 1732. In 1733 he was appointed physician-extraordinary to the king, and was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of London on 16 April 1739, in which year he was also appointed physician-general to the army, an office he retained until his death. He was physician to St George's Hospital from April 1735 to February 1746, and was a censor in the College of Physicians in 1744, but illness prevented him from serving his full period. He published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1744-5 'The case of a person bit by a mad dog', a paper on hydrophobia, in which he suggests the use of warm baths in such a case. He probably died in 1746. 


@@@@@


doc= 22023


Peters, Charles (1690-1774), Hebraist and Church of England clergyman, born at Tregony, Cornwall, on 1 December 1690, was the eldest child of Richard Peters. He was educated at Tregony School under a Mr Daddow, and matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 3 April 1707; he graduated BA (27 October 1710), MA (5 June 1713), and was a batteler of his college from 8 April 1707 to 20 July 1713. Having been ordained into the Anglican church, he was curate of St Just in Roseland, Cornwall, from 1710 to 1715, when he was appointed by Elizabeth, Lady Mohun, to the rectory of Boconnoc in the same county. He remained there until 1723, and during his incumbency built the south front of the old parsonage-house. On 10 December 1723 Peters was instituted to the rectory of Bratton-Clovelly, Devon, and in November 1726 was appointed to the rectory of St Mabyn, Cornwall, holding both preferments until his death. To the poor of St Mabyn he was very charitable; and, being himself unmarried, he educated the two eldest sons, John and Jonathan, of his brother, John. 
Peters knew Hebrew well (he was, according to the literary chronicler Richard Polwhele, 'the first Hebrew scholar in Europe'), and at St Mabyn he was able to pursue his studies without interruption. In 1751 he published 'A Critical Dissertation on the Book of Job', in which he criticized Bishop William Warburton's account, proved the book's antiquity, and demonstrated that a future state was the popular belief of the ancient Jews or Hebrews. A second edition, corrected and with a lengthy preface of ninety pages, appeared in 1757; the preface was also issued separately. Warburton, in the notes to his 'Divine Legation of Moses', always wrote contemptuously of Peters. The retort of Bishop Robert Lowth on the latter's behalf, in his printed letter to Warburton (1765), was that 'the very learned and ingenious person', Mr Peters, had given his antagonist 'a Cornish hug', from which he would be sore as long as he lived. Peters published in 1760 'An appendix to the critical dissertation on Job, giving a further account of the book of Ecclesiastes', with a reply to some of Warburton's notes; and in 1765 he was engaged in finishing a more elaborate reply which was never published but descended to his nephew with his other manuscripts. 
Peters died at St Mabyn on 11 February 1774 and was buried in the chancel of the parish church. In accordance with his desire -- expressed two years previously -- a volume of his sermons was printed in 1776 by his nephew Jonathan, vicar of St Clement, near Truro. Some extracts from Peters's private prayers, meditations, and letters are printed in Polwhele's 'Biographical Sketches in Cornwall' (1831). 


@@@@@


doc= 22024


Peter, Hugh (bap. 1598, d. 1660), Independent minister, was born in Fowey, Cornwall, and baptized there on 11 June 1598, the third child and second son of Thomas Dickwoode or Peter (1571-1625), merchant, and his first wife, Martha Treffry ('bap'. 1572, died 1598), daughter of John Treffry of Place and Emblem Tresithney; Thomas Peter (1597-1654/5) was his brother. His father's family, probably originally named Dykeveldt, emigrated from Antwerp about 1543 and at the end of the sixteenth century adopted the name Peter, subsequently often rendered Peters. He matriculated sizar at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1613, graduating BA early in 1618. Two years later he was in London, where he heard a sermon that initiated his conversion. Shortly thereafter he took a post teaching school in Laindon, Essex. He was ordained deacon in London on 23 December 1621, but returned to Cambridge, where he proceeded MA in 1622. Ordained priest on 18 June 1623, he became curate at Rayleigh, Essex, through the patronage of the earl of Warwick; he remained at Rayleigh until 1626. About 1625 he married Elizabeth ('nee' Cooke), widow of Edmund Reade of Wickford, Essex; she was a generation older than himself, with adult children. 
In 1626 Peter returned to London, possibly to organize opposition to royal policies, particularly the forced loan, on behalf of Warwick. He was also active in the effort to buy up lay impropriations. He preached regularly at St Sepulchre, Holborn. In November, preaching at a private day in the neighbouring parish of Christ Church, he prayed for the queen to forsake her 'idolatry and superstition' ('CSP dom.', '1625-49', 175). He was imprisoned, but Warwick posted bail. In August 1627 Peter composed a statement to prove his orthodoxy for the bishop of London, but later that year his licence to preach was suspended. For the next year and a half he moved back and forth between the Low Countries and England. He served briefly as the minister at Amelant, an island off Friesland. He preached at Rayleigh, where the rector and wardens claimed to be ignorant of his suspension. When he prayed for the salvation of the queen at St Sepulchre his audacity landed him in prison for six months without bail. After his release he became proctor at Friesland University under its rector, William Ames. In 1628 Peter subscribed $50 to the precursor to the Massachusetts Bay Company; he attended company meetings as late as May 1629. 
After that Peter stayed on the continent, taking a position as chaplain to one of the four English regiments in the army of Frederick Henry, stadholder of the United Provinces, possibly that of Sir Edward Harwood. He published an account of the army's successes, 'Digitus Dei' [1631]. He eventually became pastor of the church at Rotterdam, and in 1633 set out to reform it along congregationalist lines. He introduced a church covenant and made subscription to it a condition of continued membership. The covenant unchurched a sizeable portion -- one opponent alleged two-thirds -- of the members. The congregation then proceeded to 'call' Peter as its minister, a ceremony that implied a renunciation of his Anglican ordination, a fact that was duly brought to the attention of the authorities in England. Later that year Ames joined Peter at Rotterdam but died soon after, in November 1633. Ames left his papers to Peter, who saw two works into print. In October 1633 Charles I put the English churches in Holland under the direct supervision of Archbishop William Laud. Henceforth, Peter found his activities increasingly scrutinized and many of his colleagues departing for New England. William Brereton visited Rotterdam in May 1634, describing Peter as 'a right zealous and worthy man'. He further opined that the church, 'formerly intended for a playhouse [was] now converted to a better use to a church' ('Travels in Holland', 1844, 6). In 1635 the Merchant Adventurers relocated their court to Rotterdam and commandeered the English church. By agreement with local officials, who had heretofore supported Peter, the church was to conform to the Church of England discipline. 
Peter and his wife returned to England in June 1635. The following month he sailed for New England, along with his stepdaughter Elizabeth, her new husband John Winthrop (1606-1676), and Sir Henry Vane. The three men were employed as agents by a group of investors interested in the Connecticut River valley, and for the first year of his sojourn in New England Peter worked on its behalf. He soon became involved in the affairs of the Bay Colony, helping to organize a January meeting to deal with differences between magistrates John Winthrop (1588-1649) and Thomas Dudley. He became a freeman in Massachusetts in March 1636. In July he travelled to Saybrook, on the Connecticut River, but that visit apparently ended his work for the patentees. Peter also worked to improve the region's economy, advocating the development of the fishery and shipbuilding, and persuaded a group to join with him in financing the construction of a ship. He suggested increased co-operation between congregations and a programme to readdress seasonal under-employment of women and children. He served on the colony's committee to develop a law code and as an overseer for Harvard College. 
Peter became minister at Salem on 21 December 1636. The previous minister, Roger Williams, had been banished for his controversial views on separatism and other matters. Peter immediately wrote a new church covenant and, as in Rotterdam, required all church members to subscribe. During the same winter the so-called 'Antinomian controversy', centring on the religious teachings of Anne Hutchinson, generated considerable contention. At least from the moment he became Salem's minister, Peter took a leading role in the effort to root out the Hutchinsonians. He participated in clerical conferences, met with the general court, and attended both the civil and ecclesiastical trials of Hutchinson. He publicly confronted her and her supporters, including the young governor, Sir Henry Vane. At her church trial he lectured Hutchinson that she knew neither her catechism nor her place. His own congregation was divided at this time. A few of Williams's supporters remained in Salem, and they were joined by a number of Hutchinson's defenders. Peter laboured, in private conferences and eventually in a church trial, to eliminate opposition. His wife, who during his absence from Europe had returned to Rotterdam and been reportedly ill-treated by the church, had joined Peter in Salem in 1637. Williams's supporters questioned her admission to the church on the grounds that she lacked a proper dismissal from the Rotterdam church. 
During his sojourn in New England Peter began to experience chronic health problems. His correspondence and that of others mention his debility, which occasionally became acute enough to affect his work. John Endecott, his friend at Salem, wrote that he 'hath bene very ill. But I hope the worst is past, though hee be as sick in his thoughts as ever' ('Winthrop Papers', 4.30). Peter reported in September 1640 'that deep melancholy is getting fast upon mee agayne' (ibid., 4.285). Despite his infirmity, however, he was a popular minister, credited with bringing a measure of harmony to the town. On one occasion his romantic entanglements gave rise to controversy. His first wife having died within the previous two months, Peter was in April 1638 accused of misleading Ruth Ames, daughter of his former colleague, about his intentions. Her uncle John Phillips -- minister at Dedham, Massachusetts -- claimed that Peter had caused her to dismiss a marriage prospect in London. About the same time Peter was negotiating marriage with a widow, Deliverance Sheffield. Letters between Peter and various New England friends about these negotiations indicated that they were strained and that he felt himself committed to the marriage regardless of his own inclinations. How the Ames imbroglio was resolved is not known, but by mid-1639 Peter was married to Sheffield. She was dismissed from Boston and admitted to Salem church in January 1640. The couple's only child, a daughter, was born in October 1640. 
In 1641 Peter returned to England as one of three agents of the Massachusetts government. Their assignment was: 'to negotiate for us, as occasion should be offered, both in furthering the work of reformation of the churches there which was now like to be attempted, and to satisfy our countrymen of the true cause our engagements there have not been satisfied this year. ('Journal of John Winthrop', 346)' Salem church was dismayed by the prospect of Peter's going, but relented under pressure from the general court. His wife and child remained behind in New England, where his absence was widely lamented. 
Peter's work for the colony included raising $500, sent in 'Useful commodities for the country' ('Journal of John Winthrop', 402). He also raised money to send poor children to New England. These funds became the subject of controversy, and it seems clear that some was misspent. Peter compiled and composed the introduction for a defence of the New England church way, 'Church-Government and Church-Covenant Discussed' (1643), which appeared just as the Westminster assembly convened. Overlooking the Massachusetts agents, leaders in parliament wrote to New England to ask that John Cotton, Thomas Hooker, and John Davenport attend, but, partly on the advice of Peter, they declined. Peter was featured in a satirical pamphlet, purporting to be written by William Laud, in which the archbishop pleaded that he 'not be transported beyond the seas into New England with Master Peters' ('Copy of the Petition', 1643). The satire appeared shortly after Laud heard apparently unfounded rumours of 'a plot laid by Peters, Wel[d], and others' that he be sent to New England ('The Works of... William Laud', ed. J. Bliss and W. Scott, 7 vols., 1847-60, 3.251). 
Resuming the role he had held in the United Provinces as chaplain, Peter served from May to September 1642 with the naval forces under Lord Forbes sent to reduce Ireland. He wrote an up-beat account of that unsuccessful campaign, 'A True Relation of the Passages of God's Providence' (1642). In it he suggested that Ireland be reduced through the use of physical force as well as the civilizing force of a godly protestant ministry. Upon Peter's return to England, he took the lead in a petition against peace overtures and accommodation on religious issues. He emerged as an advocate of co-operation among the godly and embraced toleration in pursuit of shared goals. A zealous advocate of the Independent cause, he became a target of the more conservative presbyterians. He occasionally traded insults with them. He attended Laud's trial. Enraged over Laud's claim to have converted many, Peter accosted him, and Laud believed that only the intervention of the earl of Essex prevented Peter from laying hands on him. Later Peter preached against Laud at Lambeth, singling out his claim for ridicule. By this time his wife had joined him in England. She was suffering from some sort of mental problem, and her 'distraction' had led to her excommunication from the Salem church, which Peter judged to be uncharitable. 
Peter emerged as a major promoter of parliament's cause, combining his inspiring preaching, his gift for practical organization, and his vision of a reformed England. Important parliamentarian military leaders -- especially Sir Thomas Fairfax and Cromwell -- relied upon him for counsel and to promote their activities. S. R. Gardiner wrote of him: 'It is easy to imagine how he could chat and jest with the soldiers, and yet could seize an opportunity to slip in a word on higher matters. His influence must have been such as Cromwell loved -- an influence which in every word and action made for concord. (Gardiner, 'Great Civil War', 2.326)' Considered a conciliator by his friends, he was also an accomplished polemicist who made many enemies among those he opposed. Peter was present at various military campaigns: the expedition to Lyme (May 1644), Bridgwater (July 1645), Bristol (August, although he left before the main attack), Winchester Castle (October), and Dartmouth (January 1646). He was at Fowey when the remnant of Essex's army under Major-General Philip Skippon surrendered in September 1644 and back in his native Cornwall in 1646 when parliament subdued it. He saw Oxford capitulate in June 1646 and Worcester in July. He repeatedly hurried to Westminster to deliver reports of the army's doings -- often to announce victories and request more aid. Warwick sent him from Lyme in June 1644, and he conveyed money back to the army. When Bridgwater was taken and Prince Charles's papers captured, Peter carried the news. He brought word of the surrender of Winchester Castle on 7 October 1645. A week later he returned to report the storming of Basing House (where he reportedly tarried long enough to harangue the aged marquess of Winchester, whom he tried to argue out of his royalism). The following January he brought news of victory at Dartmouth, and in March he announced Sir Ralph Hopton's surrender in Cornwall. His reports were often published. At the close of the war, in 'The Last Report of the English Wars' (1646), he warned: 'This is the misery of England whilst others are beaten into slavery, they are apt to be complemented into it' (p. 9). 
Peter also rallied support through his preaching. Exhortations delivered in his capacity as a chaplain were described as extremely effective at pivotal moments. He was frequently dispatched to win support in crucial areas. In July 1643 he raised support for parliament in Kent and Sussex. Somerset clubmen heard him preach in August 1645, and Peter claimed to have won many recruits for Fairfax's forces at the siege of Bristol. He temporarily left the army to travel around the home counties to garner support for parliament's war effort later that month. In September his preaching in the market of Torrington reportedly 'convinced many of their Errors in adhering to the King's Party' (Whitelocke, 194). He preached of the royalist intention to invade Cornwall with Irish papists, thereby turning the people against the king. In addition to these recurrent efforts, Peter received special assignments. In September 1643 he went to the Netherlands to raise money for protestants in Ireland and for parliament. The efforts yielded $30,000. There he also collected information on royalists' efforts to organize support. He was appointed in March 1645 to seek out delinquents' estates. In 1646 Peter negotiated terms with leading royalists in his native Cornwall, dissuading them from coming into the war against parliament. That November he readied regiments to send to Ireland. He occasionally ministered to men condemned by the state. He acted as chaplain at the execution of Richard Challoner in July 1643 and through the condemned man's confession gathered evidence against his accomplices. In January 1644 Peter attended Sir John Hotham, receiving his thanks on the scaffold. 
All of these efforts were rewarded. The house voted Peter an occasional monetary payment for his services. In March 1644, after he returned from the Netherlands, he received $100 and some of Laud's books. In 1646 $200 a year from the earl of Worcester's estate was settled on him. Other gifts were reported in the press, and Peter was derided for enriching himself through the suffering of others. He denied these charges in 1660, stating 'By the War, I never enriched my self, I have often offer'd my personal Estate for $200 and for Lands, I never had any but that part of a Noble mans, which I never laid up peny of' ('Case of Mr. Hugh Peters', 5). Parliament also rewarded him with opportunities to preach before it. He delivered his best-known sermon, 'God's Doings and Mans Duty' (1646), at a thanksgiving for the conquest of the west. 
That autumn, the war over, Peter considered returning to New England -- a move he often discussed. He sent his wife ahead in September but never followed her. He participated in the campaign against presbyterians in London, including drawing up a petition that received 20,000 signatures. Together with 'his London friends', he was frequently blamed for the radicalization of the army in this period (Gentles, 141). That winter Peter again experienced debilitating illness, but by late spring 1647 he was much improved. He then championed the Independents and the army, whereas earlier he had worked for co-operation among Charles's foes. John Lilburne characterized Peter as 'the grand Journey or Hackney-man of the Army' ('Clarke Papers', 2.259). With Cromwell he fled London for the army in June 1647. Some accounts state that on that journey he worked on Cromwell to support the demand to bring the king to justice. When the king fell into the army's hands Peter had several conversations with him in Newmarket (June 1647), and Charles was reported to have said 'that he had often heard talk of him, but did not believe he had that solidity in him he found by his discourse' ('A Conference betwixt the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and Mr. Peters', 1647). The king, however, declined to hear Peter preach. That October Peter defended the army's refusal to disband and put forward his own proposals for reform in 'A Word for the Army and Two Words to the Kingdom' (1647). Later that month he attended the Putney debates, speaking only briefly. 
In the short but sharp second war, Peter resumed his former duties. He was with Cromwell at the siege of Pembroke Castle. After the castle finally surrendered, Cromwell and Peter went to Preston. Subsequently Peter joined in the pursuit of the duke of Hamilton. His news report exaggerated his own role in the duke's surrender, and in New England the tale was further embellished so that it was rumoured that Peter alone had captured him. 
Peter was extremely active in the months between the war's end and the king's execution. He preached to fortify the army before it marched on London for Pride's Purge. In the aftermath of the purge, Peter carried a list of the forty-one imprisoned members to Fairfax, then brought back word that two were to be freed. He gave one long speech at the Whitehall debates, in which he argued for involving the people in discussions of liberty of conscience and favourably cited the Dutch example of toleration. Ian Gentles describes Peter, in the weeks before the king's trial, dashing frenetically between various parties, working with Ireton and Cromwell to confound those opposed to regicide. He was one of only two ministers (John Goodwin being the other) publicly to support the army after its invasion of London. On the day before the execution he preached a 'grisly' sermon on 'Isaiah' 14: 19-20 (Gentles, 309). As in other periods of intense activity, Peter fell ill. He missed the king's execution, sick in his lodgings. His absence led to rumours that he was the masked executioner. His prominent place in these events -- both real and rumoured -- contributed much to his fate at the Restoration. Lilburne accused him of recognizing no law but the sword, but Gardiner declared the charge clearly untrue (Gardiner, 'Commonwealth and Protectorate', 1.50). When, in the aftermath of the regicide, the duke of Hamilton was to be executed for his support of the king (March 1649), he publicly embraced Peter and bid him farewell. 
For some years after the regicide Peter remained active in public affairs. He advocated naval expansion before the new committee for the navy. He was temporarily given charge of the confiscated royal property at St James's Palace, a responsibility that led him to be blamed later for its dispersal. He quelled a mutiny in the navy at Sandwich in one powerful sermon, preached on 24 April 1649. A parody of the sermon was published as 'A Most Pithy Exhortation Delivered in Eloquent Oration to the Watry Generation' (1649). The effort seems to have exhausted him once more, and he became ill. Upon his recovery he gained an interview with Lilburne, now in the Tower, accusing him of fomenting mutiny. Their conversation provided the basis for a number of Lilburne's pamphlets, attacking Peter and his circle. As those who had once supported parliament began fighting among themselves, Peter became an object of attack by his erstwhile allies. As with earlier royalist parody, much of these were sexual in nature. His wife having returned to England in ill health again that spring, the opposition press ridiculed her mental instability as well as his own. 
Despite these attacks, Peter continued to receive major responsibilities. He managed the transport of a large contingent of men and troops intended to follow Cromwell's forces into Ireland. He again posted reports of the war. Cromwell commissioned him colonel, possibly to facilitate his provisioning efforts. Illness cut short his stint in Ireland, however, and he returned to Milford Haven, where parliament dispatched a physician to attend him. Dr William Yonge later testified against Peter and published an opprobrious biography, 'England's Shame, or, The Unmasking of a Politick Atheist' (1663). Peter claimed that Yonge's animosity arose when he received no advancement through Peter's connections. After his recovery Peter became governor of Milford Haven, from whence he continued to supply the Irish expedition and worked to persuade the Welsh to subscribe to the engagement. Having long thought the Welsh border counties ripe for the gospel, as is evident in 'Mr. Peters Last Report' (1646), he worked closely with the commissioners for the propagation of the gospel in Wales. 
Peter returned to London from Wales in September 1650, just after the battle of Dunbar. Before the end of the year he was appointed chaplain to the council of state, with lodgings in Whitehall and a salary of $200 a year. His wide-ranging plans for social reform received a hearing, as he was closest of the would-be reformers to the seat of power. He sat on Mathew Hale's legal reform committee in 1651. Bulstrode Whitelocke said of this effort that 'none was more forward or lyable to mistakes then Mr Hugh Peters' ('Diary', 1990, 274). He continued to advance his reform agenda, as he had in the 1640s, by publishing pamphlets, including 'Good Work for a Good Magistrate' (1651). He hurried up to Worcester after Cromwell's victory and preached to the soldiers. Colonist William Coddington visited Peter in 1651, and reported: 'I was mery with him and called him, the Arch BB: [Archbishop] of Canterberye, in regard of his adtendance by ministers and gentelmen and it passed very well' ('Winthrop Papers', 6.173). Roger Williams noted that Peter had lodgings that had formerly belonged to Laud, along with his portion of Laud's books. Peter used his connections to find positions for his acquaintances, especially young New England men who came seeking their fortunes in the new republic. Although named an overseer of the Corporation for the Propagation of the Gospel in New England, he did not support efforts to convert Native Americans. Long an advocate of the Dutch model, which along with New England served as his major source of reform ideas, Peter abhorred the Anglo-Dutch War. When he tried to persuade Sir George Ayscue not to participate, Ayscue turned him in. Peter fell into disfavour briefly, although Cromwell intervened on his behalf. 
Peter appears then to have sided with the army, which had become openly critical of the republican government. When the Barebone's Parliament convened Peter was restored to his former influence. He worked to bring the war to an end, intervening to smooth the peace negotiations. In the autumn of 1653 he was among those appointed to prepare Whitelocke's embassy to Sweden. He not only prayed over the departing retinue, but also sent along gifts of a cheese and an English mastiff to Queen Kristina. Whitelocke thought the gesture inappropriate but when the queen learned of it, she scolded Whitelocke for withholding her goods. 
Although Peter had good relations with Cromwell personally, he apparently felt misgivings about the turn away from a republic to protectorate. Yet he served the protector faithfully, continuing as chaplain to the council of state. Under Cromwell, Peter served as one of thirty-eight 'triers' responsible to oversee the English ministry. Still, the later 1650s saw Peter less often in the centre of public affairs, perhaps owing to his ill health. He may have fallen again into disfavour. His correspondence with the Netherlands was suspected as the source of a leak of confidential information. Cromwell apparently reprimanded him for meddling in naval affairs in 1656, and his duties may have been limited to council chaplain after that. In 1658 he was called out of this semi-retirement to smooth over tensions between French and English forces at Dunkirk, which he performed with his previous energy and ability. Shortly thereafter, at Cromwell's funeral, Peter preached on the text 'Joshua' 1: 2, 'Moses my servant is dead'. He served as a chaplain at army meetings plotting to bring down Richard Cromwell and reinstitute the republic, but later claimed not to have understood the intention. He published an open letter to the officers of the army, attempting to save the protectorate, but to no avail. Unsurprisingly, he was not active in public affairs after its fall. He was reviled in the press as an associate of Cromwell. 
When George Monck approached London, Peter went to join him. Although he preached before Monck, the general did nothing to promote or protect Peter, and he was turned out of his chambers at Whitehall. Then or shortly thereafter he retired to Southwark, where an obscure family sheltered him. Although technically not a regicide, Peter was exempt from royal pardon and was listed by parliament for revenge to be exacted for his prominent if largely unofficial role. His arrest was ordered on 7 June 1660, and he was caught on 31 August, reportedly betrayed by his servant. His daughter, by then aged twenty, visited him daily in prison. A committee also visited him to investigate what had become of the contents of St James's Palace. In a petition to the House of Lords Peter argued that due to the illness that kept him away from the execution he had had no hand in the king's death. While in prison, he wrote perhaps his best work, 'A Dying Fathers Last Legacy to an Onely Child' (1660). It includes an autobiographical statement and denies the charge of sedition. 'Sedition is the heating of mans minds against the present Authority, in that I never was, yet sorry, Authority should have had any thoughts of me, or know so inconsiderable a creature as myself' (p. 111). At his trial on October 12 he responded angrily to Yonge's testimony. He averred that he had been guided by his concern for 'sound Religion... Learning and Laws... and that the poor might be cared for' (Stephen, 1.155). He was duly sentenced to a traitor's death. On 16 October he was made to watch the execution of his friend, John Cooke, before meeting his own death with dignity. His head was placed on London Bridge. The news weeklies averred 'there never was a person suffered death so unpitied and (which is more) whose Execution was the delight of the people' than he (Stearns, 'The Strenuous Puritan', 418). He was reviled in the press, and the tradition of depicting him as a buffoon was given a boost by the publication of 'Tales and Jests of Hugh Peters' (1660). 
Peter's wife, who lived apart from him in England for some years before his death, was in 1677 living on the charity of George Cokayne's Independent church in London. Their daughter remained in England and in 1665 married Robert Barker; eventually they lived in Deptford and had eight children. Peter's estate in England was confiscated, but not that in New England. Later, the royal official Edmund Randolph, while damning the Massachusetts government for its association with Peter, tried to acquire Peter's estate, arguing that he had forfeited it by his treason. Elizabeth eventually won a suit for a Marblehead farm she claimed as the inheritance from her father. 
Opinion about Hugh Peter was sharply divided from his own day at least through to the mid-nineteenth century. His contemporaries among royalists and religious conservatives roundly hated him. Thomas Edwards dubbed him 'Vicar Generall and Metropolitane of the Independents both in New and Old England' ('Second Part of Gangraena', 1646, 61). His most recent modern biographer, Raymond Phineas Stearns, asserted that, except for C. H. Firth's 'Dictionary of National Biography' entry on Peter, all accounts followed either the hagiographic tradition of Peter's own 'A Dying Fathers Last Legacy' or the unfounded attacks of William Yonge's 'Englands Shame' (1663). This overstates the case somewhat, although there has been a tendency to champion or revile Peter depending on one's political leanings. In nineteenth-century New England, defending Hugh Peter became a point of honour. The editor of the 'New England Historical and Genealogical Register' fulminated: 'Mr. Peters perished by the hand of the mercenary murderer, but his memory should be safe in the hands of a faithful historian of New England... The cause of Peters was the cause of New England and he perished for doing more than many others had courage to do. (8, 1854, 85-6)' Many modern scholars have attempted to come to terms with this charismatic, practical, and naive man. To Gardiner he was the 'prince of army chaplains', almost capable of 'real, if somewhat incoherent, eloquence' and 'entirely without fear of giving offence to any of his hearers' (Gardiner, 'Great Civil War', 3.84). Bernard Bailyn characterized him as 'that ambitious, worldly cleric whose fascination with the things of Caesar was to cost him his head' ('New England Merchant', 1955, 76), Austin Woolrych called him 'voluble and self-important' ('Commonwealth to Protectorate', 1982, 119), and C. V. Wedgwood described him as an 'eloquent, resolute, bustling little man' ('King's War', 1958, 111). Unlike many fellow ministers, Peter was no intellectual. He cared little for doctrine or theology. His tendency toward melancholy suits the stereotypical 'puritan' temperament, and his theology was no doubt central to his personal psychology. But in his public life religion seems to have mattered most as a guide to social and political action. He expected religious reformation to yield concrete results, and he supported causes from suppression of the Hutchinsonians to civil war and regicide because such position seemed conducive to the change he sought. He spoke especially to the common person, so that his preaching was highly effective in rallying soldiers or turning the mood of a crowd. This same common appeal no doubt earned his reputation for buffoonery. His flair for the dramatic and his willingness to take the lead at controversial moments thrust him into the centre of things in the 1640s. These tendencies, his mastery of the barbed insult slung at his foe, and his close association with the reviled Cromwell ensured his place on the scaffold in 1660. 


@@@@@


doc= 22025


Peters, Mary (1813-1856), hymn writer, was born in Cirencester, Gloucestershire, on 17 April 1813, the daughter of Richard Bowly and his wife, Mary. According to the 'Dictionary of National Biography' and John Julian's 'Dictionary of Hymnology', while very young she married John McWilliam Peters, rector of Quenington in Gloucestershire and later vicar of Langford in Oxfordshire, who left her a widow in 1834. If, as seems virtually certain, he was the John William Peters ('b'. 1791) mentioned in Venn's 'Alumni Cantabrigienses', who held the same cures, it appears likelier that he seceded from the Church of England in that year, as he did not die until 11 September 1861, when he was described as a fundholder. 
Whatever the source of her troubles in 1834, Mary Peters reputedly found solace in literary pursuits, writing a seven-volume work entitled 'The World's History from the Creation to the Accession of Queen Victoria' (n.d.). It is, however, as a hymn writer that she was best-known. She contributed hymns to the Plymouth Brethren's 'Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs' (1842). Fifty-eight of her poems appeared in 1847 under the title 'Hymns Intended to Help the Communion of Saints'. Selections from this volume were used in various hymnals, both of the established and nonconformist churches. E. F. Hatfield described her poetry as 'both pleasing and impressive': 'Around thy table, Holy Lord' and 'Through the love of God our Saviour' seem to have been the most popular of her hymns. Mary Peters died of pulmonary consumption at 7 The Mall, Clifton, Bristol, on 29 July 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 22026


Peters, (Matthew) William (1742-1814), portrait and genre painter and Church of England clergyman, was born at Freshwater, Isle of Wight. His father, Matthew Peters ('b'. 1711), was described on the 1778 engraving by Murphy after his son's portrait as 'Member of the Dublin Society and author of several treatises on tillage and agriculture'. His mother was the daughter of George Young of Dublin. Shortly after the birth of William (as he became known early in life, signing himself W. Peters) the family moved to Dublin, where Matthew Peters advised on the improvement of loughs and rivers for navigation. 
William Peters was trained as an artist by Robert West in the first School of Design in Dublin; he received prizes in 1756 and 1758. The Dublin Society sent him to London where, when a pupil of Thomas Hudson in 1759, he won a premium from the Society of Arts. The Dublin Society paid for him to go to Italy ($30 per annum) and he arrived in Rome on 6 May 1762, having by his own account left Dublin for Cadiz in August 1761. He was delayed at sea 'beating about in the... equinoctial storms' (Ingamells, 763), and was then stranded for three months in Gibraltar. In Rome he studied life drawing at the Accademia del Nudo and at Pompeo Batoni's private academy. He was elected to the Accademia del Disegno in Florence on 23 September 1762. 
Peters left Italy at the end of 1764, and was back in England in 1765. He exhibited at the Society of Artists from 1766 to 1769 from Tavistock Row (1766), Bond Street (1767), Suffolk Street (1768), and Welbeck Street (1769). On 27 February 1769 he became a freemason (Somerset House Lodge No. 2): he was made grand portrait painter of the Freemasons and first provincial grand master of Lincolnshire in 1792. The final works that Peters exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1785 were portraits of the duke of Manchester and Lord Petre as grand master. 
Peters exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1769, and was elected associate in 1771 and academician in 1777. He was back in Florence by 5 November 1771 but by 1773 he was in Venice, from where he sent works to the Royal Academy exhibition that year and the next, and where he presumably painted 'Edward Wortley Montagu in his Dress as an Arabian Prince' (NPG) in 1775. He exhibited in 1776 from Great Newport Street, Horace Walpole noting that he was 'just returned from Rome' (Ingamells). Peters also spent time in Paris, including (probably) 1783-4, where he was friendly with L.-P. Boilly and Antoine Vestier, and was influenced by Greuze. 
However, no British contemporary had such an Italian manner of painting as Peters, reflecting the old masters he copied: for example Correggio's 'Madonna of St Jerome' in Parma (parish church of Saffron Walden, Essex) and Barocci's 'Madonna della scudella' in Perugia (1774), for which he was paid the substantial sum of 100 guineas by Robert, first Baron Clive. Peters's copy of Titian's 'Venus of Urbino' is probably 'the Couchant Venus' attributed to Titian in the sale of the pictures of Richard, first Earl Grosvenor, following his death in 1802. The next lot in the same sale was Peters's most notorious composition, 'Lydia' (exh. RA, 1777; Tate collection) showing a woman in bed, her prominent breasts and erect nipples frankly revealed. The 'Morning Chronicle' (26 April 1777) commented in laboured 'doubles entendres': '[the picture] makes every gentleman 'stand' for some time... the inviting leer of the lady and her still more inviting bosom, ought to be consigned to the bed chamber of a 'bagnio', where each would doubtless 'provoke' a proper effect.' It did Peters no harm: he was elected Royal Academician the same year. He made numerous compositions of a similar kind, all with the principal erotic charge of bare breasts, uncovered on one pretext or another, and all of these works were engraved and popular. Peters later regretted these 'jeux d'esprit': in 1781 he was ordained deacon and subsequently priest in 1782, having gone up to Exeter College, Oxford, in 1779 with this purpose. He was chaplain to the Royal Academy from 1784 to 1788 (when he resigned from the academy) and chaplain to the prince of Wales (he was also founding secretary of the Prince of Wales's Lodge, 1787). 
Charles Manners, fourth duke of Rutland, presented Peters to the living of Scalford, Leicestershire, in 1784, and Peters became an enthusiastic but conscientious pluralist. In 1788 the dowager duchess (whom he had portrayed in 1783 as 'An Angel Carrying the Spirit of a Child to Paradise', priv. coll.) added the living of Knipton, when Peters also gained Woolsthorpe, both close to Belvoir Castle, where he became curator of pictures. He became prebendary of Lincoln Cathedral in 1795, at first with the stall of St Mary, Crackpool, quickly exchanged for the better living of Langford Ecclesia, Oxfordshire, to which he added Eaton (near Knipton) in the same year. He lived variously at Woolsthorpe, Knipton, and Langford, scrupulously maintaining the parish registers in Woolsthorpe and Knipton until 1806, and building a new church at Woolsthorpe in 1791 (replaced 1845). He painted numerous religious works, including a 10 by 5 feet 'Annunciation' for Lincoln Cathedral (1799; subdeanery, Lincoln) and 'The Resurrection of a Pious Family', a picture won by the father of the future Cardinal Manning in a sovereign raffle and given to the church in Totteridge, Hertfordshire (sold in 1886). He painted five Shakespearian subjects for Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery from 1786, six for the Irish Shakespeare Gallery, and continued to paint portraits, charging 80 guineas for a full length in 1794. He married Margaret Susannah Knowsley, daughter and co-heir of the Revd John Fleming of Burton Fleming, Yorkshire, on 28 April 1790 at St James's, Piccadilly, London; there were five children. 
Masonic quarrels persuaded Peters to live chiefly in Langford from about 1800. Other old habits perhaps died hard, for in 1810-11 he upset the locals with a 'certain sketch' (Hodgson and Eaton), and took refuge at Brasted Place, Kent, where he died, a rich man, on 20 March 1814. 


@@@@@


doc= 22027


Peter, Thomas (1597-1654/5), Church of England clergyman and colonist in America, was born at Fowey in Cornwall and baptized there in June 1597, the second child and elder son among the three children of Thomas Peter or Dickwoode (1571-1625), merchant, and his first wife, Martha ('bap'. 1572, died 1598), daughter of John Treffry of Place and Emblem Tresithney; Hugh Peter (bap. 1598, d. 1660) was his younger brother. Admitted to Brasenose College, Oxford, on 12 November 1610, Peter graduated BA on 30 June 1614 and proceeded MA on 6 April 1625. By 1628 he was serving as vicar of Mylor in Kerrier hundred, Cornwall. On 25 September 1632 he married Anne Rawe; they had a son, John, and four daughters, Mary, Sarah, Ann, and Elizabeth, living at the time he drew up his will in 1654. 
At the time the Long Parliament was called, Peter was numbered among the few puritan ministers in Cornwall. The county became a royalist stronghold during the first civil war, and, probably in 1643, Peter was driven out by Sir Ralph Hopton. He arrived in New England in 1644, apparently without his wife and children, and by the next year was living at Saybrook Fort, possibly serving as chaplain to George Fenwick there. Peter was related to the Winthrop clan (John Winthrop the younger having married his brother, Hugh's, stepdaughter Elizabeth Reade) and became involved with young Winthrop's plan to create an independent plantation at Pequot (later New London, Connecticut). When a church was gathered there in 1646, he was called as its first minister. During his time in New England he was involved with Native Americans in the Connecticut River region, especially the Pequot leader, Uncas. His earliest surviving letter relates a visit to Uncas in spring 1645; the following year he complained of Uncas for 'a plott etc & for some iniurious and hostil insolencies' and in 1647 he sparked a confrontation with Uncas over hunting rights and tributary Indians (N. B. Shurtleff, ed., 'Records of the Colony of New Plymouth', vol. 9, 1859, 71, 99-100). His household at Pequot included another stepdaughter of Hugh Peter (Margaret Lake) as well as her daughter. His correspondence reveals that he practised medicine, although he seems to have deferred to Winthrop on such matters. 
Peter's decision to return to England appears to have been made suddenly in the autumn of 1646 and he travelled to Boston to await a ship. Initially he contracted to go home in the 'Supply' but, after John Cotton preached a sermon predicting that the voyage would be troubled if a petition (known as the remonstrance) was taken to London aboard the vessel, he changed his plans and travelled on another ship by way of Spain. The voyages of the 'Supply' and of his new ship were difficult, but both reached London safely. Upon his arrival Peter reported finding his brother Hugh 'sad afflicted' ('Winthrop Papers', 150). Before leaving London to resume his duties in Cornwall he raised money for the school in Roxbury, Massachusetts. 
Peter then returned to Mylor, serving as minister there until his death. During these years he engaged in a long drawn-out controversy with Samson Bond, rector of Mawgan in Meneague, Cornwall, whom he accused of plagiarizing sermons and of unsound doctrine. According to Peter's own account, published as an appendix to 'A Remedie Against Ruine' (1652), a sermon preached at Launceston assizes, he got the better of this confrontation. At the end of his life he seems to have been discouraged about the effects of his preaching, describing his ministry at Cornwall as 'with little successe to soules' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/243, fols. 238'v'-239'v'). He died at an unknown date between 26 October 1654, when, 'having some of deathes sentences upon my Body', he drew up his will, and 19 January 1655, when it was proved. He was buried in Mylor churchyard. Anne Peter survived her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 22028


Petersdorff, Charles Erdman (1800-1886), legal writer, was born in London on 4 November 1800, the third son of Christian Frederick Petersdorff, furrier, who began trading in London in the 1790s and later lived at Ivy House, Tottenham. He became a student of the Inner Temple on 24 September 1818, and after practising as a special pleader and going on the home circuit, was called to the bar on 25 January 1833. 
Petersdorff was for some time one of the counsel to the Admiralty, and by order of the lords of the Admiralty he compiled a complete collection of the statutes relating to the navy, to shipping, ports, and harbours. He had already, when only twenty, produced 'A General Index to the Precedents in Civil and Criminal Proceedings from the Earliest Period', followed in 1824 by 'A Practical Treatise on the Law of Bail' and between 1825 and 1830 the fifteen volumes of 'A practical and elementary abridgement of cases in the king's bench, common pleas, exchequer and at nisi prius from the Restoration'. Among his later writings, the most important was 'A Practical and Elementary Abridgement of the Common Law' (five vols., 1841-4). In its synthesis of common law and statutory modifications, this work looked ahead to later legal encyclopaedias such as 'Halsbury's Laws'. 
On 15 November 1847 Petersdorff married Mary Anne, widow of James Mallock, a London solicitor. He was created a serjeant-at-law on 14 June 1858, and on 1 January 1863 nominated a judge of the county courts for north Devon and Somerset, an appointment which he resigned in December 1885 at the age of eighty-five. He died from a fall into the area of his house, 23 Harley Street, London, on 29 July 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 22029


Peterson, Peter (1847-1899), Sanskritist, was born in Edinburgh on 12 January 1847, the son of John Peterson, merchant of Leith, and Grace Montford Anderson. Sir William Peterson, classical scholar and educationist, was his brother. His father and grandfather were natives of Shetland, and hence Peterson often described himself as a Shetlander. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and Edinburgh University, where he graduated MA with first-class honours in classics in 1867. It was there that he began to study Sanskrit, under the professor Simon Theodor Aufrecht. After a visit, partly for study, to Berlin, he proceeded in 1869 to Lincoln College, Oxford, to continue Sanskrit under Monier Williams and Friedrich Max Muller, gaining the Boden Sanskrit scholarship in 1870, and then moving to Balliol College, from which he graduated BA in 1872. Peterson married, on 29 October 1872, Agnes Christall (died September 1900). Several children of the marriage survived him; a son entered the India civil service. 
On 2 January 1873 Peterson joined the Indian educational service, and went to Bombay as professor of Sanskrit in Elphinstone College, where he remained until his death, except for the period from September 1874 to November 1876, in which he spent a year's sick leave in Europe and another year teaching at the Deccan College, Poona. During his first nine years in India Peterson did little research, thus contravening the terms of his post; accordingly in 1881 the government proposed to transfer him to a chair of English which did not require him to produce original work, and to give the Sanskrit chair to Professor Bhandarkar of Poona, who had been acting professor at Elphinstone from 1867 until Peterson's appointment. In 1882, however, it was agreed that the two would retain their posts and jointly lead the government-funded search for Sanskrit manuscripts in the Bombay 'circle' (western and central India). Many of Peterson's discoveries in the libraries of Gujarat, Rajputana, and elsewhere were of high literary value, and his six reports on the search (1883-99) were highly praised, as displaying his ability to identify what was most important out of a large mass of material; his exploration of Jain literature was especially appreciated. He edited several Sanskrit texts, mostly for the 'Bombay Sanskrit Series', of which he and Bhandarkar had joint charge. The most important were the romance 'Kadambari' (1883) and the poetry anthology 'The Subhashitavali of Vallabhadeva' (1886), the latter edited jointly with Pandit Durgaprasada; in these his main aim was to convey his appreciation of the literary qualities of the Sanskrit, and he frequently made comparisons with Western literature. Others included the 'Hitopadesa' (1887) and selections from the 'Ramayana' (1883) and the 'Rigveda' (4 vols., 1888-92). For the 'Bibliotheca Indica' he edited (1889) 'The Nyayabindutika of Dharmottaracharya', a Buddhist text he had discovered himself. Much of Peterson's success was due to his tact and respect for Indians and their traditions. This is made clear in an obituary speech made by Bhandarkar, who remained not only a colleague but one of his closest friends (Bhandarkar, xlvi-l). To this also was due his success in unearthing the jealously concealed manuscripts of the Jains at Cambay and elsewhere. 
Peterson also taught and examined English for Bombay University and produced editions of 'The Merchant of Venice' and book 4 of Palgrave's 'Golden Treasury' designed for Indian students. He was much admired for his mastery of different styles of English, displayed mainly in his frequent contributions to the Bombay dailies and the 'Times of India'. 
For some time Peterson was a popular member of the Bombay municipal corporation, and for a long time he was registrar of Bombay University. He often served as secretary of the Bombay branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, and he was its president from 1895 until his death. In 1883 he received a DSc in philology from Edinburgh University, and he was a candidate for the Boden chair of Sanskrit in Oxford at the time of his unexpected death from heart disease in Bombay on 28 August 1899. 


@@@@@


doc= 22030


Peterson, Robert (fl. 1562-1606), translator, was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 14 April 1562. Nothing else is known of him. 
Peterson's two translations demonstrate two different facets of Italian cultural influence, 'Galateo' from the Italian of Giovanni della Casa, archbishop of Beneventa (1576) and 'A Treatise Concerning the Causes of the Magnificence and Greateness of Cities' (1606) from Giovanni Botero's original. 'Galateo' is a manual of polite conversation proper to court circles. Peterson sought to instruct the general public, and his version had a fair influence. Social graces were a preoccupation of the Renaissance, and the Italian codification of manners acted as a social bond right across Europe. Social conduct was governed by the desire to please, a skill best taught 'where the mind and the eye, precept and experience joined hands together', as Peterson writes in his dedication to Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. This is clearly a selling-point: Dudley's reputation for elegance and 'savoir-faire' made him an excellent example for Peterson's readers. The book is prefaced by laudatory verses by Francesco Pucci and Alessandro Citolini in Italian, and in English by Thomas Cradock, the Lady Margaret professor, and Thomas Drant, archdeacon of Lewes, and two unknowns, Thomas Browne of Lincoln's Inn, and I. Stoughton, 'a student'. Spingarn claims without good evidence that Peterson worked almost entirely from the French version of 1577 which had the Italian on facing pages. 
Peterson's translation of Botero is a textbook in statecraft, discussing the political, social, and economic causes for the rise and fall of cities. His dedication of the translation to Sir Thomas Egerton, lord high chancellor of England, implies that this was translated from interest, and was not commissioned by the dedicatee. Both have been published in modern editions. 


@@@@@


doc= 22031


Pether, Abraham (1756-1812), landscape painter, a cousin of William Pether, was born at Chichester. As a child he showed a great talent for music, and at the age of nine played the organ in one of the Chichester churches. Adopting art as his profession, he became a talented pupil of George Smith (1713/14-1776). He painted river and mountain scenery, with classical buildings, in a style somewhat resembling that of Richard Wilson; but his reputation rests on moonlight subjects, which earned him the sobriquet of Moonlight Pether. He painted, with attention to harmony of colour, the combination of moonlight and firelight, as in 'Eruption of Vesuvius', 'Ship on Fire in a Gale at Night', and 'An Ironfoundry by Moonlight'. Pether was a frequent exhibitor at both the free and the incorporated societies from 1773 to 1791, and at the Royal Academy from 1784 to 1811. His 'Harvest Moon', which was shown at the academy in 1795, was highly praised. He had an extensive knowledge of scientific subjects, and in his moonlight pictures the astronomical conditions are always correctly observed. He was also a skilled mechanic, constructing optical instruments for his own use, and lectured on electricity. Although his art was popular, Pether was never able to do more than supply the daily needs of his large family, and, incapacitated by a lingering disease which eventually caused his death, he was reduced to great poverty. He died at Southampton on 13 April 1812, leaving destitute a widow, Elizabeth (died in or after 1812), and nine children; the fact that they were unable to obtain any assistance from the Artists' Benevolent Fund provoked a fierce attack upon the management of the society. Abraham Pether is sometimes known as Old Pether, to distinguish him from his son Sebastian Pether. 




@@@@@


doc= 22032


Pether, Sebastian William Thomas (1790-1844), landscape painter, was baptized on 31 August 1794 at St Luke's, Chelsea, the eldest son of Abraham Pether (1756-1812), landscape painter, and his wife, Elizabeth (died in or after 1812). He was a pupil of his father and, like him, painted moonlight views and nocturnal conflagrations. The realism and preoccupation with colour harmonies in these works should have brought him success, but early in life the necessity of providing for a large family forced him into the hands of the dealers, who purchased his pictures for small sums for copying purposes, to which they readily lent themselves, and consequently they were rarely seen at exhibitions. In 1814 Pether sent to the Royal Academy 'View from Chelsea Bridge of the Destruction of Drury Lane Theatre', and in 1826 'A Caravan Overtaken by a Whirlwind'. The latter was a commission from Sir John Fleming Leicester, but as the subject was not suited to the painter's talent this solitary commission was of no real benefit to him. His life was one long struggle with adversity, which reached its climax when, in 1842, three pictures, which with the help of a frame-maker friend he had sent to the Royal Academy, were rejected. 
Pether resembled his father in his taste for mechanical pursuits, and is said to have suggested the idea of the stomach-pump to a surgeon named Jukes. He died, of consumption, at Battersea on 14 March 1844, on which date a subscription was raised for his family. 
Pictures attributed to Sebastian Pether frequently appear at sales but often they are copies of his work. 



@@@@@


doc= 22033


Thomas Pether (fl. 1772-1781), who was probably a brother of Abraham -- as, according to exhibition catalogues, they at one time lived together -- was a wax modeller, and exhibited portraits in wax with the Free Society of Artists from 1772 to 1781. Nothing else is known of his life as work. 


@@@@@


doc= 22034


Pether, William (c.1738-1821), mezzotint engraver and painter, one of the three sons and two daughters of William Pether (died 1781), an organ and harpsichord builder, and his wife, Mary, was born at Carlisle. He became a pupil of the artist and porcelain manufacturer Thomas Frye of Bow, Middlesex. Between 1756 and 1762 he won four prizes for drawing and two for mezzotints from the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce. He became Frye's partner in 1761 and in the following year he engraved Frye's portrait of George III in three sizes. Pether regarded himself as a painter, and it was in that capacity that in 1765 he was elected a foundation fellow of the Incorporated Society of Artists; he served as a director in 1771-2 and 1773-4. Between 1761 and 1780 he exhibited crayon paintings of portraits and fancy heads, together with portrait miniatures and occasional mezzotints. He continued to exhibit portraits and other heads with the Royal Academy in 1781-3, 1789, and 1793-4. Although he presented himself as a candidate for election as ARA in 1781, he failed resoundingly, both then and again in 1783, to find support among the academicians. 
Pether's mezzotints have survived better than his crayon paintings, and it is on mezzotint that his enduring reputation is based. In 1763 John Boydell published Pether's first print after Rembrandt, 'Rembrandt's Wife in the Character of a Jew Bride'. This was the first of nine mezzotints of Rembrandt's paintings, executed for Boydell, or occasionally on his own account. The print called 'A Jew Rabbi' (1764, now thought to represent Uzziah struck with leprosy), was well reviewed in the 'Critical Review' and was selected by William Gilpin in 'An Essay on Prints' (1768) to exemplify the excellence of contemporary mezzotint. The mastery of the distribution of light that made Pether such a fine interpreter of Rembrandt was perfectly suited to the work of Joseph Wright of Derby, and Pether scraped a series of fine mezzotints after Wright, with whom he seems also to have enjoyed a close friendship. 'A Philosopher Giving a Lecture on the Orrery' (1768), 'Three Persons Viewing the Gladiator by Candlelight' (1769), 'A Farrier's Shop' (1771), 'An Academy' (1772), and Pether's three other mezzotints after Wright are among the finest produced in Britain. Pether published the majority of his own plates, the remainder being issued by Boydell. Very few were portraits, but he interpreted a variety of subjects by English, Dutch, and Italian masters. 
Pether's pupils included Robert Dunkarton, Edward Dayes, and Henry Edridge, and he employed the crippled dwarf John Jehner as an assistant. Edward Dayes found Pether 'a kind master, and polite gentleman', considering his rare oil portraits 'painted with a firm, broad pencil and great force of light and shade', his landscapes 'tolerable', and his miniatures 'clear, firm and spirited'. On the strength of his interpretations of Rembrandt and Wright, Dayes reckoned that in mezzotint he was 'unquestionably the first' (Dayes, 343-4). Miller considered Pether 'amiable, but an unsteady and unfortunate man... he wanted 'stability' in his pursuits; this defect in his nature rendered abortive the application of his excellent abilities' (Miller, 125). 
Pether lived at various addresses in the Soho and Bloomsbury areas of London, and from the mid-1770s he also had a home in Church Row, Richmond. He was in Nottingham in 1780. His last plate published in London was dated 1793, and he exhibited at the Royal Academy for the last time in 1794. About ten years later he had settled at Bristol and was working as a drawing-master and cleaner of pictures; while there, he engraved the portraits of Samuel Seyer, the historian of Bristol (1816), and Edward Colston the philanthropist (1817), after Richardson. He died, aged eighty-two, in Montague Street, Bristol, on 19 July 1821, and was buried on 27 July in the churchyard at Horfield, where Seyer was rector. Elizabeth Pether, who was buried there on 25 June 1833 aged eighty-four, was possibly his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 22035


Petheram, John (1807-1858), antiquary and publisher, was born at Oldmixon, near Weston-super-Mare, on 11 May 1807, the eldest in a family of four boys and three girls; his parents were Wesleyan Methodists. In 1830-31 he travelled to America with his family, who settled in New York state. From 1831 to 1834 he was a clerk with Brown, Roper & Co., Falcon Square, Aldersgate, London, in the wholesale drug trade. From July 1834 to autumn 1835 he spent some time in New York and travelling in the United States, supporting himself partly by trading in antiquarian books. An intermittent diary from his twenties shows him devoted to self-improvement and industrious reading at the London Institution (which he had joined in 1831), to collecting historical books for resale, and to preparing bibliographical compilations on English history. 
Petheram returned to the druggists' warehouse in London but left it in 1839 to work for Edward Lumley of 56 Chancery Lane, remainder and second-hand bookseller, for whose catalogues he wrote discursive bibliographical articles. By the autumn of 1841 he had set up shop in his own premises at 71 Chancery Lane, and by 1848 had moved to 48 High Holborn. From these addresses he issued 207 catalogues and published several historical works. These included reprints (1843-7), with his own introductions and notes, of seven of the Elizabethan Marprelate tracts, intended as part of a longer series of 'puritan discipline tracts'. In 1853-4 he added five parts of a 'Bibliographical Miscellany' to his catalogues, and he had earlier compiled a competent 'Historical Sketch of the Progress and Present State of Anglo-Saxon Literature in England' (1840). 
Petheram married Elizabeth Bickham, of Sherborne, Dorset, and they had six children, the eldest of whom was only fourteen when Petheram died on 18 December 1858 at 94 High Holborn, 'harassed in mind as well as body' ('The Bookseller', 24 Feb 1859), suffering from typhus fever and pulmonary disease. Sales of his general books took place on 18 February 1859, and his extensive stock of old music books on 28 March, both dispersals handled by Southgate and Barrett. There seems to have been little left over to support his young family. 


@@@@@


doc= 22036


John Lewis Petit (1736-1780), the son of John Petit of Little Aston Hall, Shenstone, Staffordshire. He graduated from Queens' College, Cambridge (BA 1756, MA 1759, and MD 1766), was elected fellow of the College of Physicians in 1767, was Gulstonian lecturer in 1768, and was censor in that year, 1774, and 1777. From 1770 to 1774 he was physician to St George's Hospital, then on the death of Dr Anthony Askew in 1774 he was elected physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital. In November 1769 he married Katherine Laetitia Serces, the daughter of one of the preachers of the French Chapel Royal in London. He died on 27 May 1780 and was buried at St Anne's, Soho. 


@@@@@


doc= 22037


Petit, John Louis (1801-1868), architectural historian and watercolour painter, was born on 31 May 1801 in Ashton under Lyne, Lancashire, the only son of John Hayes Petit (1771-1822), a Church of England clergyman and JP, and his wife, Harriet Astley. 
The family was descended from Lewis Petit, also known as Lewis Petit des Etans (1665?-1720), a Huguenot refugee and military engineer. Petit's grandfather was 
John Louis Petit was educated at Eton College and contributed to 'The Etonian', then in its heyday. He was elected to a scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1822, and graduated BA in 1823 and MA in 1826. On 17 June 1828 he married Louisa Elizabeth, the daughter of George Reid of Trelawny, Jamaica. He had been ordained deacon in 1824 and priest the year after, but it was not until 1840 that he took up his sole church appointment, as curate of Bradfield in Essex, which he held until 1848. By this time he had written and illustrated several works of architectural history, the main occupation of his career. 
Petit had shown a taste for sketching in his early years and he made many hundreds of drawings in pencil and ink. These were often finished in watercolour, though in a limited palette. His favourite subject was old buildings, particularly churches, and he spent much time visiting and sketching them. His drawings were rapidly and adeptly executed on the spot, his style in the tradition of English topographical watercolour painters of the previous generation, such as Samuel Prout (1783-1852). Although his works display an instinct for the picturesque setting and the telling viewpoint, his aim was less to produce finished paintings for their own sake than to record historic buildings and architectural details. Many were reproduced in his profusely illustrated books. He occasionally painted in oils. In almost all of these respects he resembles John Ruskin (1819-1900), whose concern for the conservation of old buildings was Petit's too. 
In 1839 Petit made his first extensive tour on the continent, which informed his 'Remarks on Church Architecture' (1841), part travelogue, part discursive survey of architectural styles since the Roman. Subsequent works provide more detailed analyses of individual buildings, including Tewkesbury Abbey, Sherborne Abbey, and Southwell Minster. Petit's credentials as an antiquary are reflected in his co-founding of the British Archaeological Institute in 1844 and his elections as fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and honorary member of the Institute of British Architects. He lectured to the Oxford society for promoting the study of Gothic architecture, a body which mirrored the Cambridge Camden Society and whose membership similarly took a deep interest in the way churches old and new should be laid out and used. This Oxford connection was fruitful academically for Petit, who was admitted to the university 'ad eundem' in 1850, and personally too, as his sister, Maria, married a classics don, William Jelf (1811-1875), in 1849. 'Architectural Studies in France', Petit's principal work, appeared in 1854 (new edition 1890). It is a detailed survey of French Gothic, profusely illustrated by Petit and by his companion on the research tour, Philip Delamotte (1820/21-1889), an artist, engraver, and early exponent of photography. Petit does not seem to have used photography for recording buildings; nevertheless, some of the illustrations were reproduced using a new technique, that of anastatic drawing. 
Petit's books come from a rich period in England for research, publication, and debate on architectural history. His writing style was accessible and the illustrations attractive, but he lacked the intellectual rigour of others in the field, such as his Cambridge contemporaries William Whewell (1794-1866) and Robert Willis (1800-1875). His judgements could be shaky and, with his genteel admiration of almost anything old, he could elicit harsh reviews at a time when attitudes were hardening in favour of particular styles as models for revival. While he had a taste for the Romanesque, for example, just before it became fashionable as a style for new churches in the 1840s, he did not make himself its champion. He was not a polemicist like A. W. N. Pugin or George Gilbert Scott; besides, he had a distaste for debates that smacked of religious controversy. This was the tendency from the 1840s, particularly in the pages of 'The Ecclesiologist', the organ of the Cambridge Camden Society. 
When Petit did turn his attention to contemporary architectural practice, he encountered spirited opposition. In 1841 Scott's designs for the remodelling of St Mary's, Stafford, were exhibited. This was a church close to Petit's heart (his brother-in-law was a benefactor) and he objected in writing to the proposal for the thoroughgoing redesign of the south transept. He could accept Scott's interventions elsewhere in the building but not so the replacement of Gothic fabric, albeit sixteenth-century. Scott accepted the principle but argued that it could be ignored if the style was 'debased'. Their debate by correspondence was eventually put to a panel of experts from the Cambridge Camden Society and the Oxford society noted above. Scott won and Petit gamely published the papers. 
As galling was the reception of Petit's only executed architectural design. His sister and brother-in-law moved to Cae'rdeon, near Barmouth, Merioneth, in 1854. Jelf took exception to the fact that most of the services in the Anglican parish church were said in Welsh, so in 1862 he asked his brother-in-law to design him a church, to be built at his own expense, where he could officiate in English. Petit designed him a rugged and muscular church for the mountainous setting. 'The Ecclesiologist' lambasted it in a pithy review, attacking the design on practical grounds (roof pitches too shallow) and on theoretical grounds (pilasters for show, not structural necessity). The critic is clearly exasperated that Petit preferred picturesque effect to the application of formal principles: the alpine-style stone hut is simply not appropriate for an Anglican church on a turnpike road. There may also be a difference of churchmanship here. Petit and Jelf (for all his belligerence on the language issue) had avoided the febrile excesses of the Oxford Movement. Happily, St Philip Cae'rdeon still stands, somewhat altered but recently repaired. 
During 1864-5 Petit travelled to Syria, Palestine, and Egypt. He continued to draw and paint avidly. He died in Lichfield on 1 December 1868 from a cold caught or aggravated while out sketching, and was buried in St Michael's churchyard. An exhibition of 339 of his sketches, including two views of the church at Cae'rdeon, was shown by the Architectural Exhibition Society in London during 1869. That year also saw the posthumous publication of a volume of his poetry. 
Sir Nikolaus Pevsner gives a characteristically pungent account of Petit in his survey of nineteenth-century architectural writers. As an artist, his modest talent was given almost unlimited scope, producing a corpus of architectural impressions which is impressive, if slight as individual works of art. As a critic of contemporary practice, he is probably most significant as a spokesman for tolerance: he valued buildings and styles of many eras and favoured, if not consistently or dogmatically, repair over rebuilding. 


@@@@@


doc= 22038


Petit, Lewis (1665?-1720), military engineer and army officer, was (according to notes made by his descendant John Louis Petit) a member of the family of Petit des Etans of Caen in Normandy, but rarely used the toponym. He arrived in England after the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685, and entered the service of the Board of Ordnance. He served with the ordnance train in Ireland from 19 June 1691 until the following May, when he was employed in the ordnance train with the Channel Fleet on the summer expeditions of 1692 and 1693. These attacks against the French coast produced little result, and in July 1693, having landed at Ostend, the train took part in the capture of Furnes, Dixmude, and Ghent. On 1 April 1697 Petit was appointed an engineer on the English establishment and may have been on half-pay until, in May 1700, he was warranted to fill a vacancy on the peace train, so called because the existence of a train of artillery in peacetime was a novelty. At about this time, perhaps in 1698, Petit married Marianne, daughter of John Meslin of Glatigny in Normandy. 
In 1702 Petit served as engineer with the train that accompanied the expedition to Cadiz and subsequently to Vigo. He was among the engineers in the ordnance train created by royal warrant dated 24 July 1703 to proceed to Portugal in support of the pretensions of the archduke Charles of Austria to the Spanish throne, in opposition to the French-born Philip V, of the Bourbon dynasty. In 1704 he was present at Portalegre as engineer and was taken prisoner when James Fitzjames, duke of Berwick, commanding the Bourbon forces, laid siege and captured it. Henri Massue de Ruvigny, earl of Galway, complaining of the difficulty of finding good engineers, wrote on 30 November 1704 that Petit was very capable, and ought to be among the first to be exchanged and returned to Portugal. Petit was with the ordnance train arriving at Gibraltar in mid-February 1705. 
The siege of Gibraltar was raised by the end of April and Petit was appointed chief engineer of the ordnance train accompanying the forces directed against Barcelona under Charles Mordaunt, third earl of Peterborough. The fleet arrived before Barcelona on 22 August. The outlying fort of Montjuic capitulated on 18 September. The attack on the town itself began with Petit erecting batteries on the side previously protected by the guns of Montjuic, ordnance from the fleet being hauled up from the beach by seamen. Eight guns and three mortars opened fire on 24 September, and four days later the whole complement of fifty-eight were in action. Petit was slightly wounded on 25 September but was out of action only briefly. His ceaseless energy was rewarded when on 3 October a breach was made and the following day negotiations for the capitulation began. 
The loss of Barcelona was keenly felt in Versailles and Madrid, where preparations were made to mount a massive expeditionary force by land and sea to recover it. Peterborough had dispersed his forces across Catalunya leaving the fortress of Barcelona with a garrison of 1400 men and a small ordnance train under Petit, though the garrison was augmented at the last moment. In the first days of April 1706 the besiegers, amounting to 21,000 men, with King Philip and Marshal Tesse at their head, had surrounded the city. Petit had exerted himself in repairing and strengthening the defences, including Montjuic, where the Bourbon attack commenced on 4 April. After heavy fighting, on 25 April the garrison of Montjuic was forced to withdraw into Barcelona, leaving the fort to Tesse and his forces. Within a few days guns were playing on the walls of the town and breaches were soon made. Petit now constructed retrenchments to isolate the weak points. On 3 May the besiegers began mining operations which Petit met with countermines, blowing in the enemy's galleries and checking their advance. Nevertheless, matters were now desperate for the defenders and only the arrival on 8 May of the van of a relieving squadron from Lisbon caused the siege to be lifted. 
The two sieges established Petit's reputation as a resourceful engineer and an officer of spirit. James Stanhope later referred to Petit's 'eminent services in both sieges of Barcelona the good success of which may chiefly be imparted to him' (Stanhope of Chevening MSS, U1590 0132/1, Centre for Kentish Studies, Maidstone, Kent). Archduke Charles, who had been present throughout the second siege, wrote to Queen Anne praising Petit's zeal and application, and appointed him his chief engineer. Petit was present at the disastrous allied defeat at Almanza on 25 April 1707 when the earl of Galway was overcome by a much superior force. Galway sent away the ordnance train ahead of his own retreat and it arrived safely at Valencia. Galway apparently conferred on Petit the rank of 'premier ingenieur en Espagne' with effect from 1 May 1707. 
On 11 May the field train from Almanza arrived at Tortosa where Petit, now promoted colonel, was directed to put the works into condition to withstand a siege. Tortosa was attacked on 11 June 1708 when the duke of Orleans invested it with a force of 22,000 men. A spirited defence and heavy French casualties were insufficient to defer the inevitable surrender of the town on 10 July. Petit had been energetic in the defence and was conducted to Barcelona with the rest of the garrison under the terms of the capitulation. By the end of July he was at Tarragona. 
At the end of August, Petit joined Stanhope, now in command in Spain, as chief engineer on the expedition to capture the island of Minorca. An allied force sailed from Barcelona on 3 September, met Admiral Sir John Leake off Minorca, and effected a landing. The unfortified town of Mahon submitted immediately, as did the remainder of the island. Resistance would come only from the fortress of St Philip's Castle, a substantial stronghold commanding the entrance to Port Mahon. The greatest problem for Petit was to transport the siege equipment from the landing place to the vicinity of St Philip's. By 23 September the guns had been brought up and emplacements were begun. On 28 September they began to fire and within five hours some of the defenders' guns were put out of action, at which Stanhope ordered a general advance. The besiegers gained a strong position near the fortress, and on the following day the French governor sent to ask for terms. On 30 September Stanhope, who could hardly have expected so easy a victory, marched into St Philip's. 
Stanhope established Petit in command of the new possession, his eventual appointment by royal warrant being as 'lieutenant-governor of the town and garrison of Port Mahon... and of the castles, forts and all other military works and fortifications thereunto belonging' (TNA: PRO, SP 44/173, 74). Stanhope conferred the civil governorship of the island on a Spanish adherent of Archduke Charles to buttress the pretence that Minorca was held by the archduke as Carlos III of Spain, while Petit's warrant specifically commanded him to admit none but her majesty's own troops into the garrison and forts belonging to it. No doubt Petit's profession made him particularly suitable to command, for Stanhope had ambitious projects in mind for the fortification of Port Mahon. 
Stanhope next gave Petit the rank of brigadier in the archduke's service. Petit was also made inspector-general of the fortifications, her majesty's chief engineer, paymaster of the works, commissary of the train, and furnisher of bread for the garrison, and in addition he was chief engineer for Archduke Charles. His emoluments amounted to $2 10's'. a day. 
Stanhope soon returned to Barcelona leaving Petit with the urgent task of measuring and costing the extensive projects for fortifications they had discussed. Work on the fortifications was funded by Stanhope from the extraordinaries of the war, and regular payments were sent to Petit throughout 1709. His first project was to build a 30-gun battery commanding the mouth of the harbour and linked to St Philip's. The estimates for enlarging St Philip's totalled about $100,000. Money ran out in the middle of 1710, when work slowed considerably. 
Petit somehow found time to enter into commercial speculations on his own account. In partnership with two Spaniards and Stanhope's secretary Arent Furley, Petit purchased a French prize at Mahon for 7800 dollars with which to trade between Minorca, Majorca, Sardinia, and the Spanish and Barbary coasts. He advised Furley that he had found it necessary to use funds supplied for the fortifications to complete the purchase, and urgently requested capital from his partners to repay this misappropriation. Petit's participation was valuable to the enterprise owing to his ability to land cargoes at Mahon without paying duty, an activity much objected to by the local town government. 
In May 1711 John Campbell, second duke of Argyll, arrived in Spain as commander-in-chief. It marked a sea change in Petit's fortunes. Argyll never acknowledged Petit's rank of brigadier, it being a foreign commission, and in little more than a fortnight of his arrival at Barcelona and before having set foot in Minorca he wrote: 'I am more and more dissatisfied every day with Colonel Petit's behaviour at Port Mahon and am therefore resolved to put Colonel Farmer... in his place of Lieutenant Governour of Mahon' (Argyll to Earl Poulett, 17 June 1711, CUL, Add. MS 6570). Argyll objected that Petit had accepted a commission as lieutenant-governor from the king of Spain and made use of the Spanish colours, though such matters were approved by Stanhope. However, the replacement of Petit as lieutenant-governor was delayed until, as Argyll put it, 'our affairs are in less disorder'. 
Petit was soon to find himself under the scrutiny of the inspectors sent from London to investigate irregularities in the expenditure of the army in Spain, as an attempt to disgrace the previous ministry. Stanhope was foremost in their sights, but Petit, having had at his discretion the disposal of such large sums, inevitably figured largely in the inquiry. The accusations against him concerned imperfections in his accounts, including allegations of missing vouchers, irregularities, and overcharging in the numbers of workmen and mules, and alleged differences between prices contracted and prices paid, among other charges. Petit was at the commissioners' disposal for these investigations from 26 January 1712, which he gives as the date of his supersession by Argyll, until 20 November following when he left for England. His accounts remained unresolved until July 1726, six years after his death. Adjustments in favour of the commissioners were small; few of the accusations against him stuck. 
Petit returned to England via France, landing in late November at Toulon, where he had a brother. His journey overland to Paris and the channel ports was tracked by the French authorities, who were aware of his identity. He next headed the list of engineers for home service dated 14 May 1714. In September he was sent to advise on the state of the works at Fort William and the other forts and castles in Scotland. Returning to London on 24 November, he laid his report before the board. In August 1715 he was ordered to Portsmouth to assist in putting it into a proper posture of defence. On 27 November a warrant was issued for the formation of an ordnance train for Scotland and Petit was appointed chief engineer, but the Jacobite rising was soon over and the train arrived too late for active service. After the rebellion Petit surveyed the head of Loch Ness for a fort, and he was in Scotland until the summer of 1716. 
On 3 July 1716 a warrant was issued appointing Petit chief engineer at Minorca in the place of Brigadier Peter Durand, who had died there the previous December. Petit's Minorca accounts for 1708 to 1712, which had been investigated, remained outstanding in the hands of the Treasury: certain debts he had contracted in connection with the fortifications at Mahon had not been settled. Petit could not go to Minorca while these matters were pending. A royal warrant was issued on 5 September 1717 authorizing the auditor to make up and pass his accounts, but with no immediate result. On 22 April of that year Petit had become director of engineers at Minorca at 20's'. a day. He eventually proceeded to the island in 1718, and work at St Philip's commenced by his authority on 21 June. On 18 November 1718 a royal warrant was issued appointing him lieutenant-governor of Fort St Philip. In the absence of the governor and lieutenant-governor of Minorca the command devolved on him, as occurred for a period in 1719. 
Petit went to Naples in January 1720, but whether for his health or seeking materials for the works at Mahon is uncertain. He died in Naples on or after 24 May 1720 (the date of his will) -- and probably before the end of May as he was not paid thereafter. He was buried in Naples, and survived by his wife. Petit also left two sons, John Peter (1699-1747) and Peter John (1700-1768), who were captains in regiments of foot and sub-engineers and who served at Minorca under their father from 1718 and for a period after his death; and four daughters, Henrietta, Judith, Susanna, and Clara. John Lewis Petit (1736-1780) and John Louis Petit (1801-1868) were descendants. 


@@@@@


doc= 22039


Petyt, Thomas (b. in or before 1494, d. 1565/6), printer and bookseller, was born in England but may have been related to the Parisian printer John Petit, who is said to have had printed books 'in thaundes of Thomas Petytt' in exchequer receipts (Duff, 'Century', 120). Nothing further is known of Petyt's origins, although he had property in Greenstead and Stanford Rivers, Essex, and a kinswoman named Agnes Vincent, in Sheppey, Kent. In his will he also describes himself as kinsman to Anthony Kitson, a former apprentice and a fellow bookseller in London. Petyt was freed as a member of the Drapers' Company by John Hutton in 1519, and was the first member of that company to become a printer. His shop was at St Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Maiden's Head, from which he issued books from 1536 until at least 1561. He may have leased the property as early as 1523, when he was assessed for $10 in a lay subsidy as a resident of St Faith's parish. In 1547 he also freed the draper Thomas Raynald, who took over operation of his press while Petyt continued to publish and sell books from Maiden's Head. By 1548, some of his printing material had passed to William Hill. 
Copies of fifty-nine editions printed by or for Petyt are extant. His name first appears in a 1536 edition of 'The Rutter of the Sea'. His output was varied: he printed law books, including George Ferrers's translation of 'Magna Carta' and royal proclamations; devotional material in Latin and English; and popular, vernacular works, including jest books, short chronicles, and herbals. He took a share in an edition of Chaucer's 'Works' (1550?) with William Bonham, Richard Kele, and Robert Toy, and an edition of 'Four Sons of Aymon' with Toy and John Walley (1554). These editions give some indication of his dealings with his close neighbours in Paul's Cross. His shop was next to that of Toy, who bequeathed property at the sign of the Bell 'adioinynge to Master Petitts house' to his widow in 1556 (Plomer, 12). Petyt was among those present in 1526 when the bishop of London issued his second set of injunctions to the booksellers (Reed, 173-5). Petyt is named, along with Bonham, John Reynes, Thomas Dockwray, Henry Tab, and Henry Pepwell, as one of the booksellers in arrears for his Paul's Cross property in September 1539, and with Toy again in the 1543-4 lay subsidy roll. More intriguing is a record of a case that came before the lord mayor in 1546, in which Petyt's servant Elizabeth Harwood confessed to attempting to murder her master and mistress by putting 'Ratsbane in her mast'er''s potte' (CLRO, Rep. 11, fol. 282'v'). 
Petyt's career as a book producer began at the time of the Reformation, and his own religious affiliations apparently shifted with official policy. He printed Tyndale bibles for the king's printer, Thomas Berthelet, in 1539, and further editions under Edward IV, but issued works on behalf of the Catholic cause under Mary, including an edition of Richard Smith's 'Brief Treatyse Settynge Forth Diuers Truthes'. In 1543 the privy council imprisoned a bookseller by the name of Petye with Edward Whitchurch, Richard Grafton, John Byddell, William Middleton, John Mayler, Richard Lant, and Kele in Poultry Compter for producing and distributing unlawful books. If this was Petyt there is no way of determining the specific nature of his transgression, as the lists of 'Englisshe bokes off ill matter' each man was to produce have not survived ('APC', '1542-7', 117). 
By the time of his death Petyt was a powerful member of the Drapers' Company. Among his apprentices was Christopher Munday, father of the writer Anthony Munday. He was admitted to its livery in 1535 and was warden of the company for 1545-6, 1551-2, 1554-5, and 1561-2. Between 1545 and 1561 his name frequently appears in the company's records of assessments for gifts, loans, and subsidies, usually as one of the wealthiest men assessed. 
Petyt died at some point between 18 May 1565 when he drew up his will and 13 February 1566 when it was proved by his wife and sole executor, Joanne (whose previous married name was Wood). Gefferey Finche of Greenstead is named supervisor. Petyt makes bequests to his wife's children by a former marriage: Marie, Margaret, Dennys, Elizabeth, William, and John Wood. He also makes bequests to a number of London stationers in addition to Kitson: William Riddell's widow, Abraham Veale, John Wight (whom Petyt freed in 1540), Thomas Wight (John's son and Petyt's godson), and the queen's printer, John Cawood. Notable among his other legatees is Steven Tenaunte, the lord treasurer's chaplain. 


@@@@@


doc= 22040


Petit, William (d. 1213), justiciar of Ireland, was a follower of Hugh de Lacy, first lord of Meath (died 1186), and probably went over to Ireland with him in 1171. Between 1184 and 1186 Lacy granted him the barony of Magheradernon in Westmeath and Mullingar became the chief Petit manor. Lacy also granted him land in the barony of Shrule in Longford and Rathkenny and possibly Dunboyne in Meath. Petit's subsequent grants of land in Westmeath and Meath to the houses of St Mary, Dublin, and Llanthony in Gloucester were made for Lacy's soul. Between 1206 and 1210 Petit was also granted Dromin and part of Dromiskin in Louth by the archbishop of Armagh. 
In 1185 Petit defeated an Irish force raiding Meath and killed its leader Mael Sechlainn Mac Lochlainn, king of Cenel nEogain. He served as justiciar of Ireland in the early 1190s. On 26 March 1204 he was appointed, with three others, to hear the complaint of Meiler fitz Henry, justiciar of Ireland, against William de Burgh. On 20 March 1208 he was sent by John with messages to the justiciar of Ireland. On 28 June 1210 Petit appeared at Dublin, with others, as a messenger from Walter de Lacy, second lord of Meath, praying the king to relax his ire and suffer Walter to approach his presence. This plea was unsuccessful and Meath was taken into the king's hands. Before 1210 Petit had served as constable of Meath for Lacy and subsequently served as steward of Meath on the king's behalf. In 1211 he was again justiciar and, along with Simon de Rochefort, bishop of Meath, Master Gerard de Cusack, and his own brother Ralph Petit, archdeacon of Meath and from 1227 to 1230 bishop of Meath, he served as an arbitrator in the matter of the division of their Irish lands between the two houses of Llanthony. In 1212 he and other Irish barons supported John against Innocent III. 
Petit died in 1213. His son was taken by King John as a hostage for Richard de Faipo. His widow in February 1215 offered 100 marks for liberty to remarry as she pleased, and for the replacement of her son as hostage by Faipo's own son. Many members of his family came with Petit to Ireland, including his brothers Ralph and Nicholas and his nephew Henry. 


@@@@@


doc= 22041


Petiver, James (c.1665-1718), botanist and entomologist, was one of at least three sons and a daughter of James Petiver, of Hillmorton, near Rugby, Warwickshire (where James was born), and Mary, daughter of Richard Elborow. His father, a freeman of the Haberdashers' Company in London, died during Petiver's childhood and he and his younger brothers were sent to the grammar school at Rugby at the expense of their mother's wealthy father. Already on the threshold of adolescence, he had the benefit of just one year there before entering an eight-year apprenticeship in 1677 to a prominent London apothecary. This select training he no doubt owed again to his grandfather's benevolence, but he was later to express regret at not having been allowed any further 'academical learning'. 
After completing his apprenticeship Petiver set up in practice on his own account at White Cross Street, Aldersgate, which was also to be his home for the rest of his life. By then he had already formed a small collection of London plants, doubtless the result of attending the 'herbarizings' traditionally laid on by the Society of Apothecaries for apprentices. This seems soon to have developed into a broader passion for natural history, in which entomology enduringly competed with botany as his dominant concern. By as early as 1690 Petiver's reputation was such that he was in frequent correspondence with the country's leading naturalists and a member of a circle of fellow enthusiasts who met informally in and around London. Sir Hans Sloane later drew on this group in his attempt to reinvigorate the Royal Society by recruiting active investigators who were not necessarily highly educated. Petiver and his friend Samuel Doody were invited to one of the society's meetings in June 1693 and allowed to take part in the discussions, an experiment sufficiently well received to gain them election as fellows some two years later. Petiver fully justified Sloane's belief in him by taking an active part in the society's affairs in subsequent years, presenting it with numerous specimens, reading before it several papers, and communicating many letters from his correspondents. Later he was also elected to its council several times. 
It seems that this attainment of learned eminence brought occupational advancement in its train, for in 1700, significantly with Sloane again as one of his sponsors, Petiver secured the prestigious appointment of apothecary to the Charterhouse. His ordinary practice also flourished, his meticulously kept prescription books revealing numerous London merchants among his patients. By 1706 he was affluent enough to have lent nearly $800 to a friend. A lifelong bachelor, without a family to support, he also had the good fortune at that point to be left a large sum by a wealthy uncle. The legacy, however, was never paid and the friend, too, went bankrupt, but severe though those reverses were they did not curtail his spending on his collections. 
By 1697 Petiver's herbarium alone amounted, on his own reckoning, to between 5000 and 6000 specimens, and he was ready to start reaping some scientific acclaim for the huge investment of time and effort by describing in print some of the contents of the by then famous Museum Petiverianum. The first and most notable of what was to prove a stream of publications to that end appeared in parts in 1695-1703, each part comprising plates and descriptions of either 100 or 200 different animals, plants, shells, or fossils, accompanied by copious notes on contributors of the specimens (as well as cutting remarks on his rival, Leonard Plukenet). This was followed by his 'Gazophylacium naturae et artis' (1702-9), again in several parts, illustrating with folio plates a further large number of natural history items, in no order and in many cases based on very imperfect material. There were many shorter lists, catalogues, and directions for collecting, all privately printed, most apparently in short runs and many undated, evidently rushed out by Petiver as a means of keeping his correspondents busy on his behalf and assured that what they sent him was duly studied and of value. In 1707 this extraordinary industry even led to the production of a periodical, the 'Monthly Miscellany', which survived for several years. Throughout, Petiver was also writing to a great assortment of people in many parts of the world, often at considerable length. The copies he kept of these, now among the Sloane MSS, fill nine volumes and together with his catalogues are a precious source of information on the provenance of specimens and the identity of collectors. 
For Petiver, acquisition was virtually all: he had scant inclination to document or arrange his collections with the care that they deserved. A large proportion of his plant specimens have lost such labels as they may have possessed and the labels that survive are often illegible and vague about localities. Many of the specimens, too, are so fragmentary as to be indeterminable. As Sloane was to remark, despairingly, Petiver 'put them into heaps... where they were many of them injured by dust, insects, rain, etc' (Sloane, vol. 2, introduction). One visiting savant from Germany, Zacharias von Uffenbach, found everything 'in prodigious confusion in one wretched cabinet and in boxes', with no proper attempt at display. To make matters worse, Petiver offered samples of his collections to wealthy connoisseurs at exorbitant prices and advertised for sale sets of named specimens (the first person known to have followed this later widespread practice). Allegedly, too, he abused his appointment (by 1709) as demonstrator to the Society of Apothecaries by exploiting its Chelsea garden remorselessly to enrich his personal herbarium. 
Though the first to record many English plants and author of a work, in 1713-15, which usefully remedied the lack of plates in Ray's great 'Historia plantarum', it was in English entomology that Petiver made his most significant contribution to learning, a greater one indeed than anyone before except for Ray. His manuscripts are a primary source for the methods of collecting insects at that period and also provide a datum-line for the distribution of many species. By the time he and Ray were in correspondence, to great mutual benefit, in the mid-1690s, he had reared a large number of Lepidoptera, and his 'Papilionum Britanniae icones' (1717), the first publication devoted exclusively to English butterflies, was to feature more than eighty of these. 
Petiver's own travels were not extensive. In England he seems to have ventured no further than the midlands (in 1692, to visit his married sister), Bristol (in 1712), and Cambridge (in 1715, with his kinsman James Sherard). A projected trip to France probably came to nothing, but in 1711 the auction of Paul Hermann's collections took him on Sloane's behalf to the Netherlands, where he met Boerhaave and many other leading Dutch naturalists and had the degree of doctor of medicine conferred on him by the University of Leiden. On 15 October 1716 the younger James Bobart wrote to congratulate Petiver on his marriage, but no supporting evidence has come to light and it is possible that Bobart was misinformed. Early in 1717 serious illness rendered him incapable of any exertion and that August he made his will, bequeathing most of his possessions to his sister. He died at his home in White Cross Street in April 1718 and was buried in St Botolph, Aldersgate, London, on 10 April. On his death Sloane, who had already offered a reputed $4000 for the collections and manuscripts (his books were but few, according to William Sherard), achieved their purchase; the plants alone, filling over 100 volumes, constituted far and away the single largest acquisition of that hardly less acquisitive man. Sloane was also one of six physicians who paid Petiver the final, signal honour of acting as pallbearers at his funeral. Petiver is commemorated in a genus of plants named after him by Plumier. 


@@@@@


doc= 22042


Peto, Sir (Samuel) Morton, first baronet (1809-1889), contractor for railways and public works, was born on 4 August 1809 at Whitmoor House, Woking, Surrey, the eldest son of William Peto (died 1849) of Cookham, Berkshire, farmer, and his wife, Sophia, daughter of Ralph Alloway of Dorking. Educated first at a Cobham village school, he then spent two years at Jardine's boarding-school at Brixton Hill, Surrey. 
When he was fourteen he was apprenticed to his uncle, Henry Peto, public works contractor, with whom he lived at 31 Little Britain, City of London. He also attended a technical school. His talent for drawing was developed by a draughtsman, George Maddox of Furnival's Inn, and an architect, either Charles or Samuel Beazley. Under his uncle, he learnt the practical side of building in the carpenter's shop and as a bricklayer and mason, before acting as a superintendent, work that gave him 'an insight into the mechanism of labour... [and] the idiosyncrasy of the English mechanic' ('Men of the time'). 
On his uncle's death in 1830, Peto and his cousin Thomas Grissell each inherited a half share in his business and heavily mortgaged estate. As partners they conducted one of the leading firms of public works contractors, in a period when competitive tendering for lump-sum contracts was becoming the norm for major building works. Their control of a wide range of building trades, even leasing their own stone quarries, enabled them to win contracts on terms that their close site controls made profitable to them. Their 1832 tender for Hungerford Market, London (designed by Charles Fowler) was, at $42,400, only $400 below their nearest competitor. It was the first in a notable series that included Charles Barry's Birmingham grammar school (1833), the Reform (also Barry, 1836), Conservative (1840), and Oxford and Cambridge (1836-8) clubs, Samuel Beazley's Lyceum (1831-4, in sixteen weeks) and St James's (1835, in thirteen weeks) theatres, and his Studley Castle, Warwickshire (1834), Bushall's Olympic Theatre (1849), and Nelson's Column (1843). They also constructed Fowler's St John's Church, Hyde Park Crescent (1830-31). 
Peto recalled that: 'our 'ordinary' business coming regularly from the large breweries and fire offices, and the work of our own connection with the architects, netted on the average $11,000 or $12,000 a year, and with only $50,000 capital engaged in that department. (Peto, 13)' Well placed to benefit from new contracting opportunities, they engaged in railway construction, beginning with two stations in Birmingham, followed by the Hanwell to Langley section of the Great Western (1840) -- where Peto successfully referred his disputed $162,000 account directly to the determination of Isambard Kingdom Brunel, the engineer -- as well as the Woolwich graving dock. But their most celebrated work was the superstructure of Barry's houses of parliament, begun in 1840 on a lump-sum contract for the river front, and continued in a series of contracts based on their schedule of prices. Young men in their employ included George Gilbert Scott and the Lucas brothers, Charles Thomas and Thomas. 
Peto was more enthusiastic than Grissell about developing the risky but profitable railway-building side of the business, which had the added advantage that he would then be able to stand for parliament, from which as a government contractor he was barred. He dissolved the partnership on 2 March 1846, taking over the railway works (including some in Norfolk), a substantial 'clear capital' and $25,000 worth of plant. He was returned as MP for Norwich in July 1847. Among his contracts were those for portions of the South Eastern Railway adjoining others being executed by Edward Ladd Betts, who in 1843 had married Peto's sister. Having run into difficulties with the Saltwood Tunnel, where Betts had the contract for the permanent way, in 1846 they agreed to join forces, and subsequently formed a partnership that lasted until Betts's death in 1872. Peto worked on securing contracts, raising finance, and carrying out a modern company chairman's role, while Betts performed that of chief executive, actually conducting the works. 
Peto and Betts's highly organized operations covered many parts of England, but especially the east, with contracts for the Great Northern loop line through Boston to Doncaster, the East Lincolnshire, and the Eastern Counties Railway for which alone their several contracts totalled over $1.12 million. Writing from Boston in 1847, Peto referred to the thirteen engines and 8000 men they had on the works. As a feeder for East Anglia, they developed the London, Tilbury, and Southend Railway (1854-6), which they also leased as operators, a costly speculation. They were also responsible for the London, Cambridge, and Ely line; the Oxford and Birmingham Railway (contracts including the Harbury cuttings, the largest in the country, requiring the removal of 1.5 million cu. yd of soil); and the Oxford, Worcester, and Wolverhampton. Other contracts included the Dorset sections of the London and South Western (at a cost of $420,000, partly paid in shares), and the Hereford, Ross and Gloucester, as well as for the Severn Valley and the Chester and Holyhead railway companies of which Peto was chairman. In the 1840s Peto had thirty-three railway contracts worth $20 million, the largest number held in the kingdom; according to Brunel he was the largest contractor in the world. 
Beyond the scale of his operations, Peto's insistence on paying his men weekly in cash was unusual. He recommended this practice to the select committee on railway labourers in 1846, and it was endorsed in their report. In 1854 Peto, supporting an amendment of the 'Truck Act', claimed always to have paid in cash the wages of the 30,000 men his firm had employed throughout the world. Peto was also interested in the physical and moral well-being of his employees, building barrack huts for them where necessary, each under the charge of a married couple, and paying for chaplains, 'Bibles', and uplifting tracts. His system of management combined 'discipline, personal freedom, moral admonition reduced to practice, and a total avoidance of ostentatious pietism' ('Men of the time'). 
Several of Peto's undertakings were 'contractors' lines', projected 'not because the district wanted a railway, but because the contractor wanted a job' ('The Times', 25 April 1868, 9). Such companies paid their contractors by issuing them with stock at a discount, to sell at a profit when possible. Peto's name was a byword for this practice. In 1857, after parliament sanctioned the London, Chatham, and Dover Railway, an author going under the pseudonym 'Tooth of the Dragon' published a pamphlet, 'Petovia', attacking 'Petoism': 'There was concoction of companies by contractors in order to make their own terms for construction of the works, or, bribery of directors in order to sacrifice the shareholders' (Popplewell, 9). As early as 1847, having been paid extensively in securities, Peto was experiencing serious cash flow difficulties, eventually resolved by the connection he developed with the Quaker Gurney banks in Norfolk and thence with the discounting house of Overend Gurney. In the late 1840s and early 1850s Peto's plans were largely focused on developing Lowestoft as a port for Norwich and its hinterland, and its establishment as a holiday resort. 
When the major domestic routes had been completed, Peto and Betts looked abroad: in co-operation with Thomas Brassey, their only equal, they extended their operations into Norway (1851) and Denmark (in 1853, 1860, and 1863, totalling 350 miles). They even undertook projects in Canada from 1852, embarking on the Grand Trunk Railway (539 miles in length); this required the bridging of the St Lawrence River at Montreal, which proved so expensive that they had to be rescued by the Canadian government. Peto found one-third of the $270,000 capital for their Birkenhead Canada works to provide the metal parts and rolling stock needed. Other enterprises in which they joined Brassey included the Lyons and Avignon Railway (1852) and extensive lines in Australia (from 1859), and at home, the Victoria docks, London, in 1852 at a cost of $870,000. In the Crimean War, Peto offered to construct a railway at Balaklava at cost, but this necessitated his resignation of his parliamentary seat in December 1854; he was compensated with a baronetcy the following February. Peto and Betts were also responsible for the Algiers to Blidah line, the first railway in Algeria, and the Algiers quays; the Dunaberg and Vitebsk Railway in Russia (220 miles long); the Buenos Aires to Rosario; and a land drainage scheme in the Netherlands. At Sir John Rennie's suggestion, the firm made an agreement in 1857 for building the Coimbra to Porto line, abandoned after disputes with the Portuguese government; Rennie thought that the real cause 'was that their resources were swallowed up by a great variety of speculations' (Rennie, 366). 
It was, however, essentially their involvement at home with the controversial and insecure London, Chatham, and Dover Railway (LCDR) that brought about their collapse. Peto and Betts, in partnership with the engineer T. R. Crampton from 1862, concluded a lump-sum contract at $5.979 million (including more than $1 million for land) for its metropolitan extension into Victoria Station. They were to be paid not in cash, but in shares and debentures of the heavily indebted company, to which in December 1863 Peto offered his services as financial adviser. He undertook to fund a floating debt of $1.25 million which enabled the company to issue more stock, taken by Peto at a heavy discount. By improperly certifying that the majority of this stock had been subscribed for, the company was then able to raise cash on debentures, a not unusual, but illegal, proceeding. It was exposed by Peto's borrowings, and on 11 May 1866 the partners went down, following their bankers, Overend, Gurney & Co., with liabilities estimated at $4 million. Though denouncing the essential unsoundness of 'contractors' lines', 'The Times' lamented: 'It is not without a sense of national humiliation that we contemplate the failure of a house which is identified with some of the grandest mechanical achievements of the present century. Perhaps no one, save Mr Brassey, has filled so high a position among English contractors as Sir Morton Peto... a leading pioneer of the railway system, and a great master in the art of organizing labour. (26 July 1867, 9)' Gladstone and Disraeli alike paid him similar tributes in the Commons. 
In the subsequent bankruptcy proceedings, the transactions between Peto and the LCDR were left undetermined: although the firm's books 'had been admirably kept' according to the LCDR's solicitor ('The Times', 7 July 1868, 11), another viewpoint was that the accounts 'were both contradictory and most difficult to unravel' (Peto, 47). The firm claimed a balance due to them of $380,000, and the LCDR counter-claimed for $6,661,941. The affairs of the partners, too, were almost inextricable: $800,000 belonging to Peto, Betts, and Crampton had been applied to discharge Peto and Betts's liabilities, leaving a deficiency of over $1 million. The LCDR received a dividend of 1's'. 10died from the bankrupts' estate on their discharge. Peto had meanwhile resumed his parliamentary activities, being returned first for Finsbury in 1859 and then becoming member for Bristol in 1865, but as a bankrupt was once again obliged to step down, which he did in April 1868. Nevertheless he evidently had hopes of re-election, and his election committee in June 1868 rejected his offer to resign as a candidate; his subsequent 'involved and prolix exposition' to his former constituents of his affairs 'obscured rather than elucidated' in the view of 'The Times' (7 July 1868), which thought that the ordinary reader would conclude that in Peto's opinion there were people involved who were more to blame than himself (a view shared by 'The Builder'); but he could not 'be held as irresponsible as he claims' ('The Times', 25 Oct 1868, 6). Peto did not, however, again contest Bristol. 
On 18 May 1831 Peto married Thomas Grissell's oldest sister, Mary ('c'.1811-1842); the couple, who had two sons and three daughters, lived in Albany Terrace, York Road, Lambeth. After her death he married, on 12 July 1843, Sarah Ainsworth (1821-1892), eldest daughter of Henry Kelsall of Rochdale, a textile manufacturer and leading Baptist layman; they had another six sons, of whom Harold Ainsworth Peto became a partner in the leading architectural practice of Sir Ernest George and Peto, and four daughters. 
Peto, who had been brought up an evangelical Anglican, joined the Baptists about 1844, influenced by his second wife; from the mid-1840s until his bankruptcy he was the leading Baptist layman, serving in 1853-5 and again in 1863-7 as chairman of the dissenting deputies. He was treasurer of the Baptist Missionary Society from 1846 to 1867. Peto's omnibus, conveying family and servants (the sexes segregated) to worship in Bloomsbury, was a familiar Sunday sight between 1849 and 1873. He was in favour of complete religious freedom for every denomination, and this was one of the few topics on which he spoke in the Commons. 
As an MP, Peto acted independently on the radical wing of the Liberal Party, expressing his confidence in the fourth earl of Aberdeen's coalition ministry in June 1854, during the Crimean War. Membership of the Commons for him offered a means of promoting his interests; he did not seek a career in politics. Peto was naturally active in discussion of religious questions: in 1850 he secured a non-contentious 'Trustee Act' to safeguard nonconformist chapel trusts, but in 1861 his 'Burials Bill' (to allow nonconformist services in parochial graveyards) was rejected. He encouraged a non-aggressive attitude towards the Church of England but attacked compulsory church rates, arguing that they were unnecessary. Apart from religious and public works topics, his speeches principally concerned the condition of the working classes, on which he regarded himself as peculiarly well informed: he 'believed he had been more extensively engaged with the industrious classes of this country than any Member' ('Hansard 3', 121, 1862, 698). He was indeed seen as a philanthropic employer, endeavouring to make all in his employ 'feel that the interests of employer and employed are identical,... that the master cares for the comfort and welfare of his men, and is really... anxious that they should be helped in every way to rise in the world' ('Cassell's Illustrated Family Paper', 39-40). Peto set out his political views in seconding the Address in the Commons on 4 February 1851, when he praised the reduction of import duties and the repeal of the 'Navigation Acts'; pointed to the thriving state of stock farming as a result of the consequent improved working-class living standards; urged the building of more railways to benefit Ireland, and to open up India as a market for cotton manufactures; approved anti-papal legislation; and recommended the universal registration of property deeds. He served on a number of select committees (including that on masters and operatives, 1860) and official commissions, particularly the metropolitan commission of sewers (1849), of which he was deputy chairman in 1851-2, and the royal commission for the 1851 exhibition. 
Peto published, in addition to religious tracts, 'Observations on the Report of the Defence Commissioners, with an Analysis of the Evidence' (1862); 'Taxation, its Levy and Expenditure, Past and Future' (1863) -- a 400 page criticism of British financial policy; and 'Resources and prospects of America ascertained during a visit to the States in the Autumn of 1865' (1866), a lengthy, generally admiring, analysis, but advocating the merits of free trade. 
Although Peto spent liberally, his income was not as large as might be expected. In 1861 he said $10,000 was his best for seven years past, and in 1862 he realized assets in real estate worth several thousands annually. He was a generous benefactor to charity, funding the building of Bloomsbury Baptist Chapel (at a cost of $18,000) and, when repaid, buying the Regent's Park diorama for conversion to a chapel; he also restored the parish church on the estate he had bought at Somerleyton, Lowestoft, Suffolk, where he built a model village, with a school for the children of the men in his Lowestoft works. In 1850 he came forward as guarantor of the $50,000 required for the Great Exhibition of 1851. 
In London, Peto and his family lived at 47 Russell Square, and then in 1853-63 in great style at 12 Kensington Palace Gardens (built by Thomas Grissell), supported by a governess, three male and twelve female indoor servants. In 1863-5, while he was temporarily living at 9 Great George Street, Lucas Brothers built him a new mansion on the adjoining garden plot, at a cost of nearly $50,000, complete with remarkable stables that accommodated nine coaches and twelve stalls. In consequence of Peto's bankruptcy, this house was bought by Thomas Lucas. At Lowestoft, Peto employed John Thomas to rebuild Somerleyton Hall for him (1844), described by Pevsner as 'more Jacobean than any original Jacobean house' ('Buildings of England, Suffolk', 1961, 390). He became a JP and deputy lieutenant for Suffolk (and JP for Norfolk, and later Middlesex), but in 1862 moved to Chipstead, Sevenoaks, Kent. After his bankruptcy, Peto moved almost annually, until settling at Eastcote House, Pinner, Middlesex, in 1877. He moved for the last time in 1884, to Blackhurst, Tunbridge Wells, Kent. 
After their discharge from bankruptcy in July 1868, the only contract undertaken by Peto and Betts was for minor works on the Metropolitan Railway. However, they had hopes of an abortive scheme for regulating the Danube at Budapest, where Peto spent much of 1868-9, moving on to Paris in hope of French contracts. After Betts's death he undertook construction of the Cornish mineral railways. His health deteriorated in the mid-1880s and he spent two winters at Cannes, but from November 1888 became increasingly ill. He died at Blackhurst on 13 November 1889, and was buried in Pembury churchyard, Kent. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 22043


Peto, William (c.1485-1558), cardinal, was a younger son of Edward Peyto of Chesterton, Warwickshire, and Goditha Throckmorton (died 1531), although it has been much more commonly said that 'the acts of his life were so obscure that in some respects Petow might be compared to Melchizedek, as no one knew who his parents were, nor where he was born' ('CSP Venice', '1556-7', no. 937). One of four children, his brothers included John Peyto ['see under 'Peyto family]. After graduating BA at Oxford in 1502, Peto was incorporated in the following year at Cambridge, where he proceeded MA in 1505. In 1507/8 he was paid $4 to lecture on mathematics, and seems to have become briefly a fellow of Queens' College in 1511 (probably through John Fisher's patronage), immediately before his ordination to the priesthood on 15 March that year. He had been incorporated MA at Oxford on 16 June 1510 and held the office of university preacher at Cambridge in 1510-11. Peto was vice-warden of the Observant Franciscans at Richmond, Surrey, by December 1520, warden in 1522, and provincial minister of the Observants. In 1524 the Carthusians of Axholme presented him to the living of Sharnford, Leicestershire; he failed to keep the church in repair, which suggests that he did not reside. 
Nothing further is known of Peto until the time of the divorce crisis, when he was again provincial and apparently also acting as confessor to Katherine of Aragon and her ladies, as well as to Princess Mary. He defended the queen, preaching a sermon before Henry at Easter 1532 in which he denounced those who repudiated their wives, threatened excommunication for the king since flatterers always ruined kingdoms, and observed that princes' affections obscured the truth. Nicholas Harpsfield later claimed that Peto had warned Henry that, like Ahab, dogs would lick his blood. An angry king summoned Peto before him, and Peto flatly told Henry that he would lose his kingdom because of his subjects' opposition. According to Sir George Throckmorton's confession of 1537, Peto offered Henry a detailed refutation of his case, arguing that he could have no other wife while Katherine lived unless he could prove that Prince Arthur had intercourse with her, something the king could not do, as the only evidence was Arthur's 'light word' about having been 'in the midst of Spain'. Peto also insisted that Henry could not marry Anne Boleyn, since he had 'meddled with the mother and the sister' ('LP Henry VIII', 12/2, no. 952), probably the origin of Nicholas Sander's famous canard to the same effect. Peto helped to organize parliamentary opposition to the divorce, telling Throckmorton to stay the course for his soul's sake, and in convocation attacked Richard Curwen for having preached in the convent of Greenwich without the brothers' permission -- Curwen had by royal order delivered a sermon confuting Peto. 
The chronology of Peto's career becomes confusing after 1532. According to one story, he had asked and received Henry's permission to retire to Toulouse, but the king had changed his mind and had him arrested. Nevertheless, Peto seems to have reached the continent before returning to England. It is certain that when he accused Curwen he was in the custody of Bishop Standish (where he remained at least into May 1532) and that he was in the Franciscan house at Pontoise in January 1533. Most sources agree that during this time he had a book published in Antwerp (suppositiously at Luneburg) against the divorce, 'Philalethae hyerborie... in Anticatoptrum suum... paresceve' ('Lover of truth from the north...') a reply to 'A Glasse of the Truthe'. Although the book cannot have been his, both because of the pseudonym and also because its author refers to himself as having studied in Paris, Peto was frequently accused of having written it. There is a single copy in the Grenville collection in the British Library. Peto and his companion Friar Henry Elston may have brought the work back to England, or perhaps they merely forwarded it. 
Once Peto had fled, various English agents, especially John Hutton, ambassador to the court of Mary of Hungary in the Low Countries, kept a close eye on him. In 1533 and 1534 he was in Antwerp in company with Elston, who was spreading the rumour that Spain was about to invade England. Stephen Vaughan, Thomas Cromwell's representative in the Low Countries, who once solemnly proclaimed that he would capture Peto, whom he called 'a hypocrite, a tiger clad in a sheepskin, a perilous knave' ('LP Henry VIII', 6, no. 1324), wrote in March 1535 that Peto was at Bergen-op-Zoom (where he seems mainly to have stayed during the rest of his time in the Netherlands) and that Mary would have him arrested if Henry wrote to her personally. Peto was variously said to be supported by the Spanish or from England, and seems to have kept very close ties with home, notably with Sir Thomas More, who sent him several books including his own 'Confutation of Tyndale's 'Answer''. 
Two years later, in 1537, Peto was involved in one of the more curious episodes in Reginald Pole's first legation against England. Hutton had recruited one William Vaughan, offering him a pardon in exchange for insinuating himself with Pole. Vaughan had a letter of introduction from Peto to his relative Michael Throckmorton. Pole greeted Vaughan cordially, according to Hutton, as a fellow exile and Welshman, gave him money and asked him to go to Antwerp to gather news. He left with a letter for Peto from Throckmorton. This may have been Peto's first contact with Pole, of whom he would later be described as one of the principal followers. He acted as go-between for Hutton with Throckmorton, Pole's representative, and often conferred with Hutton in person. Peto helped to cover Pole's escape from Flanders, possibly on the latter's instructions, recommending to Hutton that Nicholas Wilson be sent on the king's behalf to confer with Pole 'to stop such things as were likely to be put forth shortly' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/124, fol. 167'r'), probably a reference to the planned publication of Pole's 'Pro ecclesiasticae unitatis defensione', which borrowed Peto's argument that flattery was at the root of Henry's actions. Peto probably had a copy, although Pole denied any knowledge of it. It apparently reached Hutton, who burnt it. 
Peto still held out hope that the change in the pope's status in England was not permanent, and at least as late as December 1537, after Pole had returned to Rome, offered his allegiance to the king and his service to Cromwell, and said he would try to prevent the publication of a book against Henry, probably another reference to 'Pro ecclesiasticae unitatis defensione'. About the same time, Peto told Hutton that if peace were concluded and a council called, he would go to Italy, but that he found many abuses among monks and nuns in England and thought the monasteries could be put to better uses. Thus except for the status of the pope, Peto wished he were in England. Shortly afterwards, however, Peto acted on his resolve to go to Italy, encountering Hutton's brother-in-law at Mainz as he made his way in secular attire to Rome. In August 1538 Peto was in the Observant convent at Venice, 'by Mr Pole's means' ('LP Henry VIII', 13/1, no. 115), and he spent the winter there, Thomas Theobald describing him as 'somewhat babbling and very open' (Ellis, 2.128). He stayed against his wishes, since he had wanted to go to Rome, but had been prevented by the Franciscan general's orders. Pole wrote on Peto's behalf, asking the general to give Peto permission to join Pole whenever he chose. 
This was now Peto's only good option, since he had been indicted for having traitorously gone to Rome, and then included in the massive bill of attainder against Pole and his allies of 19 May 1539. On 30 March 1543 Paul III nominated Peto as bishop of Salisbury with Marcello Cervini as referendary, after Pole had refused the see four years earlier. Henry did not recognize the election, and by the time Pole was in a position to implement it in 1555 Peto no longer wished to have the see and never took possession. He next became successively a chamberlain and warden of the English Hospice in Rome in 1544; he last appears as warden in November 1548. A gap of six years ensues until Peto appears in a Franciscan house in Mantua, according to the somewhat garbled testimony of the Mantuan envoy to the imperial court. It may have been thence that he wrote to Mary Tudor, probably in early 1554, advising her to remain single, supporting his argument with numerous quotations from the 'Bible', and warning her that she would be dominated by her husband and suffer dangerous pregnancies. Peto offered to come to England to tell the queen more. 
On 4 January 1555 Peto's attainder was reversed, and by then he had probably returned home. Once there, he led the attempt to destroy Christ's Hospital, which had been founded on the site of the Greyfriars' convent in London, until persuaded to abandon his efforts by the intervention of the Spanish Friar John, probably Juan de Villagarcia. In November 1555 he was among twenty-five friars in the restored convent of Greenwich, and was possibly correctly identified as Mary's confessor and certainly incorrectly as a recent nominee for cardinal. That did not occur until 14 June 1557 when Paul IV, acting out of divine inspiration, or so he claimed, surprised the whole College of Cardinals; the pope did not even give Peto a cardinal's title. More importantly, Paul did transfer to him Pole's legation to England. Sir Edward Carne, Mary's ambassador in Rome, rejected the nomination of a 'blockhead' and a dotard, and told the pope that he would have to report the news to the queen himself. Paul replied that Peto had been a great help to the congregation of the Inquisition (under unknown circumstances), and that he was certain Peto had been Mary's confessor despite Carne's attempt to prove he was not. Other observers put the nomination bluntly down to Paul's proceedings against Pole for heresy. 
The pope's nomination, dated 20 June, went off to England on the 28th. Within a month Peto wrote back rejecting the appointment as legate, although Mary had refused to allow the courier to cross from Calais where he was put up at royal expense, and tried to keep the news from Pole. When the latter found out, he sought entry for the messenger. Carne secured a papal audience to present Peto's and the queen's letters, and Paul replied that the matter needed consultation with the cardinals. Peto's letter was read under the strictest secrecy in consistory on 12 August, but the absence of four leading imperialist cardinals gave the pope an excuse for further delay. In December Paul tried to summon Peto to Rome via Cardinal Carlo Carafa, probably to make it appear that the general summons of cardinals was not merely a cover to get Pole into the pope's hands. Peto may have formally resigned his bishopric in early 1558 and probably died late in the year. He was still alive and in England shortly before 17 November, when he attended the deathbed of Pole's brother Geoffrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 22044


Petowe, Henry (1575/6-1636?), poet, was made free of the Company of Clothworkers on 13 August 1600, so he would have passed a minimum age that was probably twenty-three. He did not inherit his freedom (despite the suggestion of Eccles, 105), for no earlier Petowe appears in the Clothworkers' freedoms' list, which begins in 1528. Neither was he elected to the livery of the Clothworkers' Company. Insights into the clothiers' trade in the 1603 pamphlet 'Londoners, their Entertainment in the Countrie' indicate that the writer was once active in this trade. 
A chancery record dated 1613 contains two autograph signatures of Henrie Petowe, identified as a scrivener thirty-seven years of age of the parish of St Michael, Wood Street (TNA: PRO, C24/81/74). These match exactly the 1613 signature of a Henrie Petowe identified as a 'Clothworker', who witnessed an obligation (Corporation of London RO, journal 29, fol. 65; Petowe is identified as clothworker also in the record of this obligation, Corporation of London RO, report 31, fol. 112'v'; Petowe's slightly different 1618 signature appears on a bond in TNA: PRO, REQ 2/243). Thus the poet, clothworker, and scrivener were one man. Petowe's name does not appear in surviving documents of the Scriveners' Company, but the company's records are not intact (Woudhuysen, 53-4; Guildhall Library, MS 5370). 
As a clothworker Petowe was free of the City, and so eligible for the London volunteer infantry company known as the artillery garden. He was admitted to the artillery garden between 15 August and October 1611 and later became marshal (The vellum book). There is an unascribed note at the Honourable Artillery Company indicating that Petowe was 'Marshall T[rained] B[ands] 1622-26'. The writer's work after 1622 is often identified to be by Marshall Petowe. 
The poet may have been same Henry Petowe who married Ann Burt on 16 April 1604 at St Bartholomew by the Exchange (Eccles, 105). But similar names are also found: a different Henrie Petto married Alse Harison on 14 January 1604 at St Bride's, Fleet Street, and a Humphrei Petto married on 12 March 1604, also at St Bride's, Fleet Street. 
The parish records of St Michael, Wood Street, show that Henry Petowe, scrivener, with a wife identified from 1616 onwards as Anne, fathered twelve children between 1605 and 1622. At least seven of these died by 1625. Petowe's children were baptized and (where recorded) buried at St Michael's: Richard ('bap'. 1605, died 1611); Thomas ('bap'. 1607); Henry ('bap'. 1609, died 1610); Henrye ('bap'. 1610, died 1613); Marie ('bap'. 1612, died 1625); Anne ('bap'. 1613, died in or before 1619?); Benjamin ('bap'. 1615); Catherine ('bap'. 1616, died 1625); Thomas ('bap'. 1617); Anne ('bap'. 1619); and Francisse ('bap'. 1622, died 1624). In addition, William, son of Henrie Petowe, scrivener, was buried on 4 February 1618. Two daughters and their mother died on 15, 25, and 29 August 1625, probably owing to an outbreak of plague. 
Petowe's first publication, 'The Second Part of Hero and Leander, Conteyning their Further Fortunes' (1598), continued Marlowe's epyllion. An address 'To the quicke-sighted Reader' excuses this as 'the first fruits of an unripe wit, done at certaine vacant howers'. It begins with high praises of Marlowe, and then describes chivalric adventures leaving many corpses, but a happy ending for the hero and heroine. Leander is exiled on arbitrary charges of treason, a topic with a political edge. Hero's constancy withstands repeated assaults; one makes a villain 'hoarse', and he dies of heartbreak. Leander is not discredited when, in disguise, he tests Hero's chastity. A connection of the text with an image in 'Hamlet' is proposed by B. L. Joseph. Taylor argues it takes its Ovidian allusions directly from Golding. The text is edited in N. Alexander, 'Elizabethan Narrative Verse' (1967) and in Stephen Orgel's edition of Marlowe. 
Petowe regrets his continuation of Marlowe in a not entirely conventional manner in the introductory matter to his next book, 'Philochasander and Elanira' (1599). Introductory verses describe the earlier work using images of a 'snare', a 'gin', 'the pit', and 'The sinke of misconceite, and errors Cell'. Admitting the late 'head-long' fall of his 'wandering 'Muse'', Petowe says his muse now 'hath prunde her wings', and hopes his new effort will 'live eternallie'. 'Philochasander' is dismissed by most nineteenth- and twentieth-century critics (see, for example, Shapiro, 25-6; Zocca, 177, being a partial exception). Yet it is not 'prunde', but more daring. Following an introductory poem, it consists of forty-four poems of eighteen lines. Poem 2, 'From 'Tuskane' came my ladies worthy race', deliberately echoes Surrey (as does most of poem 9), and poem 5 identifies the lady as ''White' by name'. The sequence becomes erotic from poem 8. 
Petowe's next work, 'Elizabetha quasi vivens: Eliza's Funerall' (1603), is composed of an 'Induction', then eight sonnets, six prose pages listing 'the order and formall proceeding at the Funerall', and a final verse. The fifth sonnet strikingly evokes massed black-clad mourners. The last sonnet names King James. 
The queen is lamented also in Petowe's next book, of twenty-three sonnets, 'Englands Caesar: his majesties most royall coronation... Eliza her coronation in heaven; and Londons sorrow for her visitation' (1603). The plague of 1603 is attributed to London's sins; the nineteenth sonnet rues James's by-passing of the expensive pageantry put on by the City to receive him, as the king had travelled by water purportedly to avoid infection. 
Next appeared 'Londoners, their Entertainment in the Countrie', entered as by Henry Petoe on 26 December 1603 (Arber corrects 26 November). This argues that 'sin' caused the 1603 plague equally in London, the suburbs, and the countryside. It describes escaping Londoners' poor reception in the country, and paints a lively picture of country towns during the visitation (claiming that, unlike London, the country does not bury its dead). The last section of the book contains two pastoral poems allegorizing the London plague, 'An Aelegie' (sig. C3'r'- 'v') and 'The Aeglogue' (sig. C4'r'), then affectingly realistic reportage of the economic impact of London's disasters on the countryside (sig. C4'r'-D1'r'), and finally a summarizing poem (sig. D2'r'-D4'r'), the sixth stanza of which contains further economic reflections. 
The only later longer work of Petowe preserved also concerns a plague year: 'The Countrie Ague, or, London her Welcome Home to her Retired Children' (1626). Most of the pamphlet is spoken in sorrow by London personified, who enjoins mercy and charity, and sharply condemns Londoners in authority who remained away from their posts when 'my Poore cryed out for reliefe'. A penultimate section, including an epitaph, describes the 'Funerall of Captaine Richard Robins' to prove the diminished artillery garden company and city authorities were still functioning. The pamphlet followed multiple deaths in Petowe's family (especially closely if the overprinting '1625' in the unique BL copy is accurate), which may account for its softened tone as compared with Petowe's book on the 1603 plague. 
In the dedicatory epistle of 'The Countrie Ague', Petowe identifies a work, now lost, of 'some ten Weekes since' titled 'London Sicke at Heart, or, A Caveat for Run-Awayes'. This would seem another plague pamphlet, yet Petowe writes that in comparison with it 'The Countrie Ague' is 'in another kinde and Garbe of writing, yet to purpose and according as these dayes and times require... [for] I write no Fables, nor Imaginary Toyes, but lamentable Experience shall justifie my writ'. This differentiation implies that 'London Sicke at Heart' was not a work of reportage. 
Corser (9.147) claims a bookseller advertised a manuscript: ''A Description of the Countie of Surrey', containing a geographicall account of the said countrey or shyre, with other things thereunto apertaining. Collected and written by Henry Pattowe, 1611.' This is not likely to be by the London Henry Petowe; one or more contemporary Henry Petowes appear in the records of Farnham, Godalming, and Chiddingfold, Surrey. 
'Marescallus Petowe' signed a poem in Anthony Munday's edition of Stowe, 'The Survey of London' (1633, 754-5), 'The foundation of the armory of that remarkable nursery of military discipline, called the Artillery Garden London'. This commemorates improvements made between 1 May and 30 November 1622, and is not a separate broadside as sometimes thought. Petowe similarly signed a folio broadsheet preserved uniquely at the Society of Antiquaries entitled 'An honourable president for great men by an elegiecall monument to the memory of that worthy gentleman Mr. John Bancks' (1630). Mr Banckes, a mercer, had given generously to the artillery garden. The Barber-Surgeons' Company thereafter gave 'to Marshall Petoe for his elegies on Mr Banckes his funerall' either 5's'. or 10's'. (Young, 211, 398). The following July Petowe was paid 20's'. by the Goldsmiths' Company for an elegy on one Mr Crownshawe (now lost). 
A broadside signed 'Henricus Petowe area militaris Londinensis marciscallus composuit' is headed 'The Artillery Garden London, Magnificent and Tryumphant' (1635; Bodl. Oxf., Douce prints 6.12, fol. 83). It illustrates a coat of arms newly 'assigned to the Gentlemen of the same Societie'. There follow seventy-six couplets. These include recollections of English civil wars that may seem ominous in a poem dedicated to Charles I by a London citizen given to outbreaks of imagination. 
Eccles suggests that Petowe later remarried and relocated. One Henry Petowe of the parish of All Hallows, London Wall, and his wife, Mary, baptized Sara on 19 October 1632 and Nycholas on 21 August 1634. In the plague year of 1635-6, first Mary, then Sara, and then Henry Petowe died, on 22 January, 27 September, and 10 October respectively. The administration of the estate of this Henry Petowe is noted in the act book of the archdeaconry court of London (London, Guildhall Library, MS 9050/7, fol. 10'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 22045


Benjamin Petre (1672-1758), vicar apostolic of the London district, was born on 10 August 1672, the sixth son of John Petre (1617-1690), of Writtle, Essex, and his second wife, Elizabeth Pincheon (died 1678). He was a grandson of John, first Baron Petre, and a cousin of William Petre, the translator. He studied at the English College, Douai, and was ordained priest, probably in 1696. After returning to England in 1697 he was chaplain to members of the Radcliffe family, notably James, third earl of Derwentwater. In 1721 Petre was nominated by Bishop Bonaventure Giffard, vicar apostolic of the London district, as his coadjutor and eventual successor. He protested that this nomination had been made without his knowledge, claiming that he had been chosen only because of his high birth and private wealth, and asserted that he had little theology and could hardly read Latin without a dictionary. Giffard however was insistent: he saw the appointment as a way of resisting Bishop John Talbot Stonor's attempts to secure another episcopal appointment for a member of the regular clergy, and Petre was consecrated bishop of Prusa on 11 November 1721. His reluctance was more than the conventional humility of a potential bishop, for he continued to protest and threaten resignation until 1730. Giffard continued to resist his arguments, despite complaining that Petre was more of a burden to him than the hoped-for 'comfort to me in my old age' (Anstruther, 3.166). When Giffard died in 1734 Petre succeeded him as vicar apostolic and hastened to secure the appointment of a coadjutor. The person chosen was Richard Challoner, who was appointed bishop of Debra in September 1739 and who was thenceforward largely responsible for episcopal duties in the district. He noted, for example, when visiting Bishop Benjamin's own congregation at Writtle in 1742 that fifteen of its forty members were awaiting confirmation. Petre appears to have spent much of his time on one or other of the Petre family estates in Essex. Among the family portraits at Ingatestone Hall is a painting of a large mongrel dog which 'saved Benjamin Bishop Petre's Life when he was attacked by Robbers whilst saying his Office in the Lime Walk at Ingatestone Hall' (Piper, 22), where he was living in 1733. In 1739 he consecrated the chapel at Thorndon Hall: the text of the service survives among the family papers, and is thought to be the earliest service of benediction used in England. The attached 'Rules for the keeping of the sacristy' give a vivid picture of religious observance in a devout eighteenth-century Roman Catholic household. 
Although the London district covered the ten south-eastern counties and the Channel Islands, Petre seems to have confined his activities to Essex and the capital, and it was at his London house in King Street, Golden Square, that he died on 22 December 1758. He was buried in St Pancras old churchyard on 27 December 1758; his remains were moved to St Edmund's, Ware, Hertfordshire, in 1908. 



@@@@@


doc= 22046


Petre, Sir Edward, third baronet (1630x33-1699), Jesuit and courtier, was born in London, possibly on 4 March 1633, the second son of Sir Francis Petre ('c'.1605-1658), first baronet, of Cranham Hall, Essex, and his wife, Elizabeth (died in or before 1655), daughter of Sir John Gage, first baronet, of Firle Place, Sussex. However, his apparent age at death suggests that he may have been born in 1630/31. His great-grandfather was John, first Baron Petre (1549-1613). Petre was educated at the college at St Omer from about 1644 until 1652. He entered the Society of Jesus at Watten on 1 March 1653 under the name of Spencer. He then studied philosophy and theology at Liege, 1655-64, during which time he was ordained a priest, on 22 October 1662. After spending some time in England he professed the four vows on 2 February 1671. He seems to have returned to England in 1672, and served as rector of the Hampshire district in 1678-9. 
At this point Petre became embroiled in the Popish Plot. It was a letter from Petre which gave credence to the claim made by Titus Oates that a Jesuit consult had been held in London in April 1678. Petre was arrested, brought before the privy council, and committed to Newgate in September 1678. By January 1679 Petre had succeeded his elder brother, Francis, to the baronetcy. Petre was not tried with other alleged conspirators in June 1679, some people later claiming that he was under the protection of the duke of York, possibly for services rendered in the upbringing of York's illegitimate children, but it was probably because Petre was slated for trial with the Staffordshire plotters which had been delayed as there was only a single witness against Lord Aston. Petre was released on bail in June 1680. In August 1680 he became rector of the London district and vice-provincial of England until a new one could safely be appointed, but in October 1680 he again found himself in prison, being released on 6 February 1683. 
The accession of James II in February 1685 transformed Petre's situation. He was called to court and appointed dean of the new Chapel Royal in St James's Palace. Petre possessed 'a fair smooth tongue, and a very affable way of flattery', both attributes useful at court (Marshall, 144). However, Petre had no experience of court politics and was 'to state affairs a perfect novice' ('Memoirs of... Ailesbury', 1.128). This made him an easy target for the machinations of a shrewd political operator like Robert Spencer, second earl of Sunderland, who used Petre as an ally in his pursuit of power and more specifically the dismissal from office of his rivals the Hyde brothers. Further, Petre was 'puffed up with... vanity and ambition', which made him yearn for recognition within the church (Marshall, 144). Initially Petre wanted James II to procure him a bishopric but in November 1685 Pope Innocent XI refused the king's request, noting that Jesuits were not allowed to hold high office. Not that this rebuff deterred James as he continued to instruct his representative in Rome, Roger Palmer, first earl of Castlemaine, to press the pope in the matter. Eventually in June 1687 James accepted that a bishopric was out of the question and changed his request to ask for a cardinal's hat for Petre instead. Again he met without success. 
Petre's perceived influence at court was evinced by the number of requests for patronage he received. One observer noted that Petre's 'antechambers were crowded with petitioners, for they found by experience if he undertook their business it seldom failed to prosper' (Marshall, 145). More formal recognition followed when on 5 November 1687 Petre was named to succeed Thomas Sprat as clerk of the closet. On 11 November he was sworn a member of the privy council. However, this merely regularized his position as an adviser and did not enhance his influence. Petre was also a member of the commission charged with regulating the corporations of the parliamentary boroughs in order to influence the composition of any new parliament. Gradually he moved beyond Sunderland's influence and supported the court faction grouped around the more extreme Catholics such as the earl of Melfort. Petre was a proponent of severe measures being taken against the fellows of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1687-8. 
The birth of the prince of Wales in June 1688 led to a host of scurrilous diatribes accusing Petre of involvement in a plot to switch babies in order to produce a male heir for the king. Petre advised a conciliatory approach to the petition of the seven bishops as he foresaw that punitive action would rebound against the government. With a Dutch invasion expected James refused to banish Petre from court, and as late as 22 October 1688 the king told the earls of Clarendon and Nottingham that should they return to the privy council he would ensure that Petre would not attend its meetings, but would not dismiss him. By the end of November 1688 Narcissus Luttrell reported that Petre had sent 'several great chests from Whitehall' ready for his departure (Luttrell, 1.480). He soon made his escape from London and fled to France. He never saw James II again. 
Petre soon left France, for he was reported to be in Rome in December 1689, 'but is not much looked on there' (Luttrell, 1.616). In both 1691 and 1692 he was back in France, at Abbeville. In 1693 he was appointed rector at St Omer. In 1697 he retired to Watten, where he died on 15 May 1699, apparently aged sixty-eight. His sister, Mary Petre, took out administration of his will on 17 May 1699. As baronet Petre was succeeded in turn by his brothers Thomas and William; following the death of the latter in 1722 the baronetcy became extinct. His younger brother Charles (1644-1712) had most closely followed Petre's career, being educated at St Omer and serving the Jesuits in the English mission. 
Petre's importance at the court of James II arose from his closeness to the king. The earl of Sunderland was able to utilize Petre's influence in order to manoeuvre the Anglican earl of Rochester from office. Gradually Petre moved free from Sunderland's influence, particularly as he felt that the earl was responsible for his failure to secure that which he coveted the most: preferment in the church. Indeed the earl of Ailesbury characterized him as 'a hot-headed ignorant churchman', who 'had nothing in view but a cardinal's hat' (Miller, 'Popery', 235-6). For the English he remained a 'bogey-man', commonly being burnt in effigy on 5 November each year. His papers were transferred from St Omer to Bruges but were lost in October 1773 when the Austrian government suppressed the Jesuits. 


@@@@@


doc= 22047


Petre, Sir William (1505/6-1572), administrator, was the son of John Petre, a prosperous cattle farmer and tanner whose family had long been settled at Tor Newton in Torbryan, Devon. John had married Alice, daughter of John Colling of the neighbouring parish of Woodland. Both families occupied that intermediate station between yeomanry and gentility then known as that of franklin. William may have been the eldest son, though his brother John (died 1568) inherited the main family property; another brother, also John, became customer of Dartmouth and Exeter, and sat for Dartmouth in the parliament of November 1554; the youngest brothers, Richard and Robert, became respectively archdeacon of Buckingham and an auditor of the exchequer. 
Petre entered Oxford as a law student in 1519. He has been claimed for Exeter College, of which he was later a considerable benefactor, but there is no evidence of his undergraduate membership, which would have been irregular in a college restricted to arts students. He was admitted fellow of All Souls in 1523, retaining this place until 1535 and serving as law bursar in 1528/9. He graduated bachelor in both laws on 2 July 1526, and during 1527 and 1528 he practised in the Oxford chancellor's court. He is believed to have been made tutor to Sir Thomas Boleyn's son George (brother of Anne). Through this connection, supposedly, he came to Henry VIII's notice, and was one of the junior counsel representing the king in his matrimonial suit before the legatine court at Blackfriars (May-July 1529). Petre played no active part in these proceedings, and his presence is deduced only from the imprecise recollection of Cavendish in his life of Wolsey. 
On 19 January 1530 Petre advanced his Oxford career by becoming principal of Peckwater Inn, a position he vacated by February 1534. On 17 February 1533 he incepted DCL. It is difficult to see how an alleged residence of several years abroad, chiefly in France, in the service of Boleyn father or son, can be accommodated in these years. Possibly Petre attended George Boleyn (now Viscount Rochford) on a mission to France between October 1529 and February 1530. If Petre spent further time overseas, he must have returned by the start of 1533; on 8 March he was admitted to Doctors' Commons, and in the course of the year began work as a chancery clerk. About this time he married Gertrude, daughter of John Tyrrell of Little Warley, Essex. 
During the summer of 1535 Petre submitted proposals for the reorganization of ecclesiastical jurisdiction under the crown, and from October he presided over Cromwell's vice-gerential court. On 2 November Cranmer recommended him for the deanery of arches ('no man so meet'; 'Miscellaneous Writings', 315); this particular appointment eluded him, but on 13 January 1536 Cromwell made Petre his deputy in probate and other matters. In this capacity, though still a very junior official, he controversially presided at a session of convocation in June. Perhaps feeling that his status would be enhanced by an ecclesiastical dignity, Petre accepted a canonry of Lincoln Cathedral, with the prebend of Langford Ecclesia, to which he was installed by proxy on 11 December. The presentation was in the crown's gift by the attainder of the previous incumbent; Petre resigned by the following April. More importantly he had in 1536 been promoted to a mastership in chancery, and as such was on 25 November appointed to scrutinize papal bulls in the light of recent legislation. He may also have entered parliament this year as MP for Downton, Wiltshire, though the only evidence is an inconclusive scrap in Cromwell's hand. 
Between 1535 and 1540 Petre was principally occupied with the visitation and dissolution of religious houses, tasks he performed with efficiency and fairness, avoiding the unsavoury reputation of his fellow commissioners. Nevertheless he used his position to amass a substantial landholding, mainly in his native Devon and in Essex. By 1540 he had a rent-roll in excess of $500. Like others he secured favourable leases from houses on the point of surrender, including (May 1538) that of the manor of Gyng Abbess, Essex, from Barking Abbey. On 15 December 1539, following the abbey's dissolution, he received a grant of the property from the crown. Here he built his seat, Ingatestone Hall, which his heirs still occupy. 
During 1540 Petre first showed that adroitness in high politics which marked his career thereafter. He had been deputed to travel to Cleves to negotiate Henry VIII's marriage to the duke's daughter Anne, but he escaped this responsibility and so emerged from the resultant fiasco untainted by too close an association with Cromwell's failed scheme. On the minister's fall no new vicar-general was appointed, and Petre's deputyship necessarily lapsed. But on 5 October he was sworn of the king's council and appointed to preside over the conciliar court of White Hall. 
Petre's wife died on 28 May 1541. By the following March he had married Anne, daughter of John Tyrrell of Heron (of another branch of the Essex gentry family from which Petre's first wife had come). She was the widow of William Browne of Flambard's Hall, and brought a healthy portion of $280 per annum. 
During 1543-4 Petre deputized for Sir Ralph Sadler as keeper of the seal of the duchy of Lancaster. On 21 January 1544 he was appointed one of the principal secretaries (of state) in succession to Sir Thomas Wriothesley and as junior to Sir William Paget; at the same time he acquired a knighthood, membership of the privy council, and an 'ex officio' seat in the House of Lords. By this year also he sat on the Essex bench; he would be appointed to numerous other local commissions. When in the summer of 1545 Henry VIII went to campaign in France, Petre was one of the queen regent's small advisory council, and (because the king took Paget with him) he was for the first time in charge of the national bureaucracy. From April to July 1545 he was one of five ambassadors sent to discuss commercial affairs at the imperial diet of Bourbourg. In September 1546 he paid a brief visit to France in an attempt to persuade the French to honour an ancient debt. He was unsuccessful, but this in itself cannot explain why Henry VIII excluded him from the regency council which he designed for his son's minority. Petre was appointed only to the outer group of assistant executors, and was the only one of the whole body of executors who did not receive a personal legacy from the king. 
Notwithstanding this apparent disappointment, Petre and Paget were reappointed secretaries on 13 February 1547, Edward VI's coronation day, but for the moment Paget, as a privy councillor, was markedly the senior partner. Not until 18 March, when Somerset had expanded the privy council, did Petre regain a place there. However, on 29 June he was promoted to the comptrollership; he was then sole secretary until April 1548, and remained senior secretary until retirement in 1557. The secretaryship was his life's work; to it he brought a sharp mind and an easy command of paperwork; his handwriting, though not particularly neat, has a fluency which demonstrates the confidence with which he handled the multifarious duties of his office. Unsurprisingly he found little time for his position of 'custos rotulorum' for Essex, also acquired in 1547, and he rarely sat as JP for the county. On 18 August 1547 he was made keeper of the 'ad causas' seal which authenticated the crown's ecclesiastical jurisdiction. On 9 October he was awarded a $200 'bequest' from the late king (in reality compensation for the legacy he had been denied). 
If Petre found Somerset's administration increasingly arbitrary he did not (as Paget did) make his feelings known. He developed a rapport with William Cecil, whose function as Somerset's secretary to some extent undercut the principal secretaries' work. Petre played a key part in the events leading to the end of the protectorate. He was with Somerset and the king at Hampton Court on 5 October 1549 when the protector, alarmed by the opposition of councillors left in London, appealed for military assistance. On the next day Petre was sent to London to parley with the councillors there. When he had not returned by nightfall, Somerset hustled the king away to Windsor. He supposed that Petre had been detained against his will; in fact he had been won over, and he drafted much of the correspondence which then flowed from opposition headquarters at Ely House, including the separate letters of 10 October to Somerset and to the latter's colleagues, the one conciliatory and the other disclosing the conspirators' true purpose. This manoeuvre succeeded in forcing Somerset's peaceful capitulation; when he was removed to the Tower, Petre composed the new government's official explanation. His role in the affair is not enlightened by any personal account, and he has been much criticized for it. Hayward, writing at the end of the century, said that 'under pretence of gravity [he] covered much untrustinesse of heart' (Hayward, 108). Subsequent better understanding of the ineptness of Somerset's regime makes it easier to condone Petre's defection. 
In the succeeding administration Petre was (20 October 1549) given the further office of treasurer of first fruits and tenths, which he held until 25 January 1553. From January to May 1550 he was among the commissioners who negotiated the return of Boulogne to the French. During this mission Petre was said to have been described by Gaspard de Coligny as 'the man who said nothing' by whom the French were denied an additional 200,000 crowns in compensation (Emmison, 'Tudor Secretary', 88). The report is not contemporary, but it has fixed Petre with a reputation for shrewd silence, though it may be that his hesitancy in French contributed to this impression. In the remaining years of Edward VI's reign Petre served on taxation and chantry commissions for Essex, and in 1551 he was named a governor of Chelmsford grammar school. As the king was introduced into affairs of state, Petre assisted his political education; among Edward's surviving papers is a scheme in the king's hand for improving the privy council's routine, which was revised by Petre for submission to the council on 15 January 1553. The appointment of Cheke as a third principal secretary on 2 June was thought to signal Petre's imminent removal. But, although he was later reported by Cecil to have had misgivings, he remained senior secretary and, though excluded from part of the deliberations, drafted some of the documents by which the succession was altered in favour of Lady Guildford Dudley. He was one of those who swore allegiance to her as Queen Jane on 9 July, three days after Edward's death. He and Cecil were sent to explain matters to the imperial ambassadors on the 10th. By 19 July the coup had collapsed, and Petre was among the councillors in London who changed sides and proclaimed Mary. On 30 July he was received by the queen at New Hall in Essex, and admitted to her council. The queen spent the night of 31 July at Ingatestone; there, if not before, Petre was reappointed secretary. Lady Petre's presence in the new queen's household may have assisted his re-engagement, but Mary was in no position to form a government from her own affinity, and Petre was among those of her brother's councillors she would have employed anyway. 
Petre at once busied himself with the varied business the accession involved, and was soon rewarded with honours and service. With effect from 29 September he became chancellor of the Order of the Garter (though never a knight companion), charged with restoring religious elements in the statutes which Edward had personally expunged. On 1 January 1554 Petre was among the commissioners appointed to negotiate the queen's marriage to the prince of Spain. He was active in suppressing the disorders which the marriage provoked, and was among those who interrogated Princess Elizabeth over her alleged involvement in Wyatt's rising. When Philip arrived Petre was naturally in attendance, and received an annuity appropriate to his rank. After the king's departure in 1555, he became one of a group of 'select' councillors on whom Philip relied for information, and through whom he channelled his directives for his English realm. Petre drafted most of this body's reports, and so played a pivotal role in the Tudor-Habsburg monarchy. Meanwhile the English ambassador in France, Nicholas Wotton, frequently wrote dispatches to Petre alone, confident in his ability to digest news and present it to the government as a whole. 
Petre may have wanted to retire as early as September 1554, but in November that year Paget had told the emperor that he should not be allowed to do so because 'he had been there so long that he was as good as a council register' ('CSP Spain', '1554-8', 89). No doubt this was meant as a compliment, though it could have seemed patronizing from one who had moved on from the secretaryship to higher office and a peerage. Petre was in fact by no means chained to his desk, but was also active in parliament. He sat as a member for Essex in every assembly from 1547 to 1563 -- which gave him a seat in the Commons as well as his 'ex officio' place in the Lords. During Edward's reign he was employed on at least seven Commons' committees, and in the more frequent sessions of Mary's parliaments he came to be something like the modern leader of the house. Two months before the meeting of April 1554 he was among those deputed to plan the legislative programme and to appoint drafters of bills. In the first Marian parliament he had carried up two bills to the Lords, and in that of April 1554 he did so six times. In the crucial parliament of November 1554, when the reconciliation deal with Rome was hammered out, Petre was the chief mediator between legislature and legate; as Christmas approached he was almost daily on the river, plying the diplomatic shuttle between Westminster and Lambeth. He also had to introduce the new 'Treasons Bill' in the Commons when the government's original proposals were thrown out by the Lords. In the 1555 parliament he was again busy on the floor of the house and in committee. In the final Marian parliament (1558) he was on the committee to examine the revived sanctuary claims of Westminster Abbey -- an awkward by-product of the restoration of Catholicism. 
Petre was probably sympathetic to the reunion with Rome; back in 1539 he had drafted the conservative 'Act of Six Articles', and now he was able to help implement Mary's comprehensive reaction. He was given to pious reflection, and in a letter to Cecil in 1551, discussing the many who were 'angling' for a particular church preferment, observed that: 'We which talk moch of Christ and his holy worde have I feare me used a moch contrary way, for we leave fysshing for men and fyssh agayn in the tempestuous sees of this world for gayne and wycked mammon. (TNA: PRO, SP 10/13, no. 43)' Nevertheless, like all conservatives who had a share of appropriated church lands, he was not minded to part with his new acres to save his conscience. The deal made between Cardinal Pole and parliament in December 1554 had only been achieved because the current owners were left in possession. A bull issued by the new Pope Paul IV in July 1555 apparently rescinded that concession, to the consternation of Mary's council. Petre appears to have had secret knowledge of the issue, and expressed his anxieties to King Philip. He then secured for himself a personal papal bull confirming his property rights. By the time this was issued (28 November) a general confirmation of Pole's settlement had been received from Rome, but the incident is a notable indication of Petre's ability to make the papal bureaucracy work for his private purposes. 
Dutiful son of the church he may now have become, but Petre probably thought the queen's firm policy against heretics was misguided, and this may help to explain his resignation. Another factor was Philip's return to England in March 1557, determined to bring the country into his war against France and the papacy. Unlike Paget, Petre had never been an ardent Habsburg imperialist, and he now voiced his opposition to English involvement in the continental war. For whatever reason, Petre vacated the secretaryship by the end of March. That he nevertheless continued to draft a good deal of the routine correspondence in the office shows that his retirement was unforced, and highlights the inexperience of those whom the queen had to employ in his place. Mary named Petre one of her executors but, by her successor's general order, he did not receive his designated legacy. Elizabeth retained him as a councillor, but he does not seem to have been a candidate for any office of state. He did, however, return to duty as acting secretary when Cecil was in Scotland in the summer of 1559. 
In July 1561 Petre entertained the queen at Ingatestone for a few days, at a cost of $136. During 1564-6 he had another, though involuntary, royal guest, the queen's cousin Lady Catherine Grey, under house arrest because of her unauthorized marriage. Petre continued to attend council meetings until February 1567. He died at his house in Essex on 13 January 1572 and was buried on 1 February in the church at Ingatestone, where his memorial stands. He had already made substantial charitable bequests -- a fellowship endowed at All Souls in 1557 and an almshouse founded at Ingatestone in the same year, and seven fellowships endowed at Exeter College in 1566, and another in 1568, these benefactions earning him recognition as the second founder of the college. By these and other gifts in his will he disposed of about $5000. 
Petre's widow lived until 10 March 1582. The surviving children of his first marriage, Dorothy ['see 'Wadham, Dorothy] and Elizabeth, had married Nicholas Wadham, founder of the eponymous Oxford college, and John Gostwick respectively; Catherine and Thomasine, daughters of Petre's second marriage, married respectively John Talbot of Grafton, Worcestershire, and Ludovick, son of Sir Edward Greville. Petre's only surviving son, from his second marriage, was John (1549-1613); he inherited Ingatestone, was knighted in 1576, sat as MP for Essex (1584-7), and in 1603 was created Baron Petre of Writtle. He and his descendants made their chief residence at Thorndon Hall near Brentwood, as a result of which (and some conscious twentieth-century restoration) Ingatestone remains much as it was in Sir William's time. His life there is also richly documented by a substantial household archive, amply drawn on in F. G. Emmison's biography. Petre established a reputation for handsome hospitality, though perhaps of the contrived kind to which the 'nouveaux' are reputedly inclined. As far as can be judged he lived within his means at the level appropriate to his station. Unlike his colleagues Cecil, Paget, and Russell he did not found a political dynasty. His family's firm adherence to the Catholic religion ['see 'Petre family] largely impeded his heirs from following the path of royal and public service which he had himself so successfully negotiated. 


@@@@@


doc= 22048


Petre, William (1602-1678), translator, was born on 28 July 1602 in his father's house at Ingatestone, Essex, the third son of William, second Lord Petre (1575-1637), and his wife, Catherine (died 1624), second daughter of Edward Somerset, fourth earl of Worcester ('c'.1550-1628), and his wife, Elizabeth ('fl'. 1571-1621). He was the great-grandson of Sir William Petre (1505?-1572), secretary of state and benefactor of Exeter College, Oxford, where Petre matriculated as a gentleman commoner on 5 February 1613, at the early age of ten. The strength of the family's association with the college is marked by the fact that when Petre's eldest brother, John, died on 11 October 1613, the society of Exeter dedicated a threnody to the family. However, Petre's own connection with Exeter was short. When Wadham College was completed by his great-aunt, Dame Dorothy Wadham (1535-1618), later in 1613, both he and his elder brother, Robert, became members of that college; as Wood records, Petre was entered as 'the first gentleman commoner or nobleman thereof' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1144-5). Both brothers left without taking a degree, but as fellow-commoners they presented the college with two silver tankards, which survived until 26 January 1643, when they were melted down at Charles I's mint in New Inn Hall Street. 
After leaving Oxford, Petre joined the Inner Temple. He went on to travel in the south of Europe, and 'became a gentleman of many accomplishments' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1145). He married Lucy (died 1679), daughter of Sir Richard Fermor, of Somerton, Oxfordshire, with whom he had four sons and two daughters. Like the rest of his family, he remained a Roman Catholic, as is reflected in his translation work; later generations became leaders of English Roman Catholic society ['see 'Petre family (per. 1633-1801)]. In 1669 he had published at St Omer a translation of the then popular 'Flos sanctorum' of the Jesuit Pedro de Ribadeneira, originally published at Madrid in 1599-1601. His translation, 'Lives of the Saints, with other Feasts of the Year According to the Roman Calendar', extends the calendar as far as 1669. The first edition soon became scarce, and a second, corrected and amended, was published in London in 1730. This too appears to have been popular; Petre's translation was commended by Southey and by Isaac Disraeli in his 'Curiosities of Literature'. Petre died on 16 January 1678 at his house in Stanford Rivers in Essex, and was buried in the chancel of Stanford Rivers church. 


@@@@@


doc= 22049


Petre, William, fourth Baron Petre (1625/6-1684), nobleman and victim of the Popish Plot, was the eldest son of Robert Petre, third Baron Petre (1599-1638), and Mary (1603-1685), daughter of Anthony Browne, second Viscount Montagu. Although his twin brother, John, quickly sickened and died William appears to have been a fairly robust infant, upon whom the hopes of his house were settled. A full-length portrait of him, aged six, was commissioned from J. Parker in 1632, and shows him as an anxious, self-possessed child, who still had the need for a coral suckling stick or dummy. He came into his title and estates after the premature death of his father, in October 1638, and -- at the outbreak of the civil war -- was made a ward of the king. It is possible that he watched the battle of Edgehill, on 23 October 1642, from the comparative safety of the royalist baggage train, before returning to Charles I's wartime capital at Oxford. Upon his arrival he was placed under the care and supervision of the earl of Northampton, who chose to put him to his studies under the careful eye of a protestant tutor. Petre could not, however, be shaken from his attachment to the Roman Catholic faith in which he had been raised. Though he and his devoted servants continued to mask his beliefs -- until the Restoration -- in an attempt to prevent the total sequestration of his estates, there is every reason to believe that the heady atmosphere of ultra-royalism that he imbibed while at Oxford was of far more significance to his subsequent intellectual development than the admonitions of his rather ineffectual and pedestrian tutor. 
In the summer of 1655 Petre was arrested at Westminster and imprisoned on suspicion that he was planning to take part in a projected royalist rebellion. Held until August he anxiously petitioned Secretary Thurloe for his release, declaring that it was impossible to find another man 'that hath lesse crime upon him' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 3.699). Despite his subsequent release Petre found that life under the republican government was becoming increasingly uncongenial. Consequently, he sought -- and obtained -- passes to go to France in March and November 1658, and 'beyond the seas' in June that year ('CSP dom.', '1658-9', 583). However, it is not certain if he made use of them, for in the summer of 1659 he was arrested and taken into custody in Sussex in order to prevent his possible involvement in a fresh cycle of royalist insurrection. It was only after the collapse of Booth's rising that the council of state finally ordered his release, on 13 August 1659. 
Denied a significant role at the heart of national government on account of his religion Petre seems, at the Restoration, to have been content to live in quiet seclusion, overseeing the administration of his large Essex estates from his seat at Ingatestone Hall. However, the state of his troubled marriage to Elizabeth (died 1665), eldest daughter of John Savage, second Earl Rivers, whom he married in or before 1655, returned him to the public eye. Though handsome and high spirited in her youth Elizabeth's infidelities and heavy drinking had caused the couple to separate at some point before the spring of 1664. Faced by a warrant for her arrest for debt she claimed that she was exempt from the charges on account of her privilege as a peeress of the realm. William Joyce, the unfortunate chaloner who had attempted to recoup his losses through the prosecution, was subsequently reported by her to the House of Lords' committee of privileges, and was imprisoned for contempt in April 1664 in a remarkable reversal of fortune. Joyce was released upon bail and was compelled to apologize to both the house and to Lady Petre upon bended knee. This, however, did not satisfy Elizabeth, who declared 'that Revenge was sweeter to her than milk' and provoked a public row with her husband, who thought that the conduct of his estranged wife was bringing him nothing but disgrace (Pepys, 5.128). Despite her vow to continue pursuing Joyce 'if she lived [to] the age of Methusalem' Elizabeth died, still unsatisfied, on 19 July 1665, and was denied burial in the traditional Petre burial vault, her body being relegated to the New Chapel at Ingatestone (Pepys, 5.126). 
Having married, by 15 April 1675, Bridget (1652/3-1695), daughter and coheir of his neighbours, John and Anne Pincheon of Writtle, Petre was unprepared for the storm that broke over him, in late 1678, as the result of Titus Oates's fevered allegations of a popish plot which aimed to overthrow the state and murder the king. Petre was named in Oates's initial deposition, sworn before Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey on 6 September 1678, and the justice's mysterious death, shortly afterwards, served to lend credence to the story, which might otherwise have been entirely lacking. Despite his having had no formal military training it was claimed that Petre was one of a number of leading Catholic magnates who aimed forcibly to reimpose their faith upon the peoples of the British Isles, and that he had received a commission as the lieutenant-general of an invading army, stamped and sealed by Johannes Paulus d'Olivia, the head of the Jesuit order. Further corroboration appeared to be provided by the testimony of Miles Prance, who swore that he had heard that Petre was intent upon levying war, that he had already appointed officers for the task, and that 'there would very shortly be Fifty thousand men in Arms' awaiting his command ('A True Narrative and Discovery', 4-5). Following Oates's repetition of his allegations before the Commons in October, Petre was arrested along with four other Roman Catholic lords, Belasyse, Powis, Arundel, and Stafford, and charged with high treason. Committed to the Tower of London on 28 October, he was finally permitted to seek legal counsel in early December, and on 8 April 1679 he was summoned to appear before the bar of the Lords in order to hear the indictment read against him. However, despite the repeated pleas of his friends and the incessant clamouring of Oates and his following, further charges and a firm date for the trial were not forthcoming. Fortunately his plea of not guilty had been entered and accepted by the Lords as a legal answer to the charges brought, and he was allowed permission to visit his wife, who was still recovering after the difficult delivery of their only child, Mary (1679-1704), who had been born a month before. 
In November 1679 royal assent was given to the bill stripping Petre of his membership of the Lords, while the hapless Viscount Stafford was found guilty and sent to the block in December 1680. However, the lack of a second prosecution witness, in addition to Prance, and the resurgence of the tories' political strength in 1681-2, increasingly rendered the chances of Petre's successful conviction an unlikely event. As the scaffolding erected in Westminster Hall to accommodate spectators for his projected trial began to decay, the threat under which Petre had laboured began to evaporate and his spirits began to rise. His confinement in the Tower had never been particularly harsh and, having taken lodgings in the home of one of the warders, he was often permitted to dine with noble visitors. On 19 August 1683 it was reported that during a game of 'nine pins in the bowling green' he had been 'very merry' and had declared that he expected to be 'cleared about next spring... by parliament' ('CSP dom.', '1683', 308). Sadly, at precisely the moment when deliverance appeared to be close at hand, his health finally broke down. He had suffered occasional bouts of illness throughout his imprisonment, but in October 1683 he suddenly sickened and was in 'danger of speedy death'. In December his wife desperately petitioned the king that he needed a 'change of air, which his physicians are ready to attest' and that he was prepared to offer a bond for his good conduct ('CSP dom.', '1683-4', 145). However, Charles II chose to ignore her pleas and Petre's condition continued to worsen. Knowing that his end was upon him Petre composed a final declaration in which he vigorously defended the Roman Catholic church from charges that it promoted regicide, and proclaimed his own continuing innocence as: 'a Dying but Dutiful Subject... [who had] lain so long under a false and injurious Calumny of a horrid Plot' ('Declaration', 1). On 4 January 1684 the lord lieutenant of the Tower wrote that reports of the prisoner's death were still premature, 'though we expect it every hour' ('CSP dom.', '1683-4', 199). In the event, he had not long to wait, for Petre died in the Tower the very next day. Having been permitted to claim the body of her husband Lady Petre had his remains taken back to Essex and buried them in the family vault at Ingatestone church, on 10 January 1684. She died on 5 January 1695, aged forty-two, and was buried with him. 
Yet even in death controversy continued to attach itself to Petre's name, and the publication of his 'Declaration' sparked the exchange of rival, and bitterly polemical, pamphlets. While the anonymous author of 'Observations on a Paper Intituled, 'The Declaration of the Lord Petre'' (1684) chose to cast doubt upon the authorship of his last statement, arguing that it smelt 'rank of a Popish Priests Contrivance' (p. 2), the writer of 'A Pair of Spectacles for Mr. Observer' (1684) attested to its provenance and capably refuted the idea of a highly organized and covert Catholic plot, stating that 'his 'Lordship' [had] to hundreds... of very 'Worthy Protestants' (who during his Confinement came often to him) 'most solemnly declar'd his Innocence'' (p. 1). It is clear that Petre's sufferings aroused considerable public sympathy, and the duke of York was quick to take advantage of the sudden sea change, successfully pressing for the release of the surviving Catholic lords at the next session of the king's bench, on 18 February 1684. Petre was succeeded in his peerage by his brothers John ('bap'. 1629, died 1685) and Thomas Petre (bap. 1633, d. 1707) ['see under 'Petre family]. 


@@@@@


doc= 22050


Petrie, Alexander (c.1594-1662), Presbyterian minister in the Netherlands, was born in Montrose, the third son of Alexander Petrie, merchant burgess of that town. He graduated MA from St Andrews University in 1615 and from 1620 to 1630 was master of the grammar school of Montrose. He was presented to the parish of Rhynd, Perthshire, by Charles I and was ordained in July 1632. According to Robert Baillie, he wrote against corrupt episcopal practices and was appointed to a committee to consider such practices by the 1638 Glasgow general assembly. 
In 1642 a Scottish church was founded in Rotterdam for the many expatriates who lived there, and Petrie was selected as the first minister by the presbytery of Edinburgh. He arrived in Rotterdam in July 1643 and was inducted by the local Dutch 'classis' in the presence of William Spang, minister of Veere, on 30 August. The Dutch states and city authorities provided the salary and building (initially a former warehouse belonging to a wine merchant), and the church formed part of the Dutch Reformed church, though it was exempt from some aspects of normal Dutch practice. 
Petrie's incumbency came during a period when the fledgeling kirk faced disruption from independency and millenarianism in the Netherlands. Soon after his arrival Petrie published 'Chiliasto-mastix' (1644) to refute the millenarianism of Robert Maton's 'Israel's Redemption' (1642); there were also heated disputes within the congregation on the exposition of scripture, which were only resolved when Petrie appealed directly to the Church of Scotland authorities. In April 1645 Robert Baillie and George Gillespie, who had been driven to the Dutch coast by a storm, advised Petrie on how to deal with Robert Nasmyth, a troublesome member of the church, and on the same visit they asked the Scots conservator to support the minister and elders in their efforts to maintain discipline. Nevertheless, as late as 1650 Petrie was appealing to the local Dutch church authorities for help in restoring peace to his disordered congregation. He was a strong disciplinarian, not known for his patience, and complained to the authorities of the work involved in caring for such a 'Rouwe Gemeente' ('raw congregation'); his portrait, still displayed in the Rotterdam kirk at the beginning of the twenty-first century, depicts a man of stern and determined temperament. Keen to have responsibility for the spiritual care of all Scots in Rotterdam, he sought to ensure that all Scottish marriages and baptisms took place in his kirk (between 1643 and 1660 there are records of 734 baptisms and more than 1100 new members) and a poor fund was established to assist the less fortunate. The ultimate success of the new kirk was largely his, and he gained respect from his congregation and from fellow theologians. 
Petrie kept the church as close as possible to developments in Scotland: in January 1644 the solemn league and covenant was subscribed publicly in the church, and throughout the 1640s there were several fast days in support of the Scottish armies. Petrie was also in touch with developments taking place in the Westminster assembly and in 1649 was involved in negotiations with Charles II, who was then in exile in the United Provinces. 
Petrie's 'magnum opus' was 'A compendious history of the Catholick church, from the year 600 untill the year 1600, showing her deformation and reformation', published in 1662. It was a well-researched history of the Christian church, dedicated to the prince of Orange and containing extracts from the records of the early general assemblies of the Church of Scotland. Petrie did not long survive the publication: his meticulous reports in the church register had been deteriorating since 1654, and he died after a protracted illness on 6 September 1662. He was married (his wife's name is unknown) and was survived by two sons and three daughters, including Alexander ('c'.1622-1683), minister of the Scottish church at Delft from 1645 to 1668 and 1669 to 1683, and Christian, who married Andrew Snype, minister of the Scots church at Veere. 


@@@@@


doc= 22051


Petrie, George (1790-1866), antiquary and painter, was born in Dublin on 1 January 1790, the only child of James Petrie, a portrait painter. His mother was a daughter of Sacheverel Simpson of Edinburgh. His paternal grandfather, also named James, had moved from Aberdeen to settle in Ireland. In 1799 Petrie was sent to Samuel Whyte's school in Dublin. From childhood he helped his father to paint miniatures, and he attended the art school of the Dublin Society. Before he was fourteen he was awarded the society's silver medal for drawing a group of figures. He early became interested in Irish antiquities, and in 1808 travelled round co. Wicklow, making notes of Irish music, ecclesiastical architecture, and ancient earthworks and pillar-stones. In 1810 he visited Wales, where he made landscape sketches, and in 1813 he visited London, where he was kindly treated by Benjamin West, to whom he had an introduction. 
After his return to Ireland, Petrie painted landscapes, mainly in Dublin, co. Wicklow, co. Kildare, the King's county, and co. Kerry; in 1816 he exhibited at Somerset House pictures of Glendalough and Glenmalure, both in co. Wicklow. In 1820 he contributed illustrations to a number of guidebooks on Ireland. At the first exhibition of the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1826, Petrie exhibited a large picture of Ardfinane, a castle standing above a many-arched bridge on the north bank of the Suir. The next year he exhibited 'The Round Tower of Kilbannon', co. Galway, and 'Dun Aengus', a great cashel in Aranmor, co. Galway. He was elected an academician in 1828, and exhibited 'The Twelve Pins in Connemara' and 'The Last Round of the Pilgrims at Clonmacnoise'. In 1829 he painted 'The Knight and the Lady' and 'Culdean Abbey'. He was appointed librarian to the Hibernian Academy in 1830, and exhibited six pictures that year and nine in 1831. In the course of his studies for these works he made many tours throughout Ireland, travelled along the whole course of the Shannon, and explored Clonmacnoise, Cong, Kilfenora, the Aran Islands, and many other ecclesiastical ruins. 
When Caesar Otway (1780-1842) began the 'Dublin Penny Journal' in June 1832, Petrie joined him, and wrote many antiquarian articles in the fifty-six weekly numbers that appeared. He was also the sole editor of the 'Irish Penny Journal', which appeared for a year in 1842. Its aim was to describe to the Irish people the importance of their history and antiquities, their legends and traditions. John O'Donovan was a fellow contributor. Petrie joined the Royal Irish Academy in 1828, was elected onto its council in 1829, and worked hard to improve its museum and library. In 1831 he discovered and purchased the autograph copy of the second part of the 'Annals of the kingdom of Ireland', called by John Colgan the annals of the four masters. For the academy's museum he bought the cross of Cong, the Ardagh Chalice, and some torcs from Tara. Petrie's work on the collection made the museum a centre for the study of Ireland's past. The pieces he purchased now form the nucleus of the National Museum of Ireland. 
From 1833 to 1846 Petrie worked for the Ordnance Survey of Ireland. Here his assistants were John O'Donovan and Eugene O'Curry. After O'Donovan, Petrie was the member of the staff who did most to preserve local history and historical topography through the publication of memoirs to accompany the maps. His work on Tara, written in 1837, was published by the Royal Irish Academy. The first memoir of the survey on Londonderry appeared in 1839. Here Petrie, who was a Catholic and a nationalist, charged the early Scottish settlers with fanaticism, and suggested that since the union the cultural life of the area had deteriorated. An anonymous letter to Dublin Castle accused him of prejudice and of wasting money by devoting too much time to investigating the ancestry of the peasantry. 
The government soon after decided to stop the survey on the grounds of expense. A commission appointed in 1843 recommended its continuance, after examining Petrie and other witnesses, but it was never resumed. The Royal Irish Academy awarded Petrie a gold medal for his essay on Tara. Sir William Betham (1779-1853), the Ulster king of arms, whose theories on Irish antiquities had been demolished by Petrie, fiercely opposed the award and resigned his seat on the council. In 1833 Petrie was awarded a gold medal for an 'Essay on the origin and uses of the round towers of Ireland', which was later published as 'The Ecclesiastical Architecture of Ireland' (1845). The round towers in Ireland -- of which there are approximately 120 -- had been variously (and sometimes comically) identified by other scholars as Phoenician fire-temples, sorcerers' towers, astronomical observatories, centres for religious dances, temples of Vesta, minarets for proclaiming anniversaries, Danish watch-towers, tombs, gnomons, homes of Persian magi, and phallic emblems. Petrie put paid to all these theories, showing that the towers were Christian ecclesiastical buildings of varying dates. His evidence was abundant and well presented, and although modern research has refined his theory -- suggesting that the towers date from the period of the viking raids and may have served a defensive purpose (although attached to ecclesiastical establishments) -- the substance of his findings is established scholarly opinion. 
Petrie also wrote numerous papers on Irish art, mainly careful descriptions of various antiquities. He also made a collection of Irish inscriptions, which was edited after his death, with additions, by Margaret Stokes, under the title of 'Christian Inscriptions in the Irish Language'. In 1816 he wrote an 'Essay on music' in the 'Dublin Examiner': a devotee of Irish music, he collected airs wherever he travelled, and learned to play them on his violin. In 1855 he published 'The Ancient Music of Ireland', a collection of songs and airs made in all parts of Ireland. In the introduction he lamented the loss of a national memory of the past, the result of successive disasters, death, and emigration. 
Petrie received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of Dublin in 1847, and in 1849 was given a civil-list pension. He continued to tour Ireland in his later years; in 1857 he again visited the Isles of Aran, and in the autumn of 1864 he made his last journey to the one region he had never seen, the Old Glen in the parish of Glencolumkille in Donegal. Petrie, who was married to a Miss Mills, died at his house at 7 Charlemont Place, Dublin, on 17 January 1866, and was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. He was survived by at least one daughter. A disinterested student of medieval Irish architecture, decorative art, music, and topography all his life, he made permanent and important contributions in these fields, and, tangentially, in others. His work in tracing and illustrating Irish decorated churches from the seventh century was, for example, extremely influential on the designs of church architects in nineteenth-century Ireland. His sole object was the advancement of his research: he gave generous help to many other scholars, and attracted a large circle of friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 22052


Petrie, (Frederick) Henry (bap. 1772, d. 1842), antiquary, was baptized on 28 April 1772 at St Mary's, Lambeth, the son of Henry Petrie, a schoolmaster in Stockwell, Surrey, and his wife, Elizabeth. He was intended to follow in his father's profession, but soon showed a marked preference for antiquarian research. He was a faithful topographical artist, and before 1810 carried out a large number of sketches of historic buildings in southern England and northern France. Between about 1800 and 1809 he also painted several hundred watercolours, mostly of churches and castles in Kent, Sussex, Surrey, and Bedfordshire. He had taught French and drawing to Thomas Dibdin, a pupil at his father's school, and the two remained close friends. Dibdin introduced Petrie to George John, second Earl Spencer, who warmly encouraged his researches. Petrie assisted Dibdin with his bibliographical works, leading his friend to claim that 'his knowledge of ancient manuscripts, places him second to none' (Dibdin, 'Reminiscences', 716). On the death of Samuel Lysons in 1819, Petrie was appointed keeper of the records in the Tower of London, and in 1830 his edition of the 'Magni rotuli scaccarii Normanniae' was published. He was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1820. After prolonged study of the materials for early English history, Petrie saw the need for the publication of a complete 'corpus historicum' for the period. A similar scheme had been suggested by the Scottish antiquary John Pinkerton, about 1790, and keenly advocated by Edward Gibbon, but after Gibbon's death it had lapsed. Petrie was the first to revive it. During 1818 and 1819 various meetings were held at Earl Spencer's house to further the scheme, at which it was agreed that a project of such national significance should be publicly funded. An appeal was made for government aid, and Petrie was chosen to draw up a plan. He aimed to make the body of materials to be published absolutely complete, and to include extracts from Greek and Roman authors containing references to early Britain, as well as copies of inscriptions on stone or marble, letters, charters, bulls, proceedings of councils and synods, laws, engravings of coins, medals, and seals, in addition to general histories, annals, and chronicles of England, and histories of particular monasteries. 
The plan was presented to the record commission in 1821, and was sanctioned by the government and parliament. Work began in 1823, with Petrie as chief editor, assisted by his brother-in-law the Revd John Sharpe (1769-1859). The Welsh portion was entrusted to John Humffreys Parry (1786-1825) and to Aneurin Owen, and was published in 1841. Petrie's section progressed steadily until 1832, when it was interrupted by his illness. But in 1834, when the whole text of the first volume had been completed, and a large collection of materials made for further volumes, the work was suspended by an order of the record commissioners. It had been criticized by Francis Palgrave as intrinsically defective, because the project was based on the methods of Dom Bouquet, the French historian, who advocated dispersing extracts in chronological order instead of printing entire texts. 
Petrie was retired in 1840, and awarded compensation for loss of office. He died unmarried at his house at Stockwell Place, Stockwell Road, Stockwell, Surrey, on 17 March 1842, before the project was revived. His large collection of books was sold at auction by Evans over three days from 23 June 1842. One volume was finally completed and published in 1848 by Sir Thomas Duffus Hardy (who had been trained by Petrie), bearing the title 'Monumenta historica Britannica, or, Materials for the history of Great Britain from the earliest period to the Norman conquest'. Hardy acknowledged valuable aid derived from Petrie's manuscripts in his 'Descriptive Catalogue of Materials', published in 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 22053


Petrie, Martin (1823-1892), army officer, was born on 1 June 1823 at the Manor House, Kings Langley, Hertfordshire, the second son of Commissary-General William Petrie (1783/4-23 Dec 1842), who had seen active service in Egypt, Italy, and France. His mother, Margaret, was daughter and coheir of Henry Mitton of the Chase, Enfield. Colonel Petrie was sixth in descent from Alexander Petrie DD. His infancy was spent in Portugal and his childhood at the Cape of Good Hope, where his father held appointments. In youth he was chiefly in France, Italy, and Germany. On 14 April 1846 he entered the army as ensign in the Royal Newfoundland corps, and served for several years in North America, becoming lieutenant on 7 January 1848 and captain on 5 May 1854. On 26 January 1855 he was transferred to the 14th foot, and left Newfoundland on 20 March in the small steamer 'Vesta', which carried twenty-four passengers, seven of them, including Petrie, officers travelling to the Crimea. Some 300 miles off St John's the vessel, already damaged by ice floes, was caught in a terrific storm, and the engine-room was flooded. Petrie's mechanical skill and great courage enabled him to save the ship. He was called the 'hero of the 'Vesta'', but his hands were so lacerated and frostbitten that he was invalided and could not go to the Crimea. 
In May 1856 Petrie joined the Staff College at Camberley, and in December 1858 he passed the final examination, first on the list. He was attached to the topographical and statistical department (established 1855) of the War Office from 10 March 1859 to 30 June 1864, and in 1860 he brought out a standard work in three volumes, 'The Strength, Composition, and Organisation of the Armies of Europe', showing the annual revenue and military expenditure of each state, with its total forces in peace and war. In 1863 he published a volume of more detailed information on the British army, 'The Organisation, Composition, and Strength of the Army of Great Britain' (5th edn, 1867). He also compiled two important volumes, 'Equipment of Infantry' and 'Hospital Equipment' (1865-6), part of a series on army equipment. For eighteen years (1864-82) he was examiner in military administration at the Staff College, and latterly also at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He became major on 13 July 1867 and exchanged to the 97th foot on 18th December; in July 1872 he retired on half pay, in 1876 became colonel, and in 1882 withdrew from the service. He presented papers at the Royal United Service Institution, of which he was a member; and as an enthusiastic freemason he was master of the St John's, Newfoundland, lodge, and a member of the Quatuor Coronati Lodge in London. He was active in philanthropic and religious work, and was a trustee of the Princess Mary Village Homes. 
Petrie married Eleanora Grant (died 31 Jan 1886), youngest daughter of William Macdowall of Woolmet House, Midlothian, and granddaughter of Sir William Dunbar of Durn, baronet, and they had three daughters. Petrie died on 19 November 1892 at his house, Hanover Lodge, Kensington Park, London, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery, London. His elder daughter, Mary Louisa Georgina (died 1935), author of 'The Best Methods of Promoting Temperance among Educated Women' (1901) and of many religious books, married in 1893 Charles Ashley Carus-Wilson (1860-1942), an electrical engineer. The younger daughter, Irene Eleonora Verita Petrie, joined the Church Missionary Society in Kashmir: after her death her sister published a memoir of her, 'The Missions of the Church Missionary Society: the Kashmir Mission' (1901). 


@@@@@


doc= 22054


Petronius (d. 654?), abbot of St Peter's and St Paul's, Canterbury, was probably born in or near Rome. All that is known about him comes from a late medieval Canterbury tradition recorded by William Thorne and Thomas Elmham. According to this, Archbishop Honorius consecrated him abbot of the monastery of St Peter and St Paul, Canterbury, in 640, two years after the death of his predecessor Gratiosus. Petronius probably died in 654. There was no record of his place of burial in the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 22055


Petrucci, Ludovico (b. c.1575, d. in or after 1619), poet and soldier, was born at Pitigliano, near Siena, son of an Italian nobleman, Ariodante Petrucci. In 1597 he was arrested by the inquisition, accused of a number of crimes relating to necromancy, including possession of magic books and summoning of spirits. In particular, he had allegedly persuaded the son of a member of the Neapolitan aristocracy to sell his soul to the devil, and provided another Neapolitan nobleman with a familiar spirit to ensure success in love. It is unclear which members of the aristocracy of Naples were implicated in this matter, though Gabrieli (p. 300) suggests the duke of Amalfi as a plausible candidate. 
Petrucci protested his innocence, claiming that he was being punished for offences committed by others. He remained incarcerated by the inquisition in Padua for four years, a horrifying experience later discussed in his published work. In 1601 he was released, and began a career as a soldier, serving first for the Venetians in Candia (Crete). Between 1603 and 1610 he worked as a soldier in the wars in Hungary, Austria, Moravia, and Germany: his employers during this period included the Holy Roman emperor, the duke of Brandenburg, and the duke of Neuburg. 
In April 1609, in Dusseldorf, the wandering soldier encountered two English merchants, Thomas Stone and James Higgins, and this may have persuaded him to try his luck in England. His arrival in London was noted in a report of 19 August 1610 from the Venetian ambassador, and he is next heard of in Oxford, where he was registered as a student of St Edmund Hall on 27 April 1611. He was later associated with Balliol College, New College, and perhaps others: it seems at least possible that he taught Italian in Oxford. Chronically short of money, Petrucci later wrote warmly of the hospitality provided by the university. In 1613 the university printer published Petrucci's 'Raccolta d'alcune rime', a collection of poems in Latin and Italian, containing numerous dedications to royalty and to British notables including Bacon and Archbishop Abbot. The collection is interspersed with letters and testimonials received by Petrucci from patrons across Europe. 
Petrucci left Oxford about 1616. Anthony Wood's statement that anti-Catholic feeling forced his departure is perhaps corroborated by Petrucci's repeated attempts to prove by certificates his adherence to the Church of England. On 10 July 1619, incarcerated in the Fleet prison, he wrote the epistle to his second book, 'Apologia equitis Ludovici Petrucci contra calumniatores suos'. The contents of this book include, once again, a dedication to King James, numerous Latin and Italian poems and prose addresses, and dedications to and testimonials from numerous British and European luminaries. The book also includes emblems, and an engraved portrait of Petrucci by Thomas Pothecary. 
In a Latin epistle, Petrucci describes his current plight -- which is, presumably, imprisonment for debt -- as the culmination of a secret Catholic operation against him which has been active since his first encounter with the inquisition. Throughout his career, he writes, he has been beset by 'innumerable enemies of almost every nation and condition' employed by them, including 'certain booksellers' who seem to be responsible for his imprisonment (Gabrieli, 313), and he dwells at some length on this conspiracy. 
Nothing is known of Petrucci's career after this. As Gabrieli notes, he may have died in the Fleet, but it is just possible that he escaped to further, unknown adventures across Europe. Petrucci's fame lived on in Oxford long enough for Wood to write a note on the unlucky knight, whom he considered 'phantasticall' and mentally unbalanced: in a broader sense his work is interesting as part of the story of the British reception of Italian culture. 


@@@@@


doc= 22056


Petrus (d. 605x11), abbot of St Peter's and St Paul's, Canterbury (later St Augustine's), was both a monk and a priest, and was one of the companions of St Augustine on his mission to England in 596-7. Probably in late 600, Augustine sent him in company with Laurence, afterwards archbishop of Canterbury, to Pope Gregory to announce the success of the mission and to lay before him certain questions ['see also 'Gregorian mission]. He brought back the pope's replies in 601. AEthelberht, king of Kent, was building the monastery of St Peter and St Paul at the time of Augustine's death, and Petrus was appointed its first abbot. Bede is the principal witness for Petrus, probably deriving his information from Albinus, abbot of St Peter's and St Paul's, via the priest Nothelm. He recounts that Petrus was drowned in a creek of the sea at 'Amfleat' (Ambleteuse), a short distance north of Boulogne, while fulfilling a mission to Gaul on which he had been sent by AEthelberht. He was given an unworthy burial by the local inhabitants, but a heavenly light appeared above his grave every night, revealing to the people that it was a saint who was buried there. Having discovered his identity, they removed his body and buried it with due honour in a church in Boulogne. 
According to the Benedictine martyrology, Petrus's death occurred on 30 December, though the English martyrology (reproduced by the Bollandists) places it on 6 January. William Stubbs suggested that this may have been the day of his translation. The year of his death probably depends on that assigned to Augustine, since Thomas Elmham, the early fifteenth-century chronicler of St Augustine's (as St Peter's and St Paul's became in 978), states that Petrus died one year, seven months, and three weeks after Augustine. Augustine's death occurred at some time between 604 and 609. Elmham gives an epitaph on Petrus. There is an unprinted and unreliable life of Petrus, written in the twelfth century by Eadmer, in Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 371, fol. 416. 


@@@@@


doc= 22057


Pett, Peter (d. 1589), shipwright, was the son of Peter Pett of Harwich, Essex (died 'c'.1554) and Elizabeth Paynter. The details of his life until his appointment as a royal shipwright, from Michaelmas 1543, at a fee of 6died per day for life 'in consideration of good and faithful service done and to be done' ('Autobiography of Phineas Pett', xxi) are unknown. However, he may just have been the boy of the same name who was swept up in a press of East Anglian shipwrights in 1523 to work at Portsmouth. In April 1558 he was granted a patent advancing his fee to 1's'. per day, which he surrendered in July 1582 for a new patent giving him the title of master shipwright for the first time. 
Pett trained Richard Chapman, and probably also Matthew Baker, both of whom eventually joined him as the principal royal master shipwrights. Practically all the important shipbuilding of Elizabeth's reign was carried out by this triumvirate, and it is difficult to establish individual responsibility for the construction of particular vessels. William Borough, comptroller of the navy, held the opinion that, of the three, Baker built the better ships. In 1579 bargains were made between the queen and Sir John Hawkins, treasurer of the navy, and with Pett and Baker, for maintaining twenty-five named vessels in a seaworthy condition. Pett and Baker were to have $1000 a year between them, for which they were regularly to service ships' hulls, repair or replace defective upper spars and masts, provide all materials, and pay the workers. Perhaps in expectation of enhanced status from this arrangement, Pett obtained a grant of arms in 1583, but Hawkins's enforcement of the contract to his own advantage severely reduced the anticipated profit to Pett and Baker. In January 1588 they accused the treasurer of dishonesty. These charges seem not to have damaged Hawkins, nor indeed to have affected the positions of Pett or Baker, both of whom continued in their posts. 
Faced with the Armada threat of 1588, the earl of Leicester called Pett to advise on the construction of a defensive barrier across the Thames between Tilbury and Gravesend to prevent Spanish ships reaching London. Pett inspected the site with Leicester on 23 July, and was not impressed by the proposed boom constructed from lighters chained together. He recommended that this should be strengthened with a number of ship's masts, which he would have sent down from Deptford. Leicester reported to Walsingham that the fort at Tilbury was lacking gun platforms, and that Pett had been sent 'for provision of such thinges as are most necessary for the platforms, as also touching the defence uppon this water'. That Pett discharged this mission is confirmed by a warrant dated 15 August 1588, ordering the payment of $150 to him, Matthew Baker, and Richard Chapman 'or any of them' towards charges incurred at Gravesend and Tilbury, pending detailed examination of their accounts (Cruden, 237, 247). 
Peter Pett married twice. Nothing is known of his first wife, but they had at least five children, of whom William (died 1587), Joseph (died 1605), and Peter (died 'c'.1631) became master shipwrights with their own commercial yards. Joseph also succeeded to his father's post at Deptford. The date of Pett's second marriage, to Elizabeth Thornton (died 1597), is unknown; there were at least eight children of this union, of whom Phineas Pett (1570-1647), yet another royal master shipwright, was the most notable. Through his offspring and their descendants Peter Pett founded a dynasty of shipwrights that dominated both royal and private Thames dockyards throughout most of the seventeenth century. Even eight generations after his death one descendant, Peter Rolt (1798-1882) was chairman of the Thames ironworks and Shipbuilding Company, which in 1912 was destined to launch the last new ship constructed on the Thames. Pett died, still working, at Deptford on or about 6 September 1589. 


@@@@@


doc= 22058


Pett, Peter (b. 1610, d. in or before 1672), naval administrator, was born at Woolwich on 6 August 1610, the fifth son of Phineas Pett (1570-1647) and Anne Nicholls (died 1627). He was brought up by his father as a shipwright, while still very young was his father's assistant at Deptford and Woolwich, and in 1635-7 built the 'Sovereign of the Seas' under his father's supervision. On 8 September 1633 he married Katharine Cole of Woodbridge (died 1651); they had seven sons and four daughters. In 1647 parliament ordered him a gratuity of $10 for building the 'Phoenix' at Woolwich. He was then appointed master-shipwright at Chatham, and in 1648 he both warned parliament of the threat to the ships at Chatham from the royalist revolt in Kent, and subsequently repossessed the ships when the revolt began to collapse. In the same year he became the resident commissioner of the navy at Chatham. Pett excited a strong feeling of animosity by filling all the more important posts in the yard with his near relatives. As early as November 1651 complaints were laid by some of the subordinate officials, including the chaplain, William Adderley, that members of the family worked into each other's hands, that stores were wasted or misappropriated, that higher wages were charged than were paid, and that false musters were kept. A special inquiry was ordered in the following January, when Pett had little difficulty in proving that the charges were malicious; but it is clear that there were great opportunities for fraud and reasonable grounds for suspicion and Pett's running battle with Adderley continued intermittently throughout the 1650s. The commissioner's cousin, Joseph Pett, was master shipwright at Chatham; another cousin, Peter Pett, was master shipwright at Deptford; a younger brother, Christopher, assistant master shipwright at Woolwich; another brother, Phineas, clerk of the check at Chatham, and a cousin, Richard Holborne, master mast-maker. When, in the following summer, his cousin Peter at Deptford died, he was able to have his brother Christopher promoted to the vacancy, and Peter's son Phineas appointed assistant. Pett was also permitted to undertake private contracts for building ships of war. 
Pett had, following his first wife's death in July 1651, married Mary Smith (died 'c'.1664) daughter of the serjeant-at-arms to Charles I. In 1665 he married his third wife, Elizabeth Hatton, 'nee' Pitt, widow of Sir Henry Hatton. Pett served as MP for Rochester in Richard Cromwell's parliament in 1659 and the convention in 1660. Due, in part, to the urging of his brother Phineas, he was won over to support the Restoration and retained his office as a result. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1662. He remained commissioner at Chatham until 29 September 1667, when he was charged with being the main cause of the disaster there in June, when the Dutch had attacked the English fleet, and was summarily superseded. He was accused, in detail, of having neglected or disobeyed orders from the duke of York, the duke of Albemarle, and the navy commissioners to moor the 'Royal Charles' in a place of safety, to block the channel of the Medway by sinking a vessel inside the chain, to provide boats for the defence of the river, and to see that the officers and seamen were on board their ships. On 18 June he was sent a prisoner to the Tower, on the 19th was examined before the council, and on 22 October before the House of Commons. Impeachment proceedings began in November, but when parliament adjourned for two months the matter was dropped. The accusation was merely the outcome of a desire to make him answerable for the failings of those in high places, and Pett was also vulnerable because of his republican past and alleged links to nonconformity. The general feeling was clearly put by Marvell, in the lines: '
All our misfortunes upon Pett must fall 

His name alone seems fit to answer all. 

Pett, the sea-architect, in making ships 

Was the first cause of all these naval slips. 
(A. Marvell, 'The Last Instructions to a Painter'; Lord, 1.131-2)' Pett's convenience as a scapegoat was enhanced by the realization that the commissioner's nepotism and corruption had seriously damaged the efficiency of Chatham yard: Pepys's papers of the 1660s are full of references to Pett's 'hypocrisy', 'false dealing' and 'villainy', and to his being 'as very a knave as lives upon earth... a false-hearted fellow' ('Samuel Pepys and the Second Dutch War', 18, 19, 21, 383). Pett lived in obscure retirement after his dismissal until his death; his will was proved on 2 December 1672, at which time he was lord of two manors in Suffolk. None of Pett's sons pursued significant careers in the navy, despite the fact that the two eldest were bequeathed their father's ship models in his will. However, many other members of the extended Pett family did serve in the navy throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, leading to long-standing confusion between an abundance of naval Peter and Phineas Petts. 


@@@@@


doc= 22059


Pett, Sir Peter (bap. 1630, d. 1699), lawyer and author, was baptized on 31 October 1630 at St Nicholas's Church, Deptford Green, Kent, the son of Peter Pett (1592-1652), master shipwright at Deptford, and his wife, Elizabeth Johnson ('fl'. 1623-1652). He was the grandson of Peter Pett of Wapping, shipbuilder, and great-grandson of Peter Pett (died 1589), the Elizabethan royal master shipwright. Having been educated at Greenwich School and St Paul's School, he was admitted as a pensioner to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, in 1645. After graduating BA in 1648 he migrated to Pembroke College, Oxford, and in 1649 was intruded into a fellowship at All Souls (from which he was ejected in 1660). He graduated BCL in 1650, was entered as a student at Gray's Inn, and settled there 'for good and all' about a year before the Restoration. 
When the Royal Society was formed, in 1663, Pett was one of the original fellows, elected on 20 May, but was expelled on 18 November 1675 for 'not performing his obligation to the society'. He was probably absorbed in other interests. From 1661 to 1666 he sat in the Irish parliament as MP for Askeaton. He also participated profitably in the farm of Irish tax, and obtained Dutch property confiscated there. A protege of Arthur Annesley, first earl of Anglesey, he was appointed advocate-general for Ireland, where he was knighted by the duke of Ormond in 1663. 
Back in London in the 1670s, Pett acted as the earl of Anglesey's man of business, entering politics under the earl of Danby. He opposed exclusion and moved closer to the political centre with the accession of James II, but became 'badly tarred with the brush of popery' in the process (Goldie, 251). 
The editor of the memoirs of the first earl of Anglesey and Thomas Barlow, bishop of Lincoln, Pett is best known as a polemicist. In a 'Discourse Concerning Liberty of Conscience' (1661) he argued for the comprehension of protestant 'dissent' within an Anglican establishment broadened along the lines proposed by Archbishop James Ussher before the civil wars. Although intolerant of the kind of radical protestant ideology which had issued in regicide, he was prepared to accept peaceful unorthodoxy, and was generally latitudinarian in his belief in the passing of the age of religious controversy. He defended James II's declaration of indulgence in his 'Obligation Resulting from the Oath of Supremacy' in 1687, albeit largely on pragmatic grounds. His most famous work is 'The Happy Future State of England', begun in 1681 and published in 1688, in which he followed the lead of Halifax and Anglesey in exploring the possibility of tory pragmatism. He was sceptical in his thinking, an Erastian ultimately indifferent to the theological differences between protestant and Catholic, believing first and foremost that the menace of popery must be eradicated from within both churches as a threat to the authority of the civil magistrate. 
Pett died, unmarried, on 1 April 1699, and was buried on 19 April at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. In his will he bequeathed to his old school friend Samuel Pepys the ring given to Howard of Effingham by the admiral of the Spanish fleet in 1588. Pett has been often confused with his father's first cousin Peter Pett, commissioner of the navy at Chatham, who is separately noticed. 


@@@@@


doc= 22060


Pett, Phineas (1570-1647), shipbuilder and naval administrator, was born at Deptford on 1 November 1570, the eldest son of Peter Pett (d. 1589), master shipwright, of Deptford and his second wife, Elizabeth Thornton (died 1597). He attended school at Rochester and Greenwich before entering Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1586. It would appear that he was intended for a career in the law or the church but his father's death and his mother's subsequent marriage to 'a most wicked husband' forestalled his future plans ('Autobiography', 2). He was, however, awarded the degrees of BA in 1592 and MA in 1595. 
Lack of prospects and funds obliged Pett, with his mother's encouragement, to become apprenticed to Richard Chapman, a master shipwright at Deptford, thereby following in an established family tradition. Once again Pett's plans were aborted with the death of Chapman after only three years of service, during which time he claimed to have learned little. Desperation obliged him to join the privateer 'Gallion Constance' as a humble carpenter's mate, but its Mediterranean cruise proved unproductive and in 1594 Pett once again found himself facing destitution in London and dependent on his brothers Peter and Joseph. 
The preparation of the 'Defiance' and the 'Triumph' for what was to be Drake's last voyage provided Pett with employment as a common workman. He also embarked on a deliberate campaign to advance his career by establishing contact 'with men of good rank far better than myself' ('Autobiography', lv). This practice was to serve Pett admirably throughout his career. He was employed in the same humble capacity during the construction of the 'Repulse' for the earl of Essex's Cadiz expedition while at the same time studying mathematics and ship construction in the evenings under the tutelage of the master shipwright Matthew Baker. It was during this period that Pett came under the notice of the earl of Nottingham, the lord high admiral, who became his patron. From this point his star began to ascend, first as purveyor of timber in Norfolk and Suffolk in 1599-1600, and then as keeper of the stores at Chatham in June 1600. He used the role of purveyor to some financial gain and the navy treasurer, Sir Fulke Greville, questioned his accounts and withheld $20 from him. In March 1601 he became assistant to the master shipwright at Chatham. He quarrelled with and discarded Baker, having found more prestigious patrons. This breach reveals one of the less attractive sides of Pett who throughout his life believed that those who disagreed with him were conspiring maliciously against him. 
In accordance with contemporary practice Pett was on the look-out for patrons and associated himself with Sir Robert Mansell, Greville's successor as navy treasurer, and Sir John Trevor, the navy surveyor. Unfortunately, in a period when naval administration was at its most corrupt, Mansell was arguably its most corrupt officer, with Trevor his willing accomplice. It was therefore highly likely that Pett would be drawn into dubious practices, as proved to be the case. As early as 1602 it was alleged (in an anonymous account preserved by Pepys) that Pett had sold the fore-topmast of the 'Repulse', for which offence Sir Henry Palmer sen., comptroller of the navy, struck him with a cudgel. Pepys also provides a list of items allegedly stolen by Pett, including timber sufficient to build a bridge and a sluice, and to run a small business selling posts (painted with naval paint) on which to hang clothes. 
None the less Pett's position was secure and in 1604 he was ordered to build a miniature ship for Prince Henry, whose pleasure in it further assured Pett's future. In the following year he was granted the reversion of the positions held by Baker and his brother Joseph, and the latter's death in the same year allowed Pett's succession to the post of master shipwright at Deptford. In 1604 he had embarked on a shady construction project, in partnership with Mansell and Trevor. This was the construction of the 'Resistance', a small vessel of about 160 tons laid down in a private yard at Gillingham belonging to David Duck, a fellow shipwright at Chatham. The vessel was built entirely from timber, rigging, and sails which had been 'borrowed', or purchased at discounted rates, from the dockyard at Chatham on warrants from the principal officers, two of whom were Mansell and Trevor. She was then hired to the state as a transport for Nottingham's embassy of 1605 to Spain and rated as 300 tons (almost double her actual size). Not content with the excessive freight payment the owners also loaded a cargo for trade in Spain and Pett, in command, also sold a demi-culverin plus shot to the Spanish for $300, together with some of the ship's victuals (also 'borrowed' from Chatham). Pett's brother even managed to sell some of the vessel's sails during the voyage. 
The extent of corruption in naval affairs finally forced James I to act and in 1608 a commission of inquiry was established under Nottingham and Henry Howard, earl of Northampton, to investigate the matter. It quickly emerged that Pett was one of the main offenders, his name appearing a number of times, notably in the 'Resistance' affair. Other offences in which he was implicated were the acceptance of poor timber and the continuous repair for personal gain of vessels that were no longer serviceable. An example of this was the 'Anne Royal' the estimate for which was $3576 but which in fact under Pett's supervision cost $7600. He also allegedly received bribes for the delivery of short loads of stores and used naval timber to build an extension to his house. Pett's response to these accusations was less than convincing but equally he seems to have been taking an undue proportion of the blame, much of which should have fallen on his superiors, Mansell and Trevor. Fortunately for Pett the king decided in 1609 to judge the matter personally. A condemnation of Pett would have damned the principal officers and even Nottingham, so ignoring the evidence James let all parties off with only a lecture. As a result the navy was condemned to an indefinite future of malpractice. 
In 1607 Pett built a scale model of a substantial ship which so impressed the lord admiral that he in turn presented it to the king. James agreed to the construction of a ship based on the lines of the model. This is perhaps the first instance of a scale model being presented for approval before construction began, the vessel being the 'Prince Royal'. The laying of the keel in October 1608 coincided with the commission of inquiry and thereby raised doubts as to the suitability of Pett as a builder, both morally and professionally. Baker stated 'that he never saw any work of his doing whereby he should so think him sufficient for that work, but rather thinketh the contrary' ('Autobiography', lxviii). Baker also estimated the cost of constructing such a large ship (1187 tons old measurement) at $7000. The actual cost came to almost $20,000. 
The 'Prince Royal' was in fact only the third vessel fully built by Pett (he had rebuilt three and contributed to others) and undoubtedly there was a considerable amount of envy in the opposition of his fellow shipwrights, accentuated by Pett's rapid rise. An investigation of her construction, instigated by Northampton but under the direction of Nottingham, together with the earls of Worcester and Suffolk (both of whom were ignorant of ship design), decided in Pett's favour, as did the king. By contrast a survey by six shipwrights together with Captain George Waymouth provided a detailed list of her defects. It is important to note that many of the misdemeanours of which Pett was accused were common practice among his colleagues and his patrons ensured that he survived the commission of inquiry and the launch of the 'Prince Royal'. One charge, of having used insufficient and unsuitable timber, does appear to have had substance for by December 1621 the navy commissioners were complaining that the vessel was unfit for service having been built of decayed or green timber. Almost $1000 was spent in repairs although they felt more was required ($6000). In 1641 the ship was completely rebuilt by Peter Pett at a total cost of over $18,000. 
A further commission of inquiry was instituted in 1618 and yielded much the same results as that of 1608-9, although this time Pett did not emerge as the chief villain. One outcome of the inquiry was the recommendation to concentrate shipbuilding at Deptford, whereas Pett was employed at Chatham. William Burrell, the East India Company's chief shipwright, was contracted to build two ships a year for five years at Deptford, much to Pett's anger. He maintained a characteristic enmity towards Burrell despite the fact that Burrell had supported him in the 'Prince Royal' affair. 
Pett's career continued to prosper despite the damage to his reputation. In 1612 he was appointed first master of the Shipwrights' Company and in the following year was present when the elector palatine was escorted to Flanders. He was present on the 1620-21 expedition against the Algiers pirates and in 1623 sailed to Santander to collect the infanta. Marks of royal favour continued when Charles I succeeded to the throne, the new king awarding him a gold chain and allowing him to be present when Henrietta Maria embarked at Boulogne in June 1625. In February 1630 he became an assistant to the principal officers and in late December that same year a full principal officer. 
In 1620 Pett built two vessels for a consortium of London merchants but, as was common practice, he exceeded his instructions by more than doubling their dimensions in order to increase profits. The merchants refused to pay the extra costs, which consequently had to be borne by Pett (a total of $900). To meet his debts (he was arrested briefly in 1628) he borrowed $325 from his brother Peter, who died about 1631. After his death Peter's widow relentlessly pursued the debt until eventually Pett was arrested in December 1634 despite going into hiding. He appears eventually to have cleared the debt. A similar instance of exceeding instructions may have occurred when Pett built the 'Destiny', on which he lost $700, for Sir Walter Ralegh in 1617. In 1633 Pett was again accused of graft, along with Sir Henry Palmer jun., over the sale of old cordage ('brown paper stuff'). In February 1634 he and a number of others were suspended from office only for Pett to receive a personal pardon from Charles. Throughout his career he relied on patronage from the highest levels at times of crisis. 
In 1634 Pett prepared a model for what was to be the largest ship in the navy, the 'Sovereign of the Seas' (1522 tons). Despite opposition from the masters of Trinity House, much of it transparently wrong, the keel was laid in December 1635 and the ship launched in October 1637, six months late. Once again the budget proved inadequate. Despite Pett's original estimate of $13,860, and assurance to complete her for $16,000, the final cost was a staggering $40,833. Pett continued to work at Chatham, where, following the defection of the fleet to the earl of Warwick in July 1642, he handed the dockyard over to parliament's control. For this he was rewarded with appointment as a navy commissioner on the same allowances as he already held, higher than the $100 allowed the other commissioners. He was not an active commissioner, perhaps owing to his age, and lived out his remaining years quietly at Chatham. 
Pett was married three times: on 15 May 1598 to Anne (died 1627), daughter of Richard Nicholls of Highwood Hill, Middlesex; in July 1627 to Susan, 'nee' Eaglefield (died 1636), widow of Robert Yardley; and in 1638 to Mildred Byland, 'nee' Etherington (died 1638). He had three daughters and eight sons with his first wife. His eldest son, John (who married Katharine Yardley, daughter of Robert Yardley, in 1625), was lost in his ship the 'Sixth Whelp' when returning from the Rochelle expedition in 1628; Peter Pett (b. 1610, d. in or before 1672) was a shipwright and navy commissioner; Phineas (1619-1666) was killed in the 'Tiger'; and Christopher (1620-1668) was a master shipwright at Woolwich and Deptford. Their father died at Chatham, where he was buried on 21 August 1647. 


@@@@@


doc= 22061


Pettie, George (c.1548-1589), writer of romances, was the fourth son of John Pettie (or Le Petite or Petty) of Tetsworth and Stoke Talmage, Oxfordshire, and Mary, daughter of William Charnell of Snareston, Leicestershire. He became a scholar of Christ Church, Oxford, in 1564 and graduated BA on 29 March 1569. He was uncle of Mary Pettie, the mother of Anthony Wood, and it is Wood who records that during his time at Oxford Pettie formed a literary friendship with the Latin dramatist William Gager, also of Christ Church. Upon leaving Oxford, Pettie travelled in continental Europe and saw military service abroad. 
Pettie's best-known work is a story collection entitled 'A Petite Pallace of Pettie his Pleasure: contaynyng many pretie hystories by him set foorth in comely colours, and most delightfully discoursed', which acknowledges the book's debt to 'The Palace of Pleasure' (1566 and 1567) of William Painter. The 'Petite Pallace' was licensed to Richard Watkins on 6 August 1576 but was published undated. Its dedication, 'To the gentle Gentlewomen Readers', is signed 'R. B.' Hazlitt, in his edition of Thomas Warton's 'History of English Poetry' (1871, 4.336), proposes that these are the reversed initials of Barnaby Riche but Hartman favours the unknown 'R. B.' who wrote 'A New Tragicall Comedie of Apius and Virginia' (1575). The possibility remains that 'R. B.' is an authorial alias used by Pettie; the prefatory matter to George Gascoigne's 'Adventures of Master F. J.' (1573) employs a similar strategy, if such this is. 'R. B.' confesses to supplying the stories without the author's permission, a scenario supported by the letter of the printer to the reader. The preliminary matter also includes 'The letter of G[eorge] P[ettie] to R. B. concerning this woorke', dated from Holborn, 12 July, which urges R. B. to keep the stories 'to your owne private pleasure' because they 'touch neerely divers of my nere friendes'. 
Subsequent editions were published 'c'.1578 and 'c'.1585, the latter omitting the prefatory material, as does the edition of 'c'.1590. Editions by George Eld appeared in 1608 and 1613. Modern editions have been undertaken by Israel Gollancz (1908) and Herbert Hartman (1938). The significance of the 'Petite Pallace' lies in its prioritizing of a female readership, and its role in the development of the literary style called euphuism: it influenced the early euphuistic romances of Robert Greene and acted as a storehouse of proverbs for John Lyly in the writing of his romance 'Euphues'. Pettie himself was not averse to literary borrowing: the influence of George Gascoigne and George Turberville can be detected in his work. The overwhelmingly Ovidian and euphuistic character of the collection is remarked in 'Le prince d'amour' (1660), in which one of the offences against the prince is described as being to 'deprave the books of 'Ovid de Arte amandi', 'Euphues' and his 'England', 'Petite Pallace', or other laudable discourses of love' ('Le Prince', 57). 
Pettie also translated the first three books of Guazzo's 'Civile Conversation', using the French of George Chappuys. The translation was licensed to Richard Watkins on 11 November 1579, with another mention in the Stationers' register on 27 February 1581. It was published later that year with a dedication addressed from Pettie's lodging near St Paul's, London, to Marjorie, wife of Henry Norris, Baron Norris of Rycote. In his preface to the 'Civile Conversation' Pettie explains that he intends this translation to counterbalance the frivolity of the 'Petite Pallace': he hopes 'to purchase to my selfe some better fame by some better woorke, and to countervayle my former Vanitie, with some formal gravitie' ('Civile Conversation', 1.7). A second issue, by Thomas East, was dated 1586, and included Guazzo's fourth book, translated from the Italian by Bartholomew Young. 
According to Wood, Pettie died in July 1589 at Plymouth, 'being then a captain and a man of note', and was buried in the 'great church' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.555) there. He left to his brother Christopher the lands at Aston-Rowant, Kingston, and Tetsworth, Oxfordshire, which he had himself received from his father. Wood is in two minds about the literary merits of Pettie's 'Petite Pallace': his relative's 'passionate penning of amorous stories' made him 'as much commended for his neat stile as any of his time', but in Wood's own time the 'Petite Pallace' seemed 'more fit to be read by a schoolboy, or rustical amoratto, than by a gent. of mode or language' (ibid., 1.553). 


@@@@@


doc= 22062


Pettie, John (1839-1893), painter, was born in Edinburgh on 17 March 1839, the eldest of the three sons and two daughters of Alexander Pettie, a prosperous shopkeeper, and his wife, Alison Frier. At the age of thirteen he moved with his family to East Linton, East Lothian, and it was here that he began to show artistic promise by making copies of reproductions of paintings with household paints from his father's shop. On 16 October 1855 he enrolled at the Trustees' Academy, Edinburgh, where he studied for five years under Robert Scott Lauder. Among his contemporaries were William Quiller Orchardson, William MacTaggart, and George Paul Chalmers, all of whom later became distinguished painters. 
An ambitious and conscientious student, Pettie began exhibiting at the Royal Scottish Academy, Edinburgh, in 1858, and two years later had his first picture accepted by the Royal Academy in London. Among his early successes were numerous interpretations of incidents from the novels of Sir Walter Scott, including 'Scene from 'The Monastery'' (1859), as well as historical subjects, such as 'The Prison Pet' (1859; priv. coll.). His gift for visual narrative was recognized by the publishers Blackie & Son, who commissioned him to produce illustrations for their devotional part-work 'Family Worship' (1862-3). Commercial assignments of this kind were to provide a lucrative source of income in the early stage of Pettie's career, and throughout the 1860s he regularly contributed illustrations to several other popular periodicals, among them 'Good Words' and the 'Sunday Magazine'. 
The financial security provided by his work as an illustrator enabled Pettie to move to London in 1862. Here he shared lodgings at 62 Stanley Street, Pimlico, with his former student colleague Orchardson, with whom he moved in 1863 to 37 Fitzroy Square (a house later occupied by Ford Madox Brown). On 24 August 1865 he married Elizabeth Ann Bossom, the sister-in-law of the Scottish painter C. E. Johnson, and lived with her in Regent's Park before moving to St John's Wood Road in 1869. They had three sons, Graham, Ralph, and Norman, and a daughter, Alison, who later married the Scottish composer Hamish MacCunn. In 1882 the family finally settled in The Lothians, a house in Fitzjohn's Avenue designed for Pettie by his friend the architect William Wallace. 
On his arrival in London, Pettie quickly established himself as the leader of a group of expatriate Scottish painters, whose work was distinguished by the vividness of its narrative content and the brilliance of its visual style. Pettie himself was strongly influenced by the earlier work of Sir David Wilkie, from whom he developed an interest in physical gesture and facial expression. Much of his subject matter was historical, with the turbulent events of the English civil war and the Jacobite rising providing his principal source material. His approach to the representation of history was not, however, a rigorously academic one, and in most cases the scenes he depicted were intended merely to embody the 'spirit and romance of history' (Hardie, 1908, 76) rather than illustrate documented historical occurrences. Typical examples of such historical fictions are 'The Drumhead Court-Martial' (1862; Sheffield Galleries and Museums Trust), 'Treason' (1867; Sheffield Galleries and Museums Trust), and 'The Vigil' (1884; Tate collection). In many cases the narrative is focused on a single dramatic moment, as in 'The Disgrace of Cardinal Wolsey' (1869; Sheffield Galleries and Museums Trust), a psychologically charged study of political humiliation, or 'The Sally' (1870; Sheffield Galleries and Museums Trust), in which suspense is created by the skilful massing of a group of soldiers huddled behind a castle door. Apart from the clarity and force of his narrative technique, Pettie's great strength as a painter lay in his ability to evoke the atmosphere of a historical period through the effective use of costume and background accessories. He was also a fine colourist, and in many of his mature paintings the composition is organized around a dominant figure, or group of figures, dressed in brilliantly coloured costumes. Examples of this tendency are 'Ho! Ho! Old Noll' (1874; Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum) and 'The Chieftain's Candlesticks' (1886; Forbes Magazine Collection, New York). 
Towards the end of his career Pettie began to concentrate on studies of social manners, with works such as 'Two Strings to her Bow' (1887; Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum) and 'The World Went Very Well Then' (1890; Dundee City Art Gallery) typifying his fondness for idealizing the day-to-day life of rural communities. It is significant, however, that these are almost invariably set in the Regency period, rather than Pettie's own day, despite his frequent use of friends and relatives as models. His reluctance to engage with contemporary history extended to his portraits, many of which present the sitter in period costume or in the manner of earlier artists such as Rembrandt. In his portrait of the novelist William Black, for example, the subject is depicted as 'A Knight of the Seventeenth Century' (1877; Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum). 
One of the most critically and commercially successful artists of his day, Pettie became an associate of the Royal Academy in 1866 and a Royal Academician eight years later. He himself attributed his success to an almost superhuman capacity for hard work, and there is little doubt that his lifelong dedication to painting left little time for other pursuits. As a student his principal leisure activity was participating in the meetings of an informal sketching club, a practice which he continued after his arrival in London. Similarly, his involvement with the National Volunteer Association in Edinburgh in 1859, and his consequent role in the establishment of the Artists' company of the City artillery volunteers, may be seen as an extension of the passion for military matters which inspired much of his creative output. Towards the end of 1892 he began to suffer from an abscess of the ear, and on 10 January 1893 he was found unconscious on his studio floor. The abscess was later removed, but he failed to recover and died at 47 Eversfield Place, Hastings, on 21 February. He was buried in Paddington cemetery six days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 22063


Pettigrew, Thomas Joseph (1791-1865), surgeon and antiquary, was born on 28 October 1791 at 128 Fleet Street, London, son of William Pettigrew (1739-1825), surgeon-apothecary, a Scot and former naval surgeon, and his second wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Cranford). Thomas showed an interest in anatomy from the age of twelve. He attended a local school until the age of fourteen, assisted his father for two years in his duties as surgeon to St Bride's parish, and was then apprenticed to the surgeon John Taunton. He attended the United Borough Hospitals' medical schools and assisted Taunton as demonstrator in his anatomy school. In 1808 he was one of the founders of the City Philosophical Society, later the Philosophical Society of London. Also in 1808 he was elected a fellow of the Medical Society of London and in 1809 he published his first book, 'Views of the Basis of the Brain and Cranium', a precocious work which attracted suspicions of plagiarism -- the first of many controversies. In 1811 he married Elizabeth Reed (1786-1854). They had twelve children, of whom five sons and three daughters reached adult life. Two of the sons followed their father into the medical profession. 
In 1812, at Taunton's instigation, Pettigrew was elected secretary of the Medical Society of London, defeating the eminent physician George Birkbeck, a contest which led to some subsequent ill feeling. He also took on the post of registrar with residential accommodation at the society's house in Bolt Court, Fleet Street, but forgoing the salary. He qualified as MRCS in 1812. In 1813, through the influence of the Medical Society's founder, John Coakley Lettsom, Pettigrew became secretary to the Royal Humane Society, holding the post until 1820 and in 1818 receiving the society's medal for life-saving. On Lettsom's death in 1815 Pettigrew delivered a eulogy before the Philosophical Society of London, printed in 1816, and in 1817 produced 'Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the Late John Coakley Lettsom', in three volumes. From 1816 to 1819 he was surgeon to the Dispensary for the Treatment of Diseases of Children, St Andrew's Hill, Doctors' Commons, later the Royal Universal Dispensary for Children. In 1818 he left the Medical Society and moved to 22 Spring Gardens. 
Through his connection with the Royal Humane Society, Pettigrew was appointed surgeon to the duke of Kent and vaccinated his daughter Princess Victoria. He also became surgeon to the duke of Sussex and, in 1819, his librarian. Under the duke's influence he was initiated as a freemason. The first volume of an ambitious catalogue of the duke's library, 'Bibliotheca Sussexiana', was published in two parts in 1827, containing the religious manuscripts and printed editions of the 'Bible'. Pettigrew's reward was a doctorate in philosophy from the University of Gottingen, conferred on 7 November 1826. Meanwhile his professional career continued: in 1819 he became surgeon to the Asylum for Female Orphans, a post which he retained until 1848, and in 1822 surgeon to the Royal West London Infirmary and Dispensary which in 1827 became the Charing Cross Hospital. He published regularly in the medical journals and in 1819 delivered the annual oration of the Medical Society of London, on medical jurisprudence (MS in Wellcome Library). In 1824 he moved to 8 Savile Row, where he later held popular soirees. His connection with the duke of Sussex came to an untimely end. Pettigrew, who had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1827, was involved in the negotiations leading to the controversial election of the duke as president on the resignation of Davies Gilbert in 1830. The duke found the unexpected contest embarrassing and soon afterwards severed relations with Pettigrew, following his repetition of the duke's private comments about an unsuccessful fellowship candidate. Pettigrew was never restored as librarian but a partial reconciliation made possible publication of volume 2 of the 'Bibliotheca Sussexiana' in 1839. In 1835 Pettigrew also lost his position at Charing Cross Hospital on a charge of receiving $500 from John Howship for securing him the post of assistant surgeon, though Pettigrew in his 'Address to the Governors and Subscribers of the Charing Cross Hospital' (1836) maintained that the payment was part of an agreement for the sharing of anticipated fees. Thereafter he devoted himself to private practice and, increasingly, to his antiquarian interests. 
Pettigrew had been interested in Egyptology since the 1820s; he published in 1834 'A History of Egyptian Mummies' (having himself unrolled numerous specimens) and in 1842 the first part only of 'Encyclopaedia Aegyptiana'. In 1836 he published 'The pauper farming system: a letter... on the condition of the pauper children of St James Westminster'. As a diversion after the death of his eldest son, Thomas Lettsom, an officer in the Madras army, in 1837 he compiled 'The Medical Portrait Gallery' (4 vols., 1838-40), including his own autobiography. He also contributed 540 biographies to H. J. Rose's 'A New General Biographical Dictionary' (12 vols., 1840-57), and in 1849 published 'The Life of Vice-Admiral Lord Nelson', in two volumes. He was appointed to the council of the Historical Society of Science in 1840 and to the council of the Percy Society in 1841. In 1843 he was elected one of the first fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons and over the years was elected to various foreign medical and antiquarian societies. His publications in medical history include 'On Superstitions Connected with... Medicine and Surgery' (1844) and an edition for the Percy Society of John Halle's 'An Historiall Expostulation Against the Beastlye Abusers both of Chyrurgerie and Physyke' (1844). He had been an active fellow of the Society of Antiquaries since 1824 and was one of the founders of the British Archaeological Association in 1843, serving as treasurer until his death and allowing meetings to be held at his house. He declined an offer of the presidency in 1854. 
Pettigrew continued to court controversy: in 1852 his 'Letter to the Lord Viscount Mahon' criticized the management of the Society of Antiquaries, and in 1854 he successfully defended his conduct at the British Archaeological Association against an attack by Thomas Hugo. His antiquarian writings appeared mainly in periodicals. A revised edition of Richard Gough's 'Sepulchral Monuments' was projected in 1852 but abandoned on grounds of cost. His last book was 'Chronicles of the Tombs' (1857). On the death of his wife in 1854 he retired from practice and moved to 16 Onslow Crescent, Brompton, London. He continued to attend the British Archaeological Association's annual conferences, in spite of failing health, but made only a token appearance at Durham in 1865. Pettigrew died at his home on 23 November 1865 and was buried on 30 November at Brompton cemetery. His library was sold at Sothebys on 10 May 1866. There had been an earlier sale on 13 February 1856, and a final sale at Knight, Frank, and Rutley on 23 August 1905 included his collections of paintings, engravings, Egyptian antiquities, shells, and minerals, as well as books and manuscripts. 


@@@@@


doc= 22064


Pettingall, John (1707/8-1781), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, was born in Newport, Monmouthshire, the son of the Revd Francis Pettingall. He attended the grammar school in Newport before matriculating from Jesus College, Oxford, on 15 March 1725, aged seventeen. He graduated BA in 1728 and was later incorporated at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he received the degree of MA (1740); he later proceeded DD from Lambeth. He was ordained priest at Llandaff on 5 March 1732 and for a while served as chaplain to the bishop of Llandaff, Richard Watson. He was rector of Whitsun, and vicar of Christchurch, both in Monmouthshire, until 1756. On 3 June 1757 he was appointed a prebendary of St Paul's Cathedral and on 28 July 1758 was installed prebendary of Lincoln. He appears to have been the incumbent preacher at Duke Street Chapel in Westminster until his preferment to the rectory of Stoke Hammond, Buckinghamshire, which he held until his death. 
Pettingall was a keen antiquarian and in 1752 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He wrote several works on Roman artefacts and early British coins, and published a study of the use of the jury system in Greek and Roman society. He read three papers before the Society of Antiquaries which were later published in 'Archaeologia', together with another paper on a deed issued by Bishop Odo of Bayeux. He also translated A. C. F. Houtteville's 'Discours historique et critique sur la methode des principaux auteurs qui ont ecrit pour ou contre le Christianisme', which he published in 1739 with an appendix entitled 'A dissertation on the life of Apollonius Tyaneus, with some observations on the Platonists of the later school'. Pettingall, who was married to Susanna Long of the parish of St Margaret's, Westminster, died at Stoke Hammond on 30 June 1781 and was buried in the churchyard there on 2 July. His son 


@@@@@


doc= 22065


Thomas Pettingall (1744/5-1826), a Church of England clergyman and tutor, was educated at Westminster School from about 1756, where he became a king's scholar in 1758, and at Christ Church, Oxford, whence he matriculated on 9 June 1762, aged seventeen. He graduated BA (1766) and proceeded MA (1769) and BD (1778). He was briefly an usher at his old school (1770-73) but returned to his college to take up a post as tutor and censor from 1774 to 1779. He was appointed rector of East Hampstead, Berkshire, in 1782 and died at Bagshot, Surrey, on 8 April 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 22066


Pettitt, Henry Alfred (1848-1893), playwright, was born on 7 April 1848 at Cape Hill, Smethwick, near Birmingham, the son of Edwin Pettitt, a civil engineer, and his wife, Lucy, 'nee' Hart. Pettitt was educated at a school kept by the Revd William Smerdon, but was thrown on his own resources at the age of thirteen, as a result of the failure of his father's investment in cotton patent machinery, which forced him to leave England and live abroad. Henry Pettitt tried various professions, including an attempt on the stage at Sadler's Wells, and he was for two years clerk in the head offices in London of Messrs Pickford & Co., the carriers. He wrote without remuneration for various periodicals, and tried his hand at writing novels, producing 'The Cotton Lord' (1862) and 'Uncle Crotty's Relations' (1864) under the pseudonym Herbert Glyn. About 1869 he obtained a post as junior English master in the North London Collegiate School, High Street, Camden Town. 
Still writing for periodicals and for the stage, Pettitt reached a turning point when he was paid $5 for 'Golden Fruit', a drama produced at the East London Theatre (14 July 1873). Before this time he had written, in collaboration with Paul Merritt, 'British Born', in a prologue and three acts, produced on 17 October 1872 at the Grecian Theatre, of which Merritt had been a principal support. Between 1875 and 1893 Pettitt went on to produce (singly and with collaborators) an extraordinary number of plays for the London stage and touring companies. At one time, twenty-two companies were on tour in England and six in America, performing his pieces. According to one authority, 'Six dramas in which he had collaborated were on in London the same evening', although no specifics are given as to the date involved (Boase, 'Mod. Eng. biog.', 2.1486). 
Pettit was to collaborate with writers such as Merritt, George Conquest, Augustus Harris, Charles Reade, George R. Sims, and Sydney Grundy. His partnership with Conquest was the most productive in the early stages of his career: in 1875, for instance, they worked together on 'Dead to the World' and 'Sentenced to Death' at the Grecian Theatre, and they continued their partnership in the following year with 'Snatched from the Grave' and 'The Sole Survivor'. They continued to produce plays together until 1879. As the titles indicate, Pettitt favoured melodrama, and his work in the genre was inventive. He also wrote comedies, however, and in 1880 he supplied the Grecian with a pantomime, 'Harlequin King Frolic', which was said to have had the longest run of any pantomime of the nineteenth century. 
Pettit's star was rising. On 31 July 1880 'The World', by Paul Merritt, Henry Pettitt, and Augustus Harris, was staged at Drury Lane, and marked the beginning of a very prosperous era both for Pettitt and the playhouse. In 1880 and 1881 Pettitt visited the United States to look after his royalties, and to superintend the production of a version of 'Le voyage en Suisse', which he wrote for the Hanlon-Lee troupe. While in America, he became involved in a legal case in Boston concerning the copyright of his play 'The World'. Pettitt's return to England was followed by increased writing activity, which continued until his death. He began to collaborate to a greater extent with Harris, producing plays such as 'A Run of Luck' (Drury Lane, 28 August 1886), which was aptly named, as it brought in $25,000 in only twelve weeks. He also worked more extensively with Reade, Sims, and Grundy in this later part of his career. His penultimate play, 'A Woman's Revenge', was described by William Archer as a 'beautifully symmetrical fable' marred by a 'ridiculously wound up' ending (Archer, 188). 'The Life of Pleasure', a drama written with Harris, was his last work and was performed on 21 September 1893. 
Pettit's many plays were thought by his contemporaries to show considerable knowledge of dramatic effect, a sense of situation, and general deftness of execution, although the critics also found his characters to be conventional, and largely forgettable. He enjoyed great popular success, however, and managed to accumulate considerable wealth in a few years, while remaining a generous and open-handed man. He died of typhoid fever at Chestnuts, 352 Goldhawk Road, London, on 24 December 1893 and was buried in Brompton cemetery on 29 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 22067


Petto, Samuel (c.1624-1711), clergyman and ejected minister, may possibly have been connected with the Peyto family of Chesterton, near Leamington, Warwickshire. He was admitted as a sizar at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, on 15 June 1644, matriculated on 19 March 1645, and graduated MA. In 1648 he was admitted as rector of Sandcroft, in the deanery of South Elmham, Suffolk. Perhaps a little later he married; his wife's name was Mary, and they baptized a son, Samuel, at South Elmham St Cross on 27 April 1654, but Mary died the next year. In the summer of 1654 Petto was reported to be paid $36 a year for his services at Sandcroft, and to give a sermon every second Sunday at nearby Homersfield. He was at Sandcroft when on 4 May 1658 the council of state recommended that he be granted an augmentation of $50 per annum. In a letter of 17 August 1658 to Samuel Slater, of the Independent church at St Katharine by the Tower, Petto reported that while many Suffolk Independents opposed or doubted infant baptism, none had themselves been rebaptized and all were happily in communion with the majority who differed in the matter. His own congregational views embraced the practice of lay preaching, and on this subject he engaged in 1658-9 with Frederick Woodall of Woodbridge, Suffolk, and John Martin of Edgfield, Nottinghamshire, against Matthew Pool's 'Quo warranto', a work commissioned by the London Provincial Assembly, and 'Vindiciae ministerii evangelici revindicate' (1658) by John Collinges, who conceded in his foreword that their efforts were the work of 'grave and sober persons, with a good show of argument'. After ejection from Sandcroft in 1660 Petto moved to nearby Wortwell-cum-Alburgh, Norfolk, and continued his ministry in the area. In 1669 he was preaching in Norfolk at Yarmouth, at Denton, and to an auditory of over 300 at Gillingham. On 8 May 1672 he was licensed as a congregational teacher at his own house at Wortwell, and at the house of John Wesgate at Redenhall. About two years later Petto began his long association with the town of Sudbury, Suffolk. 
A Sudbury corporation document of 5 October 1669 reported that 'there is no settled minister' in the town and that services depended 'upon the goodwill and benevolence of the people' of whom the greater part 'meet in conventicles and absent themselves' ('Short History', 152-3); it was resolved to seek an act of parliament to provide proper maintenance. This evidently this did not materialize for in 1684 local tories alleged that the former mayor John Catesby had so favoured dissenters, that 'Mr Petto the Nonconformist preacher in the barn' had been unmolested there for ten years, only once having been brought before the quarter sessions, and then not punished. Petto had, moreover, with his wife and family 'constantly lived within the said Corporation for ten years last past, in no more private place than in the Vicarage House belonging to All Saints Church' (Hodson, 'Independents', 53-4). Petto had other problems at Sudbury. On 31 August 1677 he wrote to Increase Mather that: 'lately one of my daughters is become a prodigal, & about 10 dayes ago resolved to go beyond sea, hath obscured herself in order to that end, so as I have been searching for her all this week in London & cannot find her; she was a sempster in the city and might have lived well, but on a suddain is bent to ramble and hath sinned greatly against the Lord by falsehoods. ('Letters of Samuel Petto', 341)' Before the following 14 May the prodigal had returned. In 1690 Petto was reported still to be a preacher at Sudbury, with his second wife, Martha, and twelve children to support and in receipt of $45 per annum. 
Petto was a firm believer in the power of witchcraft and in 1693 published 'A faithful narrative of the wonderful and extraordinary fits, which Mr Thomas Spatchett, minister of Dunwich and Cockley, was under by witchcraft', in which he claimed that despite hearing her confession in 1665 the justices refused to punish the alleged culprit because she bewitched only Spatchett and another local puritan, one Manning. Petto did not see his belief in occult powers as incompatible with his interest in science. He wrote in 'Philosophical Transactions' of the appearance in the sky over Sudbury on 28 December 1698 of three 'suns', and was aware that these were 'really one true sun; the reflections of its beams cause such images' ('PTRS', 21, 1699, 107). Petto was greatly respected by dissenters in the district. He died in Sudbury in 1711 and was buried in the churchyard of All Saints, Sudbury, on 21 September. His son-in-law, the Revd Josias Maultby, had been appointed as his copastor in 1707; after Petto's death he continued as pastor until emigrating to Rotterdam in 1719. 


