@@@@@


doc= 22068


Pettus, Sir John (c.1613-1685), natural philosopher and politician, was the second son of Sir Augustine Pettus (died 1613) of Rackheath, Norfolk, and his second wife, Abigail (1592-1673), third daughter of Sir Arthur Heveningham of Ketteringham in the same county. In 1632 he matriculated as a fellow-commoner at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where his tutor was Thomas Boswell. He probably attended the college from about 1627 and may have graduated BA in 1631. When he was seventeen Pettus undertook the first of three summer tours around England in the company of Sir Thomas Bendish. Each tour lasted two months and they continued until he left Cambridge. They were designed to give Pettus a wide knowledge of England before he travelled on the continent, and the first included a visit to a lead mine in Derbyshire. Pettus was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 13 May 1635. In 1637 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Richard Gurney of Cheapside, London, who became lord mayor in 1641-2, and his wife, Ebigail, daughter of Henry Sandford of Birchington, Kent. John's and Elizabeth's only son, Richard, died in 1662. Their daughter, Elizabeth, married Samuel Sandys, son of Samuel Sandys of Ombersley, Worcestershire, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Barker, in 1657. Elizabeth Sandys died on 25 May 1714 aged seventy-four. 
Pettus entered the service of Charles I in 1639, and was knighted on 25 November 1641 as a mark of the king's favour to Gurney. In March 1643 he was among those captured by Oliver Cromwell's forces at Lowestoft, suspected of trying to fortify the town for the king. Pettus reportedly told Cromwell of his intention of joining the royalists. He was first imprisoned at Cambridge before being transferred to unpleasantly overcrowded quarters in Windsor Castle. He was released on an exchange early in 1644 and then served in Oxford, Bath, and Bristol. He and his wife were in Bristol at the surrender of the city to the New Model Army in September 1645, when they were helped by Charles Fleetwood, who was related to Pettus by marriage. The fine for Pettus's delinquency was first set at $1300, but was later reduced to $866 13's'. 4died, one-tenth the value of his estate. He was also involved in settling the estate of Sir Richard Gurney, who died in October 1647, in conjunction with Thomas Richardson, later Baron of Cramond, who had married Gurney's other daughter, Anne. 
Pettus was imprisoned in 1650 on suspicion of corresponding with Charles II, being questioned by the council of state over a period of three weeks before being released on bail of $4000. Presumably this was when he felt that his life had been in danger and he had again been indebted to Fleetwood for intervening on his behalf. He also acknowledged Fleetwood's help with preserving his estates and in protecting him from being required to take oaths and renunciations. In 1656 he protested to the lord protector of his loyalty to the regime, but after the fall of the protectorate he was approached in 1659 by Francis Finch, an ironmonger, to act as an intermediary between the royalists and Fleetwood. 
Pettus's wife left him in 1657, taking some of his possessions, including jewels which he valued at $900. He attributed her action to her conversion to Roman Catholicism. A reconciliation in 1662, when she restored his jewels and he paid her debts, which totalled more than $800, did not long outlast the death of their son in that year. She left Pettus once more in 1662, again taking possessions with her, including pictures, books, and 'rarities', and entered a nunnery abroad. Although she returned to England after five years they were not reconciled, and disputes over her alimony led to his excommunication and an appearance before the privy council in 1672, when the king personally ordered him to pay $2 per week. The case was brought before the privy council again in 1673 and 1674. In 1674 Pettus published a justification, 'A Narrative of the Excommunication of Sir John Pettus'. 
Pettus's interest in metallurgy and mining led to him becoming a member of the Society of Mines Royal and Battery Works in 1651 and he acted as deputy governor of the royal mines from then until his death, apart from one brief interval. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1663. He published, in 1670, 'Fodinae regales, or, The history, laws and places of the chief mines and mineral works in England, Wales and the English pale in Ireland' and, in 1683, 'Fleta minor: the laws of art and nature, in knowing, judging, assaying, fining, refining and inlarging the bodies of confin'd metals'. The latter consists of a translation of a sixteenth-century work in German by Lazarus Erckern, with a dictionary of metallurgical terms by Pettus. 
Pettus was chosen as MP for Dunwich at a by-election in March 1670. He was named to 109 committees of the Cavalier Parliament and was listed as a member of the court party. He made four attempts to obtain a bill regulating charitable stock in the parish of Kelsale, Suffolk, and also presented a bill for settling the estate of Henry Smith, for whom Sir Richard Gurney had acted as executor. 'The Case and Justification of Sr J. Pettus' (1678) was his defence against claims that he was introducing needless bills and disturbing charities which were functioning satisfactorily. He was blacklisted in the 'unanimous club' of court supporters and did not seek re-election after the dissolution of the Cavalier Parliament. 
Pettus was involved in affairs in East Anglia, visiting Norwich after the explosion of the magazine there in 1648 and providing for the prisoners taken during the Third Anglo-Dutch War in 1672, in his capacity as deputy to the vice-admiral, as well as mediating between the military and the inhabitants. He was a JP for Suffolk from July 1660 until his death, and deputy lieutenant from 1671. He held the rank of captain of the foot in the militia by 1665 and was a colonel from 1671. Pettus was made a freeman of Dunwich in 1670 and served as bailiff in 1671-2 and 1675-6, and as coroner in 1677-8. He was made a gentleman of the privy chamber in 1670 and retained the position until his death. 
Pettus succeeded his grandfather as tenant of land in South Walsham, Norfolk, and before his marriage he bought the manor of Chediston, Suffolk. He used his wife's jointure to acquire the manor of Winbaston and a nearby farm, also in Suffolk, but sold them in the late 1640s to pay his composition fine and debts incurred during the civil war. At the Restoration he claimed that he had lost $25,000 in the royal service and in 1674 that he had not been paid by Charles I or Charles II. His debts were reported at $5960 in 1651 and in 1674 he wrote that he had discharged debts of $28,000 since about 1664. His circumstances were exacerbated by the dispute with his wife and his finances continued to deteriorate. In 1679 he was in a debtors' prison and appealed to William Sancroft, archbishop of Canterbury, for a loan of $20 to release him. He was in the Fleet prison for debt in 1683, hence the punning title of 'Fleta minor'. 
Pettus's other publications were 'Volatiles from the History of Adam and Eve' (1674) and 'The Constitution of Parliaments in England' (1680), and he contributed a preface to 'England's Independency upon the Papal Power' by Sir John Davis and Sir Edward Coke (1674). The attribution to Pettus of 'St Foine Improved' (1674) is doubtful. He died in 1685 and was buried in the Temple Church in London on 12 July. A portrait of him, aged fifty-seven, engraved by W. Sherwin, is the frontispiece of 'Fodinae regales' and another of him, aged seventy, engraved by R. White, is the frontispiece to 'Fleta minor'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22069


Petty, Sir William (1623-1687), natural philosopher and administrator in Ireland, was born at Romsey, Hampshire, on 26 May 1623, the third child of Anthony Petty (1587-1654), clothier, and his wife, Francesca (died 1663). In later life Petty was keen to stress the obscurity of his origins in order to exaggerate his spectacular success. 
After a conventional education in Romsey, Petty did not follow his father's calling in the textile trade, but instead went to sea as a mariner. An accident on board ship led to his being abandoned in Normandy in 1637. This mishap was apparently put to good use when he enrolled in a Jesuit college at Caen. There he refined his mathematical proficiency and developed a voracious appetite for learning. On returning to London he continued his studies. However, once the civil war broke out he returned to the continent. His intention was to acquire medical qualifications. To this end he went to Amsterdam, Leiden, Utrecht, and Paris. In Paris he met and quizzed Thomas Hobbes, Gassendi, and Mersenne, and was put in touch with prime exponents of experimental science. He was back in England by 1646 and continued his education at Oxford. The victory of parliament and consequent purge of royalists and episcopalians from the university speeded Petty's advance. Happy enough to comply with the political and ecclesiastical principles of the new order he accepted a fellowship of Brasenose College, probably in 1648, and was created DM on 7 March 1650. In 1651 he served as vice-principal of the college, and was elected to the professorship of anatomy. He attended assiduously to the duties of the post. Some of his lecture notes -- in Latin -- have survived and reveal the methodical manner in which he approached his responsibilities. 
As well as lecturing Petty conducted chemical experiments and built up a private medical practice. It was as a doctor that he first achieved wider fame. He resuscitated the corpse of Anne Greene, which had been cut down from the gallows and was intended for dissection. This wonder was soon publicized in pamphlets, and brought Petty's name before a larger public. He was admitted to a fellowship of the College of Physicians, and elected as one of the readers at Gresham's College in London. 
Petty's medical skills secured his next appointment, in September 1652, as physician to the army in Ireland. Contacts in Oxford, as well as the recent publicity over Anne Greene, probably secured the post. Paid $1 daily it was financially attractive. It also brought additional fees through attending officers of the English army and administration. Petty's talents, which he never hid, were soon in demand in other spheres. In particular the complex task of surveying the lands forfeited by the defeated Irish insurgents and of allotting them to their new owners among the English soldiery and investors overstretched the resources of the administration. Petty derided the scheme of the surveyor-general, Worsley, and sketched a better of his own. In December 1654, a grateful government accepted his proposal for the 'down survey', as it became known. Its chief attraction was its lower cost. The circumstances in which Petty had ousted Worsley rankled. Not only had he impugned Worsley's technical abilities, but he differed from his competitor in religion and politics. Worsley had identified with the republicans and sectaries who thrived under the lax regime of Lord Deputy Charles Fleetwood. This group felt beleaguered when in the summer of 1655 Fleetwood was effectively superseded by his brother-in-law, Henry Cromwell. Petty, for his part, gravitated towards Henry Cromwell, becoming one of his secretaries and a confidant. As a result, he was regarded as a prime target by the aggrieved republicans and officers. These alignments help to explain why Petty's survey was fiercely criticized. Inevitable mistakes, especially when he had to rely on soldiers for much of the detailed surveying, led to the available lands being underestimated by 10 per cent. This deficiency embarrassed a government which intended that the confiscations surveyed by Petty should reward thousands of creditors. The latter, civilians in England and soldiers in Ireland, had expected more and better than they were now allocated. However, the undoubted shortcomings in the down survey pale beside its achievement. The mapping was based on the administrative unit of the barony, and combined other man-made features with the staples of the physical terrain. On the basis of Petty's work 8,400,000 acres were redistributed to new (and usually protestant) owners. 
Any final distribution of the lands took time. The impatient and disappointed blamed Petty. Moreover their often meagre returns were contrasted with the evident plenty which Petty himself had secured. He conceded that he had made at least $9000 from the undertaking. Soon allegations of chicanery as well as incompetence were voiced. In the parliament of 1659 a direct attack was launched when Sir Jerome Sankey, an MP from Ireland and sectarian supporter of Fleetwood, sought to have Petty impeached. More than the detail of the down survey was at stake. Strenuous efforts had been made to have Petty elected to this parliament, with the result that he was returned for both the Cornish constituency of West Looe and an Irish one. He chose to sit for the first. Petty had been selected for attack not just because he was the architect of the land settlement and could be blamed for its inadequacies. He personified the more conservative tenor of Henry Cromwell's government, and as such antagonized the supporters of 'the good old cause': in the Irish context, the regime of Fleetwood. The parliament was dissolved before Petty suffered any serious retribution. Belatedly, in 1660, he published his own riposte to Sankey. 
The protracted dispute with Worsley was the more embarrassing because both he and Petty belonged to the circle of Samuel Hartlib, the refugee from Bohemia anxious to advance learning and protestantism. Petty embraced the empirical and utilitarian philosophy of the group, having been introduced to many of its principles while he was on the continent during the 1640s. He first showed his commitment publicly in 1648 when he addressed a printed manifesto on the advancement of learning to Hartlib. The same principles underpinned the down survey, and assorted practical and utopian schemes which Petty (and others) promoted in Cromwellian Ireland. His many talents, including a taste for controversy, endeared him to Henry Cromwell. The clerkship to the council, to which the latter had promoted him, added $400 to Petty's annual income. 
The collapse of the protectorate at first presented the agnostic Petty with opportunities. He was in England during 1659, and frequented the Rota Club, a group of republican idealists. What soon followed, the restoration of Charles II, offered both challenges and chances. Petty, supple and opportunistic, seized the chances and met the challenges. He had not been concerned in the representative body, the general convention, which assembled in Dublin briefly in the spring of 1660. But he was returned to the Irish parliament of 1661 for the Wexford borough of Enniscorthy and the Kilkenny town of Inistioge. He opted for the second. 
Petty's experience and his considerable stake in Ireland -- more than 18,000 acres in five counties -- gave him a continuing role there. His usefulness explained his being chosen as an MP. At the same time, closely involved in the Cromwellian regime, he was naturally suspected. Persistent doubts about his reliability meant that he was never again entrusted with the same responsibilities as in the 1650s. Relegated to the Irish council of trade Petty was unwearyingly inventive in the suggestions with which he bombarded the government in Dublin. But few of his schemes were adopted. Also, he felt victimized when his large holdings of Irish lands were subjected to heavy taxes. This was an issue with which Petty became obsessed. The estates were to serve as a showcase for his rational methods. By increasing their yield and value he would show others how best to proceed. Much of what he hoped to do still derived from the philosophy and designs of his and Hartlib's friends. The informal discussions and plans of the 1650s were systematized, notably in the Royal Society. Not only had Petty joined the groups of the 1650s, but was a founding member of the Royal Society when it was established in 1662 ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. Because he divided his time between Ireland and England, participation in the London society was erratic until the early 1670s, when he became (temporarily) a stalwart. 
Petty exemplified the continuities between the earlier devotees of the Baconian method, the utilitarianism of Hartlib's followers, and the wider constituency of the fashionable and altruistic to which the infant Royal Society appealed. Reading, interpreting, and communicating 'the book of nature' preoccupied him. His wit and asperity entertained the king. Petty was unabashed in seeking a profitable outlet for his manifold talents. He impressed and amused the important, including the king, by his verbal and intellectual dexterity. Unfortunately, he also irritated and bored them. Although knighted in 1661 he felt undervalued and underemployed. A peerage proffered in acknowledgement of his wealth -- estimated at more than $6000 p.a., principally from Irish lands -- was spurned. Rationally enough he objected to the extra expenditure that such a rank would involve. He sought in vain a seat in the privy council. 
Petty's claims to fresh public employment were seconded with a series of disquisitions. These built on his work in the 1650s. Maps which had first been drawn to assist the down survey were corrected and reworked until they could be issued in 1685 as the first atlas of Irish counties, 'Hiberniae delineatio'. Before that Petty regarded the originals of the maps as his own property and charged those who wished to consult them. At the same time he composed apparently authoritative surveys of the topography, demography, and potential of Ireland. In these writings he returned many times to the obvious gap between the ideal and the real Ireland. If some of these tracts had arisen from his official role in the council of trade, others, such as 'A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions' (1662) backed his unsuccessful bid to farm the Irish customs revenues. The majority remained in manuscript but circulated freely among those who governed Ireland and England. In addition to serving personal and topical purposes Petty was developing a mathematical approach to the problems confronting government. With access to official data about mortality, housing, imports, and exports, he collected and then analysed much. In particular, interest in matters relating to production and employment led him to elaborate a theory of economic surplus, through which human beings would be freed from the drudgery of constant labour. He was also consciously promoting the discipline of 'political arithmetic', entailing a more rigorously statistical approach to running the state. 
Petty's interest in the problems and opportunities specific to Ireland was encouraged anew by his appointment in 1676 as judge and registrar of the admiralty court in Dublin. His authority derived from James, duke of York, who, although obliged by the 'Test Act' of 1673 to relinquish the post of lord high admiral in England, evidently retained an Admiralty jurisdiction over Ireland. Petty went to work enthusiastically. He hoped through his court to assist poor mariners against arbitrary masters. However, he was obstructed both by common lawyers and landowners resentful of the Admiralty. Petty planned to rout these adversaries by investigating the origins and extent of the court's powers. This ambition, along with his aim that the Admiralty advance commerce and shipping, was not realized. 
The accession of James II, his erstwhile patron, revived Petty's hopes. After 1685 he deluged the new monarch with proposals. What Petty wrote, about both Ireland and England, blended exact statistical information with fanciful projections. True to his belief in the empirical method, learned on the continent early in the 1640s, he aimed to end idle speculation by expressing all in 'number, weight and measure'. This statistical precision certainly added to the novelty and authority of 'The Political Arithmetic' and 'Anatomy of Ireland'. The precision owed much to his access to the cadastral data which had been collected under his own auspices during the down survey, and later when poll and hearth taxes were levied in Ireland and as bills of mortality enumerated and classified the dead both in London and Dublin. In addition he gathered information from his own estates, particularly those in co. Kerry, from which he then constructed his larger theories. These offered estimates of the proportions and absolute totals of those involved in different occupations and living in houses of different sizes. He also speculated about the mean sizes of households in Ireland, again distinguishing between the various social orders. 
Petty did not confine his advice and reflections to Ireland. In England, he concerned himself with agriculture, industry, technology, population, architecture, and medicine. He also interested himself in the demography of London, now more clearly revealed in the weekly bills of mortality. In association with John Graunt he analysed this material and used it to predict future trends. During the 1680s these analytical techniques were applied to Dublin. Petty examined the wealth, potential and actual, of England. He saw labour as the key to increased national prosperity. Like other commentators he sought lessons from the evident successes of the United Provinces and France under Colbert. The novelty in Petty's approach was to quantify. Yet sometimes his willingness to give numbers invested his calculations with a spurious authority. Just as the down survey was found wanting as to its accuracy, so in his later endeavours too often he seemed to pluck numbers from the air, usually when solid figures were lacking. Nevertheless, by abstracting numbers and using these as the basis of calculation, whether of profit and loss in his own Irish ironworks or English trades and industries, he constructed the method known as political arithmetic which was widely copied in the later seventeenth century (and beyond). In addition, by isolating such issues as the velocity of circulation, the difference between the natural and market price of a commodity, and the theory of economic surplus, he established important themes and methods for classical economists. 
Intimates venerated Petty. Sceptical and droll, when relaxed he delighted and charmed. On occasion he composed scabrous and indecent verses. Others merely encountered a combative and abrasive character. Detractors revelled in his discomfiture when certain of his highly advertised ventures foundered. Notable among these was the double-hulled ship -- a novel catamaran -- which turned turtle and sank in Dublin Bay. The wearisome struggle to overcome the impersonal and human obstacles to immediate improvement of his Irish estates disillusioned him and cautioned his contemporaries. Yet something of the respect in which he was held was shown in 1684 when he was chosen as first president of the Dublin Philosophical Society. This was appropriate as the institution sought to realize the objectives which Petty and his associates had espoused since the 1650s. Its rules insisted on a preference for experiment and observation rather than for tradition, the free communication of discoveries, and more intensive researches into the physical resources of Ireland. 
After 1660 the bulk of Petty's income came from Ireland. He hoped to use it to finance an English career. To this end he investigated the purchase of an English country estate. In the event, he remained in London, where he owned a house and dabbled in the redevelopment after the fire of 1666. On Trinity Sunday 1667 he married Elizabeth ('c'.1636-1708/10), daughter of Sir Hardress Waller (c.1604-1666), the regicide, a prominent landowner in co. Limerick. She was the widow of another prosperous settler in Munster, Sir Maurice Fenton (died 1664). Care of a young son gave her interests which were multiplied after her marriage to Petty. Her new husband deputed oversight and management of his scattered Irish concerns to her, especially during his absences in London. Together they attended to the upbringing of four children, John ('bap'. 1669, died 1670), Charles ('c'.1653-1696), Henry (1675-1751), and Anne (died 1737), who married Thomas Fitzmaurice, first earl of Kerry (1668?-1742), and was grandmother of the prime minister, the second earl of Shelburne. The needs of his family and household prompted Petty to reflect more generally on education. True to his questioning approach he rejected as useless some parts of the traditional scholastic curriculum, and instead urged more practical and vocational studies, akin to those which he had had. At the same time he was sensitive to the compromises and conventions necessary to succeed in public life. His own failures cautioned him against too cavalier a dismissal of these requirements. 
James II failed to adopt Petty's programme. It included constitutional union of England with Ireland and the enforced transfer of peoples from one island to the other. These proposals, redolent of what had been attempted in the interregnum, belonged to a tradition in which Ireland was treated simply as a colony akin to North America. On other occasions he accepted as axiomatic that Ireland was a kingdom with its own sophisticated institutions, albeit one which had been conquered and subordinated to England. Petty's stated indifference to questions of religious confession ought to have endeared him to the Catholic monarch eager to help his co-religionists. However, Petty's willingness to contemplate greater generosity to Catholics combined with a fierce and occasionally irreverent anti-clericalism. Clerical power, especially as exercised by the papacy and Catholic priesthood, conflicted with Petty's idea of a well-governed state in which the church was firmly subordinated to the secular authorities. Nor could Petty escape from the logic of a situation in which he, in common with other recent gainers of Irish lands, benefited directly from the expropriation of the Irish Catholics. He never proposed a wholesale reversal of the land transfers which his own work had facilitated and from which he had profited so handsomely. In addition, although many of his schemes rested on a belief that the indigenous Irish could be trained for a variety of crafts and tasks, he did not altogether shed the English sense of cultural superiority. 
From 1685 Petty lived continuously in London. Easier access to the king and court did not in the end bring any greater influence over policies. His health deteriorated sharply, and on 16 December 1687 he died at his London residence in Piccadilly. He was buried at Romsey Abbey. His ample fortune, suspected by contemporaries, was fully disclosed in his will. It was further recognized when, in 1688, his widow was ennobled as Baroness Shelburne, and the barony of the same name conferred on his eldest surviving son, Charles. The scope of Petty's interests and scale of his achievements were enlarged after his death: first, with the publication of his 'Political Arithmetic' in 1690 and 'Political Anatomy' in 1691, and then of other papers. This process has still to be completed. The writings, if sometimes repetitive and frequently utopian, provide abundant detail of the physical and human geography of seventeenth-century Ireland and England. They also show Petty's formidable intellectual prowess, especially as the originator of statistical analysis under the name of political arithmetic. 


@@@@@


doc= 22070


Petty, William, second earl of Shelburne and first marquess of Lansdowne (1737-1805), prime minister, was born on 2 May 1737 in Dublin, the elder son of John Fitzmaurice 
(later Petty; 1706-1761)
, a landowner, and his wife, Mary Fitzmaurice (died 1780), who was a cousin. His father's family had dominated co. Kerry for generations; his paternal grandmother, Anne, was the daughter of Sir William Petty, whose estates at High Wycombe, carrying with them electoral influence over one seat, were inherited in 1751 by his father, who thereupon changed his name to Petty. His father was created earl of Shelburne in 1753 and in 1760 was raised to the British peerage, an honour which the duke of Newcastle believed was obtained only by his wealth and Henry Fox's patronage. 
William, who was styled Viscount Fitzmaurice from 1753, believed his childhood had been peculiarly wretched and talked of it with horror, according to his friend Jeremy Bentham. Brought up in co. Kerry by his grandfather, the first earl of Kerry, whom he thought a tyrant by nature, he described his experience of childhood as 'domestic brutality and ill-usage', since his father had 'no notion of governing his children except by fear' (Fitzmaurice, 1.9, 12). He was educated at Dr Ford's school in Dublin and was instructed by a private tutor before going to Christ Church, Oxford, whence he matriculated on 11 March 1755. He summarized his position on leaving Christ Church: 'it became necessary for me to take some resolution for myself; home detestable, no prospect of a decent allowance to go abroad, neither happiness nor quiet' (ibid., 1.92). Having joined the army, he served in the 20th regiment and was present at the attack upon Rochefort in 1757. He was then appointed to Lord Granby's staff in Germany and distinguished himself at Minden (1759) and Kloster Kampen (1760). His reward was immediate. By the end of 1760 he had been promoted colonel and appointed aide-de-camp to the new king, George III. His prospects were transformed. In June 1760, after his father had been given a British barony, Fitzmaurice succeeded to the parliamentary seat at Wycombe, and at the general election of 1761 he was returned to the Westminster parliament for Wycombe and to the Dublin parliament for County Kerry. 
This spectacular progress aroused envy. The duke of Richmond resigned his place in the royal bedchamber in protest at the slight which Fitzmaurice's army promotions implied for his brother, Lord George Lennox. Before Fitzmaurice could take his seat in either House of Commons, his father's death in May 1761 transported him to the House of Lords at Westminster as Baron Wycombe and at Dublin as second earl of Shelburne. His initial political contacts were with Henry Fox, a distant relative and his father's patron, and with Fox's new ally Lord Bute. Despite his promising military debut, Shelburne now resolved on a political career, though he continued to hold army rank. As early as March 1761 he had applied to the king for the comptrollership of the household, in what must have been a maladroit letter: the king, disliking the suggestion that his aide-de-camp sought 'real business', took offence, leaving Shelburne to make awkward apologies through Bute. Next he acted as broker in the complex negotiations by which Bute obtained Fox's support. His credit with the king was further damaged by an injudicious speech and protest on 5 February 1762, when he joined the duke of Bedford in deploring any continuation of the war in Germany (a move against Newcastle) and voted against the previous motion which Bute himself had moved. Bute was irritated, and the king pointedly ignored Shelburne at the next levee. By June 1762 George III was describing Shelburne as a man who 'once dissatisfied will go any lengths' ('Letters... to Lord Bute', no. 163). 
Shelburne declined to take part in Bute's ministry, despite Fox's urgent entreaty to 'get your harness on immediately' (Fitzmaurice, 1.143). He remained on good terms with Bute and Fox, and in December 1762 moved the acceptance of the peace preliminaries in the Lords. But when in the reshuffle in the spring of 1763, following Bute's decision to retire, Fox proposed Shelburne as one of the two secretaries of state, the king objected strongly. George Grenville, who finished up in the reshuffle as prime minister, warned Bute that Shelburne's promotion would disgust many people: 'from Lord Shelburne's youth, his inexperience in business, by having never held any civil office whatever, and from his situation and family, so lately raised to the peerage' ('Grenville Papers', 2.35). The problem was compounded by an acrimonious quarrel with his patron Fox, who accused him, without any authority from Fox himself, of spreading the impression that Fox wished to retire from the paymastership. The mutual recriminations in which the affair ended deprived Fox of two of his closest supporters, John Calcraft and Richard Rigby, who sided with Shelburne. It is not easy to see what Shelburne stood to gain by misrepresenting Fox's views, but the episode lost nothing in the retelling, and enhanced Shelburne's growing reputation as a slippery fellow. 
Shelburne was also extremely ambitious. Before he had held any political office, and while negotiations were still continuing, his friends spoke of his prospects in lofty terms. On 15 March 1763 Calcraft wrote assuming that Shelburne would be made secretary and dismissing the question of prime minister somewhat airily: 'with our hold on Lord Northumberland, is it possible to think of placing him as a great lord... at the head of the Treasury, either for some short time, or till you could take it?' (Fitzmaurice, 1.195-6). In the end, Shelburne had to be content to be first lord at the Board of Trade, with a seat in the cabinet, and proved at once a difficult colleague. A demarcation dispute over American policy arose immediately with Lord Egremont, secretary of state for the south, and Shelburne demanded equal access to the king; American issues, brought to the forefront of politics by the Seven Years' War, dominated Shelburne's public life for the next twenty years. For good measure, he was also at odds with the other secretary, Lord Halifax, doubting both the wisdom and the legality of prosecuting Wilkes for no. 45 of the 'North Briton' under a general warrant. Within two months of taking office Shelburne was threatening resignation. But Bute dissuaded him, pointing out that, at his age, the office which he held was one with which 'ambition ought to be satisfied' (Fitzmaurice, 1.276). 
By the summer of 1763 the king was finding Grenville intolerable, and Shelburne was employed to negotiate with Pitt and Bedford. His admiration for Pitt dates from this period. When the negotiations broke down Shelburne tendered his resignation from the Board of Trade, though assuring the king of his continued support. George III regarded it as desertion in the midst of battle: he reported to Grenville, not one of Shelburne's admirers, that 'he finds the business of the board disagreeable to him... and subjecting him to too close an attendance' ('Grenville Papers', 2.203). This may have been unfair to Shelburne, but he had held office for only four months: great noblemen with large incomes and estates to supervise often found the routine of administration tedious, and Shelburne had already declared that 'emolument' was no consideration with him (Fitzmaurice, 1.142). On 29 November 1763, in a debate on the expulsion of Wilkes, he spoke strongly against the government line that privilege of parliament did not extend to seditious libel. Grenville, temporarily reconciled with George III, reminded him that Shelburne was still an aide-de-camp and should be disciplined. 'A worthless man' was the king's terse reply, and Shelburne was dismissed, together with his parliamentary lieutenants Isaac Barre and Calcraft ('Grenville Papers', 2.230, 236). Horace Walpole presumed that Shelburne was making up to Pitt as the man of the future. It was not, however, at all obvious in 1763 that Pitt had much political future, unless a new war should break out, which might sweep him to power by popular demand. Shelburne prided himself on his independence from party connection and his devotion to the monarch (which does not seem to have been reciprocated). He was now able to devote himself to that rural retirement he had previously commended: he employed Capability Brown to construct the lake at Bowood and Robert Adam to enlarge the house, and he turned his attention to the neglected Wycombe estates. In April 1764 he visited Ireland and took his seat in the Dublin House of Lords. On 2 or 3 February 1765 his marriage to Sophia Carteret (1745-1771), the daughter of John Carteret, Earl Granville (1690-1763), and his second wife, Lady Sophia Fermor, brought him large estates near Bath, including much of Lansdowne Hill. They had two sons, John Henry, who succeeded as second marquess of Lansdowne, and William Granville, who died on 28 January 1778. 
For a time it looked as though Shelburne's rapprochement with Pitt had been unwise. When the king's patience with Grenville finally ran out in the summer of 1765 it was the marquess of Rockingham who formed a ministry. Shelburne was offered his former post at the Board of Trade, but declined, pleading to Rockingham 'a real consciousness of my own inability in so active an office, to which the domestic habits I have lately fallen into add not a little' (Fitzmaurice, 1.334). His reliance was now totally upon Pitt: ''tis you, Sir, alone, in everybody's opinion', he wrote to the great man in December 1765, 'can put an end to this anarchy' ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 2.357). 
Shelburne followed Pitt's line on America: he spoke and voted on 3 February 1766 for the repeal of the 'Stamp Act' but, disapproving strongly of the 'Declaratory Act' which accompanied it, he warned the Lords that it was unwise to raise abstract constitutional questions, and voted in a minority of 5 to 125 against it. When Pitt, by then elevated to the Lords as earl of Chatham, formed his second ministry in July 1766 in succession to Rockingham, Shelburne was appointed secretary of state for the south. His responsibilities included India, Ireland, and America, as well as diplomatic relations with France, Spain, and the south of Europe. Three factors enhanced his standing still more. His colleague in the northern department was Henry Seymour Conway, one of the more conciliatory politicians of the day; Grafton, officially first lord of the Treasury, was young, inexperienced, and in thrall to Pitt: moreover, Pitt himself succumbed to a mysterious breakdown, which rendered him incapable of business or even human contact, and left Shelburne as his main representative in the deserted cabinet. 
The absence of its real head made for an acrimonious and inept administration. Shelburne was soon at odds with a number of his colleagues. His sharpest differences were with Charles Townshend, chancellor of the exchequer, who made all the running in Chatham's absence. Shelburne's attitude towards the American colonies was circumspect, and he hoped that the issue of taxation could be avoided by reducing expenditure and by exploiting the quitrents on virgin land. Townshend, who was not fond of the Americans, approved of the 'Stamp Act', and in January 1767 he pledged himself to raise an adequate revenue from the colonies. Shelburne appealed by letter to Chatham, recuperating at Bath, but his reply was painfully inexplicit. Townshend's position was strengthened by Lord North's refusal to replace him, and he carried the day; the Townshend duties were introduced in June. Shelburne's ineffective retort was to stop attending cabinet meetings. 
The post-war financial difficulties would also be helped if a revenue could be raised from India. The role of the East India Company moved to the forefront and, again, Shelburne and Townshend clashed. Shelburne was deeply interested in the matter, publicly and privately, since he had invested heavily in company stock, which fluctuated according to government intentions, and was supporting Laurence Sulivan in the company against Lord Clive. Chatham and Shelburne denied the right of the company to a territorial revenue and favoured instead a searching review which would lead to a measure of government control and a substantial subsidy to the exchequer: Townshend hoped to achieve a similar end through negotiation with the directors. While matters drifted, Townshend's proposals went through. 
Though Shelburne's rivalry with Charles Townshend was ended by the latter's sudden death in September 1767, it continued with his elder brother, Lord Townshend, appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland in August 1767. Within weeks of his arrival in Dublin he was complaining of a 'very severe letter' from Shelburne, and later of 'the propensity Lord Shelburne always expresses to condemn my conduct' ('Rutland MSS', 2.293, 298). With the duke of Grafton, Shelburne was on better terms, since both admired Chatham; however, neither had a high opinion of the other, and there were sharp clashes over patronage. 
Nor were Shelburne's relations with the king himself much warmer than they had been during his first spell in office. Before the ministry had been in power a year, George III was writing to Chatham that he and Grafton regarded Shelburne as 'a secret enemy' and suggesting his removal ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 1.480, no. 521). Shelburne survived, but suffered a significant setback when the supervision of the American colonies was removed from his department and given to a newly created American secretary, Lord Hillsborough. The king clearly hoped that Shelburne would resign in dudgeon, but he held on, waiting for Chatham's return. The junction with the Bedford group was yet another misfortune for him, since their views rarely coincided with his. 
To these differences was added a major one in April 1768, when it became necessary for the ministry to decide its attitude towards Wilkes's election for Middlesex. At first Grafton and the cabinet inclined to a gentle approach to avoid giving Wilkes the crown of martyrdom, but in the course of time opinion hardened. Camden and Shelburne continued to urge caution, but the Bedfords were for strong measures, and the king wrote in April that 'the expulsion of Mr. Wilkes appears to be very essential and must be effected' ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 2.21, no. 613). But before the issue came to parliament Shelburne's fate had been sealed. Whateley reported to Grenville in May that Shelburne's dismissal was 'expected every day' ('Grenville Papers', 4.296). In September the king warned Grafton that 'Lord Shelburne manifestly still attempted to thwart every measure that originated from you, and seemed resolved to propose none himself' ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 2.43, no. 651). But Camden, to whom this was confided, reminded the king that Shelburne was still under Chatham's protection, even if he had lost the good opinion 'of every one of the other active members of the cabinet' (ibid.). The following month the king again urged Grafton to sound out Chatham, believing that he would acquiesce in Shelburne's dismissal. He did not, but tendered his own resignation. Shelburne's resignation followed a week later. 
During 1769, Grafton's administration, assaulted by Junius, fell to pieces, while Shelburne joined Rockingham and Grenville in opposition. The Wilkes issue rumbled on, with the momentous decision to seat the government candidate, Colonel Henry Luttrell, for Middlesex. Shelburne was a valuable recruit to opposition in the Lords, particularly since Rockingham was a notoriously poor and reluctant speaker. In his speech of 15 December 1768 Shelburne sniped at his former colleagues, for he was still waiting to see whether Chatham would return and what his line would be. In January 1770 Chatham, amazingly restored, appeared once more in the Lords, denounced the ministers for their policies on both America and Wilkes, declared that the liberty of the subject was in danger at home and abroad, and hinted darkly at a secret influence, 'a mysterious power', that lurked behind the scenes. This salvo carried away Camden, who resigned the chancellorship, and it appeared that the government was doomed: 'the seals would go a begging', said Shelburne, but he 'hoped there would not be found in the kingdom a wretch so base and mean-spirited as to accept of them' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 16, 1765-71, 665). By the end of the month Grafton, too, had resigned. But the advantage did not fall to Chatham and Shelburne. Lord North took over as prime minister, and, while he was at first regarded as a mere stopgap, he established an administration which condemned Chatham to opposition for the rest of his life and Shelburne for the next twelve years. 
Shelburne's private life was also difficult. He invested heavily in East India Company stock through his under-secretary Lauchlin Macleane and admitted losing $40,000 in the 1769 crash, in which Macleane was completely ruined: though Shelburne gave up interfering in company matters, the suspicion of insider dealing did little for his reputation. His building programme at Bowood, at Wycombe Abbey, and at the large house in Berkeley Square, which he had purchased half-finished from Bute, made severe demands upon even his ample fortune. His way of life was lavish, with great hospitality extended to the remarkable coterie of friends and advisers whom he gathered round him. In addition, on 5 January 1771 his wife died in childbirth at the age of twenty-five. Shelburne left in May for a continental tour with Barre to assuage his grief, during which he made the acquaintance of a large number of 'philosophes', including Beccaria, Turgot, Malesherbes, and Morellet, and became a convert to the new free-trade doctrine. 
The hopes of opposition for a speedy return to power depended upon war with Spain over the Falkland Islands, which, they believed, must lead to Chatham's recall. While the issue was still in doubt, Shelburne declared that 'whether we commence a war with Spain or tamely crouch under the insults of that haughty kingdom', power could not remain 'in such feeble, in such incompetent hands' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 16, 1765-71, 1113-14). North negotiated a peaceful settlement of the dispute in January 1771, which the opposition naturally denounced as craven and cowardly. On 14 February 1771, in an attack upon the settlement, Shelburne spoke, according to Horace Walpole, 'better than he had ever done' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George III', 4.275). On his return from the continental tour he took up the proposal of Dr Richard Price, one of his closest followers, that dissenting clergy should be released from the obligation to subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. The ministers decided to let the measure through the Commons but kill it in the Lords, where it was rejected by 102 votes to 29. The East India Company, despite the settlement of 1767, got into further difficulty, and in 1772 was obliged to approach the government for a substantial loan. North agreed to rescue it, but subject to the appointment of a governor-general and a considerable degree of governmental control. Though the Rockinghams condemned the bill as a gross violation of charters, Shelburne gave it general support. William Lyttelton reported that Shelburne had 'never spoken better in his life', though his enemies hinted that he was angling for a return to office ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 4.284). 
Shelburne was by now a leading member of the opposition and more than a mere mouthpiece for the ageing Chatham. He had a considerable following in the City of London, where he worked closely with James Townsend and the more moderate radicals. His electoral interest was useful. After spending $100,000 on property in the neighbourhood, he controlled two seats at Calne and one at Wycombe and had influence in Wiltshire and Buckinghamshire. His parliamentary following, though small, was able, with John Dunning a rising lawyer and Barre a formidable debater. His own parliamentary speeches were frequently informed and impressive, though he was sometimes tempted into lurid and melodramatic language, and he had a penchant for threatening severe punishment. Not only did this lay him open to easy retorts from the more adroit lords, it built up a residue of dislike which, in the end, proved costly. 
Increasingly in the 1770s the political scene was dominated by the American troubles. Shelburne was perhaps handicapped by his strict adherence to Chatham's line, which, from 1773 onwards, looked unrealistic and sentimental. In January 1775 he supported Chatham's motion to withdraw British troops from Boston, condemning 'the madness, injustice and infatuation of coercing the Americans into a blind and servile submission': it was defeated by sixty-eight votes to eighteen (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 18, 1774-6, 163). In a debate in February on an address urging the king to enforce obedience on the colonists, Shelburne clashed violently with Lord Mansfield, whom he accused of being the secret influence behind the American policy. In return he was attacked for 'uttering the most gross falsehoods' (ibid., 18.282). Once shots had been exchanged at Lexington, events developed their own momentum, and it was hard for the opposition not to appear factious and disloyal: 'the popular tide', Shelburne admitted, 'was against him' (ibid., 18.449). In November 1775 he paid handsome tribute to Chatham as 'the most efficient servant of the crown, and while he had life in him, the nerve of Great Britain' (ibid., 18.923-4). It was not clear, however, how much life Chatham did have left in him, and his argument that the colonists were not really seeking independence looked more and more implausible. On 5 March 1776 Shelburne was said by Walpole to have made 'a great figure in the debate' on Richmond's motion against the employment of German mercenaries in America ('Last Journals of Horace Walpole'). On 14 March he made a major effort in support of Grafton's motion for some gesture of goodwill towards the colonists, pleading that a middle path was the only hope of avoiding disaster. It was defeated by ninety-one votes to twenty-eight. There was little chance that Shelburne and the opposition could change the direction of policy, but the possibility remained that Chatham might be invited to join the government, bringing Shelburne with him, especially after the news of Burgoyne's surrender at Saratoga had been received in December 1777, carrying with it the probability that France and Spain would intervene. An important speech of 5 March 1778 on the American conciliation bills suggested a change of emphasis, if not of policy, on Shelburne's part. He told the Lords that he would: 'never consent that America should be independent... Great Britain should superintend the interests of the whole... as soon as that event should take place, the sun of Great Britain is set, and we shall no longer be a powerful or respectable people. (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 19, 1777-8, 850)' A week later North obtained the king's grudging permission to sound out Chatham through Shelburne: 'I do not expect Lord Chatham and his crew will come to your assistance', George warned North ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 4.58, no. 2221). The proposal, put forward by William Eden, was for Chatham to receive the Garter and join the cabinet, while Shelburne took his old post as secretary of state. Shelburne replied that Chatham 'must be dictator' and would bring in the Rockinghams. The king's relief at the failure of the negotiations with Chatham, 'that perfidious man', was total (ibid., 4.59, no. 2224). Three weeks later Chatham suffered his dramatic collapse in the House of Lords, and by May he was dead. Shelburne's motion that the House of Lords as an order should attend the funeral in Westminster Abbey was lost by one vote. But his final verdict on his former idol, recorded many years later, was much cooler: 'he was always acting, always made up, and never natural, incapable of friendship, and constantly upon the watch and never unbent... I was in the most intimate political habits with him for ten years... without drinking a glass of water in his house or company, or five minutes conversation out of the way of business. (Fitzmaurice, 1.72-9)' Chatham's death, though depriving Shelburne of a diminishing asset, liberated him from the need to consult and report. But his political behaviour became somewhat erratic. In a rambling speech of 26 November 1778, which contained veiled threats against the king, Shelburne called for a union of all parties to bring 'condign punishment' on wicked and evil ministers; he would 'cheerfully cooperate with any set of men to drag them from their present situations', and bring them to justice (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 19, 1777-8, 1318-19). The following month he repeated his view that, without America, Britain would be but a petty state: 'he would never serve with any man who would consent to acknowledge the independence of America' (ibid., 20, 1779-80, 40). This drove a wedge between him and his Rockingham allies and suggested that he was a man the court might approach. With North still anxious to lay down the burden of office, fresh negotiations took place. In February 1779 Grafton was entrusted with discussions for a general coalition, which got nowhere, though he recorded that Shelburne had promised not to contest the premiership with Rockingham. There were further discussions in November 1779 when Gower and Weymouth left the ministry. Shelburne attempted to inject some vigour into the proceedings by moving on 1 December a motion on the state of Ireland, which North feared would be the prelude to his own impeachment. Shelburne obliged with a strong personal attack, insisting that North's conduct was 'highly criminal' (ibid., 20.1169). North had suggested to the king that Shelburne could be 'easily induced' ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 4.501, no. 2855) to make up an administration with Gower and Thurlow. But Thurlow's conversation with Shelburne found him more inexplicit than ever: 'the more connection that could be preserved with America the better; but he did not say what the nature of that connection should be' (ibid., 4.521, no. 2882). Nor could he say whether the opposition would take part in a coalition. The king found this reply 'cold and distant' (ibid.), the negotiations came to nothing, and North was persuaded to soldier on. 
Several episodes at this time throw light upon Shelburne's character and reputation. In 1777 an Irish adventurer, David Brown Dignam, accused him and other lords of a bizarre conspiracy to assassinate the king. Though Dignam was soon unmasked and sent to the hulks, he would not have picked on Shelburne had not the latter's French connections and his correspondence with Franklin and other Americans rendered him suspect. In 1778 Shelburne's engagement was announced to Frances Molesworth, a young, attractive, and wealthy heiress. But Eleanor Elliot wrote to her brother Hugh: 'she dined at his house and sat at the head of the table and was seen to cry all dinner-time... she sent Lady Lucan a letter and begged she would break off the detested match' (Minto, 147). Horace Walpole, no friend to Shelburne, conceded that he had been an 'admirable husband' to his first wife, but there were reports that Miss Molesworth complained that Shelburne did nothing but talk politics to her (Walpole, 'Corr.', 33.115). Shelburne's disappointment soon passed, and the following year he married Louisa Fitzpatrick (1755-1789), the daughter of John Fitzpatrick, first earl of Upper Ossory, and his wife, Evelyn Leveson-Gower. They had two children, Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, third marquess, and a daughter who died in infancy. On 22 March 1780, as a consequence of some characteristically sharp remarks in debate, Shelburne fought a duel with the Scottish MP William Fullarton. Shelburne behaved with military courage, was slightly wounded in the groin, and achieved fleeting popularity, since the Scots were even more disliked than he was. In 1778 he became acquainted with the young Jeremy Bentham, whose reminiscences of the Bowood circle are of value, but who repaid considerable hospitality and kindness from Shelburne with a verdict far from flattering. 
The weight of wartime taxation and the development of the Yorkshire Association's campaign for economical reform put wind into the sails of the opposition during the winter of 1779-80. Shelburne responded by moving on 8 February 1780 for a committee to examine the public accounts with a view to economy and a reduction in the influence of the crown. After a long debate the motion was rejected, though Shelburne was supported by fifty of the peers attending, eighty-one being against. But a further difference with Lord Rockingham arose when the economical reformers moved on to embrace parliamentary reform. Rockingham was mistrustful, but Shelburne, following the line chalked out by Chatham in the 1770s, favoured an increase in the number of county seats and shorter parliaments. The gap between the two groups widened dramatically with the Gordon riots in June 1780: the Rockinghams were strong supporters of law and order, while Shelburne's sympathy for the rioters was so great that he was accused of encouraging them. He was also, like Charles James Fox and many others, impatient at Rockingham's sluggish leadership. On 3 June 1780 he declared that, though he would not pledge himself, he would attend the House of Lords no more until there was 'a greater likelihood of speaking to some purpose' (Christie, 112-13). The well-publicized split in the ranks of the opposition and the swing to the political right caused by the riots prompted a fresh negotiation for a government of national unity, but in the discussions held with Rockingham in July 1780 Shelburne was neither consulted nor mentioned. Shelburne was understandably nettled: 'I owe nothing to them', he wrote of the Rockinghams, 'and much to others... The conduct of others during the summer will abundantly justify silence and inaction' (Fitzmaurice, 3.105-6). Of Rockingham himself, he wrote: 'there he stands obstinately stopping the free course of popular spirit which alone can ever oppose the court' (ibid., 3.107). When he spoke in January 1781 on the breach with Holland, he began by telling the house that 'he had long determined to absent himself from his attendance there' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 21, 1780-81, 1023). From this dangerous split the opposition was rescued by the news of Cornwallis's surrender at Yorktown in October 1781. 
Shelburne attended the opening of parliament on 27 November 1781 and moved an amendment to the address, arguing that financial debility and shortage of recruits made any further prosecution of the war in America impossible. In a debate of 7 February 1782 on the surrender of Yorktown, he took the opportunity to repeat that 'he would never consent, under any possible given circumstances, to acknowledge the independency of America' (ibid., 22, 1781-2, 987). To the king this represented a signal that Shelburne was the least implacable of his opponents. Consequently, when Lord North insisted on resigning on 20 March, the king sent for Shelburne and expressed 'his preference of me compared to the rest of the opposition' (Fitzmaurice, 3.131). This was not saying much, but the king was in a very difficult position and contemplating abdication. Shelburne declined to try to form an administration, telling Rockingham, 'you can stand without me, but I could not without you' (ibid., 3.131). The king refused categorically to deal directly with Rockingham but agreed to negotiate through Shelburne: in that decision were many of the seeds of the subsequent resentments. Buttressed by Dunning, to be brought into the cabinet as Lord Ashburton, and supported by Thurlow, to be retained as lord chancellor at the king's insistence, Shelburne would be in a powerful position. On 26 March George III wrote to him: 'Lord Shelburne's note I look upon as an instance of 'personal' attention, and feel it as such: I trust from it, he has stood firm, and will have remembered that the powers intrusted to him in the ministerial line... gives him strength with more vigour to resist all others. ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 5.412-13, no. 3582)' Rockingham accordingly took the Treasury, with Fox and Shelburne as the two secretaries of state. On 19 April Shelburne was given the Garter. 
The second Rockingham ministry was brief and unpleasant. The rifts in it were apparent before it took office -- indeed, they were built into it. Within a week of kissing hands, Shelburne and Rockingham were at odds about patronage: George III told Thurlow that 'Lord Shelburne expressed an uneasiness lest I should yield to the importunities of Lord Rockingham, which would reduce him to a Secretary of State, acting under the former, instead of a colleague' ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 5.443, no. 3632). The king composed a bland formula, suggesting joint recommendations. Fox and Shelburne disputed in whose department negotiations with the Americans lay and finished up with rival plenipotentiaries in Paris. The implementation of economic reform also caused trouble. Of the debate in the Lords on 15 April, Shelburne reported to the king that 'I insisted that the proposed reduction of ministerial influence must make the struggle within and without doors who should contribute most to Your Majesty's dignity, comfort and splendour' (ibid., 5.463, no. 3665). This interpretation had occurred to no one before, but George III, not surprisingly, replied that 'nothing could be more proper than Lord Shelburne's language' (ibid., 5.464, no. 3666). Shelburne was already building up support, sending Thurlow to sound out Henry Dundas as early as April in case 'a breach of administration should ever happen as to leave him in possession of government'. At a later meeting Dundas, a blunt Scot, found Shelburne's 'civility and courtship a little overdone upon so slight an acquaintance' (Cannon, 'Fox-North Coalition', 12-13). 
One of Shelburne's main responsibilities was for Ireland, where the armed volunteers were demanding the immediate acknowledgement of legislative independence. In public, Shelburne declared handsomely that 'the voice of a people... ought to be attended to': in letters to his brother-in-law Richard Fitzpatrick, now chief secretary, he urged firmness and delay. To the king he confessed that, while it was 'a subject through which I do not see some sort of way', it was 'never off my mind'. On American independence he was equally delphic. In cabinet and to the commanders in the field he accepted that independence was not a condition of peace, but a categorical offer: to the king he reported to the contrary -- that peace would be 'the price of independence' (Cannon, 'Fox-North Coalition', 12-13, 17-18). Fox was considering resigning on the issue when rumours spread that Rockingham was gravely ill. Shelburne at once began making plans, discussing with the king what role, if any, Fox should play in the new government: 'it may not be necessary to remove him at once' ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 6.70, no. 3825). As soon as Rockingham's death was known, the king offered Shelburne the Treasury. 
Shelburne's ministry, the peak of his career, lasted eight months, for five of which parliament was in recess. His strongest card was his new chancellor of the exchequer, young William Pitt. But Pitt, who had already raised eyebrows with his declaration that he would never accept a junior post, was also a potential rival -- an obvious successor to an unpopular first minister. Lord Grantham became foreign secretary, Lord Temple went to Dublin as viceroy, and Thomas Townshend took the Home Office: the new recruits, thought Thurlow, who remained as lord chancellor, were 'not all of the most promising sort' ('Fifth Report', HMC, 211). Dundas was brought in to augment the Commons team, John Robinson was recruited to give electoral advice, and in August the king wrote personally to beg North to use his influence on behalf of the ministry. Challenged by Fox to deny that his resignation was not pique but policy, Shelburne produced one of his classic responses: 'he made no such assertion; but he had certainly said, that 'in his opinion', that was the cause, and the exclusive cause, but he had not asserted it as a fact' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 23, 1782-3, 200-01). 
Most of Shelburne's time in the summer was devoted to the peace negotiations, over which he exercised very close supervision. Until a late stage he entertained hopes of some form of federal union. The first setback was the American declaration that, if independence was not unconditionally acknowledged, negotiations were at an end: though the king grumbled that he did not see 'how the present ministry can consent to it', Shelburne gave way. A second problem was the American refusal to compensate the loyalists, insisting that this was a matter for the individual colonies -- a palpable evasion, which was bound to go down badly with the British public. At the same time Shelburne continued the complex process of economical reform, and though he wriggled out of any commitment to parliamentary reform, it meant that he was seriously overloaded. He had neither the time, nor probably the inclination, to consult widely or to carry his colleagues with him. Grafton, Camden, Richmond, Keppel, and Conway rebelled on a proposal to cede Gibraltar, and it had to be abandoned. Temple, in Dublin, was outraged that Shelburne could not find time to talk to his younger brother William Grenville, the chief secretary, about Irish problems. On 27 November 1782 Shelburne fell back on one of his stock phrases: 'the subject was never off his mind... and a great deal of such verbiage' ('Memoirs of the Court', 1.67). On 7 December Grenville was mortified when Shelburne walked out while he was talking, and concluded that 'Lord Shelburne's evident intention is to make cyphers of his colleagues' (ibid., 1.84). A week later Shelburne produced another classic: 'he was 'inclined to think'', Grenville reported to Temple, 'not that he 'thought', your government would go on there more easily than you expected' (ibid., 1.87). With that serene assurance, Temple had to be satisfied, and began to contemplate resignation. 
Peace preliminaries with America were signed on 30 November, and Shelburne approached the meeting of parliament in a mood of unintelligible confidence. He had always shared Chatham's conviction that the support of the king was everything, but he possessed neither Chatham's oratory to fall back on nor his experience of the Commons. On 13 November he assured Lord Carmarthen that his opponents in the Lower House would not exceed sixty -- 'which he had reason to be assured of, tho' it appeared scarce credible' ('Political Memoranda', 76). Next he told Fitzpatrick that he understood nothing of the Commons, 'but that they show him 'a very good list'' ('Memorials and Correspondence', 2.10). This was Robinson's estimate of probable voting, itself based upon the assumption that the king would bring North and his troops to the support of the ministry. On 18 December 1782 Grenville reported another meeting with Shelburne: 'I never heard any man, in the whole course of my life, affirm any one thing more distinctly, positively and unequivocally, than he did, when he told me that Government were on a sure foundation here -- there was a moral certainty... Either Lord Shelburne is... the most abandoned and direct liar upon the face of the earth, or he is deceived himself, too grossly to be imagined. ('Memoirs of the Court', 1.89)' Nor had the opening day in parliament gone well. The issue of recognition of American independence returned to haunt him. In the Commons, Pitt declared that it was unconditional: in the Lords, Shelburne declared the opposite. Fox and his friends made the most of their advantage, and though the king suggested that Pitt must have got it wrong and could correct himself, Pitt did not take kindly to the idea. It was, Shelburne admitted, 'awkward', and in the Lords he was forced to take refuge in refusing to answer questions on the subject ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 6.175, no. 4014). Worst of all were signs that the king was beginning to harbour doubts about his new first minister. Deploring the administration's poor showing in the Lords on 5 December, he remarked that these mishaps would not occur 'if there was any energy or discipline in government' (ibid., 6.173, no. 4012). On the 8th he declared that 'it is highly material that Lord Shelburne should not by any language in the House of Lords appear to change his conduct, let the blame fall where it may. I do not wish that he should appear but in a dignified light' (ibid., 6.175-6, no. 4015). 
With Fox and Shelburne quite irreconcilable, the fate of the ministry turned on North and his friends. But North was by no means a free agent, and it is doubtful whether he could have carried most of his followers in support of the peace. Setting aside personalities, the failure to secure compensation for the loyalists was bound to be a sticking point for men who had, for seven years, supported the American war. Preoccupied with the peace negotiations, Shelburne left his approach to North far too late, partly because Pitt remained opposed to any such move. In the meantime Shelburne scarcely seemed to notice that his government was disintegrating. Keppel resigned from the Admiralty on 23 January 1783, Carlisle gave up the lord high stewardship, Richmond left the cabinet, and Grafton, always unsteady, resigned on the day of the debate on the peace. North's understanding with Fox was agreed on 14 February and announced in parliament on the 18th. In the Lords, Shelburne offered a rather rambling and theatrical defence but carried the day, in a very full house, by seventy-two votes to fifty-nine. In the Commons, despite surprise at the new coalition, Fox and North held most of their supporters and defeated the ministry by 224 to 208. At this point Shelburne's unpopularity came into play. A rearguard action was not out of the question, but hardly any of his colleagues wished Shelburne to continue, and he seems himself to have been exhausted, bewildered, and demoralized. Carmarthen, who dined with him on the 20th, found him 'totally devoid of spirit' ('Political Memoranda', 82). He had been so convinced that the king's support would be decisive that he had no contingency plans and could scarcely comprehend what had happened. His friends hinted at treachery at court. Orde reported the opinion of John Hatsell, clerk to the Commons, that 'the stability or downfall to your administration depends solely (as Your Lordship has always said) upon the 'Highest'... It is his will' (Fitzmaurice, 3.361). This was arrant nonsense. Nor is it clear why the opinion of a Commons clerk on such a matter should carry much weight, but it was perhaps easier for Shelburne to believe that he had been betrayed than to admit that he had totally misjudged the situation. In a second debate on 21 February, Pitt acquitted himself magnificently. However, that was of little comfort for Shelburne since it established Pitt firmly as the heir apparent, and much of his speech sounded like a political obituary for Shelburne, abandoned to the admiration of posterity: 'when stripped of his power and emoluments, he once more descends to private life... men will see him through a different medium' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 23, 1782-3, 551). The opposition won again by 207 to 190, and the following day Shelburne was told that he must resign. 
Shelburne stayed in office until 26 March to enable a new administration to be formed. Though he remained active in the Lords for more than twenty years, his political career was over. He spoke bitterly afterwards of the king as a man who 'obtained your confidence, procured from you your opinion of different public characters, and then availed himself of this knowledge to sow dissension' (Fitzmaurice, 3.363). Hardly any of his associates mourned his departure. Horace Walpole's vituperation may be ascribed to Shelburne's threat to his sinecures: 'he was so well known that he could only deceive by speaking truth... He was so fond of insincerity as if he had been the inventor' ('Last Journals of Horace Walpole', 2.465). But few found him pleasant to work with. George Rose declared he would never be in the same room with him again: 'the alternate violence and flattery of Lord Shelburne... made my situation so thoroughly unpleasant to me that I felt the certain removal from office as a relief' ('Diaries and Correspondence', 1.25-8). William Knox wrote that 'those who served with him in office abhorred him as a principal', and Sir Stanier Porten claimed to have told him 'God be thanked I am not going to be under you again' ('Various Collections', 6.283). He might perhaps have found a niche as a reforming minister under some enlightened despot, but, in a parliamentary system which called for some capacity to work with other people, his basic insecurity meant that he found it almost impossible to establish tolerable relations. 
Since at the time of his resignation Shelburne was only forty-five, a return to power was not impossible. A strange speech in May 1783 did little to restore his reputation. He denied that the House of Commons had the sole right to consider money bills, and added: 'with regard to the argument that he had lost the confidence of the House of Commons, he did not believe he had lost it, but let the House of Commons beware or they would lose my confidence'. The House of Commons bore this threat with equanimity, the House of Lords declined to pick a quarrel on money bills, and Shelburne's comeback finished with an acrimonious exchange with his former colleague Keppel (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 23, 1782-3, 824). The coalition ministry which followed lasted only until December 1783 and was succeeded by Pitt's. But Pitt, according to George Rose, was 'as little disposed to further connexion with Lord Shelburne as myself' ('Diaries and Correspondence', 1.32), and Townshend (now Lord Sydney) confided to Orde that to bring back Shelburne would be as alarming as bringing back Lord Bute. At a later date Bentham reported a conversation with Shelburne who 'complained repeatedly of Pitt and Thurlow for breach of faith... it seemed to sit very heavy on him' (Bentham, 10.214). Nursing his resentments, he did not attend to vote against Fox's 'India Bill'. In August 1784 Daniel Pulteney wrote that the only thing that could endanger Pitt's government would be to give a place to Shelburne 'where he can be credited to be prime minister' ('Rutland MSS', 3.132). Pitt's solution was to obtain for Shelburne promotion to a marquessate in November 1784. This did not mollify him for long. In October 1785 Orde found him at Bowood 'not in the most satisfactory temper with the ministers', and in March 1786 Shelburne -- now Lord Lansdowne -- admitted that he found the ministry's attitude towards him 'unaccountable' (ibid., 250, 287). Meanwhile the coalition wits pilloried him in 'The Rolliad' as 'the sylvan sage, whom Bowood guards to rule a purer age', and made fun of his contorted language. His small following collapsed. Dunning died in August 1783, Townsend followed in July 1787, and Barre went blind. The duke of Rutland, lord lieutenant of Ireland, who had lobbied Pitt on Lansdowne's behalf, died in October 1787 at the age of thirty-three. Of his newer associates, Bentham was unfitted for parliamentary life and Samuel Romilly did not enter parliament until after Lansdowne's death. 
Lansdowne continued to speak in the Lords, but as a commentator, or even a lecturer, rather than a leading politician. In June 1785 he took the opportunity of Pitt's Irish commercial propositions to reiterate his belief in free trade, and he repeated the argument when he gave strong support to the commercial treaty with France in March 1787, denying that France was a natural enemy of Britain. Even then he became involved in another angry exchange with a former colleague, Richmond, which smouldered on for several days. In 1788 he spoke and voted on the government side over the proposed regency. 
It is possible that the death of his second wife on 7 August 1789 would have pushed Lansdowne back into politics in any case, but the advent of the French Revolution was certain to call him into action. His close contacts with French writers and statesmen, among them Mirabeau and Talleyrand, made him sympathetic, and he was convinced that the French sought only a liberal constitution. His judgement was not noticeably better than that of his colleagues. He greatly approved of the French nobility abandoning their separate order and joining the Third Estate, which, he insisted, would give them vast influence. He believed that the revolution would grow less violent and that the continental powers would not intervene. Most obvious was his growing antipathy towards Pitt, with whom he had already had differences over Indian affairs and the impeachment of Hastings. The first public evidence of the breach came in his speech of 13 December 1790 on the settlement with Spain at the end of the Nootka Sound crisis. In a long survey of the foreign policy of Pitt's government he claimed that, as soon as Frederick the Great had died in 1786, ministers had abandoned their pacific stance and sought to terrify and intimidate every court in Europe. By 1791 he was in persistent opposition, joining the strong censure of Pitt's handling of the Ochakov crisis with Russia, which forced the minister into a humiliating withdrawal. Lansdowne, reported Sydney in June 1791, was 'in a state of great and extraordinary political violence' ('Correspondence of... Cornwallis', 2.142). The diplomatic rebuff forced the resignation of the foreign secretary and shook Pitt's position, and in the spring of 1792 there were negotiations for a coalition, in which Lansdowne played some part. Gillray produced a caricature, entitled 'Malagrida's Driving Post', which showed him entering St James's Palace while Fox and Sheridan begged a lift, and the Bowood archives include a rather strange memo by Lansdowne, more of a disquisition than a working paper, on the possibilities of a change of ministry. The negotiations failed, but in the summer Thurlow was dismissed and Loughborough took his place as lord chancellor. 
Under these circumstances, Fox and Lansdowne edged closer. Their rapprochement was assisted by Fox's friendly treatment in the House of Commons of Lansdowne's son Lord Wycombe, which contrasted with Pitt's scorn. Some more formal understanding was needed in 1793 after the outbreak of war hardened the divisions in parliament. To Fox's initiative, Lansdowne responded by asking whether a mere reconciliation or an avowed junction was intended. Lord Spencer wrote in February 1794 that 'Lord Lansdowne stands as clearly at the head of the opposition in one house as Mr Fox does at the head of that in the House of Commons' (Mitchell, 232), but wondered whether a formal coalition would do much to improve Fox's popularity. The following year Fox admitted that 'I never can have a good opinion of him, and still less a great one. However, we are upon terms of the greatest civility' ('Memorials and Correspondence', 3.112-13). They agreed to consult in the unlikely event of an approach from the court. In the meantime Lansdowne's opposition to the war led to a fresh campaign of vilification in the newspapers as a friend of the Jacobins. Caricaturists had a field day, portraying him as a French agent or a sans-culotte, shouting 'Ca ira!', wearing the cap of liberty, and working the guillotine, usually with a bland smile. His parliamentary activity increased considerably. He insisted that any attempt to invade France would be doomed to failure, warned of the danger of turning France into 'a military republic... impossible to extinguish', and predicted that France might produce a military genius -- 'great moments have always produced great men' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 30, 1792-4, 1395). His motion was rejected by 103 votes to thirteen. In May 1794 he protested strongly against the suspension of habeas corpus, complaining that the committee of secrecy was made up of alarmists, and in January 1795 he supported the duke of Bedford's motion for peace with France. But his renewed activity made it less rather than more likely that he would be recalled to active service, and he admitted ruefully that 'the tide of popularity was against him' (ibid., 31, 1794-5, 973). In a debate on the 'Seditious Meetings Bill' in December 1795 he agreed that precautions against subversion were needed -- 'an admission which, he trusted, would at least be sufficient to exempt him from the charge of Jacobinism' (ibid., 32, 1795-7, 534). But he was trapped in the same position as in the 1770s when he had opposed the American war, and he conceded that he attended reluctantly, when all he could do was to issue warnings of dire disaster. 'Not one session had passed since 1793', he declared in 1797 in a rare moment of wry humour, 'in which he had not bored their lordships with his prophetic admonitions' (ibid., 32, 1795-7, 1564). The isolation of the leaders of the opposition forced them closer. In February 1796 Fox wrote that 'the circumstances of the times will of themselves bring me and Lansdowne together... we are indeed now upon a very good footing and quite sufficiently so to enable us to act cordially together, if any occasion offers to doing so usefully. ('Memorials and Correspondence', 3.129)' There was a flurry of excitement in February 1801 when a recurrence of the king's illness made possible a regency for the prince of Wales, an ardent admirer of Fox. Lansdowne and Fox agreed to serve as secretaries of state under Lord Moira, which would have reconstituted the unhappy partnership of the spring of 1782, and Lord Wycombe was pencilled in for the Admiralty. But the king recovered within four weeks, and Lansdowne's last moment had passed. He lived to see his younger son, Lord Henry Petty, lay the foundations of a distinguished parliamentary career, and he made his last speech on 23 May 1803, arguing that none of Napoleon's provocations justified a resumption of the war. The motion was lost by 142 votes to ten. He died at his house in Berkeley Square on 7 May 1805 and was buried at High Wycombe. 
A good and ready speaker, a formidable debater, more persistent and better informed than almost all his contemporaries, particularly among the peerage, Lansdowne was in the centre of politics for forty years, held high office on four occasions, was awarded the Garter (1782) and was raised in the peerage (1784). Nevertheless, his career was a failure and he felt it dearly: 'his mind is soured', wrote Thomas Orde in 1786 ('Rutland MSS', 3.324). At the end of his life, in a fragment of autobiography, he reflected on the causes of his lack of success. He deplored his education; complained that as a child only one aunt, Lady Arbella Denny, had shown him any real affection; and lamented that 'it has been my fate through life to fall in with clever but unpopular connections' (Fitzmaurice, 1.17). In all of this there was a certain amount of self-deception. He was certainly not worse educated than most of his aristocratic contemporaries, and his later circle at Bowood included such distinguished men as Dunning, Price, Priestley, and Bentham. Early in his political career he was associated with Bute and Henry Fox, who were certainly disliked. But men can choose their associates. His patrons were out of active politics by 1766, and soon Shelburne himself was the unpopular connection other people shunned, collecting more than his share of political abuse as 'Malagrida' (arch-dissembler) or 'the Jesuit of Berkeley Square'. There are other and more plausible explanations of the mistrust he aroused and the disappointment he suffered. His uneasiness prompted him to alternate flattery and hectoring, which most of his colleagues found unpleasant, and to suspiciousness, of which his son complained forcefully while abroad in 1785. In debate he was frequently vituperative and sarcastic -- Daniel Pulteney referred in 1787 to his 'sneering manner' ('Rutland MSS', 3.376) -- and Lord Holland, in a very fair assessment, wrote that his speeches 'were not only animated and entertaining, but embittered the contest' (Holland, 1.42). His early success was resented by his fellow peers, who regarded him as a pushy Irish upstart, and his very brief membership of the Commons (he never took his seat) left him seriously underestimating the importance of that house. His advocacy of popular and reformist policies -- free trade, religious toleration, economical reform, and parliamentary reform -- while commending him to some later historians, won little praise from the governing elite of Hanoverian Britain. Bentham thought that Lansdowne was muddle-headed, with a tendency to embrace grand schemes without fully understanding them, and though it would be difficult for anyone to attain Bentham's standards of rigour and logic, Lansdowne could become confused. His reluctance to delegate meant that he was often overworked: 'of all ministers', wrote one subordinate, 'he was the most difficult to please, never satisfied with what anyone did, or even what he did himself' ('Various Collections', 6.283). 


@@@@@


doc= 22071


Fitzmaurice, Henry Petty-, third marquess of Lansdowne (1780-1863), politician, was born on 2 July 1780 at Lansdowne House, Berkeley Square, London, the second surviving son of William Petty, second earl of Shelburne (1737-1805) (first marquess of Lansdowne from 1784), and the first with his second wife, Lady Louisa Fitzpatrick (1755-1789), daughter of John, first earl of Upper Ossory. His father was prime minister in 1782-3 and he was brought up from his earliest years with a political career in mind. Educated from at least 1793 to 1796 at Westminster School under the supervision of one of the masters, Peter Debary, he was sent with him at the suggestion of his father's friend Jeremy Bentham to study, like many other British noblemen, under Dugald Stewart at Edinburgh University from 1796 to 1798. In 1798 he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, until he could travel abroad. 
Having graduated MA in 1801, Petty left for the continent with Bentham's protege Etienne Dumont. Apart from visiting Switzerland, he spent much time in Paris, where he was introduced to Lafayette, and also first met his hero Charles James Fox. While still abroad he was returned by his father as MP for Calne on 7 July 1802. Among others to recognize his potential was Pitt, who on his return to power in May 1804 offered him a post, but Petty was already firmly committed to the whig cause. In June 1805 he was elected to the Commons' committee to prepare the articles of impeachment against Pitt's ally Melville. When parliament reassembled on 21 January 1806 the whigs chose him to read in the Commons the amendment they had prepared to the loyal address but in view of the prime minister's mortal illness waived a vote. Even before Pitt's death on 23 January 1806, Fox backed his desire to stand for Pitt's Cambridge University seat. On 24 January Petty resigned his seat at Calne, and won the university seat on 7 February in a famous tripartite contest with his future colleagues Althorp and Palmerston; in the general election of October-November 1806 he was returned unopposed. 
On 5 February 1806 Petty had taken the seals as chancellor of the exchequer in Grenville's ministry and been sworn to the privy council. His first budget on 28 March 1806 raised property tax by 50 per cent and continued the whig campaign for economy in public expenditure and against official corruption. In the reshuffle occasioned by Fox's death on 13 September 1806, Grenville briefly considered making him home secretary. On 29 January 1807 Petty introduced a new financial plan to sustain expenditure on the war, embodied in his second budget of 4 March 1807. This, which involved the redemption of public loans over fourteen years, was thought fundamentally unsound and was abandoned by the next government. Petty was a strong supporter of the ministry's moves to improve the position of Catholics in the army, which led to its dismissal by George III on 24 March 1807. Petty was himself defeated at Cambridge over the Catholic question, on 8 May 1807, and was brought in instead for Camelford by the duke of Bedford on 11 May. On Grey's succession to his father's earldom in November 1807, he was happy not to press his claims against those of George Ponsonby to the leadership of the opposition in the lower house, though he was, in the opinion of his first cousin Lord Holland, 'the best hope of the Whig Party in the Commons' (Holland, 'Memoirs of the Whig Party', 44). It was also clear that he was unlikely to remain there long. His father had died in 1805, leaving him extensive lands in co. Kerry and an income which contemporaries put at $5000 a year. The death, on 15 November 1809, of his half-brother, the second marquess, who led an eccentric life and had been in poor health, removed him to the Lords, where he took his seat on 23 January 1810. On 30 March 1808, at her father's seat, Melbury, Petty had married Lady Louisa Emma Fox-Strangways (1785-1851), daughter of Henry Thomas, second earl of Ilchester. They had three children: William Thomas, Earl Wycombe, and from 1818, earl of Kerry ('b'. 24 March 1811, died 21 August 1836); Louisa ('b'. 21 Jan 1813), who married the Hon. James Kenneth Howard on 10 February 1845; and Henry Thomas Petty-Fitzmaurice ('b'. 5 Jan 1816), from 1836 earl of Shelburne, who was summoned to the Lords as Baron Wycombe in 1856 and succeeded his father as fourth marquess. 
Following what proved to be the king's final descent into madness at the end of 1810, Lansdowne, as he now was, and Holland were among the leaders of the unsuccessful whig opposition to the 1811 act which temporarily restricted the powers of the regent. But the whigs were to receive no thanks from the prince of Wales. On Wellesley's resignation as foreign secretary early in 1812, George urged the whigs to form a coalition ministry with Perceval, knowing they would not accept. Grenville and Grey consulted Lansdowne and others and, at Lansdowne's urging, rested their refusal solely on the government's and their incompatible views on Ireland and the Catholic question. After Perceval's assassination on 11 May, the prince commissioned Wellesley to form a ministry, but Lansdowne and the other whigs returned the same answer as to the previous overture, and Liverpool was confirmed in office. In May 1813 Lansdowne actively supported Grattan's abortive bill for the removal of Roman Catholic civil disabilities. The long years of whig opposition were spent by Lansdowne in championing causes which were to remain dear to him throughout his career: the ending of the slave trade and the removal of discriminatory legislation against Catholics, dissenters, and Jews. He was also particularly interested in financial questions, foreign affairs, and law reform. On succeeding his cousin as fourth earl of Kerry in 1818, he added the family's original surname of Fitzmaurice to his own. 
By 1826 Canning, who felt isolated in Liverpool's cabinet, was sounding out Lansdowne about a possible coalition between his supporters and the whigs. They had much in common: for example, on 15 March 1824 Lansdowne had moved for the immediate recognition of the new South American states, one of Canning's most cherished objectives as foreign secretary. Canning's appointment as prime minister on 10 April 1827, following Liverpool's stroke and the subsequent resignation of the diehard tory ministers, should have led to a political realignment, but George IV's opposition to the pro-Catholic bias of the new ministry proved a stumbling-block. Meanwhile the whig party split, with Grey and 'the malignants' going into opposition; Lansdowne leading a section of the whigs onto the government benches, while a third group, under Althorp, adopted a neutral stance. Lansdowne and his followers refused to take full office until the king's opposition to installing pro-Catholics in the Irish government could be overcome, and he initially joined the government without portfolio on 20 May. He eventually became home secretary, the post always intended for him, on 16 July. By then Canning was mortally ill and it fell to Lansdowne to convey the news of his death on 8 August to the king at Windsor. George was not prepared to countenance the idea of a whig prime minister and sent instead for Frederick Robinson, Viscount Goderich, a Canningite. Lansdowne agreed to continue in office, but events soon showed both Goderich's incapacity and the exposed position in which this left his allies. On discovering that the politically objectionable Herries was to be chancellor of the exchequer, Lansdowne threatened to resign but the king, playing on his patriotism, persuaded him to stay. Lansdowne spent the remainder of the year in vain attempts to strengthen his position by securing the admission of Holland to the cabinet, but at the start of 1828 Goderich's ramshackle administration finally collapsed. The episode damaged Lansdowne's political standing for at least a decade and, more importantly, seems to have shaken his own confidence in his ability to lead the party. 
When the whigs returned to power in November 1830 Grey offered to stand aside if Lansdowne wished to be prime minister, but doubtless did so in the sure knowledge that the offer would be refused. The recurrence and rejection of similar offers were to characterize the second half of Lansdowne's political life. After it had first been proffered to Holland, Lansdowne also turned down the post of foreign secretary and settled for that of lord president of the council on 22 November. He was, however, one of Grey's closest advisers and one of the government's chief contacts with the tory 'waverers', led by Harrowby and Wharncliffe, in its attempt to secure the passage of the 'Reform Bill' through the Lords in late 1831 and 1832. Like Grey, Melbourne, and Palmerston, he was at first opposed to any large-scale creation of sympathetic peers, though he came to think that some might be necessary. In the event William IV's promise to create peers proved sufficient to secure the passage of the bill. Lansdowne was, as he was to remain, a very moderate reformer who wished to remove obvious abuses and anomalies, but also to ensure that the landed interest remained well represented in the Commons and to maintain the authority of the House of Lords. 
When Melbourne was sent for by the king on Grey's resignation in July 1834, he sought and received an assurance from Lansdowne that he did not wish to head the new government. Lansdowne continued as lord president until Melbourne's ministry was dismissed by the king on 14 November 1834. On Peel's resignation in April 1835, Grey advised William IV to send for Melbourne and Lansdowne, and after both had rebuffed the king's suggestion of a coalition government, Melbourne resumed the premiership, and, on 18 April 1835, Lansdowne his former office, which he held until the government's resignation on 31 August 1841. He was installed as a knight of the Garter on 5 February 1836. He had been a member of Grey's commission of inquiry into the Church of England in 1832-4 and was reappointed by Melbourne on 6 June 1835. When the permanent ecclesiastical commission was established in 1836, he was an 'ex officio' member as president of the council. State grants for education had been initiated in 1833 and the whigs were eager to use them to extend educational provision. On 10 April 1839 an order in council appointed a committee of the privy council to supervise these funds and Lansdowne, as lord president, named James Kay-Shuttleworth its first secretary. The established church strongly opposed government interference and was deeply suspicious that the privy council was being used to avoid parliamentary scrutiny. In a justly celebrated reply on 5 July to motions by the archbishop of Canterbury in the Lords against the committee and its policy, Lansdowne defended the scheme, arguing that the quantity and quality of education in Britain was less than in any other major European state except Spain and Russia, and that the diffusion of 'sound, moral, and religious instruction' was the only way to make the uneducated 'useful, respectable, and orderly members of society'. In the uninstructed children now growing out of infancy, he warned the peers, 'your Lordships may see the rising Chartists of the next age' ('Hansard 3', 48, 1839, 1263). A settlement was eventually reached at a conference at Lansdowne House between Lansdowne, Russell, the archbishop of Canterbury, and the bishops of London and Salisbury, at which most of the church's objections were met, and which was ratified as the so-called 'Concordat' of 1840. 
After Melbourne's stroke on 23 October 1842, Lansdowne effectively became the whig leader in the Lords. In the mid-1840s Peel's second ministry began to falter under his determination to repeal the corn laws. Lansdowne had been educated in the free trade traditions of the Scottish economists and the Benthamites. On 28 February 1812 he had attacked the protectionist orders in council as injurious to the manufacturing and commercial interests of the country, and, when on 26 May 1820 he moved in the Lords for a select committee to inquire into the means of extending and improving the country's foreign trade in order to relieve distress in the manufacturing districts, he had observed: 'No axiom was more true than this -- that it was by growing what the territory of a country could grow most cheaply, and by receiving from other countries what it could not produce except at too great an expense, that the greatest degree of happiness was to be communicated to the greatest extent of population. ('Hansard 2', 1, 1820, 549)' However, he was no doctrinaire theorist and although he thought the onus was on those who wished to restrict free trade to prove their case, he acknowledged there were occasions when this could be justified. Thus, when the whigs adopted a free trade budget before they went out of office in 1841, Lansdowne was among those who had reservations. During the unsuccessful whig attempt to form a government in December 1845, he persuaded Russell to make the repeal of the corn laws more acceptable to the landed interest by offering $1 million compensation without increased taxation. As a major Irish landowner he particularly feared the effect that unrestrained free trade would have on that country, and personally favoured a fixed duty on corn. Palmerston, meanwhile, was advocating a coalition of whigs and protectionists. In alarm, Russell asked Lansdowne to summon a meeting of all whig peers at Lansdowne House on 23 May 1846. At it Russell told them he would not lead a government supporting a fixed duty and, to maintain party unity, Lansdowne urged the peers to follow his lead, and put aside their own preferences to support Peel's total repeal of the corn laws. 
Following the fall of Peel in June 1846, Lansdowne played an important role in the formation of Russell's ministry, and was one of those who argued that the more sympathetic members of Peel's cabinet should be invited to stay in office. His advocacy of a coalition with the Peelites was to continue throughout the life of the government. He himself once more became lord president of the council on 6 July, and leader of the House of Lords. Lansdowne's position was to be an unenviable one, not least because during the next five years he was forced frequently to defend Palmerston's indiscretions in a house with an inbuilt tory majority, leading him to complain that Stanley was the real leader of the Lords. To remedy this Russell proposed the introduction of life peerages to be conferred on Liberals. Lansdowne was not opposed to this in principle, as was shown by his position during the Parke case in 1856, but thought a controversy would be more trouble than it was worth, and favoured merely some hereditary Liberal additions or the calling up of Scottish or Irish peers. 
In 1851 Russell decided to resign after the defeat in the Commons on 20 February of his plans for parliamentary reform. The queen refused to accept his resignation until she had seen Lansdowne, who was summoned from Bowood to London on 22 February for an audience at which he supported Russell's decision. However, Stanley failed to form a government, nor did a coalition of Peelites and whigs prove viable. On 28 February the former ministers met at Lansdowne House to determine their next move, and Russell suggested the queen seek the advice of Lansdowne after the meeting. He was unable to suggest anything, though 'offered to do whatever might be most conducive to the Queen's comfort -- stay out of office, or come into office -- as might be thought the most useful' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 2.309). In fact, the old government carried on until 21 February 1852. Lansdowne was rightly seen as a restraining influence on Russell's enthusiasm for parliamentary reform. He, for his part, told Greville 'that if any strong measure was to be contemplated by the Cabinet, I should immediately walk out of it' ('Greville Memoirs', 6.423). 
During the ministerial crisis of 1851 Lansdowne, who was now in his seventies, had made clear his desire to stand down from his offices. When he announced the government's resignation to the Lords on 23 February 1852, he also signalled his own effective retirement from public life: 'I think the time has arrived when I may reasonably dispense with a constant, or... compulsory attendance upon the proceedings of this House' ('Hansard 3', 119, 1852, 883). By this time he had been widowed: Lady Lansdowne died on 3 April 1851. A subscription was raised for a bust of Lansdowne by Marochetti, but he was not to escape so easily. The Liberals in opposition were divided and, among others, Palmerston pressed for him to take the lead in any new Liberal government. Lansdowne rebuffed the suggestion, loyally supporting Russell -- even the latter's assurance that he would serve under him made him no more willing to shoulder the burden of office. On 17 December Derby's government was defeated on the budget and resigned. The queen sent for Aberdeen and for Lansdowne, who was ill with gout and could not travel to Osborne. Before leaving to see the queen on 19 December Aberdeen visited him at Lansdowne House and the two statesmen tried to persuade each other to take office. In fact, the queen thought Lansdowne too old and ill to be prime minister, as well as suspecting that the Peelites would not serve under him. In spite of his show of reluctance, Aberdeen was in any case determined to be prime minister and Lansdowne's indisposition and genuine disinclination rendered the matter a foregone conclusion. The chief difficulty in forming the ministry lay in conciliating Russell, and Lansdowne played a leading role in persuading him to serve as foreign secretary. He himself agreed to be a member of the cabinet without portfolio. 
When Aberdeen's ministry fell on 30 January 1855, after the defection of Russell and its defeat on the conduct of the Crimean War, many whigs expected the queen to send for Lansdowne and still hoped he would lead a new government. In the event, she sent for Derby. After his failure to form a government she consulted Lansdowne. The problem on the Liberal side was that neither Russell nor Palmerston would serve under each other. As both had expressed a willingness to serve under Lansdowne the queen urged him to form a government, but he protested his age and health meant that such a ministry might only last a few months, and advised her to send for Russell. Privately, he was convinced that Russell could not form a government and, since it would have had to rely on radical support, would not have served with him had he done so. Events vindicated his judgement and Palmerston succeeded where Russell had failed. Such was Lansdowne's prestige that Palmerston hoped that he would be the 'Organ of the Government' in the Lords and, while other ministers performed the ordinary duties of leader of the house, that he would be 'the directing chief, who would give a character and tone to the body' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 3.102). Lansdowne insisted that Granville be leader in the Lords but signified his approval of the ministry by once again serving in the cabinet without portfolio until Palmerston's resignation on 21 February 1858. 
Aside from his other interests Lansdowne was an active connoisseur of the arts. His father's debts and his brother's eccentricities had caused the family collections to be scattered. When he inherited Bowood, it was nearly derelict. Lansdowne refurbished it and employed C. R. Cockerell to build the chapel in 1821. He bought back his father's collection of ancient marbles from his brother's widow, and commissioned Robert Smirke to complete the construction of a sculpture gallery to house them at Lansdowne House. He also assembled a large collection of paintings (including many by Reynolds), watercolours, and drawings. He became a trustee of the British Museum in 1827, of the National Gallery in 1834, and of the National Portrait Gallery in 1856. He was appointed to the royal commission for promoting the fine arts in 1841. 
Lansdowne's longevity -- 'The Times''s obituary (2 February 1863) observed 'His Life is the history of the Whigs during the present century' -- coupled with his birth, ability, and amiability assured him an outstanding place in the public life and affections of the country. All remarked on his mildness of temper, while his benevolence is typified by the support he afforded to the Irish poet Thomas Moore over several decades. Though his devotion to the whig party was never in doubt, he was by nature conciliatory and always ready to work with and meet the concerns of political opponents. Over the years this exasperated his more enthusiastic colleagues. In the 1830s Brougham dubbed him 'Mother Elizabeth' and in the late 1840s the younger Grey stigmatized Lansdowne and his associates in the party as 'old women'. However, his experience and reputation for fair-mindedness enabled him, in the years after Wellington's death, to fill the duke's role as leading constitutional adviser to the crown. In September 1857 Palmerston conveyed the queen's offer of a dukedom, and it was widely regretted that modesty and an unwillingness to exchange 'that name which has now been mine for so many years, & with which my publick character such as it is has become identified' (BL, Bowood MSS, Lans. 3/42/72) led him to decline the honour. Following his death many tributes, including a much quoted poem in 'Punch' (14 February 1863), attributed to Tom Taylor, described him, after the wise old warrior in the 'Iliad', as the Nestor of his age. In the Lords on 5 February 1863, Russell commented that 'while he dearly loved the Constitution, he was a friend to every improvement, every well-considered advance that could be made in our institutions' and commended his politics as 'alike favourable to liberty and order' ('Hansard 3', 169, 1863, 51). 
On 21 January 1863 Lansdowne, who, though still active, had grown increasingly deaf and frail, fell on the terrace at Bowood and cut his head. His strength slowly failed and he died on 31 January at Bowood, where he was buried on 7 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 22072


Fitzmaurice, Henry Thomas Petty-, fourth marquess of Lansdowne (1816-1866), politician and railway company chairman, was born on 5 January 1816 at Lansdowne House, London, the second, and only surviving, son of Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, third marquess of Lansdowne (1780-1863), politician, and his wife, Lady Louisa Emma Fox-Strangways (1785-1851), fifth daughter of Henry Thomas, second earl of Ilchester. His father had been born with the surname of Petty, but in 1818 reassumed his Irish patronymic of Fitzmaurice. Between August 1836 and 31 January 1863 H. T. Petty-Fitzmaurice was styled earl of Shelburne. 
Lord Shelburne was educated at Westminster School and Trinity College, Cambridge. He sat in the House of Commons for Calne from 1847 to 5 July 1856, and was a junior lord of the Treasury in Lord John Russell's administration from December 1847 to August 1849. In July 1856 he was summoned to the House of Lords in his father's barony of Wycombe, and became under-secretary of state for foreign affairs under Lord Palmerston from 1856 to 1858. 
Unlike his father, Shelburne took small interest in politics; he possessed, however, an admirable capacity for administrative work, which well fitted him for the post of chairman of the Great Western Railway Company, to which he was elected in 1859. He married, first, on 18 August 1840, at Wilton, Wiltshire, Lady Georgiana Herbert (1817-1841), daughter of George Augustus Herbert, eleventh earl of Pembroke; and, secondly, on 1 November 1843, Emily Jane Mercer Elphinstone de Flahault (1819-1895), eldest daughter of Auguste Charles Joseph, Count de Flahault de la Billardrie, and his wife, Margaret de Flahault de la Billardrie, Lady Nairne and Baroness Keith. There were two sons from the second marriage. 
Lansdowne became the fourth marquess, following the death of his father on 31 January 1863. In consequence of his elevation, he resigned from his railway duties. He was made knight of the Garter in 1864. An offer of ministerial office was made to him by Lord Derby on 4 July 1866, but he died suddenly the following day; he was seized with paralysis at White's club, and died a few hours afterwards at Lansdowne House. He was buried in the mausoleum at his family home, Bowood Park, Calne, Wiltshire. 
His elder son, Henry Charles Keith Petty-Fitzmaurice, succeeded as fifth marquess. His widow succeeded her mother as Lady Nairne in 1867. Lord Edmond George Petty-Fitzmaurice, the second son, was created Baron Fitzmaurice in 1906. 


@@@@@


doc= 22073


Pettyt, Thomas (d. 1556), surveyor and military engineer, is of unknown origins; all that is known of his family is that an Edmund Pettyt who was at Calais while Thomas was surveyor there may well have been related. Thomas appears first in 1542 'riding to Barwike about the King's affairs' ('LP Henry VIII', 17, no. 482), and the next year was sent north again to inspect the conditions of Wark Castle at a time when Anglo-Scottish conflict threatened: probably he also resumed work on the defences of Berwick. He then appears to have accompanied the English army in its drive north in 1544 and 1545, when he was required to report on the potential of Ross Castle on the Isle of Bute to control Scotland's western approaches. In autumn 1545, however, he was in Calais, drawing up a map of the English holdings around the city, completed and signed in October. Early the next year he was appointed surveyor of Calais, a post he held until his death. 
Towards the end of 1547 Pettyt was dispatched north again to survey and examine various fortified or fortifiable sites in the west marches of Scotland, and subsequently to advise on the further improvement of the defences of Berwick. It seems that he was not the official architect or consultant but rather the on-site manager; in this role he ensured that instructions from the principal engineers were carried out despite the shortage of money and manpower and the difficulty of the ground, all of which figure in his reports. In this capacity and as surveyor he was to remain in the borders or in Scotland during the English invasions. 
When required to advise on a suitable site for an inland fort to protect English lines of communication, Pettyt proposed Lauder, and spent some months there in 1548. Although he did not stay long enough to complete the work, it was at least in an advanced state at his departure in June. This seems to be the only case where he supplied the design as well as organizing building operations, although it is possible that he was involved in fortifying Eyemouth. His structure at Lauder is now largely buried under later buildings, but a plan drawn up shortly after he left suggests that he had absorbed well the ideas of Italian engineers and the leading English engineers who were adopting their principles, notably in the modern form of the bastions. Merriman comments that the design shows 'sophistication and eccentricity' (Merriman and Summerson, 4.715). Lord Grey, the English commander, claimed that the whole Scottish army would not be able to capture such a strong fortress, whatever foreign aid they might have. His report was apparently accompanied by Pettyt's own plan, which has not survived. 
In July Pettyt accompanied an English force that set out to reinforce Haddington, then besieged by the joint Franco-Scottish army. Finding the allied forces had given up the siege for the time being, and were retreating, the English sought to harass them; the allies then turned on them, pursuing them for several miles. Pettyt was among those captured, and wrote from prison in Edinburgh, to ask for an exchange. After his release he remained on the borders until almost the end of 1549. A substantial bonus was awarded him for his services over the two years. Once the English army had evacuated Haddington late in that year, Lauder was an obvious target. The allies were preparing to besiege it when, by the terms of peace signed at Boulogne in 1550, the whole area had to be returned to Scottish control; the fortress was abandoned and apparently dismantled. 
Meanwhile Pettyt had returned to Calais, where he remained for the rest of his life apart from official visits to London. He was given instructions for improving the defences of Calais and outlying strongholds, including the replacement of a rounded bastion by one apparently more Italianate. These instructions were sufficiently important for Pettyt to have to report directly to Somerset, the lord protector, and even to be recorded in some detail in Edward VI's own chronicle for 1550. In such cases it is never clear how far these instructions may not have been his own recommendations, which he laid before the council, who then ordered him to carry them out; and how far he simply had to report on the state of particular structures, and then act on plans laid down by his superiors. Another map of Calais and the surroundings dating from this time is probably also by him. A few later references in 1552-3 mention his work as surveyor, carrying out various improvements to the fortifications, notably at the outlying stronghold of Guines, but he died before December 1556, when John Rogers was appointed in his place. As Rogers was to be paid 'from the tyme of Petyte's death' ('CPR', '1555-7', 527), and to have the same house for his residence, Pettyt's death must have been quite recent. 
Pettyt's role as surveyor evidently included inspection and overseeing construction and repair of fortifications. Except at Lauder, however, he was a manager and supervisor rather than original designer. His two maps of the Calais territory of 1545 and 'c'.1550 are in the British Library (Cotton MS Augustus I.ii.57B and Cotton MS Augustus I.ii.71 respectively). Plans and maps he made in Scotland are lost, although a plan of Lauder is now at Belvoir Castle. 


@@@@@


doc= 22074


Petyt, William (1640/41-1707), lawyer and political propagandist, was born at Storiths, near Bolton Abbey, Skipton in Craven, Yorkshire, the son of William Petyt, a landowner and lawyer of Bolton Abbey and Barnard's Inn. He was educated at Skipton School and, according to the college's records, matriculated from Christ's College, Cambridge, in April 1660, aged nineteen. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 8 June 1660 and specially admitted to the Inner Temple on 25 November 1664 when he returned to London. Petyt was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in February 1671 and to the bench of the Inner Temple in 1689. Between 1701 and 1702 he was treasurer of the Inner Temple. His brother Silvester (died 1719) also enjoyed a career in law, serving as principal of Barnard's Inn (1715). 
Known throughout his adult life as an assiduous student of English historical records, Petyt learned at the feet of the high tory archivist and lawyer Fabian Philipps. But his own political inclinations ran in a different direction. By the late 1670s he had become an active proponent of excluding Charles II's brother, the Catholic James, duke of York, from the throne, and he counted among his close associates some of the most radical whigs of the period. Thus he was the friend, protege, and legal adviser of Arthur Capel, earl of Essex, who committed suicide while imprisoned for alleged complicity in the Rye House Plot. This relationship gave him access to the group of people around Essex's friend the earl of Shaftesbury, including James Tyrrell and perhaps John Locke. Petyt's circle also included such like-minded whig lawyers as William Atwood, whom he tutored in the ways of the historical archives, and Sir George Treby and Sir Francis Pollexfen, whom he supplied with legal precedents in Charles II's 'quo warranto' proceedings against the City of London. In addition, Petyt was in touch with Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, Henry Neville, William Post-Script Hunt, and Samuel Johnson -- all associated with spirited and sometimes violent opposition to the late Stuart kingship. 
Petyt's reputation rested upon his polemical contributions to this opposition, and, in particular, his service to the radical ancient constitutionalist cause during the exclusion crisis and at the revolution of 1688. Indeed, his powerful briefs on its behalf made him one of the most highly valued -- and feared -- of whig writers. This particular ideology, which was based upon medieval chronicles and manufactured texts such as the so-called laws of St Edward the Confessor, the 'Modus tenendi parliamentum', and the 'Mirror of Justices', had grown out of the civil wars of the 1640s, where it served, along with theories of natural law, to justify rebellion, regicide, and the establishment of a republic. Ancient constitutionalist theorizing, to which Petyt fully subscribed, began with the assumption that the governmental arrangements of pre-Norman England were the same as those that existed in Stuart England. 
Although modern scholarship has shown that this whiggish version of the past, based as it was on spurious texts such as St Edward's laws, the 'Modus', and the 'Mirror', was wrong, most sixteenth- and seventeenth-century writers found both its sources and its stories of institutional continuity credible. In the late 1670s and early 1680s, however, the ancient constitutionalist construction fell under serious attack, as tories scrambled to repair the damage it did to the principle of indefeasible hereditary succession. First came the publication of Sir Robert Filmer's 'Patriarcha' (1679), which was soon followed by the republication of his 'Freeholder's Grand Inquest' (1680). The 'Freeholder's' proved particularly dangerous to the ancient constitutionalist cause because it presented a wide range of arguments against the antiquity of the House of Commons, including evidence that the earliest extant writ to the house dated from 1265. If this line of reasoning, which would soon be reinforced by the powerful polemics of the high-tory historian Dr Robert Brady, went unrefuted, the ancient constitution would lose its claim to antiquity and the Commons would forfeit its right to participate as an equal with the king and the House of Lords. Put differently, this particular tory version of English history seriously undermined the whig argument for excluding the future James II from the throne. 
It was in this charged and risky ideological atmosphere that Petyt wrote his immensely influential 'The Antient Right of the Commons of England Asserted' (1680). One of the most effective and powerful of the radical ancient constitutionalist tracts published in the late seventeenth century, the work was deemed sufficiently weighty to warrant extended response from Brady, and it was cited approvingly by whigs such as Atwood and Tyrrell throughout the rest of the Stuart period. In his tract Petyt turned to medieval chroniclers such as Matthew Paris, Roger Hoveden, and Henry Huntingdon, and, above all, to St Edward's laws, the 'Modus', and the 'Mirror', to make his case for a legally sovereign parliament that now possessed the power to alter the succession because it had anciently done so. Although there was nothing new in the story Petyt told, he presented his arguments for the ancient constitution in a particularly powerful and compelling manner. To the tory denial of the Commons' antiquity, Petyt responded that St Edward's laws told how St Edward collected and reformed 'the ancient Saxon laws and added new ones 'a Rege, Baronibus, & Populo', that is, by king, barons, and people'. Thus, concluded Petyt: 'it is apparent and past all contradiction that the Commons in those days were an essential part of the legislative power, in making and ordaining laws, by which themselves and their posterity were to be governed, and that the law was then the golden metwand and rule which measured out and allowed the prerogative of the prince and the liberty of the subject. (W. Petyt, 'The Antient Right', 1680, 11-12)' Nor was this arrangement changed in 1066 or its aftermath, for William I and his successors kept St Edward's laws alive through a series of confirmations made in the coronation oath and in 'Magna Carta'. This historical evidence gave the lie to tory claims that a Norman conquest had obliterated Saxon laws and institutions. Indeed, what else could the repeated confirmations of Saxon laws mean other than: 'that in the British, Saxon, and Norman governments, the commons (as we now phrase them) had votes, and a share in the making and enacting of laws for the government of the kingdom, and that they were an essential part of the 'Commune Concilium Regni', WittenaGemot, or parliament, before and after the supposed conquest of William the First. (W. Petyt, 'The Antient Right', 1680, 73)' Petyt also turned to the 'Modus' and the 'Mirror' to prove the high power of parliament and the king's subservience to the law made there. The 'Mirror''s message was particularly appropriate to his discussion of parliament's right to exclude the duke of York from the throne, for it told how 'parliaments were instituted 'pur oyer & terminer les plaintes de tort de la Roy, de la Roigne & de lour Infans'... against whom the subject otherwise could not have common justice' (W. Petyt, 'The Antient Right', 1680, 40-41). Since the reign of a Catholic king would surely wrong the people of England, parliament necessarily possessed the power to alter the succession. Moreover, this right was not merely theoretical. Indeed, Petyt wrote, it had been previously exercised on many occasions, as in, for example, the cases of William II, Henry I, and King John, who 'were elected kings of England having no hereditary right' (ibid., 46-7). 
Although Petyt wrote several other political tracts in which he argued the ancient constitutionalist position ('Miscellanea parliamentaria', 1680; 'The Pillars of Parliament Struck at by the Hands of a Cambridge Doctor', 1681; 'Jus parliamentum', 1739), none came close to attaining the status of 'The Antient Right'. Its persuasive power gave Petyt a presence at the revolution of 1688. He was called, along with the leading common lawyers and judges of the day, to give counsel about what had happened in 1688 and 1689. When queried by the Lords about the Commons' resolution concerning the original contract, most members of the long robe admitted that English law had little to say. Petyt was less reticent. Turning to the radical ancient constitutionalist version of history, he told the Lords that in Germanic and Saxon times kings, who were elected by people and parliament, swore an oath at their coronation to uphold the law. This practice continued after the Norman invasion and characterized their present governmental arrangements. Here in the oath, Petyt strongly implied, could be found the contract that bound kings to the law, a contract which James II had presumably broken. 
Although the Convention Parliament eventually reached a compromise in which the 'Bill of Rights' contained no mention of contract, the radical ancient constitutionalism that Petyt had so well articulated constituted a primary, though by no means the only, justification for the revolution settlement. 
Petyt was duly rewarded for his service to the cause. On 25 July 1689 William III appointed him keeper of the Tower records, in which position he replaced Brady, the favourite historian of late Stuart kings. There Petyt 'reigned... as a respectable scholar until the end of his days' (Pocock, 229). 
Petyt died, unmarried, on 3 October 1707 at Chelsea and was buried in the west part of the Temple Church. In his will he provided for the building of a library in the Inner Temple to house his enormous collection of manuscripts and tracts, but his brother Silvester removed about 2000 pieces to his Yorkshire home ('A Catalogue of the Petyt Library at Skipton', 1964). A monument to his memory and a portrait were placed in the Inner Temple. 


@@@@@


doc= 22075


Peverel, Thomas (d. 1419), bishop of Worcester, was said by John Bale in the sixteenth century to have been of good birth, but no connection has been established with any of the several notable families with his surname. He was a member of the Carmelite friary at Bishop's Lynn, Norfolk, by 1377, and became BTh of Oxford University. On 31 July 1387 he was summoned before the lord mayor and aldermen of London, for reasons unknown. On 17 June 1392 he attended the trial of the heretic Henry Crump at Stamford, and in the following year was appointed second 'socius' to the prior-general of his order. On 25 October or 3 November 1395 he was papally provided to the see of Ossory in Ireland, with restitution of temporalities on 4 February following. This was a see under English control, but Peverel secured licence to live in England on 19 May 1396, and nominated attorneys in Ireland on 30 July. His translation on 12 July 1398 to Llandaff was said by the pope to be from Leighlin, another see in the English pale, but this seems a simple error. The temporalities were restored on 16 November. 
Although there is no explicit evidence, it seems very probable that he was among the handful of monks and friars whom Richard II kept around his court in his last years, to considerable criticism. Indeed, on 17 March 1399 he was appointed chancellor to the child Queen Isabella. The fall of the king ended any such role at court, but Peverel was never implicated in any die-hard Ricardian plotting. Probably, he devoted himself quietly to his little Welsh diocese, whence in the summer of 1402 he was forced to flee by Owain Glyn Dwr's rebels. This at least would have ensured any necessary reconciliation with the Lancastrian crown, and on 12 May 1405 he received letters of protection to go with Henry IV on a projected expedition into Wales. However, his diocese remained too dangerous to occupy, especially as Glyn Dwr had now developed firm plans for an all-Welsh episcopate under the Clementist obedience. Peverel was obliged to mark time as a suffragan for Bishop Henry Beaufort, performing ordinations at Winchester on 6 March 1406, and on 12 March and 5 May 1407. 
On 4 July 1407 Peverel was translated to Worcester, receiving his temporalities on 20 November. This was quite notable preferment for a man of his background, especially from a dynasty that had usurped his original patron. Presumably the crown wished to make plain its firm support for anyone who had fallen foul of rebellion against itself. The promotion did not mean that Peverel now had any active public role under the dynasty, although he attended parliaments regularly. He settled down to run his diocese. Archbishop Thomas Arundel once had occasion to remind him formally to observe the constitutions of the province, but his register suggests that he was a conventionally conscientious diocesan, willing and able to move around between his residences. His register ends in 1417 -- both the general 'acta' (April) and his record of ordinations (August) -- but this seems more likely to be a misfortune of survival than sure evidence of suddenly failing powers. He died intestate (as his order required) on 1 March 1419 and was buried in the Carmelite house in Oxford. He seems to have had an equivocal reputation. While John Bale described him 150 years later as a scholar of long standing and an admired preacher, an opponent in the papal curia in 1407 said he was 'of evil life and bad character... a simple-minded man, ignorant of law and insufficient in learning' (Bodl. Oxf., Arch. Selden B.23, fols. 113'v'-114). With Peverel, it was very much a matter of the light in which he was viewed. 


@@@@@


doc= 22076


Peverel, William (b. c.1090, d. after 1155), baron, was the son of a father of the same name, an important Domesday tenant-in-chief in the north midlands, and Adeline. His father, who had custody of Nottingham Castle from 1068, and of the Castle of the Peak in Derbyshire (later named Peveril Castle), died on 28 January 1114; his mother was still alive in 1130. Their children were William, Adelise ('b'. 'c'.1080), who married Richard de Revieres, and Matilda. Peverel witnessed 'c'.1109 his father's foundation charter for the Cluniac priory at Lenton, near Nottingham, and some royal charters in the 1120s. He was twice married, first, 'c'.1115, to Oddona, and second, 'c'.1145, to Avice, daughter of William of Lancaster. William of Lancaster was one of the honorial barons of the honour of Lancaster, then controlled by Ranulf (II) of Chester. With Oddona, Peverel had a son William (described as his heir in a charter for Garendon Abbey), who predeceased him, a son Henry, who may also have predeceased him, and a daughter, Margaret, who married Robert de Ferrers, earl of Derby. 
Peverel, like his father, served as a royal agent under Henry I, particularly in forest matters, though he was less frequently at court. At Northampton in September 1131, if not earlier, he would have sworn to accept the succession of the empress; but he attached himself to Stephen on his accession, and witnessed his charter of liberties of April 1136. He took a prominent part in the civil war of Stephen's reign, and ultimately suffered forfeiture for backing the wrong side. He fought for Stephen at the battle of the Standard in August 1138 and at the battle of Lincoln in February 1141, when he was captured. He thereby lost control of Nottingham Castle, which was given to Ralph Paynel, who had instigated an attack on it by Robert of Gloucester in the previous year. About this time Robert de Ferrers took the title of earl of Nottingham. In 1142 Peverel's knights recaptured the castle and town of Nottingham, and expelled from it 'all who were in favour of the empress' (Symeon of Durham, 2.312). These events were not forgotten when the civil war drew to its close. When Duke Henry landed in England in 1153 he granted Ranulf (II), earl of Chester, the lands of William Peverel, 'unless in my court he is able to clear himself of charges of wickedness and treason' ('Reg. RAN', 3, no. 180). The reference is to the charge that Peverel had earlier attempted to poison Ranulf of Chester while a guest in his house. When Ranulf did die later in the year, the story was not forgotten. 
Nottingham Castle had been burnt in the summer of 1153, and it may be presumed that William Peverel lost control at that time, for no security in respect of it was asked for in the peace settlement later in the year. Peverel's lands were forfeit in February 1155 when Henry, by now king, marched against him. Peverel, who had earlier taken the cowl in one of his religious houses, probably Lenton Priory, fled the area, and was not heard of again. 'The lands of William Peverel' were accounted for separately in the pipe rolls throughout Henry II's reign. 


@@@@@


doc= 22077


Peyton, Sir Edward, second baronet (1587/8-1652?), parliamentarian political writer, was the eldest of the five sons (there were also six daughters) of Sir John Peyton (died 1616) of Isleham, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Alice (1563-1626), daughter of Sir Edward Osborne, lord mayor of London in 1565. A nephew of Robert, Lord Rich, the future second earl of Warwick, Sir John held various political offices in Cambridgeshire, was knighted in 1596, and created a baronet on 22 May 1611. Edward studied at the grammar school in Bury St Edmunds and then, according to Anthony Wood, at Cambridge. He also pursued legal studies at Gray's Inn, where he was admitted on 16 August 1611. Although he had no bachelor's degree, he was allowed to proceed MA at Cambridge in 1618. 
At Streatham, Surrey, on 24 April 1604 Peyton married Martha (died 1613), daughter of Robert Livesay of Tooting, Surrey, on which occasion Peyton's father gave him the manor of Great Bradley, Suffolk. Peyton and his first wife had five children, John (1607-1693), Edward, Robert ('b'. 1611), Thomas ('bur'. 1 Jan 1614), and Amy ('b'. 1605), who in October 1623 married Henry Lawrence, politician and lord president of the council from 1653. James I knighted Peyton at Whitehall on 18 March 1611, and he succeeded to the baronetcy and the family estate at Isleham when his father died in December 1616. Following his wife's death in October 1613, Peyton married on 6 June 1614 Jane, daughter of Sir James Calthorpe of Crockthorpe, Norfolk, and widow of Sir Edmond Thimelthorpe (or Sir Henry Thomelthorpe); they had three children, James (died November 1620), Thomas (1617-1683), and Jane (died February 1633). Peyton was briefly custos rotulorum of the Cambridge bench between 23 December 1617 and 5 February 1618, when the previous incumbent, Sir John Cotton, was restored. Peyton fully expected to regain the post on Cotton's death in March 1621, but the duke of Buckingham instead granted it to Sir John Cutts. 
In 1621 Peyton represented Cambridgeshire in parliament, reporting to the house for the recess subcommittee on petitions, including those dealing with patents. In later speeches he argued that bishops should not try capital cases in the Lords, and he opposed a bill for enclosing more commons, which he did not think 'fitt now when Christendom is a garboile' (Notestein, Relf, and Simpson, 3.186). Peyton served as sheriff of Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire in 1622-3. In January 1624 he defeated Sir John Cutts in a hotly contested election to represent Cambridgeshire in parliament. Responding to a petition from Cutts and Toby Palavicini, who had been defeated by Peyton's electoral partner, Sir Simeon Steward, the House of Commons invalidated the election, but Peyton prevailed in a second election on 18 March. 
As MP for Cambridgeshire in Charles I's first parliament Peyton served on various committees, including those that dealt with privileges, fraudulently held estates, inebriety, and petty larceny. Sitting again for Cambridgeshire in the parliament of 1626, he was appointed to numerous committees, including those for religion, recusancy, and purveyance, and those that considered Lords' bills regarding adultery and fornication, the export of ordnance, and outlaws. In the Commons he spoke against the bill to drain 360,000 acres of fens, a third of which would have gone to the crown, and he presented a petition against William Gyles, vicar of Elm, Cambridgeshire, for drunkenness, recourse to prostitutes, and slandering Martin Luther, Theodore Beza, and William Perkins. About 1627 Buckingham dismissed Peyton as 'custos rotulorum' for Cambridgeshire, replacing him with Cuts. For instigating a fight with neighbours Peyton was summoned before Star Chamber on 10 October 1632. Despite these difficulties he was not yet a staunch critic of the royal court, for his unpublished manuscript, 'A discourse of court and courtiers' (1633), acknowledges that favourites have served the crown by commanding military forces, undertaking embassies, and raising revenue, and are thus entitled to advance their families and augment their estates. However, Peyton was again in trouble in 1638, when Archbishop William Laud and the high commission ordered him to appear before them, presumably for his puritan views. By this time Peyton's second wife had died, and in December 1638 he married the spinster Dorothy Minshawe ('c'.1617-1681) at St James's, Clerkenwell, Middlesex (according to Burke, his new wife was Dorothy, daughter of Edward Ball of Stockwell). 
Although Peyton did not serve in the Short or Long parliaments, his sympathies were clearly with the country, as reflected in his book, 'The King's Violation of the Rights of Parliament' (1641), criticizing Charles I's attempt to arrest the five MPs. Yet Peyton also insisted that the people had no right to destroy the monarchy. The following year he published 'A discourse concerning the fitnesse of the posture necessary to be used in taking the bread and wine at the sacrament', in which he defended his right to partake standing or sitting. To buttress his argument he cited Augustine, Tertullian, Calvin, Bullinger, Beza, Perkins, and others. Roger Cocks responded in 'An Answer to a Book Set Forth by Sir Edward Peyton' (1642). Peyton would subsequently write prefatory verse for Humphrey Mill's 'The Second Part of the Nights Search'. 
During the first civil war Peyton fought with the parliamentary forces at Edgehill, serving as a captain in the earl of Peterborough's regiment of foot. Captured, he was incarcerated in Banbury Castle. He claimed to have fought against the royalists at Newbury and Naseby, but Joshua Sprigge does not include his name in the list of officers who served under Sir Thomas Fairfax. Beginning in 1644 Peyton's second son, Edward, served under the earl of Denbigh as a lieutenant-colonel of horse in the parliamentary army. Sir Edward offered suggestions to resolve the disputes between Charles, parliament, and the army in 'The High-Way to Peace' (1647). Peyton's family had suffered financially during the war. Royalist troops had seized household goods worth $400 from Peyton at Broad Chalk, Wiltshire, where his brother Robert was vicar, and because Peyton's son Thomas had fought for the royalists in Wales, he was fined $338 in December 1646. Convinced Sir Edward had conveyed his estates to Thomas during the war, the committee for compounding sequestered them, an action that prompted Sir Edward to protest that his son only had a reversionary interest in the property. The committee reduced Thomas's fine to $169 in February 1649, but the fine to reclaim Rougham Manor, Norfolk, which his wife had inherited from her father, Sir William Yelverton, was set at $1500 in November 1650, though reduced by a third in June 1651. Thomas paid the fine two months later, having raised the money by selling Greenhall Manor, Norfolk. 
The bitterness Peyton now felt toward the Stuarts is evident in 'The Divine Catastrophe of the Kingly Family of the House of Stuarts', issued by the radical printer Giles Calvert in 1652. In it Peyton defended the regicide and the abolition of monarchy as actions that conformed to the divine will. Underlying this work are Peyton's millenarian convictions and belief in the role of divine providence in ordering human affairs. Peyton even thought God might destroy all the monarchs in Christendom. The precise date of his death is unknown, but he was described by his son Thomas as 'late deceased' in a petition of 3 December 1652 (TNA: PRO, C 5/15/81). Peyton died intestate, and his widow, Dorothy, was empowered to settle his estate. His eldest son, John, succeeded him as baronet. Dorothy subsequently married Edward Lowe, vicar of Brighton; she was buried at Brighton on 10 April 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 22078


Peyton, Edward (d. 1749), naval officer, details of whose parents and upbringing are unknown, entered the navy in 1707 as a volunteer per order on the 'Scarborough'. Afterwards he served as a volunteer in the 'Kingston' for over four years, during which he participated in the abortive expedition to the St Lawrence in 1711. Peyton went on to serve as midshipman in the 'Aldborough' and the 'Elizabeth'. He passed his lieutenant's examination on 4 August 1715, but seems not to have gained a commission. On 6 February 1716 he married Ester Higgins at the church of St Mary, Lewisham, Kent. What he did during the next eleven years is unclear, but he was given a commission as fourth lieutenant in the 'Royal Oak' on 30 April 1727 by Sir Charles Wager, whose squadron was cruising off the Spanish coast. The commission was confirmed on 6 February 1728 and he was promoted third lieutenant on 22 May. On 26 July he became lieutenant on the 'Gibraltar' and seems to have joined the ship with her new captain, John Stanley, at Lisbon. Peyton left the ship when she refitted at Deptford and was not recommissioned when the 'Gibraltar' left for America under Captain Henry Medley. However, Peyton rejoined the 'Gibraltar' on 23 November 1733 and went with Medley to the Mediterranean. Peyton was commissioned lieutenant in the 'Dursley Galley' on 18 June 1734, and stayed with this ship on cruising and convoy duties in the Mediterranean until 20 January 1738, when the muster book notes that he 'quitted' the ship. He seems to have made his way back to England and on 24 April 1738 he was commissioned lieutenant of the 'Chatham', which was fitting out for Newfoundland under Captain Vanburgh. The 'Chatham' spent the summer at Newfoundland and in October escorted the fisheries trade to the markets of Lisbon and Leghorn. At Leghorn, on 24 February 1739, Vanburgh left the ship and Peyton was commissioned first lieutenant of the 'Somerset', flagship of the commander of the Mediterranean squadron, Rear-Admiral Nicholas Haddock. 
Peyton's first command, from 27 June 1739, was as master and commander of the sloop 'Grampus' in which he resumed the familiar convoy and cruising work between Port Mahon and Gibraltar. On 17 January 1740 he was put in command of the bomb-vessel 'Salamander'. On 20 January Captain Ambrose of the 'Greyhound' was suspended after complaints by the Lisbon merchants and on 4 April Haddock gave Peyton a commission as captain of the 'Greyhound' -- he had thus at last achieved post rank. On 16 July Peyton took command of the 'Kennington'. Operations in the 'Kennington' took Peyton to the West Indies, where he saw the remnants of the expeditionary force return from the failure to take Cartagena de las Indias. After returning to Portsmouth for a refit he convoyed trade to Ireland and on to Gibraltar. The new commander in the Mediterranean, Vice-Admiral Thomas Mathews, promoted Peyton to the 'Rochester' on 10 June 1743. He stayed in the 'Rochester' only until 3 August, when Mathews chose him to take dispatches to the king in Hanover and then on to the ministry and Admiralty in London. 
Peyton had gained considerable experience at sea and evidence of high regard from his commanders when he arrived in London. However, he heard that Captain Ambrose had been acquitted at a court martial and was to be paid as captain of the 'Greyhound' during his suspension. This called into question both Peyton's pay and seniority. Peyton wrote to the Admiralty: 'I believe there is no precedent of any Gentleman having served without a commission from any admiral on board his majesty's ships (especially in time of war) without being confirmed from it. I therefore hope their Lordships will not make me a precedent' (Peyton to the secretary of the Admiralty board, 7 Oct 1743, TNA: PRO, ADM 1/2285). He heard nothing and wrote again requesting the confirmation of his commission. He feared 'being commanded by so many gentlemen that I must always look on as juniors to me. I must also beg their Lordships to consider my service on board the 'Greyhound' was in time of war on a station where I might have lost my life and limbs and surely I deserv'd something for my service'. He offered to give up the pay if only they would confirm his rank (ibid., 21 Jan 1744). Although he received no reply from the Admiralty it appears that this compromise was accepted and his post rank was dated from 4 April 1740 (TNA: PRO, ADM 6/424). 
On 19 March 1744 Peyton was given command of the 'Medway' (60 guns); she was under two years old, but already plagued with a serious leak that could not be located. He sailed as part of Commodore Curtis Barnett's small squadron for the East Indies in May 1744. After leaving Madagascar the 'Medway' and the frigate 'Diamond' were sent to cruise the straits of Malacca, where Peyton captured a large French merchant ship, which was added to the squadron as the 'Medway Prize' (40 guns). Peyton later joined Barnett at Batavia, where the 'Medway' was cleaned and the problem of the ship's leak became more pronounced. The force later sailed for the Bay of Bengal. Throughout the following months rumours of a French squadron reaching this coast forced Barnett to keep his force together despite diminishing stores, fouled bottoms, and the serious leak in the 'Medway'. 
On 29 April 1746 Barnett died at Fort St David, Cuddalore, and Peyton, as senior captain, assumed command of the force. By June the 'Medway' was taking in so much water that he decided to take the whole force to Trincomalee to repair her. On 25 June he fell in with the long-expected French squadron off Negapatam. The force that La Bourdonnais, the governor of Mauritius, had managed to assemble consisted of nine large ships. Peyton drew up his vessels into line of battle and by late afternoon there was a general cannonading along the line. The following day, calms and light winds precluded renewing the action. Three British ships had severely damaged masts and a council of war decided it was best to seek repairs at Trincomalee, so the British force bore away. On 27 July Peyton's squadron was at sea again in search of the French. On 7 August he sighted them in Negapatam Road and bore down. The following day, as the two squadrons closed, Peyton believed that the French were now considerably reinforced and decided not to pursue the action. Instead he stood off to remain in a position to protect a convoy expected from England. With the French close to Madras, provisions short, and the 'Medway's' leak causing great concern he sailed to re-provision in the Hooghly River, south of Calcutta. La Bourdonnais unexpectedly captured Madras on 10 September while Peyton's squadron was careening and victualling. Peyton was still effecting these repairs when Commodore Thomas Griffin arrived with reinforcements in December 1746. 
Although there were no immediate repercussions news of the loss of Madras reached England by the end of 1747. The secret committee of the East India Company, the principal executive body of the company, complained to the Admiralty about Peyton on 8 December that year and the board reacted by ordering Griffin to arrest Peyton. Peyton had been ill since the end of 1747; his health suffered further when he was confined aboard the 'Pearl', which, with Peyton and his witnesses, returned with Griffin to England and arrived at Spithead on 6 July 1749. Peyton remained confined aboard the 'Winchester' until the end of the month and was eventually allowed to return to London to await events. Although too ill to travel, Peyton considered himself a prisoner and pleaded for his case to be brought to trial. However, by then the East India Company had made it clear to the Admiralty that it would not proceed as the principal complainant against Peyton. On 16 September 1749 Peyton informed the Admiralty that his condition had become so bad that he hoped 'their Lordships will excuse me that I have at last put myself into his hands [his surgeon, Mr Sharp] and shall tomorrow undergo an operation for the stone. If I survive it as soon as I am able to go out I will acquaint their Lordships and be ready to attend their commands. (Peyton to the secretary of the Admiralty board, TNA: PRO, ADM 1/2289)' He survived the operation, but died on 26 October of 'a mortification in his foot' (TNA: PRO, ADM 6/424). He was buried at St Alfege, Greenwich, on 31 October 1749. 
Peyton was an officer with great experience in keeping ships at sea for long periods in difficult circumstances. The need to keep his squadron seaworthy and a threat to the French until reinforcements arrived led to decisions that ended with the loss of Madras. Although never formally condemned for this, he was never able to justify his behaviour and the result was to end his career and probably to shorten his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 22079


Peyton, Sir Henry (d. 1623), army officer, was the son of Thomas Peyton of Bury St Edmunds, customer of Plymouth, and his wife, Cecilia, daughter of John Bourchier, second earl of Bath. He attended Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1594. He probably went straight from there to serve in the army of the Dutch republic, though the date and circumstances of his first service in the Netherlands is uncertain. He was given command of a company of foot in 1605, an office which he kept until at least 1614. 
Peyton was knighted by James I in 1606 and joined the household of his namesake, Henry, prince of Wales, the same year. Peyton married Mary (died 1619/20), the daughter of Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, and widow of Andrew Rogers of Bryanstone, Dorset, at Long Ditton, Surrey, on 22 September 1607. She must have been more than twenty years older than her new husband. Peyton wrote in his will (which he made in April 1618) of the 'singular love which I beare unto... my wife' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/143, fol. 142). 
In 1610 Peyton was given charge of a 'kind lettre' from Prince Henry's secretary to Sir Horace Vere, the pre-eminent English commander in Dutch service (Trim, 347); this marked the beginning of an attempt by the prince to establish a circle of military men. In 1613 Peyton and another English soldier, Sir William Constable, were rivals for a subordinate office in the 'cautionary town' of Brill: such posts were prized because they were a foothold in the English establishment, though it did not necessitate surrendering existing commissions in the Dutch army. The following year Peyton served as a captain in Vere's regiment in the Cleves-Julich campaign. 
Early in 1618 Peyton expanded his horizon when he went to the Adriatic in command of a force of 500 infantry hired by the Venetian republic as part of an Anglo-Dutch force raised to counter the threat posed by the aggression of the Spanish viceroy of Naples. Peyton was, the Venetian ambassador-extraordinary assured his masters, 'an English gentleman, one of the good soldiers of Flanders, where he yet has a company in the service of the States' ('CSP Venice', '1617-19', 123). Conceding that Peyton had no experience of naval affairs, the ambassador was convinced that his courage on land would make him worthy of the republic's favour. Peyton was made a colonel to give him the same rank as the senior Dutch officer. Having reached the Adriatic in July 1618 after a hard voyage, Peyton was unable to prevent his troops mutinying over pay. Any breach caused by the ruthless action of the Venetian admiral in hanging the ringleaders was later papered over by the Venetian authorities paying Peyton the money due to him and giving him a gold chain in token of their respect. Peyton's force formed only a small part of the foreign troops aboard the Venetian fleet -- a mere 350 men by the summer of 1619 after the depletions of long months at sea, compared with over 3000 Dutchmen -- but his three companies were praised by the new captain-general at sea as brave troops under a brave and prudent leader. Peyton had command of his own ship. 
In December 1619 Peyton's force went into winter quarters at Zara in Dalmatia; from the following summer they were stationed partly in Venice's mainland territories, partly at sea. Peyton himself seems never to have returned to England, despite his or the English ambassador's suggesting on three occasions -- in August 1620, February 1621, and January 1622 -- that he go back to recruit more men. In March 1621 the Venetian ambassador to England reported to the doge and senate stories that returning officers and soldiers were complaining of the ill treatment that they had received at Peyton's hands. By early 1622 Peyton, when he was stationed at Brescia, was reported as heavily in debt. In July of that year Peyton offered to serve with Venice's allies, the Grisons -- the protestant 'grey leagues' whose lands which controlled the alpine passes into Italy had recently been partly occupied by Habsburg forces -- either openly as an officer of the republic or covertly in a deniable role. The suggestion was turned down. 
Peyton's wife, Mary, died in his absence and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 18 January 1620. Later, in Venice, Peyton married a daughter of Vicenzo Gritti, who survived him. He died of a fever on 13 October 1623. 


@@@@@


doc= 22080


Peyton, Sir John (1544-1630), soldier and administrator, born between February and December 1544, was the second son of John Peyton of Knowlton, Kent (died 1558), and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of Sir John Tyndale. Before 1564 Peyton served in Ireland under his father's friend and neighbour Sir Henry Sidney of Penshurst, and in 1568 he was again in Ireland with Sidney, then lord deputy. He became a member of Sidney's household and sometimes bore dispatches to England for him. On 8 June 1578 he married Dorothy (died 1603), the only child of Edward Beaupre of Beaupre Hall, Outwell, Norfolk, and his second wife, Catherine Beddingfield, and the widow of Sir Robert Bell (died 1577). The couple had one son, Sir John Peyton, a soldier and spy, who is now known for his study of Poland. From his wife's large property, Peyton gained a position in the county of Norfolk. She died in February 1603. 
In 1586 Peyton served under the earl of Leicester with the expedition to the Netherlands. In 1586-7 he was lieutenant-governor of Bergen op Zoom, and was often effectively in command there in the absence of the governor, Peregrine Bertie, thirteenth Baron Willoughby. He was knighted in 1586, and in 1588 was appointed colonel in the forces for the defence of the queen's person against the threatened attack of the Spanish Armada. He was granted the receivership of the counties of Norfolk and Huntingdon and of the city of Norwich in 1593. In 1596 he was appointed one of three deputy lieutenants of Cambridgeshire under Roger, Lord North, treasurer of the household, and in 1602 he was appointed deputy lieutenant of the same county under Thomas, Lord Howard de Walden. 
Peyton was appointed lieutenant of the Tower of London in June 1597, and it was in that capacity that he examined several witnesses in the trial of Essex and was present at Essex's execution. On 10 December 1600 he was appointed to the commission to investigate controversies and abuses in the ordnance office. A report was written detailing the abuses and proposing wide-ranging reforms. Peyton was discharged from the lieutenancy of the Tower on 30 July 1603 and appointed, apparently in accordance with his own wishes, governor of Jersey, a post forfeited by attainder of its previous holder, Sir Walter Ralegh. Ralegh had been under Peyton's care as a prisoner in the Tower, and his 'strange and dejected mind' had caused concern to Peyton, for whom he would send several times a day in his passions of grief (BL, Add. MS 6177, fols. 127-8). Later, in January 1604, Peyton was, according to a letter from Dudley Carleton to John Chamberlain, disgraced for entertaining intelligence between Cobham and Ralegh. 
Peyton took the usual form of oath as governor before the royal court of Jersey on 10 September 1603. Peter Heylyn states that Peyton tried to do away with the Calvinist form of church government then current in Jersey and to introduce the established church there, but that does not seem to have been his intention immediately upon his appointment. In fact, James I, believing it to have been sanctioned by Elizabeth, expressly permitted the continuation of the French Calvinist form of church government in Jersey and Guernsey. There was a dispute between Peyton and the Jersey colloquy in 1604 over the manner of the appointment of a minister to a benefice, but generally Peyton seems to have been on good terms with the ministers during his early years in office, and sometimes attended and participated in the colloquy meetings. His relationship with the colloquy deteriorated when they took issue with his appointment of a chaplain in 1609. Following a dispute in 1613 over the refusal of Peyton's episcopally ordained candidate for a vacant benefice in Jersey to submit to the laying on of hands of the ministers, delegations were summoned to England in 1614, one favouring the continuation of the 'status quo' and another supporting the introduction of the usages of the Church of England to Jersey. The final outcome was the appointment of David Bandinel as dean in 1620 and the promulgation of the ecclesiastical canons for Jersey in 1623: these together represented the end of the Calvinist form of church government in the island and its bringing into the reformed Church of England. 
The period of Peyton's governorship saw much strife in Jersey over civil matters, and Peyton was involved in constant disputes with Sir Philippe de Carteret, with Philippe Maret, and, most of all, with the bailiff Jean Herault. The dispute between Peyton and Herault over the relationship of the bailiff and governor led to a suit resulting in the judgment of 1617 declaring that the charge of the military forces rested only in the governor: this judgment has ever since been regarded as a principle fundamental to the government of the island. During the time of his residence in Jersey, Peyton seems to have conscientiously supervised the defence and fortifications of the island, and many of his records relating to the military care of the island survive in the state papers. 
Peyton's friends included Sir Philip Sidney, Lord Willoughby, and Henry Cuffe, Essex's secretary. He died on 4 November 1630 and was buried on 15 December at Doddington in the Isle of Ely, where he had had his private residence since his wife's death. Though it was stated by John Lewis Peyton that he was ninety-nine at the time of his death, and the monument of his great-granddaughter Mrs Alice Lowe, in Christ Church, Oxford, gives his age at death as 105, from his own statements of his age as seventy-nine in February 1624 and eighty in December 1624 it appears that Peyton was in fact eighty-six. He was survived by his son, who between 1618 and 1630 served on occasions on behalf of his father as lieutenant-governor of Jersey. 


@@@@@


doc= 22081


Peyton, Sir John (1579-1635), soldier, spy, and administrator, was probably born at Beaupre Hall in Outwell, Norfolk, in 1579, the only son of Sir John Peyton (1544-1630), soldier and administrator, of Doddington, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Dorothy, 'nee' Beaupre (died1603), widow of Sir Robert Bell. He was admitted as fellow commoner of Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1594. At Queens' he was an exact contemporary of the poet and later traveller John Weever and there he may have met Nathanial Fletcher, elder brother of the future playwright John Fletcher. Peyton must have acquired excellent Latin, and his later writings certainly exhibit some knowledge of German and Italian. 
In 1596 Peyton left on a confidential mission for Germany and Bohemia, reaching Poland in spring 1598. His task was to gather detailed information on Spanish activities in the Holy Roman empire and in the Polish-Lithuanian commonwealth, and his mission appears to have been arranged and at least partly financed by Robert Cecil, who had recently been appointed secretary of state. From Poland, Peyton travelled to Padua, then to Basel, where he was in November 1599, before returning to Italy. Writing to his father from Basel, Peyton complained about his life as a spy: 'it being... dangerous for a man to bee noted of curious enquiry' (CUL, MS Kk.5.2., fols. 2'r'- 'v'). He returned to England between 1601 and November 1602 at the latest. 
Peyton's reports have survived in three separate manuscripts. The accounts of Germany and Bohemia -- together with some of his letters -- were begun in 1599 but completed in 1619 on the island of Jersey and are held in the Cambridge University Library (CUL, MS Kk.5.2). The contents are written by a variety of scribes; only Peyton's letters were copied into the codex by himself. His 'A Relation of the State of Polonia and the United Provinces of That Crowne' is the most celebrated early description of Poland written in English. It was prepared in Cracow and Warsaw between April and September 1598 and was long thought to have been anonymous. The work survives in two manuscript copies: one at the British Library, London (BL, Royal MS 18 B I), and a second at the University of St Andrews (U. St Andr. L., MS 38902). The former is an unfinished presentation copy given by Peyton to James I and VI on his accession to the English throne in May 1603 and most likely prepared in London by one of his father's scribes; the latter is the only complete version of the work, produced under Peyton's supervision between 1619 and 1635 in Jersey. On 25 November 1602 Peyton married Alice Peyton, the second daughter of his cousin Sir John Peyton of Iselham, at Iselham, Cambridgeshire. They had three sons and six daughters: his heir, Robert, Algernon (heir to his brother Robert), Henry, Elizabeth, Alice, Dorothy, Frances, Susanna, and Anne. 
In March 1603, when Queen Elizabeth lay on her deathbed, Peyton's father, a close associate of Robert Cecil and a member of the Jacobean camp, placed his son in daily attendance at court. When the queen died, Peyton raced to Edinburgh to break the news to James and assure the future king of his father's loyalty. Although he was not the first to reach James, Peyton was rewarded with a knighthood, which was bestowed on him either on 28 March or on 12 April 1603. He was afterwards known as the king's 'first Knight' (Chambers, 2.11). 
Some time between the queen's death and James's arrival in London, Peyton presented the king with what is now the British Library manuscript of 'A Relation of the State of Polonia'. On 18 August 1603 James granted to Peyton in fee simple Lingen manor in Gloucestershire and five other manors in Herefordshire. At the time his father was lieutenant of the Tower of London, and Peyton was alleged to have been friendly with Sir Walter Ralegh, one of the prisoners. 
In 1612 and 1618 Peyton served in the Low Countries and, with the help of his friend and neighbour Sir Robert Cotton, he unsuccessfully attempted to secure the post of lieutenant-governor of Brill. From 1618 until 1630 Peyton served intermittently as lieutenant-governor of Jersey on behalf of his father, who had assumed the lieutenancy of Jersey on leaving his post at the Tower in July 1603. Throughout much of his life Peyton acted jointly with his well-connected father, both in running Jersey and maintaining the family estate in Cambridgeshire. In a letter to Cecil sent in 1605 Peyton hints at his past intelligence gathering: '[h]aving divers times attended to present my service, as well of myself as by my father's directions' (Cecil MSS 112/112, 1605, 10 Oct or later). Peyton's hand appears in a number of letters sent by his father to Cecil. 
Peyton's will is dated 24 February 1635 and was proved by his wife, the sole executor of the will, on 22 April of that year (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/167/4). The exact date of his death is unknown and he was buried in the chancel of the church of St Mary the Virgin, Doddington. In 1633 his daughter Alice (1607-1649) married the composer Edward Lowe, professor of music at Oxford and long-time organist of Christ Church, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 22082


Peyton, Sir John Strutt (1786-1838), naval officer, born in London on 14 January 1786, was the third son of William Peyton, chief clerk of the Navy Office, grandson of Admiral Joseph Peyton (died 1804), and great-grandson of Commodore Edward Peyton. His father's three brothers were also all in the navy; one of them, John, who died a rear-admiral in 1809, was captain of the 'Defence' in the battle of the Nile. His grandmother was a daughter of Commander John Strutt; his mother was the daughter of Commander Jacob Lobb, who died in command of the sloop 'Kingfisher' in 1773, and was sister of Captain William Granville Lobb, afterwards a commissioner of the navy. 
Peyton first went to sea in October 1797, on the 'Hector', off Cadiz; he was then for three years in the 'Emerald' in the Mediterranean, and in January 1801 was appointed to the 'San Josef', Nelson's flagship in the channel. With Nelson, his patron, he was moved to the 'St George', in which he was in the Baltic and afterwards off Cadiz and in the West Indies, for part of the time under his uncle, Captain Lobb. During 1802-3 he served, in quick succession, in several frigates in the channel or in the North Sea, and in August 1803 was sent out to the 'Victory', Nelson's flagship off Toulon. In March 1805 he was appointed acting lieutenant of the 'Canopus', from which he was moved in May to the frigate 'Ambuscade', with Captain William Durban, employed during the next two years in the Adriatic. Peyton's commission as lieutenant was dated 7 October 1805. In July 1807, having been sent to destroy a vessel which ran herself ashore near Ortona, he was wounded in the right elbow by a musket bullet; the arm had to be amputated, and he was invalided. 
On 1 December 1807 Peyton was promoted commander, and from June 1809 to February 1811 he commanded the brig 'Ephira' in the North Sea, in the Walcheren expedition, and afterwards off Cadiz. He was then appointed to the 'Weazle' (18 guns), in the Aegean archipelago; and on 26 September 1811 was posted to the 'Minstrel' (20 guns), in which, and afterwards in the 'Thames', he was employed on the coast of Valencia and Catalonia until near the end of the war. During this time he repeatedly fought coastal batteries and privateers, and received the thanks of Sir Edward Pellew, the commander-in-chief. In September 1813 the 'Thames' returned to England and was paid off. In October 1814 Peyton married a daughter of Lieutenant Woodyear RN, of St Kitts, and they had three daughters and two sons. 
On 25 January 1836 Peyton was made a KCH, and in June 1836 was appointed to the 'Madagascar' (46 guns), in which he went out to the West Indies. In the spring of 1838 he had to be invalided, returned in extreme ill health, and died at his lodgings in Somerset Street, Portman Square, London, on 20 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 22083


Peyton, Thomas (1595-1626), poet, was born at Royston, Hertfordshire, the son and heir of Thomas Peyton. On 26 November 1613 he was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn. He was a studious and devout young man who published the first part of a poem entitled 'The Glasse of Time in the First Age, Divinely Handled by Thomas Peyton of Lincolnes Inne, Gent' (1620), with every intention of a continuation. The volume opens with addresses in verse to King James, Prince Charles, Lord Chancellor Bacon, and the reader. The poem consists of 168 stanzas, of varying lengths, in heroic verse and relates the story of the Fall, as told in the 'Bible'. There are many classical allusions and digressions into contemporary religious topics. Peyton writes as a champion of the established church and a warm opponent of the puritans. 
In 1623 Peyton continued the work in a second volume, entitled 'The Glasse of Time in the Second Age', and brought the scriptural narrative up to Noah's entrance into the ark. A further continuation was promised but never written. The two parts together are titled 'The Glasse of Time in the Two First Ages' and consist of 164 pages, interspersed with woodcuts. Some of the episodes in Peyton's poem -- notably his descriptions of paradise and of Lucifer -- very faintly suggest some masterly passages on the same subject in Milton's 'Paradise Lost' but the resemblances are not close enough to render it probable that Milton was acquainted with his predecessor's efforts (see 'North American Review', October 1860). Peyton died in 1626. 


@@@@@


doc= 22084


Pfeiffer, Emily Jane (1827-1890), poet, was born on 26 November 1827 in Montgomeryshire, Wales, eldest of the three daughters of (Thomas) Richard Davis, who was in his early years an army officer, and his wife, Emily, the youngest daughter of the Tilsley family of Milford Hall, Montgomeryshire. Davis once owned considerable property in Oxfordshire but lost his fortune when his father-in-law's bank, the chief banking institution in Montgomeryshire, failed in 1831. The family's straitened circumstances prevented Emily from receiving any regular education, but her father encouraged her to study and practise painting and poetry. Flower painting and embroidery were lifelong pastimes, and her first book, 'The Holly Branch, an Album for 1843', was published as early as 1842. A friend took her on tour to the Rhineland, and she spent a season in London before marrying Jurgen Edward Pfeiffer (died 1889) on 26 January 1850. He was a German tea merchant resident in London, and the marriage, though childless, was a happy one. In 1858 they bought 2 acres on West Hill, just south of Richmond Road in Putney, London, and they built a house on it called Mayfield where they lived for the rest of their lives. 
Throughout her life Pfeiffer suffered from bouts of ill health and insomnia, but she remained a prolific writer. Her first mature work, 'Valisneria' (1857), prompted comparisons with Sara Coleridge. Conscious of the imperfection of her education, she worked hard at improving herself, and she did not publish again until 1873, when 'Gerard's Monument' appeared. Thereafter she published a full-length work every two or three years throughout her life. Her writings varied widely in form and style, from collections of miscellaneous poems to the complex narrative structure of 'The Rhyme of the Lady of the Rock, and how it Grew' (1884) and the full-length blank verse drama 'The Wynnes of Wynhavod' (1881). The long prose work 'Flying Leaves from East and West' (1885) is a narrative of her travels in 1884 in eastern Europe, Asia, and the United States and has been described as 'a collection of political and artistic commentaries in travelogue form' (Todd, 536). However, her sonnets were generally regarded as her best work and were praised by contemporary critics for their delicacy. Later, feminist critics highlighted the theme of female disempowerment which runs throughout her 'oeuvre'. Her contributions to the 'Cornhill Magazine' and the 'Contemporary Review' demonstrate her interest in the position of women in society. The essays collected in 'Women and Work' (1887) assessed and attacked theories concerning women's inherent weakness: ironically, 'The Spectator' commented of her case that 'few men could have stated it more ably' (p. 112). 
Pfeiffer's husband died in January 1889 and she never recovered from the blow. She wrote and published 'Flowers of the Night' later that year, but she survived him by only just over a year, dying of pneumonia at their home in Putney on 23 January 1890. She asked that her property be disposed of according to the wishes of her husband, as expressed in a letter of 1884 composed before a journey to the United States. Thus, although she left some money to her two sisters, most of her wealth went towards charity and education. Funds were provided to endow a school of dramatic art for women and to establish an orphanage. The remainder was left to trustees to further women's higher education: $2000 of this was used to build Aberdare Hall, the first dormitory for women at the University College of South Wales, Cardiff, which was opened in 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 22085


Phaer, Thomas (1510?-1560), translator and physician, was the son of Thomas Phaer of Norwich and his wife, Clara, daughter of either Sir Richard or Sir William Godier. He was educated at Oxford University and Lincoln's Inn. Early in his career he became attached to the household of William Paulet, first marquess of Winchester, whom he described as 'my first brynger up and patrone' (Phaer, sig. A2'r'). With his patron's backing, Phaer was appointed solicitor to the council in the marches of Wales in or about 1547. Winchester was also apparently instrumental in arranging Phaer's marriage to Anne Revel, the prosperous widow of a Pembrokeshire merchant, Thomas Revel. The marriage took place between 18 June 1548, when Agnes was granted the wardship of her late husband's heir, and 21 December 1551, when Richard, Lord Rich, ceased to be lord chancellor. In 1549 he was granted a lease in the Forest of Cilgerran in Pembrokeshire, and lived there for the remainder of his life. Thomas and Anne had two daughters, whom they named Mary and Elizabeth, after the two daughters of Henry VIII. Thomas Phaer had another daughter, Eleanor, who was married by 1560, and may have been the product of a previous marriage. 
Phaer's first professional activities were in the field of law, and he published two legal handbooks in the English language, 'Natura brevium' (1530?) and 'A Newe Book of Presidentes' (1543). The latter proved enduringly popular, with twenty-seven editions up to 1656. From about 1540 Phaer embarked on a second career as a doctor and writer on medical matters. In 1544 he published in one volume 'The Regiment of Lyfe', a translation of the work by Jehan Goeurot, together with three medical works of his own, 'A Goodly Bryefe Treatise of the Pestylence', 'A Declaration of the Veynes', and 'The Boke of Chyldren'. An enlarged edition appeared in 1553, and the volume would prove one of the most widely read and frequently reprinted medical texts of the Tudor era. While early readers may have been primarily interested in Goeurot, Phaer's own importance as a paediatrician is now widely recognized. He has been called the 'Father of English Pediatrics' (Ruhrah, 147). There is reason to suppose that he was responsible for the introduction of a bill 'for the nursing of Children in Wales' in the 1547 parliament. Although he published no further medical works, Phaer continued to practise medicine. On 6 February 1559 he graduated MB from Oxford, with leave to practise, proceeding MD on 21 March of the same year. In his supplication for the first degree he stated that he had practised medicine for twenty years, and had conducted experiments involving poisons and antidotes. 
Alongside his professional activities Phaer was an author and translator of verse. He contributed commendatory verses to Peter Baldwin's 'Preceptes of Warre' (1544). In one edition of 'A Mirror for Magistrates' (1578) he is identified as the author of a lament in the person of Owen Glendower (Owain Glyn Dwr), though earlier editions attribute the same lament to William Baldwin. Phaer does seem to have been acquainted with the editors of the 'Mirror', raising the possibility that the ballad on the famous Gad's Hill robbery attributed to him by Wharton was intended for inclusion in that work ['see also 'Contributors to A Mirror for Magistrates]. Another lost work, 'Certen Verses of Cupydo, by M. Fayre', received licence for publication by Thomas Purfoot in 1566, after Phaer's death. 
Phaer is remembered above all as the first Englishman to attempt a full translation of Virgil's 'Aeneid'. He began the work on 9 May 1555 and made it, as he explained in his dedication to Queen Mary, 'my pastyme in all my vacations' (Phaer, sig. A2'r'). 'The Seven First Bookes of the Eneidos of Virgill' was published in 1558, with a note at the end of each book of the number of days (averaging around twenty) spent in translating it. Phaer went on to translate the eighth and ninth books, and to begin work on the tenth, before receiving an injury to his right hand in 1560 that stopped his work and led to his death. In 1562 Phaer's friend and literary executor William Wightman, 'receptour of Wales', arranged the publication of 'The nyne fyrst bookes of the Eneidos of Virgil converted into Englishe vearse by Thomas Phaer doctour of phisike, with so muche of the tenthe booke, as since his death coulde be founde in unperfit papers at his house in Kilgarran forest in Penbroke shyre'. The volume was dedicated, as Phaer had apparently requested, to Sir Nicholas Bacon, lord keeper of the great seal. Phaer's translation was finally completed by his friend Thomas Twyne in 1573. In 1584 the work was reissued, with the addition of Twyne's translation of the 'thirteenth book' added to Virgil's twelve by Maffeo Veggio. 
Phaer's translation, in rhyming lines of fourteen syllables, is fairly readable and generally faithful to the original. The work was held in high esteem by the Elizabethans. George Puttenham, in numbering the best English poets, declared that 'In Queenes Maries time florished above any other Doctour Phaer' (Puttenham, 'Arte of English Poesie', ed. E. Arber, 1906, 75). Thomas Nashe too praised Phaer's 'heavenly verse' while complaining that it was 'blemished by his hautie thoghts' ('The Works of Thomas Nashe', ed. R. B. McKerrow, rev. F. P. Wilson, 1958, 3.319). The precise nature of the charge is unclear, but Nashe may have been referring to Phaer's ambitiousness as a would-be Renaissance polymath, devoting himself simultaneously to law, medicine, and poetry. The same point was later made by Wood, rather more gently, when he noted that Phaer was remembered as 'a person of mutable mind' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 315). 
However disparate their subject matter, all of Phaer's published works are united by use of the English language, and the author's often aggressive pride in that tongue. In his legal and medical works Phaer associated the use of the vernacular with social reform and the popularization of vital knowledge. Describing medical lore as a treasure, he announced his intention 'to declare that to the use of many, which ought not to be secrete for lucre of a fewe' (Phaer, 'The Regiment of Lyfe', 1546, sig. Aii'v'). At the same time, in keeping with the mood of post-Reformation England, Phaer was concerned to uphold the worthiness of English on patriotic grounds. He claimed to have undertaken his translation of the 'Aeneid' in part 'for defence of my countrey language (which I have heard discommended of many, and estemyd of some to be more than barbarous)' (Phaer, sig. X2'r'). 
It is a paradox of Phaer's career that he devoted himself to the defence of the English language on populist and patriotic grounds while living in a region of west Wales where English was not widely spoken. Whether or not he ever learned Welsh, Phaer was clearly committed both politically and poetically to his adopted country. Given that the Welsh in this era claimed descent from Aeneas and the Trojans, Phaer's decision to translate Virgil's epic may have owed something to his local situation. 
In addition to serving as solicitor to the council in the marches, Phaer represented Welsh constituencies in four parliaments under three monarchs, being returned first for Carmarthen Boroughs (1547) and subsequently for Cardigan Boroughs (1555, 1558, 1559). He also held a variety of local offices, serving as steward of Cilgerran and constable of Cilgerran Castle from 1548 until his death, as justice of the peace in Cardiganshire, and as customs officer in Milford Haven and other ports. His 'Report on his perambulation around the coast of Wales', prepared in the reign of Edward VI, remains a valuable source of information about Welsh ports and customs administration in the mid-sixteenth century. Phaer's career as a public servant was not marked by controversy, though there is an intriguing reference at the end of the fifth book of 'Eneidos', completed on 4 May 1557, to his having escaped some kind of personal danger in Carmarthen. 
In 1560 Phaer suffered the injury, possibly involving a fall from a horse, which deprived him of the use of his right hand and led to his death. His will is dated 12 August 1560, and his death, at his home in the Forest of Cilgerran, followed within a few weeks; on 26 September 1560 John Vaughan succeeded him as steward of Cilgerran. He left his Cilgerran estate, which had been regranted to him in 1558 for a term of forty years, to his wife. He also instructed her to bestow the sum of $5 'where she doth knowe, by an appointemente betwene her and me' (Cunningham, 4). This bequest has been taken as indication that Phaer remained privately faithful to the Catholic church. The inference is supported by his dedication of the 'Eneidos' to Queen Mary, and by an approving reference in the preface to Rome's abiding spiritual authority. 
On the day before he died, according to William Wightman, Phaer translated and sent to Wightman two lines from the tenth book of the 'Aeneid': '
Ech mans day stands prefixt, time short & swift with cureles bretche 

Is lotted al mankind, but by their deedes their fame to stretche 

That privilege vertue gives. 
('Nyne First Bookes', sig. Gg3'r')' Phaer's death was mourned in verse by Thomas Chaloner and Barnabe Googe. George Ferrers selected the scriptural verses for Phaer's memorial in Cilgerran church, where he was buried. The memorial has long since disappeared, but a new commemorative tablet was erected at Cilgerran in 1986, following an appeal in the 'British Medical Journal'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22086


Phayre, Sir Arthur Purves (1812-1885), administrator in Burma, born at Shrewsbury on 7 May 1812, was the second son of Richard Phayre, of Claremont, Shrewsbury, and his wife, Maria, daughter of James Leech Ridgeway, publisher, of 169 Piccadilly, London. Sir Robert Phayre was his brother. Educated at Shrewsbury School, he entered the Indian army and was gazetted ensign in the 7th Bengal native infantry in August 1828, serving in Gorakhpur and Azamgarh. His first connection with Burma, the country with which his life was mainly associated, came in 1834, when he was sent to Moulmein to raise a Mon corps of military police for service in Tenasserim which, together with the province of Arakan, had been ceded to the British in 1826 at the close of the First Anglo-Burmese War. Promoted lieutenant in 1835, Phayre was appointed senior assistant to the commissioner of Arakan in 1837, and served as a district officer at Akyab, Kyaukpyu, and Sandoway. In 1846 he became principal assistant to the commissioner of Tenasserim, and after volunteering to serve with his regiment in the Punjab campaign of 1848, returned to Burma in April 1849 as captain and commissioner of Arakan, in succession to his former chief, Captain Archibald Bogle. The foundations of Phayre's administrative abilities and of his intimate knowledge of Burmese language and history were laid during these early years in Burma. His talents caught the attention of Lord Dalhousie, governor-general of India, who selected him in December 1852 to become commissioner of the Lower Burma province of Pegu, annexed at the close of the Second Anglo-Burmese War. Phayre was promoted major in 1855 and lieutenant-colonel in 1859. He was responsible for planning the early development and lay-out of Rangoon as the capital of the new province of Pegu, which flourished under his administration. In late 1854 he accompanied a Burmese mission to Calcutta and the following year, as envoy of the governor-general, led a return mission to the court of King Mindon for the purpose of establishing treaty relations. He was accompanied on the 1855 mission to Amarapura by, among others, Thomas Oldham, superintendent of the geological survey of India, the photographer Captain Linnaeus Tripe, Colesworthy Grant as official artist, and Captain Henry Yule as secretary. Phayre's mission, although it did not succeed in obtaining a treaty, collected much valuable information about Burma, its people, and its government, and achieved fame through Yule's report, published in 1858 as 'A Narrative of the Mission Sent by the Governor-General of India to the Court of Ava in 1855'. In 1862 the three provinces of Tenasserim, Arakan, and Pegu were formed into a united administration and Phayre was appointed first chief commissioner of British Burma. Phayre led a second mission to the Burmese court at Mandalay in 1862, when a commercial treaty was negotiated, and a third mission in 1866 when he was promoted colonel. Owing to ill health, he retired as chief commissioner in February 1867 and the following month left Burma, never to return. 
Phayre, having declined Sir Stafford Northcote's offer of the prestigious post of resident at Hyderabad, travelled extensively in India, the Far East, and America. After returning to Britain in 1870, he settled at Bray, near Dublin, for four years. In November 1874 he was appointed by Lord Carnarvon to the governorship of Mauritius. His administration was both successful and popular, and he held office until the end of 1878, when he in effect retired from the Indian army, though remaining on the supernumerary list of the Bengal staff corps. In recognition of his distinguished services he was made a CB in 1863, KCSI in 1867, and GCMG in 1877, and he received military promotion to major-general in 1870 and to lieutenant-general in 1877. On his return from Mauritius he settled again at Bray, and occupied himself in compiling his 'History of Burma, including Burma proper, Pegu, Taungnu, Tenasserim and Arakan, from the earliest time to the end of the first war with British India' (1883; repr. 1969). This pioneering work was based substantially on the 'Mahayazawin' or 'royal chronicles' and other Burmese sources. One of his last public acts was to write a letter to 'The Times' (13 October 1885) expressing his approval of military intervention in and annexation of independent Upper Burma. He died, unmarried, at 12 Goldsmith Terrace, Queensborough Road, Bray on the night of 14-15 December 1885, and was buried at Enniskerry. 
As a soldier-administrator, Phayre had a deep devotion to duty and was a zealous official correspondent, while his understanding of Burmese matters was exceptional. His firm and just administration laid the foundations of the prosperity of the lower Burma provinces under British rule, and his scholarly knowledge of Burmese language, literature, and history made an important contribution to Anglo-Burmese relations and to the historiography of Burma. 
Phayre's publications, besides 'The History of Burma', were 'Coins of Arakan, of Pegu and of Burma' (part of the 'International Numismata Orientalia', 1882), and many articles in the 'Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal' as detailed in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society' (8, 1886, 111) and the 'British Library Journal' (1975, 69). 


@@@@@


doc= 22087


Phayre, Robert (1618/19-1682), parliamentarian army officer, was almost certainly the son of the Revd Emmanuel Phayre. The father had migrated, probably from Devon, to Ireland, where he held ecclesiastical livings in co. Cork. Both father and son sustained losses during the uprising of 1641, when they were living near Duhallow in the north of the county. Robert Phayre was then farming in a modest way. In 1642 he asserted that he had endured losses totalling $51 10's'. Like neighbours among the protestant settlers he enlisted in the force commanded by Inchiquin in an effort to contain the Irish Catholic insurgents and recover possessions. By September 1646 he had risen to the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the regiment of Richard Townshend. Phayre did not follow his general, the earl of Inchiquin, in defecting to the king, and was arrested by Inchiquin in the spring of 1648. 
Freed after an exchange of prisoners, Phayre next made his way to England where he appeared as a volunteer in Thomas Fairfax's parliamentarian force. Shortly afterwards, in January 1649, he was one of the officers in London to whom the warrant for Charles I's execution was directed. He was among the halberdiers who guarded Whitehall while the sentence was carried out. In the autumn of 1649 he returned to Ireland to assist in the reconquest. Serving under Roger Boyle, Lord Broghill, he fought chiefly in his own province of Munster, taking part in the victory in Macroom on 10 April 1650. His enthusiasm for and prominence in the cause of the English Commonwealth led to his appointment in 1651 as governor of co. Cork. As well as overseeing numerous administrative tasks in the aftermath of warfare, he supported religious and political radicals. This offended the more orthodox within the local protestant community. At the same time he treated some defeated Catholics, notably Lord and Lady Muskerry, compassionately. Phayre's loyalties lay with the Commonwealth: reservations about the 'Instrument of government' and Cromwell's advance to the position of protector may explain his retirement from the governorship of Cork in 1654. In the same year, however, at the age of thirty-five, he was appointed to the commission of the peace in that county. The authorities were perturbed when he protected Quakers, whom he credited with doing more to advance godliness than any other group during the past century. 
Phayre's army service was rewarded with the grant of lands confiscated from the defeated Irish Catholics. To these he added through private transactions. In particular he became involved in the exploitation of the dense woodlands and iron ore deposits around Enniscorthy, co. Wexford, where he and other soldiers from his regiment had been allocated lands. Earlier, in 1654, he had been charged by the state with preserving the depleted woods in co. Cork and settled at Rostellan, where he was still living in 1664. These private and profitable projects occupied him during the time of Henry Cromwell's government in Ireland, the conservative tenor of which did not please Phayre. Between 1657 and 1658 he was in London to negotiate a partnership to exploit the Enniscorthy property. Phayre had married, probably a woman named Houghton, by 10 March 1653, when a letter to him referred to his 'wife and little babes'; they are known to have had two sons (both of whom predeceased Phayre) and two daughters (Welply, 30.22). Following his first wife's death Phayre married on 16 August 1658 at St Werburgh's, Dublin, Elizabeth (died 1698?), daughter of Thomas Herbert, attendant to Charles I in 1647-9. Together they had three sons and three daughters. 
The fall of the protectorate and the advent of a more radical regime both in Ireland and England led to his receiving a new commission, on 8 July 1659, as a colonel of foot under Edmund Ludlow. Phayre had been on hand in London on 27 June 1659 to present a petition from republican officers in Ireland to parliament. In Ireland, he again acted as governor of Cork. But once the restoration of Charles II became inevitable, he was vulnerable on account alike of his opinions and record. He had been seized during the coup engineered by more conservative officers in December 1659. He was arrested again at Cork on 18 May 1660, and then transported to England. Although imprisoned in the Tower of London, he escaped trial thanks to the intercession of royalists whom he had befriended during the interregnum and of his father-in-law, Herbert. However, he was not released until 1662, when he was permitted to return to Ireland. There he soon came under fresh suspicion of complicity in a plot to surprise Dublin Castle in 1663. He had not severed his links with republican comrades of the 1650s. Indeed John Lisle was assassinated while visiting Edmund Ludlow in his Swiss exile in 1664 when allegedly he was mistaken for Phayre. 
In Ireland, though he was watched closely, Phayre was not ostracized. He continued to develop iron-works in co. Wexford and his own estate at Grange, near Ovens in co. Cork, where he settled in his later years. He was also still involved in the timber trade. Nor had he forsaken his search for spiritual satisfaction. He patronized the co. Waterford healer Valentine Greatorex (who had earlier served in Phayre's own regiment), and still kept the company of the Quakers. He entertained William Penn, the son of another settler in co. Cork, when the Quaker visited Ireland in 1669-70. But it was as a disciple of Lodowick Muggleton, encountered in London in 1662 while under restraint, that Phayre ended his idiosyncratic quest for religious truth. In worldly terms, to judge from his will, he had prospered. He died at Grange between his making it, on 13 September 1682, and its proof on 13 November 1682, and was probably buried in the family plot belonging to his son-in-law, the Cork merchant, Quaker, and former Muggletonian George Gamble, in the parish of St John of Jerusalem in the south liberties of Cork. 


@@@@@


doc= 22088


Phayre, Sir Robert (1820-1897), army officer, born at Shrewsbury on 22 January 1820, was the third son of Richard Phayre of Claremont Buildings, Shrewsbury, and brother of General Sir Arthur Purves Phayre. He was educated at Shrewsbury School, and commissioned ensign in the East India Company service on 26 January 1839, being posted to the 25th Bombay native infantry, and became lieutenant on 1 December 1840. He served with his regiment in the First Anglo-Afghan War, was engaged with the Baluchis under Nasir Khan at Kotra and Gandava in December 1840, and was mentioned in dispatches. He took part in the 1843 Sind War, was severely wounded at Miani, and was again mentioned in dispatches for bravery. In 1844 he was appointed assistant quartermaster-general in Sind. In 1846 he married Diana Bunbury (died 1904), daughter of Captain Arnold Thompson, formerly paymaster of the 81st regiment. 
From 1851 to 1856 Phayre was specially employed in clearing mountain roads in the southern Maratha country. In 1856-7 he was involved in the organization of the expeditionary force to Persia. From March 1857 and throughout the Indian mutiny he was quartermaster-general to the Bombay army, his services being highly commended by Sir Hugh Rose (later Lord Strathnairn) on 15 May 1860. He held this appointment until 1868. He had become captain in his regiment on 28 December 1848, and was made brevet major on 16 June 1857, and major in the Bombay staff corps on 18 February 1861. 
Phayre became brevet lieutenant-colonel on 6 January 1863, and colonel five years later. He took part in the Abyssinian expedition as quartermaster-general, was mentioned in dispatches, and was made CB and aide-de-camp to the queen. From 1868 to 1872 he was political superintendent of the Sind frontier, and commandant of the frontier force. In March 1873 he was appointed resident at Baroda. He made strong representations of the misgovernment of the Maharaja Gaikwar, Malhar Rao, and a commission which investigated his charges found that they were substantially proved. The Gaikwar was warned and advised to change his minister, but matters did not improve. The friction between Phayre and the Gaikwar increased, and at the instigation of the latter an attempt was made on 9 November 1874 to poison Phayre, by putting arsenic and diamond dust in his sherbet. The Baroda trial followed, and led to the deposition of the Gaikwar on 23 April 1875. But the Indian government had previously decided to change the resident at Baroda, and Phayre, declining to resign, was superseded by Sir Lewis Pelly on 25 November 1874. 
Reverting to military employment, Phayre commanded a brigade, first in Bombay and afterwards in Rajputana, from 10 May 1875 to 4 May 1880. Having been promoted major-general on 1 January 1880, he was then appointed to command the reserve division of the army engaged in the second campaign of the Second Anglo-Afghan War, and had charge of the line of communication by Quetta to Kandahar. After the disaster of Maiwand (27 July 1880), Phayre was directed to push forward to Kandahar, which was being besieged by Ayub Khan, but was delayed by a lack of troops and transport, as well as by tribal uprising as a result of Maiwand, and Kandahar was relieved by Roberts before his arrival. Phayre was mentioned in dispatches, and made KCB on 22 February 1881. He commanded with distinction a division of the Bombay army from 1 March 1881 to 2 March 1886, and for some months acted as commander-in-chief at Bombay. On 22 January 1887 he was placed on the unemployed supernumerary list. He had become lieutenant-general on 1 November 1881, and became general on 22 January 1889. He received the GCB on 26 May 1894. 
Phayre was active in religious and philanthropic movements, and published pamphlets including 'The Bible versus Corrupt Christianity' (1890) and 'Monasticism Unveiled' (1890). He died at his home, 64 St George's Square, Pimlico, London, on 28 January 1897. 


@@@@@


doc= 22089


Phelips, Sir Edward (c.1555-1614), speaker of the House of Commons, was the fourth and youngest son of Thomas Phelips ('c'.1500-1590) of Montacute, Somerset, and Corfe Mullen, Dorset, and his wife, Elizabeth Smyth (died 1598), daughter of Matthew Smyth ['see under 'Smyth family (per. c.1500-1680)], a merchant, of Bristol. His father, former servant to Thomas Cromwell and Protector Somerset, was a successful grazier in Somerset and Dorset, whose own parliamentary service provided the political base for three of his sons. Phelips's education at New Inn and Middle Temple was sponsored by his cousin, the treasurer, Matthew Smyth. Called to the bar in 1579, he established a lucrative career in chancery and in the court of Star Chamber, where his political connections proved crucial. He was appointed autumn reader in the Middle Temple in 1596. 
Phelips's legal career was synonymous with his political life. His first seat, Bere Alston, in the 1584 parliament, was under the patronage of his legal client the marchioness of Winchester. His 1586 seat for Weymouth had been previously held by his father, grandfather, and a cousin. He sat for Penryn in 1593, and Robert, second earl of Essex, married to a Somerset connection, was his likely patron for the 1597 seat for Andover. In 1601 he was selected junior knight of the shire for Somerset, just as his impressive mansion at Montacute was being completed alongside the public highway which connected the county seat at Ilchester and the muster grounds on Ham Hill. The intersection of his legal and political careers was evident in his selection as queen's serjeant-at-law in February 1603. When the group of fourteen serjeants were invested in May 1603, Phelips was chosen as James I's serjeant-meane, with 'precedence before all others'. His patrons were Thomas Sackville, earl of Dorset, and Thomas Egerton, then lord chancellor, both supporters of the accession of James I; he was knighted in July that year. In February 1604 he was returned again for Somerset and he was elected speaker on 19 March. Both honours recognized his service to the new sovereign and his chief ministers. 
Phelips's political and legal career was devoted to the preservation of governmental order: as justice of common pleas in the county palatine of Lancaster from 1604, he was noted for his prosecution of recusancy; as king's serjeant he opened the indictment against the gunpowder plotters in 1606; as speaker he effectively represented the crown interests. He was rewarded with the reversion of the mastership of the rolls in 1608, succeeding in January 1611, the chancellorship of Prince Henry's re-established duchy of Cornwall in 1610, and the rangership of all royal forests, parks, and chases in 1613. He was also a minor literary patron. He sponsored his father's godson, George Coryate, in Prince Henry's household, and paid Thomas Chapman and Inigo Jones for their Middle Temple masque written for the marriage of Princess Elizabeth. However, the cost of such a public career was high. His expenses, such as the lavish house at Montacute and the entertainment of James I at his leased house at Wanstead, required more funds than the rewards from his political career. The untimely death of Prince Henry in 1612 may have deprived him of future grants. 
By the time of his sudden death at Rolls House in London on 11 September 1614, Phelips was $12,000 in debt. His political credit had been eroded, with James I due to his objections to the 'post nati' issue and among his peers in Somerset over the contested election in March 1614 when his son, Sir Robert Phelips, failed to secure a seat. With his first wife, Margaret Newdigate (died 1590), daughter of Robert Newdigate of Hawnes, Bedfordshire, he had two sons, Sir Robert and Francis. By his second marriage, to Elizabeth Pigott (died 1638), daughter of Thomas Pigott of Dodershall, Buckinghamshire, he had one son, Edward. He was buried at St Catherine's Church, Montacute, on 25 September 1614. The family held the mansion at Montacute until 1931, when it was donated to the National Trust. 


@@@@@


doc= 22090


Phelips, Sir Robert (1586?-1638), politician and landowner, was the elder son of Sir Edward Phelips (c.1555-1614) and his first wife, Margaret (died 1590), daughter of Robert Newdigate of Newdigate, Surrey. There is no record of his early education. He entered the Middle Temple in 1606 as son and heir apparent of Sir Edward, serjeant-at-law, but was never called to the bar. He had already been knighted (with his father) at James I's coronation in 1603. From 1604 to 1611 he sat for East Looe, Cornwall, in James's first parliament, of which his father was speaker. By 1613 he married Bridget, daughter of Sir Thomas Gorges of Longford Castle, Wiltshire. In the parliament of 1614, he failed to win a county seat for Somerset thanks to the organizational skill of another Somerset squire, John Poulett, who became his inveterate enemy. Phelips scrambled to be returned for the Cornish seat of Saltash. He was one of the more eloquent and aggressive MPs, attacking undertakers, demanding satisfaction of grievances before supply, and hotly pursuing Bishop Richard Neile of Lincoln for his speech in the Lords which demeaned the Commons. He moved into the first rank of the growing parliamentary opposition, and suffered for his prominence: by James's command he was sacked as a JP and as 'custos rotulorum' for Somerset (in which office he had succeeded his father two years before). Though restored to the commission in 1616, he was never again 'custos'. 
While his father had secured for him the reversion of one of the three clerkships of the petty bag in chancery in 1613, and he later pursued (unsuccessfully) a mastership of requests, Phelips does not appear to have held any central office. His ambition lay elsewhere. The experience of the grand tour in 1613 promoted his inclusion in Sir John Digby's 1615 embassy to Spain for negotiation of the Spanish match. His journal and papers in his near-illegible hand (Somerset Archive and Record Service, DD/PH, family letters) indicate his early distaste for the alliance. He carried that distaste to parliament in 1621, when he sat for Bath, Somerset, and emerged as one of the half-dozen leaders of the new and strident opposition. But only in the second session, after mistakenly perceiving the marquess of Buckingham's opposition to the alliance, did he attack it in the house and subsequently in a paper entitled 'A Discourse... betweene a counsellor of state and a country gentleman' (Somerset Archive and Record Service, DD/PH 227/16). Attacking Spain as the paymaster of the Catholic powers against the elector palatine and as the destroyer of English trade, he proposed withholding supply until there was a thorough preparation for war in defence of the elector. In 1621 every targeted grievance of the Commons saw Phelips in hot pursuit, leading the chase against monopolists, particularly Sir Giles Mompesson, and against Lord Chancellor Francis Bacon. He went after smaller game, notably the hapless recusant lawyer, Edward Floyd (Flud) -- giving point to S. R. Gardiner's disdainful 'Gifted with an elegant tongue, and with every virtue except discretion' (Gardiner, 'History', 4.248). With parliament's dissolution Phelips was arrested on 1 January 1622; he remained in the Tower until 10 August. 
In the 1621 parliament Phelips had led in restoring the franchise of a number of ancient boroughs, including Ilchester, Somerset, of which he was steward and in which he had considerable, though not ineluctable, influence; he meant to avoid another Saltash. In 1624 he carried one of the Somerset seats and had enough sway to put his friend and fellow radical John Symes in the other. While the king wished to exclude Phelips, influence stopped any attempt to bar him. The initial common cause joining Buckingham and the opposition in carrying out war against Spain, the 'blessed revolution' (Cogswell, 139-65), deteriorated by the end of the parliament, and Phelips's mounting bellicosity, given edge by the favourite's passing him over for ambassador to The Hague, cost him Buckingham's indulgence. With the first parliament of Charles's reign in 1625, Phelips again won a county seat, though the other knight for Somerset was Sir John Stawell, protege of John Poulett. Stawell, no less inimical towards Phelips, was very young and impetuous and cut no figure in the Commons. At Westminster and on adjournment at Oxford, Phelips was pre-eminently the leader of the opposition, in full cry against Buckingham, insisting on withholding supply until grievances were addressed, attacking impositions, and railing against court toleration of Catholics. Gardiner concluded that 'the history of the Parliament of 1625 is summed up in the name of Phelips', that at Oxford he 'virtually assumed that unacknowledged leadership which was all that the traditions of Parliament at that time permitted. It was Phelips who placed the true issue of want of confidence before the House' (Gardiner, 'History', 4.432). 
Like Sir Edward Coke and Sir Thomas Wentworth, Phelips was made sheriff (in his case of Somerset) in November 1625 to disable him from sitting in the next parliament. He lost his deputy lieutenancy and his militia colonelcy in 1625 for his opposition to the privy-seal loans. He was put out of the Somerset commission of the peace in 1626 for his vehement opposition to the free gift. The loss of these offices -- on the delation of John Poulett, according to Phelips -- put him at considerable political disadvantage in the county in his rivalry with Poulett, whose star rose to the heights of a peerage (as Baron Poulett) as Phelips's descended at court. In the two years of his eclipse before the next parliament, Phelips responded to Poulett's challenge by reining in any tendency to court popularity, such as might be considered dangerous by fellow members of the elite, or to trade on the fact he was one of those to be 'thought their countries only freindes' (BL, Royal MS 17 A.xxxvii, fols. 17-33) as the undertakers for draining King's Sedgmoor put it. In fact, while he might have been expected to lead the opposition to that ambitious scheme, he was silent. Phelips managed an advantageous exchange of his Neroche Forest property with the commissioners for its disafforestation and had the satisfaction of seeing the forest's keeper, Poulett, lose his hunting there. During the forced loan of 1626-7 Phelips was much in London and raised no voice against the loan in the county. He could not resist troubling the reform of militia mustering, both in revenge for being excluded from militia matters and as a means to annoy Poulett and his adherents. But his sallies were sufficiently oblique that they could be dissembled by protestations of being wronged by his adversaries and merely defending the just interests of his countrymen threatened by the deputy lieutenants' undue proceedings. In the process he maintained his constituency against the next county election. 
Phelips's last election to parliament for Somerset, in February 1628, was at the cost of Sir John Stawell and came upon another victory. Stawell had accused the sheriff of partiality at the 1625 elections, had pressed one of his bailiffs as a soldier, and had slandered Phelips and other JPs at quarter sessions. Phelips had prosecuted him in Star Chamber, and the dismissal with heavy costs of Stawell's countersuit a couple of months before the new election gave Phelips added satisfaction. Though somewhat overshadowed by both Wentworth's purposeful management of the debate on the petition of right and Sir John Eliot's soaring rhetoric if not always clear policy direction in leadership of the opposition, Phelips yet played a crucial role in the debates over lieutenancy and billeting in April 1628, not only casting the question higher than it had been before but bringing to the issues a convincing, principled, albeit pragmatic, realism. 
The 1629 session proved difficult for Phelips. John Pym's single-minded and unprecedentedly vehement pursuit of Arminianism devalued the grand issues -- foreign affairs, privileges, prerogative, taxation, the liberties of the subject -- which were always central in Phelips's politics. He now followed rather than led. Though he was 'as intense' in his 'religious alarm' as Pym, he was 'less settled in it' (Russell, 407). Having distanced himself from the hysteria with which the session ended, he was not arrested with Eliot and eight other MPs the day after parliament adjourned. 
With the advent of Charles I's personal rule Phelips's political ambit -- but not his political ambition -- was limited to Somerset. He was certain there would be another parliament, and he sought supremacy in the county in order to assure the political base for his election. It has been suggested that 'Phelips in the 1630s perhaps served his county's interests more effectively for the fact that he was able to use discretion about when it was expedient to do so' (Russell, 425). Expediency dictated Phelips's assiduous execution of various enclosure and disafforestation schemes and of the Somerset commission for distraint of knighthood, his vigorous implementation of the 'Book of Orders', and his strident support for the 'Book of Sports' (where he scored against both Poulett and the hapless chief justice Sir Thomas Richardson). Expediency was overborne in 1636 in the matter of the militia, when Phelips adroitly manoeuvred Poulett into an abuse of his authority as chief deputy lieutenant, resulting in Poulett's severe reprimand by the lord lieutenant and other privy councillors. And with the 1634 writ of ship money, Phelips raised the first opposition to the tax in what would be a sustained campaign to cripple it by disputing the rates for its collection. Where Phelips led other county magnates followed, and by 1638 ship money was virtually uncollectable in Somerset. Phelips's victory was complete, for he had become truly his 'countries only freinde', had defeated Poulett and Stawell at every juncture, and could reasonably claim that those principles for which he had stood so prominently in the parliaments of the 1620s he had advanced in county governance in the 1630s. 
Phelips's victory was short-lived. He died in 1638 and was buried on 13 April in the parish church at Montacute, leaving his widow, Bridget, his sons Edward (1612/13-1680) and Robert (1619-1707), and three daughters. He had been a poor manager of his estates and had not advanced his fortune. He cleared his debts and settled Edward's inheritance by a marriage alliance between Edward and Sir Walter Pye's daughter, Anne, that compromised Bridget's dower and deprived their three daughters of their portions. Sir Robert had not lived long enough to see another parliament -- or, for that matter, a revolution. Edward did, being elected to both the Short and the Long parliaments for his father's pocket borough, Ilchester. Disabled in 1644, Edward was a royalist colonel and governor of Bristol after it fell to the king. There is little reason to suppose that had he lived Sir Robert's pilgrimage would have been any different. 


@@@@@


doc= 22091


Phelps, John (b. 1618/19), government official and regicide, was the second son of Robert Phelps (died 1622), gentleman, of Salisbury, and his wife, Sarah. He matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 20 May 1636, aged seventeen, and entered the Middle Temple in 1641. He appears to have married Jane Birt at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 25 July 1642. His first employment seems to have been that of clerk to the committee of plundered ministers. On 26 December 1648 he was appointed clerk assistant to, and temporary replacement for, Henry Elsing, clerk of the House of Commons, and on 8 January he was selected as one of the two clerks of the high court of justice which sat to try Charles I. He read out the roll-call of the commissioners and the preamble of their authorization when the trial opened on 20 January and then took minutes of the proceedings ['see also 'Regicides]. The resulting journal of the court, presented by the judges to the House of Commons, was published by John Nalson in 1682. 
In 1650 Phelps was called to the bar at the Middle Temple. On 14 October 1652 he was made clerk of the committee of parliament chosen to confer with the deputies of Scotland on the question of the union, and the committee for plundered ministers was asked to excuse his attendance in the meantime. He was employed as official note taker at the trial of the royalist plotters Vowell and Fox in 1654 and was also concerned in the 1658 trial of the plotters Slingsby and Hewitt. He acted as clerk to the restored Rump Parliament, from 7 to 14 May 1659. By these different employments he made sufficient money to purchase the fee of the manor and honour of Hampton Court in 1652, confirmed on 15 November 1653. He is recorded on the court roll as lord of the manor from 14 May 1652 to 2 June 1654. It was bought back from him when Hampton Court was set aside for the use of the protector. On 17 May 1654 the council of state authorized a repurchase payment of $750, exactly what it had cost Phelps. The deed of sale was executed by Phelps on 27 June but the money was still due when the excise commissioners ordered it paid on 31 July 1655. He also leased Steventon rectory, Berkshire, part of the sequestered lands of the dean and chapter of Westminster. 
At the Restoration the House of Commons included Phelps and his fellow clerk Broughton among the regicides, and on 14 May 1660 voted their arrest. Prynne was ordered to secure all the public documents which were among Phelps's papers and his goods were also seized. On 9 June it was further voted that he should be excepted from the 'Act of Indemnity' but with his punishment to be determined in the future by some penalty less than death, apparently in the hope that he would 'render himselfe' and provide useful information (Ludlow, 'Voyce', 167). Phelps, who had earlier warned Edmund Ludlow of the dangers of arrest, had already 'resolved to provide for his safety by going beyond sea' (ibid., 150). On 1 July 1661 Phelps was attainted in company with twenty-one dead regicides. He succeeded in evading all pursuit and in 1662 was in Lausanne with Ludlow, whom he may have supplied with documents. At the close of that year he and Colonel John Biscoe bought goods at Geneva and other places and resolved to make a livelihood by trading in Germany and the Netherlands. In 1666 Phelps appears to have been in the Netherlands, and his name was included in a list of exiles in enemy service summoned on 21 July to surrender themselves within a given time to the English government. The date of his death is unknown but he presumably died at Vevey where a memorial tablet was set up near his unmarked grave at St Martin's Church by American descendants in the late nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 22092


Phelps, Samuel (1804-1878), actor and theatre manager, was born on 13 February 1804 at 1 St Aubyn Street, Plymouth Dock (Devonport), Devon, the seventh child and second son of Robert M. Phelps and his wife, Ann, the daughter of Captain Turner. His affluent father, whose ancestors came from Somerset, was a supplier of naval uniforms and occupied a significant social position in the town. 
Phelps was educated at a Plymouth Dock school and at Dr Samuel Reece's classical school at Saltash, Cornwall, where he stood out as an accomplished swimmer. In 1813-14 and 1818-19 he visited London and went to the theatre with a cousin, Dr Hyde, a drama critic. At Covent Garden and Drury Lane he saw such leading performers as J. P. Kemble, Charles Kemble, Edmund Kean, W. C. Macready, Eliza O'Neill, and Sarah Siddons. Back home he helped backstage at the Devonport Theatre, and walked on occasionally. However, his growing theatrical ambitions were dashed abruptly when, at the age of sixteen, he was suddenly orphaned. His elder brother took him in and, pragmatically, Phelps became a junior reader for the 'Plymouth Herald' newspaper. Within a year he left for London, nursing his burning theatrical aspirations. 
London offered little opportunity for a novice actor, and so, for five years, Phelps resumed work as a reader, first for 'The Globe' and then for 'The Sun' newspapers. Fortunately, his fellow readers included the dramatist-to-be Douglas Jerrold and W. E. Love (a polyphonist/ventriloquist), and the three performed with a small theatrical troupe which presented weekly performances at a private theatre in Rawstorne Street (Finsbury). Phelps's life jogged on in this fashion until spring 1826, when, as a gentleman amateur, he performed successfully the role of Eustache de St Pierre in 'The Surrender of Calais' and the Count de Valmont in 'The Foundling of the Forest' at the Olympic. Despite Jerrold's contrary advice, Phelps abandoned journalism and secured a professional engagement on the York circuit for 18's'. weekly. Equally impulsively, and before leaving for York, he married Sarah Cooper (1810/11-1867) on 11 August 1826; she was just sixteen. However, their marriage was very happy: they were a devoted couple, and Sarah later served as Phelps's dresser. Phelps preferred home life with her to clubs or social gatherings. His other delights were angling and shooting, and he purportedly knew every trout stream in England. They had three sons and three daughters, including William Robert (1828-1867), who became chief justice of St Helena, and Edmund (died 1870), who became an actor. Sarah suffered from breast cancer for seven years before her death in 1867, which affected Phelps profoundly. 
Phelps's years in the provinces from 1826 to 1837 provided invaluable though typical experience for a tyro. They were also extremely gruelling physically and financially for the young couple: Sarah lived in a wretched tenement while Phelps often walked miles from engagements to be with his wife. His first position at Pontefract in autumn 1826 typifies his experience: he played no fewer than six roles in 'Macbeth'. Indeed, his early career was a catalogue of numerous towns and of roles growing gradually in importance: he visited Hull, Sheffield, Leeds, Preston, Perth, Dundee, Aberdeen, Inverness, and Belfast, playing Malcolm, Benvolio, the Ghost in 'Hamlet', Macduff, Claudius, and Julius Caesar. By 1830 he was attracting favourable critical notices which pinpointed his hallmark traits: his well-studied conception of a role, his ability to move audiences, and his precise, distinct diction. (Through his peregrinations in Scotland he also mastered the Scottish dialect.) There were also frustrations: for example, in Sheffield in February 1830, he was obliged to play second fiddle to a young, inexperienced Charles Kean trading on the fame of his father, Edmund. However, Phelps garnered more favourable notices than Kean junior. Within the next three years, with Lear, Macbeth, Othello, and Shylock under his belt, Phelps was hailed as an excellent Shakespearian actor. He excelled in both tragedy and comedy, and in non-Shakespearian roles, such as Sir Archy Macsarcasm in Charles Macklin's 'Love a la Mode'. These experiences developed his character, suffusing it with patience and doggedness: he worked hard for his family and persisted despite adversity. 
By 1836 Phelps hankered for the fame and fortune that London offered, but contented himself with engagements in southern England. First he impressed audiences in Worthing and then was hired by Hay for the Exeter theatre for the winter season of 1836. There local newspapers eulogized Phelps, judging him Edmund Kean's equal. (Perhaps unfairly, although inevitably, Phelps frequently laboured under the shadow of Kemble, Kean, and Macready.) Nevertheless, his Exeter Shylock was acclaimed as original in conception, and, unlike Kean and Macready, Phelps omitted making 'points' -- contrived acting business designed to elicit applause from audiences at particular moments in a play. Rather, he remained consistently in character throughout. Striking, too, were his Lear and Sir Giles Overreach in Philip Massinger's 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts'. He also squeezed in performances at Plymouth as Virginius (in Sheridan Knowles's play), Richard III, Othello, and Iago. 
In June 1837 Phelps returned to Devonport (living in lodgings once occupied by Edmund Kean), and played Hamlet, among other roles. He now judged the time was ripe to explore his prospects in London, since he had received overtures from Alfred Bunn, the manager of Drury Lane. When, strangely, Bunn refused to see him, he turned to Benjamin Webster at the Haymarket, who offered promises and somewhat vague terms. So, while awaiting a definite offer from Webster, Phelps fulfilled an engagement at Southampton, where his performance on 14 August 1837 as Sir Edmund Mortimer in George Colman's 'The Iron Chest' persuaded Macready, in Southampton secretly to see Phelps, to offer the latter a contract at Covent Garden. This was to prove a crucial, career-altering moment for Phelps, particularly because he rather naively assumed others possessed his sense of integrity. Macready led him to believe Webster knew of the negotiations, and, since the Haymarket operated only part of the year, Phelps probably believed there was no barrier to his signing Macready's contract as well as fulfilling his obligation to Webster. Effectively, however, Phelps had placed himself under Macready's control. 
Phelps's choice of Shylock for his Haymarket debut on 28 August 1837 deliberately courted comparison with Edmund Kean who, for his sensational 1814 Drury Lane debut, had discarded Shylock's traditional red hair and beard. Critics made inescapable comparisons, not deeming Phelps's performance particularly remarkable, although they considered his conception of Shylock judicious. The audience was far more receptive, as it was when Phelps performed another Kean role, Sir Edmund Mortimer, without aping Kean's original. His expressive features, splendid voice, and good figure (combined effectively with his height of 5 foot 9 inches and grey eyes) also drew praise. Equally well-judged, maturely conceived performances of Hamlet, Othello, and Richard III followed before Phelps joined Macready at Covent Garden. 
Phelps's salary at Covent Garden, at $12 weekly, provided reasonable financial stability for his family. Virtually everything else at Covent Garden under Macready was unreasonable, for the latter soon realized Phelps was a serious threat to his own position as the period's eminent tragedian. Phelps opened on 27 October 1837, playing Jaffier in Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd' to Macready's Pierre. Phelps was received too warmly for Macready, who withdrew from the production. Phelps's next performance as Othello (to Macready's Iago) was so successful that, instead of rejoicing in an associate's success, Macready confined him thereafter to minor roles -- Cassius ('Julius Caesar'), Antonio ('The Tempest'), and the Constable of France ('Henry V'). Although stoic, Phelps chaffed at the lack of opportunities and tried to induce Macready to release him; Macready would consent only if Phelps agreed to leave London. Remarkably, although he essentially had no options, Phelps signed a second contract with Macready for the 1838-9 season. Not surprisingly, conditions, namely secondary roles, remained the same: Macready, as was indeed his prerogative, reserved the star spotlight for himself. 
There was no amelioration when both actors joined Webster at the Haymarket for summer 1839. On 19 August they alternated Othello and Iago to Helena Faucit's Desdemona; Phelps's more natural Othello was preferred over Macready's rendering, and Macready persuaded Webster to withdraw the production. Again, lesser roles (such as Jaques in 'As You Like It') went Phelps's way, and he concluded he would have to bide his time. 
A chance at Drury Lane under W. J. Hammond's management in early 1840 fizzled out when Hammond decamped leaving $8000 in debts. So Phelps returned to the Haymarket, his talent still eclipsed. In summer 1840 he had the galling experience of again supporting Charles Kean's bigger reputation and lesser talent by performing such roles as the Ghost ('Hamlet') and Macduff. More satisfying was his success as Old Dornton in Thomas Holcroft's 'The Road to Ruin' (September 1840) followed by Gabor in Byron's 'Werner', where he upstaged Macready playing the title role. In November 1840, while Macready was absent because of his daughter's death, Phelps seized the opportunity to demonstrate his versatility in the contrasting roles of Iago and Joseph Surface. That same month, a group of dramatists known as the Syncretics asked Phelps to put up $500 and join them in leasing Drury Lane in order to produce some of their works. Macready allegedly got wind of the scheme and scotched it by leasing Drury Lane himself. So Phelps was obliged to return to the Haymarket and more secondary characters. The final straw came when Webster cast him as Friar Laurence in 'Romeo and Juliet'; Phelps quit the company, explaining in a letter to 'The Spectator' that he merely wanted a fair crack of the whip. 
The Syncretics then asked Phelps to produce George Stephens's 'Martinuzzi' at the Lyceum (26 August 1841). Although the play was essentially unactable, Phelps was successful both as Cardinal and Martinuzzi and as stage-manager, and the play eked out a one-month run. Some provincial touring and an engagement at the Surrey followed, and then Phelps was approached by Macready to join the company he was assembling for Drury Lane. Amazingly, and against the advice of friends, Phelps agreed. Unsurprisingly, Macready had not changed his ways, and small parts again came Phelps's way. However, their relationship warmed somewhat, especially after Macready assisted Phelps financially with a loan. Macready also gave Phelps 300 guineas when he left him in June 1843. A highlight of Phelps's career at Drury Lane was his 'fearfully effective' portrayal of Lord Tresham in Browning's 'A Blot in the 'Scutcheon' (11 February 1843), where his raging passion evoked inevitable memories of Edmund Kean's histrionics. Earlier, his portrayal of Hubert in 'King John' (24 October 1842), which Phelps imbued with manly pathos, so affected Queen Victoria that she commissioned Sir William Ross to paint Phelps's portrait as that character. 
More important in 1843, when Phelps was performing his repertory of Iago, Lear, Macbeth, and Sir Giles Overreach in the provinces, was the 'Theatre Regulation Act', which removed the exclusive rights of the patent theatres to perform 'legitimate' drama. Ironically, since it eventually gave Phelps his big chance, Macready himself had been foremost in urging the change and had presented a petition to the House of Commons to that effect. 
Phelps's chance came when Thomas Greenwood, the lessee of Sadler's Wells, approached him with a proposal to join him and manage the theatre with Mary Amelia Warner, a leading actress. Sadler's Wells was a large theatre with a capacity of 2500, one thousand of which occupied the pit. While it was an inexpensive theatre to rent, its location was far from ideal, being removed from central London, its theatres, and their clientele. The local Islington audience was relatively uneducated: the lower-middle classes formed its upper echelon. Thus Sadler's Wells was unfashionable and an unlikely prospect for Shakespeare and other high-minded drama. (Ironically, Edmund Kean had made his first appearance in 1801 at Sadler's Wells as the child actor Master Carey.) Nevertheless, Phelps harboured high ideals, which he enshrined in his prospectus. He believed the theatre should be a 'place for justly representing the works of our great dramatic poets', especially because the leading London theatres were not presenting 'the real drama of England'. He believed that each area of London should have 'its own well-conducted theatre within a reasonable distance of the homes of its patrons' with fair ticket prices. Further, he promised a company of 'acknowledged talent'. So began one of the most glorious reigns of any London theatre, during which Phelps produced more than 1600 performances of thirty-one of Shakespeare's plays (the exceptions were 'Henry VI', 'Titus Andronicus', 'Richard II', and 'Troilus and Cressida'), together with numerous works from the Renaissance to the mid-nineteenth century. 
Phelps opened on 27 May 1844, performing Macbeth, with Mrs Warner as Lady Macbeth. A packed house was entranced by Phelps's vigorous and vivid portrayal, which such critics as attended compared unavoidably, although favourably, with Kean's and Macready's. 'Macbeth' became part of a season of ninety-eight plays, of which twenty-six were main pieces (seven Shakespearian) and seventy-two afterpieces. This pattern established Phelps's policy for the remainder of his eighteen-year tenancy. Frequent changes in the repertory were necessitated by the numerically limited local audience, and Shakespearian productions were added gradually. The first season also established other enduring features. For example, 'Richard III' (20 February 1845) was given in the original Shakespeare version rather than Cibber's, although Phelps still cut 46 per cent of the lines. Care was given to ensure both scenery and costuming were historically accurate, as 'King John' (30 September 1844) also exemplified. Moreover, scenery, costumes, and other effects had to enhance a play and not be solely spectacular. Notable, too, was the variety of genres (tragedy, drama, and comedy) Phelps presented; his own roles included Sir Peter Teazle in 'The School for Scandal', Virginius, King John, Luke Frugal in Massinger's 'The City Madam', Claude Melnotte in Bulwer-Lytton's 'The Lady of Lyons', Hamlet, and Rover in John O'Keeffe's 'Wild Oats'. In these productions Phelps was supported well by his company of 'acknowledged' talent, which also contributed organically to the whole production, for, although Phelps often played leads, he was no spotlight hugger. Although Tom Taylor's 'The Fool's Revenge' was not produced until 18 October 1859 (during Phelps's sixteenth season) Taylor's account of Phelps's production methods is apposite: '[Phelps] had something of the irritability of Macready, and was not slow to give stupid, or, still more, careless people the rough side of his tongue; but his heart was so evidently in his work,... never sacrificing other scenes to his own, or other actors to himself.... [T]hough the rehearsals were so strict and elaborate they took up no more time than more slipshod ones would have done.... [R]ehearsal [was] continuous, well-considered, patient, shaping of the play for public performance, in which not merely the groupings and movements of the personages were attended to, but the delivery of every speech watched, nay, the emphasis and pronunciation of every word noted. (Taylor, 341-2)' One problem Phelps faced was the constantly changing composition of his company, which, from time to time, included George Bennett, Henry Marston, Laura Addison, Fanny Cooper, and Isabella Glyn. Although some actors remained loyal, others, once established at Sadler's Wells, moved on, typically to the central London theatres, in hopes of the fame and fortune not really to be found at Sadler's Wells. Thus Phelps and his theatre became a dramatic arts training school. 
Subsequent seasons consolidated Phelps's initial achievements, as the repertory was enlarged with a wide range of English plays. Each season had particular highlights. In the second season an original-text 'King Lear' (5 November 1845), with the Fool fully restored, was given, with Phelps stressing Lear as a suffering, outraged parent (although it was not his greatest role). More popular was Bulwer-Lytton's 'Richelieu' (thirty-nine performances; Phelps as the Cardinal). That was eclipsed by the forty-five performances of 'The Winter's Tale', with Phelps as Leontes, a role Macready had performed frequently, and later to be one of Phelps's favourites after Hamlet and Macbeth. The Shakespearian novelty of the third season (now lacking Mrs Warner as co-lessee) was Phelps's unconventional rendition of Falstaff in 'Henry IV, Part 1' (25 July 1846): 'He lays stress not on 'Falstaff's' sensuality, but on the lively intellect that stands for soul as well as mind in his gross body... [Falstaff] is not vulgarised in Mr Phelps's reading' (Morley, 333). Phelps was also a notable Prospero on 7 April 1847. 
In the fourth season Phelps introduced a 'Macbeth' expunged of the singing and dancing witches inherited from eighteenth-century productions and his inventive reading of Malvolio in 'Twelfth Night' (26 January 1848), where 'his conceit, exaltation, and profound contempt of others were admirably true. His set and abstracted look seemed to ignore the existence of those whom he despised. The picture of fatuous vanity was thoroughly incisive, and yet free from exaggeration' (Marston, 2.24). 'Cymbeline', 'As You Like It', and 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' (Phelps as Falstaff again) also joined the repertory, which now embraced half the Shakespeare canon. This and Phelps's larger repertory (whether or not he himself was in the cast) began to swell the ranks of the locals with the likes of Charles Dickens, John Forster, and other literati. However, royal patronage, which could have done much to boost Sadler's Wells' fortunes, remained absent. Nevertheless, Phelps did give four command performances at Windsor Castle, in 1853 (twice), 1859, and 1860. 
Among the Shakespeare plays Phelps produced later, most notable, for differing reasons, were 'Antony and Cleopatra' (1849), two rarely performed works, 'Timon of Athens' (1851) and 'All's Well that Ends Well' (1852), and 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1853). Although Phelps was less than successful as Antony, the lavish production, with scenery and costumes emphasizing Rome and Egypt's grandeur, achieved twenty-two performances. Phelps's Timon was judged superior to Kean's, while as Parolles in an expurgated version of 'All's Well' he exploited his own comical and whimsical abilities. 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' was a more significant production, which Phelps conceived as a dream evoked and sustained by appropriate scenery and costuming. He emphasized the play's poetry, and his rendition of Bottom was subtle and eschewed external comic trappings. Such trappings were also absent in his portrayal of Sir Pertinax Macsycophant (in Macklin's 'The Man of the World', 1851), a role requiring thorough impersonation. Phelps realized it completely and topped it off with his fine Scottish accent. Altogether, the refinement and intellectuality of these productions bore Phelps's signature. 
Further instances of Phelps's brave Shakespeare production policy were 'Pericles' (14 October 1854) and 'Love's Labour's Lost' (30 September 1857), neither of them popular plays; indeed, 'Pericles' had not been performed for nearly 200 years. Phelps gave it a spectacular production which ran for two months. His 'Love's Labour's Lost' was only the second production since the Renaissance (Madame Vestris had presented it at Covent Garden in 1839). It was always considered a difficult play because of its intricate sophisticated wit and minimal plot; Phelps's version was, nevertheless, considered a charming production and ran for fourteen performances. Similarly, he revived Colman and Garrick's rarely seen 'The Clandestine Marriage' (4 November 1857), playing Lord Ogleby successfully for twenty-eight performances. After the close of the next (fifteenth) season he took seven of his Shakespearian productions to Berlin, Leipzig, and Hamburg; critics found them admirable and worthy of emulation. Unfortunately, poor attendances caused Phelps to cut short his tour. For the summer breaks of 1860 and 1861 he accepted engagements with Augustus Harris senior at the Princess's, where he alternated Shakespearian roles with Charles Fechter (then much in vogue) and collected a handsome $60 weekly. 
What were to be the final two seasons at Sadler's Wells were undistinguished. First, Greenwood resigned as Phelps's business manager with the 1860-61 season, which was remarkable mainly for the debut of Phelps's son Edmund as Ulric in 'Werner' (21 November 1860). The following season, on 21 September 1861, Phelps produced his first and only French adaptation, Casimir Delavigne's 'Louis XI', taking the title role. Later that season he learned of his wife's illness, and that, combined with the pressures of running Sadler's Wells single-handedly, ended his gallant venture on 15 March 1862. 
Phelps was not one to give up, and he continued his acting career. In January 1863, again heedless of friends' advice, he accepted an offer from Fechter to perform at the Lyceum for $40 weekly. He realized eventually that he had repeated his earlier mistake when Fechter would not assign him any roles and was simply paying him a salary to keep him off the stage and out of competition. They quarrelled when Fechter offered him merely the Ghost in 'Hamlet'; Charles Dickens, a friend of both men and called in to adjudicate, found in Phelps's favour, declaring he should be given prominent roles. Fechter then released Phelps from his contract. Fechter also proved an irritant during the Shakespeare tercentenary celebrations of 1864. Phelps was asked to perform only Iachimo in 'Cymbeline' at Stratford while Fechter was offered Hamlet; Phelps, rightly regarding himself as the leading English player of the day, was annoyed. Ironically, neither man performed at Stratford, although Phelps did plant an oak tree on Primrose Hill as part of the London commemorations. 
Phelps was more fortunate in his association with Falconer and Chatterton, the managers of Drury Lane. He joined them in autumn 1863 and stayed there for seven successful years, reprising many of his old roles (for example, Falstaff, Othello, Richelieu, Wolsey, Sir Pertinax Macsycophant), as well as adding Manfred in Byron's play of that name (10 October 1863), Mephistopheles in 'Faust' (20 October 1866), and the Doge in W. Bayle Bernard's 'The Doge of Venice' (2 November 1867). However, these successes were eclipsed by family losses. Both his wife and his eldest son died in 1867, and his actor son, Edmund, died in 1870 at the age of only thirty-two. Somehow Phelps soldiered on, adding provincial touring to appearances at Astley's, the Princess's (where he performed Hamlet at the age of sixty-eight), the Gaiety (in novel matinee performances introduced by John Hollingshead in 1874-6), and the Aquarium. His provincial appearances are noteworthy for the connections they provide with the twentieth-century acting tradition. In 1866 at Hull he played Macbeth to Madge Kendal's Lady Macbeth, while in September 1874, at Charles Calvert's Prince's Theatre, Manchester, he first performed with Johnston Forbes-Robertson. Phelps, doubling Henry IV and Justice Shallow in 'Henry IV, Part 2', coached Forbes-Robertson as Prince Hal. He thought highly of the young actor, and they later acted together quite frequently in London. Forbes-Robertson painted Phelps's portrait as Wolsey for the Garrick Club. 
By 1878 Phelps's health had begun to fail; he caught a bad cold, but still continued to alternate the roles of Richelieu and Wolsey at the Aquarium, the latter being his last performance, on 1 March 1878. He went to Anson's Farm, Coopersale, near Epping in Essex, to recuperate and did so sufficiently to contract with Chatterton for the 1878-9 season at Drury Lane. However, a further series of colds finally felled him, and he died at Anson's Farm on 6 November 1878. His body was removed to his London home the next day, and he was buried, alongside his wife, at Highgate cemetery on 13 November 1878. 
Phelps was a genial, kind-hearted, intellectual man, who was devoted to his family, his profession, and his hobbies. His contribution to the theatre cannot be overestimated, although it took nearly a century for its full value to be realized. As actor, manager, and producer he had a seriousness of purpose, a high moral conviction, and worked hard. He conceived productions as organic entities designed to enhance the play itself and directed his energies to that end. In restoring Shakespeare's texts he took Macready's reformations one step further. Nor should the high percentage of the Shakespeare canon he produced be overlooked. To boot, he did not neglect the remainder of the British repertory, since over half his productions at Sadler's Wells were non-Shakespearian plays. In his own acting, his careful, judicious performances stand out, and his repertory is remarkable for its range, encompassing both heroes and cowards, tragedy and comedy. He was a selfless man; he did not reserve the spotlight for himself, but nurtured others. He obviously possessed integrity and trusted others, far too much in some instances. His misfortune was to lie in the shadow of a predecessor such as Edmund Kean and such contemporaries as Macready and Fechter. Nevertheless, Phelps's achievement at Sadler's Wells, a theatre judged snootily merely because of its locale, was magnificent. 


@@@@@


doc= 22093


Phelps, Thomas (b. 1694, d. in or after 1776), astronomer, was born at Chalgrove, Oxfordshire, in January 1694. In 1718 he was a stableman in the service of the lord chancellor, Thomas Parker (afterwards earl of Macclesfield), but his good conduct and ability induced George Parker, second earl of Macclesfield, to take him into his observatory in 1742. He was the first in England to detect the great comet of 1743 and his observations of it on 23 December were published anonymously in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society'. An engraving in the keeping of the Royal Astronomical Society represents Phelps as just about to make an observation with the Shirburn Castle 5 foot transit, which John Bartlett, originally a shepherd, prepares to record. The print dates from 1776, when Phelps was eighty-two and Bartlett fifty-four years of age. It is not known when Phelps died. 


@@@@@


doc= 22094


Phelps, William (bap. 1776, d. 1856), topographer, son of the Revd John Phelps and his wife, Mary, was baptized on 28 August 1776 at Flax Bourton, Somerset. He matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford on 18 November 1793, and graduated BA from St Alban's Hall, Oxford, in 1797. After taking holy orders he was vicar of Bicknoller, Somerset (1811-51), and of Meare, Somerset (1824-51), after which he became rector of Oxcombe, Lincolnshire. In 1810 he published 'Calendrium botanicum', detailing the generic and specific name, class, order, and habitat of all British plants, arranged monthly according to their time of flowering. In later life he compiled guidebooks to the duchy of Nassau (1842) and Frankfurt am Main (1844) while recuperating from ill health at German spas. 
However, Phelps's chief work was an elaborate 'History and Antiquities of Somersetshire', with learned historical introduction and illustrations. Eight parts were issued between 1835 and 1839, when they reappeared in two volumes. The first portion deals with the Roman and Celtic remains of the county, and includes numerous plates. Phelps personally inspected all the sites. The latter parts describe the hundreds and parishes with data collected from questionnaires after the model of the Scottish statistical accounts. Owing to ill health the work remained unfinished, lacking an index, and with only a third of the county described. Phelps died at Upper Norwood, Surrey, on 17 August 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 22095


Phesant, Peter (1584-1649), judge, was the eldest son of Peter Phesant, barrister, of Barkworth, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Vincent Fulnetby. Admitted to Gray's Inn on 26 October 1602, he was called to the bar in 1608. About the following year he married Mary Bruges, who came from a Gloucestershire family. Having become a common pleader of London, he was elected a bencher of his inn in 1623, and was reader in the autumn of 1624. Following the death of his cousin Mary Weld, Lady Weld, in 1623, as one of her executors Phesant was energetically involved in the arrangements for her substantial charitable benefactions. From 1630 to 1641 he was steward of the manor of Hackney, Middlesex. He was appointed a serjeant-at-law in May 1640 and in the following year he was a justice of assize for Nottinghamshire. On 10 March 1642 Sir Edward Herbert, the attorney-general, asked for Phesant's services as defence counsel during Herbert's impeachment, but Phesant excused himself on the grounds of ill health. Briefly, from 2 May 1643, he was recorder of London. He had already, in February that year, been proposed to the king as a potential judge of common pleas, but was not voted in by parliament until 30 September 1645; he was formally appointed on 7 October. Meanwhile, by March 1644 he was engaged with Serjeant Henry Rolle in the project to print Edward Coke's work 'for the good of the commonwealth' (Green, 312). 
By this time Phesant had accumulated considerable wealth. In June 1644 he was assessed at $1000. He had a large estate at Upwood in Huntingdonshire and properties in London; about 1647 he also had the lease of a house in Warwick Lane in the city, belonging to Sir John Bramston. He was re-appointed to his judgeship on 9 February 1649, but by June was acknowledged to be unwell. His will, drawn up on 22 September, left generous bequests to his wife, his sons Stephen and Nathaniel, and his sons-in-law William Cheney, John Sotherton, and Christopher Goodfellow; fellow lawyers Bramston and Sir Robert Berkeley were the overseers. Phesant died at Upwood on 1 October, and was buried in the church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 22096


Philidor, Francois-Andre Danican (1726-1795), musician and chess player, was born at Dreux, France, on 7 September 1726, the youngest child from his second marriage, to Elisabeth Leroy, of Andre Danican Philidor 'l'aine' ('c'.1647-1730), composer, instrumentalist, and librarian, the presiding genius of the Philidor manuscript collection. His half-brother Anne Danican Philidor founded the Paris Concert Spirituel. Danican, the original family name, may be a corruption of the Scottish Duncan; anecdotally, the name Philidor was used since Louis XIII dubbed his own outstanding court oboist Michel Danican, great-grandfather of Francois-Andre, 'another Filidori', after the celebrated Italian oboist. 
As a composer Philidor's importance exceeds all other members of his family; in addition, he was the finest chess player of his age, certainly in northern Europe. He was orphaned at the age of four, but the family enjoyed royal favour, and when aged six he joined the royal chapel at Versailles. There he studied under Andre Campra and learned the rudiments of chess from his fellow musicians, exhibiting precocity in both fields. All his early music is lost, but a motet was performed at Versailles as early as 1738, and another in Paris in 1743: Philidor moved to Paris in 1740. He assisted Jean-Jacques Rousseau with his opera-ballet 'Les muses galantes', and otherwise made a living as a copyist and teacher. He quickly became known at the Cafe de la Regence as a strong chess player, capable of extending the skill of the great Legal. 
Philidor's long association with London began through a misfortune. In 1745 he embarked on a concert tour of the Netherlands, but it was cancelled when one of his fellow musicians died. Left without resources in Amsterdam, he exploited for money his skill at chess and Polish draughts. Some British officers helped him reach London, which became his base from 1747 to 1754; among his patrons were John Montagu, fourth earl of Sandwich, and William Augustus, duke of Cumberland. During this period he visited Holland and the court of Frederick II of Prussia. He frequented English chess venues such as Slaughter's Coffee House in St Martin's Lane, defeating the strongest English player, Sir Abraham Janssen, and the Syrian Phillip Stamma. He organized his thoughts into the first serious investigative study of the game, 'L'analyze des echecs', published in Aachen (1748) and London (1749), with important second editions in French (as 'Analyse du jeu des echecs') and English in 1777 and a third edition in 1790. It was reprinted into the twentieth century, and translated into nearly 100 languages. Philidor's understanding of pawn play (he declared pawns 'the soul of chess') revolutionized strategy; 'Philidor's defence', though no longer used in grand master chess, remained in the repertory for many years. 
No compositions survive from this period, but Philidor evidently studied music more modern than was available in France, especially Italian music, then much favoured in London. His friend the 'philosophe' Denis Diderot persuaded him to return to Paris in 1754. He defeated Legal to become the undisputed master at chess, but he was refused a musical post at Versailles because his trial motet 'Lauda Jerusalem' was considered too Italian. He published some quartets ('L'art de la modulation'), and from 1756 seized the chance to compose theatre music. The suburban 'fair theatres' were giving irresistible momentum to the genre of 'opera comique', which the established theatre in Paris (Academie Royale de Musique) was no longer able to suppress. Philidor was the first important French composer in this genre, although preceded by the Italian Egidio Duni and soon rivalled by Pierre-Alexandre Monsigny. In 'opera comique' an Italian style was no obstacle, and he sensitively modified it to French words. His earliest theatre works, including arrangements and collaborations, are lost, but from 'Blaise le savetier' (Theatre de la Foire St Germain, 1759), most of them were published. 'Blaise' is a witty one-act farce to a text by M. J. Sedaine, the leading librettist of early 'opera comique' after Favart. A. F. Quetant wrote the text for the popular 'Le marechal ferrant' (Foire St Laurent, 1761), in which the composer evokes the metiers of the blacksmith and coachman. In 'Le bucheron' (Comedie Italienne, 1763) he ingeniously parodied the old French style. His orchestration is simple and effective, and his pleasing melodies characterize persons and situations, but his particular gifts were making music out of scenes of normal life, and composing complicated but lucid ensembles in which different characters express their feelings simultaneously. 
In 1760 Philidor married the singer Angelique Richer ('fl'. 1750-1800); they had seven children and were a devoted couple, her lively character and shrewdness compensating for his own quiet manner and naivety. Philidor became the tool of a party which attempted to overthrow traditional French opera, led by A. A. H. Poinsinet, described in Monnet's memoirs and Grimm's 'Correspondance litteraire' as a weak poet of monumental conceit, the perpetual butt of practical jokes. Yet Poinsinet wrote the librettos for Philidor's greatest triumphs. After 'Le sorcier' (1764) Philidor was the first composer called to acknowledge applause from the stage. 'Tom Jones' (1765), a radical compression of Fielding, flopped until revised by Sedaine (1766), when thanks to Philidor's evocation of the hunt (Squire Western), his portrayal of Sophia through the formal 'scena' of serious opera, and his brilliant ensembles, one in seven parts, it was recognized as his best work; it has had several modern revivals. 
Poinsinet next adapted an Italian libretto for the Academie Royale. 'Ernelinde, princesse de Norvege' breached many conventions of that house: it was in only three acts, there were no supernatural characters (although a grandiose sacrifice scene included altars to Odin and Frigga), and while the recitative honoured French tradition, the arias were in Philidor's Italian-derived style. A pamphlet war accompanied its production, and it achieved a 'succes d'estime'. 'Ernelinde' anticipated a change in French opera which was consummated by the arrival of Gluck in 1774; in turn Gluck paved the way for 'Ernelinde's' successful revival in 1777, after which Philidor presented two further, unsuccessful, works at the Academie Royale ('Persee', 1780; 'Themistocle', 1785). 
By the 1770s 'opera comique' was dominated by Monsigny and Gretry, and Philidor's later production was sporadic. Unable, or unwilling, to develop his musical range, he turned back to chess for a livelihood and from 1775 divided his time between Paris and the London season. He was not musically idle, composing motets for the Concert Spirituel (lost) and in London his grandest concert work, 'Carmen saeculare', written at the suggestion of Giuseppe Baretti, who adapted the text from several odes of Horace. Masonic symbolism graces the title-page of the beautifully engraved score; the first performance was in Freemasons' Hall (1779), and the following year 'Carmen saeculare' was acclaimed in Paris. In 1789 Philidor composed an 'Ode on His Majesty's Recovery' for King George III, now lost. At his death an opera derived from Marmontel's 'Belisaire' was left incomplete; it too is lost. 
Although eclipsed as a musician, Philidor remained the strongest chess player in England and France, and was well known to society in both capital cities. This agreeable life continued until the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars in 1792. Philidor, then in London, was unfairly proscribed as an emigre and cut off from his family. Despite his difficulties and illness (probably gout), he continued giving displays of blindfold chess until June 1795. His family finally succeeded in obtaining permission for him to return to Paris, but by the time the news reached London, Philidor had already died, it is said partly of grief, on 31 August 1795 at 10 Little Ryder Street. He was buried from St James's, Piccadilly. 
From Legal, Philidor learned the concept of simultaneous and blindfold chess; but no one before him had combined these skills, and his persistence in exercising them (naturally for money) caused anxiety to Diderot, who urged him to desist in case it drove him mad. Philidor's chess strength is hard to estimate since he nearly always conceded odds to his opponent, and nearly always won, but in his own time he was nonpareil. It appears that the mental powers which served him so well -- clear memory of successful moves and combinations, and skill in applying them in new games -- had mixed results for his musical reputation. Even in his lifetime he was accused of plagiarism, and in some instances the charge can be sustained. Burney in 'The Present State of Music' referred to 'Philidor's Italian plunder'. Since musical styles were then international, and more conventional than in later periods, plagiarism implied more than merely borrowing a short phrase, something most composers did. In 'Le sorcier' and 'Ernelinde' relatively extended passages have been identified which originated with Gluck and Jommelli. This offence was almost certainly inadvertent, and should not detract from the originality of Philidor's output; his ensembles (in which plagiarism is hardly possible) surpassed all available models. No doubt what contemporaries called the 'revolution in French music' would soon have come about without Philidor, whereas the revolution in the analytical understanding of chess owed nearly everything to his insight. In 'Le neveu de Rameau' Diderot called Philidor 'le subtil' (and Legal, 'le profond'), but his achievements in both fields warrant the sobriquet 'Philidor le grand'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22097


Philip (1527-1598), king of England and Ireland, consort of Mary I, and king of Spain, has left only an ephemeral impression upon the English historical record. Although his time as co-monarch has largely vanished from the collective memory, to be replaced by images of invincible armadas and inquisitorial fires, it remains true that during his years of kingship (and especially during his two lengthy periods of residence in England) he was regarded by many of his adoptive subjects as hardly less than the political equal of his wife, Mary I (1516-1558). 
Philip was born in Valladolid in northern Castile on 21 May 1527. His mother was Isabella (1503-1539), the sister of the king of Portugal, and his father was Charles V (1500-1558), king of Spain and Holy Roman emperor. Philip was brought up by his mother, during his father's many absences overseas, until her death in 1539. The empress fostered in him a love of the arts as well as an abiding affection for all things Portuguese, and also a deep if unostentatious religious faith, onto which was bracketed an unshakeable belief in God's providence and in his own part in the unfurling of the divine will. Philip was taught Latin, along with French, Portuguese, and some Italian, but although he was a competent linguist he was always reluctant to converse in languages other than Spanish, and he never troubled to learn English. A steady fare of humanist learning, including Erasmian texts on how to be a Christian prince, was supplemented by a musical education, leading to a brief passion for the guitar. His lifelong love of hunting began early, though he never cared much for the running of bulls. 
Philip became nominal ruler of Spain in 1543, when he was sixteen. This was also the year of his first marriage -- to his cousin Maria (1527-1545), another princess of Portugal. It was also when his father presented him with a famous set of instructions, which were to influence his reign in England as well as later in his life. The paternal advice might be summed up as a double warning. First, Philip was not to become prey to sexual licence at his still tender age because this, the emperor reminded him, had been the cause, through nuptial over-indulgence, of the premature death of Prince Juan, the heir to Philip's grandparents, Ferdinand and Isabella, and thus the reason why the Spanish thrones passed to the Catholic kings' Habsburg descendants. The emperor's second admonition was that his heir should never rely on a chief minister. He should always be sure to pit the leaders of different factions against each other, and every minister should be set to work according to his own talents. For instance, the emperor warned his son about the overweening ambition of the duke of Alva, who later accompanied Philip to England and then took the lead in Spain's response to the Dutch revolt. The duke was useful in military matters, but it would be unwise to let so powerful and ambitious an aristocrat take overall control of government. Charles was doubtless pushing at an open door, for his son was predisposed to such ideas, but for the rest of his rule, whether in England or in his hereditary territories, Philip never allowed a single minister to influence the royal mind. 
In August 1548 Philip ceased to dine in public according to the rituals of the Castilian royal court, and for the first time was waited upon in a manner appropriate to the heir of the fifteenth-century dukes of Burgundy. This alteration in etiquette represented a conscious attempt by Charles to prepare his son for his first visit outside the Iberian peninsula. In November Philip set out on a visit which lasted two and a half years and took in not only the Habsburg dominions in Italy but also the Burgundian Netherlands and Germany. Charles's desire to preserve the links between Spain and his northern dominions helps to explain his decision to marry his son to Mary Tudor. Philip's first marriage ended in July 1545, when the princess of Spain survived the birth of their son, Don Carlos, for only a few days. In 1553, when Philip was about to marry another Portuguese princess, despite a liaison with Isabel Ossorio which lasted for several years, news reached the imperial court in the Netherlands that Edward VI had died and that Princess Mary was successfully fighting her way to the throne. Charles's links with Mary had long been very close. He had often protected her from the wrath of her father, Henry VIII, as well as from her half-brother's councillors. Moreover, they were first cousins. Katherine of Aragon was the sister of his mother, Juana the Mad. 
Naturally Charles felt that it was his duty to support his cousin, not least because of her determination to restore the old religion. Initially Mary let it be known that she would take Charles as her husband, but the elderly emperor replied that he was too old and that his son was more appropriate. It is unclear how far Charles, still recovering from a nervous breakdown after his defeat by the protestant princes of Germany and their allies, was in charge of these negotiations, or whether they were in the hands of his haughty sister, Mary of Hungary. What is certain is that Philip's marriage to Mary Tudor gave Charles the upper hand in the squabbles then tearing the Habsburgs apart. There was glory attendant on the restoration of Catholicism within the Tudor dominions, but the English throne was also a pawn in Habsburg dynastic politics. 
The problem was that Philip was indeed Charles's heir, but it was not entirely clear what he was heir to. Even his claim to be heir to the Castilian throne was debatable. If Charles died before his own mother, Juana the Mad, with whom he was co-sovereign of Castile until her death in April 1555, who would then take his place -- her second son Ferdinand, king of the Romans, or Philip, her grandson through Charles? A less hypothetical and more pressing problem was how Charles's empire outside Spain should be divided. In 1550 an unhappy compromise had been reached between Charles and his brother. Spain and the fabulously wealthy Netherlands would pass to Philip, but the hereditary lands in Germany and Austria, along with the imperial title, would fall to Ferdinand. On the latter's death Philip would become emperor, and thereafter that title would alternate between Vienna and Madrid. The English match threatened to upset these arrangements. If the Viennese branch of the family succeeded in winning Mary's hand in marriage, then its members would be able to mount an irresistible claim to the Netherlands. Not only were the Low Countries England's principal trading partner, but each country guaranteed the other's defence against France. In April 1553 Philip had been specifically warned by his father that he needed to take steps to court popularity in the Netherlands. Marriage to England's new Catholic queen now held out the immediate prospect of Philip's undisputed succession in the Netherlands. 
Charles V's negotiators recognized that Philip could only be governor of England, as they put it. He could have no proprietary rights of his own to enable him to remain England's king if his spouse died childless before him. The imperial court was highly doubtful that any issue would survive to inherit, but if there were a son by Philip and Mary he would receive England and the Netherlands. If Philip's son from his first marriage, Don Carlos, were to die, then any surviving child from his second would also inherit Spain and the Italian Habsburg possessions, as well as the New World. If Philip and Mary had only a daughter, she was 'not' to inherit the Low Countries unless she married with the approval of Don Carlos. Perhaps the most interesting clause was an alternative which the imperial court offered to the English for insertion into the draft, dealing with what should happen if Don Carlos died but there were two sons from the English marriage. This possibility was extremely remote, but it was suggested that if the English wanted a king of their own they could take the younger son, but on condition that England and the Netherlands went together. Charles told Renard that this was because England was the best ally for the Netherlands. Mary's privy councillors apparently declined to incorporate this into the treaty, however, and no provision was made for carving out a North Sea kingdom for a younger son. Also included in the treaty were stipulations that only Englishmen should wait on the king and take command of the country's forts, and that neither munitions nor the royal jewels should be at the king's disposal. Philip was even to surrender his right to take his wife out of the country. 
At the heart of these restrictions lay England's relations with France. The question on everyone's minds was whether the new king's arrival would automatically involve the kingdom of his wife, which looked to Philip for protection from France, in a war against that country. Again, the imperial court was prepared to put English minds at rest. The settlement did bind all parties to mutual assistance but it was pointed out that this was no more than a reiteration of existing treaties in force since the days of Henry VIII, and that since Charles had not invoked these treaties to oblige England to join the current war with France, he would hardly do so now. Some of Mary's councillors none the less felt that a drift into war with France would be unavoidable. But according to the imperial ambassador, Simon Renard, Lord Chancellor Stephen Gardiner was determined to prevent it, and it was probably he who was responsible for a declaration in the second part of the settlement that England 'by occasion of this matrimony shall not directly or indirectly be entangled with the war that now is betwixt' the emperor and the French king, and also that Philip would 'see peace between the said realms of France and England observed, and shall give no cause of any breach' (Hughes and Larkin, 2.25). 
Philip did not receive a copy of the draft treaty until the new year. His disappointment was palpable. The normal prerogatives of a husband had been denied him, and he was effectively forced to share his wife with the English realm. On 4 January 1554 he denounced the terms of the treaty, declaring that he was not bound by an agreement that had been reached without his knowledge, and a copy of his protest was placed among the other papers dealing with the treaty. In the end he adhered scrupulously to the public restrictions placed on him in the settlement, but when he sent permission for his formal betrothal to be conducted by proxy in England on 6 March 1554, he sent his future wife neither a letter nor a gift, as Renard uneasily pointed out. Philip's Spanish advisers, too, had a grievance. They felt that their equivalents in Brussels had pursued their own interests during the negotiations, and indeed, in order to avoid a transfer of power to Vienna, the emperor's counsellors had been content to arrange a loose alliance between England and the Netherlands, instead of ensuring the former's subservience to the heir to the Spanish thrones. 
These misgivings were not voiced in public, and the marriage negotiations were ratified by the English parliament during January 1554. Gardiner announced the successful outcome of the negotiations to MPs in the presence chamber on the 14th and, in an attempt to fend off hostility to the queen's marriage to a foreigner, introduced the constitutional restrictions placed on Philip's kingship by first thanking God that 'so noble, worthy and famous a prince would vouchsafe so to humble himself as, in this marriage, to take upon him rather as a subject' (Nichols, 35). However, it was not until 13 July that the prince of Spain sailed out from La Coruna. This was partly because Sir Thomas Wyatt's rebellion had raised doubts about Philip's security, but equally important was the need to settle the government of Spain. There was little need to hurry, however, since Philip's betrothal to Mary blocked any attempts from Vienna or Paris to bid for the hand of England's first virgin queen. The new king sailed into Southampton Water accompanied by eighty large ships and over a hundred smaller ones, and stepped ashore on Friday 20 July. He moved on to Winchester, and shortly after 10 o'clock on the night of 23 July crossed from his lodgings to the palace where the queen was housed. According to a Spanish reporter, the queen was in her privy chambers and chaperoned by a handful of senior councillors and her ladies-in-waiting. When Philip arrived, the queen, with wifely subservience, 'made her way to the door where the prince kissed her, which is the custom of the country' (Munoz, 92). The 27-year-old Philip was fair-haired, with blue eyes, and despite some awkwardness of face was regarded as attractive, not least for his shapely legs. He was also experienced in the ways of the world. A widower with a nine-year-old son, he had had several love affairs and also had a reputation for carousing. His bride, though sexually inexperienced, was far from blushing, having been solemnly betrothed to her husband's father before he married. Aged thirty-seven, Mary was of a different generation from Philip. She was the granddaughter of Ferdinand and Isabella, whereas he was their great-grandchild; revealingly, Philip referred to her as his 'cousin and aunt'. 
The wedding of Philip and Mary in Winchester Cathedral was conducted with enormous pomp and ceremony on the morning of Wednesday 25 July 1554. It was also fraught with difficulties of protocol, despite the fact that Philip had been made titular king of Naples by the emperor so that he could marry Mary as an equal. Thus Philip arrived at the cathedral to await the queen, and at the following banquet he was served with silver whereas the queen was served on gold. These apparent indignities barely mattered, however. One reason was that Mary accepted that Philip held the upper hand in their marriage, despite Gardiner's earlier protestation that it was as a subject that Philip was marrying her, and subtly worked to undermine the restrictions of the marriage settlement. Philip was accorded precedence within the marriage and in the country. His name preceded his wife's, in the dating of regnal years as well as in acts of parliament. Within days of the wedding the queen also contrived that conciliar business was to be transacted in such a way that Philip and his courtiers could find out what was being done in their joint names. It was determined that 'a note of all such matters of Estate as should pass from hence should be made in Latin or Spanish from henceforth' ('APC', '1554-6', 53). There were also efforts to create an image for Philip as England's king. The most successful of these came in September 1554, when new coins appeared on which both Philip and Mary appeared in profile. The king was shown on the dominant or right-hand side, with a single crown floating above them both. This iconographical shift away from the constitutional concessions made on Philip's behalf was noticed by contemporaries. One pamphleteer complained that Philip was being turned into a 'king of England indeed', with his name now appearing on proclamations and on 'the coined money going abroad current'; and in another reference to the coinage Anna Hooper, wife of Bishop John Hooper, remarked to Heinrich Bullinger that the king and queen were like 'Ahab and Jezebel' (Richards, 915-16). 
A further reason for the unimportance of the issue of precedence lay in the remarkable fact that when Philip set foot in England, he intended to stay only for a week or two. Once the marriage was consummated, he planned to sail to the Netherlands and deliver to his father the army that he had brought with him from Spain; for that reason, neither the Spanish troops nor their horses were disembarked. It seems unlikely that Mary had any idea that her conjugal life was intended to be so brief, but it was only after he had landed in England that Philip heard the unwelcome news that, following the repulse of a French invasion of the Low Countries, his father -- or perhaps his father's ministers -- no longer wished to see a rival court in the Netherlands. 
Philip fortunately had more than enough to occupy him during summer 1554. He had to get to know his wife. Language was a difficulty. Mary could understand Spanish, her mother's language, but could not speak it. The king spoke in Spanish and the queen replied in French. Their marriage was obviously not one made in heaven, but all observers noted how respectfully Philip treated his wife, even if her penchant for dressing in the French fashion added to her dowdiness in Spanish eyes. As with all royal marriages of the time, the king and queen spent much of their lives apart. Mary continued to live on the 'king's side' of her palaces, while Philip moved into the vacant side traditionally allotted to consorts. The organization of his court also took up much of Philip's time. Not only had Philip arrived with 6000 soldiers and 1500 cavalry, who soon sailed on to the Low Countries, but he was also accompanied by a household of some 3000 people. In addition to trusted advisers like Gonzalo Perez and Ruy Gomez da Silva, there were also at least two dukes (Alva and Medinaceli), a bevy of marquesses and counts, bishops, confessors, choristers and instrumentalists, together with kitchen staff and cleaners. 
Communications between London, Brussels, and Madrid had been so poor that Philip barely realized that in accordance with the marriage treaty -- which had stipulated that the king 'was to receive and admit into the service of his household and court gentlemen and yeomen of the said realm of England in convenient number' (Hughes and Larkin, 2.24-5) -- another complete household, staffed only by Englishmen and rapidly trained in what was assumed to be Burgundian ceremonial, awaited him on his arrival. The question which then arose, of which nation should actually wait upon Philip, threatened to develop into an international incident. Although the son of the duke of Infantado was permitted to act as a cup-bearer, the duke of Alva was forced to concede to Lord Williams of Thame the wand of office that was the symbol of headship over the royal household. Spain's greatest general even found himself struggling to proffer King Philip the royal napkin. Though Alva stayed longer than most, the other distinguished members of Philip's entourage soon headed across the channel in search of military glory. 
Philip sought his father's advice about how to conduct his life in England, now that he was required to stay longer than expected. He was especially concerned at the way in which English noblemen, professing a dubious religion, invaded his privy chamber. The emperor told him always to appear affable, and that he might stroll through the palace and allow access to his person that way. Affability came at a price, as it had been agreed that Philip would have to pay for his own household. The fleet which brought Philip over had also carried a large number of gold and silver ingots. On 2 October 1554 twenty cartloads of these precious bars were transferred to the safety of the Tower of London, and soon afterwards it was ordered that they be turned into coin of the realm. In January 1555 the king's treasurer, Domingo de Orbea, received $40,507 13's'. 4died sterling from the officers of the royal mint. The money was desperately needed if Philip was to pay the daily expenses of his court, and also keep faith with nearly two dozen councillors and advisers of the queen whom on Renard's advice he had pensioned most handsomely. 
Following his ceremonial entry into London in August 1554, King Philip rarely ventured further afield than Hampton Court, Greenwich, or Windsor. At Westminster, as in other palaces, he continued to be lodged in the apartments normally reserved in palaces for the queens of England. During his first few weeks in residence, he paid out of his own coffers for some small-scale building work, possibly to increase office space for his many advisers and attendants. He was normally protected by a special bodyguard of some 100 archers whom he brought with him from Spain. Although there were constant fears for his safety, there is little evidence that his daily routine was unduly constrained. Whenever he could, he seems to have enjoyed hunting in the royal parks. As for day-to-day business, it was organized around his liturgical requirements. He would hear mass either in a private chapel or in one of the chapels royal, with his own party meeting the queen's so that both could process together to hear mass. According to the Venetian ambassador, he attended meetings of the privy council on Tuesdays and Fridays, though for linguistic reasons his participation was probably only a formality, except perhaps when the future of the church lands was under discussion. It was also reported that Philip gave public audiences, at which no mediator was required even for the most humble petitioner. His own accounts reveal that he was sometimes presented with small gifts of food or wildfowl. 
Philip and his wife were not always of one mind. In her dealings with the daughter of Anne Boleyn, Queen Mary's feelings were always those of the daughter of Katherine of Aragon. But in the euphoria that greeted him on his arrival, Philip was able to save Elizabeth, in the words of Jane Dormer, one of Mary's ladies-in-waiting, from 'extreme punishment' (Rodriquez-Salgado and Adams, 313). Doubtless advised by Baron Paget, who consistently tried to protect Elizabeth, the king and his counsellors accepted that any judicial attempt on the princess's life would inspire further rebellions, quite apart from opening the way for Mary, queen of Scots, to claim the English throne for herself and her husband, the French dauphin. Instead Philip tried to engineer a safe Catholic marriage for Elizabeth, preferably with Duke Philibert Emmanuel of Savoy, who came to England on a family visit in December 1554. But the princess refused to entertain the idea of such a marriage, and anyway the queen was disinclined to allow her half-sister the full royal honours necessary for such a prestigious union. Though it was rumoured that in 1557 Philip asked his confessor, Fray Bernardo Fresneda, to raise the possibility of the Savoy marriage for Elizabeth with both Mary and Cardinal Pole, he was prevented from actively reviving his plans until the very end of Mary's life. 
Elizabeth apart, the most pressing political issue for Philip during the first few months of his reign was the embarrassing fact that his new country was still constitutionally, if not spiritually, separated from Rome. Philip was advised in England on theological matters by a small junta of churchmen, which, in addition to Fresneda, included Bartolome Carranza, the future archbishop of Toledo and a friend of Cardinal Pole, as well as the great jurist Alonso de Castro. Mary probably planned to restore papal authority in her first parliament at the same time as she successfully repealed the Edwardian religious legislation, but the attempt failed, and she seems thereafter to have been more than happy to leave the restoration of Roman primacy to her husband. Working closely with Paget, Philip and his advisers brokered a compromise with the nobility of England, in which the latter's right to retain former church lands was guaranteed even after the reintroduction of papal authority. Apparently Philip employed Carranza to press Cardinal Pole to accept this compromise, while at the same time using the Habsburgs' diplomatic network to put pressure directly on Pope Paul III to insist upon the concession. Meanwhile, the king favoured summoning a parliament for November 1554 in the expectation of negotiating a satisfactory agreement. The king and queen attended on several occasions, and a speech advocating peaceful union was read out in Philip's name. 
The consequent restoration of English communion with Rome greatly enhanced Philip's political authority. In January 1555 the scope of the treason laws was extended to give him protection during Mary's lifetime. It was even possible to amend some of the restrictions of the marriage treaty. It had initially been laid down that Philip should retain only his kingly title if the queen died after giving birth to an heir, with the regency being exercised by a council of nobles. Now it was decided that Philip should be guardian of the kingdom until the heir was eighteen, if a son, or fifteen, if a daughter. 
Philip's role in the persecution of protestants is hard to pin down. During an exchange of memoranda with his father, one of the headings for discussion referred starkly to 'greater firmness in religion'. But it is unclear whether Philip was seeking his father's support for intensified persecution, or asking for advice concerning the wisdom of moderation. Ambassador Renard persistently advised Philip, as a foreign-born king, not to become tainted by the campaign against protestants. The question of Philip's involvement is also complicated by the divisions within his own household. The Dominican Carranza was active in seeking Thomas Cranmer's death, once it became clear that the archbishop would not give an unequivocal recantation. But the Franciscan Castro advocated a degree of moderation. Matters came to a head on Sunday 10 February 1555, when Castro preached before the king at court. According to John Foxe, the friar argued from the pulpit that the bishops had 'learnt it not in scripture, to burn any for his conscience: but the contrary -- that they should live and be converted' (Foxe, 6.704-5). But despite a temporary halt to the burnings following Castro's sermon, probably all that can be said is that Philip did not intervene on either side, which is tantamount to saying that he saw no reason to restrain his wife or their ministers. 
Where Philip openly involved himself in religious affairs was in his enthusiastic and public endorsement of the restoration of Catholicism. His chapel choir joined forces more than once with the choristers of St Paul's Cathedral, and he also attended services outside the palace. According to his household accounts his organist received additional payments for assembling a portable organ whenever Philip ventured into the city to hear mass or attend other public festivals. Equally significantly, the king allowed his own churchmen to show their support for the restoration of the old religion. Vestments were imported from the Low Countries to help restock the new religious houses. Carranza even composed his ecumenical 'Catechism', for which he was later suspected of heresy, with the conversion of English protestants in mind. 
In addition to overseeing his wife's direction of English affairs, Philip also had to play a part in the administration of the Habsburg empire. Although his titular role as king of Naples did not include the actual administration of the kingdom, which the emperor retained, Philip mediated between his sister Juana, the new regent of Spain, and his father's court in the Netherlands. Philip never knew when his father might summon him from England, but he and his youthful Hispanic advisers were preparing for the day when they would take over control of Charles's far-flung realms from the latter's ageing Francophone court. He had his own private council, headed by the aged Juan de Figueroa. Interestingly, many of his advisers lived out of court and lodged with English families. Gonzalo Perez lodged with the young William Cecil, while Carranza stayed with Bishop Bonner of London. There was in fact one issue over which Philip and Mary presented a united front against Charles V. Philip was able to use his new position as a king of England to press for an end to hostilities with France. Philip's Spanish advisers were concerned that when he inherited the Netherlands and Spain he would not have the ability, without the empire, to defend the Low Countries against an aggressive France. In their efforts to end the Franco-imperial conflict they made common cause with Cardinal Pole, whose legatine mission was to promote peace among all Christian princes. In May 1555 Philip and Mary, together with the papacy, sponsored a peace conference at La Marque, in the English enclave around Calais. 
Philip took his titular responsibilities as king of Ireland seriously. In the mid-1530s Charles V had given lukewarm support to Irish Catholics resisting Henrician policies in Ireland, and Philip now joined with Mary in supporting a partial restoration of the pre-Reformation 'status quo' there. Mary's hereditary rights in Ireland were reinforced when both she and her husband were specially invested by Pope Paul IV as monarchs of the island on 7 June 1555, a step which also reinvigorated Rome's claim to ultimate lordship. Links with the Old English aristocracy were also reanimated. Together they supported moves to allow the Geraldine earls of Kildare to recover something of their former glory, with Gerald Fitzgerald being restored as eleventh earl in 1554, while his wife, Mabel, was one of the ladies of Mary's court whom the Spanish courtiers treated with greatest respect. In 1557 forfeited Irish lands in Laois and Offaly were shired to form King's county and Queen's county. Philip was not averse to intervening in person, as when he wrote late in 1555 to English councillors concerning the Irish lands of one Christopher Bloncquet, quite probably a member of the important Plunket family. Perhaps his most important involvement with Ireland came in September 1555, when Lord Clinton was being proposed as lord deputy for Dublin. Although Philip had already left for the Netherlands, and had relations with France principally in his mind, he wrote to his English ministers that this was not the time to be sending such an experienced soldier away from England. Another of the Irish magnates whom Philip encouraged was Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond. On 13 May 1557 the king wrote to thank him for his work in defending Ulster from the Scots, and shortly afterwards Ormond returned the favour, asking Philip at the start of Elizabeth's reign to appoint a Catholic king for Ireland. 
Overall, there is little evidence that during his first visit Philip wished to direct England's affairs in anything but the most general terms. The day-by-day running of the country was of no interest either to him or to his Spanish advisers. Yet his ability to determine the direction of English affairs should not be underestimated. He was primarily responsible for engineering the restoration of papal authority on terms acceptable to the nobility. He successfully defended Princess Elizabeth. He even manipulated English policy so as to put pressure on his own father. Whereas at first he was seen as defending England against a French invasion, on his second visit he persuaded Mary to countenance English involvement in war against France. Sometimes Philip flexed his political muscles in public, as in healing the breach with Rome. More often he acted behind the scenes, through influential councillors like Paget and Pole, or by persuading his wife. In so doing he gave a highly intelligent response to a delicate constitutional position. The bravura show of disdain with which he had first reacted to the marriage treaty had slowly given way to the realization that as king of England he could serve God by restoring the true religion, and his future empire by securing the transfer of power in the Netherlands. He owed his influence to the fact that Mary's compliance and the patriarchal values of the time were more than enough to override the limitations imposed on his freedom of manoeuvre by the marriage settlement. But that influence was in itself a diminishing quality, in that implicit in his authority was the assumption that he would father an heir. Thus the settlement of 1554 had made it plain that only a royal birth would allow Philip to retain the title of king of England after his wife's death, even if his powers of regency had been extended. Probably only the birth of a child would have secured for Philip the coronation at Westminster which he felt was his due. 
Philip remained in England until the beginning of September 1555. His father, and perhaps still more his father's courtiers, were reluctant to summon him to the Netherlands, but his departure was further delayed by the belief that the queen was expecting a child. By the time of Pole's arrival in England in November 1554, Mary believed that she was pregnant. On 28 November a service of thanksgiving was held in St Paul's Cathedral and throughout the land prayers were said after every mass for the birth of a prince. The news of Mary's pregnancy was not good news for everyone, and a full-blown conspiracy was allegedly planned to kill the king and queen at a demonstration of cane-play which Philip organized at this time. Dressed in purple and silver, and with the queen looking on, Philip took part in Diego de Cordova's team. The indifference of Londoners, who did not comprehend the rules of the game, combined with the atrocious weather, led to the spectacle's being abandoned before the third round, which was later said to have been the point at which a group of heavily armed men was to rush forward and murder the royal pair. By the end of April 1555 a rumour spread from London to the Low Countries that the queen had given birth to a son, but by July Philip had finally given up all hope of an heir. On 29 August he left Greenwich, and travelled with a small entourage by Canterbury to Dover. His ecclesiastical household stayed behind for several months, along with his Spanish and Flemish guards, but it is not clear whether this was a sign that he seriously intended to return to London or merely a sop to his wife, who increasingly felt herself to have been abandoned. 
Despite Philip's absence in the Netherlands, he was still able to monitor English affairs. Before his departure he had been instrumental in setting up a 'select council'. As in so many things, Philip was co-operating with William Paget. He drew up a memorandum whereby the select councillors were to reside at court, report three times a week to the king or queen, and brief the other councillors each Sunday. Philip asked Cardinal Pole to supervise the select council, and he also requested the privy council as a whole to defer to the cardinal, even though Pole's ecclesiastical scruples had previously made him hesitate to take a councillor's oath of obedience. After the first few months, the select council's reports to the king, and his own replies, became increasingly infrequent, but it was not an ineffective channel of communication. It was through this medium, for instance, that the king gave detailed advice about the preparations for the parliament summoned for later that year, in the process shedding a rare gleam of light on his attitude towards religious persecution. In August 1555 Philip secretly discussed Gardiner's plans for that parliament with English representatives at Brussels. They consisted of three points: that only Catholics should be returned as MPs; that offences against religion should be dealt with in the localities; and that they (presumably the MPs -- the text is ambiguous) should hear mass daily. The king was taken aback to be told that while the first proposal was unexceptionable, the other two were otiose. On 15 October 1555 Philip authorized a message to the English parliament. He cited his absence as a reason for greater consideration to be given to his wishes, and added, according to the Venetian ambassador, that 'the queen, who represented their joint authority, would act in his stead' ('CSP Venice', '1555-6', 228). 
Philip also had less formal channels of communication. Thus when Gardiner died on 12 November 1555, the members of Philip's household left behind in England, led by Carranza, put concerted pressure on him to advise the queen against appointing Paget as chancellor, even though the marriage settlement had stipulated that appointment to public office was to remain in the queen's gift. They wanted another churchman to succeed Gardiner, and though it cannot be proved that Philip's intervention was decisive, Paget was not appointed and Archbishop Nicholas Heath became chancellor. During this first absence from England there was, however, one issue over which Philip certainly did not manage to have his own way. This concerned his coronation. According to the Venetian ambassador in Brussels, the king intimated to Mary that they might be reunited the sooner if she were to arrange this. Mary told him that parliament would not tolerate his being crowned, and Philip wisely let the matter drop. 
The La Marque peace conference failed, and consequently Philip inherited an empire still at odds with France. During his first absence from London his father had bequeathed all his dominions to his son, allowing only the imperial title and the Austrian lands to pass to Ferdinand. Since renewed hostilities with the French were only a matter of time, it became increasingly urgent for Philip to draw England into this continental war, even if it meant infringing his marriage settlement. It could be argued that Philip's war against France was a different conflict from his father's, but Mary's advisers were none the less minded to put up a stout rearguard action against English involvement. Philip concentrated on winning over the queen. To achieve this he returned to England on 18 March 1557 and stayed for barely three months. Mary was most anxious that her husband be royally entertained. She ordered her players to do the best they could, despite their protestations that the king had already seen all their productions as well as many others 'fair and rich beyond the seas'. Eventually, on 25 April, a revival of a 'Great Mask of Almains, pilgrims, and Irishmen' was 'shown before the queen's majesty in his highness's court at Whitehall' (Feuillerat, 245, 225). There were other distractions from war. The king and queen were visited by two relatives, the duchess of Lorraine and Philip's half-sister Margaret of Parma. Rumours spread that the duchess was the king's lover, though the queen was probably just as perturbed by the problems of precedence which overshadowed their visit. Apparently Margaret left for Italy in a huff after she was inadvertently locked out of the chapel at Greenwich by the duchess's servants. Then a French-backed attack on Scarborough at the end of April gave the queen a pretext to declare war on 7 June. Mary accompanied Philip to Dover, where in mid-afternoon on 6 July he bade farewell to the queen and to his English kingdom for the last time. 
Once over the channel, Philip awaited the arrival of an English army of some 7000 men and 200 gentlemen and officers. It was eventually brought over by the eager-to-please William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, who doubtless had his eye on a dukedom. Among the army's strengths were sappers from the west country whom the king had been particularly anxious to recruit. The expedition was significant politically as well as militarily. Philip was damping down the flames of religious division in England by uniting his subjects in a war against their old enemy. The earls of Arundel and Rutland, along with the young Viscount Montagu, took part in defensive operations, while former supporters of Wyatt's rebellion used the war to display their loyalty to Philip and Mary. Even the relatives of Lady Jane Grey rallied to the cause. King Philip missed the battle of San Quentin on 10 August because he was waiting for his English regiments to cross the channel and break out from the pale; however, they arrived in time for him to lead them in the siege of the city, which fell on the 27th. During the siege the king called upon his English archers to shoot over the city wall. Wrapped around their arrows was a message calling upon the inhabitants to surrender to their lawful king, an allusion to Queen Mary's hereditary claim to the French throne. But the defenders responded in kind with the words ''Regem habemus'' -- 'We have a king!' Although subsequent events overshadowed England's military contribution to the campaign, Philip had achieved a stunning political success. The weakness of his position as the uncrowned partner in his marriage to Queen Mary had been largely nullified by his riding at the head of an English army, and it appeared now that he only needed to cross the Narrow Seas for a coronation to be his for the asking. 
There seemed to be no end to Philip's run of luck. In December 1557 Mary informed him that she was pregnant. Although it was six months since they had parted, the queen had wanted to wait until she was certain. Then fate intervened, with loss of Calais on 10 January 1558 casting a pall over Philip's successes of the previous autumn. Though no Spanish soldiers were in the pale at the time, the king offered to mount a campaign for its recapture, only to be told that his wife had no reserves to assist a counter-offensive. On the same day that he commiserated with the English councillors over the loss of Calais, on 21 January, he also wrote to Pole. The cardinal had sent him letters containing 'news of the pregnancy of the Queen, my beloved wife, which has given me greater joy than I can express to you'. It was, Philip continued, 'of the greatest importance for the cause of religion and the welfare of our realm' ('CSP Spain', '1554-8', 340). But the queen's pregnancy was quickly recognized for what it was, irremediable illness. By May Philip's letters ceased to mention the possibility of an heir. 
Philip's relationship with England in the last year of his reign was conducted at second hand. The nobles he had pensioned before his first arrival, possibly with the intention that they should form the nucleus of a 'king's party', were now reduced to complaining of arrears of payment. In February 1558 the count of Feria was sent to London. The mission of the king's close friend was ostensibly to congratulate the queen on her pregnancy, but his real task was to maintain English support for Philip's French war. Again the recruitment of English sappers was high on the king's list of priorities. Feria found few allies, even among the king's former allies, Paget and Pembroke, who blocked efforts to reinvigorate England's war effort. Lord Clinton was consulted but showed no enthusiasm. Naval operations round the coast of Brittany achieved modest success, soon reversed. The man in whom Philip had reposed most confidence, Cardinal Pole, was said by Feria to be quite moribund. 
King Philip now concentrated on achieving a smooth transfer of power to Princess Elizabeth. The marriage settlement had stated that his prerogatives would lapse if Mary died childless (though it is noteworthy that in 1557 he had drawn up a will bequeathing to Don Carlos all his patrimonial realms, including the Netherlands, in clear defiance of another part of the settlement). News that the queen's death could not be long delayed obliged Feria to return to England in October 1558. There was a forlorn hope that Elizabeth could still be married as a royal princess while the queen lived. But Mary was dying, and Feria visited Elizabeth to express Philip's hope that the amity would continue between Spain and the Tudor dominions. Relations between the king and his half-sister through marriage had been respectful though never cordial. The queen-in-waiting reminded the envoy that she would always be grateful to Philip, principally because 'when she was in prison [the king] had shown her favour and helped to obtain her release' (Rodriquez-Salgado and Adams, 330). The suggestion that she should reconsider marriage to the duke of Savoy was dismissed with disdain. To the suggestion that she might marry Philip, floated either just before or shortly after Mary's death, Elizabeth gave an answer-answerless. Yet when she learned in April 1559 that Philip's peace negotiators with the French were already proposing a marriage alliance with Elisabeth de Valois without waiting for her own formal refusal, the English queen could not resist saying that the erstwhile king 'could not have been much in love with her, since he did not have the patience to wait four months' (Kamen, 72). But his fears that the French-backed Mary, queen of Scots, might take the English throne kept Philip well disposed towards Elizabeth, at least for some years, and he recoiled from suggestions, put forward by Cardinal Granvelle among others, that he should invade England from the Netherlands and restore Catholicism by force. 
In February 1570 Philip wrote concerning the pope, 'that I could give him better information and advice on that kingdom, and on its affairs and people, than anyone else' (Parker). He was incensed that Pius V could excommunicate Elizabeth and call for her deposition without consulting him first. Philip's time as king of England made a profound impression on him. He had seen at first hand the lack of reverence shown by heretics towards royal as well as divine authority. He became convinced that England was a dangerous and unstable country that was best left alone. Mary died on 17 November 1558 and in the decade after her death he struggled to maintain amicable relations with Elizabeth. Unfortunately Spanish intervention in the Netherlands, and the activities of English corsairs in the New World, made an ideological and military struggle with protestant England unavoidable. By 1571 he was prepared to commit himself to the Ridolfi plot and Elizabeth's overthrow (though not her assassination) in favour of Mary Stuart. The failure of the Invincible Armada of 1588 did nothing to stop him from supporting a variety of military and naval operations against England and in Ireland, culminating in 1597 in a second armada, which, however, came to grief like the first. Two years earlier a book attributed to Robert Persons, 'A Conference about the Next Succession to the Crowne of Ingland', had argued for the claims of Philip's daughter Isabella, on the grounds of her father's descent from John of Gaunt. In hindsight, Philip's identification with the struggle against his former sister-in-law is the principal reason why his time as king of England has not made a stronger impression upon the historical imagination. But he too was prepared to erase the memory of his years as England's king. When his statue was commissioned for a place above the high altar in his monastic church of the Escorial, it represented him kneeling alongside his wives as a supplicant before God. His first wife appeared, as did his third, Elisabeth de Valois (died 1568) and fourth, Anna of Austria (died 1580). But Mary Tudor was omitted. And late in 1558, when news of the queen's death had reached him as he was heading for Brussels to mourn his father, Philip himself informed his sister in Spain of the queen's death, noting only that 'my wife is dead. May God have received her into his glory. I felt a reasonable regret for her death' ('CSP Spain', '1554-8', 440). Philip II of Spain, as by then he had long been, died in the Escorial after an agonizing illness at dawn on 13 September 1598. He was buried in the Escorial on the next day. 


@@@@@


doc= 22098


Philip de Montgomery (d. 1097/8), was presumably named after King Philippe of France. He is variously styled 'clericus' and 'grammaticus' ('the grammarian') by Orderic Vitalis, but for some years at least was destined for a secular career: he joined his two eldest brothers in confirming a paternal grant, and in another charter is described as the holder of an island in Normandy. He may have supported Robert Curthose in 1088, being indeed imprisoned, according to John of Worcester, and followed him on the first crusade, dying at Antioch, presumably in 1097 or 1098. He was the only son of Earl Roger to die while actually serving Curthose. It is not known whether he ever married, but his daughter Matilda succeeded her aunt Emma as abbess of Almeneches in 1113. 


@@@@@


doc= 22099


Thaun, Philip de (fl. 1113x19-1121x35), Anglo-Norman poet, was probably from the seigneurial family of Than, or Thaon, near Caen. He is the earliest known Anglo-Norman poet. It is possible that he moved from Normandy to England in the late eleventh century with his uncle Hunfrei de Thaun, chaplain to Yun, who was seneschal dapifer to Henry I, and is usually identified with Eudo or Odo Dapifer, who died on 29 February 1120. Hunfrei is named at the beginning of the 'Cumpoz', which Philip sent to him for comment and correction. The family de Thaun did not survive beyond the fifteenth century. P. Meyer disputed Philip's seigneurial background, and saw no reason to suppose that Philip was more than a simple cleric who, like Wace, travelled to England to make his services available to the court (Meyer, 34.367). 
Philip de Thaun's first work was the 'Cumpoz', or 'Compuz' ('Computus'), called in Wright's edition 'Liber de creaturis'. It was written between 1113 and 1119 as a clerics' aid to calculate the moveable feasts of the church calendar. Written in rhyming hexasyllabic couplets, and interspersed with edifying exhortations, its principal sources appear to have been Bede, William de Conches, and Chilperic of St Gall's 'De compoto'. There are four manuscripts of the 'Cumpoz' in England, and three in the Vatican Library. 
Between 1121 and 1135 Philip de Thaun translated the first French version extant of the bestiary 'Physiologus' ('Li bestiaire') and dedicated it to his queen, Adeliza of Louvain, wife of Henry II. 'Li bestiaire', written in rhyming hexasyllabic couplets except for the final 303 octosyllabic lines (ll.2891-3194), comprises a prologue, 35 chapters on animals, 3 on precious stones, and an epilogue. There are three extant manuscripts of 'Li bestiaire'. Although Philip's manuscript source is unknown, he appears to have made few alterations to the general substance of the Latin bestiary tradition, with its descriptions of animal properties and its typological interpretation of the animal 'exempla'. Presumably the ordering of the 'exempla' and the addition of material from Isidore of Seville were done by his source. Philip was, however, responsible for the translation into French and for its (somewhat pedestrian) versification. While not a literary masterpiece, this very early French translation of the 'Physiologus', composed for the edification and enjoyment of the court, has become, by the primacy of its date of composition, an important source of information for the language of Anglo-Norman England. 
Also attributed to Philip de Thaun, although its sole manuscript (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, fonds fr. 25407) contains no dedication identifying him or a patron, is a hexasyllabic translation-adaptation of the 'Sibylla Tiburtina', supplemented with material from the 'Libellus de Antichristo' by Adso of Montier-en-Der, and entitled 'Le livre de Sibile' ('c'.1239). The attribution to Philip of an alphabetical lapidary, an apocalyptic lapidary, and the 'Debat de l'ame et du corps' is less certain. 


@@@@@


doc= 22100


Poitou, Philip of (d. 1208), bishop of Durham, was a Frenchman of unknown origins, first recorded as clerk of the chamber to Richard I, whom he accompanied on the third crusade. He attested Richard's marriage settlement in Cyprus on 12 May 1191, and also royal charters in 1192, at Jaffa in January and at sea in November. He was with Richard when he landed on the Adriatic coast, and probably also in Austria. Attending the king in captivity at Worms, he was made archdeacon of Canterbury by Richard, but an appointment as dean of York by Geoffrey, archbishop of York, was ineffective. After Richard's release Philip continued in regular attendance, but he was also dispatched to Germany to convey a contribution towards Richard's ransom. It is a measure of the king's regard for him that late in 1195 he was chosen by Richard to be bishop of Durham, and elected by the chapter probably on 4 January 1196. But although the pope confirmed his election on 13 April, and he was ordained priest at Durham on 15 June, Philip remained unconsecrated for fifteen months. During this time, however, he managed to purchase a royal licence to revive the Durham mint, and to secure for his nephew Aimery the vacant archdeaconries of Durham and Carlisle. 
In 1196 Philip was sent from Normandy with the abbot of Caen to investigate the efficiency of the exchequer, bearing instructions to Archbishop Hubert Walter. At the turn of the year the chancellor William de Longchamp, Guillaume de Rupierre, bishop of Lisieux, and Philip were dispatched to Rome to put to the pope the king's case against the interdict imposed on Normandy by the archbishop of Rouen. Longchamp died on the way, but the other envoys secured a settlement at Rome. On 20 April 1197 Philip was consecrated bishop by the pope. 
Philip served as a royal justice while he was bishop-elect and after he was consecrated -- since he is often styled 'magister', he may have had the advantage of a university training. In September 1197 he was with the king at Rouen, but in December he was at the council at Oxford when the bishops of Lincoln and Salisbury refused knight service. He led Richard's delegation to the imperial election at Cologne in February 1198, and spent the following summer with the king in Normandy. In September Richard sent him and others an exultant letter reporting the success of his campaign at Gisors. In the same year Philip was one of five bishops sent by the king to Geoffrey, archbishop of York, in an unsuccessful attempt at reconciliation. Philip attended King John's coronation in 1199, but protested at its taking place in Archbishop Geoffrey's absence. Sent unsuccessfully by John to persuade William the Lion, king of Scots, to meet him at Nottingham, in the following year Philip was among those deputed to escort William to Lincoln, and he was present there when John received the Scottish king's homage. In February 1201 Philip set out on pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela, but he was back at Chinon by late July, when the king resolved the question of Queen Berengaria's dower with the help of those who had witnessed her marriage settlement. From Chinon Philip returned to London carrying money on behalf of the king, but thereafter is not mentioned as being at court for two and a half years. 
As bishop, Philip recovered for his see the wapentake of Sadberge, purchased by his predecessor from Richard but afterwards resumed by the crown because it had not yet been paid for. Renewed payments to kings Richard and John secured its future as part of the temporalities. His relations with his chapter were stormy, stemming largely from his recurrent claim to present to the chapter's churches, and on one occasion the monks were forcibly ejected from a church. The monastic chronicle blames his nephew Aimery for fomenting the quarrel, but depicts the bishop as no less violently inclined. In one attempt to interfere in monastic affairs he besieged the cathedral and excommunicated the prior, a violent attempt being made to prevent the latter saying mass at the altar. Eventually, however, compromises were reached. The last seven years of Philip's life are ill-documented, although many undated episcopal acts may belong to this period. In 1203 he was included in papal commissions for Gerald of Wales's great suit over the diocese of St David's. He recurs as a witness to royal charters in March and May 1204, but thereafter only sporadically and not at all after February 1206, and when chroniclers name the bishop of Durham as one of the evil counsellors who encouraged John to defy the pope, they may well mean the next incumbent, Richard Marsh, rather than Philip. He died on 22 April 1208, a month after the declaration of the interdict, and according to the Durham chronicle he was buried by laymen in unconsecrated ground. If so, his body was later reinterred, as his grave cover is recorded in the Durham chapter house. 
A typical curial servant of the Angevin monarchs, Philip was trusted by both Richard and John. He ruled the see of Durham for more than ten years, and consolidated its franchise. His temperament, however, appears to have resembled that of his masters, and his posthumous reputation has suffered accordingly. 


@@@@@


doc= 22101


Remi, Philippe de (1205x10-1265), poet, born in France, was the son of Pierre de Remy, of the Terre Bernard in Remy (Compiegne). In 1237 Philippe was named 'bailli' of Gatinais for Robert d'Artois, a post he held until Robert's death at Mansourah in 1250. In 1239 he succeeded his father in the Terre Bernard, becoming liegeman, therefore, of the abbey of St Denis. After the death of Robert d'Artois, he continued to serve Robert's widow, Mahaut, acting as counsellor and arbitrator, and, no doubt, participating in the literary activities of her court at Arras. In an act of 1255 he is for the first time referred to as 'Phelippes de Remin, chevaliers, 'sires de' 'Biaumanoir'', the original 'beau manoir' ('fair manor') having been expanded into a small fief by the acquisition of a chapel. Philippe de Remi married twice. His first wife, Marie, is believed to have been the mother of Girard and Peronelle. His second wife, Alix de Bailleul, mentioned in documents dated 1262 and 1267, survived him. She was probably the mother of Philippe. 
There has been much controversy concerning Philippe de Remi's literary achievements, but most modern scholars reject Bordier's hypothesis (Bordier, 25-39) that all works written by Philippe de Remi, sire de Beaumanoir, are attributable to his son, the jurist ['see below']. After Gicquel's discovery that Rudolf von Ems's 'Willehalm von Orlens' of 1242 derived from 'La manekine', it is now generally accepted that Philippe de Remi the younger wrote the 'Coutumes de Beauvaisis' (see below) and that between 1230 and 1240 Philippe de Remi the elder, wrote the works contained in Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Fr. 1588: 'La manekine' (fols. 2-56'v'), 'Jehan et Blonde' (fols. 57-96), 'Li salu d'amours' (fols. 97-103'v'), 'La complainte d'amour' (fols. 103'v'-106'v'), 'Le conte de fole larguece' (fols. 107-109'v'), 'Fatrasie' (fols. 109'v'-110'v'), 'Lai' (fols. 110'v'-112'v'), 'Ave Maria' (fols. 112'v'-113'v'), 'Fatrasie' (fols. 113'v'-114'v'), 'Chanson d'amour' (fol. 114'v') (incomplete). 

'La manekine' ('The Handless Maiden') blends incest folklore, hagiographic 'exempla', and courtly topoi into an 8590-line octosyllabic romance. The widowed king of Hungary, wishing to avoid marriage to anyone who did not resemble his dead wife, planned to marry his daughter, Joie. To avoid the incestuous nuptials Joie cut off her left hand which was swallowed by a sturgeon in the river below her window. The heroine, imprisoned, sentenced to burn, set adrift at sea, and subjected to multiple vicissitudes, was eventually rewarded for her virtue and her fortitude. Her identity as Joie rather than 'la manekine' was reaffirmed when the sturgeon miraculously reappeared in the church's baptismal water, and the pope was instructed to reattach the severed limb. Joie's husband, the king of Scotland, inherited the territories of Joie's father, who had now repented and abdicated. Joie's sons and daughters became kings and queens of sundry lands, and all lived happily ever after. The underlying moral of these peripaties was enunciated at the end of the romance when Remi urged his public never to succumb to despair, whatever their adversities, but to remember 'La manekine'. If the story was perhaps memorable, its manner of composition was less so and, in the prologue of this first youthful work, Philippe de Remi in fact apologizes for his lack of 'clergie' and for never having rhymed before: '
molt petit sai de clergie, 

Ne onques mais rime ne fis. 
(I have very little learning. 

I have never rhymed before.) (Remi, 'La manekine', ll. 32-3)' Realism rather than the miraculous characterized Philippe de Remi's second long romance, 'Jehan et Blonde', which narrated the heroic progression of the impoverished hero from 'ecuyer' ('squire') of the earl of Oxford to penniless knight who married a rich heiress and who then became, after these inspiring triumphs over adversity, count of Dammartin and Oxford. The moral of this second romance also was made explicit: poor young men should leave home and seek their fortune, and, if not, 'should have their eyes put out' as punishment for their indolence. H.-L. Bordier and H. Suchier interpreted the author's detailed treatment of the geography and customs of England and Scotland in 'La manekine' and 'Jehan et Blonde', and 'Jehan et Blonde''s mischievous imitation of aristocratic 'franglais', as proof of his having travelled extensively in those lands. They believed that the author was in England between 1261 and 1265. Subsequent research has separated 'pere' from 'fils', and has questioned this chronology. Several modern commentators believe that it is not necessary to posit a cross-channel visit to explain the author's textual references to England and Scotland. 




@@@@@


doc= 22102


Philip, Alexander Philip Wilson (1770-c.1851), physician and physiologist, was born Alexander Philip Wilson in Scotland on 15 October 1770. He studied medicine at Edinburgh and graduated MD on 25 June 1792, with a dissertation entitled 'De dyspepsia'. In the same year he published the first of a long series of medical works. 
Admitted a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh on 3 February 1795, Wilson practised in that city for a few years, and gave a course of lectures on medicine. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh on 26 January 1795. About 1799 he settled at Winchester, and he afterwards moved to Worcester, where in 1802 he was elected physician to the Worcester General Infirmary. He was successful in practice, but in 1817 he resigned his post and moved to London. On 22 December 1820 he was admitted licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, and on 25 June 1834 he was made a fellow. In 1835 he delivered and published the Goulstonian lectures, 'On the influence of the nervous system in disease'. He was also elected fellow of the Royal Society, in 1826. Before moving to London he had assumed the additional surname of Philip; his books appeared up to 1807 under the name of Wilson, and after that date under that of Wilson Philip, by which he became generally known. 
For many years Wilson Philip maintained a large and apparently lucrative London practice in Cavendish Square but he was overtaken by misfortune in his old age. About 1842 or 1843 he suddenly disappeared from London. William Munk states that his investments were injudicious, and that the scheme in which he had placed his accumulated fortune failed, so that he had to leave the country to avoid arrest for debt (Munk, 227). He went to Boulogne in France and is thought to have died there; his name disappeared from the list of the Royal College of Physicians in 1851. These circumstances may have suggested to Thackeray the unfortunate career of Dr Firmin in 'The Adventures of Philip'. 
Wilson Philip was a popular physician and an assiduous researcher even while he was busily engaged in practice. His investigations in physiology and pathology earned him a considerable reputation in his day, particularly as an expert on indigestion. He was one of the first to employ a microscope in the study of inflammation, and his observations attracted much attention both at home and abroad; the work in which they were contained, 'An Experimental Enquiry', was translated into German and Italian. In his physiological studies the principles stated by Wilson Philip to have guided him in the performance of experiments on living animals were considered both rational and humane. His numerous practical works, especially on indigestion and fever, were widely circulated, and also translated into several languages; and he published several papers in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society'. They demonstrate his wide medical experience. 


@@@@@


doc= 22104


Philip, John (1775-1851), missionary, was born on 14 April 1775 in Kirkcaldy, Fife, the eldest son of James Philip, a weaver, and his wife, Mary. After leaving school at eleven he worked as a weaver and then moved to Dundee, where he became first a clerk in, and then manager of, a spinning mill. Brought up in the Church of Scotland, he was attracted to the Congregational denomination being established in Scotland by James and Robert Haldane. After a religious conversion Philip left his job at the mill, in protest, he later claimed, against the use of child labour. After a short period as a master weaver, he spent three years at Hoxton College in London, training as a Congregational minister. Thereafter he worked for two years in Newbury before being transferred to Aberdeen in 1804. His first years there were difficult, as the congregation was split between those like Philip who wished to remain as Congregationalists and those who followed the Haldanes into the Baptists. Philip was able to maintain the loyalty of the majority of his congregation and soon gained a reputation as a dynamic preacher. On 24 September 1809 he married Jane Ross (1792-1847), the daughter of a prosperous Aberdeen engineer; they had seven children. 
In addition to his pastoral work and preaching, Philip took considerable interest in missions, as secretary of the Aberdeen Missionary Society and as the representative of the London Missionary Society (LMS) in north-east Scotland. In 1813 he preached the annual missionary sermon to the LMS, entitled 'The necessity of divine influence', in which he displayed much more millenarianism than in his later years. He was thus a very suitable candidate for the post of resident director in South Africa, which the LMS directors felt called upon to institute in 1818, as the affairs of the society in Cape Colony were then in crisis. Despite resistance from his Aberdeen congregation, Philip accepted. As a sign of the esteem in which he was held in Congregational circles, doctorates were obtained for him from both Princeton and Columbia universities, as neither English nor Scottish institutions would convey this honour on one who was not a member of their respective established churches. Thus equipped, Philip arrived in Cape Town, together with the Revd John Campbell, in February 1819. Except for three extended visits to Britain, his main residence was Cape Town until 1847, when he retired to Hankey in the eastern Cape. Until well into his sixties, however, he made regular long trips in an ox-waggon through the interior of southern Africa and, together with his extensive correspondence, these made him probably the most widely informed individual on southern Africa of his day. 
Philip's work in Africa had three interlocking facets. First, he was minister of the Congregationalist Union Chapel in Cape Town, to which the mission house where he lived was attached. On occasion, particularly in 1841-2, problems arose because members of the congregation believed that they did not have sufficient control over their minister, who was after all imposed by the society rather than called by his church. Moreover, Philip was often away and his replacement was a natural focus for resentment. Secondly, he acted as administrator of the London Missionary Society, which at any one time had up to twenty-five clergymen at work in southern Africa. Much of the practical work was carried out by his wife, who was unofficial treasurer of the society in southern Africa; she took on all administrative tasks during his absences and was the official agent in Cape Town of the Paris Evangelical Mission. Nevertheless, the planning of an evangelical campaign fell to Philip, and it was at his initiative and as part of his strategy that the Paris Evangelical Missionary Society, the Rhenish Missionary Society, and the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions sent missionaries to southern Africa. Thirdly, there were his public and campaigning activities, for which he is best known. These all derived from his vision of missionary activities. For Philip, salvation could only be achieved by those who lived 'civilized' lives, very much according to the current norms of Great Britain, and particularly Scotland. Heavily influenced both by the political economists of the Enlightenment in Scotland, and successors such as David Ricardo and Sir William Blackstone, he believed that the colonial system of southern Africa in the early nineteenth century did not allow converts to lead Christian lives. 
Philip's first activity, which his opponents construed as political, was on behalf of the beleaguered British settlers in the eastern Cape. This earned him the enmity of Lord Charles Somerset, the governor of Cape Colony. Then, in 1823, Philip was instrumental in persuading the British government to send out the commissioners of eastern inquiry. This commission was to investigate the system of government in all colonies in the east captured during the Napoleonic wars, thus including Mauritius and Ceylon as well as the Cape. In the event the commission spent six years at the Cape, producing a dozen detailed reports on all aspects of government. Philip, however, despaired of the commission ensuring the human rights of, in particular, the Khoi-Khoi, who were the main residents on the LMS mission stations. He therefore went to London in 1827 to campaign. 
In the course of his British visit Philip wrote 'Researches in South Africa', in which he exposed the various abuses perpetrated in Cape Colony and expounded the benefits of missions. He also made contact with Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, and convinced him that the struggle for the rights of free Khoi-Khoi people in southern Africa was inseparable from the main emancipation agitation. With this entree into the world of high politics he was able to persuade the colonial secretary, Sir George Murray, to remove all civil disabilities on 'free persons of colour' at the Cape, and indeed throughout the British empire. Since, in his absence but probably by his inspiration, the Cape government had in the meantime issued ordinance 50 to this effect, the British government ordered that all future measures which might impinge on the ordinance had to be sanctioned in London. On his return to Africa in 1829 Philip was feted as a hero by the Khoi-Khoi, but vilified by the settlers and officials. He was convicted of libelling William Mackay, magistrate of Somerset, but his hefty fine was covered by evangelicals in Britain to whom he had become a hero. 
From the 1830s Philip was primarily concerned with arranging matters beyond the borders of Cape Colony, both to the north and to the east. As before, his prime concern was to help create the conditions which he saw as necessary for salvation. This entailed that the African polities be reorganized but also that their rulers did not feel that they had been treated unjustly. To that effect Philip arranged that treaties were made between Cape Colony and Andries Waterboer, Adam Kok II and Moshoeshoe, of the Griqua and Sotho to the north. His dealing with the Xhosa to the east were complicated by the outbreak of war with the colony in December 1834, which led to the annexation of a large part of Xhosa. Philip did not oppose this, as he believed that benevolent British rule would be advantageous, provided that the colonial system was organized to allow the progress of 'civilization'. It was to ensure this, and to safeguard the civil rights of the free persons of colour within the colony, that he journeyed to Britain in 1835, accompanied by James Read, a veteran missionary who was his closest ally, Read's son, and two converts, Andries Stoeffels, a Khoi-Khoi, and Jan (Dyani) Tshatsoe, a Xhosa chief. The five men gave evidence before Buxton's select committee on Aborigines. It was their evidence and the documents which Philip had sent to the Colonial Office through Buxton that led the British government to order that the conquered territory be returned to the Xhosa. While Philip was not directly responsible for this decision, and indeed may have disapproved of it, he was held to be so by the colonists of the Cape. 
Thereafter, Philip's political influence in both London and Cape Town declined, except with regard to the northern frontier. His position within the LMS was increasingly challenged by those, notably Robert Moffat, who disapproved of his political activities and were less prepared to see African converts as their potential equals. Indeed, Philip had to fight to prevent the mission stations being broken up. His final years were saddened by the death of his wife, the drowning of his son and grandson, and, just before his death, the revolt against British rule of many of the Khoisan converts who believed that the implicit contract they had made with Philip, for further benefits beyond the freedom of ordinance 50, had not been honoured. He died on 27 August 1851 at Hankey, a mission station in the eastern Cape, and was buried there. 
Philip was a thickset, dark-haired, handsome Scot. His forceful personality made many of those he came across his devoted followers, and more his implacable enemies. His reputation as a meddlesome priest lived on into the twentieth century in southern Africa, but so did an understanding of his belief that society must be organized to allow the living of a Christian life and that duty required him to do what he could to make this possible. 


@@@@@


doc= 22105


Philip, John Birnie (1824-1875), sculptor, was born in London on 23 November 1824, the son of William and Elizabeth Philip. In 1842 he entered the Government School of Design at Somerset House, London, where he studied under the painter John Rogers Herbert. Through Herbert, Philip met A. W. N. Pugin who engaged him to assist with designs for wood-carvings ('c'.1844-1845) in the House of Lords at the Palace of Westminster, London. Much later (1868-9) Philip renewed his links with this building, executing eight statues of monarchs for the royal gallery. 
After visiting Rome in 1848-9, Philip resumed what proved to be a lifelong career specializing in architectural decoration. His longest and closest association was with George Gilbert Scott, the most prolific and successful architect in mid-Victorian Britain. Scott valued Philip's versatility in stone-carving and metalwork, engaging him on many commissions from 1852 onwards. Examples include the evangelist statues and tympanum relief of 'St Michael Overcoming Satan' ('c'.1856-1860) for St Michael Cornhill, London, and the font, reredos, and Katherine Parr monument (1859- 'c'.1865) for St Mary's Church, Sudeley, Gloucestershire. His metalwork skills are evident in his figures on the crossing screen (1859-63) at Lichfield Cathedral, executed in conjunction with Francis Skidmore. Nikolaus Pevsner described this high Victorian creation as an example 'of the highest craftsmanship and an ornament to any cathedral' (N. Pevsner, 'Staffordshire', 1974, 'The Buildings of England', 186). Philip's last major work for Scott was the spandrel reliefs (1873-5) which he and Henry Hugh Armstead executed for the Government Offices building, Whitehall, London. Although Philip was less imaginative than Armstead, his carvings are better suited to their architectural context. 
Philip's best-known work is the marble podium frieze of sculptors and architects (1864-72) for another Scott commission, the Albert Memorial in Kensington Gardens, London. It comprises eighty-seven historical figures, all carved 'in situ'. It is uncertain whether Philip himself chose who was to be represented or whether this was determined by the successive sculptural advisers to the project, Charles Eastlake, A. H. Layard, and Charles Newton. Like Armstead, who carved the adjoining reliefs of poets and painters, Philip aimed at careful historical accuracy and realism. A reviewer in the 'Art Journal' praised him for giving 'infinite variety to his design by the costumes of the respective periods... he has so arranged the figures as to present a series of distinct groups, yet all forming one harmonious whole' ('Art Journal', 1874). Philip also executed bronze statues representing Geometry, Geology, Philosophy, and Physiology, and two groups of angels immediately beneath the summit. 
Philip produced few civic statues, probably because of his many commissions for architectural sculpture. An exception is the Richard Oastler monument (bronze, 1869, Northgate, Bradford). This shows Oastler standing beside a boy and a girl, who represent the exploited factory workers he championed. While the conception is sentimental and the children are better dressed than their real-life counterparts, the group is powerful and convincing. Other large-scale portrait statuary by Philip includes the Lord Elgin memorial (1869) in Calcutta Cathedral and outdoor monuments to the Revd Robert Hall (1870) in Leicester and Colonel Edward Akroyd (1875) in Halifax. 
John Birnie Philip died of bronchitis on 2 March 1875 at his home, 280A King's Road, Chelsea, London, and was buried in Brompton cemetery, London. He was survived by his wife, Frances Black (died after 1902), whom he had married in 1854. Their eldest daughter, Beatrice (Trixie) ['see 'Whistler, Beatrice], married the architect and designer E. W. Godwin, and then the painter James Abbot McNeill Whistler. Despite the publicity accorded to the Albert Memorial following its restoration in 1998, Philip has not received his art-historical due. This is partly because his work immediately preceded the more spectacular achievements of the New Sculpture. Moreover, his field of architectural decoration, long considered a craft, has traditionally received far less attention than 'fine art' sculpture. 


@@@@@


doc= 22106


Philip, Robert (1791-1858), Congregational minister, was born at Huntly, in Aberdeenshire, in May 1791, the eldest son of an elder in the church of George Cowie, the founder of Independency in northern Scotland. After his father's death in 1806, Philip moved to Aberdeen, where he was employed as a clerk in the Grandholm works. In 1811 he was admitted to Hoxton Academy, under Dr Robert Simpson. In 1815 he became minister at Newington Chapel, Liverpool. Here he devoted his attention to the spiritual welfare of seafarers, and published 'The Bethel Flag, or, Sermons to Seamen' (1823). He remained in Liverpool for ten years. 
In July 1818 Philip had married Hannah, daughter of Nathaniel Lassell of Bolton, Lancashire, and sister of William Lassell, the astronomer. They had at least one son. In 1826 they moved to London, where Philip became minister of Maberly Chapel, Kingsland, and from then on he devoted himself to writing a series of religious manuals, which enjoyed considerable vogue both in Britain and America. They included 'Christian Experience, or, A Guide to the Perplexed' (1828), which, with five other works, was reprinted in New York in 1867 as 'Devotional Guides'; two volumes on manly piety, also published in one volume in New York as 'The Young Man's Closet Library' (1838); and four works on female virtue, collectively entitled 'The Young Ladies' Closet Library' (1834-41). He also published a study of the practical works of Richard Baxter (1838, 1847), as well as the lives of George Whitefield (1837) and John Bunyan (1839), both of which were largely composed of extracts and were principally remarkable for their strongly evangelical tone. He was made an honorary DD of Dartmouth College, Massachusetts, in 1852. 
Philip served on the board of the London Missionary Society, and sought to extend its operations, especially in China: he was a convinced opponent of the opium trade, and published sermons and pamphlets against it. He also wrote biographies of the missionaries John Philip, William Milne, and John Campbell. Owing to poor health Philip resigned from Maberly Chapel in 1855, and died at his home, Maberley Cottage, Richmond Road, Dalston, London, on 1 May 1858. He was buried in Abney Park cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 22107


Philipot, Sir John (d. 1384), merchant and alderman of London, was probably the son of Adam Philipot of Halstow, on the Isle of Grain, whose will, proved in 1348, named his executors as his wife, Maud, and his son John Philipot. He was married before 1357 to Joan Sauneford who appears in the London husting rolls of that year, with their daughter Joan, as the owner of a tenement on Lambeth Hill. It was 1363 before Philipot himself bought property, which included a wharf, in the parish of St Michael Queenhithe. 
By that time Philipot was a successful wool exporter, for in 1362 he was appointed a receiver of forfeited goods at Calais, while in the following year he was elected constable of the staple. In 1364 he was exporting wheat to Calais, and in 1365/6 the London particulars of customs show him exporting 326 sacks of wool. It appears that, like many other wool merchants of his generation, he established himself in the trade by exploiting both the king's abolition of London's franchise in 1351 and the temporary ban imposed in 1353 on exports of wool by Englishmen. These meant that provincial merchants could bring wool to London and sell it directly to alien exporters without first having to obtain citizenship. It is noticeable that Philipot is at first described solely as a merchant, and it is only in 1367 that he appears as a citizen of London. Although historians have always referred to him as a grocer, in 1369 and 1371 he is described in the husting rolls as a mercer. The assumption that he was a grocer rests on a spurious list of wardens which a fifteenth-century clerk of the Grocers' Company composed to fill a gap in its records, and there is no evidence that Philipot ever belonged to the Grocers' Company. His name does not appear on a contemporary list of its members, and it would seem, therefore, that he was admitted to citizenship as a mercer, although his main interest was in the wool trade. 
This would account for the curiously independent part which Philipot seems to have played in the politics of London. Although he often acted closely with other staplers in the interests of the wool trade, he also did striking things on his own, while his support for the Calais staple almost certainly alienated him from many mercers whose commercial interests led them to demand a staple at Antwerp. He may have become a mercer because he imported some of the rich fabrics which the Italians sold at Bruges. Certainly he had early links with the court: in 1362 he was granted a wardship by the king, and in 1365 he was acting as the partner of a king's esquire in lending $200; he was lending the king money in 1370, and he and Nicholas Brembre used their trade with the staple to transfer funds to Bruges for John of Gaunt. He acted for the earl of Arundel in the latter's moneylending activities and sold wool for him at a commission of 25 per cent. He also served the brother and children of the earl. 
None the less, the confidence which the Londoners had in Philipot's protection of their interests is shown by his election as their member of parliament, first in 1369, twice in 1371, twice in 1377, and then in 1380, 1381, and 1383. His first election corresponded with the renewal of the war against France. Philipot was chosen to advise the king's council on how best to protect merchant shipping, while his financial acumen and probity is reflected by his being appointed in 1371 and in 1377 to supervise the raising and spending of parliamentary taxation for the war. The naval disaster off La Rochelle in 1372, which left the wool fleet unprotected, brought Philipot and Brembre together into London's politics. They were simultaneously elected sheriffs and aldermen in September 1372 with the object of galvanizing the city's government into protecting its trade. The heavy war taxation and commercial depression made the royal government hugely unpopular by 1376, and Londoners led the attack on the crown's policies in the Good Parliament. In response John of Gaunt planned the suspension of the mayoralty, and in the troubles which followed Philipot and Brembre worked to preserve London's independence and to protect the Calais staple. After the accession of Richard II Philipot was chosen to lead a delegation which sought to conciliate Gaunt, with whom he seems to have maintained good relations. 
Philipot's relations with the leading staplers were cemented by marriage. His first wife died on 14 November 1374, and soon afterwards he married Margaret Croydon, the heir of a rich fishmonger. Both father and daughter died within a few months, and Philipot then became Brembre's brother-in-law by marrying Margaret, the daughter of the rich vintner, John Stodey. She was also the widow of the mercer and wool merchant, John Birlingham. The wealth he gained from these marriages, and from his own trade, enabled him to take a leading part with the other staplers in lending money to the crown from 1377 to 1380. By this means they purchased the restoration of the city's franchise and protected the Calais staple, which they saw as essential to their domination of the wool trade. Philipot secured his several appointments as collector of the customs largely to recover his loans to the crown. 
The staplers' control of London's government and financial power was threatened from 1376 by John Northampton, who exploited popular discontents to pursue his personal ambitions and those of his mistery, the drapers. Philipot worked with Brembre to hold the city together. He was elected mayor in 1378 and gained wide popularity by equipping a fleet which captured the pirate John Mercer, although his success aroused the jealousy of the nobility. He also built one of two stone towers on the Thames to defend shipping, and in 1380 he provided ships for the earl of Buckingham's expedition to Brittany and rescued it financially when it lacked money. He was knighted in 1381 by the king for his part in defeating the peasants' revolt. Philipot, like most of the staplers, supported the re-election of Northampton as mayor in 1382 in the hope of appeasing the latter's patron, John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. But Northampton saw Philipot's popularity, and his friendship with the leading staplers, as threats to his own power, and a charge was speedily concocted to deprive him of his aldermanry. However, the financial support Philipot gave to the bishop of Norwich's expedition to Flanders in May 1383, which was followed by a loan supported by the staplers, recovered the king's friendship and permitted his re-election to parliament that October, together with the election of Brembre as mayor. 
Philipot died in the summer of 1384, probably in London, and was buried in the Greyfriars Church. He was survived by at least one son, John, a mercer, and a daughter, Margaret, as well as by stepchildren. His widow married another future mayor, Adam Bamme. In his will Philipot left the reversion of a considerable amount of property to be used for the benefit of the city he had served so notably. 


@@@@@


doc= 22108


Philipot, John (c.1589-1645), herald, was born at Folkestone, Kent, the second of seven sons and nine children of Henry Philpot (1543/4-1603), a property owner who was thrice mayor of Folkestone, and his wife, Judith, daughter and coheir of David Leigh, servant to the archbishop of Canterbury. In his will dated 1602 Henry Philpot made provision for John, who was then at school, to be apprenticed to such trade as his father's executors thought most fit. 
On 20 June 1604 John Philpot was bound apprentice to Edmund Houghton in the Drapers' Company. He was made free on 26 June 1611 and an apprentice was bound to him on 1 April 1612 for eight years. On 28 December 1612 Philpot married, at St George the Martyr, Canterbury, Susan (died 1665), only child and heir of William Glover of Sandwich, Kent, the brother of Robert Glover, Somerset herald (1544-1588). They had two sons and two daughters: the elder son, Thomas Philipot (d. 1682) became a poet and writer. The marriage licence described Philpot as 'John Philpot of the City of London, woollen draper' and he seems to have intended to continue this business after his marriage as a second apprentice was bound to him on 12 May 1613 for seven years. However, possibly as the result of his marriage, Philpot was in a financial position to accept appointment on 10 December 1613 as Blanch Lyon pursuivant-extraordinary. From this time he wrote his name as 'Philipot'. 
By patent dated 13 November 1618 Philipot was promoted to Rouge Dragon pursuivant in ordinary and despite objections from Garter and Norroy that so profitable a position should be given to someone so junior in the College of Arms, William Camden, Clarenceux, thought sufficiently highly of Philipot to make him his deputy for the visitation of Kent in 1619. He was subsequently Camden's deputy for the visitation of Hampshire, 1622-3, and jointly with Chester herald for Gloucestershire and Berkshire in 1623. On 10 July 1623 he was appointed to the lucrative post of land and water bailiff of Sandwich, Kent, in succession to his wife's cousin Thomas Milles, and in July 1625 a warrant was issued for payment to him of $250 for the repair of Sandwich gaol. In 1628 the office of bailiff was regranted to him jointly with Gabriel Marsh, whose wife, Judith, was the only child of Philipot's elder brother, Thomas, and in 1642 after Marsh's death the office was regranted for the joint lives of Philipot and his younger son, John. He also held the office of lieutenant or chief gunner of the fort of Tilbury with a daily fee of 1's'. 
Philipot was appointed Somerset herald by patent dated 28 June 1624, having purchased the office from Robert Treswell who had debts, but on 2 November 1624 he was fined $5 for keeping back fees due to the College of Arms and lost his heraldic profits for October 1624. In January 1628 there was a complaint that he was keeping an admiralty court at Faversham, thereby depriving the lord warden of the Cinque Ports of the salvage brought in by fishermen. He was returned as one of the members of parliament for Sandwich on 12 March 1628 and sat until that parliament was dissolved on 10 March 1629. In 1628 James Balfour, subsequently Lyon king of arms, went to London and dined with the heralds, when he wrote that Philipot was noted for 'eloquence, oratorie [and] diversitie in languages' (Wagner, 'Heralds', 232). By 1630 he was steward of the royal manors of Gillingham and Grain in Kent. On 25 November 1630 he was accused by Clarenceux of invading his rights with regard to a funeral and allowing quarterings on funeral banners without justification. 
In November 1632 Philipot accompanied Lord Arundel on a mission to The Hague to try to persuade the widowed queen of Bohemia, sister of Charles I, to return to England, and as Garter's deputy he invested her son Charles Lewis, the elector palatine of the Rhine, with the Order of the Garter at Bokstal, Netherlands, on 28 May 1633. He was still at The Hague on 29 August 1633, being paid thirty shillings a day, when the queen of Bohemia wrote to Lady Arundel: 'this bearer Mr. Philpot can tell you all the newes here, I have stayed him of purpose to carie the King my brother some newes of it.... he is a verie honest man and done all the right that can be to his place and his master's honour in that he was imployed in. (M. F. S. Hervey, 'The Life, Correspondence and Collections of Thomas Howard, Earl of Arundel', 1921, 344)' In 1633 Philipot and York herald were deputed to visit Sussex, and the following year Philipot alone continued the 1622-3 visitation of Hampshire, then with Bluemantle pursuivant that of Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire. On 8 August 1635 Philipot was admitted a member of Lincoln's Inn at the request of the recorder of London. Before 18 July 1637 he was appointed registrar of the College of Arms and in the same month Philipot obtained a privilege for twenty-one years for the sole printing and selling of a book to be called 'The new description of Kent'. In his will Philipot directed that his executrix and overseer shall 'cause to be imprinted my book of the Survey of Kent wherein I have taken soe great labor and pains'. It was never published, although it has been suggested that his son Thomas Philipot's 'Villare Cantianum, or, Kent Surveyed and Illustrated' (1659) was mainly his father's work; however, James Greenstreet writing in 'N&Q' (5th ser., 1879, 11.92) concluded that if the father had a hand in the compilation it would have been more exhaustive and more reliable. In December 1638 proceedings were brought against Philipot and Sir Henry St George, Norroy, as Philipot had persuaded St George to forge the signature of his father, Sir Richard St George (died 1635) as Clarenceux on a grant of arms to a Kentish man who was not a gentleman. Both St George and Philipot were fined and suspended from office on 19 March 1639 but later pardoned on 6 April 1640. In a letter dated 20 April 1640 Sir Thomas Peyton referred to Philipot as 'the Maltman Viceroy of Sandwich for soe his authority and place denominate him' (London, 37). Unless he combined the business of maltster with his many other activities the maltman reference is not clear. 
In 1642 Philipot accompanied Charles I to Oxford and on 18 July 1643 received the honorary degree of doctor of civil law there. On 10 August 1643 he and the York herald accompanied Charles I at the siege of Gloucester and carried to that city the king's summons to surrender, which was refused. He returned to Oxford but was captured at Chawley by parliamentarian soldiers and sent to London in or after May 1645. His property was sequestrated on 26 September 1645, when he was stated to be worth $52 19's'. per annum. Philipot died in London on 22 November 1645 and was buried as Fillpot at St Benet Paul's Wharf on 25 November. In his will dated 15 November 1645 he describes himself as 'of Eltham in Kent Esquire designed Norroy King of Arms' believing that he would obtain this vacancy, and this appears on his widow's memorial at Eltham. He bequeathed some of his books of heraldry to his son Thomas 'at the rate they are [ap]praised at' (will). 
John Philipot was a collector of both heraldic manuscripts and charters. A large number of these had come into the possession of Onslow Gardiner by 1648 and were subsequently acquired by Arthur Annesley, earl of Anglesey. After his death they were purchased for the College of Arms for $50, where about 130 volumes, many of which are bound together, still remain. They are primarily genealogical with many copies of heralds' visitations, almost all south of the River Trent; the collection also contains manuscripts compiled by Robert Glover and William Smith, Rouge Dragon. In 1640 108 of Philipot's charters were copied into Sir Christopher Hatton's 'Book of Seals'. Some of these are in the British Library, fifty-four in the Harley collection and thirteen among the Cotton charters. 


@@@@@


doc= 22109


Philipot, Thomas (d. 1682), poet and writer, was the elder son of John Philipot (c.1589-1645), Somerset herald, and Susan (died 1665), only daughter and heir of William Glover of Sandwich, Kent. He was admitted a fellow-commoner of Clare College, Cambridge, on 10 February 1634 and matriculated on 29 March 1634. He graduated MA 'per' lit. reg. on 4 February 1636 and was incorporated in that degree at Oxford in July 1640. At some point he settled near Greenwich, where he lived quietly and prosperously until his death. According to Anthony Wood, 'he was by those that well knew him, esteemed a tolerable poet when young, and at riper years well vers'd in matters of div[inity] history and antiquities' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.518). He dedicated his 'Poems' (1646) to 'the publike Assertor of Letters' (sig. A2) Mildmay Fane, the second earl of Westmorland. In one copy the date has been changed in manuscript to 3 February 1645. A poem by Philipot, 'Faire Chloris standinge by the fier', absent from the 1646 collection, appears in the commonplace book of Sir John Perceval, compiled at Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1646-9 (Egmont MS). In 1659 he published as his own work his father's 'Villare Cantianum, or, Kent Surveyed and Illustrated'. He may have used the time and industry expended editing his father's papers to justify this deception to himself. A British Library copy (shelfmark 578.i.21) has manuscript additions by Philipot. Two years later there appeared his 'An historical discourse of the first invention of navigation and the additional improvements of it', dedicated to Sir Francis Prujean. Philipot went on to publish several more treatises, including 'Self-homicide-murther, or, Some antidotes and arguments gleaned out of the treasuries of our modern casuists and divines against that horrid and reigning sin of self-murther' (1674). He justified this treatise by pointing to the evil influence of John Donne's 'Biathanatos' (sig. A2). Philipot had many literary friends and contributed verses to Payne Fisher's 'Marston Moor' (1650), William Cartwright's 'Comedies' (1651), Edmund Benlowes's 'Theophila' (1652), John Boys's 'Aeneas his Descent into Hell' (1661), and Thomas Southouse's 'Monasticon Favershamiense' (1671). Philipot was buried at Greenwich on 30 September 1682. His will, dated 11 September 1680, leaves certain premises to Clare College, Cambridge, for the creation of two Kentish fellowships, and his houses in the town of Eltham and a field to the Clothworkers' Company to establish six almshouses for four people from Eltham and two from Chiselhurst, allowing them $5 each a year. 


@@@@@


doc= 22110


Philippa (1310x15?-1369), queen of England, consort of Edward III, was born in Hainault, probably at Valenciennes, the daughter of Count William the Good of Hainault and Holland (died 1337) and Countess Jeanne (died 1342), granddaughter of Philippe III of France. Her date of birth is not entirely certain, owing to the imprecision of the records as to the order in which she and her sisters were born. Philippa may have been born on 24 June 1310, but it is also possible that she was not born until 1315. Of her sisters, Margaret was the wife of the Emperor Ludwig of Bavaria, and Joanna married William, marquess of Juliers; her brother succeeded his father as Count William (IV) (1337-45). 
A diplomatic report (probably dating from 1319) inserted in the register of Bishop Stapledon of Exeter describes a young daughter of the count of Hainault in candid detail. This may refer to Philippa, and several points tally with visual representations of the queen: her face was well proportioned, with a broad and prominent forehead, the head narrowing at eyes and chin, with a straight, broad-based nose, wide mouth, and an upper lip fuller than the lower. The realistic effigy on her tomb, commissioned in 1367, two years before her death, shows a general thickening of face and figure in later life. 
A marriage alliance with Hainault was an essential part of Queen Isabella's strategy to oust her husband, Edward II, and place their son (the future Edward III (1312-1377)) upon the throne. This entailed military aid from Philippa's uncle, John of Hainault, lord of Beaumont, and the active collaboration of the count. Philippa's mother, Jeanne de Valois, countess of Hainault, was first cousin to Queen Isabella. Negotiations for a marriage between Edward and Philippa's eldest sister in 1320-21 came to nothing. Edward and Philippa met in Paris in December 1325, when a visit of Jeanne de Valois and her daughter coincided with that of Edward and Isabella. A marriage contract, with strict terms for non-compliance and conditional upon papal dispensation, was drawn up on 27 August 1326 at Mons in Hainault, despite opposition from Edward II and his council; the Hainault court, with Isabella and Edward, celebrated the alliance in various towns in Holland. Isabella swore (on behalf of her son) to provide Philippa with an appropriate dowry, and that the marriage would take place within two years. Negotiations for papal dispensation for the marriage (Philippa and Edward were related within the third degree of consanguinity) were in train from March 1327, and this was granted on 30 August 1327. 
Provided for by her father in a manner befitting her position as future queen of England, Philippa participated in a proxy marriage ceremony performed by Roger Northburgh, bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, who had been sent by Edward (who was now king, following his father's deposition at the beginning of the year) on 8 October 1327 for this purpose and to confirm the terms of her dowry. The arrival of the English contingent on 2 November marked the beginning of lavish espousal ceremonies. Bartholomew Burghersh, constable of Dover Castle, and William Clinton were then commissioned (28 November) to accompany Philippa to England. Leaving Valenciennes on 2 December with an escort of Hainault notables, who included the young Walter Mauny and Jean Bernier, provost of Valenciennes, Philippa embarked at Wissant on 16 December for Dover, reaching London by 22 December, where she was enthusiastically received by clergy and people. After Christmas Philippa left for York, where she married Edward III on 24 January 1328. On 15 May Edward confirmed his promise relating to her dowry and settled 15,000 livres tournois on her, together with lands and annuities given to some members of her entourage. 
Apart from the all-important need to secure the succession through the provision of an heir, Edward III's marriage to Philippa served three main functions. Most immediately, this manifestation of continental support -- from a principality playing an increasingly important role in Europe independently of France -- consolidated his vulnerable position upon the throne; then it provided military support against the Scots -- a substantial contingent of Hainaulters, under Philippa's uncle, John of Hainault, served in the Stanhope Park campaign of 1327; and finally, in the longer term, it furnished an important point of access, through the connections made by the marriage, to a number of princes and lords of imperial allegiance in the Low Countries. However, it was only on 25 February 1330 that Philippa was crowned in Westminster Abbey. It has been suggested that the coronation was intentionally delayed by Isabella and Roger Mortimer: whatever the case, the issue is likely to have been forced by Philippa's pregnancy. She gave birth to their first child, Edward (later called the Black Prince), on 15 June 1330. 
Until the downfall of Isabella and Mortimer in October 1330, Philippa was clearly underendowed with lands and revenues, but the problem seems to have continued into the 1360s. In January 1331 dower lands to the value of $4000 were assigned to her, some of which had formerly been held by Queen Isabella. They included Pontefract, Knaresborough, Tickhill, and High Peak. A continuous series of further grants was made over the next three decades, including the town of Bristol and lands in Essex (among them the royal manor of Havering atte Bower, one of her favourite residences, conveniently close to London and well placed for hunting in royal forests). Despite these increases (ultimately amounting to an annual income in excess of $7000), Philippa's finances seem always to have shown a deficit. Considerable sums were lost through the negligence of her officials, an unexceptional state of affairs for the period. The situation was eventually stabilized and then gradually improved by the queen's appointment (confirmed by the king) of the energetic Richard Ravenser as her receiver in June 1359. In May 1360 it was decided to merge her household with the king's. Her debts by this time were so great, however, that for six years after 1362 all her annual income from her dower lands (other than 4000 marks reserved for personal chamber expenses) had to be devoted to the settlement of household debts incurred before 1360. 
From the very beginning of her life in England Philippa was concerned with the exercise of the royal prerogative of mercy, in 1328 securing a pardon for an eleven-year-old girl who had been convicted of a robbery at Bishopthorpe, York. In 1333 a pregnant woman who had stolen a surcoat and 3's'. at York was pardoned at the queen's request. This pattern continued throughout her life: in March 1365 at Nottingham, for example, a pregnant woman condemned to be hanged for stealing was shown clemency at her entreaty. She displayed a similarly constant solicitude for those in her family and household circles, for instance with a stream of petitions to the pope requesting indulgences or promotion for members of her chapel and household, and for one of her godsons (her godchildren appear to have been numerous). Immediately after her death a series of detailed instructions, designed to ensure the continuing welfare of her servants, was carried out by the king, suggesting the same concern for individuals. 
In 1331 Philippa had narrowly escaped when the stand from which she and her ladies were viewing a tournament at Cheapside in London collapsed. Her intervention on this occasion with the king on behalf of the negligent carpenters once more shows her acting as intercessor, a role that features prominently in chroniclers' accounts of her personality and made a marked contribution to her popularity -- most notably in the famous episode of the burghers of Calais, after the siege of the town in 1347, when though far advanced in pregnancy she is said to have persuaded the reluctant Edward to spare the lives of six principal 'bourgeois'. 
In the 1330s and 1340s Philippa's itinerary is characterized by her accompanying Edward III on his expeditions to Scotland, and also to the Low Countries during the early campaigns of the Hundred Years' War. Thus she is reported to have been at Bamburgh in Northumberland in the winter of 1335, while in 1338 the king gave her $564 3's'. 4died from the customs in the port of London for horses, dress, plate, and jewels for her imminent passage with him to Brabant. After their arrival in the Low Countries, Philippa remained at Antwerp while Edward continued on to Koblenz, and she gave birth to their third son, Lionel, at the abbey of St Michael on 29 November. Similarly, in March 1340, she remained at Ghent for the birth of John of Gaunt, returning to England in November 1340. Ten years later, on 29 August 1350, according to Froissart, she was at Winchelsea while the king and her two eldest sons went to sea from that port for the battle of 'les Espagnols sur mer'. 
Just as Philippa's connections gave Edward an entry point to northern France and the Low Countries, so she provided supporters of the French cause with a channel through which they could hope to exert influence upon the English king. In the early 1340s, for instance, there was an exchange of envoys bearing verbal messages as well as letters between Philippa and the pro-French Pope Clement VI, with whom she may have become acquainted at the French court. She sent Clement a gift of a 'ring set with precious diamonds' ('CEPR letters', 1342-62, 3), no doubt in an attempt to make the pope more favourably disposed to Edward's activities. 
It was uncommon for an English king and queen to spend as much time together as Edward and Philippa did, and their forty-year-long marriage may have been more than usually companionate. They enjoyed hunting together, and at home she is normally recorded as present with the king and court at the principal feasts of the liturgical year, and at the tournaments and celebrations that accompanied them, as well as those which formed part of the festivities surrounding her own churchings after childbirth. 
Philippa's brother William was injured in such a tournament at Eltham during a visit in 1342. After his death without issue in 1345, Edward pursued claims in Hainault, Holland, and Zeeland on Philippa's behalf. Although the estates of Hainault and Holland were to rule against Philippa's claims (maintaining the indivisible sovereignty of the territories), Edward III continued to uphold her interest. A further crisis was provoked by the insanity in 1358 of Philippa's nephew, the Wittelsbach William (V), count of Hainault, whose wife, Maud, was the eldest daughter of the duke of Lancaster. Edward III's formal renewal of his claims on Philippa's behalf threatened to destabilize the whole balance of power in the Low Countries; Hainault itself was split on the issue at almost every social level. In June 1361 Maud visited England: although her exact intentions are unknown, she probably sought English support to counterbalance the power of the regent of Hainault, William (V)'s brother Albrecht of Bavaria. It is clear that Maud remained in close personal contact with Philippa at this period of crisis. 
Maud's death in April 1362 threw Philippa's claims into sharper focus. Already in February 1362 Edward had given his envoys full power to treat with the count of Flanders over a projected marriage between his fifth son, Edmund of Langley, and the count's daughter, Margaret: Edmund would bring to the marriage the considerable lure of Philippa's rights to Hainault, Holland, and Zeeland. Critical diplomatic negotiations were in progress between April and August 1364, and a contract dated early October set out the terms of this projected marriage. Philippa's continuing network of contacts in Hainault facilitated Edward's attempt to construct a web of dynastic alliances (not unlike the network of loyalties he had attempted to forge in the Low Countries earlier in the reign in support of his claims to France) and also enabled him to identify the rival, pro-French, faction (led by Albrecht's right-hand man, Jean de Werchin, hereditary seneschal of Hainault) which was to undermine and ultimately defeat his plans. It was perhaps typical of Philippa that she appears to have been entirely ready to renounce her personal claims in favour of one of her sons. She would appear to have supported Edward III in ensuring, as far as possible, an equitable balance of power (and lands) among their numerous sons. 
Grants made by the queen from 1365 onwards refer to the possibility of her dying before the grantee, suggesting that the condition from which Philippa was eventually to die may first have been evident at this date. In 1367 the king named his new castle and town in the Isle of Sheppey, Kent, Queenborough in her honour. Her failing health must have given greater urgency to Edward's prosecution of the claims to her continental inheritance. The outcome was by no means certain: both Edward of Gueldres and Philippa's nephew the marquess of Juliers supported English rights, and in October 1367 Albrecht of Bavaria made an impressive two-week-long visit to England (described in detail by Froissart), where he was showered with presents and lavish hospitality by Edward and Philippa and their children at Windsor, in an apparent attempt to outbid the influence of the king of France. In June 1371, two years after Philippa's death, Edward relinquished her claims, in terms that may echo Philippa's own benign attitude: 'so that love and affection may be fostered in time to come between us and our cousins, their heirs, and their lands' (Quicke, 172, n. 129). 
Philippa probably gave birth to twelve children (seven sons and five daughters), of whom five died in childhood and five outlived her, among them Isabella, countess of Bedford, and Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester. The few glimpses there are suggest a happy relationship with her children that continued when they were adult -- gambling with Edward the Black Prince, for instance, and giving a handsome present in March 1362 to his wife, Joan of Kent, with no suggestion of disapproval for their somewhat unorthodox marriage. She seems to have been altogether a woman of warm and stable character to whom credit should be given for the remarkable absence of squabbles among her grown-up sons, and for the easy integration of her Hainault followers, men such as Sir Walter Mauny and the d'Aubrechicourts, into English knightly and aristocratic circles. Her household did not attract the criticism of foreigners that attended other queens before and after her who came from overseas. 
Like other women in the Hainault courtly milieu from which she came, Philippa evidently possessed literary interests: the poet-minstrel Jehan de le Mote dedicated to Philippa his verse lament of 1339 on the death of her father ('Li regret Guillaume'), and he also performed before the English court. On his arrival in England in 1362 the young Jean Froissart presented a rhymed chronicle to the queen; she also patronized his lyric poetry, and under her auspices he made the journeys around the British Isles which provided him with the raw material for both the lengthy verse romance 'Meliador' and his 'Chroniques'. His devotion to the queen's memory (he wrote a lament on her death) has substantially influenced much subsequent writing. Something of Philippa's diverse literary background is reflected in the ewer she gave Edward III as a new year gift in 1333, described as enamelled with a range of figures from epic and romance. The richly illuminated manuscript compilation (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS fr. 571) commissioned as a wedding gift and containing Brunetto Latini's 'Tresor' and a French translation of 'De secretis secretorum', as well as Raoul le Petit's romance, 'Fauveyn', is an indication of Philippa's high artistic expectations. The same cultural links led her to commission an innovatorily realistic tomb sculpture at the end of her life from the Brabancon Jean de Liege, who was also active at the French royal court. Two illuminated psalters (DWL, MS Anc. 6; BL, MS Harley 2899), bearing the arms of England and Hainault, apparently indicating her ownership, have also survived. A more modest example of cultural dissemination through Philippa's agency is to be found in a short treatise on the medicinal virtues of rosemary, supposedly sent to her by her mother in 1338. 
Philippa seems also to have had a reputation for fostering learning, which would be entirely in keeping with the long tradition of literary interests at the Hainault court. In 1334, for instance, the chancellor and masters of Oxford University petitioned her for support against the would-be secessionist establishment at Stamford, and alluded to previous instances of her favour. In 1341 her clerk Robert Eglesfield founded Aulam Regine de Oxoni (now the Queen's College, Oxford), but granted its 'advocacio' (patronage) to Philippa, in the hope -- as he says in the college statutes -- of a better and more secure foundation. She used her influence actively on the college's behalf, especially after Eglesfield's death in May 1349, referring to it as 'our foundation'. Other benefactions advanced the expansion of the hospital of St Katharine, near the Tower of London, and the collegiate chapel of St Stephen, Westminster. Her alms-giving reflected the court devotion of the period. A vow to go on pilgrimage overseas was fulfilled by proxy in 1344. 
Edward III's redecoration of St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, included wall-paintings (preserved only in later drawings) which incorporated members of his own family as donor figures. Philippa and her daughters appeared on the south side of the altar wall. There is a full-length wooden effigy of Philippa in Queen's College, Oxford. First documented in 1658-9, this has yet to be scientifically dated; however, it is not a copy of her tomb effigy, and depicts a younger woman whose features may correspond with the Stapledon description. The original college seal also has a full-length figure of the younger queen. 
Philippa died at Windsor Castle shortly before 14 August 1369. Her funeral took place at Westminster Abbey in the following January, with the exequies commencing at Windsor on 3 January and ending at Westminster six days later, a period that spanned the anniversary of her marriage; her 'anniversarium' (year's mind) was formally observed by the court at Westminster. She was buried on the south side of the Confessor's chapel, Westminster Abbey, in a tomb chest decorated with thirty-two small figures and her own recumbent effigy. Queen Philippa appears to have been widely admired in her adopted country. To the censorious Walsingham, for instance, she was 'a most noble woman and most constant lover of the English' ('Historia Anglicana', 1.309). Her long and fertile marriage to Edward III was an important factor in the preservation of stability and continuity in England for much of the fourteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 22111


Philippa (1360-1415), queen of Portugal, consort of Joao I, was the first child and elder daughter of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster (1340-1399), and his first wife, Blanche of Lancaster (1346?-1368) ['see under 'John of Gaunt]. In September 1372 she and her sister Elizabeth were sharing a household with their brother Henry (the future Henry IV), and in 1376 the sisters' governess was their father's mistress, Katherine Swynford ['see 'Katherine, duchess of Lancaster]. Philippa was a well-educated woman, who in later life habitually read the book of 'Psalms'; a copy of John Gower's English poem 'Confessio amantis' was probably sent to her in Portugal, and won her approval. The French poet Eustace Deschamps's characterization of her as chief patron of the order of the Flower in England places her at the centre of courtly debates relating to May day celebrations. In Portugal her love of courtly games with her ladies was remarked on. 
Philippa remained unmarried until her twenty-seventh year: her father had frequently used her marriage in diplomacy. In 1374 she was contracted to Gaston de Foix (Phebus), count of Foix; in 1381-2 she was offered to Jean de Blois, claimant to the duchy of Brittany, and in 1383 to Count William of Ostrevant, the heir to Hainault, Holland, and Zeeland. Gaunt took her on his expedition to claim the Castilian throne in 1386; after he was established in Galicia, Joao I of Portugal (1357-1433) offered to marry her, and this was agreed on as part of the alliance made between the two princes at Ponte do Mouro in November. The betrothal and nuptials took place at Porto during February 1387, before the necessary papal dispensation for the marriage had been issued. In July Philippa miscarried while visiting Joao, who lay seriously ill at Curval, but the births of other children followed rapidly. Branca, born in 1388, and Afonso, born in 1390, both died in infancy. Then came the future Duarte I (1391-1438), Pedro, duke of Coimbra (1392-1449), Henrique 
(Henry the Navigator; 1394-1460)
, Isabel (1397-1471), who married Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, Joao (1400-1465), and Fernando (1402-1443). 
Besides ensuring the succession for the new Portuguese dynasty (the house of Avis), Philippa was important in fostering links between Portugal and England, a trend facilitated by the mixture of Portuguese and English servants in her household. She was on good terms with both Richard II and her brother Henry IV. In 1399 she wrote to Thomas Arundel, archbishop of Canterbury, asking him to assuage her brother's anger with her friend Bishop Henry Despenser of Norwich, which probably stemmed from the bishop's attempt to defend Richard's cause against Henry's invasion. Philippa was instrumental in persuading Henry to foist Joao's illegitimate daughter, Beatriz, on the earl of Arundel as his bride in 1405. She and her English servants had some cultural influence in Portugal. She introduced the use of Sarum to Lisbon Cathedral. One of its canons, the Englishman Robert Payn, translated Gower's 'Confessio amantis' into Portuguese. The historian Fernao Lopes (secretary to Philippa's son Fernando) pictured her as a model queen, obedient to her husband, pious, charitable, and affable. She died of plague on 18 July 1415 at Odevillas, and was buried in October 1416 in the Dominican friary founded by her husband at Batalha. Their magnificent tomb, with their effigies clasping hands, is in the Capela do Fundador, constructed on Joao's orders between 1426 and 1434. 


@@@@@


doc= 22112


Philippart, John (c.1784-1875), military writer, born in London, was educated at a military academy, and then placed in the office of a Scottish solicitor. He was, however, more interested in military matters. In 1809 he became private secretary to John Baker Holroyd, first Baron Sheffield and afterwards first earl of Sheffield, president of the board of agriculture, but two years later he was able to secure an appointment as a clerk in the War Office. He proposed, in pamphlets issued in 1812 and 1813, the establishment of a benefit fund for officers, an idea suggested by Colonel D. Roberts. The scheme was supported by some senior officers, but it failed owing to ministers' fears that it might weaken discipline. Philippart also suggested, in a further pamphlet, a plan for making the militia more readily available for foreign service, and part of his plan was adopted by Lord Castlereagh. Philippart was one of the members of the order of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem, or knights hospitaller, who revived the English 'langue'. He was elected a knight of St John of Jerusalem on 11 November 1830, chevalier of justice in 1831, and bailiff 'ad honores' in 1847. He was chancellor of the order for forty-three years, and outlived all the knights who had revived the English 'langue' except the Chevalier Philippe de Chastelain. His interest in the traditional duties of a knight hospitaller induced him to help found in 1856 the West London Hospital (originally called the Fulham and Hammersmith General Dispensary). He was its honorary treasurer from 1856 to 1861, and an active member of the committee until his death. He was created a knight of the Swedish orders of Gustavus Vasa and of the Polar Star of Sweden in 1832 and was a member of the Royal Irish Academy. 
Philippart was a prolific compiler of pamphlets and books of reference relating to the British army. From October 1812 to September 1814 he owned and edited a journal, 'The Military Panorama'. His publications included 'Northern Campaigns, from... 1812... June 4, 1813' (2 vols., 1813), 'The royal military calendar, containing the services of every general officer... in the British army... and accounts of the operations of the army under Lieut.-Gen. Sir John Murray on the eastern coast of Spain in 1812-13' (3 vols., 1815-16), and 'The East India Military Calendar' (1823). Philippart died at his residence, College House, Church Lane, Hammersmith, on 8 May 1875, survived by his daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 22113


Philipps, Baker (c.1718-1745), naval officer, was a man details of whose place of birth and family are unknown. He first joined the 'Diamond' in the Downs on 5 February 1734 as an able seaman, and then served in the 'Greenwich' (Captain James Cornewall). In his next ship, the sloop 'Otter', he was rated midshipman, and then in the 'Prince of Orange' he became master's mate, before passing for lieutenant on 27 November 1740. He did not have to wait long before being appointed sixth lieutenant of the 'Royal Sovereign', and then to the 'Kinsale' in home waters, a move which was followed on 20 April 1744 by his appointment as second lieutenant to the 'Anglesea' (44 guns), stationed off the south coast of Ireland to protect trade. On 28 March 1745 she sailed from Kinsale, leaving her first lieutenant ashore sick. The next day she sighted a large ship to windward, which the captain, Jacob Elton, and the master wrongly supposed to be her consort, the 'Augusta' (60 guns). The stranger with a fair wind, came down under a press of sail. A master's mate who was on the forecastle suddenly noted that her poop-nettings and quarter showed unmistakably French ornamentation and ran down to tell the captain. It was about two o'clock in the afternoon and he was at dinner. Thereupon the stranger, which proved to be the French ship 'Apollon' (60 guns), in private employ, ran under the 'Anglesea''s stern, and poured in a heavy fire of great guns and small arms at less than a hundred yards' distance. The 'Anglesea' replied as best she could, but her decks were not cleared and her fire was very feeble. Hoping to fore-reach on the Frenchman and so gain a little time, Elton set the foresail. The only effect of this was to prevent her firing her lower deck guns. The 'Apollon''s second broadside killed both Elton and the master. Philipps was left in command, and, seeing no possibility of defence, he ordered the colours to be struck. 
The court martial which, after the return of the prisoners, examined the affair, rightly pronounced that the loss of the ship was due to Elton's over-confidence and neglect. However, it was also decided that Philipps, by not endeavouring to put the ship in order of fighting, and by not encouraging the crew to fight the 'Apollon', fell under part of the tenth article of the articles of war. The court martial had no alternative but to sentence Philipps to death, but recommended him to mercy in view of his youth and inexperience. The lords justices, to whom the case was referred, saw no reason for advising his majesty to grant mercy, and the sentence was carried out on the forecastle of the 'Princess Royal' at Spithead at 11 a.m. on 19 July 1745. It is difficult to understand the grounds on which Philipps was condemned, for the ship was virtually lost before he succeeded to the command. Probably the government was alarmed by the Jacobite rising but this was not mentioned at the court martial, nor did the circumstances render this a likely explanation. It is recorded that as he met his death 'he behaved with great firmness and intrepidity' ('GM', 15.531). He left all to his wife, Sarah, who later remarried. Philipps's will mentions children, but does not specify their details. 


@@@@@


doc= 22114


Philipps, Sir Erasmus, fifth baronet (1699-1743), politician, was born on 8 November 1699, the eldest son of Sir John Philipps, fourth baronet (c.1666-1737), of Picton Castle, Pembrokeshire, and his wife, Mary (died 1722), the daughter and heir of Anthony Smith, an East India merchant. His cousin Katherine Shorter was the first wife of Sir Robert Walpole. He is sometimes wrongly identified as the author of several economic tracts, including 'An Appeal to Common Sense, or, Some Considerations Offer'd to Restore Publick Credit' (1720) and 'The State of the Nation in Respect to her Commerce, Debts, and Money' (1725). These publications were in fact the work of Erasmus Philips (fl. 1720-1751). 
Philipps was educated privately before matriculating at Pembroke College, Oxford, on 4 August 1720. He left Oxford in the following year without graduating (extracts from the diary he kept at the university are reprinted in 'N&Q', 2nd ser., 10, 1860, 365-6, 443-5), and entered as a student at Lincoln's Inn on 7 August 1721. On 5 January 1737 he succeeded as fifth baronet following his father's death. Since February 1726 he had been MP for Haverfordwest, a seat he held for the rest of his life. He was a loyal supporter of the Walpole administration, although he did vote against the ministry over the selection of the chairman for the election committee in December 1741. He died, unmarried, on 15 October 1743 from drowning when he was thrown from his horse into the River Avon. On his death the baronetcy passed to his brother John Philipps, MP for Carmarthen and later Petersfield and then Pembrokeshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 22115


Philipps, Fabian (1601-1690), author, was born at Prestbury, Gloucestershire, on 28 September 1601, the son of Andrew Philipps. His father, who belonged to an old Herefordshire family, owned estates at Leominster; his mother, whose family, the Bagehots, had settled at Prestbury for four hundred years, was heir to one of her brothers. Philipps studied first at one of the inns of chancery, and afterwards at the Middle Temple. He was also at Oxford during 1641, studying at the Bodleian Library, but was not a graduate of either Oxford or Cambridge. In 1641 he was appointed filazer of London, Middlesex, Cambridgeshire, and Huntingdonshire, in the court of common pleas. His claim to the emoluments of the office was disputed, and fourteen years later the case was still unsettled. 
Two days before Charles I's execution, Philipps wrote a 'protestation' which he printed, and 'caused to be put on all posts and in all common places' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.6). It was published with the title 'King Charles the First no man of blood; but a martyr for his people, or, A sad and impartiall enquiry whether the king or parliament began the warre' (1649). 'The Royall Martyr' (1660) continues the theme, and in an appendix lists all those who had a hand in the treatment of the king, and ends with the execution: 'His Executioners disguised with Vizards; yet was his Majesty not affrighted... he stooped down to the block as to a prayer-desk, and most humbly bowed his generous Neck to God, to be cut off by the Vizarded Executioner, which was suddainly done at one blow. Thus fell King 'Charles', and all 'Britain' with him. ('Royall Martyr', appendix)' On the suppression of the court of chancery in 1653, Philipps published 'On the Court of Chancery and the Courts of Justice at Westminster' (1653), for which he received the thanks of William Lenthall, speaker of the House of Commons. He wrote three works against the abolition of tenures by knight service: 'Tenenda non tollenda' (1660), 'Ligeancia lugens, or, Loyaltie lamenting the many great mischiefs and inconveniences which will fatally and inevitably follow the taking away of the royal pourveyances and tenures in capite' (1661), and 'The Mistaken Recompense for Pourveyance and Tenures' (1664). 
Repairing the harm done against tradition and divine authority by the act of regicide occupied Philipps's career for many years after the Restoration. His work is characterized by its length; many of his publications extend over several hundred pages. There is also dense and detailed argument in favour of the authority of the monarch, derived from classical and biblical sources, chronicles, and court records from all periods. 
On 30 November 1661 Philipps and John Moyle received a grant, with survivorship, of the office of remembrancer of the court of the council in the marches of Wales. In his eightieth year he still retained his 'great memory'. He died on 17 November 1690 and was buried near his wife in the south-west part of the church of Twyford, near Acton, Middlesex. He wrote his own epitaph some years before his death. Philipps 'was eminent in his time, considering that his parts were never advanc'd, when young, by academical education' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.'); according to John Aubrey, he was 'of great assiduity and reading, and a great lover of antiquities'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22116


Philipps, Jenkin Thomas (d. 1755), translator and tutor, was of Welsh origin. He studied at the University of Basel, where in 1707 he delivered a Latin oration, 'Uses of travel', which was published in London in 1715. He appears to have held a place in the London court of George I, according to the dedication to his 'Discours touchant l'origine et le progres de la religion chretienne parmi la nation Britannique' (1716?), which was written in Latin and French. Philipps was a highly accomplished linguist and worked as a private tutor from 1717 to 1720. He expounded his methods in 'A compendious way of teaching ancient and modern languages, formerly practised by... T. Faber... now with little alteration successfully executed in London' (2nd edn, 1723). By 1726 he was tutor to the children of George II, and wrote for their use 'An Essay towards a Rational Grammar; with Easy Rules in English, to Learn Latin' (1726; 3rd edn, 1741). His royal pupils included William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, for whom he published several Latin epistles, and he remained his private tutor when the boy attended lessons at Westminster School. 
On 13 November 1732 Philipps was appointed historiographer royal, with a stipend of $200, a position that he retained until his death. He translated a number of historical works from German into English, and translated from German the Russian catechism by Theofan, bishop of Pskov and Novgorod. He compiled a history of the laws and constitutions of northern European states, which was published in 1752. He died a widower in London on 22 February 1755. 


@@@@@


doc= 22117


Phillips, Morgan (d. 1570), Roman Catholic priest, was born in Monmouthshire, and entered the University of Oxford in 1533. He soon made an impact as a bright, confident young man, and acquired the title Morgan the Sophister owing to his delight in debate. He graduated BA on 18 February 1538 and was elected a fellow of Oriel College on 17 April 1538. He received the degree of MA on 27 March 1542, and afterwards was ordained a priest, before proceeding to study for the degree of BTh. In 1543 he was presented to the rectory of Kiddington, Oxfordshire, and on 5 February 1545 he was appointed principal of St Mary Hall, Oxford. In 1549 he obtained the vicarage of St Winnoc, Pembrokeshire, while remaining as principal. In 1549 he took part in a public disputation with Peter Martyr Vermigli, the Italian friar and leading convert to protestantism, Phillips standing in for William Tresham, chaplain to Edmund Bonner. 
In 1550 Phillips resigned as principal of St Mary Hall, having by then graduated BTh, and on 31 May 1554 he became precentor of St David's Cathedral in Pembrokeshire. Because of his commitments in west Wales and his absence from Oxford, his fellowship at Oriel College was declared vacant on 20 December 1554. However, the accession of Queen Elizabeth in 1558 forced Phillips to leave St David's Cathedral for Louvain. Soon afterwards he visited Rome with one of his proteges, William Allen, who was at Louvain University. On his return to Flanders he co-operated with Allen in the foundation of the English College at Douai, pioneering the training of priests to win England and Wales back to Roman Catholicism. Indeed, Phillips was the main benefactor, as the Douai diaries admit: he gave the first sum of money for the purpose of establishing the college. 
Another Oxford graduate who supported Phillips and Allen at Douai was Owen Lewis, son of an Anglesey squire, who had left his position as fellow of New College, Oxford, for Douai and became in 1561 regius professor of civil law at the University of Douai. The three were close friends, exiles for the sake of conscience, and zealous supporters of Mary, queen of Scots. The defeat of Mary's supporters at Carberry Hill and Langside (1567-8) convinced the exiled Douai intellectuals that their immediate hope of the conversion of their home countries to Catholicism had to be abandoned. Phillips taught at the college, supporting Allen, until his death at Douai on 18 August 1570. By his will he left to William Allen all his Flanders property, which was used in the purchase of a house and garden for the enlargement of Douai College. Phillips had property in Oxfordshire and Pembrokeshire and on 15 February 1577 a commission was granted from the prerogative court of Canterbury to George Farmour of Easton Neston, Northamptonshire, to administer the goods, debts, and chattels of 'Morgan Phillips, clerk, sometimes chantor at the Cathedral Church of St David, who lately died in parts beyond the seas'. 
A book pleading Mary Stuart's right to the English throne was republished posthumously in 1571 at Douai, under Phillips's name as author and the title 'Defence of the Honour of Mary Queen of Scotland'. But the book was in actual fact the work of John Lesley, Roman Catholic bishop of Ross. 


@@@@@


doc= 22118


Philipps, Thomas (1774-1841), singer, was born in London. He came from a Monmouthshire family. His first appearance was on 10 May 1796 at Covent Garden Theatre, when he played Philippo in Samuel Arnold's 'The Castle of Andalusia'; his tenor voice was pronounced by critics to be tolerable in tone. After receiving some lessons from Arnold he improved rapidly, and in 1801 he was engaged at the Crow Street Theatre in Dublin. Back in London, on 26 June 1809 he appeared at the English Opera House in 'Up All Night'. In the same theatre in 1811 he took part in Henry Bishop's 'The Maniac', and other pieces -- 'The Peasant Boy', 'Plots', and 'M.P.' A tour in America is said to have enriched him by $7000. In 1826 he was regarded by Michael Kelly as the best acting singer on the English stage. Philipps retired early from the stage, taught singing, and composed ballads. He was a professional member of the Catch Club in 1828. He died at Northwich, Cheshire, on 27 October 1841 as a result of falling from a moving train. 
Philipps published 'Elementary Principles and Practices for Singing' (1826), compiled 'The Mentor's Harp, a Collection of Moral Ballads' by T. H. Bayly, and produced many songs and ballads, the best-known of which was the three-part 'Crows in a Cornfield', written about 1830. He also arranged Thomas Linley's 'The Duenna'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22119


Philips, Ambrose (bap. 1674, d. 1749), poet and playwright, was born in Shrewsbury, of a Warwickshire family, and baptized there on 9 October 1674, the fourth son of Ambrose Philips (died 1677), a draper, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Brookes (1648-1712), of Montgomeryshire. He was not, as Robert Shiels ('Lives of the Poets', 1753) believed, of the Leicestershire branch of the family of which Sir Ambrose Philips (died 1706) was a distinguished member. 
Philips was educated at Shrewsbury School and at St John's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted fellow in 1699, and remained in residence until 1704. He held a variety of posts throughout his life, none very distinguished or lucrative. He was commissioned captain-lieutenant in Colonel Breton's regiment of foot in 1705, campaigned in Spain, was captured after Almanza in 1707, but escaped and returned to Britain by the end of that year. In January 1709 he went to Denmark as secretary to the British envoy and, with a break in London, remained there until the end of 1710. 
In 1695 Philips contributed a poem on the death of Queen Mary to a Cambridge collection, 'Lacrymae Cantabrigienses', presented to the royal family, and in 1700 he wrote a short life of John Williams, archbishop of York, a benefactor of his college. His 1748 collection includes a poem on the death of King William (1702) and a verse 'Epistle from Utrecht' (1703). From about 1704 he was composing pastoral verses, two of which were praised by Joseph Addison in a letter of 10 March 1705. All six of his 'Pastorals' were published in Jacob Tonson's 'Miscellany' of 1709, as were Alexander Pope's. Praise of Philips's poems eventually excited a sardonic riposte from Pope in 'The Guardian', number 40 (27 April 1713). (Johnson and others report that Philips hung up a rod at Button's Coffee House with which to avenge himself on Pope for this attack; (S. Johnson, 'Lives of the English Poets', ed. G. B. Hill, 1905, 3.320).) Another work that had secured Philips admirers was a 'Winter Piece' evocatively describing the rigours of the Danish winter, which appeared in 'The Tatler', number 12 (7 May 1709). 
Philips did not marry. He refers in 'The Freethinker', number 103, to a 'broken love-promise'. A letter from Jonathan Swift (30 Oct 1708) refers to a 'Geneva' lady Philips evidently admired, and it may be in this connection that in a letter of 15 December 1710 Swift, by then very influential, refers to Addison's 'soliciting me to make another of his friends queen's secretary at Geneva; and I'll do it if I can, it is poor Pastoral Philips'. Philips did not get the post. 
In early 1711 Philips went from Denmark to Italy as tutor, or chaperone, to the 24-year-old Simon Harcourt, son of the lord chancellor, an appointment that must have been grating to both, as the young man was something of a tearaway as well as a Jacobite, and Philips a rather prim and rigid whig. He was close to Addison during this period and may have acted for him as amanuensis or secretary. With his play 'The Distrest Mother' (1712) -- almost a translation of Racine's 'Andromaque' in Johnson's judgement (S. Johnson, 'Lives of the English Poets', ed. G. B. Hill, 1905, 3.320) -- Philips enjoyed real success, partly perhaps attributable to 'The Spectator''s endorsement and partly to a highly popular comic epilogue by Budgell spoken by Mrs Oldfield, whose 'manner of speaking the Epilogue... greatly contributed to the success of this play, and which whenever revived, the Audience have always insisted on' (W. Egerton [E. Curll], 'Faithful Memoirs... of Mrs Oldfield', 1731, 35). In 1714 Philips was briefly tutor to George I's grandchildren. He was appointed paymaster of the lottery in 1715, which afforded him $500 per annum for himself and his staff. In the same year he was made a justice of the peace. For most of the next decade Philips was engaged with writing for various periodicals. Philips's later historical play 'The Briton' (1722) and his protestant propaganda piece 'Humphrey Duke of Gloucester' (1723), derived from '2 Henry VI', earned him no further fame as a dramatist. Much more successful had been the 350 issues of the whiggish periodical 'The Freethinker' (24 March 1718 - 28 July 1721) which he founded and wrote much of: contemporaries ranked this after only 'The Tatler' and 'The Spectator'. His 'Collection of Old Ballads' (1723-5) was innovatory and anticipated later interest in indigenous ballads. At the same time his 'Proposals for Printing an English Dictionary' (which did not materialize) impressively anticipated many features of Johnson's 'Dictionary'. 
Philips's later verse included poems addressing the children of aristocratic acquaintances: their intended charm excited the derision of fellow writers and earned him the nickname 'Namby-Pamby', his most lasting, if involuntary, contribution to the language. The style of Philips's poem 'To the Honourable Miss Carteret' (1725) and the motives that prompted it are scabrously lampooned in Henry Carey's 'Namby-Pamby' (1725?): '
All ye poets of the age, 

All ye witlings of the stage... 

Namby-Pamby is your guide, 

Albion's joy, Hibernia's pride. 

Namby-Pamby, pilly-piss, 

Rhimy-pim'd on Missy Miss 

Tartaretta Tartaree 

From the navel to the knee; 

That her father's gracy grace 

Might give him a placy place. 

' In November 1724, aged fifty, Philips had gone to Dublin with Boulter, the bigoted anti-Irish primate of all Ireland. In 1727 Philips was given the insignificant post of purse-bearer to the lord chancellor, and later that year was returned as member for Armagh, retaining his seat in the Irish House of Commons until his death. Boulter angled unsuccessfully for appointments for Philips, who eventually turned to the law in 1734, became a public notary and was appointed registrar for the court of facilities and the prerogative court. He prepared an edition of his poems in 1748, and probably returned to London in that year, where he died in early June 1749. He was buried on 4 June at the Grosvenor Chapel, Audley Street. 
Johnson's assertion that 'Philips became ridiculous, without his own fault, by the absurd admiration of his friends' (S. Johnson, 'Lives of the English Poets', ed. G. B. Hill, 1905, 3.320) is most apt to the period about 1712 when Philips was closest to Addison, 'The Spectator' praised his pastorals above Pope's, and 'The Distrest Mother' enjoyed an unwarranted success. In general, however, if Philips was not brilliant he was competent. Even Pope, before becoming riled by 'The Spectator''s devaluation of his own pastorals, recognized the quality of Philips's in a letter to Henry Cromwell, and also particularly commended the early 'Winter Piece': 'This Gentleman... is capable of writing very nobly, as I guess by a small Copy of his... on the Danish Winter; Tis a very Lively Piece of Poetical Painting, and I recommend it particularly to your Perusall' (Pope to Cromwell, 28 Oct 1710). Philips was not a hack beneath notice but he lacked the deftness and wit of Pope and his friends, and his whiggish sympathies may have exacerbated the ridicule of the so-called tory satirists. His sycophantic and sentimental later verse, including that to children, perhaps merited the obloquy it attracted. Swift, an early friend who had later turned against him, seems to have taken something of Philips's measure: 'Philips is a complainer... and Complainers never succeed at Court though Railers do' (Swift, 29 Sept 1725). 
Philips's twentieth-century editor, M. G. Segar, noted that Philips reportedly thought he looked like Julius Caesar, and Caesar of course was also fatally wounded by his former friends. Joseph Spence describes Philips as 'of lean make and pale complexion, extremely neat in his dress and five feet seven inches high' (J. Spence, 'Anecdotes', ed. J. M. Osborn, 1966, 1.340). However moderate in his talents, and however much ridiculed, Philips had a place in the Augustan world of letters. A contemporary obituary notice described him as 'the last survivor of the excellent authors of the spectators, tatlers and guardians, author of the 'Distressed Mother'; and several other pieces' ('GM', 1st ser., 19, 1749, 284). In fact, as Segar notes, Philips may have been ahead of his times rather than a 'survivor': his sentimentalism was perhaps more in tune with the emergent cult of sensibility than the writing of the wittier, cleverer, more talented authors who mocked him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22120


Philips, Charles (bap. 1703, d. 1747), portrait painter, was baptized in St Mildred Poultry with St Mary Colechurch, London, on 8 May 1703, the son of Richard Philips ('c'.1681-1741), a minor painter who probably taught him. In 1731 George Vertue reviewed Philips's work 'in painting small figure portraits & conversations [which] has met with great encouragement amongst People of Fashion -- even some of ye Royal Family' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.54). Their naive charm attracted commissions from noble families. His earliest portrait groups date from 1730 and show static figures in untamed landscapes. 'Thomas Hill of Tern with his Family', dated 1730 (Attingham Park, Shropshire), shows a groom leading the pony belonging to the eldest son, who stands with a family group posing in a landscape. Another, which recalls the form of William Hogarth's more accomplished 'Wanstead Assembly' (1730; Philadelphia Museum of Art), shows an assembly at Lord Harrington's house (1730; Yale U. CBA). In the next two or three years Philips's style became more relaxed, and his patrons included Algernon, seventh duke of Somerset (1732; priv. coll.), and the duchess of Portland (1732; priv. coll.), who are both shown with their families in sumptuous baroque interiors. His work is characterized by bright colouring and an uncluttered directness that must partly explain his popularity. As the 1730s progressed his conversation pieces became more elaborate with an increasing number of sitters participating in more varied activities. Perhaps the portrait of John Shales Barrington posing beside a statue of Diana with his Leheup and Lowndes relations on either side is the most complex example (Christies, 8 April 1998, lot 13; priv. coll.). Despite his success in gaining aristocratic commissions, his handling of paint and portrayal of the psychological relationship between his sitters were less sophisticated than those of his Scottish contemporary Gawen Hamilton. 
In 1737 the prince and princess of Wales sat to Philips for full-length portraits (former, the Royal Collection; latter, priv. coll.) which recall the work of Jacopo Amigoni. They were probably inspired by more decorative portraits by Philips's contemporary Philip Mercier but appear coarse in comparison. Philips painted a number of life-size portraits of the Wentworth family at the same time. His last portrait, of Thomas Secker, is dated 1740 (diocese of Oxford). His marriage to Mary Francis is probably that recorded in Fleet Street on 21 May 1737. He moved to Great Queen Street, near Lincoln's Inn Fields, soon afterwards, and this change in circumstances may have kept him from painting. Charles Philips died prematurely in London between 20 October and 23 November 1747. 


@@@@@


doc= 22121


Philips, George (1629/30-1696?), writer and politician, was the son of Dudley Phillips (1610-1672) of Crondall, Hampshire, and Limavady, co. Londonderry, MP for Limavady and town governor in the 1640s. Dudley's father, Sir Thomas Phillips (died 1636), was a captain in the English army which came to Ireland under Sir Samuel Bagenal. He was knighted at Drogheda in 1606, was governor of Londonderry, superintended the survey and plantation of co. Londonderry, for which he was granted 4 per cent of the temporal lands in the county, and settled at Limavady, where he was responsible for building the new town. The town was known from then until 1870 as Newtownlimavady. 
George Philips's date of birth remains uncertain, though he was born at Crondall, attended Christ's Hospital school, and was aged fifteen when he was admitted on 20 June 1645 to Christ's College, Cambridge, from where he matriculated the following year. Although his father did not die until 1672, he seems to have inherited the Limavady estate prior to that date. In 1659 he attained the highest office in the Limavady corporation, that of the annual post of provost, and was elected MP for the borough in 1661. In 1662 he granted all the customs belonging to the markets of the corporation to the provost, while in 1669 he permitted the county sheriffs to hold their court leet within the corporation of Limavady, and in 1671 subscribed $3 for a school and bells in Londonderry. From 1681 to 1684 he was governor of Culmore Fort, and seems to have filled the same post for Londonderry about this time. 
At the revolution of 1688-9 Philips took a leading role in the events surrounding the siege of Londonderry. When, on 6 December 1688, the Jacobite forces of the earl of Antrim, marching for Londonderry, approached Limavady, described in a contemporary account as 'a market town belonging to Col[onel] George Philips, twelve miles distant from Derry' ('Reprint of Walker's Diary', 15), Philips sent a dispatch to the city warning them of the dangers of admitting Antrim's forces. The next day he sent further word, advising the city 'to cause the gates... to be shut, and assured them he would be with them with his friends the day following, and would stand by them and would serve them to the hazard of his life and fortune' ('Reprint of Walker's Diary', 15). His warnings led to the shutting of the city gates against Antrim's forces. Philips himself arrived in Londonderry on 9 December, having been sent by Antrim, ostensibly to negotiate with the inhabitants. However, a later report stated that Philips brought encouragement to the city's inhabitants 'with an auxiliary aid of six hundred horses of his tenants and neighbours, and reducing the untrained people of the place into order and discipline' (Treasury papers, TNA: PRO). At his own suggestion he was made a nominal prisoner, so that he could inform Antrim that he was detained, and that it was not safe for Antrim to attempt an entry. Antrim withdrew to Coleraine, while the city's inhabitants entrusted the governorship of Londonderry to Philips. On 11 December David Cairns was sent on Philips's advice to represent the case of the citizens in London. However, Philips was soon replaced as governor by Robert Lundy. On 23 March 1689 Philips, who was 'well acquainted with proceedings in England', was sent to London with an address to William III 'to solicit a speedy supply' ('Reprint of Walker's Diary', 17, 21). 
Philips remained in London for the next three months, writing a pamphlet entitled 'The Interest of England in the Preservation of Ireland' (1689), in which he stated that he was 'animated and perhaps transported by a glowing zeal for religion, an anxious sympathy with his friends, and a pungent sense of his own sufferings'. He called upon England to save the protestants of Ireland, and warned of the danger of allowing Ireland to fall into French hands. He has also been accredited with writing two other tracts, 'Lex parliamentaria: the Law and Customs of Parliaments of England' (1690) and 'A Problem Concerning the Gout, in a Letter to Sir John Gordon, F.R.S.' (1691). In this latter pamphlet he disclaims all knowledge of medicine, though in his youth he had been 'conversant in the most delightful study of anatomy'. He based his claim to be heard on age and experience, and on the fact that he had had the gout for twenty years. 'In the tenets of religion', he incidentally remarks, 'I desire to be always orthodox'. 
Philips was ruined by the war, his house burnt down, and the improvements of more than eighty years laid waste. He was also imprisoned for debt relating to his involvement in the farms of the Irish revenue in the 1670s, though he was released on the instigation of the lord chancellor, Sir Charles Porter, an action that was to be included among the articles of impeachment against Porter in the Irish House of Commons in 1695. Philips was elected to the Commons for Londonderry County in 1692 and 1695. In 1694 he informed the Irish lord justice, Henry, Lord Capell, that an Irish parliament would meet in a better temper than that of 1692. He also stated that new laws were necessary for Ireland: 'How near were we in the last reign to feel the direful efforts of a bigoted clergy, actuated by Popish principles? And therefore how necessary it is to abolish that statute, 'De heretico comburendo'? We want many beneficial laws relating to religion, peace, and our secular interest, in which England is beforehand with us, and has set us good precedents, easy to be copied. We have no coercive laws against Papists, nor punitive... and though by a side wind we drive them from sitting in Parliament, yet should they be hardened by a Jesuitical equivocation to claim their 'right', we cannot directly oppose them. ('Buccleuch MSS', 2/1.104-5)' Philips appears to have died in 1696, while the Limavady estates were sold to William Conolly in 1700. Philips's son William Philips (d. 1734), an army officer and tory MP in the Irish parliament in Queen Anne's reign, became a noted dramatist. 


@@@@@


doc= 22122


Philips, Humphrey (1632/3-1707), Presbyterian minister, was born in Somerton, Somerset. According to one account he was 'of a genteel family' and 'inclined to the ministry from his youth' (Palmer, 1.472). Philips matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, on 14 November 1650 and was elected a scholar in July 1651, aged eighteen. He graduated BA in 1654 and proceeded MA in 1656, with the latter degree incorporated at Cambridge in 1657. He was elected a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1656 but was ejected from the post in 1660. 
Ordained at the age of twenty-four, Philips had been a chaplain and tutor to the family of John Bampfield of Poltimore, near Exeter. Following ejection from his fellowship he moved to Sherborne, Dorset, where he became curate to Francis Bampfield, whom Calamy notes he had already assisted in 1658. Both Philips and Bampfield were ejected in 1662, and for preaching they were held in an inn with twenty-five people and bound over for good behaviour until the next quarter sessions, an event described in 'A brief narration of the imprisonment of Mr Francis Bampfield... with Mr Phillips (his assistant)' (1662). On the imprisonment of Francis Bampfield in Dorchester gaol Philips became chaplain to Thomas Bampfield at Dunkerton, Somerset, with whom he was incarcerated in Ilchester gaol for eleven months. Appearing at Wells assizes he experienced 'hard usage; being put into a chamber, like Noah's Ark, full of all sorts of creatures, and laid in a bed with the Bridewell-keeper, where the sheets were wet, and clung to his flesh' (Palmer, 1.473). 
On his release Philips travelled to the Netherlands in the company of the son of Colonel Strode MP and visited Leiden and other university cities, where he discussed theology with Dr Gisbert Voet, last survivor of the 1618 Synod of Dort. Following his return to England he went back to Dunkerton, where he discovered that the Bampfields had become sabbatarian Baptists. He preached there 'with good success' (Palmer, 1.473) as well as at a number of other parishes in Somerset, and also at Warminster in Wiltshire. He was heavily fined for his Presbyterian beliefs and 'had much trouble from the bishop's court, which drove him from his home to Bristol, London, and other places for several years' until the indulgence of 1672 (ibid., 1.474). Philips returned to Sherborne where he was licensed in June 1672 as a Presbyterian preacher, at the home of Cath[erine?] Chase, but was 'forced away' (ibid.). In the following September he was licensed at his own home in Priston, Somerset, which was also a meeting-place. He is next recorded as living on his estate at Beckington, Somerset, and continued to preach at Frome where he '[brought] forth fruit in old age', and at Simonsbath and Englishcombe, Somerset (ibid.). 
Philips's literary output was small and he is thought to have written only two funeral sermons, one for a Mr Ivyleaf, and the other for Mrs Anne Gibbs. He was married three times: first in 1665 to Dorothy (died 1667), daughter of John Collins of Priston; then in 1672 to Sarah (died 1675), daughter of John Rosewell of Englishcombe; and finally, in 1679, to Anna, daughter of Sam[uel?] Millard of Shaftesbury. He had a number of children, among them at least one son, Samuel, and four daughters. He died on 27 March 1707 and was buried at Beckington, Somerset, where his funeral sermon was preached by his son-in-law, the Presbyterian John England, husband of his daughter Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 22123


Philips, John (1676-1709), poet, was born on 30 December 1676 at Bampton, Oxfordshire, the sixth of seven sons of Stephen Philips ('bap'. 1638, died 1684), archdeacon of Shropshire and vicar of Bampton, and Mary Cook (1640-1715), daughter of Thomas Cook, the previous vicar. Philips's grandfather was canon of Hereford Cathedral and vicar of Lugwardine, his great-grandfather a clothier at Ledbury. Royalists during the civil war, the family had an estate at Withington, Herefordshire. 
Initially educated at home, John Philips entered Winchester College as an elected scholar on 25 September 1691. Remembered there for his 'tender constitution' and the 'sweetness of his temper' ('Biographia Britannica', 3353), he was a superior scholar, excused from sport and from observing college rules. According to his fellow student William Oldisworth, when the other boys went to the field for games, Philips loved to retire to his room, 'where he procured a person to attend him, and comb his hair, of which he had a very handsome flow' (Johnson, 'Poets', 1905, 1.312). Like Pepys before him, Philips felt from this exercise 'an exquisite delight', enhanced in his case by the reading of Milton ('Biographia Britannica', 3353), no very obvious choice for a descendant of royalists. 
On 16 August 1697 Philips matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, where, intending to become a physician, he studied natural history, excelling particularly in botany, 'his greatest delight as well as accomplishment' ('Biographia Britannica', 3355). Two of his brothers were already in residence at Oxford. Many of his fellow Christ Church students -- John Mostyn, William Brome, James Scudamore, Sir Thomas Hanmer, Simon Harcourt, and William Bromley -- along with the dean, Henry Aldrich, came from the Hereford, Worcester, and Oxford area, and were later complimented in his 'Cyder'. (Most of them were, like Philips, grandsons of civil war royalists.) His health was still 'very infirm', his manners displaying a 'modesty' and an 'uncommon simplicity' (ibid., 3355). One contemporary reported much later that Philips was invited by Dr John Meare, a Herefordshire man and principal of Brasenose (his father's college), to his lodgings, where Philips 'conceived a secret passion' for his daughter Mary. So awed was he by her 'disdain' that he 'never had courage to hint his passion to her'. This 'secret passion' is said to have been 'well known in the university' (ibid., 3359). While at Christ Church, Philips began to write poems: his 'Splendid Shilling', in Miltonic blank verse, was composed 'for his own diversion, without any design of publication' (Smith, 'Preparatory discourse', 183). 
Philips remained at Christ Church until at least 1707, without taking a degree. In 1701 his 'Splendid Shilling' was twice pirated. In February 1705, after another piracy, Philips published his own edition; the poem was later commended by Joseph Addison in 'Tatler' (no. 249, 1710) as 'the finest Burlesque Poem in the 'British' Language'. It also attracted the attention of the tories, who, perhaps feeling an obligation to add their party's praise of the victorious Marlborough to Addison's 'Campaign' (1704), invited Philips to Henry St John's country seat and persuaded him to produce 'Bleinheim' (1705), dedicated to Robert Harley. Johnson thought it the poem of a man who 'studies the world in a college' (Johnson, 'Poets', 1905, 1.317). In his 'Advice to the Poets' (1706) Richard Blackmore mocked Philips as one of Milton's imitators who '
Torture our Language to torment the Ear, 

With numbers harsher than the Din of War. 
(R. Blackmore, 'A Collection of Poems', 1718)' But Thomas Tickell made the comparison with Milton an occasion for praise: '
Unfetter'd in great Milton's strain he writes, 

Like Milton's angels, whilst his hero fights; 

Pursues the bard, whilst he with honour can, 

Equals the poet, and excels the man. 
(T. Tickell, 'Oxford, 1707', 'Poetical Works', 1796)' In the following two years Philips published another Miltonic imitation, 'Cerealia' (1706), and a Horatian 'Ode ad Henricum St John' (1707), in which he thanks his patron in Latin alcaics for wine and tobacco, and hints at his passion for Miss Meare. 
Philips's greatest poem, a two-book georgic 'Cyder' (1708), begun at Oxford, celebrates his native land (and in particular Herefordshire) with a combination of accurate knowledge of apples and cider making and a 'sketch of our National History' (Philips, 'Cider', 157). The botanist Philip Miller told Johnson that 'there were many books written on the same subject in prose, which do not contain so much truth as that poem' (Johnson, 'Poets', 1905, 1.319). 'Cyder' conveys compliments to the author's royalist friends, to nonjurors who refused to break their 'plighted faith' ('Poems of John Philips', 1.734), and to tory leaders, including Harley and Sir Thomas Hanmer. The survey of English history compliments Charles I, deplores 'the mad, headstrong rout' who 'Defy'd their prince to arms' in the civil war (ibid., 2.498-9), and passes over subsequent years without mentioning King William, 'till prudent Anna said,/ LET THERE BE UNION' (ibid., 2.639-40) -- in commendation of the 1707 'Act of Union' that Harley and the tories were then promoting. There is no compliment to Marlborough, hero of Philips's 'Bleinheim', perhaps because, as Dunster notes, 'a party was secretly forming against him at court, and the particular Patrons of our Poet were at the head of the confederacy' (Philips, 'Cider', 154). Philips praises Milton as the first who 'ennobled Song/ With holy Raptures' ('Poems of John Philips', 1.785-6), hints at disapproval of his anti-royalist politics, but declines to 'blast his Fame' (ibid., 1.792). The poem is dedicated to two Christ Church friends, book 1 to John Mostyn, book 2 to Simon Harcourt, whose father, the future lord chancellor, was Philips's 'zealous patron' (Philips, 'Cider', 98). The poem was 'received with loud praises, and continued long to be read' (Johnson, 'Poets', 1905, 1.313). But the author of 'Milton's Sublimity Asserted' (1709) deplored the reduction of Milton's forbidden fruit to mere cider apples. 
Philips turned next to a poem entitled 'The Last Day', but illness in his lungs (aggravated perhaps by a fondness for tobacco) prevented him from finishing it. During a 'lingering consumption, attended with an asthma' ('Biographia Britannica', 3358), he was nursed by his 'very particular friend' Thomas Trevor, later chief justice of common pleas, who took Philips into his home. Their common friend Edmund Smith -- another Christ Church man -- remembers gratefully that 'One table fed you, and one bed contain'd' (Smith, 'Poem', 1.7). In the summer of 1708 Philips went to Bath for his health, and then to his mother's house in Hereford, 'where the asthma returning in the winter put a period to his life' ('Biographia Britannica', 3358) on 15 February 1709. 
Philips was buried in Hereford Cathedral, under a stone in the north transept with a Latin epitaph commissioned by his mother. In 1710 his friend Simon Harcourt erected a white marble monument in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey, with a bust in relief and a long Latin epitaph by Dr Robert Freind (Hackett, 1.99-101), between the monuments to Chaucer and Drayton. Also in 1710 appeared memorial poems by Edmund Smith ('A Poem on the Death of Mr John Philips') and Leonard Welsted ('A Poem to the Memory of the Incomparable Mr Philips'). The latter was dedicated to St John, the former praised by Johnson as 'among the best elegies which our language can shew' (Johnson, 'Poets', 1905, 2.16). 
In manners Philips was said to be 'somewhat reserved, and silent among Strangers, but free, familiar, and easy with his Friends' (Sewell, 8). 'The quiet enjoyment of his muse, in the company of a few select friends, was his principal delight' (Duncumb, 2.247). His genius for friendship won over several -- Smith, Addison, Welsted, Tickell -- who inclined rather to the whigs than the tories. He published with both the tory bookseller Thomas Bennet and the whig Jacob Tonson (Johnson, 'Poets', 1854, 2.22n.). A poet who could commend both Charles I and John Milton, both Bolingbroke and Marlborough, would find many friends and make few enemies. Their praise suggests that, whatever his Stuart sympathies, his deepest political instincts, like Pope's, were for reconciliation. 
Philips did not aim at literary fame or fortune: he apparently wrote for his own pleasure and to please his friends. With one exception his poems were published anonymously. The only poem with his name on the title-page is the single copy of the first edition of 'Bleinheim' ('by Mr. Philips of Christ Church, Oxon.') which may have been a proof copy later presented to Christ Church. Even though Tonson paid Philips 40 guineas for 'Cyder', Philips avoided the status of a professed author. His contract with Tonson also provided for two copies bound in leather (for the dedicatees), and 100 large-paper copies (Johnson, 'Poets', 1854, 2.22n.), probably for presentation to the poet's Oxford friends. 
In 1715 Curll published a collection of Philips's 'Poems', prefaced with a 'Life' by the whig writer George Sewell. A second edition appeared the same year, a third in 1720. 'The Splendid Shilling' received the compliment of frequent (though inferior) imitation. 'Cyder' was carefully studied, and more profitably imitated, by georgic writers, who learned from Philips how to treat a humble subject both ardently and wittily, and how to mix an account of native products with a survey of political history in order to celebrate their native land. Philips taught Pope, who drew on 'Cyder' in 'Windsor Forest', how to use 'Paradise Lost' for un-Miltonic purposes, and to suggest that paradise might still be found in England's green and pleasant land. He also taught James Thomson, John Dyer, and William Cowper how a Miltonic blank verse might be used for poems in the middle style. 


@@@@@


doc= 22124


Philips, Katherine (1632-1664), poet, was born in London on 1 January 1632 and baptized at St Mary Woolchurch on 11 January, the daughter of John Fowler (died 1642), a prosperous cloth merchant, and Katherine Oxenbridge (died 1678), daughter of Daniel Oxenbridge. Her family connections were puritan: her uncle was John Oxenbridge, a puritan minister and friend of Marvell and Milton, and her aunt was married to Oliver St John, a prominent parliamentarian lawyer. 
According to Aubrey, Katherine Fowler: 'was very religiously devoted when she was young; prayed by herself an hower together, and took Sermons verbatim when she was but 10 yeares old... She was when a Child much against the Bishops, and prayd to God to take them to him, but afterwards was reconciled to them. ('Brief Lives', 242)' A precocious child, 'mighty apt to learne', she 'had read the 'Bible' thorough before she was full four yeares old' and at this age had committed to memory 'I know not how many places of Scripture' (ibid.). 
Until the age of eight Katherine Fowler was educated at home, and then was enrolled in Mrs Salmon's boarding-school for girls in Hackney. In 1646 or 1647 her mother, already twice widowed, married Sir Richard Phillipps of Picton Castle, Pembrokeshire, and at this time Katherine, then fifteen years old, accompanied her mother to Wales. In August 1648, at the age of sixteen, Katherine Fowler married James Philips ('c'.1624-1674), a kinsman of her stepfather and a substantial landowner in Cardiganshire. It was once thought that James Philips was fifty-four at the time of the marriage, but Elizabeth Hageman has shown conclusively that the statement on the marriage licence, indicating that he was twenty-four, is accurate. For the rest of her life Katherine Philips lived in the small Welsh town of Cardigan, of which her husband was a leading citizen, with occasional visits to London. The death in infancy of her one son, Hector (died 1655), born after 'seaven years Childless Marriage', is the subject of two touching poems, and another poem commemorates her stepdaughter Frances Philips, who died in 1660 at the age of thirteen. Her daughter Katherine ('b'. 1656) married Lewis Wogan of Boulston, Pembrokeshire, and was the mother of fifteen children, fourteen of whom predeceased her. 
James Philips was a supporter of parliament, prominent in Welsh politics during the Commonwealth and protectorate: he served as MP in successive parliaments between 1653 and 1662, both under Cromwell and under Charles II, was appointed to the high court of justice in 1651 and to the army committee, with the rank of colonel, in 1653, as well as playing an active role in local politics for over twenty years. Though he supported the Cromwellian government, Philips had a reputation as a moderate among contemporaries. Antenor, the name his wife gave him in poems and letters, is probably an allusion to the Trojan who tried to make peace between Greece and Troy. He was, one contemporary commented: 'One that had the fortune to be in with all Governm.ts but thriv'd by none... regarding sometim more the Employm.ts then the Authority from whom he received the Same: he hath done much good and ill rewarded by those he deserv'd most of. ('Poems', ed. Thomas, 347)' Katherine Philips's own royalist sympathies are evident in a poem defending her husband against attacks by his 'unworthy Adversary', the anti-Cromwellian puritan Jenkin Jones, and in a second poem of 1651-2, 'Upon the Double Murther of K. Charles, in Answer to a Libellous Rime' (by the radical preacher Vavasor Powell). In 'To Antenor on a paper of mine wch J. Jones threatens to publish to his prejudice', she is at pains to distinguish her own 'follies' and 'errours' in loyalty to the dead monarch from her husband's views. As the eloquent poem 'On the 3d September 1651', on the occasion of the defeat of 'our Gasping English Royalty' at the battle of Worcester, indicates, her royalism is far from bellicose. Here as elsewhere she counsels stoic fortitude in troubled times: '
Who'd trust to Greatness now, whose food is ayre, 

Whose ruine sudden, and whose end despaire?... 

O! give me vertue then, which summs up all, 

And firmely stands when Crowns and Scepters fall. 
('Poems', ed. Thomas, 'On the 3d September 1651', ll. 11, 27-8, 33-4)' In another poem of 1651, 'A Retir'd Friendship, to Ardelia', she argues that 'in such a scorching Age as this', felicity can best be found in a secluded private life, 'remov'd from noise of warres', and in the consolations of friendship ('Poems', ed. Thomas, 'A Retir'd Friendship', ll. 15, 29). 
As a poet, Katherine Philips is best known for poems on the theme of friendship, and for the establishment of a 'society of friendship' among her close associates, to whom she assigned coterie names. Her two closest friends, Anne Owen (1633-1692) and Mary Aubrey, were Lucasia and Rosania, she herself was Orinda, and, among the men in her circle, Francis Finch was Palaemon, Sir Edward Dering Silvander, John Berkenhead Cratander, and Sir Charles Cotterell Poliarchus. Dering wrote in 1665, after her death: 'Orinda had conceived the most generous designe, that in my opinion ever entred into any breast, which was to unite all those of her acquaintance, which she found worthy, or desired to make so... into one societie, and by the bands of friendship to make an alliance more firme than what nature, our countrey or equall education can produce. ('Poems', ed. Thomas, 11)' Several members of this 'society' are represented in the commendatory poems prefixed to William Cartwright's 'Poems' (1651), and a coded royalism is evident in Katherine Philips's tribute to Cartwright, placed first among fifty-four such poems, lamenting that 'Such horrid Ignorance benights our Times' and looking forward to a future age when 'Restored Poetry' would 'rescue us from this dull Imprisonment' (W. Cartwright, 'Poems', 1651, 'To the Memory of Mr Cartwright', ll. 3, 8, 12). The fashion for French pastoral romance and the use of coterie names derived from such works were particularly popular among royalists during the 1650s as a 'way of keeping the memory of courtly values alive' ('Poems', ed. Thomas, 9). 
Two prose treatises on friendship addressed to Katherine Philips, by Francis Finch in 1654 and by Jeremy Taylor in 1657, are indicative of the exalted notion of friendship in Orinda and her circle. Taylor's 'Discourse on the Nature, Offices and Measures of Friendship' seeks to answer a question propounded by Philips, 'how far a Dear and perfect friendship is authoris'd by the principles of Christianity' (Taylor, 8). Taylor, like Philips in her poem 'A Dialogue of Friendship Multiplyed', sees 'a special affection and a great readiness... to delight in certain persons' as a type of Christian charity: 'Universal friendship... must be 'limited', because 'we are so'... our hands can reach no further but to our arms end' (Taylor, 14-15, 17). 'He cannot be a friend that is a fool', treachery and violation of secrecy are 'the greatest Sin' among friends, 'Friends are each others Mirrours' and serve for 'counsell' as well as 'Company', not hesitating to 'chide each other's fault' without censoriousness ('Poems', ed. Thomas, 'A Friend', ll. 38-9, 50, 54, 62, 67; cf. Taylor, 91-101). Taylor's 'Discourse' includes a lengthy passage arguing, rather condescendingly, that though he 'cannot say that Women are capable of all those excellencies by which men can oblige the world', nevertheless women have 'all that which can be necessary and essentiall to friendships' (Taylor, 86-91). Philips makes a similar point more forcefully: '
If soules no sexes have, for men t'exclude 

Women from friendship's vast capacity, 

Is a design imperious and rude, 

Onely maintain'd by partiall tyranny. 
('Poems', ed. Thomas, 'A Friend', ll. 19-22)' Where Taylor characterizes marriage as 'the Queen of friendships... and the measure of all the rest' (Taylor, 72), Finch in his 'Friendship' sees the marriage bond as falling 'short of' sacred friendship, except in those rare instances 'where the Marriage was purely the choice and congruity of the Persons united, without the Byass of other 'Interests' which usually bear a great sway in that Union' ('Poems', ed. Thomas, 360). In her poems 'A Friend' and 'Friendship', Philips expresses scepticism about the way 'the marriage ty' is compromised by worldly motives, 'Lust, design, or some unworthy ends': '
Nobler then kindred or then marriage band, 

Because more free; wedlock felicity 

It self doth only by this Union stand, 

And turns to friendship or to misery. 
('Poems', ed. Thomas, 'Friendship', ll. 29, 31; 'A Friend', ll. 13-16)' A poem to her husband, 'To my Dearest Antenor on his Parting', is couched in much the same terms as other poems by Philips in praise of an idealized friendship. Like a number of her poems, it takes as its occasion the enforced separation of friends or lovers, and argues that 'Absence can doe no hurt to souls combin'd', united even at a distance of 'a thousand miles' by a 'secret sympathy' ('Poems', ed. Thomas, 'To my Dearest Antenor', ll. 6, 21, 34). But the most intense expression of emotion in her writings can be found in poems addressed to women. Twenty-one poems are addressed to her 'dearest friend' Lucasia, Anne Owen, and nine to Rosania, Mary Aubrey, a friend since childhood. Six further poems celebrate the friendship between Rosania and Lucasia. Among Philips's poems, the theme of absence or separation is especially prominent, partly because of the circumstances of her life in the isolation of rural Wales. Except in brief visits to London, she rarely saw Mary Aubrey after her friend's marriage in December 1651, and though she frequently exchanged visits with Anne Owen, who lived 25 miles away, after her second marriage in 1662 Anne, now Lady Dungannon, left Wales to reside in Ireland. 
Another recurrent topic is the actual or feared estrangement of friends. Rosania's marriage to William Montagu is presented as 'Apostacy', the death of an 'unequall' passion ('For mine's too hot, and thine too cold') turned to 'indifference' ('Poems', ed. Thomas, 'To Rosania', ll. 28-32). The bitter 'Injuria amici' uses the metaphor, familiar from Renaissance love poems, of the mistress as cruel tyrant and murderess, exulting in her power over a besotted lover. As letters make clear, Philips was deeply unhappy at the widowed Anne Owen's second marriage, partly because she disliked her friend's prospective husband, partly because she detected a marked decline into 'Lukewarmness and Indifference' on Anne's part: 'I now see by Experience that one may love too much, and offend... by a too fond Sincerity... I find too there are few Friendships in the World Marriage-proof... And such a Temper is so rarely found, that one may generally conclude the Marriage of a Friend to be the Funeral of a Friendship. ('Letters', 42-3)' Such poems as 'Friendship's Mystery', 'To Mrs. M. A. upon Absence', and 'To my Lucasia, in Defence of Declared Friendship' are, in all respects, love poems, unusual primarily in being addressed by a woman to a woman. These poems are both traditional and innovative, appropriating the characteristic discourse and imagery of seventeenth-century love poetry in a series of lyric poems in which both lover and beloved are female. In these works, the main literary influence is Donne, more or less acknowledged in 'Friendship in Emblem', with its imitation of the 'compass' conceit of 'A Valediction: Forbidding Mourning'. A number of Philips's best poems, like 'Friendship's Mystery' and 'Parting with Lucasia', though less overt in their homage to Donne, are clearly within the 'metaphysical' tradition, and are notable for their striking metaphors and forceful, economical expression: '
And when our sence is dispossess'd, 

Our labouring Souls will heave and pant, 

And gasp for one another's Brest, 

Since theyr conveyances they want. 
('Poems', ed. Thomas, 'Parting with Lucasia', ll. 5-8)' Critics disagree on the extent to which Philips can be considered a lesbian poet. 'To my Lucasia, in Defence of Declared Friendship' in some ways lends itself to such a reading: the spiritual affinity of lover and beloved, the poem argues, must find expression in 'the flesh we wear': '
Ah! no, let misers bury thus their gold, 

Who, though they starve, no farthing will produce: 

But we lov'd to enjoy and to behold, 

And sure we cannot spend our stock by use. 
('Poems', ed. Thomas, 'To my Lucasia', ll. 21-4, 30)' 'Enjoyment' in this poem is not, as in such poets as Rochester, sexual: to 'enjoy' here means to 'behold', to see, to 'speak our Love' (ibid., l. 1), through 'free and deare converse' (ibid., l. 74), taking pleasure in one another's company. Nevertheless, the poems to Lucasia and Rosania anatomize a passionate relationship between women, charged with jealousy, ambivalence, and the fear that the love is not reciprocated. 
In June 1662 Katherine Philips accompanied her newly married friend to Dublin, where she remained for over a year. While in Ireland she found sufficient 'Diversion' to help 'Cure a Passion that has met with so ill a Return' ('Letters', 85), in the circle of James Butler, duke of Ormond, lord lieutenant of Ireland, where her friends included the playwright Robert Boyle, earl of Orrery, his sister-in-law the countess of Cork, and the countess's daughters Lady Elizabeth, Lady Anne, and Lady Frances Boyle (to whom she assigned the names Celimena, Valeria, and Amestris), as well as Ormond's daughter, Lady Mary Butler. With Orrery's encouragement, she embarked on a translation of Corneille's 'La mort de Pompee', which was performed at the Theatre Royal in Smock Alley, Dublin, in February 1663 and published, first in Dublin and then in London, in 1663. 'Pompey' was, as Beal says, 'the biggest literary success of her life', and its initial printing sold out in a few weeks (Beal, 'Scribes', 137). Other translations from the French by Philips include a version of St Amant's 'La solitude' and a second tragedy by Corneille, 'Horace', left unfinished at her death (the missing fifth act was provided by Sir John Denham when the play was acted in 1668-9). 
Nearly all of Philips's surviving letters date from this period of her life: forty-seven letters to her friend Sir Charles Cotterell, from December 1661 to May 1664, later published as 'Letters from Orinda to Poliarchus' (1705), tell of her year in Dublin and her reluctant return to the 'Desart' of rural Wales, 'to converse with the Rocks and Mountains, where Fate has allotted me my Abode' ('Letters', 84, 88). Several letters to Cotterell involve delicate negotiations to arrange a visit to London, in the hope that her friends could 'contrive some way to bring me among them, that may not be prejudicial to Antenor's Affairs, nor thwart my willing Compliance with his Fortunes' (ibid., 89). 
Philips succeeded in getting to London in March 1664, but three months later contracted smallpox and died at her brother-in-law's house in Fleet Street on 22 June 1664, at the age of thirty-two. She was buried, along with her father, grandparents, and infant son, in the church of St Benet Sherehog in London on 23 June. Tributes in the folio volume 'Poems by the most Deservedly Admired Mrs. Katherine Philips the Matchless Orinda' (1667) praise her as 'the honour of her Sex, the emulation of ours, and the admiration of both'. 
In 1664 an unauthorized edition of Philips's 'Poems' was published; the bookseller Richard Marriott had entered the volume in the Stationers' register in November 1663 and advertised it for sale in January. Philips, claiming she 'never writ any line in my life with an intention to have it printed', expressed her indignation in a number of letters, defending herself against any 'malicious' suggestion that she 'conniv'd at this ugly accident':'I am so Innocent of this pitifull design of a Knave to get a Groat, yt I was never more vex'd at any thing, & yt I utterly disclaim whatever he hath so unhandsomly expos'd' ('Letters', 128, 142). Some twentieth-century critics are sceptical of these conventional disclaimers: the 1664 edition is based on manuscripts that Philips herself circulated among friends (not at all 'abominably transcrib'd' and inauthentic, as she claims), and the text of the seventy-five poems it contains differs only slightly from that in the later, authorized edition of 1667. Yet her distress at seeing poems she considered private, circulated within a literary community of intimate friends, exposed to public gaze, goes beyond the conventional:'Tis only I... that cannot so much as think in private, that must have my imaginations rifled and exposed to play the Mountebanks, and dance upon the Ropes to entertain all the rabble' (ibid., 129-30). 
The posthumous 1667 folio, probably seen through the press by Cotterell, contains, along with the poems published in 1664 (virtually in the same order), an additional forty-one poems, 'Pompey', 'Horace', and five shorter translations. As Beal says, the many extant manuscript collections of Philips's poems comprise 'one of the best documented centres of MS circulation in the 17th century'. The posthumous reputation of 'the matchless Orinda' in the century after her death was extremely high, yet curiously double-edged, as though the fact that a woman managed to put pen to paper was in itself worthy of praise. Cotterell wrote of her poems in the 1667 folio: 'Some of them would be no disgrace to the name of any Man that amongst us is most esteemed for his excellency in this kind, and there are none that may not pass with favour, when it is remembered that they fell hastily from the pen but of a Woman. ('Poems', 1667, sig. a1'v')' Philips's name was often coupled with that of Aphra Behn as a model for prospective woman poets, the one chaste and respectable, the other talented but disreputable. More recently, her poems have been rediscovered by feminist scholars. A new edition of her poems and plays, edited by Elizabeth Hageman and Andrea Sununu, is in preparation. 


@@@@@


doc= 22125


Philips, Miles (b. c.1554), mariner, can be identified as the son of Robert Gils, merchant of London, and his wife, Anne. In October 1567 Philips sailed from Plymouth as page to John Hawkins in the 'Jesus of Lubeck', and his experiences during the next fifteen and a half years are chronicled in Hakluyt's 'Principall Navigations' and in documents from Mexico now in Cambridge University Library. Although there are some minor discrepancies in the evidence, there seems little reason to disbelieve Philips's remarkable story. Hawkins's fleet made for Guinea in west Africa to buy slaves and other merchandise before sailing to the West Indies in February 1568 to trade. In September the ships were forced into the port of San Juan de Ulua to repair storm damage and purchase provisions. Hawkins negotiated terms to share the harbour peaceably with the Spanish plate fleet, but the Spaniards broke the agreement and attacked the English ships. Philips escaped in the damaged 'Minion' which became overcrowded with rescued sailors, who were forced to eat hides, cats, dogs, mice, rats, parrots, and monkeys. On 8 October Philips and about one hundred others were put ashore near the River Panuco in Mexico by Hawkins, who promised to fetch them home the following year. Having started to walk along the coast, the sailors were attacked by the Chichimeca Indians who took all their coloured clothing. Philips went westward with a party of men which surrendered to the Spanish at Panuco, and was marched to Mexico City. He spent six months in hospital before being sent to prison in Texcoco. He was released into the household service of a Spanish gentleman, and was subsequently appointed overseer of his master's mine, thereby accumulating much wealth. By this time he was known as Miguel Perez. 
By 1572 Philips had returned to Mexico City, where he apprenticed himself to a taffeta weaver. His life changed dramatically when all his goods were seized and he was imprisoned with many fellow Englishmen for interrogation by the Inquisition throughout 1573. Since Philips was too young to have received Catholic instruction in England, he was sentenced in February 1574 to three years' service in a monastery. He was released on 7 May 1577 and resumed his trade as a weaver, but could not leave Mexico City without permission from the Inquisition. When news came of Francis Drake's landing at Guatulco in April 1579, Philips was sent with the Spanish forces as interpreter, hoping in vain that he would fall into English hands. On the next occasion that he was allowed to leave Mexico City on business, he decided to escape, relying on his ability to speak fluent Spanish. He was arrested at Vera Cruz, mistaken for a fugitive Spaniard. Another prisoner identified Philips, who was clapped in irons and sent towards Mexico City. Having managed to take off his shackles and manacles, he fled still wearing a neck collar which was removed for him by Indians. He travelled with a friendly friar to Guatemala, and then hired guides to reach the port of Caballos. From there he sailed to Havana and enlisted as a soldier, leaving for Spain with the plate fleet on 4 June 1582. Philips's deception was uncovered, but he managed to escape at San Lucar before the Inquisition could take him. He travelled to Seville and worked as a silk weaver while being hunted. The master of an English ship at San Lucar refused to take him on board after hearing his story, so Philips went to Puerto de Santa Maria and sailed to Majorca in a Spanish galley. There he secured his passage to England on the 'Landret' by claiming to be a student returning home; he arrived in Poole in February 1583. 
Little is known of Philips's life after his early adventures. He must have returned to sea since in January 1587 he was taken on board the 'Red Dragon' at the River Plate by Captain Robert Witherington. 


@@@@@


doc= 22126


Philips, Nathaniel George (1795-1831), artist, was born on 9 June 1795 in Mayfield, Manchester, the youngest of the five children of John Leigh Philips (1761-1814) and his wife, Caroline Renny (1770-1834). His father gained great popularity as lieutenant-colonel commandant of the Manchester and Salford Volunteers and is said to have had 'a talent for rendering discipline engaging and authority amiable' (Philips). He was well known as a philanthropist, but he also formed a remarkable collection of books, pictures, and other works of art which, on his death in 1814, were dispersed at a sale that extended over nineteen days. Philips was educated at Manchester grammar school and afterwards entered the University of Edinburgh, with the intention of qualifying for the medical profession. While pursuing his medical studies he made the acquaintance, among many brilliant men then resident in Edinburgh, of Sir William Allan, who included his portrait in the principal group of his picture 'The Circassian Slaves', and other distinguished artists of the Scottish school. By their advice he ultimately adopted art as a profession. In Edinburgh he had also gained the friendship of the learned Roman Catholic Bishop Cameron, which secured for him, on his visit to Italy, an introduction to artistic circles in various towns that he visited. 
To prepare for his new profession, in 1824 Philips went to Italy, where he stayed for three years. So greatly was his talent appreciated in Rome that, on the death of Fuseli, he was, in 1825, elected to fill his place as a member of the Academy of St Luke. During his time in Italy he travelled widely, and it was said that during one trip into the remote countryside with a fellow artist, when they were captured by bandits, that they were able to escape by giving their captors examples of their work. 
On his return to England Philips settled in Liverpool, where he worked industriously. He exhibited landscapes at the Liverpool Academy and the Royal Manchester Institution and between 1819 and 1829 three paintings at the Royal Academy in London, including 'View Near Naples, on the Road to Salerno' in 1828 and 'Aqueduct on the road between Caestella Mora and Amalfi: a party of pleasure surprised by brigands' in 1829. The work by which he is best remembered is a series of twenty-eight engravings on copper, many of them beautifully executed by himself from his own drawings, of old halls in Lancashire and Cheshire, including Dinkerley Hall and Thurland Castle. These were first published as 'Views in Lancashire and Cheshire of old halls and castles, intended as illustrations to the county histories' (1822-4), and there is some doubt if more than twenty-five were then printed. All were reissued in book form in 1893, 'with descriptive letterpress by twenty-four local contributors', a memoir of the artist by W. Morton Philips, and 'a pedigree of Philips of Heath House... county Stafford'. 
Philips also produced some etchings, and three portrait paintings by him are known, one of which depicts the lawyer and poet W. Baltine (1803, at Uppark, Hampshire). All his work is marked by close attention to detail. Philips died relatively young, unmarried, and after several years of illness, at his residence in Rodney Street, Liverpool, on 1 August 1831. He was said to have been 'an amateur artist of great taste and skill' ('GM', 101/2, 1831, 651). According to his will he was able to leave substantial annuities to his mother and to a family friend, Catherina Bansfield. The sale catalogue of his collections of paintings and books reveals him as having acquired several old masters, notably 'Head of a Poetess' by Domenichino and 'The Emblem of St Luke' by Correggio. His collection included various costumes, among them a Roman tunic and a female brigand's dress, and examples of the work of himself and his contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 22127


Philips, Peregrine (1623-1691), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Amroth, Pembrokeshire, son of the vicar of that parish. He was educated first at the grammar school, Haverfordwest, later by Sir Edward Harley's private chaplain at Brampton Bryan, Herefordshire, and then by Dr William Thomas (afterwards bishop of St David's). He started at Oxford University, but his education there was interrupted by the outbreak of the civil war and he returned to Wales. He acted first as curate at Kidwelly, Carmarthenshire, and was then admitted to the rectory of Llangwm in Pembrokeshire. Leading puritan gentlemen of the county -- Sir Hugh Owen, Sir Roger Lort, and Sir John Meyrick -- were impressed by his talents as a preacher in Welsh and English. They procured for him three livings, at Monkton, Cosheston, and St Mary's, Pembroke; at each of these he preached regularly every Sunday. During the civil-war siege of Pembroke, Philips probably lived at Monkton, just below the castle, but to much popular wonderment neither he nor his family was injured by the ordnance directed to and from it. 
With Philips's radical puritanism the forces of political independency found much common ground. In May 1648, at Cromwell's request, he addressed the officers in command of forces sent to put down the insurrection in south-west Wales. Next summer he was asked by Cromwell to preach aboard the ships anchored at Milford Haven, which were preparing to carry troops for the reduction of Ireland. His services were also reported to have been required by the assize judges in three counties -- at Cardigan, Carmarthen, and Haverfordwest -- and he was a member of the committee for scandalous ministers in Pembrokeshire. But it is clear that Philips was not a zealot for doctrinal correctness, for in 1655 he appeared at court in Haverfordwest in support of Henry Hake, a heretical shoemaker of Goat Street in that town. 
Perhaps in the late 1640s, Philips led a gathered church, but in June 1650 he was granted $6 for the repair of the parsonage at Llangwm. This seems to indicate continued willingness both to preach in parish churches and to accept tithe payments. Indeed, Philips favoured the proposed amalgamation of the parish of Llangwm (valued then at $20 per annum) with other smaller benefices and was in London on 8 July 1656 to receive the certificates of approval. Meanwhile, he and the several score members of his gathered church on 17 January 1656 signed 'The Humble Representation and Address' to Cromwell, a work supportive of his government. The respect was evidently mutual, for on 1 July 1656 a government supporter, James Philips (mayor in 1656), advised the council of Haverfordwest 'to carry themselves as loving and respectful as may be to Mr Peregrine Phillips and his people and in a short time the town may receive much benefit thereby' (Charles, 152-3). 
Following his refusal to conform in 1662 Philips was ejected from Llangwm and settled at Dredgman Hill, a farm near Haverfordwest. Here he established a congregational meeting-place. In 1665, however, he is believed to have become pastor of the Green meeting founded in 1651 by Stephen Love, which met on Sunday evenings at St Thomas's Green in Haverfordwest. He was assisted in his continuing work by John Luntley, a feltmaker or hatter. His comparative wealth and notoriety earned him close attention from the authorities; he was charged with holding religious meetings on 4 June 1663 and 11 July 1669, both cases leading to imprisonment by the sessions. On the second occasion Bishop William Thomas is reported to have made 'considerable offers if he would conform' but Philips refused (Calamy, 'Continuation', 843). His house was licensed as a congregational meeting-place under the first declaration of indulgence (1672) and it is possible that he taught at a school at Haverfordwest in that year. In 1675 his church was mentioned by Henry Maurice of Abergavenny as meeting in or near Haverfordwest, though it was much reduced since the days of the 'Humble Representation', having been subjected to competition from the Quakers and heavy official pressure. Calamy and Palmer depict a pattern of harassment lasting many years, in which occasional periods of imprisonment were interspersed with repeated house searches, arrests, and fines. 
Philips was certainly the leading congregationalist figure in west and central Pembrokeshire. He enjoyed the support of local gentlemen, most notably the owner of Dredgman Hill, Sir Herbert Perrot of Haroldston, who in his will of 1682 described him as his loving friend and bequeathed him $5. Under the declaration of indulgence (1687) Philips acquired a licence for his own house and for another in Haverfordwest. Late in life, it was reported, he survived on $8 a year, collected from the members of his congregation 'when the years and providence favours them, otherwise less' (Richards, 'Wales under the Indulgence', 162). Though willing to suffer privation for his religious beliefs, Philips continued eirenic in his outlook. Calamy reports that he 'took no small pleasure in reconciling differences' (Calamy, 'Continuation', 844). On 22 June 1691 the Common Fund voted him $5 a year, but he died, probably at Dredgman Hill, on 17 September. There is a tradition that he was buried at Haroldston church. 


@@@@@


doc= 22128


Philips, Peter (1560/61-1628), musician and composer, was born of unknown parents. He was brought up by the noted Roman Catholic recusant Sebastian Westcote (c.1515-1582), almoner and choirmaster of St Paul's Cathedral: Philips was a chorister there, and was eventually a beneficiary of Westcote's will, dated 3 April 1582. Philips's first dated piece is the 'Pavana' of 1580, which is marked 'the first [that] ever Phi[lips] mad[e]'; it became extremely well known, and was much copied and arranged all over Europe. 
Philips left England for ever early in August 1582 'por la foy Catholique' and 'to live after his conscience and to sie Italie where he had harde that there were excellent men of his facultie', as he later pointed out during his trial at The Hague. He went first to the English College at Douai, staying for a short time from 18 August onwards, and arrived in Rome in October 1582, being admitted to the Jesuit English College on 20 October. He entered the service of Cardinal Farnese, and became organist of the English College, spending three years in Rome. Its music -- Marenzio, Palestrina, Felice Anerio (whom he possibly knew), and Victoria were active there -- had a lasting effect on his vocal (though not on his instrumental) style. Here in 1585 he met Thomas Paget, third Baron Paget, and entered his service as a musician, travelling with him to Spain via Genoa (October 1585) and France (where he arrived in 1586). He was in Paris for most of 1587 and the first half of 1588, though he made a short trip to Brussels about March 1588, probably in connection with Paget's younger brother Charles Paget's move from Paris to Brussels. Philips seems to have been an eyewitness in Paris when Henri III fled to Chartres at the building of barricades by demonstrators on 12 May 1588. 
Philips left Paris with Lord Paget for the Low Countries in the middle of 1588. Paget died in 1590 (Philips's 'Pavana & galliarda Pagett' probably commemorates him), and Philips, left without a patron, went to Antwerp. There he married that year (his wife's name is unknown) and made a living by teaching children to play the virginals, also acting as a music editor for the publishing house of Pierre Phalese. His first publication, 'Melodia Olympica' (1591), was a compilation of madrigals by many composers including himself: the music was chosen so as to avoid the outrageously chromatic, dissonant, or virtuoso. From then on Philips had close ties with Phalese, whose firm issued all his remaining volumes except for 'Les rossignols spirituels'. His consort music and keyboard music, more English in style, remained in manuscript; it was his (published) vocal music that formed the heart of his output. Nevertheless, the instrumental music in BL, Egerton MS 3665 indicates that he was associated with an instrumental ensemble, perhaps at the Brussels court. 
Philips went to Amsterdam in 1593, as he later claimed, 'to sie and heare an excellent man of his faculties' (probably Sweelinck, whom he is known to have admired). On his way home he fell ill, and decided to break his journey at Middelburg. Here he was arrested, taken to The Hague, and imprisoned on a charge of high treason. He was accused of taking part in the burning of an effigy of Elizabeth I at the time when the barricades were put up in Paris. The association with Charles Paget, a notable and dangerous double agent, had aroused suspicions which it took some time to allay; such associations were particularly suspect in the years following the Spanish Armada. After a lengthy exchange of letters between the northern states of the Netherlands and England, and a deposition from Philips himself (the document in which he tells us much about his early life), the charge was dismissed and he was released late in October 1594. His long stay in prison produced the keyboard 'Pavana & galiarda doloroso. Treg[ian]' 'composta in prigione'. 
Philips's 'Il primo libro de madrigali a sei voci' was published in 1596. A daughter, Marie, who eventually became a Benedictine nun, was probably born in the same year, but Philips's wife seems to have died before 1597. In that year the composer went to Brussels, where his certificate of residence that year states him to have been thirty-six. In Brussels he entered the service of the Archduke Albert, who ruled the Low Countries for Spain; Philips retained the post of court organist until his death thirty-one years later. There was a regular choir in the court chapel, and the organists employed made it one of the most musically outstanding in Europe. 'Madrigali a otto voci' was published in 1598; the fact that it was reissued in 1599 and 1615 makes it his most successful book of madrigals. The dedication was to William Stanley, described by Philips as 'Collonello d'un Regimento Inglesi & Walloni'; the dedication to a man whose efforts were put to the service of Spain against England and the United Provinces is a fair indicator of the strength of Philips's Roman Catholic allegiance. Thomas Morley published a madrigal by Philips ('The Nightingale', a setting of a sonnet by Petrarch which has not survived in its presumed original form of 'Quel rosignuol') in his 'Madrigals to Five Voyces. Celected out of the Best Approved Italian Authors' in London in 1598. Even at this early stage Philips was acknowledged as something other than an English composer, and was ranked along with the greatest Italians. 
In 1599 Albert brought his bride, Isabella, to Brussels (they had been married by proxy at Ferrara in November 1598), and Philips took part in the splendid celebrations. To judge from the texts his six-voice madrigal 'Qui sott' ombrosi' and the eight-voice motets 'Ecce tu pulchra es' and 'Quae est ista' were written for and performed at these celebrations. The first of these was later included in 'Il secondo libro de madrigali a sei voci' (1603); the dedication, appropriately enough, was to the archdukes Albert and Isabella (as they liked to be known). This was Philips's last book of madrigals: from this point onwards his publications were entirely of church music, as was the case with the late output of many other composers whose lives were bound up with the Counter-Reformation (and with the Jesuits in particular). The 1603 volume came just after a terrible outbreak of plague in the Netherlands, and it is possible that Philips's five-voice 'Media vita' was written at this time. 
It has been customary to suggest that the nine years between the publication of 'Il secondo libro de madrigali a sei voci' and the next publication, the 'Cantiones sacrae... quinis vocibus', were those in which Philips undertook theological studies and entered the priesthood. In fact, in spite of the title 'Canon' which appears alongside the composer's name in nearly all his publications after 1612, he was never a priest, but was given the title so that he might draw part of his salary from the church, so short of money was the Brussels court during the prolonged war against the protestant northern provinces. His first canonry was at St Vincent in Soignies; he took it up on 9 March 1610, and it must have been purely nominal. It is more likely that these barren years saw the preparation of his first three volumes of church music, which were to appear in 1612-13. 
In 1611 Philips, with other members of the court chapel, went to Mechelen to inaugurate a new organ in the church of St Rombault; the accounts suggest that Philips played the new instrument at the solemn Easter procession. In the same year Philips was present at the funeral of the Archduchess Mary of Austria, which took place in Brussels on 12 and 13 December. 
Philips's first volume of church music, 'Cantiones sacrae... quinis vocibus', was published in 1612 when he had just entered his fifties. Although it is conservative in style it is one of his finest productions, consisting of sixty-nine motets for the church's year. In 1613 a companion volume, 'Cantiones sacrae octonis vocibus', appeared. The thirty motets in double choir format show no influence of the 'cori spezzati' of Venetian music; the choirs are almost invariably of similar make-up, and there are no obligato instruments. Indeed, the style is much more attuned to that of Rome. In the same year 'Gemmulae sacrae' was issued. It is the first volume published by any Englishman to include a 'basso continuo' part. In this, and in the use of music for two and three voices only, Philips was up to date, though its musical language bears no traces of the 'new music' of Italy. The volume may have been intended for one of the local fellowships which met in order to venerate the blessed sacrament. From this point onwards all Philips's vocal music (except 'Les rossignols spirituels') includes a 'basso continuo' part. Indeed the 'Cantiones sacrae... quinis vocibus' was supplied with a continuo part in 1617, and 'Cantiones sacrae octonis vocibus' was reissued with a 'basso continuo' in 1625. Some minor pieces by Philips appeared in Salomon de Caus's 'Les raisons des forces mouvantes' published at Frankfurt in 1615. Caus had been engineer to the archduke from 1605 to 1610 and probably commissioned the composer to make his arrangement of Striggio's 'Che fera', which is used to demonstrate a type of mechanical organ. It is possible that Gerard Philippi, who succeeded Caus as hydraulic engineer at the court, was Peter Philips's son. 
In 1616 two more volumes of Philips's church music were published. 'Deliciae sacrae', a companion volume to 'Gemmulae sacrae', is for two and three voices with continuo, and may have been written for the Antwerp brotherhood of Romanists, to which only those who had visited Rome could belong. 'Les rossignols spirituels', also from 1616, is one of Philips's most fascinating productions, and the only one issued in his lifetime by a publishing house other than Phalese (Vervlier, Valenciennes). The didactic nature of its contents (a catechism pocket book for children, with music less prominent than text), along with the fact that it constitutes Philips's only known attempt at setting French texts, makes it seem likely that the volume was the result of a commission, probably from Guillaume Marci, director of the 'ecole dominicale' at Valenciennes, who may be the author of the (sometimes violently anti-protestant) texts. Philips's music is largely for soprano and bass, though he suggests that performers might add a keyboard background. 
Plague was rife in the Netherlands in 1617 and 1618, and Philips probably wrote his two settings of plague prayers ('Haec est praeclarum' and 'Stella coeli extirpavit') at this time: both were later included in 'Paradisus sacris'. There was another long period between Philips's publications of 1616 and the next volume of church music (1623). It must have been during these years that he was preparing the twelve litanies and the enormous volume of few voice motets which was to be his swansong. On 15 January 1621 he exchanged his canonry at Soignies for a perpetual chaplaincy in the church of St Germain at Tirlemont. The archduke died, childless, on 15 July 1621, and memorial ceremonies were held on 12 March 1622. Philips led the musicians of the chapel in procession, and is so drawn in Jacques Francquart's 'Pompa funebris optimi potentissima principis Alberti Pii' (1623). 
In his 'Compleat Gentleman' (1622) Henry Peacham mentioned 'our rare countryman, Peter Philips... now one of the greatest masters of Musicke in Europe', noting that 'he hath sent us over many excellent songs, as well motets as madrigals: he affecteth altogether the Italian veine'. At this stage Philips was just over sixty years old and had produced all his madrigals and some of his finest church music. His style would have appealed to his own countrymen, for like them he avoided the more forward-looking secular styles of Ferrara, Mantua, and Venice, and followed the musical language found in the less demanding pastoral type of madrigal. 

'Litaniae beatae Mariae virginis' (1623), twelve settings of the litany of Loreto for four, five, six, eight, and nine voices, has a title page that describes the composer as a canon of Bethune; the date at which he took up this canonry is not known, but the position was again probably a sinecure. The litanies, which do not survive complete, were Philips's last large-scale volume in the old Renaissance style. A volume of masses catalogued as belonging to the library of John IV of Portugal, and destroyed in the disastrous Lisbon earthquake and fire, is probably a mis-cataloguing of these litanies, as each begins with a 'Kyrie' and has an 'Agnus Dei' near the end; there is no surviving copy of any mass by Philips -- a surprising fact in view of his strong Roman allegiance. 
Towards the end of 1624 Philips approved Mathieu Langhedul's restoration of the organ in the court chapel. His last work was also his largest (107 motets for one, two, and three voices plus continuo): 'Paradisus sacris cantionibus consitus', 1628. It contains his most baroque music (and his only music for solo voice), as well as some that may have been written many years previously. In his early years in Rome he may have encountered such 'concerti' for few voices and organ while they were being written by Viadana, or he may have come across them later, after publication. At any rate, the writing of motets for just a few voices had an obvious usefulness in a country ravaged by war and plague. Philips, it seems, was still developing in his last years. 
According to John Southcote, Philips died in 1628; this must have been some time after the dating of the dedication of 'Paradisus sacris' on 28 April. His places of death and burial are unknown. Philips was clearly a man devoted to the Roman Catholic obedience, yet there is little beyond this to illustrate his character. His style was untouched by the flow of Venetian music that resulted from the close ties between the publishing houses of Venice and Antwerp, and his own arrangements of Caccini's forward-looking 'Amarilli' also seem to have had no immediate effect on his own style. But among Englishmen of the time his output was matched only by that of William Byrd, and he was one of the most prominent composers of continental Europe. 


@@@@@


doc= 22129


Philipps, Richard (1661-1750), colonial governor, was born in Pembrokeshire, the son of Richard Philipps and his wife, Frances, 'nee' Noel. At sixteen or seventeen years of age Philipps enlisted in the army, where he distinguished himself primarily as an active whig. After William of Orange set sail in 1688, but before he landed in England, Philipps distributed whig manifestos to his fellow troops. He was arrested and condemned for sedition, but in the ensuing chaos the death sentence was never carried out. After the revolution of 1688 he served in William III's army, at the battle of Boyne and subsequently in Flanders and Spain. 
In 1712 Philipps purchased, at a price of 7000 guineas, the colonelcy of the 12th regiment of foot. Five years later he exchanged this commission for the governorship of Nova Scotia. He was simultaneously appointed governor of the British outpost on Newfoundland and colonel of a new regiment, the 40th, which had been formed to garrison the two territories. Philipps never visited Newfoundland, and he was replaced as governor there in 1729. He remained governor of Nova Scotia until 1749, though he spent less than three years in residence in the colony. 
None the less, even from a distance, Philipps was able to assist in Nova Scotia's administration. Since 1710, when the British conquered the colony (which had been known as Acadia) from the French, the garrison had been almost continuously understaffed and undersupplied. Owing to his military position Philipps acquired reliable supplies for the garrison and maintained more or less constant manpower levels, accomplishments which had eluded his predecessors. His other important early accomplishment was to fortify Canso, an island off the Atlantic coast that served as a drying station for fishermen. He hoped that the military base which he established on the island in 1720 would trigger the economic redevelopment of the eastern half of the province. This larger plan never materialized, but the base helped create economic and political links between the fishermen of New England and the government of Nova Scotia, links which proved crucial for the survival of British rule after the French attacked the colony in 1744. New England's fishermen were a powerful lobby in support of the Massachusetts government's decisions to reinforce the garrison of Nova Scotia in 1744 and pre-emptively attack the French at Louisbourg in 1745. 
Philipps is best remembered, though, for the policies he adopted towards the Acadians, the descendants of the original French colonists in the region. When he was first appointed, Philipps had hoped to remove the Acadians from their lands and replace them with English-speaking protestant settlers. During his visit to Nova Scotia in 1720 he and his provincial council had petitioned the Board of Trade in favour of the plan. The effort achieved modest political success; the board endorsed the proposed expulsion in 1721 in a report to George I. But Philipps received no money or logistical support, and in the end no official authorization. The rise of Sir Robert Walpole reshaped the political landscape and restricted the financial resources available to would-be colonial promoters. Furthermore, after Philipps's return to Britain in 1722 the Mi'kmaq (the native people of Nova Scotia) took up arms against his colonial government and the Acadians professed neutrality in the conflict. These events helped reorder Philipps's priorities. He ceased advocating the expulsion of the Acadians, and instead supported a political accommodation with them. 
Philipps returned to Nova Scotia for the last time in the summer of 1729. During his fifteen-month stay he engaged in negotiations with Acadians from various parts of the province and persuaded almost all of Nova Scotia's adult male Acadian inhabitants to swear allegiance to the British crown. By taking the oath the Acadians acknowledged British sovereignty over the colony, but in exchange they obtained recognition of their special status and limited autonomy. Philipps promised them (orally) that they would never be pressed into military service. Subsequent administrators claimed that Philipps's promise was illegal and furthermore that it contradicted and invalidated the terms of the oath of allegiance. Chief Justice Jonathan Belcher jun. made this argument in order to justify the removal of the Acadians from Nova Scotia in 1755. Unwittingly, therefore, Philipps helped lay the legal groundwork for the Acadian removal. 
After 1730 Philipps treated his governorship primarily as a sinecure, though he remained interested in issues of patronage connected to the garrison there. Working with King Gould, the colony's agent in London, he participated in negotiations over appointments within the provincial garrison and council. He also took a hand in negotiations over the sale of the chaplaincies for the garrison. But the internal government of Nova Scotia concerned him very little. Philipps was twice married: first to Elizabeth Cosby (died 'c'.1739), with whom he had at least two children, and, second, to Catherina Bagshawe, 'nee' Stratham. He died in Westminster on 14 October 1750 and was buried in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 22130


Phillips, Robert (b. 1499x1502, d. in or after 1553), musician, is of unknown parentage. His career at the highest levels in church music began in childhood, since in April 1514 his name occurs as a chorister boy of Henry VIII's Chapel Royal. In 1521 he was employed as a lay singing man of the household chapel of Cardinal Wolsey, and in 1527 may have been seconded to Wolsey for his embassy to France. By then, however, he had become a gentleman of the Chapel Royal, where his name first occurs in February 1524. 
By 1537 Phillips was tutor to his own private pupils and considered himself one of the Chapel Royal's star singers, insisting that on all great occasions the performance of the longest and most virtuosic solo passages be appointed to him. His deployment of this practice at a service sung jointly with the choir of St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, about 1538 earned him a passing mention as a minor villain of Foxe's book of martyrs. Foxe indicates that Phillips was an assertive adherent of traditional religion, who took particular exception to Robert Testwood, a singing man of Windsor and notorious evangelical. Upon discovering that there had been selected as the evening antiphon some setting of the text 'Lauda vivi alpha et o', Phillips contrived to ensure that he was appointed to sing a duet passage whose excessive and non-biblical hyperbole in praise of the Virgin Mary would prove an irresistible temptation to Testwood's indiscreet high spirits. Phillips did indeed succeed in goading him into a musical assertion of his protestant leanings that eventually helped to take him to the stake. 
Phillips's absence from Chapel Royal lists of 1551 and 1552 suggests that his religious convictions caused his withdrawal during the latter part of the reign of Edward VI. Recalled by 1 August 1553, he was not present at the late king's burial on 8 August, and does not recur thereafter. 


@@@@@


doc= 22131


Philip, Robert (c.1580-1647), Roman Catholic priest, was born in Sanquhar, Dumfriesshire, Scotland. Privately educated, he then studied at the Scots College in Paris until 1602 and in Rome, where he was among the first students in the new Scots College. After his ordination he returned to Scotland to serve the Catholics secretly until he was captured and imprisoned. After his release he went to France, where in 1617 he became a member of the Oratory in Paris, under the guidance of its founder, Pierre de Berulle. In 1625 he was appointed to be one of the Oratorian chaplains permitted to enter England, under the treaty for the marriage of Charles I and Henrietta Maria of France, to minister to the queen's large household. When Charles I demanded the expulsion of most of the French entourage in 1626 Henrietta insisted that Philip remain as her confessor, which appointment he retained even after a number of French Capuchins staffed her chapels when the household was reorganized. During the following years he became the informal head of a small circle of Scottish Catholic peers at the court, such as Robert Maxwell, first earl of Nithsdale, James Hamilton, second earl of Abercorn, and George Seton, third earl of Winton. Later, with other Catholic barons, they would be accused by the covenanters of fomenting trouble in Scotland. 
Meanwhile, with the approval of King Charles, Philip arranged to have an agent appointed by Pope Urban VIII as papal representative at the court of Henrietta. In December 1634 Gregorio Panzani, of the Roman Oratory, took up residence in London as agent. In his memoirs he described his mission only as 'an experiment how far the two churches could be brought towards union'. He noted that Philip had several discussions with Charles, 'where he inferred the necessity of reunion' and tried 'to level the way and remove prejudices' ('Memoirs of Gregorio Panzani', 165, 186-7). Furthermore, in the summer of 1636 Sir William Hamilton, Abercorn's younger brother, became the queen's agent in Rome so that a 'mutual agency', under Philip's sponsorship, was to exist for the next five years. In January 1637 George Con, a Scottish priest, replaced Panzani and encountered unexpected problems, partly because the protestants at court were startled to hear that Con was expecting to be later created a cardinal. For this reason Philip openly declared that he had no interest in a red hat. Count Carlo Rosetti, the last agent, came in August 1639, when a Scottish crisis had forced Henrietta to seek aid from her brother in France. Clearly without Charles's awareness Philip spoke to Rosetti of a possible conversion of the king, if a large papal loan were forthcoming, but nothing was accomplished. 
In spring 1640, when Philip was said to be about sixty, a major crisis overshadowed his future at court. In a letter to a French friend that was intercepted by parliament he described the queen as in grave danger and in need of Louis's aid. Articles of impeachment were drawn up that denounced him as a leader of a popish conspiracy at court and other misdeeds, such as influencing young Prince Charles towards popery. In the Commons, on 30 October 1640, John Pym accused him of corresponding with 'dangerous persons' and demanded that he appear to testify. Then on 2 November the Lords ordered him to appear to answer about an imaginary role in the Irish insurrection. When he refused to swear by a 'heretical' 'English Bible', he was confined in the Tower for a year and these dubious charges were circulated in print. From March 1642 until July 1644 he stayed with the queen in her journeys to assist the royalist cause. It is worth noting that the nuncio in Paris recommended him for the office of vicar apostolic in Scotland, but he returned to France in poor health. Late in 1646 he became gravely ill with a fever and was visited privately by the queen. Later she praised his twenty years of service as 'a prudent and discreet man who would never suffer her to be pressed to any passionate undertaking under pretence of doing good for Catholics' (Clarendon, 5.167-8). He died at the Oratory in Paris on 4 January 1647, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 22132


Philipps, Rowland (1467/8-1538?), college head, hailed from the diocese of Worcester; a witness statement which he swore in May 1527 when he was sixty would indicate that he was born in 1467 or 1468. He was educated at Oxford, where he had taken his MA degree by 1491. Philipps was elected a fellow of Oriel College, acting as collector of rents and then as junior treasurer between 1491 and 1494, and was tutor to the Benedictine monks of Gloucester College. He was ordained subdeacon to the title of his fellowship on 23 March 1493 and deacon on 6 April, and was priested on 1 June. He also served a stint as senior proctor of the university between 1496 and 1497. His accounts for the year survive. 
Having surrendered his proctor's robes, Philipps exchanged Oriel for Croydon, where he was admitted vicar on 4 June 1497. This was the first in a string of clerical preferments in London, Surrey, and Sussex, including a canonry of St Paul's (with the prebend of Neasdon) between 1517 and 1536, and the rectory of St Michael Cornhill. Philipps was also collated as precentor of Hereford and rector of Walford-on-Wye in 1524, which carried a pension of $32 when vacated in 1531. One of his tasks on departing his London benefice of St Margaret Pattens in 1515 was to act as executor for a chantry priest of the parish, William Broke. Philipps, dubbed 'my synguler goode maister', was instructed to put Broke's chattels to charitable use. He himself had the benefit of 20's'. in money and the priest's best feather bed and bolster. Philipps clearly kept up his Oxford contacts during this time: Oriel made him a perpetual commoner and rented him a room, and he supplicated for his BTh in 1508 and his DTh in 1522. By 1525 he was a licentiate of medicine. 
Philipps was already a celebrated public preacher by the end of Henry VII's reign. A manuscript of Anselm's 'Opera', which was once in Philipps's possession and is partly in the hand of William of Malmesbury, contains a note in sixteenth-century script referring to his sermons at Paul's Cross. He preached at the funeral of Giles, Lord Daubeney, in May 1508, and during Archbishop Warham's visitation of the diocese of Canterbury in 1511. His skill won him royal favour. By 1510 he was chaplain to the young Henry VIII, drawing a salary of 20's'. The king's book of payments continues to record Philipps's name for the next dozen years. This was not a sinecure, since he is known to have preached before King Henry in 1521. The sermon may not have been well received; Richard Pace quipped to Wolsey that Philipps would have done better to preach, as another had that day, on the ballads 'Passe tyme wyth goodde cumpanye' and 'I love unlovydde' ('LP Henry VIII', 3/1, no. 1188). He also made himself unpopular at the funeral of Thomas Ruthall, bishop of Durham, in 1523. In the presence of a duke, five earls, and much of the court besides, Philipps delivered 'a noble sermon and a clerckely', but preached for so long that his congregation became fractious, eager to be away to the 'great and... sumptuouse feast' that followed at Durham House (Gunn, 83). His zeal even won Philipps a place in Thomas More's 'Utopia'. Long tradition has it that More's anonymous academic, eager to be sent on a papal mission as bishop of Utopia, as none other than the vicar of Croydon. 
It was presumably Philipps's reputation as a preacher that won him election as warden of Merton College, Oxford, in 1521. It was a curious appointment: Philipps was the first head of that house who had previously been neither a scholar nor a fellow there. His advent had some impact on the religious life of the college, which became newly punctilious in observing its benefactors' obits in chapel. But his time at Merton was brief. In 1524 Philipps attempted to strike a deal with the college: he would resign, but only if Dr Thomas Musgrave was not on the list to succeed him. Musgrave, a physician who had lectured in astronomy, had already served as dean, bursar, and subwarden. Merton refused; Philipps was replaced by John Chambers the year after. 
Philipps had other patrons besides the king. Warham also retained him as a chaplain (rather than Wolsey, as claimed by Emden), although Philipps complained after Warham's death that he had been out of the archbishop's favour for seven years. His relations with Thomas Wolsey, too, were sometimes more abrasive than amicable. According to Polydore Vergil, Philipps became embroiled in the opposition of both convocations to the cardinal's haughty attempts to secure a clerical subsidy in 1523. Supported by the bishops of Winchester and Rochester, this 'splendid preacher' commanded the resistance to Wolsey, which collapsed only after the cardinal had summoned Philipps for a personal interview 'and so frightened him that he afterwards appeared no more in convocation, thereby very gravely impairing his integrity' (Gwyn, 287). Even if Vergil's account can be believed, the skirmish did not prevent Philipps from acting as Wolsey's agent in the sensitive case of the abbot of Wigmore, Herefordshire, in August 1529. Wolsey had appointed John Smart as the head of this Augustinian house in 1518, but he did not prove a success, and Philipps was deputed to encourage him to resign. Smart, however, refused the proffered 40 marks pension, and told Philipps that Wolsey's authority would soon be extinguished. On another occasion Philipps petitioned Wolsey on behalf of poor prisoners in the Marshalsea, and solicited his support for one of Philipps's former pupils, prior of the Benedictine house at Binham, Norfolk, who was vexed with thieves and lawsuits. Philipps also heard cases in the court of requests in 1528-9. 
It was with the onset of religious reformation that Philipps's previously brisk career began to go awry. In 1531 formal proceedings of 'praemunire' were initiated against him and several other clerics, implying that Philipps had opposed the king's intended annulment of his marriage in the convocation of 1529, although he was soon pardoned by name. His sermons were similarly too conservative for the court of the early 1530s. By 1533 he was in prison, writing a lament to Thomas Cromwell that he was troubled by age and disease, and had lost his canonry of St Paul's through his absence. His offence is obscure, but may have involved spreading a seditious rumour -- unwittingly, as he claimed. Philipps was plainly deemed sufficiently important to be kept under surveillance by the government, since Cromwell made a personal note of his sermon 'Pax vobis', and of 'the taking of the vicar of Croydon' in 1533 ('LP Henry VIII', 6, no. 137). News of Philipps was also frequently relayed to Lord Lisle in Calais. 
In 1534 Philipps was licensed by the king to debate with the evangelical Hugh Latimer, and was subsequently rumoured to have been sent to the Tower. Thomas More, however, wrote to his daughter Margaret Roper that Philipps took the oath of supremacy when summoned to Lambeth in April 1534, and was detained no further. Philipps was evidently relieved at the outcome; More observed, somewhat acidly, that 'the vicar of Croydon, either for gladness or dryness, or to show that he was known to the Archbishop, went to the buttery bar and drank 'valde familiariter' [in a very familiar manner]' ('LP Henry VIII', 7, no. 575). Philipps was still identified to Cromwell in 1535 as being 'of the popish sort', but useful with it, since his preaching might be more effective in persuading recalcitrant religious to submit to the king. Philipps was amenable, as witness an anxious note from the bishop of London in July 1536: it was most important that Cromwell should be informed 'with what zeal Roland Philipps at this time last year, labored in our presence to bring the Carthusians into obedience to the King as head of this Church' ('LP Henry VIII', 11, no. 186). But Philipps had his enemies still, since William Marshall identified him in August 1536 as being among the 'rabblement of seditious preachers' who had escaped punishment ('LP Henry VIII', 11, no. 325). He remained under suspicion until the end. Philipps was cited by Cranmer for examination in 1538, excusing himself, as in 1535, on grounds of illness. He probably died the same year -- his Croydon benefice was vacant by May 1538. 


@@@@@


doc= 22133


Philips, William (d. 1734), playwright, was the son of George Philips (1629/30-1696?), writer and politician. The first reference to Captain William Philips records his succession to his father as burgess of Limavady on 17 April 1697 (Boyle, 40). He was later a tory member of the Irish parliament (1707-11) and may also have been attache to Sir Thomas Hanmer, speaker of the (British) House of Commons. Apparently a dabbler in verse, Philips turned playwright with 'The Revengeful Queen' (1698), staged in London at Drury Lane in June 1698. In the printed text, dedicated to the Jacobite James Butler, second duke of Ormond, Philips defended himself against a charge that he had plagiarized Davenant's 'The Tragedy of Albovine, King of the Lombards' (1629). Philips's next play was a comedy, 'St Stephen's-Green, or, The Generous Lovers' (1700), staged, as the title-page indicates, at the Theatre Royal, Smock Alley, Dublin, 'c'.1699, the first notable Irish play with a Dublin setting. Dedicated to William O'Brien, third earl of Inchiquin, this play shows the marks of the recent shift from the bawdy excesses of Restoration comedy, condemned by Jeremy Collier and others in the later 1690s, towards a more refined, more moral concept of drama. In timely fashion, in his epistle dedicatory Philips sides with O'Brien's wish that the stage be reformed towards 'Encouraging Virtue, and Exposing Vice'. In other respects 'St Stephen's-Green' is a lively Restoration comedy, with some interesting topical references, as its revival on the Abbey stage for the Dublin millennium in 1988 revealed. 
After a considerable interval Philips's 'Hibernia Freed' (1722) was staged on 13 February 1722 at the Theatre Royal, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London. A tragedy, dedicated to Henry O'Brien, eighth earl of Thomond, this play dealt with O'Brien's ancestors' struggle against viking invaders. It would appear that allegory was intended, in the wake of the passing of the 'Declaratory Act' in 1720 which asserted the right of the British parliament to pass legislation binding on Ireland. The fervour of Philips's dedicatory letter to O'Brien, which asked 'for what is so noble as to free ones Country from Tyranny and Invasion?', marks Philips as an Irish 'patriot' of the day. The play had a strong Irish cast, with James Quin as Turgesius, and, having had seven performances, seems to have been well received. It was also staged once in Dublin in 1722. 'Hibernia Freed' stands out as one of the few Irish history plays of note in the eighteenth century. 
Philips's next production, 'Belisarius' (1724), though also a history play, had nothing overtly Irish about it. Yet a radical intention is perhaps suggested by the use of the same venue as 'Hibernia Freed', Lincoln's Inn Fields, where it ran for six nights from 14 April and was revived within a year. The play tells the story of a victorious Gothic soldier who ended up blind and destitute under the emperor Justinian. Philips dedicated the tragedy to General Webb, whom he seemed to relate to his hero Belisarius. It may be that there was a contemporary political reference here and that Philips moved among radical circles in London, for his name appears in Swift's correspondence at this time. In addition Philips was attempting to keep blank-verse tragedy alive at a very bad time for English drama. In that regard 'Belisarius' was a worthy effort, though Philips may have been overambitious in his concern to: '
reform the Stage, 

Improve our Judgment, and refine the Age. 
(prologue, lines 25-6)' Philips seems also to have been the author of 'The Romance of the Rose: Imitated from Chaucer' (1721), published anonymously by Jonah Bowyer, who also published 'Hibernia Freed'. This poem contains two passages in praise of Hanmer, and the copy presented by the author to the library of Worcester College, Oxford, on 15 February 1720, ascribes the poem to Captain Philips. While it may be that there was more than one William Philips at this time, one is inclined to believe that playwright and poet were the same man. Philips died in London on 12 December 1734. 


@@@@@


doc= 22134


Phillimore, Greville (1821-1884), Church of England clergyman and author, born in London on 5 February 1821, was the fifth son of Joseph Phillimore (1775-1855), regius professor of civil law, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1859), daughter of the Revd Walter Bagot, and brother of Sir Robert Joseph Phillimore and of John George Phillimore. He was educated at Westminster School, Charterhouse, and Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1842 and MA in 1844. On taking holy orders, he was curate successively at Henley-on-Thames (where his family owned property) and at Shiplake. In 1851 he became vicar of Down Ampney, near Cricklade, and in 1867 he returned as rector to Henley, where he remained until, in July 1883, he accepted the crown living of Ewelme from Gladstone, his brother Robert's close friend. He married, on 16 April 1857, Emma Caroline, daughter of Captain Ambrose Lethbridge Goddard (1779-1854) of The Lawn, Swindon, MP for Cricklade from 1837 to 1841, and his wife, Charlotte, daughter of Ayshford Sandford of Nynehead Court, Somerset. Unlike his brothers, he had little taste for the metropolitan world of affairs. 
Phillimore was joint editor, with Hyde Wyndham Beadon and James Russell Woodford (later bishop of Ely), of the 'Parish Hymn Book', first issued in 1863, to which he contributed, besides translations, eleven original hymns, several of which have been reprinted in other collections. His 'Parochial Sermons' was published in 1856 (2nd edn, 1885), and he was author of 'Uncle Z', a story of Triberg, in the Black Forest (1881), and 'Only a Black Box, or, A Passage in the Life of a Curate' (1883). He died at the rectory, Ewelme, on 21 January 1884, his wife surviving him. A memorial volume, printed at Henley in 1884 and edited by his daughter Catherine, contains his hymns and a few sermons. 


@@@@@


doc= 22135


Phillimore, Sir John (1781-1840), naval officer, third son of Joseph Phillimore, vicar of Orton on the Hill in Leicestershire, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Machin), and brother of Joseph Phillimore (1775-1855), was born on 18 January 1781. He entered the navy in the spring of 1795, on the frigate 'Nymphe' with Captain George Murray (1759-1819), and was present in the action off Lorient on 23 June 1795. In 1796 he followed Murray to the 'Colossus', and was on her in the battle of Cape St Vincent and when she was wrecked among the Isles of Scilly in December 1798. Phillimore was again with Murray on the 'Edgar' in the Baltic, but was sent to the 'London', Sir Hyde Parker's flagship, to pass his examination, and was on her when the battle of Copenhagen was fought. Acting as signal-midshipman, he made the celebrated signal to Nelson to discontinue the action. The first lieutenant of the 'Edgar' was killed in the battle and Phillimore was promoted to the vacancy on 4 April 1801. He was afterwards on the 'London', the 'Spartiate', and the sloop 'Gannet', and was made commander on 10 May 1804. 
In October 1805 he was appointed to the armed ship 'Cormorant' in the North Sea, and in September 1806 was moved to the brig 'Belette' on the Downs station and off Boulogne under Commodore Owen. In the spring of 1807 he convoyed three store ships to the Baltic for the relief of Colberg, then besieged by the French. The 'Belette' afterwards joined the fleet under Admiral Gambier at Copenhagen, and, as a mark of the admiral's approval of Phillimore's services, was sent to England with the dispatches. Accordingly, Phillimore was promoted captain on 13 October 1807 but remained in command of the 'Belette', which returned to the Baltic, and in February 1808 brought Lord Hutchinson to England from Gotenborg. For some months in 1809 Phillimore commanded the 'Marlborough' in the Scheldt, and in June 1810 he was appointed to the 'Diadem' (64 guns), which was employed as a troopship with a reduced armament. The Navy Board therefore gave orders for her to be on the establishment of a 32 gun frigate, with an insufficient supply of stores. Phillimore's protests were in vain, until, after pointing out that the paint was barely half what was required, he begged to be informed which side they would like to have painted, the starboard or larboard. In the course of this correspondence Phillimore, having noticed that the commissioners signed themselves -- as was the custom for a superior office -- his 'affectionate friends', signed himself their 'affectionate friend', for which he was promptly reprimanded. Phillimore acknowledged the response, and signed himself 'no longer your affectionate friend'. 
For the next three years the 'Diadem' was engaged in carrying troops or prisoners to or from the Peninsula, and in May 1813 Phillimore was appointed to the 'Eurotas', a 46 gun frigate carrying light 24-pounders on the main deck. She was attached to the fleet off Brest, and on 25 February 1814 fell in with the French frigate 'Clorinde' of nominally equal force. The action was one of the most evenly balanced and stubborn of the war. By nightfall the 'Eurotas' was dismasted; the 'Clorinde' had part of her foremast standing and drifted away. She was not, however, lost from sight. Phillimore had been most dangerously wounded and was below, but, by the exertions of the first lieutenant, when morning came the 'Eurotas' was jury-rigged and going 51/2 knots towards the enemy, which was still in the same state as on the previous evening. It was a remarkable piece of seamanship, and should have led to a brilliant success; but, unfortunately for Phillimore, the British frigate 'Dryad' and the sloop 'Achates' came in sight, and on their closing on the 'Clorinde' she surrendered to an evident superiority of force. On 4 June 1815 Phillimore was nominated CB. His wounds rendered him for some years incapable of active service, but in April 1820 he accepted command of the yacht 'William and Mary' at the disposal of the lord lieutenant of Ireland, Earl Talbot, by whom he was knighted on 12 December 1821. In March 1823 Phillimore was appointed to the frigate 'Thetis' on a roving commission to Mexico and the West Indies, the coast of Africa, South America, and the Mediterranean. 
On one of Phillimore's short visits to England during this time his attention was called to the account in William James's 'Naval History' -- then newly published -- of the action between the 'Eurotas' and 'Clorinde', which he believed reflected injuriously on the discipline and efficiency of the 'Eurotas'. He went to London and, armed with a stout cane, called on James and thrashed him, in compensation for which he afterwards paid $100. 
In August 1824 the 'Thetis' put into St Michael's in the Azores for supplies for the sick, and the British residents requested Phillimore to have their burial-ground consecrated. Phillimore agreed and ordered the chaplain to consecrate it the next day. The chaplain demurred, and explained that only a bishop could do this. Thereupon Phillimore gave him an acting order as bishop of St Michael's, and the ground was consecrated. In the following year the 'Thetis' went up the Mediterranean, carrying the British ambassador to Naples, and on the homeward voyage put into Gibraltar, just in time to establish a claim to the jurisdiction of the port, in its widest sense. Seventeen British merchant ships, blown from their anchors in a violent gale, had been driven on shore at the head of the bay, on Spanish territory, and were claimed by the Spanish commandant at Algeciras as coming under his authority. This claim Phillimore refused to allow, and leading in the 'Thetis''s boats, manned and armed, drove off the Spanish troops who had fired on the salving party. For this service in salving the cargoes Phillimore was thanked by the merchants of Gibraltar, and afterwards by Lloyds; but its principal importance was as a precedent for the senior officer at Gibraltar. 
It was during this commission of the 'Thetis' that Phillimore, with the consent of the Admiralty, reduced the rum ration from half a pint to one gill, paying the men savings-price for the other gill. The good effects of this reduction, which was in the first instance voluntary on the part of the men, were so evident that it was permanently adopted by the Admiralty in July 1824. To Phillimore were also due other changes for the comfort and improvement of the seamen, among them the payment of a monthly advance, which was adopted on board the 'Thetis'. Captain Andrew Drew, who served with him, wrote that Phillimore was constantly trying to ameliorate the condition of his fellow creatures, especially British seamen, and that he was 'a kind protector to those over whom he was placed in authority' but 'less agreeable to those under whom he served' ('Colburn's United Service Magazine', pt 2, 1850, 289). The 'Thetis' was paid off in November 1826, and Phillimore had no further service. In September 1831 he was appointed a naval aide-de-camp to William IV, and retained the appointment under Victoria. 
On 17 February 1830 Phillimore married Catherine Harriet, daughter of Rear-Admiral Raigersfeld; they had four daughters and two sons, of whom the younger, Henry Bouchier, died an admiral in 1893. They settled in a cottage on the Thames near Maidenhead. The wound that Phillimore had received in the action with the 'Clorinde' had never ceased to trouble him, and he eventually died of the effects of it at The Ray, near Maidenhead, on 21 March 1840. He was buried in Bray churchyard; his wife, who survived him by a few months, was buried beside him. Phillimore was a brave and professional officer who rose on his merits, having little influence and no obvious support. He was greatly interested in the conditions of service for seamen, but his insubordination, and the premeditated assault on William James, revealed a darker side to his character. 


@@@@@


doc= 22136


Phillimore, John George (1808-1865), jurist, eldest son of Joseph Phillimore (1775-1855), and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1859), daughter of the Revd Walter Bagot, was born at 62 Gower Street, London, on 5 January 1808. He was educated at Westminster School between 1817 and 1824, and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, where he was faculty student from 1824 until his marriage in 1839. He graduated BA in 1828, having taken a second class in the classical schools, and MA in 1831. 
From 1827 to 1832 Phillimore held a clerkship in the Board of Control for India. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 5 February 1828, and was called to the bar on 24 November 1832. He practised on the Oxford circuit for a number of years, and was appointed a revising barrister in 1837. On 1 August 1839 he married Rosalind Margaret, daughter of James Lewis Knight Bruce, the future lord justice. In July 1851 he attained the rank of queen's counsel, and on 3 November of the same year he was elected a bencher of his inn. In January 1851 he was appointed reader in civil law and jurisprudence at the Middle Temple, and in June the following year he became reader in constitutional law and history to the inns of court. 
In his legal writings Phillimore was a consistent and determined opponent of the archaic forms of the common law, and had a particular detestation of special pleading. For him the great intellectual blemish of the English was their incapacity to abandon empirical detail in favour of generalizing principle, a blemish he claimed was found most abundantly (but not exclusively) among the practitioners of common law. He looked to Roman law and to continental systems as reservoirs of principle and rationality. He was a strong advocate of law reform, and supported the ideas of codification, the fusion of law and equity, the creation of a separate court of appeal, and a system of public prosecution. He set out his views in a number of pamphlets on law reform, including his 'Letter to the Lord Chancellor on the Reform of the Law' (1847) and 'Thoughts on Law Reform' (1847). 
As a result of his lecturing, Phillimore published a number of works on Roman law and jurisprudence, as well as on canon law, including 'An Introduction to the Study and History of the Roman Law' (1848), 'Private Law among the Romans' (1863), and 'Principles and Maxims of Jurisprudence' (1856). He also published the first volume of 'A History of England during the Reign of George the Third' (1863). While these works displayed an extensive and varied range of reading, they were also vehicles for strong invective against contemporary English law and lawyers; hence Phillimore's writings were not popular among the profession. He was a regular contributor on constitutional and jurisprudential questions to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' and to the 'Westminster Review', for whom he wrote the article 'English jurisprudence' in 1857. 
A whig and an admirer of Lord John Russell, Phillimore's greatest ambition was to obtain a seat in parliament. In 1852 he was elected as MP for Leominster as a Liberal. In parliament he supported law reform (being on the select committee on the bill for the appointment of public prosecutors), the extension of the franchise, vote by ballot, and the abolition of church rates. However, just as he antagonized the profession, so he antagonized his party, and in 1857 the Liberal chief whip, Sir William Hayter, told Phillimore's election agents that the government preferred to have a tory to so 'inconvenient' a member as Phillimore. Conservative candidates were thus returned unopposed for Leominster in 1857. Phillimore died at his home, Shiplake House, Shiplake, near Henley, Oxfordshire, on 27 April 1865, and was survived by his wife. Their only son, Egerton Grenville Bagot Phillimore, was born in 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 22137


Phillimore, Joseph (1775-1855), lawyer, was born on 14 September 1775, the eldest son of Joseph Phillimore of Kensington, vicar of Orton on the Hill, Leicestershire, and Mary, daughter of John Machin of Kensington. He was educated at Westminster School, London, and Christ Church, Oxford, and matriculated on 30 May 1793; he graduated BA on 4 May 1797, BCL on 30 April 1800, and DCL on 20 January 1804. He won prizes at Christ Church for Latin verse (1793) and prose (1798), and the university English essay prize (1798) for his dissertation, 'Chivalry'. 
In December 1806 Francis Horner reported that 'that little, inconstant fluttering Philander Phillimore is to be married' (HoP, 'Commons', 795), and on 19 March 1807 Phillimore married Elizabeth (died 1859), daughter of Walter Bagot, rector of Blithfield and Leigh, Staffordshire, and precentor of St Asaph, younger brother of William, first Lord Bagot. Six sons and two daughters survived childhood. One son drowned at Oxford, with the son of the dean of Christ Church, who attempted a rescue; Phillimore's two sons John George Phillimore and Robert Joseph Phillimore became celebrated lawyers, and a further son, Greville Phillimore, was a priest and author. 
Admitted an advocate to Doctors' Commons (21 November 1804), Phillimore served as librarian there in 1816-17 and treasurer in 1818-20. He practised in the ecclesiastical and Admiralty courts, and in 1806-7 was commissioner for the disposal of Prussian and Danish ships seized after Prussian violations of Hanoverian neutrality, and Denmark's submission to France. In 1809 he succeeded Dr French Laurence as regius professor of civil law at Oxford, diocesan chancellor of Oxford, and judge of the Cinque Ports Admiralty Court, but his wish to become chancellor of Durham failed. Seen as a prospective parliamentary candidate for Oxford University, on 17 March 1817 he was returned, supporting Lord Grenville, for St Mawes, Cornwall, the seat vacated on the death of his friend Francis Horner; Phillimore represented the constituency until the dissolution of 2 June 1826. He then represented Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, from 9 June 1826 until 24 July 1830, after which he was unable to find a seat. 
In his maiden speech, on 5 May 1817, Phillimore opposed the 'London Tithes Bill', securing postponement. He was an original member of Grenville's short-lived third party in 1818. On 9 May 1817 he advocated Catholic relief, a subject upon which he published fifteen letters in the 'Morning Post' under the name of Philopatris (some of which were reprinted in a pamphlet). In 1819 he debated metropolitan prisons, building new churches, the 'Marriage Act', and international law, informing the house that civil lawyers did not seek commissions to suppress slave trading as the salaries were insufficient. From its reconstitution in February 1822, he joined the Indian Board of Control until the end of Lord Goderich's administration in January 1828; and on 23 January 1833 he became a principal commissioner adjudicating French claims under the treaties of 1815 and 1818. He presided over and drafted the report of the registration commission, dated 13 September 1836. Acting as surrogate Admiralty judge, in 1831 Phillimore established, importantly, the award of salvage to captors of royal fish. Although his candidature had been frustrated three times before, on 25 October 1834 he was appointed king's advocate in the Admiralty court, where he had been a beneficiary of the practice, pioneered the previous century by Lord Mansfield, of bringing civil lawyers into king's bench to argue maritime causes. He held this post until his death. Phillimore became commissary of the dean and chapter of St Paul's (1834), and diocesan chancellor of Worcester (1834), Bristol (1842), and Gloucester (1846). He received an honorary LLD degree at Cambridge in 1834 and was elected FRS in 1840. Lord Lyndhurst, introducing a bill to reform ecclesiastical courts on 2 March 1844, praised Phillimore's chancellorships. 
After contributions to the 'Edinburgh Review' (notably in 1811 on abuses of the licence trade by neutral ships), Phillimore fuelled developments in the ecclesiastical law doctrine of precedent by editing reports of cases determined by Sir George Lee in the arches and prerogative courts of Canterbury between 1752 and 1758 (published in 1833), and by others in the ecclesiastical courts at Doctors' Commons and the high court of delegates between 1809 and 1821 (published between 1818 and 1827). He gave evidence to the 1832 commission on the reform of the church courts. As regius professor he assisted in Lord Grenville's appointment as chancellor of Oxford University in 1809, and he was remembered for his Latin oratory at commemorations, impressing visiting allied sovereigns in 1814: the Prussian king asked personally for a copy of Phillimore's speech. His Sheldon Theatre speeches at three commemorations in 1834, the chancellor (the duke of Wellington) presiding personally, were printed the same year. Phillimore gave evidence to the royal commission on the state of the university and its colleges, recalling that, with respect to his professorship, he could be neither expected nor required to abandon his legal practice in London; on several occasions he wanted to give a course of lectures but was not encouraged to do so. He retained his chair until his death at his home, Shiplake House, near Reading, on 24 January 1855. Sydney Smith described Phillimore as 'an excellent man but not intended by nature for a giver of opinions' (HoP, 'Commons', 796). 


@@@@@


doc= 22138


Phillimore, Sir Robert Joseph, baronet (1810-1885), lawyer, second son of Joseph Phillimore (1775-1855) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Bagot (died 1859), was born at Whitehall, London, on 5 November 1810. John George Phillimore and Greville Phillimore were his brothers. In 1824 he was elected king's scholar at Westminster School, London, and from there went to Christ Church, Oxford, with a studentship, matriculating on 16 May 1828. He won the college prizes for Latin verse and Latin prose, and graduated BA with a second class in classics on 26 January 1832; he became MA in 1834, BCL on 14 May 1835, and DCL on 2 November 1838. Among his contemporaries was W. E. Gladstone, with whom he formed a lifelong friendship. Phillimore was described by Dean Stanley, at their first meeting, in 1835, as 'very handsome and very clever'. He married on 19 December 1844 Charlotte Anne (died 1892), third daughter of John Denison MP, of Ossington Hall, Newark, and sister of John Evelyn Denison, Viscount Ossington, speaker of the House of Commons. 
After holding the post of clerk in the office of the Board of Control (20 February 1832 to 6 April 1835), Phillimore embarked on a legal career, as both a civil and a common lawyer; later he was also a politician. He was admitted an advocate of Doctors' Commons on 2 November 1839, where he became steward (1847-9), librarian (1850, 1853), treasurer (1851-2), and president (from 1 August 1867 until before 20 October 1875). The attacks on Doctors' Commons, culminating in its demise in 1865, provoked Phillimore to defend in a tract of 1843 the retention of the advocates' monopoly of audience in the ecclesiastical courts; to criticize the appointment as diocesan chancellors of those who were not doctors of law; and, in 1844, to defend the practice of the ecclesiastical courts, particularly that of giving written as opposed to oral evidence. He was official of the archdeaconry of Oxford, commissary-general of St Paul's and Westminster (he resigned these posts in 1867), chancellor of Chichester in 1844, Salisbury in 1845, and Oxford in 1855, dean of the court of arches from 1867 to 1875, and master of faculties from 1873 to 1875. For Phillimore, deanship of the court of arches was more a professional honour than a profitable post: he complained publicly in 1872 that his remuneration as dean was insufficient to cover the expenses of the office. His predecessor, Stephen Lushington, had continued after resignation in 1867 in the office of master of faculties, traditionally the main source of income for the dean of arches. Phillimore became master of faculties on Lushington's death in 1873 and was the last member of Doctors' Commons to hold the offices of official-principal and dean of arches. 
As dean of arches Phillimore had to entertain several extremely controversial cases, concerning ornaments and ritual, resulting from the Oxford Movement. He was of high-church persuasion and had acted as defence counsel in the doctrine case against his brother-in-law, George Anthony Denison, in 1857, over which he had been in close contact with Gladstone. His decisions as dean contributed significantly to contemporary ecclesiastical jurisprudence, being moulded by his view of the Church of England as part of the true Catholic church. For Phillimore, the schism between the Eastern and Western churches had been caused by 'the arrogance, ambition and un-catholic conduct of Rome' (R. Phillimore, 'Ecclesiastical Law', 1873, 2); he doubted the canonical validity of the First Vatican Council and pronounced its doctrine of papal infallibility 'at variance with all sound catholic teaching and principle' (ibid., 1922). He developed in 'Martin v. Mackonochie' (1866-8) and 'Elphinstone v. Purchas' (1870) the rule that, in determining the lawfulness of ceremonies, it was necessary to distinguish between those which were immutable and those which were not, accepting in the former case that 'the true criterion is conformity with primitive and catholic use' ('Martin v. Mackonochie', 1868). In the Mackonochie case he held as new and unauthorized ceremonies at holy communion the elevation of the consecrated elements, the use of incense, and the practice of adding water to wine during the consecration. It was not, however, an offence for a priest to engage in excessive kneeling or prostration, for lighted candles to be placed on the altar, or for water to be mixed with wine before the service of holy communion; on these points Phillimore was reversed by the privy council. The litigation continued and in 1874 Phillimore held it unlawful to sing the 'Agnus Dei' between consecration and reception of communion, and for the priest to make the sign of the cross to the congregation. In the heresy case of 'Sheppard v. Bennett' (1870), he held that it was lawful to assert a real presence in eucharistic elements, to claim that holy communion is to be understood in a spiritual sense, and to speak of communion as a sacrifice; but that it was unlawful to teach that there was a visible presence of Jesus at the time of celebration. He decided in 'Jenkins v. Cook' (1875) that a priest could lawfully exclude from holy communion a person who denied the doctrine of eternal punishment -- this too was reversed by the privy council. His views on liturgical law were represented in a letter on clerical discipline to the archbishop of Canterbury in 1872, and a collection of his own leading ecclesiastical judgments of 1867-75 appeared in 1876. 
On the common law and Admiralty side, while his defence of Doctors' Commons had been critical of the learning of common-law barristers, Phillimore was himself called to the bar at the Middle Temple in London in 1841, was made queen's counsel on 16 January 1858, and became a bencher at Middle Temple on 1 February of the same year. His reading at Middle Temple in 1861 is said to have revived the practice, though his elder brother John George Phillimore had given a reading there on canon law in 1851. Phillimore became an Admiralty advocate in 1855, was queen's advocate from 1862 to 1867, was a judge of the Cinque Ports from 1855 to 1875 (an office his father had held before him), was the last judge of the high court of Admiralty, from 1867 to 1875, and was judge advocate-general from 1871 to 1873. As Admiralty judge he widened the jurisdiction of the Admiralty court by generous interpretations of earlier statutes, notably on damage to submarine cables in 'The Clara Killam' (1870). 
Following court reorganization under the 'Judicature Act' 1875, on 1 November 1875 Phillimore was appointed judge of the High Court of Justice, Probate and Admiralty division, the division which assumed the functions of the older civilian courts. Under the statute he was to retain the same rank, salary, and pension as if he had been newly appointed to the High Court, provided he resigned all other emoluments; consequently, he resigned the offices of dean of arches and master of faculties. He was the only member of Doctors' Commons to sit in the High Court, and he did so, it seems mainly in Admiralty cases, until his retirement on 21 March 1883. 
Phillimore labelled himself a Liberal Conservative; his political career began with unsuccessful candidatures for Tavistock in July 1847, April 1852, and July 1852, but he was seated on petition in February 1853 without a new election. He was a long-standing friend and correspondent of Gladstone, from whom his baronetcy was conferred in 1881 (and whose wife was godmother to Phillimore's eldest daughter, Catherine). He was among Gladstone's first supporters for the Oxford University seat in 1847 and he followed the same movement from Conservative into Peelite politics. He supported generally the Aberdeen government, and in 1853 he introduced bills to amend the law of simony and the sale of presentations. He also made speeches on church rates (1853), against the abandonment of the right to seize enemy goods in neutral ships (1854), and in 1857 on the dispute about the lorcha 'Arrow' during the Second Opium War. In 1855 Phillimore himself introduced a bill (with the assistance of Lord Brougham) to permit oral testimony in the ecclesiastical courts, and in 1856 he was responsible for the statute which abolished the jurisdiction of the church courts over defamation. He retired in 1857 but contested Coventry unsuccessfully in March 1857 when, in his manifesto, he declared himself 'opposed to all violent and organic changes in the framework of our Constitution' (Baker, 711), a notion he had developed in an earlier pamphlet, 'The Constitution as it is, or, Democracy' (1837), which contained a defence of constitutional monarchy against the republicanism advocated as a result of the 'Reform Act' 1832. 
After leaving parliament Phillimore served on numerous royal commissions: on those of royal courts of justice (1859), the judicature (1867), ritual (1867), naturalization (1868), and neutrality (1868). His interest in international law, nurtured as a law officer during the American Civil War, resulted in publication of an important treatise between 1854 and 1861; chairmanship of the Albertico Gentili Committee to erect a memorial tablet in St Helen's, Bishopsgate, and to print a new edition of Gentili's 'De jure belli et pacis' (1875); and presidency of the Association for the Reformation and Codification of the Laws of Nations, giving the inaugural lecture at its annual conference in 1879. 
Phillimore was a prolific writer, principally on church law and international law. In 1842 he authored 'Two Letters to Lord Ashburton on International Law', and 'A Letter to Mr Gladstone', both respecting ships, and 'The Case of Creole'. Ties through his father with the Grenville family led to his being entrusted with the management and publication of 'Memoirs and Correspondence of George Lord Lyttelton from 1734 to 1773'. He became in 1842 the ninth and last editor of Richard Burn's 'The Ecclesiastical Law' (1763), and subsequently published 'The Study of the Civil and Canon Law' (1843), 'Thoughts on the Law of Divorce in England' (1844), 'The Law of Domicil' (1847), 'The Practice and Courts of Ecclesiastical Law' (1848), and 'Russia and Turkey' (1853), a pamphlet on Russia's claim to intervene on behalf of Christian subjects of Turkey. His four-volume 'Commentaries upon International Law' (1854-61) saw a second edition between 1871 and 1874, and a third between 1879 and 1889. It was a formidable statement of the high-church view of nationality and internationality, with a striking analysis of the nature of the Ottoman empire's relationship to the Concert of Europe which was much used during the various phases of the Eastern Question in the 1870s. A German scholar, he translated G. E. Lessing's 'Laocoon', which he published with notes, in 1874. Phillimore is best remembered today as author of 'The Ecclesiastical Law of the Church of England' in two volumes (1873-6), with a second edition, assisted by C. F. Jemmett, in 1895. A monumental work of 2466 pages, carrying in enormous detail historical themes culled from judicial decisions, it was designed for practitioners and is systematically divided into ten sections, the last of which treats the Church of England's relation to churches in the worldwide Anglican communion. 
Phillimore was knighted on 17 September 1862, made privy councillor in 1867, and granted a baronetcy on 21 December 1881. He was a diarist, but only the many entries concerning Gladstone have survived. He and his family made a complete record of Gladstone's public speeches, which his family later presented to St Deiniol's Library, Hawarden. Phillimore died on 4 February 1885 at his home, The Coppice, near Henley-on-Thames, and was buried at Shiplake churchyard. He was succeeded to the baronetcy by his only son, Sir Walter Phillimore, a high-court judge, and had three daughters, Catherine Mary and Lucy (authors of several works), and Alice Grenville, a member of the Institute of Sick Nursing in 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 22139


Phillip, Arthur (1738-1814), colonial governor and naval officer, was born in London on 11 October 1738, the second child of Jacob Phillip and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Breach. Very little is known of his parents. His father was reportedly from Frankfurt, and a language teacher, a claim given some support by his son's becoming proficient in German, French, and Portuguese. His mother was the widow of John Herbert, a seaman in the Royal Navy, whom she had married in 1728 and who had died in 1731. The Phillips were related by marriage to the Everitts, of whom Michael Everitt, a naval captain, was to be an important patron to Arthur Phillip. Also significant in promoting his career were members of the wealthy Duncombe family. 
It seems that Phillip was at sea by the time he was nine years old. He was admitted to the school of the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, for the sons of poor seamen on 22 June 1751, whence he was bound into apprenticeship to William Readhead, who hunted whales in the waters about Spitsbergen in the summers of 1754 and 1755 and traded to the Mediterranean in the intervening winter. Later, in New South Wales, Phillip was to write that he had had as fine figs from his Sydney garden 'as any I ever tasted in Spain or Portugal' (Mitchell L., NSW, Mitchell MS C 213, 26 July 1790). 
In October 1755, as events were building to the Seven Years' War, Phillip joined the 'Buckingham' under Everitt, as captain's servant. He was present at the infamous battle off Minorca in May 1756, after which he wrote bitterly of the 'Cowardice of Admiral Byng' (Arthur Phillip to Rebecca Phillip, 21 June 1756, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/52). When Everitt and Admiral Temple West were recalled to give evidence at Byng's court martial, Phillip transferred to the 'Princess Louisa'. In February 1757 he joined the 'Neptune' as a midshipman under West and Everitt, and in mid-1759 he served on the 'Aurora'. 
On 19 February 1760 Phillip rejoined Everitt, this time on the 'Stirling Castle', which sailed for the West Indies in September. In 1761 the ship cruised about the islands, with Phillip having meanwhile been promoted fourth lieutenant. Early in 1762 he participated in the capture of Martinique, followed by the blockade of Cap Francois (Haiti), and the siege of Havana, including the futile attack on El Morro fortress led by Augustus Hervey. After the fall of the city Phillip sailed home in the captured 'Infanta'. 
On 19 July 1763 Phillip married Margaret Charlott Denison (1722-1792), a wealthy widow, who was prescient enough to have him sign a marriage contract securing her wealth and property to herself. The couple lived first at Hampton Court and afterwards at Lyndhurst in the New Forest. However, the marriage failed and they formally separated in April 1769; they had no children. 
Phillip returned to service briefly in 1770, at the time of the Falklands armament. He was on half pay from 9 July 1771 until January 1775. In 1769 and in 1773-4 he spent a considerable time in France. He may have been trading, for at this time he was able to repay his estranged wife money he had borrowed from her. However, it seems that he also trained as a military engineer, and it is likely that at this point he began his career as a spy, perhaps being recruited by John Duncombe and Robert Shafto. 
In 1775, at a time when Portugal was contending with Spain for control of territory in South America, Phillip enlisted in the Portuguese navy, with a rank equivalent to that of post captain. The Admiralty expected that the officers it loaned in this fashion would return with detailed knowledge of coasts, harbours, fortifications, and the dispositions of colonists. Phillip reached Rio de Janeiro in the 'Belem' in April 1775. Having transferred to the 'Pilar', in 1775-6 he patrolled the southern coast of Brazil and in the River Plate estuary. The comparatively small Portuguese squadron was no match for the much larger Spanish one that captured Santa Catarina in early 1777, and they did not engage. However, in April Phillip and a colleague captured a new Spanish battleship, the command of which the viceroy gave to Phillip. 
Phillip returned to England late in 1778, when he rejoined the navy and served as first lieutenant of the 'Alexander'. He was promoted master and commander on 2 September 1779. On 30 October 1781 he was made post captain of the frigate 'Ariadne' and sent to the Elbe to collect a contingent of Hanoverian soldiers. At the very end of 1782 he was appointed captain of the 'Europe' (64 guns), intended for a secret expedition against the Spanish settlements in South America. However, a storm shattered the squadron in the Bay of Biscay, and, following contingent orders, he sailed on to India alone. 
Phillip returned to England in 1784. In 1785 and 1786 he again spied on naval preparations in French ports. Then, in September 1786, he accepted appointment as the governor of the convict colony planned for Botany Bay, on the east coast of New South Wales. He had a major hand in the organization of the expedition which was elaborately and expensively equipped. He took the fleet of eleven ships (afterwards called the first fleet) out from Portsmouth on 13 May 1787. In addition to the crews, aboard were a small group of civil officers, some 240 marines (with a few wives and children), and some 760 convicts, 180 of them women. There were supplies for two years. Sailing via Rio de Janeiro and the Cape of Good Hope, the ships reached Botany Bay towards the end of January 1788. The voyage was notable for its excellent health and disciplinary record. Preferring Port Jackson, some 12 miles to the north, Phillip began the European settlement of Australia at Sydney Cove on 26 January. 
In the early days fewer than a third of the convicts showed themselves willing to work. The marine officers stood on their honour, refused to supervise the convicts, and quarrelled among themselves, while their men became lawless. As the presence of a large group of Europeans strained indigenous food supplies, relations with the Aborigines deteriorated. The long drought from mid-1790 to the spring of 1791 and the loss of the 'Guardian' (bringing agricultural supervisors, skilled convicts, plants, animals, and more supplies) retarded the colony's progress. 
Phillip showed considerable ingenuity in managing people and events. He made particular groups responsible for their own food supplies, and in 1790 sent some hundreds of the colonists to the lush Norfolk Island. Holding out inducements of freedom and land, he gave the convicts a stake in the emergent society, where from the first law functioned significantly differently from in England. Notwithstanding a failed punitive expedition against the Aborigines in December 1790, Phillip's rule was marked by an unusual egalitarianism and humanity. He encountered many difficulties, but, by the time ill health and family concerns forced him to leave at the end of 1792, it was clear that the colony would survive. 
Phillip reached England again in May 1793, and spent time recuperating at Bath. His estranged wife having died the previous year, on 8 May 1794 he married Isabella Whitehead ('bap'. 1751, died 1823), the daughter of a wealthy cloth manufacturer. The couple had no children. In March 1796 Phillip returned to active service, as captain of the 'Alexander'. In October he assumed command of the 'Swiftsure', in which he helped escort a convoy to Gibraltar, thus coming under the command of the earl of St Vincent and Lord Nelson. In September 1797 St Vincent appointed him to the 'Blenheim' (90 guns) and sent him to Lisbon in the expectation that he would become commodore of a joint Anglo-Portuguese squadron. But Phillip lost his command when Admiral Frederick installed his own flag captain. It was the severest disappointment of his career. 
Phillip was appointed commander of the Hampshire sea fencibles (a maritime militia) in 1798, and in 1803 he became inspector of the whole force and also of the impress service. The Admiralty terminated these appointments in December 1804 and February 1805, when old age and continuing disappointment were clouding his judgement. By seniority, he rose progressively through the ranks of rear-admiral (1 January 1801) and vice-admiral (25 October 1809) and was promoted admiral of the blue on 4 June 1814. In 1806 he and his wife had settled in Bath. He suffered a debilitating stroke on 20 February 1808 and he died on 31 August 1814 at his home, 19 Bennett Street, Bath. He was buried on 7 September in the church of St Nicholas at Bathampton. 
Arthur Phillip had an extraordinary life. As one of his friends remarked, he 'had doubled every Cape, had navigated every sea, had been tossed by the severest hurricanes' (Mackaness, 424). He was evidently a small man, and by middle age the hardships of life at sea had shrivelled his body. The viceroy of Brazil described him as 'a little headstrong', but remarked also that he came quickly to reason, and that he was honest, forthright, and brave (Archivo Historico Ultramarino (Lisbon), Rio de Janeiro, caixa 109, item 53, caixa 115, item 9). Phillip needed all the latter qualities, and more, in New South Wales, where he faced myriad problems in establishing the colony. He always understood that the colony was to be something more than a dumping ground for convicts. Envisaging European commercial expansion in the Pacific Ocean and about the Pacific rim, he told his patron the marquess of Lansdowne that in Sydney's matchless harbour 'a Thousand Sail of the Line may ride in the most perfect Security'; and he told Sir Charles Middleton 'that hereafter, when this Colony is the seat of Empire, there is room for ships of all Nations' (private information). He was not a great person, perhaps; however, he did great work in New South Wales, and gave the new society features it retains still. 


@@@@@


doc= 22140


Phillip, John (1817-1867), genre and portrait painter, was born at 13 Skene Square, Aberdeen, on 19 April 1817. The son of an old soldier turned shoemaker, he first became a tinsmith's errand boy and later, aged fifteen, was apprenticed to Mr Spark, a jobbing painter and glazier in Wallace Nook, Aberdeen. The young Phillip is said to have shown a flair for art, producing portrait sketches of his fellow artists and receiving a commission to paint a signboard for a basketmaker in Queen Street. Several colourful passages have been written into Phillip's early life, the most famous being that he stowed away on the brig 'Manly' from Aberdeen to London in 1834 in order to see the pictures at the Royal Academy exhibition. The artist himself seems to have recounted many of these anecdotes, but they should not be dismissed out of hand; there is a small oil painting of the 'Manly' in Aberdeen Art Gallery, signed by Phillip and dated 1834. He found some encouragement from a local portraitist, James Forbes, and an early painting by Phillip, 'The Pedlar or Newsvendor', in the style of David Wilkie, was brought to the attention of William Ramsay Maule, Lord Panmure, who agreed to sponsor the young artist. Panmure supported Phillip's move to London in 1836; there he studied first under Thomas Musgrave Joy, a minor portrait and subject painter, before entering the Royal Academy Schools in the following year. Despite their prestige within Britain, the Royal Academy Schools were felt to be somewhat moribund at this time. To counteract this Phillip and his fellow students Alfred Elmore (1815-1881), Augustus Leopold Egg (1816-1863), Edward Matthew Ward (1816-1879), Richard Dadd (1817-1886), Henry O'Neil (1817-1880), and William Powell Frith (1819-1909) set up a private sketching club named the Clique. Such groups became fairly common during the following decade and beyond, but this one appears to have been the first youthful art society set up in reaction to the academy. Its programme, as such, was hardly radical, the young artists meeting once a week to draw illustrations of passages from Shakespeare and other English literary works. Furthermore, all members of the group with the exception of Dadd, who was incarcerated owing to madness, eventually became members of the Royal Academy. 
Phillip's early manner conforms to that of many young artists of the period, and from 1838 he contributed a number of portraits and figure subjects to the annual Royal Academy exhibitions. He also maintained his links to his native city, producing several portraits of prominent citizens including a full length of James Blaikie of Craigiebuckler, provost of Aberdeen in 1840. His painting 'Bruce about to Receive the Sacrament on the Morning Previous to the Battle of Bannockburn' (Brechin town hall) of 1843, and another of Wallace and his schoolfellows at Dundee (exh. RA, 1846) of 1846, suggest he also aspired to be a historical painter. The first indication of a distinct direction to his work is found in 'Presbyterian Catechising' (exh. RA, 1847; NG Scot.), a Scottish genre painting in the style made popular by Sir David Wilkie in the early years of the nineteenth century. It has often been compared to Wilkie's 'Blind Fiddler' (1806) and 'Rent Day' (1809) in that several figures are seen to respond in different ways to a central action. Phillip's technique and working methods, as indicated by his sketches in Aberdeen Art Gallery, are also close to Wilkie's in the use of numerous figure studies or small groups which were patiently worked up into more complex combinations to elaborate the emotional range of the picture. Phillip's early essays in this style lack the older artist's depth of characterization -- as revealed by pose, gesture, and facial expression -- and he is less able to orchestrate the responses of his various figures into a satisfactory ensemble. Phillip did, however, achieve some success at this type of work, and he followed 'Presbyterian Catechising' with similar Scottish rural scenes such as 'A Scotch Fair' (exh. RA, 1848) and 'Baptism in Scotland' (exh. RA, 1850; both Aberdeen Art Gallery), and 'The Spae Wife' and 'Scotch Washing' (both exh. RA, 1851). 
In 1846 Phillip married Maria Dadd, the younger sister of his friend Richard Dadd. Unfortunately, she suffered from a similar mental disorder to her brother and was committed to an asylum in 1863. The strain this placed on his home life may have contributed to Phillip's ill health. On his doctor's advice, Phillip spent the winter of 1851 in southern Spain, an experience which marked a watershed in his career and led ultimately to the sobriquet Spanish Phillip. The landscape of Andalusia and the first-hand experience of Spanish painting of the golden age may have opened up new possibilities for his art, but most commentators, notably his friend W. P. Frith, remarked that this initial visit did not have a significant effect on Phillip's colour or handling of paint. In one sense Phillip was still following in the footsteps of David Wilkie, who had visited Spain in 1827-8 and made a considerable impact at the Royal Academy exhibition of 1829 when his modern history piece 'The Defence of Saragossa' was acquired by George IV. Phillip was more attracted to exotic genre scenes of Spanish rural life and quickly made his mark at the Royal Academy with this type of picture. In 1853 'The Spanish Gypsy Mother' (Royal Collection) was purchased by Queen Victoria on the recommendation of Sir Edwin Landseer, and in the following year she commissioned another Spanish subject, 'The Letter-Writer of Seville' (Royal Collection) as a present for Prince Albert. This began a fruitful association with the royal family, who commissioned several pictures by Phillip as private family gifts. 
Phillip's immediate success with these pictures was due, in part, to a rising interest in Spain in the wake of the Peninsular War (1808-14). More recently, the publication of George Borrow's 'The Bible in Spain' (1843) and Richard Ford's 'Handbook for Travellers in Spain' (1845) had brought the picturesque features of Spanish life to the attention of a new generation of British readers. In 1856-7 Phillip returned to Spain with the painter Richard Ansdell for a longer tour of the country, the chief product of which was 'The Prison Window' and 'Charity', both exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1857. These collaborative works, in which Phillip undertook the figures while Ansdell did the animals, are less convincing to modern eyes but they were well received, and Phillip was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in the same year. More significantly, the experience of Spain began to exert a greater influence on Phillip's handling of colour and atmosphere in pictures such as 'The Evil Eye' (1858; Hospitalfield House, Arbroath; two other versions at Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum and Smith Art Gallery, Stirling) and 'The Dying Contrabandista' (exh. RA, 1858; Royal Collection). Ruskin was almost alone in expressing doubts over this tendency, describing Phillip's picture 'A Huff' as 'slightly vulgar' in his 'Academy Notes' of 1859, the year in which Phillip was elected Royal Academician. 
Phillip's final visit to Spain in 1860 confirmed his tendency towards stronger colour contrasts and richer handling of paint, under the influence of Velazquez and Murillo; he produced several studies after their work including a large copy of Velazquez's 'Surrender at Breda' (Museo del Prado, Madrid) which now hangs in the Royal Scottish Academy, Edinburgh. The principal achievement of this trip, however, was the series of mature exhibition pictures of Spanish life and customs which he worked up from sketches made on the spot. 'La Gloria: a Spanish Wake' (exh. RA, 1864; NG Scot.), widely regarded as his masterpiece, depicts the funeral of a child in which the grief of the mother is contrasted with the exuberance of revellers in the background. According to the explanation which Phillip provided, the death of a child in Spain was accompanied by celebrations and dancing since it was believed that the child's soul was spared the pains of purgatory, going directly to heaven. This subject gave full rein to his enriched palette in describing traditional Spanish costume, but it equally allowed for dramatic contrasts of light and shade to emphasize the sentiment of the scene. The following year saw 'The Early Career of Murillo' (exh. RA, 1865; Forbes Magazine collection, New York) at the Royal Academy, in which Phillip again demonstrated his ability to exploit popular fascination with the culture and history of Spain. The details of the subject were drawn from William Stirling-Maxwell's 'Annals of the Artists of Spain', a pioneering historical work published in 1848 which recounts the anecdote that Murillo would often sell sketches in the street during the 'feria' in Seville. Both these paintings fetched huge sums when sold and maintained their high reputation long after Phillip's death. 
Throughout this period of success for his Spanish pictures, Phillip continued to produce portraits of a wide range of sitters including several of his artist friends and a full length of Prince Albert in highland dress (exh. RA, 1858; Town House, Aberdeen). He undertook two paintings of formal events, 'The Marriage of the Princess Royal with the Prince Frederic William of Prussia' (1858; exh. RA, 1860; Royal Collection) and 'The House of Commons' (1860; exh. RA, 1863), although these were probably not typical. The few Scottish genre scenes produced in his later career are often marred by excessive sentiment, but he seems to have shown some interest in recent trends in art. In 1860 he purchased 'At the Piano' (Taft Museum, Cincinnati), the first major oil painting by the young James McNeill Whistler, no doubt reflecting their shared interest in Velazquez. In 1866 Phillip embarked on a tour of Italy where, like Wilkie before him, he studied the work of Titian. Soon after his return he fell ill with paralysis. Phillip died at his home, 1 South Villas, Campden Hill, Kensington, on 27 February 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 22141


Phillip, William (fl. 1596-1619), translator, may have lived in the Netherlands, and worked for the London-based printer John Wolfe, who specialized in books and news from Europe. Wolfe had his agents everywhere, and Phillip may have been one of them, although he was not exclusively in Wolfe's employment. 
Wolfe published a number of translations by a W. P. in 1596-7 which may be by William Phillip: a Dutch treatise on painting, 'A Boke of Secrets' (1596); 'Praedictio astrologia: the Great and Wonderfull Prognostication for 1598' (entered in the Stationers' register on 19 December 1597), from the Dutch work by Rodulphus Graephus; two works describing recent events in France; and 'The Edict and Decree of Philip, King of Spaine, Touching the Exchanging of Monyes' (1597), which was translated from a French translation. 
Phillip's first known translation was of Nicholaus Petri's 'The practique om to leeren rekenen cijpheren ende boeckhouven', and appeared under the title 'Pathway of Knowledge' in 1596, dedicated to the mayor and aldermen of London. Phillip presents the treatise on arithmetic, weights and measures, and bookkeeping, as for the general benefit of the commonwealth. 
Two more works for Wolfe followed in 1598. The first was a translation of Bernardt Lanhenez's account of the successful voyage of Cornelius de Houtman, published as 'The Description of a Voyage into the East Indies' (de Houtman had returned, triumphant, to Amsterdam in 1597). It was dedicated to Sir James Scudamore, and Phillip again claims service to the commonwealth to be his chief aim. The success of de Houtman's expedition spurred others to risk ships and crews, and Phillip captured this adventure in his next translation of that year: 'John Huighen Van Linschoten, his Discours of Voyages into the East and West Indies'. This translation was dedicated to Sir Julius Caesar, judge of the high court of admiralty, and talks of 'the manyfolde Curtesies, which it hath pleased you from time to time to multiply upon mee'. 
Phillip's next translation from Dutch appeared in 1609, from an original work by Gerrit de Veer. It was titled 'The True and Perfect Description of Three Voyages by the Ships of Holland and Zeland'. It was dedicated to Sir Thomas Smith, governor of the East India and Muscovy companies. Phillip writes that he was encouraged by Richard Hakluyt and others to make the work public. A later edition was published by the Hakluyt Society in 1853 and edited by Charles T. Beke, who notes in the translation 'a number of errors resulting evidently from the want of a thorough acquaintance with the Dutch language' (Beke, cxxxviii). Phillip's next translation in 1619 was also dedicated to Smith and had the title 'The relation of a wonderful voyage made by William Cornelison Schouten of Horne, showing how south from the Straight of Magelan in Terra Del-Fuogo, he found and discovered a new passage through the great South Sea, and that was sayled round about the world'. Phillip's last known translation was from Dutch into Latin and then into English, and was printed in London in 1619 with the title 'Newes from Bohemia, showing the reasons why those of the reformed religion were moved to take armes for the defence of the king and themselves, especially against the dangerous sect of Jesuites'. 
Phillip witnessed the rapid extension of Dutch power between 1580 and 1620. To him it was a miracle. The Dutch were able to mount great navies and armies and pay for them mainly out of taxation. He was determined the English reading world understood that this was achieved through the dedication of Calvinist explorers. 


@@@@@


doc= 22142


Phillipps, Samuel March (1780-1862), legal writer and civil servant, second son of Thomas March of More Crichel, Dorset, was born at Crakemarsh, Staffordshire, on 14 July 1780. His father assumed the additional surname of Phillipps on succeeding in 1796 to the estate of Garendon Park, Leicestershire, under the will of his cousin, Samuel Phillipps. His mother, Susan, was the fourteenth daughter of Edward Lisle of Crux-Easton, Hampshire, and his elder brother, Charles March Phillipps (1779-1862), became the whig squire of Garendon Park near Loughborough and MP for Leicestershire. Two younger brothers, Edward Thomas March Phillipps (1784-1859) and William March Phillipps (1790- 'c'.1818), became clergymen. Phillipps was educated at Sherborne and Charterhouse schools, and Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA, being eighth wrangler and chancellor's medallist, in 1802; he proceeded to MA in 1805 and was made a fellow of his college. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1806, but did not practise. On 16 October 1812, he married Charemelle (died 18 Dec 1825), second daughter of Charles Grant and sister of Charles Grant, Lord Glenelg. They had two sons. 
In 1814 Phillipps published 'A Treatise in the Law of Evidence', which was well received and reached a third edition in 1838. In 1826 he published a collection of state trials, which was also praised but which was largely superseded by Howell's 'State Trials' collection. In July 1827 he accepted the post of permanent under-secretary for home affairs, which he held until his retirement in May 1848. This, the era of the Chartists and the Rebecca rioters, was a crucial period for the Home Office, and Phillipps, who in his post handled most of the correspondence with local magistrates and military commanders, was in a position to exercise considerable influence on affairs. In his capacity as under-secretary he gave evidence in 1833 to the select committee appointed to inquire into the matter of the petition of Frederick Young, and complained that policemen were being used as spies to monitor political meetings, looking in particular at the case of William Popay. On his retirement Phillipps was sworn of the privy council (June 1848). He died at Great Malvern, Worcestershire, on 11 March 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 22143


Phillipps, Sir Thomas, baronet (1792-1872), collector of books and manuscripts, was born on 2 July 1792 at 32 Cannon Street, Manchester. He was illegitimate, the only child of Thomas Phillipps (1742-1818), the prosperous senior partner of Phillipps, Lowe & Co., calico manufacturers and printers of Manchester, and Hannah Walton, daughter of James Walton, of Warley, and his wife, Mary Greenroyd. His grandfather William Phillipps farmed at Broadway, Worcestershire. On retiring from business his father moved to Broadway, and in 1794 he bought Middle Hill, a handsome five-bayed house, recently enlarged, below Broadway Tower, with a fine view over the Vale of Evesham. Father and son moved there two years later. His mother had no part in his upbringing, although she lived on until 1851, and married Frederick Judd in 1812. Thomas Phillipps senior did not take easily to country life, although he much extended his estate and became high sheriff of Worcestershire in 1802. His chief occupations were meddling in the firm, from which he had nominally retired, and litigation with his neighbours, from whom he was also isolated by deafness. Both characteristics were inherited by his son, whom he wished to become a gentleman. But Lord Chesterfield's maxims, much cited by the father, were no substitute for a mother's care; a lonely youth spent with an ageing and irascible father induced in the younger Phillipps a lifelong indifference to the feelings of others. 
Phillipps was educated locally before going to Rugby School in 1807. There his future tastes began to show. Long afterwards, in 1864, he printed the catalogue that he made at the age of sixteen of what was then a library of 110 volumes. Most of these, surprisingly, were Gothic novels, but at Oxford his antiquarian tastes developed rapidly. He went up to University College late (in October 1811), and spent four years there, acquiring more books than learning. He needed a private tutor to prepare him for examinations, and took his BA degree in 1815. His father had good cause to complain of his extravagance, especially on books. But he made some like-minded friends, who encouraged his interests. This gave him the confidence to write to the veteran antiquary Sir Richard Colt Hoare offering to help with his history of Wiltshire. Hoare welcomed this and set him to work copying documents at Salisbury; Phillipps -- unusually for him -- remained on consistently friendly terms with Hoare until the latter's death in 1838. By this time he had fallen in love with Henrietta Elizabeth ('b'. 1794/5), third daughter of Major-General Thomas Molyneux. She had good looks and a respectable family, but no dowry, which to Phillipps's father was a serious obstacle. This impediment was removed when the old man died on 1 November 1818, and the marriage took place early in the following year, on 7 February 1819. His father, apprehensive of his son's continuing extravagance, left the estate in trust, giving his heir access to only the income. 
The next ten years were perhaps the happiest of Phillipps's life. His three daughters were born -- Henrietta (1819), Sophia (1821), and Katharine (1829) -- and he was now able to indulge his interests without paternal censure. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1820, and thanks to his father-in-law's interest with the duke of Beaufort was made a baronet in the coronation honours in the following year. He set about buying books and manuscripts with gusto, copying and commissioning transcripts of historic documents, and from 1822 having them printed, usually coarsely and in small quantities, by a succession of his own printers on a private press at Broadway Tower. Even so, an income of over $6000 p.a. should have sufficed, but his complete inability to restrain his expenditure and refusal to accept the advice of his agents soon landed him in debt, from which he was never again free. In 1822-3 he was obliged to economize by living on the continent. He returned there in 1824, and again in 1827-9. This was a period when, following the French Revolution, the Napoleonic wars, and the secularization of the German monastic houses in 1803, old books and manuscripts were more widely available than at any time before or since. Phillipps made his acquisitions from many places as he travelled from Brussels to Bern, with major purchases at The Hague and Lille, in Germany, and from the booksellers of Paris. At this time he made, and largely retained, friendships with continental scholars, who repaid his hospitality by showing greater tolerance of his eccentricities than did his British contemporaries. 
Phillipps's largest acquisition in this period was the purchase at auction of over 650 manuscripts from the collection of the Dutch typographic historian Gerard Meerman (1722-1771) at The Hague in 1824. This featured texts from the seventh and eighth centuries, some renowned illuminated manuscripts, and a tenth-century Greek manuscript in gold capital script. Phillipps was just as eager in the pursuit of rarities when he returned to Britain. At the sale in 1827 of the Revd Theodore Williams, another victim of his own extravagance, he bought two famous manuscripts, the gospels of Matilda of Tuscany and the Gundulf 'Bible', for the high prices of $172 and $189. He had many dealings with the two major booksellers of the time, Payne and Foss, and Thomas Thorpe. The former represented him at the sale of Richard Heber's library in 1835-6, at which (for over $2500) he bought 428 manuscripts; the latter sold him countless historic documents. Thomas Payne and his partner, Henry Foss, were not reliant on the baronet's custom, and dealt with his unreasonable demands with firmness and good sense. Thorpe, who was less independent and less scrupulous, was too ready to give Phillipps long credit, which was subsequently abused, forcing Thorpe into bankruptcy in 1837. Over all this Sir Frederic Madden, keeper of manuscripts in the British Museum, kept a close watch, fairly tolerant if increasingly exasperated by Phillipps's activities, and his detailed and sharply observant diary provides a vivid picture of Phillipps as a collector and in his domestic life. 
In March 1832 Phillipps's wife died aged thirty-seven, and after a blatantly mercenary search he married again on 2 June 1842. His second wife was Elizabeth Harriet Anne ('b'. 1815), daughter of the Revd William Mansel. As the companion of his later years, she showed (and needed) great forbearance in the face of his increasing eccentricity. In the interval a family event with far-reaching consequences took place. James Orchard Halliwell had as a Cambridge undergraduate in 1839 written to Sir Thomas for historical information. He was still only eighteen, and Phillipps was impressed by the young man, who examined Cambridge libraries for him. In recompense Phillipps printed the catalogue of the scientific manuscripts that Halliwell had already assembled, and then invited him to stay. Halliwell visited Middle Hill in February 1842, and promptly fell in love with Phillipps's eldest daughter. Phillipps was initially sympathetic, but soon fell out with Halliwell over a dowry. But Henrietta was of age, and the couple eloped in August, soon after her father's second marriage. Phillipps's rage was unbridled and lasting, especially after evidence emerged in 1845 that Halliwell had stolen manuscripts from Trinity College, Cambridge. Thereafter Phillipps did his best to thwart and denigrate his son-in-law, and to make his daughter's life a misery. She tried her utmost to effect a reconciliation, and remained on good terms with her sisters, who both married clergymen. 
Meanwhile the collections at Middle Hill expanded rapidly. Ever since the Palace of Westminster had burnt down in 1834, when he himself had tried to rescue records from the flames, Phillipps had been preoccupied with the danger of fire. As a precaution he kept his own books in coffin-like boxes with handles and drop-down lids, piled on each other, so that if in danger they could be speedily removed. They surprised visitors, who nevertheless admitted the utility of this arrangement. Phillipps was his own librarian, and occasionally pressed his daughters into service while they still lived at home. The task demanded a professional staff and was too much for him: visiting scholars, always received with hospitality, were sometimes disappointed when what they came for could not be found. Continental scholars such as his old friend G. H. Pertz, editor of the 'Monumenta Germaniae Historica', and American historians such as W. H. Prescott and Jared Sparks, enjoyed productive visits, which they wrote about with gratitude. Phillipps was a discriminating and generous patron to two contemporary artists, the landscape painter John Glover and the American George Catlin. He had a particular sympathy with Catlin's crusade not merely to depict but to preserve the way of life of the indigenous peoples of North America. 
All this was of lesser importance when compared with Phillipps's principal task of amassing documents of the past. Phillipps referred to himself as a complete 'Vello-maniac'. He ranged widely, embracing illuminated manuscripts oriental as well as Western, medieval charters, antiquaries' collections, and all manner of historical documents and early printed books. He bought extensively at the sales of David Powell, the genealogist, George Baker, the historian of Northamptonshire, and Viscount Kingsborough, author of 'The Antiquities of Mexico', in 1842, and of Augustus, duke of Sussex, in 1844. At the Wilks sale in 1847 he bought the Caxton 'Recuyell of the Historyes of Troy' and the first folio of Shakespeare, but failed to secure the Gutenberg 'Bible', the price of which he ran up to $500, more than double the previous record for this book. He tried to buy the duke of Buckingham's Stowe manuscripts but lost out to Lord Ashburnham; and he competed strongly between 1849 and 1862 for Guglielmo Libri's fabulous -- if dubiously acquired -- collections. At the Ker Porter, Routh, Dering, and Mitford sales he consistently bought the major lots. This level of acquisition continued until he was well into his seventies; he frequently argued with his suppliers, and even complained about the condition of some books rescued from the fire that burnt down Sothebys rooms off the Strand in 1865. 
By this time the ultimate destination of his collection was in the forefront of Phillipps's mind. For ten years up to 1861 he was intermittently in negotiation with the University of Oxford, reviving earlier discussions about terms of possible acquisition by the Bodleian Library. He then proposed that he should become Bodley's librarian, with the newly appointed Henry Octavius Coxe as his deputy. Coxe, who fortunately had a sense of humour, was unable to take this seriously. Phillipps thereupon broke off negotiations. The British Museum, too, was often in his thoughts, as in his requests to Madden that the institution should stand down in his favour at sales or, alternatively, when he was more than usually hard pressed, that it should purchase his whole collection at an appropriately inflated price. In 1861 Anthony Panizzi, the principal librarian, wrote to Phillipps, ultimately to invite him to become a trustee of the museum. Phillipps accepted (in 1861), and although he rarely attended meetings, was full of ideas for improvements. Some had merit. He recommended the introduction of guide lecturers, the use of an electric telegraph to communicate between the bookstacks and the reading-room, and binding the books for use there in cloth instead of leather. But he was affronted when other suggestions were rejected, and when it came to providing for his own collection, he proved impossible to satisfy. He turned next to Wales and in particular to Manorbier, the home of the Phillipps family of Picton Castle, with whom Sir Thomas claimed some remote consanguinity; by 1869 this scheme had likewise foundered. 
Phillipps was determined, in his obsessive hatred of Halliwell, that his son-in-law should not lay hands on the collection, even though Middle Hill itself was entailed on his wife. It was this, as well as an ever more urgent space requirement, that in 1863 led Phillipps to take the lease of Thirlestaine House in Cheltenham, a large and uncomfortable mansion with additional art galleries left empty at the death of the second Lord Northwick, and to buy it in 1867. It took two years for a wagon train to transport the library across the Cotswolds to its new home. Phillipps himself arranged the books, and once wrote: 'I do everything myself, I manage all my Estates -- I have seven Works in the Press to collate & correct. People come continually to see my Gallery of Pictures & I am the only Cicerone. People come from the Continent to examine my MSS & from all parts of England, Scotland & Ireland, & I am the sole Librarian to search for the Books. Others in great Numbers will write for information & I am the sole amanuensis. The Booksellers send me countless Catalogues which I look over & select & order & when the Books arrive I am the sole unpacker and arranger on the Shelves. (Munby, 4.134)' This self-portrait is accurate and his powers, despite his advanced age, were undiminished. Lady Phillipps, her husband's heart set so much on his books, took a less favourable view of the move: she was, she complained, 'booked out of one wing and ratted out of the other' (ibid., 2.91). 
Phillipps remained at Thirlestaine House, gouty and foul-tempered, his bad qualities accentuated by age. His unreasoning anti-Catholic prejudice continued as vigorously as ever, but a campaign for the preservation of public records by anastatic printing was based on views that were well grounded and far-sighted. In Cheltenham he entertained the young W. W. Skeat, at work on his edition of 'Piers Plowman', and the great German historian Leopold von Ranke. He continued to correspond with his oldest and best friends, Sir Henry Dryden and Robert Curzon, now Lord Zouche, with whom he could exchange bibliophilic gossip in a far lighter manner than he ever displayed to his family or to librarians or booksellers. A fall from a library ladder restricted his movement, but he persisted in arranging his collections until he was too weak to continue. On 1 February 1872 he signed his will, drafted and redrafted for over fifty years, and on 6 February he died at Thirlestaine House. He was buried at St Eadburga's Church, Broadway. 
Phillipps's will was proved at about $120,000, of which he left only $100 to his widow. Most of his unentailed lands were settled on tenants called Phillipps and chosen for that reason, with a remainder to his grandson Owen Walcot. Thirlestaine House and its contents were left in trust for his youngest daughter, Katharine, with a life interest for her third son, Thomas Fitzroy Fenwick. Not a book was to be moved; the Halliwells and all Roman Catholics were banned from entering. It took many years to circumvent such provisions, though the Halliwells (who promptly took the name Halliwell-Phillipps) were soon allowed to break the entail on Middle Hill and to profit from what was still a handsome estate. But not until 1885 were the Fenwicks, left with the enormous and expensive Thirlestaine House but little income to support it, enabled by judicial approval to begin the gradual dispersal of the contents. 
Shrewdly negotiated sales of groups of manuscripts to foreign governments (such as the Meerman collection to Germany) and to major private collectors followed, and there was a long series of auctions at Sothebys. Some twenty-two sales had taken place before the still vast residue was bought, speculatively on the basis of its catalogues, by the London antiquarian booksellers Lionel and Philip Robinson, in 1946. They continued a profitable dispersal, through their own retail catalogues and eventually by a further series of auctions at Sothebys. The remainder was acquired by the New York dealers H. P. Kraus in 1977. 
The impression of Phillipps -- vain, obstinate, and intolerant -- which suffuses his extensive correspondence, is not entirely fair. Like his old friend Madden, he is seen at his worst on paper. His unfortunate family received his outbursts with some degree of indulgence. He often contested his bills, and usually paid them late, but this was less unacceptable at a time when money held its value, and in commerce the debts of a good customer could be more useful than his money. His true memorial lies in his collection; dispersed though it is, its formation was a great achievement. He was well aware that much of what he gathered was at risk of destruction. He bid high in the rooms and forced the market upwards against himself, but he recognized that higher prices would encourage preservation. In 1869 he wrote jokingly to Robert Curzon, 'I am buying Printed Books because I wish to have 'one copy of every Book in the World!!!!!'' (Munby, 1.38). That was clearly impossible, but his collection of over 60,000 manuscripts was an outstanding achievement in the annals of bibliophily. 


@@@@@


doc= 22144


Phillips, Arthur (1605-1695), organist and composer, was a younger son of William Phillips of Winchester. He matriculated at New College, Oxford, on 15 November 1622. He was appointed organist of Bristol Cathedral in 1638 and Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1639, and graduated BMus in 1640. From 1639, following in the footsteps of his predecessor at Magdalen, Richard Nicolson, he was choragus, in effect professor of music, at Oxford. 
As a composer Phillips wrote settings of royalist verse, a set of keyboard variations, and some instrumental ensemble music. The variations, based on a four-bar ground, are a valuable record of his technical skill as a composer and performer (BL, Add. MS 29996). He composed music in several parts to poems and hymns by Thomas Pierce including 'The Requiem, or, Liberty of an Imprisoned Royalist' (1641), and 'The Resurrection' (1649). His instrumental music survives in the Bodleian Library. 
In 1656 Phillips resigned his place at Magdalen, having become a Roman Catholic, and then went to France as organist to Queen Henrietta Maria. After the Restoration he returned to England and became steward of a Roman Catholic gentleman in Harting, Sussex, usually said to be John Caryll. Phillips owned Hargraves Farm in Harting and inherited from Thomas Fowler some land with a house and a barn belonging to him, in the same place. Phillips died on 27 March 1695 in Harting. His nephew, Hugh Phillips, was the executor and main beneficiary of his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 22145


Phillips, Catherine (1727-1794), Quaker minister and writer, was born on 16 March 1727 at Dudley, Worcestershire, the youngest of the six children of Henry Payton (1671-1746), Quaker minister, and his second wife, Ann ('c'.1673-1774), daughter of Henry and Elizabeth Fowler of Evesham. Educated mainly at home, Catherine was intelligent and widely read but later she felt that reading poetry, philosophy, and history tended to lead her away from true religion. She first ministered at Dudley in 1748, aged twenty-two, 'in but a few words'. From this small beginning Catherine embarked on a career of almost constant travel, as a 'public Friend', for the next thirty years. Besides repeated visits to most of the counties in England and Wales her travels extended to Ireland, Scotland, and the Netherlands. She also visited America from 1753 to 1756 and on other occasions, and travelled in total almost 9000 miles within that country. 
Throughout her life Catherine campaigned for structures that would allow women to take their full part in the running of the Society of Friends. Her own relationships with women, both relatives and friends, some of whom travelled with her, were close and supportive. In her public role, however, Catherine did not court popularity and she conceded in later life that she may have taken this resolve too far. She had an air of command which some found difficult in a woman -- James Jenkins, a critical fellow Quaker, called her 'a great Autocratrix' -- but she was clear in her own mind that the respect she demanded was for the ministry of God and not for herself. 
Catherine Payton met William Phillips (died 1785) for the first time at the very beginning of her ministry in Wales in 1749. He worked in the copper-mining business in Cornwall and was a widower with two young sons. He was attracted to Catherine but she was unwilling to contemplate any connection that might detract from her ministry, and so broke off communications. They met again and resumed a correspondence in 1766 but it was not until 15 July 1772, when Catherine was forty-five and William's sons had grown up, that she and William eventually married at Bewdley in Worcestershire. They moved to William's home in Cornwall, where Catherine also had numerous relatives. After her marriage Catherine continued to travel, supported by William's organizational skills; their partnership continued until William died on 12 August 1785. 
Most of Catherine Phillips's writings appeared just before or after her death, mainly published by her stepson James Phillips. Her principal work was her 'Memoirs', begun after William's death, partly as a memorial to him. Several of Catherine's epistles appeared in collections of letters by eminent Quakers. Her other notable publication was 'The Happy King: a Sacred Poem', addressed to George III, which is chiefly a polemic against slavery. Catherine's travels were often punctuated by illness and she was weakened by several serious falls from horses. After her husband's death her health declined further until she died at Redruth in Cornwall on 16 August 1794; she was buried at Kea, near Truro. 


@@@@@


doc= 22146


Phillips, Charles (fl. 1766-1783), engraver and drawing-master, is said to have been born in 1737, but his origins are unknown. He began to exhibit with the Free Society in 1766 and continued until 1783. In 1769 his address, as printed in their catalogue, was 'in Paris', suggesting a visit to France. In 1771 he was listed as 'Engraver and teacher of drawing' (Graves, 'Artists', 197), and his main employment may have been as a drawing-master. Several of the 'old master' paintings that he reproduced were to be found in noble collections, and since Phillips published some of them himself he may, perhaps as a drawing-master, have moved in affluent circles. His plates, few in number but of excellent quality, belong to the relatively brief period during which he exhibited. His 'old masters' include five then ascribed to Rembrandt; among contemporaries his principal collaborator was Philippe Jacques de Loutherbourg, several of whose theatrical and caricature subjects he engraved. Phillips's early work was in mezzotint, but during the 1770s he mastered the chalk manner and experimented with mixed methods: one exhibit in 1778 was 'a composition of engraving, aquafortis, aquatinta, and mezzotinto' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 22147


Phillips, Charles (1786/7?-1859), barrister, was born at Sligo, in Ireland, the son of William Phillips (died 1800), a publican and town councillor. His age was recorded as fifteen years old when he was admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, in 1802, and he graduated BA in 1806. On 30 October 1807 he entered the Middle Temple in London, and was called to the Irish bar in February 1812. He joined the Connaught circuit and quickly made a reputation through his extravagant forensic speeches, a number of which he published as 'The Speeches of Charles Phillips', in 1817. He had a grand style, explosive in pace and overflowing in superlatives, metaphor, and vivid expression, though he lacked the tact of a first-class advocate. His style attracted two critical articles by Henry Brougham in the 'Edinburgh Review', to which Phillips responded in two open letters to the 'Edinburgh Review' and in the preface to 'Specimens of Irish Eloquence', which he edited in 1819. Other contemporary critics, including William Hazlitt, Christopher North, and Sir James MacKintosh, have left their impressions of his style. 
While a student in the Middle Temple, Phillips began his literary writing, and over the next decade he published a number of poems, and some speeches and articles on contemporary political questions. One poem, 'The Emerald Isle', gained Phillips an invitation to the table of the distinguished Irish advocate and judge John Philpot Curran. On Curran's death Phillips wrote a warm biographical tribute, entitled 'Recollections of Curran and some of his Contemporaries'. This was Phillips's most enduring literary work, running to five editions between 1818 and 1857. 
In November 1819 Phillips married a Miss Whalley of Camden Town, London; they had one daughter and two sons. By this time Phillips had left Ireland for England; he was called in February 1821 to the English bar, where he prospered only in criminal cases, though in this field he was highly successful. By the mid-1830s, a contemporary barrister later recalled that Phillips: 'was signally the prisoners' counsel at the Old Bailey, the Middlesex sessions, and also upon the Oxford circuit. In this capacity he was certainly at that time unrivalled. He had great readiness, a power of repartee, earnestness when it was required; and whatever deficiency he may have shown in his earlier career, he had acquired a very sound judgment. He was never dull and the juries liked him. (Ballantine, 1.87)' By the beginning of the 1830s Phillips had formed a friendship with Henry Brougham, who soon became lord chancellor, and they corresponded on legal and political questions from this time until Phillips's death. More than 600 of their letters survive among the Brougham papers in the library of University College, London, and these form a particularly valuable archive of the reforms to criminal procedure of the 1830s. Phillips assisted Lord Brougham in the preparation of the 'Central Criminal Court Act' (1834) and encouraged him to create a salaried public prosecutor for this court. He strongly opposed the 'Prisoners' Counsel Act' (1836), both in private correspondence with Lord Brougham and publicly in evidence before a select committee of the House of Lords. He considered that this act would turn criminal trials into contests of skill between counsel, and subject human life and liberty to forensic sophistry. 
Phillips was defence counsel under the procedure established by this act in the sensational murder trial of Courvoisier in 1840. On the second day of his trial Courvoisier confessed his guilt to Phillips but insisted on continuing with his plea of not guilty. Phillips's speech to the jury included some scathing attacks on prosecution witnesses, and a number of rhetorical references to things divine. After the trial he was accused of irresponsibility and abuse of his position as an advocate. Other controversial advocacy during the 1840s periodically revived discussion of his defence of Courvoisier. Eventually on 20 November 1849 Phillips defended his conduct in a letter to 'The Times'. In retrospect Courvoisier is a landmark case in the development of professional ethics. The better view is that Phillips did not transgress the bounds of his professional duty, but that some passages of his speech were unwise and distasteful. 
In 1842 Phillips was appointed as a commissioner of the bankruptcy court at Liverpool, where his time was marred by difficulties with his fellow judge and by the death of one of his sons. In 1846 he returned to London as a commissioner of the insolvent debtors' court. In 1857 he produced the widely read pamphlet 'Vacation Thoughts on Capital Punishment', which urged the total abolition of the death penalty. Phillips died at 39 Gordon Square, London, on 1 February 1859, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 
Phillips's sensitive and imaginative nature inspired the romanticism of his writing, and the eloquence and exaggerations of his advocacy. His sensitivity and a certain lack of moral courage meant that he was easily wounded by criticism, over-ready to justify himself, and susceptible to lapses of judgement under pressure. He was not a great advocate, though significant for the success he achieved with a forensic style which, by English standards, was unusually passionate and rhetorical. He was a tall man, with expressive features and a good speaking voice. 


@@@@@


doc= 22148


Phillips, Edward (b. 1630, d. in or after 1696), writer and biographer, was the eldest surviving son of Anne Phillips (died 'c'.1640), sister of Milton, and her husband, Edward Phillips (1597-1631), secondary of the crown office in the court of chancery. The elder Edward Phillips, whose family had come from Shrewsbury, married Anne Milton on 22 November 1623; the priest who conducted the ceremony at St Stephen Walbrook, London, was Thomas Myriell, who was probably the same person as the musician friend of the elder John Milton, father of the poet. Edward and Anne Phillips had at least five children: John (1625-1629), Anne (1626-1628), the subject of Milton's poem 'On the Death of a Fair Infant'), and Elizabeth (1628-1631) were all buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields. The two surviving children were Edward and John Phillips, both of whom became the poet John Milton's pupils. 
The first home of Edward Phillips was in the Strand, near Charing Cross, in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields. He may have been born in this house, as Anthony Wood states, but the lack of an entry in the registers of St Martin-in-the-Fields makes it possible that the family had fled the plague in the summer of 1630 and that Edward was born in Shrewsbury (where his paternal grandmother was living in 1630) or Exeter (where his maternal grandfather, John Milton the elder, worked for a time in 1630) or Hammersmith (to which his maternal grandparents had moved early in 1630). The precise date of Edward's birth is not known but the entry in Milton's family 'Bible' (now in the British Library), to the effect that Edward Phillips was fifteen years old in August 1645, is consistent with Wood's assertion that he was born in August 1630. In August 1631, when Edward was about a year old, his father fell ill, probably of plague. On 12 August 1631 he drew up a will, 'being weak in body' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/160/99), and the will was witnessed by John Milton the elder; Phillips died shortly thereafter and was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields on 25 August. On 5 January 1632 Edward's mother, Anne, married Thomas Agar, her late husband's colleague and 'intimate friend' (Darbishire, 53), at St Dunstan-in-the-East; Agar thus became young Edward's stepfather (and Milton's brother-in-law) and he also succeeded Edward's father as secondary of chancery. Agar was a widower and brought to the new marriage a daughter called Anne, who may be the Anna Eager who was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields in November 1633. Thomas and Anne had two daughters, stepsisters to Edward and John Phillips: Mary, who was baptized on 10 October 1632 and seems to have died young, and Anne, who was born in 1635 or 1636, since the licence for her marriage to Thomas Moore, issued in December 1662, gives her age as twenty-six. Mary was baptized in Kensington, close to the family home in Brompton, which was the childhood home of Edward and John Phillips. 
The poet Milton, Edward's uncle, returned from his journey to Italy in 1639, and early in 1640 he took lodgings in London at the house of a tailor named Russell, in St Bride's Churchyard, near Fleet Street. Anne Agar seems to have died at about this time, and Milton assumed responsibility for the education of his nephews. John boarded with his uncle and Edward became a day pupil in his lodgings. Shortly thereafter Milton moved to a large house in Aldersgate Street and Edward joined his younger brother as a boarder. Half a century later Edward described, in his 'Life of Milton' (1694), the formidable education that he received from his schoolmaster uncle; the course of study closely resembles the syllabus that Milton set out in his tract 'Of Education' (1644). Milton taught the boys to sing and instructed them in various languages, beginning with Latin and then proceeding to Greek, Hebrew, Aramaic ('Chaldee'), and Syriac before moving on to Italian and French. Edward's account of his reading in these languages is daunting even by the high standards of that learned age: between the ages of ten and sixteen, he recalled, his Latin reading had included 'Cato, Verro, Columella and Palladius; Cornelius Celsus... a great part of Pliny's 'Natural History'; Vitruvius his 'Architecture'; Frontinus his 'Stratagems'... Lucretius and Manilius' (Darbishire, 60). In addition to these classical authors Milton prescribed modern Latin texts for the study of arithmetic, geometry, trigonometry, and astronomy. Greek poets read during this period included Hesiod, Aratus, Dionysius 'Periegetes', Oppian, Quintus Smyrnaeus, and Apollonius Rhodius; Greek prose included Plutarch, Geminus, Xenophon, Pseudo-Aelian, and Polyaenus. Edward read the 'Pentateuch' in Hebrew, the 'Targum' in Aramaic, and several chapters of 'Matthew's gospel' in Syriac. He read Giovanni Villani's chronicle of medieval Florence in Italian and Pierre d'Avity's geographical treatise in French. Edward emerged from this education as a competent linguist but nothing in his published writings suggests that he ever developed the scholarly passions or distinction of mind of his uncle. 
Late in 1645 the Milton family moved to a house in Barbican, and in 1647 to a house in High Holborn, near Lincoln's Inn Fields; it is likely that Edward remained in his uncle's household throughout this period and that he was still living with the family when Milton was appointed by the council of state to the post of secretary for foreign tongues in March 1649. The appointment entitled Milton to accommodation in Whitehall but he initially lodged next door to the Bullhead tavern at Charing Cross, near Spring Garden; forty-five years later Edward was able to remember that the landlord's name was Thomson, so it seems likely that he remained with the household in this temporary residence, which was only a few yards from his first home. When the apartment at the Scotland Yard end of Whitehall was ready at the end of November, Milton moved in with his household, of which Edward was probably still a member. 
Wood records that Edward went up to Oxford 'in the beginning of March 1648' (that is, 1649) but the matriculation record shows that he was admitted (or possibly readmitted) to Magdalen Hall on 19 November 1650. In any case he soon left Oxford without a degree, probably on reaching the age of majority in the summer of 1651, when he inherited property in Shrewsbury; his paternal grandmother, Katharine Phillips, had died in Shrewsbury in the summer of 1650, and by July 1651 Edward had moved there to manage his inheritance. He lived in Shrewsbury until 1655, during which time he became acquainted with Gilbert Sheldon, who witnessed three documents for Phillips. He visited London on occasion, serving as an amanuensis to his uncle, who had gone blind; a letter from Milton, dated 13 February 1652 (now in the Staatsarchiv in Oldenburg), is written in Edward's hand, as are several undated entries in Milton's commonplace book (now in the British Library). Phillips also attended concerts given by Henry Lawes, to whom he wrote a poem 'Upon his Book of Ayres', which was published in 1653; Phillips's other surviving poem from this period was prefaced to the 'Divine Poems' of his friend Thomas Washbourne, which was printed in 1654. 
In 1653 Edward began to dispose of his Shrewsbury property, and in the summer of 1655, when most or all of it was sold, he moved to London, where he became a hack writer for the publisher and bookseller Nathaniel Brook. In the second half of 1655 he translated two novels from the Spanish of Juan Perez de Montalban as 'The Illustrious Shepherdess' and 'The Imperious Brother', both of which were published in February 1656. His next project was an edition of the poems of William Drummond of Hawthornden, which appeared later in 1656. This is the only work of this period not to have been prepared for Brook; Phillips had been given the manuscript of some sixty of Drummond's poems by Sir John Scott, Drummond's brother-in-law, and he edited the poems and contributed an introduction. In 1658 Phillips published a dictionary called 'The New World of English Words', much of which was plundered from the 'Glossographia' of Thomas Blount, which had been printed in 1656; in 1673 Blount exacted his revenge in 'A World of Errors Discovered in the 'New World of Words''. Stephen Skinner ridiculed Phillips's philological efforts in his posthumous 'Etymologicon Linguae Anglicae' (1671), which Phillips subsequently pillaged for later editions of his 'World of Words'. 
In August 1658 Phillips published a light-hearted miscellany entitled 'The mysteries of love and eloquence, or, The arts of wooing and complimenting as they are managed in the Spring Garden, Hyde Park and other eminent places', which contains poetry, songs, parlour games, exemplary conversations and letters for courtship, a rhyming dictionary, and an 'art of logic'; in the 1699 edition the title was changed to 'The Beau's Academy'. In 1660 Phillips published an edition of 'The Chronicle of the Kings of England' by Sir Richard Baker, adding a strongly royalist continuation from 1650 to 1658; for the 1662 edition Phillips extended his chronology to the coronation of Charles II in May 1661, basing his account of the Restoration on George Monck's private papers, which had been entrusted to him by Sir Thomas Clarges, General Monck's brother-in-law. 
From 1662 to 1664 Phillips worked as an assistant to Elias Ashmole, for whom he translated and transcribed documents for Ashmole's treatise on the Order of the Garter; Phillips's distinctive handwriting -- a bold cursive script -- can be seen throughout the Ashmole papers. During this period he continued to act as an amanuensis for his uncle; several of the corrections to the manuscript of book 1 of 'Paradise Lost' (now in the Pierpont Morgan Library) are in his hand. On 24 October 1663 he found employment as a tutor to John Evelyn, son of the diarist, at Sayes Court, near Deptford. The elder Evelyn recorded in his diary that Phillips 'was not at all infected by his uncle's principles, tho' brought up by him' ('Diary of John Evelyn', 162) and describes his son's tutor as 'a sober, silent and most harmless person, a little versatile in his studies, understanding many languages, especially the modern'; Phillips seems to have transmitted his understanding of languages to his young charge, who eventually became a translator. In February 1665 Phillips moved to Wilton House in Wiltshire to act as tutor to Philip Herbert (later the seventh earl of Pembroke), son of the fifth earl; according to Evelyn the fifth earl took advantage of Phillips's residence in his household by asking him 'to interpret some of the Teutonic philosophy to whose mystical theology the earl was much addicted'. Having left Wilton at some time between 1669 and 1672 Phillips returned to London to work as a writer. In September 1677, on the recommendation of Evelyn, he entered the household of the earl of Arlington, probably at Euston in Suffolk. The earl required 'a scholar to reade & entertaine him sometimes' ('Diary of John Evelyn', 331) as well as a tutor for his daughter Isabella Bennett (the ten-year-old duchess of Grafton, to whom Phillips dedicated the 1678 edition of his 'World of Words') and his nephew Henry Bennett, both of whom Phillips instructed in various languages. 
In 1670 Phillips published an edition of Johann Buchler's 'Sacrarum profanarumque phrasium poeticarum thesaurus' (dated 1669), to which he added two original essays in Latin; one is a short treatise on the verse of dramatic poets and the other is a chronological account of poetry from Dante to the present which praises 'Paradise Lost' for its sublime subject, pleasant and majestic style, beautiful images, and accomplished natural descriptions, and notes that the poem is believed by its admirers to be a perfect epic poem. In 1675 Phillips published his 'Theatrum poetarum', an annotated alphabetical list of poets, allegedly drawn from all ages and cultures, but mostly English; the quality of the volume is very uneven but it includes considered accounts of Shakespeare and Marlowe, a well-written introductory 'discourse on poets and poetry', a panegyric on his brother John, and a reticent allusion to his famous uncle. The following year Phillips published an edition of John Speed's 'The Theatre of the Empire of Great Britain', to which he added a geographical and topographical supplement. In 1682 he published 'Tractatulus de modo et ratione formandi voces derivativas linguae Latinae', which he translated in 1685 as 'A Treatise of the Way and Manner of Forming the Derivatives of the Latin Tongue'. Two years later, in 1684, he apparently published two volumes entitled 'Enchiridion linguae Latinae, or, A Compendious Latin Dictionary' and 'Speculum linguae Latinae, or, A Succinct and New Method'. Wood describes these books as octavos published in London and says that they 'were all or mostly taken from the 'Latin Thesaurus' writ by Joh. Milton' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.'); no copy of either book has ever been found, nor has Milton's thesaurus. In 1685 Phillips published a 'Poem on the Coronation of his most Sacred Majesty King James II and his Royal Consort' and a historical romance called 'The Minority of St Lewis'. 
The personal life of Edward Phillips after 1679 is not well documented. Wood says that after being discharged from the service of the earl of Arlington, Phillips: 'married a woman with several children, taught school in the Strand near the May-Pole, lived in poor condition (tho' a good master), wrote and translated several things meerly to get a bare livelyhood; was out of employment in 1684 and 85. (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.')' These assertions may all be true but, except for the publications, they are not corroborated or supplemented by any other evidence. On 27 October 1673 Thomas Agar, Phillips's stepfather, drew up a will in which he left $200 to Edward Phillips; the two conditions attached to the bequest were that the money only be used in accordance with the advice of the executor and that the bequest would be cancelled if Phillips were to be appointed to the post of the deputy clerk of chancery; in the event the post was given to another of Milton's nephews, Thomas Milton (the son of Christopher Milton), so Edward presumably received the bequest. The first of these conditions may imply that Agar thought that his irregularly employed stepson was incapable of spending the money responsibly; an unconditional bequest was left to Anne and her son Thomas, but John Phillips is not mentioned, nor are the Miltons. 
Some time before 1681 Milton's widow passed to Edward Phillips many of his uncle's papers, including an important collection of Milton's state papers, which were written in Latin. Phillips translated these papers and published them as 'Letters of State' in 1694; he prefaced this collection with his 'Life of Mr John Milton', which, despite its inaccuracies and ambiguities, contains many details of Milton's life that would not otherwise be known. He also provided information to John Aubrey and John Toland about his uncle's life, and they used this material in their accounts of Milton. In 1696 Phillips published the fifth edition of his 'World of Words' and thereafter he disappears from the historical record; his date and place of death are not known. Toland's comment in 1698 (when John Phillips was still alive) that he had 'perused the papers of one of [Milton's] nephews, learnt what I could in discourse with the other' (Darbishire, 85) may imply that by then Edward Phillips had died. 


@@@@@


doc= 22149


Phillips, Edward (b. 1708/9), playwright, was the son of Edward Phillips, of Westminster. He was educated at Westminster School (from 1720; king's scholar, 1724), and Trinity College, Cambridge (from 1728; he was made a scholar in May 1729). He worked almost exclusively for John Rich at Covent Garden during the years when Henry Fielding -- and a namesake Thomas Phillips, with whom he is persistently confused -- were active at the rival theatres. Edward Phillips's first success was in April 1733 with a ballad opera afterpiece, 'The Mock Lawyer', its title responding to Fielding's (and Moliere's) 'The Mock Doctor'. Later that year in 'The Stage-Mutineers, or, A Playhouse to be Let' Phillips burlesqued the sensational rebellion of actors at Drury Lane led by Theophilus Cibber. He wrote a new patriotic prologue for the traditional Guy Fawkes performance (1733) of Rowe's 'Tamerlane'. The following March, as the script for Covent Garden's patriotic spectacle celebrating the marriage of the princess royal, he wrote 'The Nuptial Masque, or, The Triumphs of Cupid and Hymen', set to music by John Ernest Galliard. In January 1735 came an unsuccessful two-act spin-off of 'The Beggar's Opera', 'Macheath in the Shades'. The following year with Galliard he wrote new scenes to go with Covent Garden's elaborate scenic depictions of Queen Caroline's new Hermitage and Merlin's Cave at Richmond Park; these were added to an old pantomime of Rich's to become 'The Royal Chace, or, Merlin's Cave'. This was very successful, continuing in repertory until late in the century; the opening song, 'With Early Horn', as sung by the tenor John Beard in the guise of a royal huntsman, became in itself a popular favourite. The satire 'Marforio', Covent Garden's attempt to counter the stunning success in 1736 of Fielding's 'Pasquin', was almost certainly written by Edward Phillips; it not only failed miserably but set up Rich to become principal target of Fielding's satire in an addendum to 'Pasquin', the afterpiece 'Tumble-Down-Dick'. After this, Phillips is glimpsed only once more, in December 1739, now at Drury Lane, with a clever but unsuccessful 'rehearsal' afterpiece, 'Britons Strike Home!'



@@@@@


doc= 22150


Phillips, George (fl. 1579-1600), preacher, is of unknown parentage. He matriculated as a pensioner of Trinity College, Cambridge, on 2 December 1579 and graduated BA in 1583 and MA in 1587. The only other information about his life comes from his published works, which demonstrate him to have been a moderate puritan evangelist whose main concerns lay in the field of social ethics not (after the defeat of presbyterianism in the 1580s) in striving to alter the government of the church by bishops. He published six works, beginning with 'Five Godly and Learned Sermons' (1594) which, among other things, encouraged the soldiers of Christ to sing psalms and condemned the sin of usury. His 'God's Generall Summons to his Last Parliament' (1595) emphasized the need for the committed Christian to examine the deeds of his life for signs of grace with the hope that, on Judgment day, he be accounted among the godly not the ungodly who 'shall appeare but as Satan amongst the sons of God (that is) in the companie, but not of the companie of Gods electe' (sig. B4'v'). The same year he published his 'Paines of a Faithfull Pastor'; the reissue of this in 1597 as 'The Good Sheepeheardes Dutie' has sometimes been mistaken for a separate work. Both were dedicated to Thomas Aldersey, a member of London's common council and sometime MP for the city and patron of puritan ministers, which suggests that Phillips was resident in London at this time and eager to obtain backing. He lauded the pastoral calling -- including its highest expression, the bishop -- as higher than all others. Preachers were 'Gods Lieftenants upon earth in spirituall affaires' (unfoliated) because of their crucial role in delivering the scriptural message on the divinely ordained sabbath. That a proportion of clergymen neglected to preach the word was evidence of a grievance to be corrected, but the main enemies were the papists and their antichristian leader, the pope, who maintained devotion by enforcing ignorance. 
In 'The Embassage of Gods Angell' (1597) Phillips described again the ministry's vital role in dispersing the ignorance of popery by preaching the word and evoked the notion of the godly commonwealth where true religion, not social pre-eminence, was the only qualification for high civil and ecclesiastical (including episcopal) office. His final publication came in 1600 with 'The Life and Death of the Rich Man and Lazarus' in which he addressed the problems arising from inequality. The wealthy should avoid the sins of prideful display, covetousness, and usury and bestow their money compassionately to relieve the (deserving) poor: 'the greatest of you shall come from his Downe bed to his dust bed at the last' (sig. D3'r'). The poor were to avoid the sins of idleness and scrounging. Nothing more is known of the remainder of his life but it is clear that this sermon was preached in the city of London where, perhaps, Phillips was still resident. 


@@@@@


doc= 22151


Phillips, George (d. 1644), clergyman and colonist in America, was the son of Christopher Phillips of South Rainham, Norfolk. His exact date of birth and mother's name are unknown. He was admitted sizar at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 10 April 1610, graduated BA in 1614, and proceeded MA in 1617. He served as vicar at Boxted, Essex, and was actively associated with other puritan clergy in the region, and his views on church government were endorsed by his friend John Rogers. By 1626 he had married a daughter of Richard Sergeant and with their two children they joined the great migration to New England in 1630, sailing with Governor John Winthrop. They settled in Watertown, Massachusetts. A church covenant was signed in July 1630 and Phillips became the pastor of the church. At its first meeting, in August 1630, the colony's court of assistants voted to have a house built for Phillips at colony expense. His assistant was John Sherman, who had been a pupil of John Rogers. Phillips's wife died during their first winter in the New World and he later married Elizabeth (died 1674), the widow of Robert Welden; this second marriage produced nine children. 
Phillips was the congregation's sole clergyman until in 1642 he was joined in the Watertown ministry by John Knowles. He was a strong advocate of congregationalist polity and laboured to establish the autonomy of local churches, yet rejected calls for separation from the Church of England. He is thought to have been the author of 'The humble request of his majesties loyall subjects, the governor and company late gone for New England' (1630), that stressed that the colonists were not severing their connections with the national church; yet when colony officials came to Watertown to advise on a dispute over the fitness of one of the congregation to be an elder, Phillips insisted that they come not as magistrates but simply members of a neighbouring congregation. The same concern for local authority led him to join a Watertown protest against taxes imposed by the colony's government in 1632. He was, nevertheless, strongly respected by the colony's leaders. He served as one of the committee charged by the Massachusetts general court, the colony's legislature, to compile the laws issued in 1641 as the 'Body of Libertyes'. In 1642 he was appointed to the board of overseers of Harvard College. 
Phillips kept in touch with his friends in England and became involved in the religious disputes of the times. Shortly after his arrival in New England he composed a defence of the sacraments against Baptist views, and in the course of his argument expounded the nature of the church. He took the view that England had been Christianized by early disciples prior to the rise of the papacy, but he did acknowledge the Church of Rome to be in some sense a true church, if in error, until such time as God would terminate its existence. When these views became known Governor John Winthrop, together with elders of the Boston church, travelled to Watertown to discuss Phillips's views. Following a debate before the congregation, all, including pastor Phillips, were said to be in agreement that the Church of Rome was not to be regarded as a true church, and Phillips did nothing to publish his treatise. 
However, the appearance in 1643 of Thomas Lamb's 'A Confutation of Infants Baptisme' prompted the publication of Phillips's earlier work as a refutation of Lamb. In the event this was arranged by friends as Phillips himself died in Watertown on 1 July 1644 and was buried there the next day. His 'A Reply to a Confutation of Some Grounds for Infant Baptisme' (1645) was welcomed by English Independents and others disturbed by the spread of Baptist views. While maintaining that the outward forms of ceremonies and sacraments were less important than the spiritual truth that underlay them, and denying that baptism was a guarantee of saving grace, Phillips defended the importance of infant baptism for the growth of the church. 


@@@@@


doc= 22152


Phillips, George (1804-1892), orientalist, third son of Francis Phillips, farmer, was born at Dunwich in Suffolk on 11 January 1804 and baptized at Westleton on 5 February. Soon afterwards the family moved to Otley, Suffolk. After spending his early years in farm work, and acquiring a knowledge of mathematics in his spare time, Phillips became a master at the grammar school in Woodbridge, and later at that in Worcester. While at Worcester he published his first works, 'A Brief Treatise on the Use of a Case of Instruments' (1823) and 'A Compendium of Algebra' (1824). 
In 1824 Phillips left Worcester in order to enter Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 19 June, but after a short residence migrated to Queens' College, Cambridge, on 25 October 1825. He won a scholarship in 1827 and graduated BA in 1829 with a first in mathematics. In 1830 he was elected fellow of his college and subsequently became senior tutor. He was ordained deacon in 1831 and priest in 1832, and received the degree of BD in 1839. In 1846 he was presented to the college living of Sandon in Essex. He proved himself an energetic parish priest; he built a school, restored the church, and improved the parsonage. On 10 August 1848 he married Emily Frances (died 1898), younger daughter of Henry Pilkington, of Tore, co. Westmeath, Ireland; they had no children. He remained at Sandon until 1857 when, on the death of Joshua King, he was elected president of Queens' and returned to Cambridge, where he lived for the rest of his life. He was made a DD in 1859, and in 1861-2 he was vice-chancellor of the university. 
As a fellow of Queens', Phillips had at first continued to study mathematics, publishing 'Summation of Series by Definite Integrals' in 1832, but soon turned to Hebrew, which he began to teach in the college, although there was then little interest in the subject at Cambridge. He decided that a knowledge of the cognate languages was necessary for a full understanding of Hebrew, and to facilitate this he wrote 'The Elements of Syriac Grammar' in 1837 (2nd edn, 1845). In 1846 he published an elaborate 'Critical Exegetical and Philological Commentary on the Psalms', in two volumes (2nd edn, 1872). After his return to Cambridge he used his position to promote oriental studies in the university, and took a leading part in the establishment in 1872 of the Indian languages tripos and the Semitic languages tripos, examinations for which were first held in 1875. He published editions of several Syriac texts, and rewrote his earlier 'Elements' as 'A Syriac Grammar' (1866). Apart from his academic works, his only publication was 'Short Sermons on Old Testament Messianic Texts' (1863). He was a staunch conservative, unwilling to accept contemporary developments in biblical criticism. As president of Queens' he was noted for his hospitality, and did much to promote the welfare of his college. He gave $1000 to found a scholarship in 1887 and made a generous donation towards building the new chapel in 1891. Phillips died at his residence in Queens' on 5 February 1892. His funeral service was held in the college on the 11th, but his body was buried at Mullingar in co. Westmeath. His wife died on 14 August 1898. 


@@@@@


doc= 22153


Phillips, George Searle (1816-1889), journalist and writer, was born in Peterborough in January 1816, and educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, although he does not appear to have taken a degree. He moved to the United States, where he worked on the staff of the 'New York World' and the 'New York Herald'. On returning to England in 1837 he married and settled in Sturton, Lincolnshire, where he began a career as a lecturer. He had one son. In 1844 he moved to Leeds, and in 1845 undertook the editorship of the 'Leeds Times'. The following year he was appointed principal lecturer of the People's College at Huddersfield, and in 1854 was made lecturer to the Yorkshire Union of Mechanics' Institutes and Literary Societies. During this time Phillips also edited the 'Truth Seeker' with F. R. Lees. He was acquainted with most of the naturalists and literati of the north of England; among his works published under the pseudonym January Searle are 'Chapters in the History of a Life' (1850), 'Leaves from Sherwood Forest' (1851), 'Country Sketchbooks of Pastoral Scenes' (1851), 'The Life, Character, and Genius of Ebenezer Elliott, the Corn-Law Rhymer' (1851), a 'Memoir of William Wordsworth' (1852), and some discourses on the countryside. 
In 1860 Phillips returned to the United States, where he worked with Charles A. Dana on the 'Chicago Tribune'. He later moved with Dana to become literary editor of the 'New York Sun'. In May 1873, suffering from partial dementia, he was confined to the Trenton Insane Asylum in New Jersey. He was moved to the Morristown Asylum, New Jersey, in April 1876, where he stayed until his death on 14 January 1889. His wife had also spent several years in a lunatic asylum in Wakefield. 
A 'prolific and graceful writer', Phillips was also the author of a novel, 'Gypsies of the Danes' Dyke' (1864), and edited, among other books, 'The Memorials of Pel. Verjuice', by Charles Reece Pemberton. He also published various pamphlets and verse, and was a voluminous contributor to periodical literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 22154


Phillips, Giles Firman (1780-1867), landscape painter, was born in January 1780 in Houndsditch, City of London, and baptized on 28 January 1780 at White Row Chapel, Spitalfields, London, the son of John Phillips, a coal merchant, and his wife, Dorothy Pawsey. He was known for his landscapes in watercolours, his favourite subjects being views on the Thames. He was a founder member of the New Watercolour Society in 1831 but resigned a few years later. He was a frequent exhibitor at the Society of British Artists, at the British Institution, and occasionally at the Royal Academy and other exhibitions from 1830 to 1866. He is also known to have engraved a miniature portrait of the actress Eliza O'Neill in 1815 and another in stipple after a miniature of the actress Sarah Siddons by H. Hone in 1825. Phillips published in 1838 'Principles of Effect and Colour, as Applicable to Landscape Painting' (3rd edn, 1840) and 'The Theory and Practice of Painting in Watercolours, as Connected to the Study of Landscape'; in 1839 'A Practical Treatise on Drawing and Painting in Water-Colours', and in 1840 'The Art of Painting and Drawing Simplified'. He lived in London, and at one time at Greenwich. On 11 June 1800 he married at St Luke's Church, Finsbury, Lydia Arnold; they had four children. Phillips died at his home, 150 New North Road, Islington, Middlesex, on 31 March 1867, aged eighty-seven. His wife predeceased him. Examples of his work are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 22155


Phillips, Henry (1779-1840), writer on horticulture, was born in Henfield, Sussex. He may have been the son of James and Ann Philips who was baptized in nearby Barcombe on 15 October 1780, but nothing certain is known of either his early years or education. He was for some years a banker at Worthing, but then became a schoolmaster and taught in London and Brighton. In December 1821 he was living at Queen's House, Bayswater, London, but by 1823 had moved to Bedford Square, Brighton. In the latter year he produced a plan for the development of the Kemp Town district of Brighton; although this first plan was not implemented, a revised version which he submitted in 1828 was. He also designed an oriental garden containing a giant conservatory which collapsed during construction. 
Phillips was a member of the Horticultural Society and, in 1825, was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society. During the 1820s and early 1830s he published a number of botanical works, including 'Pomarium Brittanicum' (1820), 'History of Cultivated Vegetables' (1822), 'Sylva florifera: the Shrubbery Historically and Botanically Treated' (1823), 'Flora historica' (1824), and 'Companion for the Orchard' (1831). He dedicated his 'Sylva florifera' (1823) to his wife, stating that they had then been married for twenty-five years. Nothing else is known about her. Phillips died, of enteritis, at his home, 26 Russell Square, Brighton, on 8 March 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 22156


Phillips, Henry (1801-1876), singer, was born at Bristol on 13 August 1801, the son of Richard Phillips, an actor, and his wife (previously a Miss Barnett), a singer and actress. At the age of eight he appeared as a boy soprano at Harrogate Theatre and soon afterwards at the Haymarket and Drury Lane theatres in London. He became a pupil of Broadhurst, and developed a light baritone voice, though he also sang bass roles. His initial engagement at Covent Garden Theatre was a failure. He next studied with Sir George Smart (1823), and was engaged to sing in Arne's 'Artaxerxes' -- but again he made a very poor impression. In 1824, however, he sang Caspar in a version of Weber's 'Der Freischutz' at the English Opera House with great success, and thenceforth rose rapidly in public estimation. He soon took a leading place at the provincial musical festivals and was much engaged for theatre and concert work. 
In 1825 Phillips became principal bass at the Ancient Concerts and joined the choir of the Bavarian Chapel. In 1834 and 1835 he sang in the premieres of Edward Loder's 'Nourjahad', John Barnett's 'The Mountain Sylph', and Michael Balfe's 'The Siege of Rochelle', important in the development of English Romantic opera. Following differences with managements, in 1843 he turned from theatre work to giving music lectures, which he continued at intervals to the end of his career. In 1844 he visited America. 
After returning to Britain, in 1845 Phillips sang in Vincent Wallace's 'Maritana' and in 1846 and 1847 in Mendelssohn's 'Elijah' under the composer's direction. In 1846 Mendelssohn composed the Ossianic scena 'On Lena's Gloomy Heath' for him, but it gained neither's full satisfaction. In 1848-9 Phillips's voice declined drastically. He made various attempts in the 1850s to establish himself on a smaller scale, but frequently failed. These included performances with his elder daughter, Florence, a singer. His younger daughter, Alice, was also a singer. Nothing further is known of his family life. After his farewell concert in 1863 he taught in London and Birmingham. He died at his home, 192 Dalston Lane, Dalston, London, on 8 November 1876, and was buried at Brookwood cemetery, Woking. 
Phillips's career illustrates that of the major nineteenth-century English professional singer. Never engaged by a prestigious Italian opera company, he depended on seasonal tours incorporating operatic, oratorio, and concert work, and was especially reliant on ballads for maintaining his position and income. His own songs are generally weak. Although he was dominant in his prime, in broader terms he was not of outstanding calibre, and he lost his place and repute with a speed that, initially, surprised him. His 'Musical and Personal Recollections during Half a Century' (2 vols., 1864, including a portrait) contains much interesting matter. He also wrote 'Hints on Declamation' (1848) and 'The True Enjoyment of Angling' (1843). 


@@@@@


doc= 22157


Henry Wyndham Phillips (1820-1868), painter, with the instruction that he should be permitted to use his father's painting rooms at 8 George Street, Hanover Square until he reached the age of twenty-five. He lived at Hanover Square for the remainder of his life. Trained under his father, H. W. Phillips was also a portrait painter. He exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1838; between 1845 and 1849 he also showed a few scriptural subjects at the British Institution. He served for thirteen years as secretary of the Artists' General Benevolent Institution, and held the rank of captain in the Artists' volunteer corps. He died suddenly at his country home, Hollowcombe, Sydenham, Kent, on 8 December 1868, leaving a widow, Susanna Catherine. Some of his works, including his portrait of A. H. Layard, were engraved. 


@@@@@


doc= 22158


Phillips, John (d. 1594x1617), author, was the son of Robart Phillip, a clothworker and member of the London livery company associated with that trade who appears to have had patronage connections with Katherine, Lady Bertie, duchess of Suffolk. He was educated at Queens' College, Cambridge, (J. Phillips, 'Commemoration of the Right Noble and Vertuous ladye, Margrit Duglasis', title-page), but took no degree. In a tract dated 1578 he is described as a 'student in divinitie' (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 2.327); some of his writings also suggest formal training in the classics. Phillips's career as a writer of prose and verse began in the mid-1560s at a time when commercial forces and developments in the printing industry were significantly transforming the nature and status of the literary profession. Although he evidently enjoyed the patronage of Lord Lumley, to whom he presented two works in manuscript ('Christian and comfortable counsails' and 'A closet of counsell', BL, Royal MS 7.A. xii, fols. 168'r'-198'v', and 18A. xlii), he also seems to have written on commission for various publishers in the capital. His oeuvre, which includes ballads, broadside epitaphs, religious admonitions, miniature books of prayers, and short patriotic and moralistic tracts, as well as a metrical romance and a play, is typical of the output of an emerging class of semi-professional pamphleteers, dramatists, and rhymesters. His first published work appears to have been 'The Commodye of Pacient and Meeke Grissill', a dramatization of the last novel of Boccaccio's 'Decameron', entered in the Stationers' register in 1565-6. The same year he also contributed exhortatory verses to a series of reports about the trial of several witches at the Chelmsford assizes. In the nineteenth century these were mistakenly attributed to a John Philip, who was thereby given an illusory identity separate from that of John Phillips. 
During the 1570s, 1580s, and 1590s Phillips produced a number of single-sheet epitaphs mourning the deaths of several civic dignitaries and members of the aristocracy: the wife of Alexander Avenon, lord mayor of London; Alderman Sir William Garrat; Margaret Douglas, countess of Lennox; and Henry Wriothesley, second earl of Southampton. In addition he composed four more extended commemorative elegies modelled on the poems in the 'Mirrour for Magistrates', in which the ghosts of deceased worthies (Dame Helen Branch, wife of Sir John Branch, lord mayor of London, the countess of Lennox, Sir Philip Sidney, and Sir Christopher Hatton) recount their own achievements. These decades also saw the publication of 'A friendly larum, or faythfull warnynge... discoveryng the acte and malicious myndes of those obstinate and rebellious papists' ([1570]), an equally chauvinistic ballad entitled 'A Cold Pye for the Papists' ([1570?]), an effusive exhortation to loyalty to Elizabeth I ('The Tryumph of True Subjectes', 1588), and a pious, journalistic account of an eleven-year-old schoolboy from Walsham-le-Willows in Suffolk who fell into a trance for ten days and awoke to deliver a series of dire prophetic predictions about the fate of iniquitous England ('The Wonderfull Worke of God Shewed upon a Chylde, William Withers', 1581). A 'historycall novel' about Cleomines and Juliet appeared from his pen in 1577. He may also be responsible for producing a broadside ballad, dated about 1570, 'A Mervaylous Straunge Deformed Swyne', about a beast farrowed in Denmark, and verses answering the slanders of the papists 'against Christs syllie flock' appended to a 1581 translation of a sermon by Calvin. 
Several of Phillips's works are no longer extant: these include a set of Latin verses on the 'great earthquake' of 6 April 1580 ('Quaedam de terrae motu'), 'Rudimentes of reason gathered out of the preceptes of the worthie and learned philosopher Periander' (1578), 'A Lantern to Light Ladies... by Example of the Empress Florence' (n.d.), and 'Precious Perles of Perfecte Godlines', a tract begun by Lady Frances Abergavenny and completed by Phillips in 1577. The latter work was no doubt similar in character to his 'The Coat Armour of a Christian' ([1584]) and his 'Perfect Path to Paradice', a duodecimo collection of supplications and meditations set forth as 'a spirituall weapon to beate down sinne, sathan, and all the power of hell' (title-page) four years later. This tract, to which an abridged version of his 'Sommon to repentance' ([1584]) was appended in later impressions, was to be his most successful work. It was reprinted in 1590 and then again posthumously in 1617 and 1626. The publishers of the seventeenth-century editions were responsible for fostering the mistaken belief by subsequent bibliographers that Phillips was an ordained minister. The label 'late preacher of the word of God' was probably a piece of spurious title-page publicity designed to increase sales of this quasi-clerical work. The date of his death, which preceded 1617, is unknown but may be supposed to have followed the cessation of his publishing activity in 1594. 
Another 


@@@@@


doc= 22159


Phillips, John (c.1555-1633), bishop of Sodor and Man, was born in Wales, although the exact date and location and the names of his parents are unknown. He was educated at St Mary Hall, Oxford, graduating BA on 19 May 1579 and proceeding MA on 25 May 1584. He was appointed rector of Sessay in the North Riding of Yorkshire in 1579, and four years later to the living of Thorpe Bassett, in the East Riding. By 1585 he had come to the attention of Henry Stanley, fourth earl of Derby, acting as chaplain to the earl when he went to France as ambassador early that year. Two years later, no doubt through Stanley patronage, he was appointed archdeacon of Man, and also rector of Andreas, on the northern point of the island. By 1588 he had married (his wife's name is unknown). In 1591 he added to his Yorkshire benefices the rectory of Slingsby, in the North Riding. In 1597 he is recorded as attending the Manx convocation. On 25 April 1601 he was installed archdeacon of Cleveland in the diocese of York. 
When George Lloyd was translated to the diocese of Chester late in 1604, Phillips succeeded him as bishop of Sodor and Man: he was nominated by James I (Man being then under crown control) on 29 January 1605 and consecrated on 10 February following. That same year he was made DTh. The income from the bishopric was at the low end of the scale, valued at $140-$150, but was improvable by fines when leases fell due. He retained the archdeaconry of Man 'in commendam' as well as most of his other preferments. A pointer to his religious position is his association with the godly Hoby family of Hackness, about 121/2 miles from Thorpe Bassett. Lady Hoby recorded hearing Phillips preach three times in September 1603, noting on the last of these occasions that he was accompanied by his wife. He also conducted ordinations, to the displeasure of Archbishop Toby Matthew, who in 1612 inhibited him from conducting more such ceremonies in the diocese of York, perhaps because Phillips was less particular about ordaining non-graduates than Matthew liked. In 1605 he resigned Thorpe Bassett, but Lord Derby compensated by presenting him to the Welsh rectory of Hawarden which he retained until his death. In 1614 the countess of Derby appointed him a commissioner to act against islanders involved in piracy. He later gave up Slingsby, where he was succeeded in January 1619 by his son Samuel, and also the same year the archdeaconry of Cleveland. 
As bishop of Man Phillips acquired a good reputation for his administration, but there was inevitable resistance to change among his clergy and a strong insularity against outsiders, especially Welshmen. Of the seventeen Manx parishes he had the right of appointment to only three, the remainder being under the control of the earl. No copy of the articles survives from his first visitation in the autumn of 1605. He made some progress in 1606 in recovering episcopal estates whose leases had terminated, but was forced to appeal to Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, for help in defending his rights against an unjust petition lodged against him with the privy council. He complained that one of the petitioners had 'obtained more than three quarters of the Bishopric by leases in reversion' ('Salisbury MSS', 24.98). The council acted to protect his interests. He had learned the Manx language 'so exactly that he ordinarily did preach in it' (Moore, 140), a knowledge he used in 1610 to complete 'The Mannish Book of Common Prayer by me translated'. At the convocation that year he submitted his translation for consideration by the clergy. A number of needed reforms were pushed through in the convocation of 1610. Among others a set of ecclesiastical laws which had existed only in oral tradition was committed to writing. (One unusual piece of legislation which illustrates the survival of pre-Reformation customs was one legitimizing the children of the clergy.) 
Phillips's reforms faced firm opposition from the clergy as well as interference from the governor, John Ireland, who held full authority from Derby in his absence. Ireland, whose leanings were towards nonconformity, informed Phillips that 'being a Welshman, he could never do any good'. Among other disagreements the bishop charged that Ireland appointed a 'layman in the chaplain's place to read service to the garrison in a scandalous manner, viz. in his doblett and hose, and sometime in his livery coat; yea, when a minister or two have been present'. The controversy came to a head on the question whether the garrison was under the bishop's spiritual jurisdiction. Ireland, blocking an appeal to higher authority, denied the bishop a passport to England: his friends 'were obliged to forbare his house and his company for fear of the governor'. Ultimately Phillips lost the contest. 
Phillips's version of the prayer book faced strong objections from the island's clergy who were accustomed to using extemporaneous translations of the prayers and lessons in public worship. The printing of it was dropped, and the 1765 translation by his successor, Mark Hildesley, made no use of Phillips's manuscript. Phillips's version was finally published by the Manx Society in two volumes in 1895. One of the editors described the translation as simple and direct, and noted that it was 'for the most part, easily understood by those who speak Manx at the present day' (Moore, 136). 
The claim that Phillips also translated the entire 'Bible' into Manx is dubious. The main evidence comes from James Chaloner, governor of Man, who in 1658 gave Hugh Cannell, vicar of St Michael, a supplement of $14 to his stipend because he had assisted the bishop for twenty-nine years in the work of translating the 'Bible'. 
Phillips died on 7 August 1633 at Bishop's Court in the parish of Ballaugh and was buried in St German's Cathedral, Peel. A later bishop, Richard Parr, who died in 1643, is supposed to have been buried in the same grave, but the site is unknown. No monument exists but a fitting epitaph is provided by William Sacheverell, who declared that Phillips was 'famous for his Charity and Hospitality' (Willis, 2.368). 


@@@@@


doc= 22160


John Phillips (d. 1640) was educated at several colleges in Cambridge, being admitted a pensioner at Emmanuel College on 15 June 1594. He received the degrees BA, MA, and BD in 1596/7, 1600, and 1606 respectively and in the last year was instituted vicar of Faversham, Kent, a living he served diligently until his death in 1640. From 1615 he also delivered a weekly lecture on market day, a labour for which he received little financial reward until a small legacy supporting it was augmented by the mayor and jurats of the town to 'a convenient stipend' in or about 1625 ('Way to Heaven', sig. B2'v'). That year he reluctantly published 'The Way to Heaven', an expansion of a funeral sermon preached at the burial of Edward Lapworth, a Cambridge-educated physician practising in the parish who conformed to the Church of England but had well known Catholic sympathies (and who should not be confused with Edward Lapworth MD Oxon., 1574-1636). In 1629 a catechism entitled 'The Christians ABC' appeared, a work provoked by consideration of 'the advantage the Common Adversarie hath gotten by their pettie Pamphlets' (sig. A4'r') and intended for the edification of his flock. In his will, dated 16 April and proved on 13 July 1640, Phillips left legacies to three daughters and made provision for a short address to be delivered by his curate at his burial. 


@@@@@


doc= 22161


Phillips, John (1631-1706?), writer, was born in 1631, possibly in October, the fifth child (and the second to be called John) of Edward Phillips (1597-1631), secondary of the crown office in the court of chancery, and his wife, Anne (died 'c'.1640), sister of Milton; Edward Phillips had died in August 1631, so John was a posthumous child. His place of birth is unknown, and his approximate date of birth known only from an entry in the flyleaf of John Milton's family 'Bible', in which he recorded the birth of Edward Phillips in August 1630 and then noted that John 'is a year younger about Octob[er]' (family 'Bible', BL, Add. MS 32310). His mother later married her husband's colleague and friend, Thomas Agar. 
The poet Milton, John's uncle, returned from his visit to Italy in 1639, and early in 1640 he took lodgings in London at the house of a tailor named Russell, in St Bride's Churchyard, near Fleet Street. Anne Agar seems to have died at about this time, and Milton assumed responsibility for his nephews' education. In the first instance John boarded with his uncle and Edward became a day pupil; shortly thereafter Milton moved to a large house in Aldersgate Street and Edward joined his younger brother as a boarder. 
Late in 1645 the Milton family moved to a house in Barbican, and in 1647 to a house in High Holborn, near Lincoln's Inn Fields. In March 1649 Milton was appointed by the council of state to the post of secretary for foreign tongues, and so moved his household, including John Phillips, first to temporary accommodation next door to the Bullhead tavern in Charing Cross, near Spring Garden, and then to an apartment at the Scotland Yard end of Whitehall. In 1651 Milton vacated his Whitehall apartment and moved into a house in Petty France, opening onto St James's Park, and the following year, on attaining his majority, John Phillips finally left the Milton household. He may have remained in Westminster, which is the address that he gave on legal documents in 1653 and 1654 (both signed in Shrewsbury). 
Accounts of Phillips's career as a writer routinely assert that his first venture into publishing was a book, of which no copy survives, that was entered in the Stationers' register on 31 December 1649 as 'Mercurius paedaneus, or, A short and sure way to the Latin'; in fact two copies of 'Mercurius paedaneus' (Norwich, 1650) have survived but its author is another John Phillips. The real beginning of Phillips's career occurred on 24 December 1651, when he published his 'Responsio ad apologiam anonymi cujasdam tenebrionis pro rege et populo Anglicano infantissimam', which the printer, William Dugard, dated 1652. This 'Response to the puerile 'Apology for the king and people of England' by some anonymous dissembler' was a defence of Milton's 'Pro populo Anglicano defensio' (1651), in the face of an anonymous attack popularly attributed to John Bramhall but actually written by John Rowland. Edward Phillips records that his brother John brought instalments of his manuscript to their uncle 'for his examination and polishment' (Darbishire, 71), but the persistent speculation that began with Bramhall, that Milton may have been the author, is unfounded. It is possible that Phillips was rewarded for the writing of the 'Responsio' with semi-official duties but the evidence is ambiguous; Phillips is not named in the order books of the council of state but Edward Phillips's allusion to the 'kinsman who was then with him [Milton]' (ibid., 79), who in June 1652 translated a Latin diplomatic document, almost certainly refers to John Phillips, as does Edward's reference to 'our author's kinsman' (ibid.), who in July 1652 was sent to deliver an expulsion order to a French spy. Similarly a German diplomat called Hermann Mylius noted in his diary on 17 February 1652 that Milton had sent him a message by 'his relative' ('seinen cognatum')), and again the reference seems to be to John Phillips (Miller, 191). 
During this period Phillips published his first poem, which appeared together with one by his brother among the commendatory verses in Henry Lawes's 'Ayres' (1653). He also seems to have acted as Milton's amanuensis in the early years of the poet's blindness; the hand of Phillips has been identified in several documents but there is no known document that can be said with certainty to be in Phillips's hand so it remains possible that the handwriting is that of another amanuensis. 
On 11 April 1654 Andrew Sandelands, who had been a fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge, when Milton was an undergraduate, explained in a letter to John Thurloe (written from a debtors' prison in London) that he had employed 'Mr Phillips (Mr Milton's kinsman)', apparently to gather information about land held by the crown in Scotland; the letter specifies that Phillips had been in Edinburgh and nearby Leith (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A.13, fol. 226). This evidence of intelligence-gathering makes it possible that the John Phillips who wrote from Wales on 15 February 1654 to report anti-Cromwellian opinions was Milton's nephew. 
In the mid-1650s Phillips returned to writing with a long poem called 'A Satire Against Hypocrites', which was registered (mistakenly in the name of his brother Edward) on 14 March 1655 and published the following August; a variant, post-Restoration title, 'The Religion of the Hypocritical Presbyterians' (1661), explicitly identifies the target of this coarse and witty attack. Phillips next turned to anti-Spanish propaganda with a translation of Fray Bartolome de Las Casas's 'Brevissima relacion de la destruycion de las Indias Occidentales' (1552) as 'The Tears of the Indians' (1656), which Phillips dedicated to Cromwell. This translation had been published by Nathaniel Brook (who also employed John's brother Edward), for whom John compiled 'Sportive Wit, the Muses' Merriment' (1656), which contained 'lampoons on some heroic persons of these late times'. Members of the government were not amused; on 22 April 1656 the council of state ordered an investigation, and three days later it received a report concluding that the book was 'scandalous, lascivious, scurrilous and profane' (TNA: PRO, SP 25/77, p. 80); Phillips was arrested and fined, and Cromwell personally authorized the burning of 'Sportive Wit' in front of the Old Exchange on 30 April. About the same time Phillips and Brook produced a similar anthology of poems, entitled 'Wit and Drollery' (1656), which boldly plagiarized a collection published the previous year; this book was ordered to be burnt on 9 May 1656 but was republished in 1661 and 1682. 
In 1659 Philips published 'Montelion, 1660, or, The Prophetical Almanack', a royalist spoof on the republican astrological almanacs of William Lilly. Several sequels followed -- 'Montillion 1661', 'Montillion 1662', and 'Montelion's Introduction to Astrology' (1661; 1664) -- as did works in a similar vein, such as 'Don Juan Lamberto, or, A Comical History of the Late Times' (1661; 1665), but it is not certain that these are the work of Phillips; some scholars have attributed the sequels to Thomas Flatman. Pepys records in his diary entry of 10 November 1660 that he so disliked 'Montillion 1661' that he burnt it. 
Phillips fell silent in the late 1660s, which may imply that he had found other employment; that possibility makes it likely that he is the John Phillips, schoolmaster, who was living in Aldersgate Street in 1666, when he was taxed on six hearths. In the 1670s he again took up his pen as a hack writer, translator, and polemicist. He published a parody of two books of the 'Aeneid', called 'Maronides, or, Virgil Travesty' (book v, 1672; book vi, 1673); an epigram in Matthew Locke's 'Observations upon a Late Book' (1672); an attack on Thomas Salmon, entitled 'Duellum musicum', appended to Locke's 'The Present Practice of Music Vindicated' (1673); a satire on astrology, called 'Mercurius verax, or, The Prisoners' Prognostications for the Year 1675' (1674); a continuation of James Heath's 'A Chronicle of the Late Intestine War' (1677); and a broadside poem called 'Jockey's Downfall' 'on the late fatal defeat given to the Scottish covenanters near Hamilton Park, 22 June 1679'. In 1677 he translated Madeleine de Scudery's 'Almahide', Gauthier de Costes de la Calprenede's 'Pharamond', and Jean-Baptiste Tavernier's 'Les Six Voyages'. 
In 1678 Phillips entered into an alliance with Titus Oates, first writing 'Dr Oates's Narrative of the Popish Plot Vindicated' (1680) and then, in the same vein, an attack on James, duke of York, entitled 'The Character of a Popish Successor, Part the Second' (1681), which claimed to be the second part of a book by Elkanah Settle. 'The Character' was answered by Sir Roger L'Estrange, and Phillips reciprocated with 'Horse Flesh for the Observator' (1682). He also attacked the tory clergy in 'Speculum crape-gownorum, or, An Old Looking-Glass for Young Academics' (1682), much of which was borrowed from John Eachard's 'Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy' (1670). Turning his hand to the learned languages Phillips translated 'The History of Ethiopia from the Latin of Ludolphus' (1682) and 'Treatises in Plutarch's Morals from the Greek' (1684). In November 1684 Phillips was investigated for his role in the Popish Plot, with a view to ascertaining who had paid him to write his pamphlets, but he escaped punishment. 
On the death of Charles II Phillips contributed to the national obsequies with 'A Pindaric Ode to the Sacred Memory of... Charles II' (1685). During the reign of James II he translated 'Don Quixote' (1687) from Spanish (referring slightingly to 'Paradise Lost' in his preface) and also 'The Turkish Secretary' (1688) from the French of Du Vignan, sieur des Joannats. His main polemical work of the late 1680s was 'Sam. Ld. Bp of Oxon, his Celebrated Reasons for Abrogating the Test, and Notions of Idolatry' (1688), an attack on Marvell's old enemy Samuel Parker, bishop of Oxford. 
In 1687 Phillips launched a monthly periodical called 'Modern History, or, A Monthly Account of All Considerable Occurrences, Civil, Ecclesiastical and Military', collecting the issues at the end of each year. In August 1690 he abandoned this periodical in favour of the 'Present State of Europe, or, An Historical and Political Mercury' (much of which was a translation of a French journal published in the Netherlands), which he continued to produce until his death in 1706. 
Little is known of Phillips's last years. He assisted Toland in the preparation of his 'Life of Milton' (1691) but he did not write the anonymous biography of Milton that is sometimes attributed to him; the evidence of handwriting shows the biography to be the work of Cyriack Skinner. In 1693 he published a translation of Marie-Catherine Le Jumel de Barneville's 'The Present Court of Spain'. Two years later he published an elegy on Queen Mary, and in 1697 a poem called 'Augustus Britannicus', on the occasion of the treaty of Ryswick. In 1703 he published a collection of astrological tables and poems by various authors, called 'The English Fortune Tellers'. Phillips's last known publication, on 6 May 1706, was a poem entitled 'The Vision of Mons: Chamillard Concerning the Battle of Ramilies', written, as he acknowledged in public for the first time in decades, 'by a nephew of the late Mr John Milton'. 
In 1695 Anthony Wood described Phillips (with characteristic harshness) as 'a man of very loose principles, atheistical, forsakes his wife and children, makes no provision for them', but nothing more is known of his religious convictions or of his family; his willingness to support parliament and king, tory and whig, implies that his political principles were flexible. In 1706 the bookseller John Dunton described Phillips as 'a gentleman of good learning and well-born', noting that 'he'll write you a design off in a very little time, if the gout or claret don't stop him' (Dunton, 241). Phillips had mentioned the torment of gout in an issue of his monthly 'Mercury', attributing the poor quality of the previous issue to a violent attack of gout in both his hands and his feet. Phillips disappears from the historical record in the autumn of 1706, almost certainly because he had died. He had produced about sixty publications and so, with his brother, was one of the first hack writers, but he is chiefly remembered as the nephew of Milton. 


@@@@@


doc= 22162


Phillips, John (fl. 1778-c.1817), writer on inland navigation, was a native of Essex, of whom little is known other than statements he made about himself in his own publications. He married and apparently had a son called John, for in 1803 he was described as John Phillips, senior. He was 'brought up in the building and surveying branches' (Phillips, 'Treatise', preface), and toured Lancashire and Cheshire when the Bridgewater Canal was under construction. He was also present at the digging and vaulting of Harecastle Tunnel, whether as an employee or as an observer is not known, although he did state he had been employed by Brindley. He may have worked with Brindley on the Leeds and Liverpool Canal. 
In 1778 Phillips discussed contracts to construct sewers and pavements in Madrid and to investigate the possibility of canals in Spain, but in 1779 war put an end to these plans. In 1779 and 1780 he investigated the feasibility of a canal from London to Norwich and King's Lynn using existing rivers wherever possible. At some date between 1780 and 1783 he was a prisoner on parole in America, but his role in the War of Independence is not known. On his release he travelled in the Netherlands, Germany, Poland, and Russia, inspecting inland navigations, and in Russia was employed as official canal surveyor under the supervision of Charles Cameron, the court architect. In 1783 he was sent to southern Russia to work on a 5 mile canal linking tributaries of the Don and the Volga, but accomplished little besides cutting down a few thousand trees. On his journey back to England he inspected the North Sea and Baltic Canal in Sweden. 
Back in England Phillips appears to have concentrated on a publishing career. In 1785 he published anonymously 'A Treatise on Inland Navigation', with detailed proposals for canals from London to Norwich and King's Lynn, and from Bishop's Stortford to Cambridge. However, neither scheme was implemented. In 1792 he and Thomas Kitchin published 'A New Map of England and Wales' on which Phillips inserted the canals. Also in 1792 Phillips published the first edition of 'A General History of Inland Navigation, Foreign and Domestic', with information about all known canals. This became an essential contemporary reference work. He updated this book with addenda in 1793 and 1794, and issued new revised editions in 1793, 1795, 1803, and 1805. He also took on in 1805 the editorship of 'Crosby's Builders New Price Book', an annual guide to building material prices issued by the booksellers Crosby & Co., and he was possibly still involved in the 1817 edition. It is not known when he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 22163


Phillips, John (1800-1874), geologist, was born on 25 December 1800 at Marden, Wiltshire, the second of the four children of John Phillips (1769-1808), excise officer, and his wife, Elizabeth (1772-1808), daughter of John Smith, blacksmith, of Churchill, Oxfordshire. Orphaned at the age of seven, Phillips was brought up by his uncle, William Smith (1769-1839), later dubbed the 'father of English geology'. From 1809 to 1814 Phillips attended Holt Spa School, Wiltshire. In 1814 Smith sent Phillips to study for a year with Benjamin Richardson, rector of Farleigh Hungerford, Wiltshire, who expanded the boy's interest in science. The next year Phillips went to London where he helped his uncle in geological work and trained under him as a land surveyor. From 1817 to 1819 he accompanied Smith on surveying expeditions, but in 1819 Smith was imprisoned for debt and relinquished his London home. After this disaster Smith and Phillips wandered for four years from 1820 in the north of England, where they combined surveying with work on Smith's county geological maps including that of Yorkshire (1821). 
In 1824 the Yorkshire Philosophical Society invited Smith to give a course of lectures on geology in York. Having assisted his uncle, Phillips shared subsequent courses with him elsewhere and launched himself as a solo lecturer. Phillips was so adept in arranging the fossils in the Yorkshire Museum that in 1825 he was appointed its keeper and made York his home. Now separated from Smith, Phillips established himself as a successful lecturer and, with 'Geology of the Yorkshire Coast' (1829), in which he showed himself as a creative and not slavish pupil of his uncle, as the leading expert on the subject. As the right-hand man of William Vernon Harcourt, the key figure in the Yorkshire Philosophical Society, Phillips took a leading part in 1831 in organizing at York the first meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. Next year he was appointed its assistant secretary, an office he held for thirty years. As administrator of the association's meetings and editor of its 'Reports' he made many contacts usually denied to the isolated provincial. Encouraged by London savants, Phillips stormed the capital: elected FRS in 1834, he assumed the chair of geology at King's College, London, that year, lectured extensively, contributed to the 'Encyclopaedia Metropolitana', the 'Penny Cyclopaedia', and Lardner's 'Cabinet Cyclopaedia', and brought out with Longman three editions of his 'Guide to Geology' in the 1830s. In 1836 Phillips increased his reputation with his monograph on the Carboniferous limestone of Yorkshire in which he escaped from the limitations of fossil-labelling of strata, as practised by his uncle and Roderick Murchison, by taking preliminary steps towards a statistical palaeontology based on the number and distribution of fossil species. 
While his career in London and York was prospering, Phillips worked voluntarily for the Geological Survey from 1836 to 1838, when he began to be paid on a temporary contract to draw and describe for the survey the fossils of Cornwall, Devon, and west Somerset. The resulting monograph, 'Palaeozoic Fossils' (1841), also his chief contribution to the Devonian controversy, denounced the notion that there were well-defined geological systems such as the Devonian so dear to Murchison, revealed a more developed statistical palaeontology, and proposed that there were three great periods of past life on earth called the Palaeozoic, the Mesozoic, and the Cainozoic, terms still used over 150 years later. It led to Phillips's being employed as palaeontologist to the survey, full-time for two-thirds of the year, in 1841. He resigned his London chair in 1839 and his York keepership in 1840. Late in 1843 Phillips was appointed to the new chair of geology and mineralogy at Trinity College, Dublin. In anticipation of his becoming the first director of the new Irish branch of the geological survey, in 1844 Edward Forbes succeeded him as palaeontologist to the survey, but when its director, De la Beche, failed to implement the Irish scheme, Phillips resigned in 1845 from his Dublin chair and had to accept demotion in the survey. Though he received the accolade of the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society of London in 1845 and showed his continuing originality in his survey memoir on the Malvern hills (1848), which combined statistical palaeontology with notions about the flexing, fracturing, and mingling of strata, he resigned from the survey in 1849. 
After four years based in York, in 1853 Phillips was called to Oxford to be deputy reader in geology. In 1856 he was made reader in geology and in 1860 professor. He was also keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, in 1854-70 and from 1857 to his death keeper of the new University Museum, which he helped to plan and arrange. An experienced curator, a fluent lecturer, an excellent organizer, an accomplished textbook writer, a distinguished researcher whose view of geology was exceptionally wide, and a savant whose interests embraced meteorology, astronomy, terrestrial magnetism, and instruments, he soon became the unifying president of science in the university and the leading spirit in the Ashmolean Society. A keen lunar astronomer from 1852, Phillips catalysed the first stage of the founding of the university observatory in 1875. His general cultivation and engaging manners did much to reduce the suspicion of science in Oxford. Nationally he was prominent as president of the Geological Society 1858-60 and as president of the British Association in 1865. Though devastated by the death of his sister Ann (1803-1862), his housekeeper from 1829, the veteran bachelor published, when seventy, his highly regarded monograph 'The Geology of Oxford and the Thames Valley' (1871). A devout Anglican, Phillips opposed Darwinian evolution. In his 'Life on Earth' (1860) he reaffirmed his belief in divine design, the reality of species, the relative novelty of humans, and a reverential reading of the book of geological strata. Convinced that Darwin had exaggerated the incompleteness of the fossil record, Phillips believed that its discontinuities were explicable only in terms of separate creations which were transcendental and inscrutable acts of God. He was happy to help William Thomson attack Darwin's views on the age of the earth and unhappy with Lyell's advocacy of the antiquity of man. 
The occasion of his death showed that Phillips, a scientific Dick Whittington, had achieved the 'ne plus ultra' of distinction: he fell downstairs at All Souls College, Oxford, after dinner and died the next day, 24 April 1874. The epitome of the assiduous and triumphant provincial of humble birth, Phillips was buried in style. On 29 April a procession of 150 mourners accompanied his coffin from the University Museum to Oxford railway station. After lying overnight in the Yorkshire Museum, Phillips was buried in York, as he wished, on 30 April 1874, with the Great Peter bell of the minster tolling in tribute for ninety minutes. 


@@@@@


doc= 22164


Phillips, John Arthur (1822-1887), mining engineer and metallurgist, was born on 18 February 1822 at Polgooth, near St Austell, Cornwall, the son of John Phillips (1793-1851), mineral agent, and his wife, Prudence Gavid ('b'. 1795). He was educated at a private school at St Blazey. In the early 1840s he became involved with the Royal Cornwall Polytechnic Society at Falmouth, and in collaboration with Robert Were Fox and Robert Hunt carried out experiments connected with electricity and the deposition of metallic copper. 
It may have been through the influence of Fox that, in December 1844, Phillips entered the Ecole des Mines, Paris, from where he graduated in 1846. He was then employed for about two years at a French colliery, and returned to England in 1848. After serving as chemist to a government commission on the question of coal for the navy, and as manager to some chemical works, he started on his own account as a mining engineer and consulting metallurgist in London. From 1848 to 1850 he was also professor of metallurgy at the College for Civil Engineers, Putney; later in life he lectured at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, in 1875 and 1877. On 1 January 1850 he married Mary Anne Andrew, daughter of George Andrew, yeoman; she predeceased him. 
In 1853 Phillips went to California, where he remained for twelve months. (He subsequently visited California twice more, in 1865 and 1866.) Following his return he again lived in London, but made frequent professional journeys to various parts of Europe and to north Africa. In 1868 Phillips went to Liverpool to build and manage the works of the Widnes Metal Company, which extracted copper, silver, and gold from 'burnt' Spanish pyrites. The undertaking proved to be so prosperous that he was able to return to London in 1877, and afterwards to retire from business. 
Phillips was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1872, serving on its council from 1878 to 1882, and was a vice-president at his death. He was elected FRS in 1881 and was also a fellow of the Chemical Society and a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers. His extensive knowledge was always at the service of his friends, and his judgement and integrity made him a valued member of the learned societies. His scientific papers were numerous, and widely esteemed for their scrupulous accuracy. 
Phillips published a number of books on metallurgy and mining, especially on gold mining, including 'A Manual of Metallurgy, or, Practical Treatise on the Chemistry of Metals' (1852), 'The Mining and Metallurgy of Gold and Silver' (1867), 'Elements of Metallurgy' (1874), and 'A Treatise on Ore Deposits' (1884). He also took out several patents, for improvements in the production and refining of metals. During his visits to California he made a number of observations on the connection between hot springs and mineral vein deposits, which were embodied in an important paper, published by the Geological Society of London. He was one of the first to make use of the new polarizing microscope in the study of the structure of minerals and rocks, preparing thin sections by himself with remarkable skill. Among his more important papers were two on the greenstones of Cornwall and the rocks of the Cornish mining districts, with others on the chemical and mineralogical changes in certain eruptive rocks of north Wales, on the constitution and history of grits and sandstones, and on concretionary patches and fragments of other rocks contained in granite, all published in the 'Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society'. He also contributed to the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society', the 'Philosophical Magazine', the 'Chemical News', and other scientific journals. He died suddenly on 5 January 1887, at his home, 18 Fopstone Road, Kensington, London, leaving a son and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 22165


Phillips, John Roland (1844-1887), lawyer and antiquary, the only son of David Phillips, was born in June 1844 at Cilgerran, Pembrokeshire. He received no regular education, but at an early age entered a solicitor's office in the neighbouring town of Cardigan. His legal studies led him to take a great interest in local history and antiquities, and in August 1866 he won the prize offered at Cardigan eisteddfod for the best essay on the history of Cilgerran. The publication of the essay, the 'History of Cilgerran', in an enlarged form in early 1867 was followed by Phillips's settlement in London. He entered Lincoln's Inn in November 1867, and was called to the bar on 10 June 1870. On 31 March 1873 he married Mary Elizabeth, daughter of Abraham Hargreaves of Nebraska, USA. Literary work still took up much of his time. From 1869 to 1871 he was employed by the duke of Norfolk as the keeper of archives at Norfolk House. He began the sorting and cataloguing of papers which was completed by his successor, Charles Kent. The schedule of title deeds and court rolls, which he drew up in 1870, is still held in the archives, which continue to work on the system established by him. 
In 1874 Phillips published 'Memoirs of the Civil War in Wales and the Marches'. A reviewer in the 'Archaeologia Cambriensis' of 1875 accused Phillips of bias towards the republican party in his narrative in the first volume of the work, but the collection of original documents in the second volume proved to be extremely valuable and the 'Memoirs' are still referred to by historians of seventeenth-century Wales. At the same time, Phillips was also involved, in conjunction with J. F. B. Firth, in collecting material relating to the history and management of the city companies, which led to the appointment of the commission of 1880. He was the first secretary of the Cymmrodorion Society after its revival in 1873, and published several further works of Welsh local history. His knowledge of documents relating to Wales in the British Museum was extensive. 
On the formation of West Ham as a separate policy district, Phillips was appointed its first stipendiary magistrate on 22 June 1881. He contributed an essay on local taxation in England and Wales to the second volume of Cobden Club essays entitled 'Local Government and Taxation' (1882). After a long illness, Phillips died at South Hampstead, where he lived, on 3 June 1887, leaving a widow and four children. At the time of his death he was working on histories of Tudor Wales and Welsh castles and abbeys. 


@@@@@


doc= 22166


Phillips, Molesworth (1755-1832), marine officer, born on 15 August 1755, was the son of John Phillips ('b'. 1711) of Swords, co. Dublin, and his wife, Henrietta Eccleston. John Phillips was the natural son of Robert Molesworth, first Viscount Molesworth. Molesworth Phillips first entered the Royal Navy, but on the advice of his friend Joseph Banks he accepted a commission as second lieutenant in the Royal Marines on 17 January 1776. In this capacity he was selected to command the marines of both ships of Captain Cook on his last voyage, extending over nearly three years. He sailed with Cook from Plymouth on 12 July 1776, and was in charge of the marines who escorted Cook when he landed at Hawaii on 14 February 1779 and was fatally wounded in an attack by the Hawaiians. Phillips was wounded at the same time with an iron spike but managed to shoot his assailant dead. Unable to reload in time Phillips and the surviving marines made for the pinnace which was lying close offshore in accordance with an order given by Cook before his death. On reaching the pinnace Phillips saw that one of his wounded marines was in difficulty and, in spite of his own injuries, he jumped overboard and succeeded in rescuing him. John Webber's picture 'Death of Captain Cook' represents Phillips firing from a sitting posture at the moment that Cook was being stabbed to death. On the voyage home Phillips fought an inconclusive duel at the Cape with his brother officer John Williamson. 
On 1 November 1780 Phillips was promoted captain, and on 10 January 1782 he married Susanna Elizabeth ('bap'. 1755, died 1800), third daughter of Charles Burney (1726-1814) and his first wife, Esther Sleepe, and sister of Frances (Fanny) Burney (later Madame d'Arblay) and of James Burney, Phillips's friend, who, like him, had accompanied Cook on his last voyage. This marriage brought Phillips into connection with the Burneys' literary and musical friends -- Dr Johnson, Mrs Thrale, and others. He was promoted brevet major on 1 March 1794, and brevet lieutenant-colonel on 1 January 1798. From 1784, for the sake of his wife's health, he lived for a time at Boulogne, but after the French Revolution the Phillipses lived chiefly at Mickleham, Surrey, not far from Juniper Hall, where Talleyrand was residing, to whom Phillips showed much kindness and hospitality. When the English government obliged the former to seek refuge in America, the colonel assisted him in fitting out for the voyage and accompanied him to Falmouth. In the late 1790s during the alarm of a French invasion of Ireland and the Irish rising, Phillips felt it his duty to reside on the Irish estates at Belcotton, near Drogheda, which he had inherited from an uncle. Here he was joined reluctantly in 1796 by his wife. In the face of her husband's indifference and possible infidelity, Susanna's health gave way and she was allowed to leave Ireland. Shortly after reaching England she died on 6 January 1800 near Chester and was buried on 12 January near Neston on the Wirral peninsula. On 4 October of that year, at St Anne's Church, Dublin, Phillips married Ann Maturin (1774-1830/31), sister of his son's tutor and daughter of the Revd Charles Maturin, of co. Down, Ireland; her uncle, Captain Gabriel Maturin, was secretary to General Thomas Gage. 
In 1802 Phillips with his family visited France without permission, and they were detained under Napoleon's decree. He appealed to Talleyrand, who allowed two letters to remain unanswered. A third, couched in rather strong terms, produced an order for the release of the party, and Phillips returned to England on parole in the summer of 1804. When passing through Paris Phillips in vain solicited an audience of his former friend. After his return to England Phillips was the subject of an investigation in 1806 into his parole during which it was pointed out that he had performed no sea time in recent years and 'that on two occasions the last War he paid money to a Brother Officer to embark for him' and that 'he has been a complete shuffler from all Duties' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/3317, no. 469). Later he became acquainted with Southey; Mary and Charles Lamb, who described him as 'the high-minded associate of Cook, the veteran colonel, with his lusty heart still sending cartels of defiance to old Time' ('Life, Letters and Writings', 4.75); and John Thomas Smith (1766-1833), whom he supplied with various anecdotes for his 'Nollekens and his Times' (1.164, 200, 2.218). He died of cholera at his house in Lambeth on 11 September 1832, and was buried in St Margaret's, Westminster. 
With Susanna Burney Phillips had two sons, Norbury and William, and one daughter, Frances, who kept house for her grandfather, Dr Burney, and married C. C. Raper. Phillips also had one daughter, Elizabeth, with his second wife, Ann, who predeceased him, aged fifty-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 22167


Phillips, Sir Richard (1767-1840), author and publisher, the son of a Leicestershire farmer, was born in London; his name at birth may have been Philip Richards. He was sent to schools in Soho Square and at Chiswick by his uncle, a brewer in Oxford Street, but his home surroundings were distasteful to him, and in 1786 he started on his own account as usher in a school at Chester. In 1788 he moved to Leicester, where he invested his small means in a commercial academy in Bond Street. A year later he opened a hosier's shop, which he stocked with borrowed capital; but it was not until the summer of 1790, when he commenced business as a stationer, bookseller, and patent medicine vendor, that he found his proper vocation. He soon added a printing press, and, when his already heterogeneous business began to prosper, he expanded by selling pianofortes, music, caricatures, and prints, and running a circulating library. 
Phillips held unorthodox opinions in matters of literature and science; he conceived at an early stage a rooted idea that the theory of gravitation had no foundation, and he developed strong radical and republican views in politics. His shop became a depot for the advanced democratic literature of the revolutionary epoch, and, to give further expression to his views, Phillips founded in May 1792 the 'Leicester Herald'. His paper proved a success, and as editor he showed considerable skill in avoiding prosecutions; but in January 1793, on the evidence of a paid informer named Jackson, he was found guilty of selling Thomas Paine's 'Rights of Man', and was sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment. From Leicester gaol, then under the control of Daniel Lambert, he continued to edit the 'Leicester Herald', and succeeded in obtaining the co-operation of Dr Joseph Priestley of Birmingham. In 1795 he married Elizabeth Griffiths, a milliner's assistant, the daughter of Captain John Griffiths of Tenby. They had four daughters and three sons: Richard, Alfred (later a vicar of Kilmersdon), and Horatio (later a bookseller in Paris). 
In May 1795 Phillips added to his other ventures a fortnightly magazine of a semi-scientific nature, entitled 'The Museum', but a disastrous fire put an end to both this and the 'Herald'. With the funds derived from his insurance policy Phillips moved to London, and opened business in St Paul's Churchyard, establishing the 'Monthly Magazine', the first number of which appeared on 1 July 1796. It was edited by John Aikin (1747-1822), and among the contributors were John Wolcot (Peter Pindar), Capel Lofft, and Dr Mavor, while Phillips himself wrote trenchant articles against the government, under the signature Common Sense. In 1806 he quarrelled with Aikin, whose place was taken by George Gregory, and in the next year he founded the short-lived 'Antiquary's Magazine'. 
In the meantime, in spite of his peculiarities and irascible temper, Phillips's business prospered, and he moved in 1806 to larger premises in Little Bridge Street, Blackfriars. His publications included vast numbers of elementary school books and cheap manuals, issued under a variety of pseudonyms. French, Italian, and Latin dictionaries and phrase books, for instance, appeared as by the Abbe Bossuet; and geographical and scientific works by the Revd J. Goldsmith. Some of these works were compiled by Mavor, Watkins, Gregory, and others of Phillips's assistants; in others, however, such as 'A Popular Dictionary of Facts and Knowledge' (1827?), 'A Dictionary of the Arts of Life and Civilisation', and 'A Million of Facts' (1832?), Phillips seems to have been the primary author. Several of these works passed through numerous editions. At midsummer 1807 Phillips was elected a sheriff of London, and as the bearer of an address from the corporation to George III, he was knighted by the king on 30 March 1808. During his shrievalty Phillips established the sheriff's fund for the relief of poor debtors, and placed the sponging-houses under better regulations. In this capacity he wrote and published 'A Letter to the Livery of London Relative to the Duties and Office of Sheriff' (1808), and 'A Treatise on the Powers and Duties of Juries, and on the Criminal Laws of England' (1811). 
Subsequently Phillips's affairs went into decline, but through the generosity of a former apprentice he was enabled to repurchase the 'Monthly Magazine' and many of his best copyrights, and continued his publisher's business on a somewhat more restricted scale, until in 1823 he retired to Brighton. He died there on 2 April 1840. 
John Wilson (Christopher North) called Phillips 'a dirty little Jacobin', with no literary ability and absurd scientific views; but he later allowed him the virtue of political consistency, and confessed the 'Monthly' to be a valuable periodical. Tom Moore considered Phillips a bore, and laughed at his 'Pythagorean diet', for from an early date Phillips practised strict vegetarianism; his devotion to its tenets is depicted by George Borrow in his 'Lavengro', and is also seen in Phillips's publication of John Ritson's 'An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty' in 1802. Augustus De Morgan credited him with honesty, zeal, ability, and courage, but adds that 'he applied them all in teaching matters about which he knew nothing', and so made himself ridiculous. Particularly irritating to De Morgan was Phillips's pretentious work on the principles of universal causation, entitled 'The Proximate Causes of Material Phenomena' (1821, 1824). Phillips was a patron of Samuel Bamford and other radical contemporaries, and it was he who, after hearing Coleridge talk at a dinner party, exclaimed that he wished he had him in a garret without a coat to his back. Despite his authorship of works such as 'A Morning's Walk from London to Kew' (1817) and 'Golden Rules of Social Philosophy' (1826), his chief importance was as a purveyor of cheap miscellaneous literature designed for popular instruction, and in this vein as the predecessor of the brothers Chambers and of Charles Knight. 


@@@@@


doc= 22168


Phillips, Richard (1778-1851), chemist, was born on 21 November 1778, in George Yard, Lombard Street, London, the fifth of at least eleven children of James Phillips (1745-1799), printer and bookseller, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1746-1808), daughter of the London linen draper John Whiting and his wife, Judith. Catherine Phillips, the Quaker preacher, was his stepgrandmother and he was brought up in a strongly Quaker environment. He married, at Devonshire House on 14 April 1807, Ann Rickmann, with whom he had at least nine children between 1808 and 1832. For reasons that are not known he was disowned by the Gracechurch Street monthly meeting in November 1811. However, he retained some form of association with the Quakers since all his children (apart from Caroline, born 1812) enjoyed birthright membership of the society. 
Phillips was educated as a chemist and druggist under William Allen and received his first instructions in chemistry from George Fordyce. With his elder brother, William Phillips, Allen, Luke Howard, and others, Phillips founded, in 1796, the Askesian Society which promoted scientific knowledge and research. From this society stemmed the Geological Society, founded in 1807; Phillips was one of the original members, serving on its committee and first council, 1808-11. He also joined the City Philosophical Society, founded by John Tatum in 1808, which was aimed at the mutual self-improvement of its members. There he met Michael Faraday, with whom he formed a lifelong friendship. They and others migrated to the Society of Arts after the City Philosophical Society ceased to be active following its temporary proscription in 1817. 
In 1811 Phillips published his first major work, an experimental examination of the 'Pharmacopoeia Londinensis' which was severely critical of its contents. He followed this up with a further attack in 1816. This led to his preparing his own translation, the first edition of which was published in 1824 (2nd edn, 1831; 3rd edn, 1837; 4th edn, 1851). This pharmaceutical chemical work established Phillips's reputation as a chemical analyst of the highest competence. 
Phillips supported himself by a combination of analytical work, including giving expert testimony at trials, and by lecturing on chemistry. From 1817 he lectured at the London Hospital. During the 1820s he gave several courses at the London Institution and in Birmingham. He was professor of chemistry at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, at the school of medicine in Webb Street, Southwark, founded by Edward Grainger, and, from 1832, at St Thomas's Hospital. In 1837 he applied unsuccessfully for the professorship of chemistry at University College. In 1839 he was appointed chemist and curator at the Museum of Practical Geology at Charing Cross and assisted in its transfer to Jermyn Street (but died the day before the new premises opened). 
Out of more than seventy papers, Phillips published only two (one with Faraday) in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. From 1821 to 1826 he was editor of the 'Annals of Philosophy', one of the major journals for the communication of general scientific knowledge. From 1827 this journal was merged with the 'Philosophical Magazine', edited by Richard Taylor. Although Phillips's name appeared as an editor until his death, it is clear that, at best, he was junior to Taylor. All the chemical articles in the 'Penny Cyclopaedia' were written by him. 
Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1822, Phillips served on council in 1839-41 and from 1850 until his death. In 1841 he was one of the founders of the Chemical Society, of which he was vice-president in 1841-3 and 1846-7 before becoming president in 1849-51. He was also president of the Chemical Section of the British Association at its 1848 meeting in Swansea. These positions emphasize the important role that he played in the institutionalization of science throughout the first half of the nineteenth century, without which the growth of professional science would have been retarded. 
Phillips died on 11 May 1851 at Camberwell and was buried in Norwood cemetery. 


