@@@@@


doc= 22169


Phillips, Samuel (1814-1854), journalist and novelist, born in London on 28 December 1814, was of Jewish origin, and was the third son of Philip Phillips, a tradesman (at first in St James's Street and afterwards in Regent Street, London) who dealt principally in lamps and chandeliers. At an early age Samuel showed such talent for mimicry and recitation that his parents were disposed to train him for the stage. He attracted the attention of the duke of Sussex by an essay on Milton and by his recitation of Collins's 'Ode to the Passions', a performance repeated by him at the Haymarket Theatre. On 23 June 1829 the fourteen-year-old Phillips appeared in an act of 'Richard III' at the Covent Garden Theatre. He then had to turn his attention to his studies, first at the University of London and then at the University of Gottingen in Germany, where he remained for more than a year. On 12 September 1836 he entered Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, intending to take orders in the Church of England. After one term, however, he was obliged, through the death of his father in financial difficulties, to leave the university, and in conjunction with his brother attempted to carry on his father's business. When they failed in their enterprise Phillips was forced in 1841 to take to his pen for subsistence. He was already married, to Rebecca Lyons (14 August 1839), and was moreover suffering from consumption, but he worked on with indomitable courage, though with little success. 
While living in desperate straits at Ventnor in the Isle of Wight Phillips began a novel, 'Caleb Stukely', and sent the first part to the publishing firm of Blackwood at Edinburgh, who accepted it. Phillips then went to London to complete the work, and obtained temporary employment as private secretary and private tutor to Lord Francis Bruce. 'Caleb Stukely' was finally published in 1844. In 1843 Phillips's first wife died and he married again in 1845. In the same year, through the interest of Lord Stanley, he was engaged by the 'Morning Herald', and wrote two leaders a week for it for two years, chiefly on the subject of protection. About 1845 he obtained an appointment on the staff of 'The Times' as a writer of literary reviews, and this post he filled for the rest of his life. He was also appointed secretary to an association formed in 1845, under the patronage of the duke of Richmond, for the support of farmers who had been injured through fiscal changes. 
With the aid of Alderman Salomons Phillips soon afterwards purchased the 'John Bull' newspaper, and for little more than a year he was both editor and proprietor. But the speculation was not very prosperous, and the labour overtaxed his strength. He parted with the paper in 1846. From 1843 to 1846 he contributed to the 'Literary Gazette' besides working for 'The Times'. He was a severe reviewer; Thackeray maintained that his review of 'Henry Esmond' (1852) 'absolutely stopped' sales of the novel ('History of The Times', 2.488). Phillips was as conservative in his literary tastes as in his politics. He disliked the pre-Raphaelites, and it was said of him that he could see nothing in 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' but a violation of the rights of property. A selection of his pieces, 'Essays from 'The Times'', was published in 1851 as the first volume in Murray's series 'Reading for the Rail'. 'A Second Series of Essays from 'The Times'' followed in 1854. Both these volumes were published anonymously, but were republished by Murray in 1871 under Phillips's name. One of Phillips's most popular contributions to 'Blackwood's', 'The banking house', was also republished in Philadelphia in 1855. In 1852 Phillips was honoured by the University of Gottingen with the degree of LLD. 
On the establishment of the Crystal Palace in 1853 Phillips was appointed its literary director, and for a time he was the company's treasurer. He wrote a 'Guide to the Crystal Palace and Park' and 'Portrait Gallery of the Crystal Palace' (1854). In August 1853 he suggested the formation of a society for promoting Assyrian archaeological exploration, and in a short time a staff of skilled operators was dispatched to Nineveh. From the commencement of his connection with the Crystal Palace Phillips resided at Sydenham Hill, London, but he also bought a house in Cleveland Gardens, Hyde Park, for future residence. While his new home was being prepared Phillips went to Brighton for his health, but died there very suddenly on 14 October 1854. He was buried in Sydenham church on 21 October 1854. His widow and five children survived him and were left very well provided for. 


@@@@@


doc= 22170


Phillips, Teresia Constantia (1709-1765), courtesan and memoirist, was born on 2 January 1709 at 'West-Chester' (Phillips, 'Apology', 1.20), part of Chester in Cheshire, the daughter of Thomas Phillips, a captain in the Grenadier Guards. According to her 'Apology' (1748-9) her father was a well-connected member of an ancient Welsh family. Facing financial difficulties upon his discharge from the army in 1715, he moved with his family to London where he was obliged to distribute his offspring among relations. Phillips was looked after by her godmother, Henrietta Paulet ('nee' Crofts), duchess of Bolton. This connection enabled her to attend a Mrs Filler's boarding-school in Prince's Court, Westminster, where she acquired the grace and accomplishments that, along with her sexual allure, would ensure her spectacular success as a courtesan. She was withdrawn from Filler's school following her mother's death about 1720 and her father's subsequent marriage to their servant, perhaps because the duchess of Bolton disapproved of her new stepmother. Her career as a courtesan began at the age of twelve or thirteen as the mistress of a man identified in her 'Apology' as 'Thomas Grimes'. Phillips met Grimes while earning a living as a needle-worker in London, having left home to avoid her stepmother's cruelty. Her connections meant that she often visited Mrs Douglas, the widow of a general, with whom the impoverished Grimes was lodging. According to her account of events, when Grimes began to pursue her she showed his letters to her father who took her back home, but when she again ran away from her stepmother her new lodgings were betrayed to Grimes who plied her with alcohol, tied her to a chair, stripped her, and raped her. Phillips resigned herself to a role as Grimes's mistress until he abandoned her for another adolescent girl after two months. The 'Dictionary of National Biography', followed by many subsequent authors, identified Grimes as Philip Dormer Stanhope, fourth earl of Chesterfield; however, it has been convincingly shown by Lynda M. Thompson that what evidence there is points to his being Thomas Lumley, later third earl of Scarbrough (1690/91?-1752), the dedicatee of the 'Apology'. As Phillips's detractors have shown, none of the biographical details about Grimes match those of Chesterfield, but Phillips herself never made the connection. Like Grimes, Lumley went to Portugal on public business at the end of 1721, and had an elder brother of distinguished character, whereas Chesterfield was an elder son. 
Following her abandonment by Grimes, and already running up debts, Phillips underwent a sham marriage on 11 November 1722 at St Benet Paul's Wharf, London, to a professional bigamist, Francis Delafield or Devall. Delafield, now responsible for Phillips's debts, then joined her father's regiment, the company of invalids based at Portsmouth. She then married, on 9 February 1724, at the same church, Henry Muilman (1700-1772), the elder son of the Amsterdam merchant Pieter Schout Muilman and brother of the antiquary Peter Muilman. While she maintained that calumny turned him and his family against her, it seems more likely that it was the unpleasant discovery of her sexual past that made Muilman sue for an annulment of the marriage. While involved in endless court battles with her husband, Phillips embarked upon a series of liaisons with 'at least seven wealthy and well-connected men' (Stone, 258). 
Phillips's affairs, like her court battles, are confusing in the extreme. She was the mistress of a 'Mr B.', and of the gardener Philip Southcote (1697/8-1758) on and off for about five years. The latter she refers to as 'Tartuffe' in her 'Apology' and depicts him as effeminate and mercenary. Other lovers included Sir Herbert Perrott Pakington, fifth baronet ('c'.1701-1748), tory MP, who twice attempted suicide to prevent Phillips from leaving him, a 'Lord F.', and even her surgeon. Though the motivation for these affairs was largely financial, she laid herself open to charges of sexual depravity from Muilman and his lawyers, and in 1774 Horace Walpole would famously consider her nymphomania equal to that of Catherine the Great (Walpole, 'Corr.', 24.35). The recounting of her liaisons, along with convoluted court depositions from her messy divorce and indefatigable attempts to make Muilman pay up, make up her three-volume 'Apology'. The aim of this was clearly in part to blackmail wealthy ex-lovers, but Phillips used the dedication to refer to the text as 'this unpleasing Method of justifying myself to the World, as well as relieving my Fortune' (Phillips, 'Apology', 1.1). It is not overly titillating. Despite the generosity of many of her lovers, Phillips had experienced frequent bouts of poverty as a result of her extravagant lifestyle and legal fees. Between 1742 and 1744 she was arrested for debt and imprisoned in the king's bench prison. She periodically fled to France to avoid either creditors or importunate lovers. Though she was clearly interested in making a good sale and repairing her damaged finances, her 'Apology' is often tedious and confusing as she gives minutely detailed accounts of the extenuating circumstances surrounding each affair, and its financial cost. Though supposedly written with scrupulous honesty, Phillips tends to limit her self-accusation to a natural love of pleasure and a lack of prudence. Publication of the 'Apology' was followed by an exchange of pamphlets which included 'A Defence of the Character of a Noble Lord' (1748), issued on behalf of Grimes; 'A Genuine Copy of the Tryal of Thomas Grymes, esq., alias Lord S --, from a Barbarous and Inhuman Rape, Committed on the Body of Miss T. C. P.' (1748); a 'Counter-Apology' (1749), intended to discredit her; and from Phillips herself a second edition of the 'Apology' to which was attached 'A Letter Humbly Address'd to the Right Honourable the Earl of Chesterfield' (1750). The 'Apology' was advertised heavily in 'Old England', the journal for which Chesterfield wrote, and the tone of the 'Letter' suggests that Phillips and Chesterfield may have been lovers during this period. 
After 1751 Phillips fades from view, and seems to have spent the final ten or so years of her life in Kingston, Jamaica. There, according to an anonymous piece in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1766), she made three bigamous marriages, to 'Mr M.', an Irish land surveyor, then to 'Mr S. C.', a Scotsman and commissary for French prisoners of war in Jamaica, and finally to a Frenchman named Lanteniac ('GM', 83-4). According to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' she died in Kingston, Jamaica, on 2 February 1765, 'unlamented by a single person' (ibid., 84). She was also buried there. 
Notorious in her own day, Phillips remains a figure of historical interest as she used her damaged reputation to her own ends, and bitterly decried the sexual double standard. In this she had some success; Samuel Richardson remarked to Lady Bradshaigh on 15 December 1748: 'What think you has not Mr. Grimes to answer for, in the ruin of Constantia Phillips when but Eleven Years of Age, and abandoning her to the Town in two Months, if the story she tells be true? -- What Ruins, the Consequence of 'her' Ruin, may not be laid at his Door. ('Selected Letters of Samuel Richardson', ed. J. Carroll, 1964, 115)' Maintaining that her 'Apology' acted as a kind of cautionary tale to warn heedless young girls of the sexual snares that awaited them, she declared, with a great degree of truth: 'A Woman may want conjugal Affection, Integrity, Sobriety, maternal Tenderness, Frugality, Good-Nature, Patience, Temperance, Prudence, Charity, and, in fine, every social Virtue, if she contrive to keep her 'Person chaste'... all is well in the World's Opinion' (Phillips, 'Apology', 3.7-8). 


@@@@@


doc= 22171


Phillips, Thomas (d. 1693), military engineer, may have been of Welsh origin but his parents and background are otherwise obscure. Nothing is known of his early years and he is first mentioned in 1661, when he was appointed master gunner of the warship 'Portsmouth'. In 1672, after passing an examination by the master gunner of England, he was appointed a gunner in the Tower of London. In 1673 he served in the navy under Admiral Spragge in the final engagement of the First Anglo-Dutch War. In 1678 he was commissioned ensign in the company of the governor of Portsmouth, George Legge, later Lord Dartmouth, with whom he developed a close professional relationship. He became an expert on bombardment and fortification and was recognized as a military engineer. In 1679-80 he was sent to the Channel Islands to make maps and plans of the bays, probable landing-places and defences, both existing and required. While there he also executed a number of topographical views in watercolour. 
In 1683 Phillips sailed with Dartmouth's expedition to destroy the fortifications and mole at Tangier. His drawings of the demolition were later shown to the king as proof of the venture's success. Samuel Pepys, who accompanied the expedition, found Phillips to be a man with views on many topics, including the improvement of navigation skills, the need to study the world's currents, the importance of mathematics in the educational curriculum of children intended for careers at sea, the simplification of the rigging of ships, and the needlessness of discovering the means of calculating longitude, which he believed would only bring about miscarriages at sea. On his return to England in April 1684, he was appointed third engineer of the ordnance in July with salary backdated to September 1683. In the summer of 1684 he was sent to France, where he met Vauban in Luxembourg and viewed the frontier fortifications on the Rhine and the channel ports. He reported to Dartmouth that he had 'taken particular observations of all things that can in any way be serviceable to us, especially in the affairs of the artillery' ('Dartmouth MSS', 1.119-20). 
Phillips was next sent to inspect the defences of Portsmouth, where he was to supervise the construction of new works. In August 1684, in response to a request from the duke of Ormond, he was ordered to Ireland to survey the fortifications and harbours, draw exact designs, and advise on necessary repairs. His report, completed in 1685, criticized the condition and effectiveness of existing defences and recommended major improvements at a total cost of $554,000. Phillips's survey was accompanied by meticulous plans of the cities, principal towns, and other strong points. His familiarity with contemporary fortress design is clear from the drawings of citadels and redoubts he recommended to strengthen the fortifications of Dublin and other key strategic locations. He drafted 'Rules, orders and directions for regulating the office of ordnance in Ireland', and with Francis Povey surveyed the ordnance and arms remaining in the king's stores in Ireland and recommended the building and repair of storehouses for their protection. James II referred the matter to the Irish administration in 1686, but the immense expenditure involved ensured that little or nothing was done to implement his proposals. On his return to England in the summer of 1685 the earl of Longford, former master-general of the Irish ordnance, wrote to Dartmouth praising the character and conduct of 'Honest Tom Phillips' and regretting his departure ('Dartmouth MSS', 1.125). During his tour Phillips executed nine delightful 'prospects', or views, of Irish towns and harbours, using pencil, pen and ink, and colourwash. These show the influence of Dutch landscapists then at work in England, and are of considerable artistic merit, as well as providing an invaluable topographical record of Irish towns in the late seventeenth century. 
In December 1685 Phillips was appointed second engineer at an annual salary of $250. For the rest of James II's reign he was based at the Board of Ordnance in London, but visited Poole, Portsmouth, Plymouth, Chatham, and Sheerness to inspect and advise on the defences. In 1687 his duties included the erection of a fort on Hounslow Heath for the army's summer exercises. In December of that year he was commissioned captain of the company of miners in Lord Dartmouth's ordnance regiment. In November 1688, writing from Portsmouth, Phillips reported to Dartmouth on the strength of the Dutch fleet which had brought William of Orange to Torbay. Initially he seems to have been unsympathetic to the revolution of 1688, possibly because it brought about the fall from power of his patron, Dartmouth. In 1689, on the pretext that he was owed significant arrears of salary, he refused to go to Ireland with Schomberg, who dismissed him from his company and his post of second engineer. However, in July 1690 he was sent to work on the fortifications of Portsmouth, where his diligence was commended by Queen Mary. In September he sailed as an engineer with Marlborough's expedition to Munster, and attended the sieges of Cork and Kinsale, where his detailed knowledge of the fortifications must have proved invaluable. Plans of these operations retained by Marlborough are believed to be his work. In April 1691 he was restored to office as second engineer. In 1690 his design for a new gun carriage was adopted for all the guns of the ship 'Royal Sovereign'. He also invented a mould to cast large cannon, and shortly before his death sought to establish a company to manufacture ordnance, which he hoped to supply to the crown. 
By 1692 Phillips's pay was in arrears, and he was evidently in severe financial difficulty, complaining that he could no longer afford to live in London with his family. In August he was sent with a number of ships to report on possible landing-places on the Channel Islands and to reconnoitre St Malo, the leading base of the French privateers. He returned to England with his report in October. In 1693 he was appointed chief engineer to the train of brass ordnance for sea service. In November he was sent with Commodore Benbow and a naval squadron, which included bomb-vessels and fireships, to destroy St Malo. After a three-day bombardment during which Phillips directed the bomb-vessels, on 19 November he took a 300 ton galliot packed with explosives inshore with the intention of reducing the town to ashes. The vessel grounded before quite reaching the harbour, but damaged hundreds of houses and brought down the sea wall of the port when it exploded. Phillips escaped the scene, but his death within days, aboard Benbow's ship at Guernsey Road in the Channel Islands on 22 November, may have been related to the incident. A week later his body was brought ashore at Portsmouth, where he was buried on 29 November with military honours in the church. Soon afterwards an allowance was paid to his son Thomas to study engineering. His widow, Frances, whom Phillips married at an unknown date, claiming she had five children unprovided for, sought payment of his arrears of pay and a pension out of the Welsh revenue. The British Library, the National Library of Ireland, the Public Record Office, and Worcester College, Oxford, hold collections of his surviving plans and drawings. 


@@@@@


doc= 22172


Phillips, Thomas (1708-1774), biographer and Roman Catholic priest, was born at Ickford, Buckinghamshire, on 5 July 1708. His father was a convert to Roman Catholism, in which he was himself brought up. At an early age he was sent to a protestant school, where he supplied the deficiency in religious teaching by studying the 'Imitation of Christ', the 'Introduction to a Devout Life', and the 'Lives of the Saints'. His father soon sent him to the college of the English Jesuits at St Omer in France, where he carried off the prizes in all the schools. On completing his course of rhetoric, he entered the noviciate at Watten, near St Omer, on 7 September 1726, and he made the simple vows of the Society of Jesus on 8 September 1728. He then moved to the English College at Liege to study a triennial course of philosophy. Soon after his admission to holy orders his father died, leaving him a fortune which ensured his financial security. He travelled through the Netherlands, Germany, France, and Italy, visiting the universities, and forming many useful friendships. 
On 17 July 1731, towards the end of the third year of his philosophical course, and while still retaining the resolution to abide in the Society of Jesus, Phillips made a voluntary renunciation of his actual and contingent property in favour of the college at Liege and of the provincial father, John Turberville. However, in July 1733, after being refused the opportunity to teach classical literature at St Omer, he withdrew from the society, though his affection for it suffered no diminution. 
Phillips now moved to Rome, where Father Henry Sheldon, rector of the English College, introduced him to Charles Edward Stuart, Stuart claimant to the throne, who, on 1 September 1739, procured for him the appointment to a canonry at Tongres. After his return to England he officiated as chaplain to George, fourteenth earl of Shrewsbury; then to Sir Richard Acton at Aldenham, Shropshire; and subsequently (1763-5) to Mr Berkeley of Spetchley Park, Worcestershire. Eventually he retired to Liege, where he was readmitted to the Society of Jesus on 16 June 1768. 
Phillips's principal literary work was 'The History of the Life of Cardinal Pole' (1764). His object in writing this biography was to provide, in English, an account of the Council of Trent from a Roman Catholic point of view. The work caused alarm among certain protestant readers and elicited many replies from Timothy Neve, John Jortin, and others. Phillips died at Liege in July 1774. 


@@@@@


doc= 22173


Phillips, Thomas (d. 1815), historian, was a native of Shrewsbury. His brother Richard (died 1815) was mayor of the town in 1814. Through the influence of Sir William Pulteney, Thomas obtained a place in the customs. In 1779 he published 'The History and Antiquities of Shrewsbury'. This was to a large extent based on the work of John Bowen, who had used material collected by his father, James Bowen, a herald painter and undertaker in Shrewsbury. Between 1732 and 1736 James Bowen had accompanied the historian William Mytton of Halston around Shropshire while Mytton was researching for his own proposed general history and survey of the county. Bowen had done the drawings for this unpublished work. 
The 'History' remained the standard work on Shrewsbury until 1825 when Hugh Owen and John Brickdale Blakeway published their 'History', with acknowledgements to their predecessor. A second edition of Phillips's work formed the first volume of Charles Hulbert's 'History of the County of Salop' (1837). Phillips died in London on 9 January 1815. 


@@@@@


doc= 22174


Phillips, Thomas (1770-1845), portrait painter, was born on 18 October 1770 in Dudley, Worcestershire, the elder of the two sons of Thomas Man Phillips ('bap'. 1745), mercer, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Thomas Brett, ironmonger, whose family came from West Bromwich, Staffordshire. 
It seems that his father died while Phillips was a boy: he later described Dr Joseph Wainwright (1741-1810), surgeon, of Dudley as his guardian and uncle. His grandfather, Samuel Phillips, a dissenting minister in Bromsgrove, made arrangements for the boy's education. In his autobiographical essay covering the early part of his life Phillips recalls taking lessons in drawing and Latin. He attended the grammar school in West Bromwich for eight years up to the age of thirteen, when 'it was thought I had attained scholarship enough for... the choice made by my Guardians for my future station in life... that of a japanner' (Miller, 1). When Thomas Brett died 'c'.1782 he left his grandson $700; out of this inheritance his guardians paid the premium of 40 guineas for his seven-year apprenticeship to the glass engraver and japanner Francis Eginton, of Handsworth, near Birmingham. Eginton soon afterwards abandoned japanning and began making 'a kind of polygraphic picture' in which he was assisted by his apprentice (ibid.). This early photographic process, which produced strong chiaroscuro effects, was to have an influence on Phillips's later portraiture in which strong contrasts of tone assist in conveying psychological depth. His chief employment with Eginton, however, was to provide copies of old-master paintings for his master to use in glass painting. Eginton lent his pupil books on perspective, architecture, anatomy, and the history of art, and 'having a turn for mechanics & natural philosophy with an itinerant lecturer called Wall he [Phillips] formed a philosophical society which is now the Birmingham Library' (Turner, 4). At the end of his apprenticeship Eginton furnished him with a letter of introduction to the engraver Valentine Green. 
In 1790 Phillips moved to London. There, through Green, he met the painter Benjamin West, who gave him permission to use his studio to make a large (10 feet high) copy of a 'Descent from the Cross' after Rubens which Green had commissioned from Phillips for Worcester Cathedral. Following Green's financial ruin (brought about by the hindering of international trade by French military action in Europe) Phillips applied to West and spent two years assisting him on a commission from George III, never completed, for a series of paintings on the subject of revealed religion intended for a private chapel the king planned on the site of Horn Court, Windsor Castle. On the death of Sir Joshua Reynolds in 1792, West became president of the Royal Academy, and by 1799 the project for the chapel paintings was abandoned. Phillips had enrolled in 1791 at the Royal Academy Schools, together with William Owen and Martin Archer Shee, who became perhaps Phillips's strongest rival as a portrait painter. J. M. W. Turner, admitted in 1789, was still attending the schools when Phillips enrolled there. In 1792 Phillips, then living at 398 Oxford Street, exhibited for the first time at the academy, showing 'View of Windsor Castle from the North-East'. His diploma work, 'a repetition of a portion' of his 'Venus and Adonis' (exh. RA, 1808), was heavily influenced by his study of Titian (Turner, 3). In addition he exhibited further historical pictures, including 'The Death of Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, at the Battle of Chatillon' [Castillon] (exh. RA, 1793), and 'Elijah Returning the Restored Son to the Widow' (exh. RA, 1794), but soon realized that 'I must attach myself to Portraiture if I hoped to live by my Profession' (Miller, 3). 
In 1795 Phillips was commissioned by the medical officers of St Thomas's Hospital for a portrait of their apothecary, Dr George Fordyce. Its success was significant, marking the beginning of Phillips's role throughout his long career as a portrait painter of many eminent men of science, including Sir Humphrey Davy (1821; NPG); Isambard Kingdom Brunel (exh. RA, 1829); Francis Baily, president of the Royal Astronomical Society (exh. RA, 1839); John Dalton (1835); and Michael Faraday (exh. RA, 1842). 'My father painted 4 presidents of the Royal Society Mr Joseph Banks -- Mr Davies Gilbert -- the Duke of Sussex and then his last the Marquis of Northampton' (H. W. Phillips, MS note bound into Turner, facing p. 3). Phillips's obituarist referred to his pensive 'Mrs Somerville, one of the most intellectual of his female portraits' (1834; formerly John Murray, Scot. NPG) ('The Athenaeum', 418). 
Through Mr Birch, surgeon at St Thomas's, Phillips gained an introduction to Lord Winterton of Shillinglee Park, Sussex. 'He stopped at Petworth en route with a letter to Monr. Andre, the Librarian [and] became known to Lord Egremont' (H. W. Phillips, MS note bound into Turner, facing p. 3). George O'Brien Wyndham, third earl of Egremont, was the munificent patron of several artists including Turner, and an enlightened landowner who took a keen interest in scientific and mechanical developments relative to agriculture. He was a man 'whose kindness', Phillips recalled, 'extended to me and my family... and whose friendship... never failed me for 44 years.... By his continued patronage I was drawn into notice' (Miller, 4). The largest collection of his work, including his 'View of Petworth Park' (1798), a rare foray by Phillips into landscape, remains at Petworth House, Sussex. Phillips's early interest in natural science led in 1819 to his election as a member of the Royal Society to which in November 1834, following an excursion from Petworth that summer, he presented a paper on his discovery of 'a prehistoric canoe made out of a hollowed oak log' at North Stoke near Arundel (Hamilton, 17). The opportunities for conversation between artists, men of science, and antiquaries were frequent and convenient in Somerset House, where the Royal Academy, the Royal Society, and the Society of Antiquaries were all then situated. Phillips had been particularly stimulated by Davy's paper in 1815 on the pigments of the ancients, writing to Banks: 'we artists feel a hey-day kind of exhilaration in consequence... It appears we have better colours than the ancients ever possessed and I believe are better painters' (ibid., 10). In his portraits of men of science Phillips engaged with the task of representing visually the sitter's intellectual life. His interest in this 'interior' aspect of portraiture was to develop further in his portraits of men of letters, where the need to represent the creative imagination visually took him to the fount of Romanticism. Though the portraits are presented here as groups or series of portraits (and Phillips himself responded to earlier series of portraits in conceiving of many of his individual portraits as part of a larger series or grouping) each one is nevertheless characterized by its central concern with its sitter's individuality. 
Following the peace of Amiens Phillips departed in September 1802 for Paris, where he remained for three months to execute a commission from the duke of Northumberland for a portrait of Napoleon Bonaparte. By the intercession of Cardinal Fesch 'admission was obtained to the Consular presence at the hour of dinner, & the result was eminently successful' (Turner, 6). Copies of his portrait of Napoleon (prime version, priv. coll.) were made for 'Lords Hastings & Egremont & Talbot & Erskine, and also for Mr. Power' (ibid.). That done for Lord Egremont (a head and shoulders view in an oval frame) remains at Petworth. In addition to two privately commissioned mezzotints from the portrait by Charles Turner, Phillips made a sketch from the head in profile and from this an engraving was made by W. G. Edwards. Painted in the same year as J. D. Ingres's whole-length 'Bonaparte as First Consul' (1803; Musee des Beaux-Arts, Lille), for which the sitter similarly permitted the artist time only to make a brief sketch, Phillips's portrait also deploys the glamour of his subject's consular dress to emphasize his sitter's then refined (and idealized) features; but where the 'maitre' of the French nineteenth-century portrait conveys an unswerving image of Napoleonic will, Phillips imparted to his sitter a melancholic 'sensibilite' that almost certainly came to the attention of his most famous sitter, the poet Lord Byron. 'In portraiture Mr Phillips quickly won his way: the beauty of his colors, the truth of his eye, & the agreeableness of his manners were certain attractions; & if the assertion be true, that every painter braids a portion of his own character with his colours on his pallet, his studio had the additional charm that it was sure to produce gentlemen. Hence beauty, learning & rank soon resorted to it: in 1800 he had the honor of painting Earl Percy, & M de Calonne; the following year the Duke of Northumberland; the next the Chancellor, Lord Thurlow... among his subsequent sitters he reckoned George IV, both as Prince of Wales & Prince Regent, the Dukes of York & Sussex, the Hetman Count Platoff, the Marquis of Stafford and his family, the Archbishop of York, & Lord Byron. (Turner, 3)' 

In 1804 his growing success was marked by Phillips's move (he had moved several times in the last ten years) to a substantial house at 8 George Street, Hanover Square, London, formerly belonging to Henry Tresham RA (of whom he painted a portrait, exh. RA, 1811), which remained his home for the rest of his life. In later years his son Henry Wyndham Phillips ['see below'] made a watercolour drawing of the large studio and gallery that was attached to the back of the house ('c'.1840; repr. Miller, pl. 2). In 1805 Phillips was elected an associate of the Royal Academy and Royal Academician in 1808. He retained a connection with his native area, becoming a member of the Birmingham Academy of Arts in 1814 and exhibiting there until 1844. In 1809 he married Elizabeth Fraser (1782-1856) of Fairfield, near Inverness, at the home of the bookseller and publisher William Miller and his wife, both close friends of the bride, who lived at 50 Albemarle Street. In 1812 Miller sold his property and much of his business to the publisher John Murray the younger, and it may have been through Miller that Phillips gained an introduction to Murray. 
Murray commissioned Phillips to paint a series of portraits of contemporary poets whose work he published. Like the celebrated series by Sir Godfrey Kneller of the Kit-Cat Club, this series was painted in kit-cat size (36 inches x 28 inches) with the intention that they should be hung together at the publisher's house at 50 Albemarle Street, a meeting place for many well-known writers of the age. Phillips's 'William Blake' (1807; NPG) had earlier established his ability to convey in a portrait of a poet the contemporary fascination with imaginative genius. With the traditional attributes of the imaginative writer -- Blake sits pen in hand, his large forehead (visual symbol of his vast imagination) brightly lit -- and with 'a rapt poetic expression' that Allan Cunningham famously recorded as 'conjured up by Phillips's luring Blake to talk about his friendship with the archangel Gabriel' (Walker, 1.50), his portrait of Blake demonstrates the sensitive rapport Phillips was able to engage in with his creative sitters whether poets or men of science. In 1813 Murray commissioned from Phillips a portrait of Byron (who brought the publisher more commercial success than any other of his writers), which still hangs over the drawing-room fireplace in Albemarle Street. The half-length view famously shows a pale-complexioned Byron in a white shirt with a large turned-down 'Byronic' collar open at the neck to reveal his throat, and wrapped in a dark cloak. The dress and pose are identical to that of Charles Mayne Young in his portrait by G. H. Harlow (1809; Garrick Club, London), where the actor is portrayed as Hamlet, and it is possible that Byron saw Young perform this role. As in his portrait of Blake, Phillips's ability to convey the Romantic (and here self-dramatizing) cast of his sitter's imagination indicates that, although his 'oeuvre' is less flamboyant than that of his contemporary Sir Thomas Lawrence, he, too, was quintessentially a Romantic painter. Of the rest of the series, which includes portraits of Thomas Southey ('c'.1815; John Murray, London), the Revd George Crabbe (1817; John Murray, London), Samuel Rogers (1817; NPG, on loan to Dove Cottage, Grasmere), Thomas Campbell (1818; John Murray, London), S. T. Coleridge (1819-21; priv. coll.; copy, 1835, John Murray, London), Sir Walter Scott -- with whom Phillips became friends (1815; with the John Mitchell Gallery, London, 1960), and Thomas Moore (1819-22), several still hang together at John Murray, London. 
According to Dawson Turner, Phillips conceived a scheme for 'an interesting series of portraits of explorers' for his own gallery (Miller, 24). 'Major Denham in an African Bornouse' (formerly John Murray, NPG), exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1826, the year when Denham's 'Narrative of Travels in Africa' (written with Captain Hugh Clapperton and Dr Walter Oudney) was published by Murray, was not part of this series and was sold to John Murray. 'In Lawrence's eyes his best performance' ('The Athenaeum', 418), 'Denham' forms one of a group including, possibly, Denham's fellow African explorer Captain Hugh Clapperton, and the Arctic explorers Sir John Franklin (1828; NPG), who was a close friend of Phillips's, and Sir (William) Edward Parry (1827; Scott Polar RI). In addition to their interest as portraits of men of natural science, Phillips's portraits of explorers may be compared with those he made of Romantic poets for their interpretation of individuals for whom the exotic and the remote were of prime importance to the imagination. 
While sitting to Phillips for his picture for Murray, Byron also, as he recorded to Lady Melbourne, had to 'stand for my picture' in Albanian dress (July 1813, 'Byron's Letters and Journals', 3.70). In his painstakingly accurate recording of the richly coloured and ornately embroidered dress (priv. coll.) which had 'so much gold [it] would cost in England two hundred [guineas]' ('Byron's Letters and Journals', 5.227), Phillips ensured that this exotic three-quarter-length portrait (Gov. Art Coll., British embassy, Athens, on loan to NPG) of perhaps the most sought after man in London could not fail to dazzle the visitors to the Royal Academy exhibition of 1814 who were, that season, eagerly reading copies of Byron's oriental tales. (Together with his half-length portrait, Phillips exhibited his 'Albanian' portrait of Byron in the same exhibition.) Though it undoubtedly succeeded in drawing favourable attention to the painter (an important consideration for an artist in submitting works for exhibition) and possessed much 'that conveys the idea of the softness and the wildness of character of the popular poet of the East', Hazlitt rightly criticized its 'too smooth' appearance in which Byron appears 'barbered ten times o'er' ('Complete Works', 18.18-19). Perhaps overwhelmed by the need to represent the charismatic identity of the sitter and satisfy the exacting requirements for painting the flamboyant dress (or possibly constrained by the need to rely on his half-length portrait rather than further 'ad vivum' sittings), Phillips only partially fulfilled the opportunity for portrayal this commission presented. Nevertheless, the image is one that continues to fascinate viewers, and the half-length replica in the National Portrait Gallery is one of its most popular portraits. 
'A witty poet', quoted in Phillips's obituary, wrote that ''Phillips shall paint my wife, and Lawrence my mistress'' ('The Athenaeum', 418). Perhaps because it was never intended for public exhibition Phillips's portrait of Byron's lover, 'Lady Caroline Lamb in the Costume of a Page' (1814; priv. coll., repr. Lister, no. 32), intended by the sitter as a pendant to a portrait of Byron and painted while the Albanian portrait was in his studio, provided him with an opportunity to explore the portrayal of Romantic passion. In 1812 Byron had described Lady Caroline as 'a little volcano... the cleverest most agreeable, absurd, amiable, perplexing, dangerous, fascinating little being that lives' ('Byron's Letters and Journals', 2.170-71). In a composition based on Titian's 'Girl with a Platter of Fruits' ('c'.1555; Gemaldegalerie, Berlin), Lady Caroline appears in a vine-hung arbour as Biondetta (a spirit of the devil) bearing a gold platter of grapes. As in the picaresque tale (published in English in 1810) to which the painting alludes, the opalescent clarity of Biondetta's/Lady Caroline's face and the smooth texture of her complexion stand out as an apparition within the surrounding richly coloured and textured fruit and foliage, and silk and velvet fabrics. It is Phillips's engagement with his subject (as well as his rich use of colour) that makes this painting a masterpiece of Romantic portraiture. 
In 1813 Phillips briefly took on as a pupil his distant kinsman Thomas Griffiths Wainewright, who made a copy of his half-length portrait of Byron (Nottingham City Museums, Newstead Abbey collections). In 1814 Wainewright was succeeded by John Partridge, who became a successful portrait painter. That year Phillips visited his friend the banker, botanist, and antiquary Dawson Turner (who later wrote a memoir of Phillips) at Yarmouth; he also visited Chatsworth, Derbyshire, and Wilton House near Salisbury, where he superintended the repair of some sculptures. In 1815, accompanied by Dawson Turner, he visited Paris, where they saw the 'occupation of the French capital by the allied troops' and the Louvre. 'We saw it as left by Napoleon in its glory; we saw it in the confusion of Christie's auction room the day after a sale; & we saw it in its desolation. We walked down the steps with the Apollo of Belvidere & the Medicean Venus; we examined the beauties of the Madonna della seggiola leisurely in our own hands at the Austrian barracks; & we at the same place stood beside the Horses of St Mark, the proudest trophy in the world, as they lay stretched upon [a] litter in a waggon apparently neglected & forgotten. Impressions these, never to be effaced... I had the great pleasure of associating in his [Phillips's] company with Humboldt, Denon, Millin, Canova, Costa, Apostol, Gerard & Prud'hon; &, among our own countrymen, with Lord Dudley, & Mr Rogers, and with Sir Thomas Lawrence, Mr R. R. Reinagle, Mr Cook & Mr Underwood. (Turner, 8)' In 1817 Phillips painted 'The Allied Sovereigns at Petworth, June 24, 1814' (Petworth House; engraved by W. Ward), a crowded canvas that depicts, in the Marble Hall of Petworth, Lord Egremont receiving, among others, George, prince of Wales, Tsar Alexander of Russia, and Frederick William III, king of Prussia. Visits by Phillips and his family to Petworth, where in addition to executing commissions for portraits including several of his host (Petworth House, and NPG) he apparently compiled a list of Lord Egremont's collection of pictures, are recorded in the housekeeping books, together with those of Turner, C. R. Leslie, and George Clint. With his fellow artists Phillips was a mourner at Lord Egremont's funeral in November 1837. 
With Turner, the sculptor Sir Francis Chantrey (of whom he made a portrait in 1818, now in the National Portrait Gallery, in exchange for his own bust), and a Mr Robertson (possibly Andrew Robertson), Phillips had assisted in founding the Artists' General Benevolent Institution in 1814 and served as its vice-president. In 1825 Phillips had been appointed professor of painting at the Royal Academy and in consequence of this made a visit to Italy with Dawson Turner, the painter William Hilton, and, while in Florence, Sir David Wilkie, of whom he made a portrait in 1829 (Tate collection; replica, Scot. NPG). After resigning his professorship in 1832 Phillips published his 'Lectures on the History and Principles of Painting' in 1833, which was reviewed by Allan Cunningham in 'The Athenaeum' (9 November 1833). Further publications included contributions to Rees's 'Cyclopaedia' and a memoir of William Hogarth for John Nichols's 'The Genuine Works of W. H.', 3 vols. (1808-17). Phillips was actively involved in the business of the academy and served on its hanging committee. Following his 'bitter and acute disappointment' with the academy over the hanging of his history painting 'Dentatus' at the academy's exhibition in 1809 ('they placed it in the 'dark''), Benjamin Haydon maintained a grievance against Phillips who that year served on the academy's council ('Diary', ed. Pope, 1.123). Haydon felt that this experience 'threw a cloud on the whole of my life' (ibid.). In 1826 he noted that Phillips was 'kind but peevish. His manner of Art is heavy, a sort of exaggeration of Kneller's and Reynolds's breadth' (ibid., 3.124), and reached a climax in his extended rhyming diatribe against Phillips entered in his diary on 20 August 1831. 
After a period of frailty Phillips died at his home in George Street on 20 April 1845 and was interred in Paddington church, Middlesex, next to his brother Samuel (died 1830), who in 1796 had engraved in mezzotint his portrait of the apothecary George Fordyce. Haydon noted, 'Poor Phillips is dead!... [I] hope [he] has left his family well off -- his Wife was always true to my Genius & Works' ('Diary', ed. Pope, 5.429). 
Phillips painted over 700 portraits, many of which are entered in the transcript of his sitter book held at the National Portrait Gallery. Though he received many commissions from aristocratic patrons, he is now chiefly remembered for his portraits of 'the men of genius of his time', especially Byron ('The Athenaeum', 418). In a full-face self-portrait (NPG) he is seen with grey hair, elegantly dressed in a dark green coat, striped yellow waistcoat, and white neckcloth and cravat, and appears in a painted oval holding brushes and palette. Light falls from the right on to his prominent forehead. This portrayal of his status as a gentleman and 'man of genius' is in harmony with the sensitive expression of his large dark eyes and refined facial features, which convey an emotional appeal to the viewer's imagination. Overshadowed as they have been by Lawrence's bravura portraits of the aristocracy and beautiful women, Phillips's portraits provide a fascinating (and substantial) record of many of the keenest minds of his age and demonstrate that interest in the interior life of the individual at the centre of Romanticism. 
Of his two sons and two daughters, Phillips's elder son, J. Scott Phillips (died 1884), became an officer in the Bengal artillery. In his will Phillips left all his painting materials to his younger son, 


@@@@@


doc= 22175


Phillips, Thomas (1760-1851), philanthropist and surgeon, was born on 6 July 1760 in London, the son of Thomas Phillips, an officer in the excise revenue department. The family originated from Radnorshire, and Phillips was sent to live in that county as a boy because of his ill health in London; he later attributed his longevity to his hill-climbing youth in mid-Wales. He completed his schooling at Kempston in Bedfordshire, before serving an apprenticeship with an apothecary at Hay in Brecknockshire, and later being a pupil of the celebrated London surgeon John Hunter of Jermyn Street. In 1780 Phillips entered the King's Naval Service (the medical service of the Royal Navy), travelling to Canadian waters. On his return to England he joined the East India Company, qualifying as a member of the Company (later the Royal College) of Surgeons on 6 June 1782. He then worked in Calcutta and in 1796 he was sent to inspect hospitals in Botany Bay, Australia. He returned to England in 1798, and in 1800 he married Althea Edwards, daughter of the rector of Cusop in Herefordshire. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1802 Phillips and his wife sailed to India, where he became superintending surgeon and a member of the Bengal medical board. In India he sought to wean soldiers from undesirable habits by providing them with books, establishing small libraries in mess rooms. In 1817 he returned to live in London, a rich man from his commercial undertakings in India and with a full-pay pension of $1500. 
Phillips devoted his remaining years to philanthropic and educational works, being anxious to give away as much money as possible before he died, so that he could see it well used. His relatives, to whom he was known as the Nabob, were well cared for, but Phillips's main interest was in buying books on a vast scale and giving them away to reading rooms and scientific institutes all over England and Wales. At the time of his death there were more than 50,000 books in his house awaiting distribution. St David's College in Lampeter, Cardiganshire, benefited greatly from Phillips's philanthropy. He sent over 22,500 books there from 1834, he endowed six scholarships in the college, and he established in his will a chair of natural science. He was, however, so distressed by the college's refusal to accept his offer of an endowed chair in Welsh that in 1847 he founded the Welsh Educational Institution (later Llandovery College) at Llandovery, Carmarthenshire; there Welsh had a strong place. He endowed closed scholarships at Jesus College, Oxford, for Llandovery pupils and he gave 7000 books to the school. 
Phillips died on 13 June 1851 at 5 Brunswick Square, his London home. He was in his ninety-first year and had been ill for less than a month before his death. He made his will on 3 June 1851, leaving $52,433. He was buried in the crypt of St Pancras Church, London, next to his wife, who had died on 13 September 1841. 


@@@@@


doc= 22176


Phillips, Sir Thomas (1801-1867), local politician and writer on education, was born at Llanelli, Brecknockshire, the eldest son of Thomas Phillips and his wife, Ann, eldest daughter of Benjamin James of Llangattock, Crickhowell, Brecknockshire. He was articled to a solicitor in Newport, Thomas Prothero, becoming in 1824 a partner in the practice. Phillips and Prothero took a leading part in political life in Newport, and on 9 November 1838 Phillips became its mayor. Towards the end of his tenure of the mayoralty, he had to deal with the Chartist insurrection of 1839 in Newport, and in the attack on the Westgate Hotel on 4 November Phillips was wounded, seriously in the arm and slightly in the hip. Following the defeat of the Chartists, he was invited by Queen Victoria to stay at Windsor Castle, where he was knighted on 9 December. The grateful citizens of Newport presented him with a testimonial for over $800, a service of plate, and his portrait. He was voted the freedom of the City of London on 26 February 1840. 
On 10 June 1842 Phillips, having given up his practice as a solicitor in January 1840, was called to the bar at the Inner Temple. His career as a barrister, specializing in chancery work, was distinguished and he was named a queen's counsel on 17 February 1865. He acquired considerable wealth from his legal work and he bought coalmines in South Wales. He took a leading role in educational endeavours: as a governor of King's College, London, as a supporter of the National Society, and as a benefactor of Trinity College in Carmarthen, Howell's School in Cardiff, and Christ College in Brecon. His deep commitment to the Church of England led him to serve as a member of the Church Institution, a governor of the Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy, and a tireless contributor to the Church Extension Society in the diocese of Llandaff. He was also chairman of the Society of Arts. 
Phillips felt keenly that the so-called blue books (the reports of the commissioners on education in Wales, published in 1847) were a serious misrepresentation of social conditions in Wales, and in 1849, after travelling all over Wales to collect material, he produced a magisterial work entitled 'Wales: the language, social condition, moral character, and religious opinions of the people, considered in their relation to education: with some account of the provision made for education in other parts of the kingdom'. The following year he published 'The Life of James Davies, a Village Schoolmaster', a charming illustrated account of a pioneer of education in rural Wales. 
Phillips was struck with paralysis immediately after addressing a committee of the House of Commons and died five days later, on 26 May 1867, at his London home, 77 Gloucester Place, Portman Square. He was buried at Llanelen, Monmouthshire. He was unmarried, but his example of public service was followed by his sister's son, Thomas Phillips Price, MP for the northern division of Monmouthshire between 1885 and 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 22177


Phillips, (Israel) Watts (1825-1874), playwright and designer, of Irish extraction, was born on 16 November 1825 at Robert Street, Hoxton, Middlesex, the second son of Thomas Phillips (died 1850), upholsterer and timber merchant, and his wife, Esther Ann Watts ('b'. 1800). He had an older brother, Thomas (died 1834), four younger brothers, William Charles, Frederick William, Reginald (died 1837), and Alfred Reginald, and two younger sisters, Esther Ann 
(Annie; 1830-1916)
and Emma Watts (1837-1922), a writer, and her brother's biographer. Possessing some knowledge of the Elizabethan dramatists, and knowing John Baldwin Buckstone, Louisa Cranstoun Nisbett, and other actors quite well, Watts Phillips, as he was always known, thought he would go on the stage, and chose Edinburgh as the scene of his debut. He had shown, however, a predilection for caricature, and eventually persuaded by his father became, in 1837, one of the very few pupils of George Cruikshank, with whom he always maintained a firm friendship. He supported and counselled Cruikshank in his disputes with Dickens and the novelist Harrison Ainsworth over the artist's roles in various co-productions with them. Even in his own last years Phillips helped with fund-raising campaigns on Cruikshank's behalf. 
While Phillips was being tutored by Cruikshank he was also getting to know the playwright and journalist Douglas Jerrold, Mark Lemon, editor of 'Punch', and Augustus Mayhew. By 1844 Phillips was helping Samuel Phelps to prepare the texts for a revival of 'The Fatal Dowry', 'Rule a Wife and Have a Wife', and 'The City Madam' for productions at Sadler's Wells. Encouraged by his development as an artist under Cruikshank, Phillips went to Paris, where he rented a studio, took lessons, and tried to sell his sketches. The revolution of 1848 drove him to Brussels, and then to England in 1849. For the publisher David Bogue he designed 'The History of an Accommodation Bill' (1850?), 'How We Commenced Housekeeping', 'The Bloomers', and 'A Suit in Chancery', which were all comic sketches with an accompanying story caption. He returned to Paris and became friends with many noted French artists and writers, and also acquired a knowledge of the French stage which afterwards stood him in good stead. 
On the death of his father in 1850 Phillips returned to live in England permanently. On 7 June 1851, at St Matthew, City Road, Middlesex, he married Mary Elizabeth, daughter of William Mariner, a stockbroker -- presumably the Elizabeth mentioned unfavourably in his will of 1862. By the time he had drafted this will in Paris he was living with Caroline Huskisson ('b'. 1842/3), a novelist, daughter of John William Huskisson. They had four children: Gordon Watts (1859/60-1900), Mary Roland (1860-1929), Fairfax Balfour ('b'. 1861/2), and Leslie Latimer. His will aimed to protect Caroline and their children, 'and to prevent any portion of [his property] falling into the hands of the woman Elizabeth Phillips known as Lilly Phillips and of her child Basil of whom I am not the father and also of any other children she has had or may have by other men.' Phillips stressed that he had no 'vindictive motive', but wanted to 'protect my property from the hands of one who when I lived with her made my life a misery on account of her ungovernable and most wicked temper' (will, 24 Dec 1862). He had married Caroline by the time of the census of 1871. 
Meanwhile Watts Phillips was making his name in the arts. To 'Diogenes' (1853-4), a not very long-lived rival of 'Punch', he supplied many cartoons, writing in it under the signature 'The Ragged Philosopher'. He also wrote 'The Wild Tribes of London' (1855), an account of London slums and their inhabitants. Dramatized by Travers, it was staged at the City of London Theatre. In 1857 his play 'Joseph Chavigny' was accepted by Benjamin Webster, and produced at the Adelphi in May, with Webster and Madame Celeste in the leading roles. Phillips's obituarist in 'The Times' noted that 'Chavigny' was 'remarkable for the high degree of cynicism which prevailed more or less through all his writings'. Neither this piece nor 'The Poor Strollers', which followed, was very popular, though both were well received by critics. 

'The Dead Heart', produced at the Adelphi on 10 November 1859, with Webster, Mr Toole, David Fisher, and Mrs Alfred Mellon in the principal characters, was, however, a complete success. Some critics commented on how much 'The Dead Heart' owed to 'A Tale of Two Cities' and other works. If anything Dickens was indebted to Phillips's play for some crucial features of his novel, most notably a last-minute heroic substitution of one character for another at the guillotine during the French Revolution. Webster, who played the first Robert Landry, had read the play to Dickens during a visit by the novelist to Brighton early in 1857. The play held its own, and was revived by Henry Irving, who also took the part of Landry, at the Lyceum in 1893. 
Phillips's 'Paper Wings', a comedy of city life, was played at the Adelphi by Mr and Mrs Alfred Wigan on 29 February 1860. 'The Story of the '45', with Webster, Toole, and Paul Bedford, followed at Drury Lane on 12 November. 'His Last Victory', a comedy, premiered at the St James's on 21 June 1862. 'Camilla's Husband' opened on 10 November 1862 at the Olympic, and was noteworthy as the last piece in which T. F. Robson, who played Dogbriar, appeared. Dickens saw the play in the days before Christmas of that year, calling it a 'very good play... very well played' and noting 'real merit' in the acting of Mr Neville and Miss Saville. 'Paul's Return', a domestic comedy, opened at the Princess's on 15 February 1864, prompting a critic in 'The Times' to speculate in an otherwise favourable review that Phillips might have been borrowing without acknowledgement from a French source. Phillips, then in Paris, firmly denied any such foreign source in a letter to the editor that appeared on 20 February. 

'A Woman in Mauve' was produced by Sothern at the Haymarket on 18 March 1865; this was followed by 'Theodora, Actress and Temptress' at the Surrey on 9 April 1866, and 'The Huguenot Captain' at the Princess's with Miss Neilson as the heroine on 2 July. The same actress also appeared in 'Lost in London' on 16 March 1867 (a production of which was being performed at the Princess's at the time of Phillips's death). 'Nobody's Child' appeared at the Surrey on 15 September, 'Maud's Peril' at the Adelphi on 23 October, 'Land Rats and Water Rats' at the Surrey on 8 September 1868, and 'Amos Clark' at the Queen's in October 1872. Phillips also wrote 'The Ticket-of-Leave Man' (not the drama of that name, but a farce played at the Adelphi), and several other plays, some of them not produced, written for and purchased by Webster. 'Marlborough', by which he set great store, was staged at Brighton on 21 October 1872. His dramas show both invention and command of dialogue. 
Phillips's work as an illustrator had long been sacrificed to his occupation as writer. As a draughtsman he was remembered for the delicate designs with which he illustrated letters sent to friends. Many of these were reproduced in the biography written by his sister. Phillips also wrote for the 'Daily News'. To 'Town Talk' he contributed a novel, 'The Honour of the Family', afterwards issued as 'Amos Clark' (1862), which became the play of the same name. Innumerable novels by him also appeared in the 'Family Herald' and other periodicals. After visiting Edinburgh, where he supplied illustrations to Charles Mackay's 'Whiskey Demon' (1860), he returned to Paris, where he frequently lived -- principally, it would seem, because of financial difficulties. Watts Phillips was a skilled mimic and dinner table raconteur, but was somewhat improvident. In October 1869, then living at Edenbridge, Kent, he filed for bankruptcy. On 2 December 'an order of discharge was granted without opposition... the debts were $1,978; property in the hands of creditors stated at $200' ('The Times', 3 Dec 1869). 
Phillips was ill for many months, died on 2 December 1874 at his home at 45 Redcliffe Road, Brompton, London, and was buried in Brompton cemetery on 8 December. Most of his plays were printed in Lacy's 'Acting Edition of Plays' or in 'Dicks' Standard Plays'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22178


Phillips, William (c.1731-1781), army officer, was born about 1731. Some evidence suggests that his parents were Thomas Chichester Phillips (1707-1765) and his wife, Catherine Brudenell, a member of a distinguished military family. He entered the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich on 1 August 1746 and made rapid progress: lieutenant fireworker, 2 January 1747; quartermaster of the Royal Regiment of Artillery, 1 April 1750 (to May 1756); second lieutenant, 1 March 1755; and first lieutenant, 1 April 1756. Yet another sign of preferment was his appointment, in early 1756, as aide-de-camp to Sir John Ligonier, lieutenant-general of the ordnance. On 12 May 1756 he received an army commission as captain and was given command of a company of miners bound for service in Minorca. When this enterprise was aborted the company was incorporated into the artillery, and Phillips, by transferring his rank in the line, leapfrogged officers who were senior to him. 
In 1758 Phillips took command of a brigade of artillery that joined in the army of Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick. This brigade was heavily involved at Minden (1 August 1759) and distinguished itself by passing through a forest to challenge a French battery. Ferdinand singled out Phillips for recognition and presented him with 1000 crowns. During 1760 Phillips's battery was attached to the cavalry brigade commanded by Lord Granby. At Marburg (30 July) Phillips brought the English artillery on at a gallop to support the cavalry, an unprecedented feat that was acclaimed by both Granby and the French, and on 15 August he was promoted lieutenant-colonel in the army. While in Germany he also created the first band for the Royal Artillery. 
During the years 1763-8 Phillips divided his time between Woolwich and Minorca. After a year serving as commandant and inspector of artillery at Gibraltar, he returned to Woolwich. In 1769 he became lieutenant-governor of Windsor Castle; this lucrative appointment, which Phillips held until his death (after 1775 executing through deputy), may have come through the governor, George, fourth earl of Cardigan, who was related to him. On 25 May 1772 he was promoted colonel in the army. 
The early 1770s also saw Phillips active in politics. A long-time friend of Sir Henry Clinton, he helped organize the campaign that saw Thomas Pelham Clinton, Sir Henry's cousin, returned from Westminster in 1774. On 26 October 1774 Lord North wrote to the duke of Newcastle that Phillips had 'distinguished himself at Westminster almost as much as he did at Minden' (HoP, 'Commons, 1754-90'), and with Newcastle's support Phillips was returned from Boroughbridge on 13 March following. His military responsibilities prevented him from participating in parliament, though he held his seat until September 1780. 
During his sojourn in England (1763-75) Phillips had at least two extended affairs. The first was with Catherine Cure (later Thomson), a woman of some wealth. In 1768 he eloped with Elizabeth Colleton Browne (1737-1808), the wife (eventually divorced) of Sir John Brathwaite, an army colonel. With Cure, Phillips had two daughters; with Browne, two daughters and two sons. He married neither woman, though by his will, drawn up in New York on 5 January 1781, he left most of his estate to Browne and their children. These children were later legitimized at the instance of Charles, Lord Cornwallis. 
After sailing to America in early 1776, Phillips took command of British and German units that supported Lieutenant-General John Burgoyne as the latter pursued the remnants of the American forces that had invaded Canada the year before. Following the evacuation by the Americans of Fort St Johns (19 June 1776) Phillips served there as commander (July-December). During these months he supervised the construction of a British fleet and defensive works on Lake Champlain and won Sir Guy Carleton's praise for his 'unwearied diligence' (Davies, 12.233). He then moved on to Montreal and Quebec, where he served as Burgoyne's second in command and soon became involved in the Burgoyne expedition. Burgoyne gave him practical control of preparation and supply, and of his performance he wrote in July 1777: 'it is to his judicious arrangements and indefatigable pains... that the service is indebted for its present forwardness'. Burgoyne allowed Phillips to command army units in the field, a practice that upset Lord George Germain, who feared the precedent, but Burgoyne explained: 'I have always joined artillery to his command, which saves the precedent' (Davies, 14.141). While on campaign Phillips received two more promotions: major of artillery (25 April 1777) and major-general of the army (29 August 1777). 
Phillips played a decisive role in the capture of Fort Ticonderoga on 5 July 1777 by placing four 12-pounders on Mount Defiance, which commanded the fort. At Stillwater, on 19 September, he commanded the left wing, which included Baron Friedrich Adolphus Riedesel's column of German allies, and he personally led the 20th foot forward against the Americans, turning the tide of battle. He commanded the rearguard during the retreat that followed the defeat at Saratoga (7 October) and volunteered to lead a force through the woods to reinforce Ticonderoga. Nevertheless, with the situation deteriorating, he joined other officers in advising Burgoyne to surrender (13 October). 
With the capitulation, Phillips entered into more than two years of captivity. Following Burgoyne's return to England on 5 April 1778 he assumed overall command of the convention army. He frequently complained about treatment of the detained men, and after a British officer was shot by an American sentry (17 June 1778) he protested so vehemently that he was temporarily confined. He managed the arduous removal of the army from Cambridge to Charlottesville, Virginia (November 1778 to January 1779), borrowing money to feed the troops. In August 1779 he and Riedesel were paroled, and on 16 September they set out from Virginia. The Continental Congress reconsidered, however, and it was only after Phillips protested to Washington that the two men were allowed to proceed to New York (November 1779). Phillips was soon appointed to a commission to negotiate a general prisoner exchange with the Americans. Finally, on 13 October 1780, he and Riedesel were exchanged. 
Sir Henry Clinton, the commander-in-chief and Phillips's friend, often consulted him while he was on parole in New York, and after the exchange he was free to utilize him in the field. Instead of returning him to the artillery -- where Phillips was now a lieutenant-colonel, having been promoted on 6 July 1780 -- in early 1781 Clinton assigned him command of a 2000-man elite force, destined for service in Virginia. Phillips sailed from Sandy Hook on 20 March, arrived at Portsmouth, Virginia, six days later, and there added to his command a force led by Major-General Benedict Arnold. According to Clinton's orders Phillips was to buttress the British position at Portsmouth by securing the James and Elizabeth rivers, seize enemy magazines and damage supply lines, and assist Lord Cornwallis in his operations. Clinton believed that Phillips's mission would be completed by June and he would return to New York. Phillips entered Williamsburg unopposed on 20 April, then moved out towards Petersburg, where he hoped to join Cornwallis's army. Near Petersburg, on 25 April, he was challenged by American militia, and in a brief action the Americans were decisively defeated. At Osborne's Landing, on 27 April, Phillips used cannon to destroy a small American squadron. Three days later he directed a raid that resulted in the destruction of large quantities of American stores at Manchester. Phillips returned to Osborne's Landing on 1 May and there fell ill with a fever, possibly typhoid. Virtually incapacitated, he accompanied his force to Petersburg, where he died on 13 May 1781 and was buried. His grave was not marked, but in 1914 the Daughters of the American Revolution raised a monument to him in Petersburg. 


@@@@@


doc= 22179


Phillips, William (1773-1828), printer and geologist, was born on 9 May 1773 at the Poultry, London, the son of James Phillips (1745-1799) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Whiting (1747-1808). His father was a Quaker, originally from Cornwall, who had settled in London in 1768, acquiring the major Quaker printing and publishing house of Mary Hinde at George Yard, Lombard Street in 1775. His stepgrandmother was Catherine Phillips (1727-1794), the noted Quaker minister. 
Phillips was much influenced by his father, served an apprenticeship with him, and took over the business when his father became ill about 1791. On 11 October 1796 Phillips married Sarah Kincey (1776-1807); they later had one daughter, who died aged seventeen. Much involved in Quaker philanthropy, Phillips distributed thousands of pounds for Richard Reynolds (1735-1816), acting in this as agent for his father. The year after his marriage, with William Allen (1770-1843), Phillips established an influential soup society, with the aim of providing cheap and nutritious food to the destitute of Spitalfields. He also published an important 'Appeal... on the Accumulation of Wealth' in 1824. 
Phillips had had an early interest in crystallography -- reflected by the quartz crystal he holds in the portrait of him which appears in an 1891 memoir by his widow. He was a founder member of the London Askesian Society in 1796. With his chemist brother, Richard Phillips (1778-1851), he was active with the British Mineralogical Society from 1800, submitting geological samples and a mineralogical map of Cornwall. He was one of the thirteen founders of the Geological Society of London in 1807, and, in the words of the society's historian, 'the most distinguished, as a geologist, of the original founders' (Woodward, 13). Phillips was chosen as the society's printer in 1810 and printed its first five volumes (1811-21), four both at his own risk and at a loss. 
Phillips's first wife died on 26 October 1807 and 'his spirits were often depressed'. His second marriage, to Christiana Walduck ('c'.1786-1834) on 19 March 1811, stimulated him to re-engage in the scientific work which had been 'stopped' (Phillips, 12). In 1814 Phillips gave free lectures on geology and mineralogy to young people in his home village, Tottenham. These were printed and published as an 'Outline of Mineralogy and Geology.. for.. Young Persons' in 1815 (4th edn, 1826). In 1816 he published 'An Elementary Introduction to... Mineralogy.. for the Student'. His crystallographic work in this, using W. H. Wollaston's reflecting goniometer of 1809, drew high praise from its inventor. His 'Eight Familiar Lectures on Astronomy', another interest, followed in 1817. 
All Phillips's scientific work had to be done in the evenings after work at the printing house. His connections with Cornwall explain his attachment to that county in his early works. His greatest influence was in stratigraphy, as a result of the chapter, 'The geology of England and Wales', added to the second edition of his 'Outline' (1816). This took William Smith's recent geological map as its basis by reproducing a reduced specially permitted version. The book was enlarged as 'Selection of Facts to Form an Outline of the Geology of England and Wales' (1818). It included the then latest version of William Buckland's 'Order of superposition of strata in the British Isles' (Torrens, 68). The 'Selection' was in turn much enlarged, through important contributions from the Revd William Conybeare (1787-1857), to become the jointly authored classic 'Outlines of the Geology of England and Wales, Part 1' (June 1822). William Fitton noted in 1828 how this book had 'had an effect, to which nothing since the institution of this [Geological Society] and the diffusion of Geological maps of England can be compared... no equal portion of the earth's surface has ever been more ably illustrated' (Fitton, 57). 
In his last decade Phillips published important stratigraphic papers on the rocks of Dover and Snowdon, and one on Charnwood Forest, which early separated cleavage from bedding. He was honoured with the naming of a mineral after him in 1825 and election as FRS in 1827. Phillips was attacked by an inflammation of the lungs and then dropsy and died at his home on Tottenham Green on 2 April 1828. He was buried at the Quaker burial-ground in Whitechapel. His widow was to note with justice how 'few were so variously gifted as he' (Phillips, 13) and how he thought it 'better to wear out than rust out' (ibid., 21). 


@@@@@


doc= 22180


Phillpotts, Henry (1778-1869), bishop of Exeter, was born on 6 May 1778 at Bridgwater, Somerset, the second son among twenty-four children of John Phillpotts (1743-1814) and his wife, Sybella (1752-1833), daughter and coheir of Samuel Codrington Glover of Bridgwater. His elder brother, a barrister, John (1775-1849), sat as Liberal MP for Gloucester 1830-31, 1832-5, and 1837-47. At the time of Henry's birth his father ran a pottery and brick factory in Bridgwater. He sold the estate of Sonke at Llangarron, Herefordshire, which had been in the family for two centuries, in 1791. In 1782 the family moved to Gloucester, where John became landlord of The Bell inn and a freeman. He then worked as an auctioneer and land and timber surveyor, moving to Wallsworth, and in 1799 was appointed land agent to the dean and chapter. 
A pupil of the Gloucester Cathedral school under Arthur Benoni Evans, Henry Phillpotts won a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, matriculating in 1791. In 1795 he graduated BA and was elected probationer fellow of Magdalen College on the Somerset foundation, shortly after winning the chancellor's prize for his essay 'On the influence of religious principle'. While at Magdalen he won the Asiatic Society's prize for a Latin panegyric on Sir William Jones, proceeded MA in 1798, and served as junior bursar of the college in 1801 (a plane tree he planted was still standing 200 years later). Phillpotts was elected university praelector of moral philosophy in 1800, and acted as examiner for honours (1802-3). Among his Oxford friends were Edward Copleston and Henry Digby Beste (a convert to Roman Catholicism in 1798). The most significant relationship to emerge from his Magdalen years, however, was the friendship formed with the president, Martin Routh, who helped shape his religious views and remained one of Phillpotts's most trusted counsellors until his death in 1854. Routh's influence led to Phillpotts's ordination as deacon in 1802 and then priest in 1804. Phillpotts resigned his fellowship on his marriage on 27 October 1804 to a niece of Lady Eldon, Deborah Maria (died 1863), daughter of William Surtees (1750-1832) of Bath and his wife, Elizabeth Catherine. The couple had eighteen children, of whom no fewer than seven followed their father into holy orders. Although Phillpotts departed from Oxford, in 1805 refusing the duke of Portland's offer of the principalship of Hertford College, he maintained a lifelong interest in the university, graduated BD and DD (1821), and was elected an honorary fellow of Magdalen in 1862. 
Phillpotts's first preferment was the crown living of Kilmersdon, near Bath, which he received (probably through Lord Eldon's influence) in 1804. He seems never to have resided there or at Stainton-le-Street, co. Durham, another crown living received the following year. Resigning Kilmersdon in 1806, Phillpotts was presented to the crown living of Bishop Middleham, where he resided for two years, Routh's recommendation having secured him a chaplaincy to Shute Barrington, bishop of Durham. It was to support Barrington in a controversy with the Roman Catholic John Lingard in 1806 that Phillpotts made the first of his innumerable sallies into pamphlet controversies. This may have led the bishop to reward him with the important living of Gateshead in 1808 and in 1809 the ninth prebendal stall at Durham. Middleham was given up in 1810 on Phillpotts's collation by the dean and chapter to St Margaret's Chapel, Durham, and the remainder of his Durham career was punctuated by further lucrative preferment: promotion to the second stall in 1815, and in 1820 (on resigning it) appointment to another episcopal living, Stanhope, one of the richest livings in England. Barrington insisted on residence (and counselled the renunciation of cards) as a condition of this last piece of largess, and Phillpotts spent $12,000 on the construction of a new parsonage. Both in Durham and at Stanhope Phillpotts was a conscientious pastor, and in the latter instance an active magistrate. It was his prolific activity as a controversialist, however, that brought both wider recognition of Phillpotts's considerable talents and notoriety. 
Phillpotts entered the lists in defence of both Anglicanism and the social and political order, to the preservation of which he believed the establishment essential. In 1819 he attacked proposals for reform of the law of settlement and for the abolition of the 'Test Act', but it was his resolute defence of the authorities in the wake of Peterloo, singling out J. G. Lambton (later Lord Durham) for censure, that provoked a bitter attack on Phillpotts in the 'Edinburgh Review' and a controversy in which he was widely judged to have emerged victorious. His tory credentials were confirmed in the following year when he promoted a clerical address in support of the government in the Queen Caroline affair, accusing Earl Grey of opportunism in championing her cause. This resulted in a foretaste of Phillpotts's other great passion beside pamphleteering -- litigation -- when whig lawyers sought unsuccessfully to prove a libel. In the article 'Durham clergy -- clerical abuses', published in November 1822, the 'Edinburgh Review' once more singled him out, and further controversy ensued. By 1823 his growing reputation led Liverpool to contemplate his promotion to the Irish see of Clogher, a preferment Phillpotts spurned. 
From 1825 the Catholic question became the dominant theme in Phillpotts's writings and won him national prominence, reflected in his elevation to the deanery of Chester in May 1828. His 'Letters to Charles Butler' (1825) set out key doctrinal differences between the Anglican and Roman Catholic churches; they were followed in 1827 by two 'Letters to Canning', arguing that current schemes for emancipation offered inadequate securities, and proposing an alternative test in which Catholics would accept the possibility of salvation within the Church of England and renounce any intention of harming it. Public perception of Phillpotts as a leading opponent of emancipation was confirmed by 'A Letter to an English Layman on the Coronation Oath' (1828). This was an exercise in damage limitation after his publication of private correspondence between George III and Pitt which provided useful ammunition for opponents; such miscalculations were Phillpotts's chief weakness as a controversialist. Phillpotts also engaged in extensive (if one-sided) private correspondence with Wellington, Eldon, and others, in which he discussed the developing political situation and proposed possible securities. As early as 1812 Phillpotts had told Barrington that, given adequate safeguards, he had no objection to relief, and a letter to Eldon demonstrates that by October 1828 he felt that now inevitable concessions should be enacted, while the government still had control of the situation. This conviction, combined with a belief that Peel had behaved honourably, led Phillpotts to support Peel in the Oxford election of 1829, even though emancipation had been enacted without some of his specified precautions. Public opinion, however, interpreted this vote as evidence that Phillpotts ('the great rat') was an unprincipled careerist, 'The Times' commenting that he had 'wheeled to the right and about as if by military command' (3 February 1829). The accusation dogged Phillpotts throughout his career. 
Phillpotts's vindication of his position was not assisted by his elevation to the bishopric of Exeter in November 1830, although Wellington explicitly stated that it was done in spite of, rather than as reward for, the 'volte-face' of 1829. Phillpotts suffered further embarrassment when the ministry fell before completing arrangements for his preferment. The outgoing administration had accepted Phillpotts's request that he be allowed to retain Stanhope 'in commendam' to supplement the see's meagre income of $2700 a year; his three predecessors at Exeter had all kept such a living, and his three predecessors at Stanhope had so held it. Some parishioners petitioned against the arrangement, however, and Sir James Graham led the new cabinet, settling old scores, to repudiate it. The stand-off was resolved by Bishop Van Mildert of Durham, who presented a canon of the cathedral to Stanhope and then preferred Phillpotts to the vacant sixth stall, which he retained until his death, regularly going into residence. The incident further damaged his public standing. 
The new bishop soon acquired a reputation as one of the ablest and most outspoken debaters in the Lords, if often as much a liability as an asset to the causes he championed. In its obituary, 'The Times' (20 September 1869) judged that 'From the days of Pitt and Fox down to those of Gladstone and Bright, few Parliamentary speakers have excelled the late Bishop'. In the course of his long parliamentary career Phillpotts generally found himself opposing rather than supporting legislation: he signed more protests against bills successful in the Lords than any other nineteenth-century bishop and all but two peers. An early instance was the 1832 'Reform Bill'. During the debates of 1831-2 Phillpotts engaged in bitter exchanges with his old whig adversaries, condemning not only the bill but the methods employed to promote it. Although references to a connection between the administration and 'The Times' subsequently forced Phillpotts into a humiliating retraction, Greville among others admired his speech of 11 April 1832 as 'full of fire and venom, very able', while thinking it unclerical ('Greville Memoirs', 14 April 1832). His prominence in the debates confirmed his notoriety in radical circles. Both the bishop and his palace were threatened by an Exeter mob in November 1831, and he was burnt in effigy at Durham. This enmity was fully returned: Phillpotts secured the dismissal of Thomas Latimer as editor of 'Woolmer's Exeter and Plymouth Gazette' in 1831, and in 1840 led the call for legislative action against the socialism of Robert Owen. 
On many issues Phillpotts was happy to adopt an independent stance: unlike most fellow tories opposing the Crimean War at the outset, for example. Much of Phillpotts's parliamentary activity, however, was directed towards upholding an essentially static, localist, and paternalist social order against the threats posed by centralization and the diffusion of political economy (he voted against the repeal of the corn laws and for factory regulation). Phillpotts was a persistent critic of the new poor law of 1834, which he claimed converted the poor's right to relief into a privilege. He clashed with C. J. Blomfield over the bastardy clauses which he argued unfairly held the mother solely responsible, and after the act was passed regularly presented petitions highlighting abuses and inadequacies in the new system, which he attributed in part to the ignorance of the wealthy of the physical demands of labouring life. 
Phillpotts's orthodox high-churchmanship and command of both legal and theological argument gave his contributions to debates on ecclesiastical matters a coherence and authority which few contemporaries could match. He consistently resisted all measures which he feared would weaken what remained of the confessional character of the state, such as the 'Irish Church Temporalities Act', tithe commutation, abolition of church rates, the 'Act for the Registration of Marriages' (1836), the 'Religious Opinions Bill' (1846), the 'Deceased Wife's Sister Bill' (which he called the 'Incestuous Marriages Bill'), and the 'Divorce and Matrimonial Causes Bill' of 1857. A particular cause for concern was the position of Roman Catholicism in Ireland and the colonies, Phillpotts opposing the Irish corporations and charitable bequests bills, and protesting at the handling of the Canadian clergy reserves and the incorporation of the seminary of St Sulpice. As an orthodox high-churchman, however, Phillpotts's concern for the protestant establishment did not preclude commitment to 'jure divino' church principles, and these came to the fore prominently in his interventions on church reform, in which he sought to protect the institutional and doctrinal integrity of the Anglican church. Phillpotts recognized the need for reform: in 1835, no doubt with an eye on further advancement, he favoured Peel with a lengthy list of suggestions, including a reorganization of dioceses, improved clergy discipline, and reform of cathedral chapters to make them more useful to the church. It was typical of his sense of the church's prerogatives that he also pressed Peel to consider whether lay impropriators could be compelled to surrender their property. But the appointment of a permanent ecclesiastical commission and its concomitant centralization appeared to Phillpotts incompatible with the constitution of an episcopal church, and he claimed that in its original form (with a majority of the membership ministers or crown appointments) it might in enemy hands become an instrument for the spoliation of the church. 
In 1840 Phillpotts led the opposition to the 'Ecclesiastical Duties and Revenues Bill' in another exchange with Blomfield, arguing against the reduction of cathedral chapters and instead for a charge on dignitaries. If Phillpotts was unable to obstruct these measures, he had more success resisting the clergy discipline bills of 1836-40 -- 'the greatest blow that ever was struck against the Church of England, as a church' ('Hansard 3', 14, 1832, 603), which like the commission he saw as calculated to undermine episcopal authority through centralization. The act finally passed in 1840 owed much to his alternative proposals. Subsequent attempts to centralize disciplinary procedures similarly encountered Phillpotts's resistance, although his chief concern became the role of the judicial committee of the privy council as the final court of appeal in ecclesiastical causes, which he believed violated the spiritual prerogatives of the church. Such intrusions were to be feared not least because the state could not be trusted to uphold doctrinal orthodoxy: in 1847 Phillpotts was prominent in organizing opposition to the appointment of Renn Dickson Hampden as bishop of Hereford, having, in view of Hampden's unorthodox teaching, previously ceased to require ordinands to produce certificates of attendance at the regius professor's lectures. Phillpotts's concern that the church should have a forum in which to express its sentiments on such matters led him to take a leading role in the campaign which resulted in the gradual restoration of convocation during the early 1850s. 
The episcopal office was central to Phillpotts's understanding of the church. This was reflected in his attitude to his own diocesan responsibilities. Phillpotts was an active diocesan reformer, placing particular stress on reducing non-residence (the ninety-three non-residents in Cornwall in 1830 had been cut to twelve by 1869) and pluralism, and ensuring that curates were adequately remunerated. He also promoted church extension, not least through his own subscriptions; by his death no fewer than seventy-seven new parishes had been created in the diocese, while many new churches had been erected and others restored or rebuilt. Having early in his tenure visited the Isles of Scilly Phillpotts soon recognized that the geographical extent of the diocese presented a serious obstacle to effective supervision, and he became a strong advocate of its division. To this end he secured the preservation of the fifth canonry of the cathedral to provide an endowment for a new see, and bequeathed most of his books to form a nucleus for a diocesan library at Truro. Phillpotts also looked to the foundation of a diocesan theological college, and assigned for that purpose the money he had received from the 'commendam' of Shobrooke (long held by the bishop of Exeter) -- some $12,000 with an additional $2000 of interest. The college was duly founded in 1861 under Charles John Ellicott, the dean, but closed in 1867. From 1878 the funds set aside were devoted to 'Phillpotts studentships', postgraduate scholarships at Oxford or Cambridge tenable on condition of being ordained to two years' work in the dioceses of Exeter or Truro. The theological college was in part designed to make the diocesan clerical community self-sustaining, an objective close to Phillpotts's heart: in 1831 he had observed that 'I wish to discourage the increasing practice of strangers coming hither -- so many of the clergy of this diocese... breed sons to the Church, that I do not like that their prospects be unnecessarily interfered with'; curates who were admitted were expected to remain in post for at least two years. 
From the start, when in 1832 he was unjustly accused of fleeing his see city to escape the cholera, Phillpotts's career at Exeter was punctuated by a series of controversies, many of which ended up in the courts. After his death, his son estimated that he had expended some $20,000-30,000 on more than fifty lawsuits undertaken while bishop, and his will contained provision for the posthumous prosecution of an appeal against an action by a similarly deceased litigant. Some damaging disputes related to patronage: Phillpotts's exploitation of legal technicalities to wrest control of presentations served, with the number of relatives who received choice preferment (his son William John rose to be archdeacon of Cornwall), to support the accusation that he represented an archaic survival from the age of 'Old Corruption'. 
Even more controversial was Phillpotts's attempt to impose doctrinal orthodoxy and liturgical uniformity on his diocese. Uniformity in itself was sometimes the objective, as in an attempt in 1844 to eliminate a symbol of party difference by enforcing the rubrical requirement that a surplice be worn when preaching, abandoned in the face of popular disturbances, protest meetings, and open opposition from members of the cathedral chapter. But Phillpotts also sought to eliminate as far as possible the Calvinist element among his diocesan clergy, and repeatedly harassed or hauled before the ecclesiastical courts individuals he believed guilty of heresy or schism. Notable victims included William Malkin of St Ives, obliged to resign because his wife attended a dissenting chapel; William Beal, headmaster of Tavistock grammar school, refused ordination for preaching on the unity of the Church of England and nonconformity (though in 1833 Phillpotts had himself spoken of the possibility of reunion with all save Unitarians); and Henry Erskine Head of Feniton. The long and complex case of James Shore, who after harassment by Phillpotts attempted to secede from the church while continuing to officiate in his own chapel, ended with Shore incarcerated in debtors' prison and another spat with Latimer, who wrote in the 'Western Times' (25 July 1848) that Phillpotts was 'everlastingly in hot water, but never clean withal'. Phillpotts took out a bill for libel and defamation, but the grand jury accepted Latimer's defence of justification. On numerous occasions Phillpotts refused to license curates or institute incumbents on grounds of their heterodoxy -- William Haslam, for example, tricked into resigning his living in anticipation of preferment only to be told that Phillpotts could not license him again in view of his theology; it was typical of Phillpotts that immediately after practising this subterfuge he should invite Haslam to lunch. 
Another instance led to the most important and famous of Phillpotts's disputes, following Lord Chancellor Cottenham's presentation of George Cornelius Gorham to Brampford Speke in 1847. Having already declined to countersign his testimonials, Phillpotts refused to institute Gorham after a 52-hour, eight-day 'viva voce' and written examination of 149 questions which most importantly established that Gorham denied the doctrine of unconditional baptismal regeneration. Gorham appealed to the court of arches, where in 1849 Sir Herbert Jenner Fust found for the bishop, and then to the judicial committee of the privy council. In March 1850 the committee found for Gorham, only Blomfield dissenting from the judgment. The case had become a 'cause celebre', rallying high-churchmen as much in protest at the nature of the court of appeal in which the doctrinal bounds of the Church of England would be settled as over the doctrinal issue itself; it led directly to the secession to Rome of several prominent Anglicans, including Phillpotts's chaplain William Maskell and friend Henry Manning. Others less sympathetic delighted at Phillpotts's come-uppance, Queen Victoria clapping with joy on hearing the news -- she hardly needed Lord Palmerston to warn her in 1860 that 'The theological learning of the Bishop of Exeter has caused much mischief to the Established Church' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 3.530). In March 1850 Phillpotts himself protested in an outspoken public letter to Archbishop Sumner threatening to withhold communion from the metropolitan should he comply with the judgment; their enmity was confirmed in 1854 when Phillpotts censured the archbishop for his low view of the sacraments and the church. Phillpotts's other main response to the Gorham judgment was to summon a diocesan synod at Exeter in 1851, the first to be held in England since the seventeenth century, at which a resolution on baptism headed the agenda. The synod, however, was more than just a protest meeting. Also embracing two days of practical discussion of diocesan management and pastoralia, and a fierce protest at the 'papal aggression', it represented the culmination and convergence of fundamental theological, diocesan, and protestant constitutionalist strains in Phillpotts's thought. 
Phillpotts's aggressive high-churchmanship led many opponents to identify him with the Oxford Movement. Phillpotts was close to both Manning and Pusey, and admitted the latter to preach in his diocese when suspended by Oxford University. In Plymouth, an evangelical stronghold, he also offered resolute and provocative backing for the ministry of George Rundle Prynne and the sisterhood established in 1848 by Priscilla Lydia Sellon. None the less, Phillpotts's support was always qualified in private, and often in public. As befitted the protestant champion of the 1820s, he was a fierce critic of what he regarded as romanizing tendencies in Tractarianism. He strongly denounced 'Tract 90', the use of Roman Catholic manuals of devotion, regular confession, the doctrine of reserve, and neglect of the doctrine of justification by faith. On numerous occasions Phillpotts acted against what he regarded as ritualist excesses or pastoral practices not authorized by the Anglican formularies, in 1847 physically sweeping ornaments from the altar of St John's, Torquay, during the Easter service before appointing a court of inquiry. Phillpotts's praise for Pusey's writings on the real presence suggests some advance on the receptionist understanding of the sacrament expounded in 1825 in the 'Letters to Charles Butler'. However, more generally the 'Letters', reissued in 1866, remained a benchmark exposition of Phillpotts's theological position. He referred enquirers to the volume throughout his career, testimony that any development represented a modification rather than a repudiation of his position as an orthodox high-churchman, valuing the Church of England both for its protestantism and its catholicity. 
In the years after the Exeter synod Phillpotts was increasingly incapacitated by old age and illness. He conducted his last visitation in 1862, and after a stroke in 1865 many diocesan duties were delegated to his son the archdeacon and to retired bishops. Samuel Wilberforce, visiting Phillpotts in 1867, found him 'in full force intellectually... very kind and full of hospitable courtesy. It is very striking to see the taming of the Old Lion' (Ashwell and Wilberforce, 3.235). On 9 September 1869 Phillpotts formally executed the resignation of his see, but before its completion he died on 18 September 1869 at his favoured residence at Bishopstowe, Torquay. He was buried at St Marychurch, Torquay. 
Phillpotts was short of stature, and described by one commentator as possessing 'an intellectual, rather bulging forehead, restless twinkling eyes, a proud curving nose, and a rat-trap of a mouth whose corners drooped in line with a crescent of deep wrinkles extending from his nostrils to his chin' (Lambert, 35). The most memorable descriptions of Phillpotts's personality are exercises in equally unsparing character assassination. Most vicious was W. J. Conybeare's pen-portrait in the 'Edinburgh Review' of 1852, depicting him as 'a shrewd and worldly churchman, violent by calculation, intemperate by policy, selfish in his ends, and unscrupulous in his means' (95.72); Trollope was equally unkind in the caricature masquerading as the second son of Archdeacon Grantly in 'The Warden'. His reputation as a cold, litigious termagent was reinforced by his similarly unbending approach to spiritual counselling, severely discomforting the dying Eldon when, dismayed by the lord chancellor's complacency, he sternly called him to repentance. If family letters reveal a softer side, in public Phillpotts's attempts at charm too often appeared obsequious essays in careerist ingratiation: Gladstone described him on first meeting as 'a person of great conversational power, & courtesy very finished but beyond my taste' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 22 March 1833). Phillpotts was ambitious and, despite his explanations, contemporaries long remembered the about-turn on Catholic emancipation, the memory of which was perpetuated not least by Sydney Smith's 'bon mot' that 'he must believe in the apostolic succession, because there is no other means of accounting for the descent of the Bishop of Exeter from Judas Iscariot' (Reid, 1.300). More perceptive critics, however, recognized his determination, intelligence, and adversarial ability, and the underlying consistency of his attempts to sustain his vision of an episcopal church in which the diocesan's authority was to be upheld not only against contumacious clergy but also interference (even archiepiscopal interference) from outside the diocese. As he told Peel in 1835, 'The 'Government' of the Diocese ought to be in 'one'' (BL, Add. MS 40411, fol. 165'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 22181


Philp, Robert Kemp (1819-1882), Chartist and compiler of reference works, was born in Falmouth on 14 June 1819, the son of Henry Philp (1793-1836), a shoemaker, and his wife, Elizabeth. His grandfather, Robert Kemp Philp (1769-1850), was the Unitarian minister of Falmouth and one of the earliest supporters of ragged schools. 
Philp was apprenticed in 1835 to a printer in Bristol, and afterwards settled as a newsvendor in Bath, where he was once fined for selling a Sunday newspaper; on refusing to pay, he was condemned to the stocks for two hours. He became a well-known Chartist, regularly contributing to the movement's journals and editing, with Henry Vincent, the 'National Vindicator', a Bath weekly newspaper, which appeared in 1841-2. Prominently involved in the campaign on behalf of the leader of the Newport rising, John Frost, he was arrested in early 1840, but charges of publishing a seditious libel were dropped at Bath sessions in July 1840. Philp's prominence was confirmed by his election in mid-1841 to the executive committee of the National Charter Association. A supporter of a cross-class alliance, in the spring of 1842 he signed the declaration drawn up by Joseph Sturge and was appointed a delegate to the conference called by Sturge in Birmingham in December 1842. Philp did not believe he was abandoning his Chartist principles. He was a member of the National Convention which sat in London in April 1842, and is credited with having drawn up the second Chartist petition, signed by 3,317,752 persons. His support for Sturge's complete suffrage union, however, resulted in a bitter row with Feargus O'Connor and his removal from the Chartist executive. Phiip married, at West London register office on 4 August 1842, Laura (1823/4-1911), dressmaker, the daughter of John Willis, house steward. They had a son. 
No longer a Chartist, Philp moved to Fetter Lane in London in 1845 and began a career as a publisher of popular literature. He was sub-editor of the 'People's Journal' from 1846 to 1848 and then launched the 'Family Friend', successively a monthly, fortnightly, and weekly periodical; he was its editor from 1849 to 1852. It had an enormous sale. Similar serials followed: the 'Family Tutor' (1851-3), the 'Home Companion' (1852-6), and the 'Family Treasury' (1853-4). Philp then began to compile cheap practical handbooks; in many cases these were issued in monthly numbers at 2died The most popular, 'Enquire Within upon Everything', appeared in 1856; a sixty-fifth edition followed in 1882, and by 1888 over a million copies had been sold. Another best-seller from 1856 was 'The Reason Why', which sought to answer common queries. This compilation heralded a 'Reason Why' series of volumes dealing with such topics as domestic science (1857), the 'Bible' (1859), natural history (1860), Christian denominations (1860), the garden and the farm (1860), and physical geography and geology (1863). His dictionaries of daily wants (1859), of useful knowledge (1858-62; issued in monthly parts), and of medical and surgical knowledge (1862-4; issued in monthly parts), and 'The Lady's Every-day Book' (1873) were also popular. 
In addition to Philp's various dictionaries, he also compiled travel guides, notably a series in the 1870s for the various railway companies. Finally, at least five songs by him were set to music, and he wrote poetry and a comedy in two acts, 'The Successful Candidate' (1852). Philp died at 21 Claremont Square, Islington, on 30 November 1882, aged sixty-three, and was buried at Highgate. His wife and son survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22182


Philpott, John (1515/16-1555), clergyman and protestant martyr, was born at Compton Waselyn, Hampshire, the third son of Sir Peter Philpott ('c'.1488-1540) and Anne Troyes of Owlesbury, Hampshire. His father was a prominent member of the Hampshire gentry who served as sheriff for that county in 1524-5 and 1535-6, and as justice of the peace from 1523 to 1540. Unlike his son Sir Peter does not appear to have wavered in his loyalty to the old religion. 
John Philpott entered Winchester College at ten years of age as a scholar in 1526. There he showed great aptitude for making friends, and for classical and biblical languages. On one occasion he made a bet of 20died with his classmate John Harpesfield that he could compose 200 verses in Latin in one night with no more than three errors. Philpott won. Hebrew, however, seems to have been the ancient language for which he had the greatest love and the greatest talent, and he would become one of Oxford University's earliest Hebraists. On 27 January 1533 he was admitted as a scholar to New College, Oxford. New College, which was home to some of Oxford's earliest protestants during the 1530s and 1540s, made him a fellow in 1535. Some time before May 1541 he went to study in Italy, and visited Venice, Padua, and Rome. While in Italy he may have earned the degree of BCL. Always outspoken in his opinions, he also made no attempt to disguise his disapproval of scholastic theology and of the laxity of living that prevailed in the Italian church. While travelling from Venice to Padua he engaged in a heated discussion of the condition and learning of the Italian church with a learned Franciscan. Philpott's opinions so enraged the Franciscan that he threatened to denounce him to the Inquisition, although he never carried out his threat. Meanwhile in May 1541 New College deprived him of his fellowship because of his being absent beyond the time allowed by the college statutes. 
Just when Philpott returned to England is not clear, but he was certainly in the vicinity of Hampshire by late 1548. There is some reason to believe that Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, had earlier promised to make the promising young scholar his archdeacon of Winchester. By 1548, however, Philpott had developed into a fervent protestant, and the conservative Gardiner would no longer honour his commitment. Just when his conversion occurred is uncertain. The contributing causes, however, are fairly obvious. The ferment of protestantism in England in general and in New College in particular during the mid-1530s would have been a big influence, as were his travels during the early 1540s in unreformed, pre-Tridentine, Italy. Back home in Hampshire he engaged in several bitter confrontations with Bishop Gardiner and other local adherents of the old religion. Gardiner refused to allow Philpott to preach in his diocese, but Philpott disobeyed him. The Oxford antiquary Anthony Wood later reported that Philpott lectured on the book of 'Romans' in the cathedral for no fee, and that his interpretation was displeasing to the Catholic clergy and laity of Winchester. It is equally clear that Philpott also had his staunch supporters. 
The Edwardian government's deprivation of Gardiner as bishop of Winchester on 14 February 1551 resulted in his quick replacement by the protestant John Ponet on 23 March. A year later Ponet made Philpott his archdeacon of Winchester, with Philpott compounding for his first fruits on 27 May 1552. Unfortunately the two protestant clerics soon fell into a quarrel incited by the unsavoury diocesan registrar, John Cooke. Cooke informed Ponet that Philpott owed him a yearly pension. When pressed to pay Philpott refused. It is possible that Philpott harboured bad feelings toward Ponet because he considered himself to be better qualified to be a bishop. In an effort to curry favour with Ponet, Cooke went so far as to gather some of his servants and ambushed Philpott on one of the roads outside of Winchester. Philpott defended himself stoutly, but was overwhelmed and badly beaten. Despite Cooke's heinous actions, Ponet refused to give Philpott justice. Eventually the privy council intervened in the dispute on 21 July 1552, and ordered Philpott to submit to Ponet and to pay the pension. From that point onward the two men were on good terms. 
The death of Edward VI on 6 July 1553 resulted in Ponet's deprivation and Gardiner's restoration as bishop of Winchester, although Philpott remained archdeacon for the time being. An unbending protestant, he spoke against the real presence and other Roman Catholic doctrines at the Canterbury convocation held at St Paul's, London, during October 1553. He also excommunicated John White, another conservative who was treasurer of Winchester diocese and who became bishop of Lincoln on 1 April 1554, for preaching 'naughty doctrine'. By March 1554 Philpott had been deprived as archdeacon, excommunicated, and placed in the king's bench prison. It was then that he began writing a series of twenty pastoral letters to fellow protestants which were preserved and later printed by John Foxe and Miles Coverdale. In these letters he encouraged his friends, male and female, and also his fellow prisoners John Careless and Robert Glover, to remain steadfast in their faith during the time of persecution, and to go into exile or suffer martyrdom if the need arose. Further examinations by the authorities led in October 1554 to his being transferred to the bishop of London's coalhouse prison, along with other protestants. Bishop Bonner later put him in solitary confinement in a tower of St Paul's Cathedral. After examining him thirteen times between 2 October and 5 December 1555, Bonner and others condemned the unrepentant Philpott for heresy on 16 December. During that time Philpott managed to keep a record of his examinations and had it smuggled out of prison. John Foxe soon published it in the Latin and English versions of his 'Actes and Monuments'. On 18 December 1555 the authorities conveyed Philpott to Smithfield to be burnt. The ground was particularly foul that day and two sheriff's officers tried to carry Philpott to the stake so that he would not dirty his feet. Witty to the end, Philpott quipped 'What! Will ye make me a pope? I am content to go to my journey's end on foot'. Upon reaching the stake he then knelt and said 'I will pay my vows to thee, O Smithfield' (Eden, 161). Proceeding to his place of execution he kissed the stake; recited 'Psalms' 106, 107, and 108; paid his executioners; and went to his death by the flames calmly. His body was consumed by the fire. While he published nothing during his lifetime, some of his manuscripts relating to his martyrdom were published by his fellow protestants at Emden about 1557, along with his treatise against Arianism. Other writings on the study of languages, 'Epistolae Hebraicae' and 'De proprietate linguarum', and his translations of homilies by John Calvin and Chrysostom against heresy have been lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 22183


Philpott, Henry (1807-1892), bishop of Worcester, was the son of Richard Philpott and his wife, Jane Gertrude 'nee' Price, of Chichester, where he was born on 17 November 1807. He was educated at the cathedral school in that town, and at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1825. His university career was distinguished. In 1829 he was senior wrangler and fourteenth classic, Lord Cavendish (afterwards duke of Devonshire) being second wrangler; and in 1830 he gained the second Smith's prize, Cavendish being placed above him. He was admitted BA and elected fellow of his college in 1829, proceeding MA in 1832. He filled various university offices, acting as proctor in 1834-5, and as moderator and as examiner in the tripos five times between 1833 and 1838. He became, successively, assistant tutor and tutor to his college. Dr Blomfield, bishop of London, appointed him Whitehall preacher for 1837-9; and in 1844 Dr Turton, bishop of Ely, made him his examining chaplain. In 1839 he was admitted BD, and in November 1845 was elected master of St Catharine's; annexed to this post was a canonry at Norwich. On 29 April 1846 he married Mary Jane Doria (1814-1904), eldest daughter of Niccolo Doria, marchese di Spineto, who taught Italian art at Cambridge. They had no children. 
As head of the college, Philpott proved singularly successful, and took a prominent part in the life of the university. He was elected vice-chancellor for the year commencing 4 November 1846, and in that capacity received the queen and Prince Albert, when the prince was installed as chancellor in 1847. From this time Philpott was in close touch with the court. He proceeded to the degree of DD by royal letters patent in 1847, and was appointed chaplain and university correspondent to the new chancellor. His business capacity proved useful in enabling the university in 1856 to arrange a compromise with the town in regard to long-standing disputes as to their respective jurisdictions, and in assisting to reorganize the university itself after the changes made by the new statutes of 1854-5, into the creation of which he had put invaluable work. The general appreciation of his services was shown in his re-election to the vice-chancellorship in 1856, and again in 1857; no vice-chancellor of modern times had held the office in consecutive years. 
In 1860 Philpott was nominated to the bishopric of Worcester. His episcopal career was uneventful. Although he faithfully fulfilled the duties of his office, he disliked public life and lived in a simple manner, his not inconsiderable wealth being spent for and in the diocese. He seldom attended the House of Lords; he never attended the upper house of convocation, and is said to have only once appeared at the private meetings of the bishops. He refused to allow diocesan conferences because, as he said, he had 'a horror of irresponsible talk'. He had few disciplinary cases with which to deal, but in them showed firmness and moderation. The case of the Revd R. W. Enraght, the ritualistic vicar of Holy Trinity, Birmingham, in 1879, was almost the only one in which he felt compelled to press for the full application of the law. He published ten triennial charges during his episcopate. 
Philpott's long university experience led to his being nominated as vice-chairman of the Cambridge University commission of 1877, and he became its chairman in 1878, on the retirement of Lord Chief Justice Cockburn. He had practically 'the whole question of University government in his hands. He was wonderfully clear. A few words from him, in his delightfully judicial manner, made any complicated point simple', recalled one of the secretaries (Browne, 162). He sympathized with the minority of the commissioners in not wishing to press too hardly upon the colleges. 
While bishop, Philpott acted as provincial chaplain of Canterbury, and was also clerk of the queen's closet. In 1887 he was elected honorary fellow of St Catharine's College. In his later years he took great interest in the movement towards establishing a bishopric of Birmingham, and offered to allot $800 a year from his own revenues to that purpose. Increasing age and his wife's ill health compelled him to resign in August 1890, before the arrangements could be completed. He retired to Cambridge, where he died on 10 January 1892 at The Elms. He was buried at St Mary's Church, Hartlebury, Worcestershire, on the 15th. To a twentieth-century historian of his college Philpott seemed 'perhaps the greatest man St Catharine's has produced' (Jones, 190). 


@@@@@


doc= 22184


Phipps, Sir Charles Beaumont (1801-1866), court official, second son of Henry Phipps, first earl of Mulgrave and Viscount Normanby (1755-1831), and his wife, Martha Sophia Maling (died 1849), was born at Mulgrave Castle, Yorkshire, on 27 December 1801, and educated at Harrow School. He joined the army as an ensign and lieutenant in the Scots Fusilier Guards in 1820, rising to the rank of lieutenant-colonel in 1837. He was placed on half pay in 1847, and retired from active service in 1851, and was thenceforth a colonel unattached. He acted as private secretary to his brother, Constantine Henry Phipps, first marquess of Normanby, when governor of Jamaica, 1832, and as steward of the viceregal household, when Normanby went to Ireland as lord lieutenant, 1835-9. On 25 June 1835 he married Margaret Anne (died 1874), daughter of Henry Bathurst, archdeacon of York, and Fanny Mackenzie; they had two daughters and two sons. 
On 1 August 1846, Phipps was appointed equerry to Queen Victoria, and thereafter acquired an increasingly important role in the royal household. He became treasurer and private secretary to Prince Albert in 1847, and keeper of the queen's privy purse in 1849. Although he was never officially accorded the title, he acted with General Charles Grey as Victoria's private secretary (particularly after Albert's death), and as such was much in the political confidence of the queen and prince consort. He was made CB in 1853 and KCB in 1858. He additionally held office as treasurer and cofferer to the prince of Wales from 1849 and as one of his council from 1863. He was receiver-general of the duchy of Cornwall from 1862, and keeper of the signet to the prince of Wales as steward of Scotland from 1864. He died of bronchitis at Ambassadors' Court, St James's Palace, on 24 February 1866, and was buried on 2 March in St George's Chapel, Windsor. 




@@@@@


doc= 22185


Phipps, Charles John (1835-1897), architect, was born at Lansdowne, near Bath, the son of John Rashleigh Phipps and Elizabeth Ruth Neate. Educated locally at St Catherine's Hermitage, Bath, he was articled to James Wilson (died 1900) and Thomas Fuller (1822-1898), an architectural partnership which had produced a wide range of designs. In 1857 a brief sketching tour on the continent was followed by the opening of his own practice in Bath, where he also received his first theatre design commission, a reconstruction (1863) of the Theatre Royal, originally designed by George Dance. Supported critically by Edward Godwin, and clearly fulfilling client needs, Phipps designed a further provincial theatre, the Theatre Royal, Nottingham (1865), before opening an office in London in 1866. Phipps had married Honor Hicks of Euborne, Berkshire, on 10 April 1860; they had four children, all born in Bath: Ethel ('b'. 'c'.1861), Charles ('b'. 'c'.1862), Alwyn Rashleigh ('b'. 'c'.1865), and Ida ('b'. 'c'.1867). The family moved to London in 1868 and lived at 26 Mecklenburgh Square, from where Phipps also practised until his death. 
Phipps's move to the capital coincided with a revival in the critical fortunes of the theatre. Although only sporadically involved with designs of the music hall type, Phipps can be regarded as the 'establishment' architect for the London theatre in the second half of the century. While contemporary enthusiasts are more aware of the work of Frank Matcham, it was actually Phipps who designed theatres for the leading stage figures of the West End, such as Squire and Marie Bancroft, for whom he reconstructed the Theatre Royal, Haymarket (1880); Richard D'Oyly Carte, for whom he built the Savoy (1881); Henry Irving, the Lyceum (1885); and Herbert Beerbohm Tree, Her Majesty's (1897). Phipps never employed an identifiable decorative style and the decoration of his various theatres responded to the vagaries of contemporary taste: Greek at the Queen's Theatre, Long Acre (1867), and Gothic at the Gaiety (1868). Early theatres employed a range of decorative figurative panels over the proscenium arch; those at the Gaiety Theatre (1868) were executed by Henry Stacy Marks. A particular characteristic of his theatre type was the use of a domestic-scaled lobby and front-of-house space. This reflected on the absence of development space and the commercial pressures of the British theatre, but it also managed to exude an atmosphere of 'home' admired by the theatre going public. Phipps's early London theatres developed an auditorium design which only marginally altered over the decades and involved the employment of various tiers with private boxes abutting the proscenium arch. Historically this design type can be traced back to the continental theatre and to a certain extent the Italian Opera House, Haymarket (reconstructed 1790-91 by M. Novosielski; 1816-18 by J. Nash and E. Repton; des., 1867; rebuilt, 1868-9; dem., except the Arcade, 'c'.1895). But Phipps was never afforded the luxury of unlimited space, not to mention funds, in which to give exercise to his imagination. His expertise lay in two directions: his ability to have a theatre erected in a remarkably short time and his ability to accommodate the multifarious requirement of lobbies and backstage requirements in often cramped, ill-lit spaces. While none of his theatres reached the norms advocated by critics such as Sachs and Woodrow, the type was widely popular and his standard London plan was emulated throughout the United Kingdom; George Bernard Shaw, otherwise critical of his work, was full of praise for his last theatre, Her Majesty's, London. During the execution of this work, and while engaged with a further project, the Tivoli Theatre, Dover, Phipps developed a chill (he had for some time suffered from a combination of heart and kidney problems) and died of associated complications on 25 May 1897 at home at 26 Mecklenburgh Square. His funeral service took place at the church of St Alban the Martyr, Holborn, on Friday 28 May and his remains were interred in Highgate cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 22186


Phipps, Sir Constantine (bap. 1656, d. 1723), lord chancellor of Ireland, was baptized on 12 November 1656 in St Mary's parish church, Reading, Berkshire. With his twin sister, Ann, he was the youngest of eleven children of Francis Phipps (1610-1668), a Nottinghamshire yeoman who by dint of marrying Anne Sharpe (died 1660), a propertied widow, had been able to purchase The Bear inn in Reading; later in life Constantine's enemies in Dublin drank 'confusion... to the fat bear of Reading' (D. Hayton, ed., 'An Irish parliamentary diary from the reign of Queen Anne', 'Analecta Hibernica', 30, 1982, 40). Francis Phipps's social aspirations were greater than his means, and the young Constantine suffered several disappointments in his youth. Put down for Eton College, to follow his eldest brother (who became a clergyman), he was unable to take his place. Then, having won a scholarship to St John's College, Oxford, he was obliged to ask the college to postpone his entry, and never went up. He even had to sue for the $500 legacy that he should have received after his father's death in 1668 but which debts had swallowed. Eventually he secured admission to Gray's Inn in 1678, transferring in due course to the Middle Temple, where in 1684 he was called to the bar. 
In the same year occurred the event that transformed Phipps's fortunes. On 12 October he married Catherine ('c'.1667-1728), orphaned daughter of George Sawyer, a Herefordshire gentleman, and, more importantly, the niece of the attorney-general, Sir Robert Sawyer, who not only doubled Catherine's fortune to $2000 but took her husband under his wing. With such a patron Phipps soon began to develop a flourishing practice, and he appeared as junior counsel for the crown in various political cases, including the trial of Titus Oates for perjury in 1685 (though he was also retained to defend the nonconformist clergyman Richard Baxter). In 1686 he was granted the office of steward of the crown manors of Cookham and Bray, Berkshire, which Sawyer had held before him. 
Although his reputation and income grew steadily Phipps's prospects for professional advancement were seriously dampened by the revolution of 1688. Not only was Sawyer out of office (he died in 1692) but Phipps's own political prejudices were too resolutely tory for him to be considered for preferment. He specialized in acting for high-flyers and even downright Jacobites: Lady Preston, wife of the Jacobite conspirator, in 1691; Sir John Fenwick, in his abortive trial in 1696, prior to the bill of attainder; the nonjuring bishop of St David's, Thomas Watson, in his appeals against deprivation for simony in 1703 and 1705. Several colonial connections, in particular with his cousin Sir William Phipps, governor of Massachusetts, also gave him opportunities of another kind; he was probably the Mr Phipps who acted as London agent for Massachusetts and as agent and counsel for other New England and West Indian interests. But his greatest opportunity came in 1710, when he was one of the defending counsel at Dr Sacheverell's impeachment. Though on occasion drawn into difficulties by supererogatory ingenuity he was able to make some effective points through paying close attention to the text of the offending sermon, and in general was thought to have given one of the more impressive displays of forensic skill of all the counsel on view. 
It was this performance that at last made Phipps seem an appropriate candidate for high office, but he was still too much of a high tory to be raised to the English bench and instead, in December 1710, he was named the new lord chancellor of Ireland, under the viceroyalty of the second duke of Ormond. Some observers were surprised that he was willing to relinquish a highly lucrative legal practice even for this honour. Knighted in advance of appointment, he travelled to Dublin in January 1711 to take up his office and was almost immediately sworn in as a lord justice, until Ormond came over to undertake the parliamentary session in July. After a honeymoon period, in which he was complimented with the freedom of several Irish cities, he launched himself into the furious party conflict that characterized Irish politics in this period, making himself a hero to the tories and a bitter enemy to the whigs. The first opportunity to show his party colours came when a dispute over the election of the lord mayor of Dublin was brought before the Irish privy council. The predominantly whiggish corporation had broken with convention to pass over the claims of the most senior alderman, who happened to be a tory. Under the new rules of 1672 elections of chief magistrates in certain boroughs had to be approved by the council, and Phipps led the tory majority in refusing Dublin's choice. Thus began a long-drawn out dispute between the council and the corporation that lasted through successive mayoral elections over the next three years. To make matters worse the council also refused to approve whig magisterial elections in other boroughs and were denounced for acting partially and arbitrarily, in a way that was said to recall the excesses of Wentworth and Tyrconnell. 
The campaign against borough corporations, for so it was perceived, and the Dublin dispute in particular, served to focus the hostility of the Irish whigs upon Phipps himself. His suspected Jacobite sympathies made him something of a bogeyman in Irish politics. Among a whole battery of accusations he was accused, as lord chancellor, of favouring Catholics in legal cases and of appointing crypto-Catholics as sheriffs and justices of the peace; and, in his capacity as one of the lords justices, in Ormond's absence, of failing to implement the penal laws against Catholics and of allowing the militia to run down, so that the kingdom would be a more easy prey to invasion. Whatever the truth of these charges (and in the case of the implementation of the penal laws it would appear that government may actually have been more active in this respect under Phipps's direction) there is no doubt that in two contrasting and controversial legal cases his administration was at least guilty of party-political bias, if not worse. On the one hand a young whig, Dudley Moore, was subject to the full severity of the law for his part in a riot at a Dublin theatre, with Phipps accused of attempting to pack the jury and to prejudice the case by ill-advised public comments. On the other hand the Jacobite publisher Edward Lloyd, who had advertised for sale the Pretender's 'memoirs', was set free when government, encouraged by Phipps, entered a 'nolle prosequi'. 
By the time that a new viceroy arrived in Ireland in the autumn of 1713 -- the moderate whig duke of Shrewsbury -- Irish politics were in turmoil. Shrewsbury's efforts to defuse tension were undone by Phipps and his fellow tory councillors' refusing all overtures to compromise on the Dublin mayoral dispute. Then, during the short parliamentary session of November-December 1713 the whig and 'Hanoverian tory' majority in the House of Commons mounted a sustained attack against 'that devil the chancellor' ('Various Collections', 8.264), with inquiries into the cases of Lloyd and Moore, and into the Dublin affair, culminating in an address to the queen to remove Phipps from office. Friends in the Lords and in Convocation drew up counter-addresses but the government's loss of control in the Commons necessitated the prorogation of parliament, which did not meet again in Anne's lifetime. 
Phipps was again named a lord justice after Shrewsbury returned to England in 1714, but with the death of the queen his days as lord chancellor were numbered. Having resigned from office in September 1714 he returned to England and immediately resumed his legal practice. Oxford University granted him an honorary DCL, essentially a political gesture but one that must have given him particular satisfaction when he remembered his forfeited scholarship. He recovered his position as a leading chancery and exchequer pleader, but without relinquishing his strong political prejudices, defending the Scottish Jacobite Lord Wintoun in 1716 (and publishing his address to the jury) and acting in a private capacity to advise the exiled duke of Ormond. His name figures frequently in Jacobite correspondence after 1715, and in 1718 the pretender himself requested his confidential advice on a difficult legal matter. At the time of the so-called Atterbury plot in 1722 he channelled funds to the Jacobites. One of his last appearances as an advocate was as counsel for Bishop Atterbury in May 1723, against the bill of pains and penalties. His defiant speech in Atterbury's defence was published in part soon afterwards, although its full printing did not occur until after Phipps's death, in the Middle Temple, on 9 October 1723. He was buried, on 15 October, with his wife's ancestors and some of his children, at White Waltham, Berkshire, but the property that he bequeathed was almost entirely in London. Of his eleven children only four survived: three daughters and a son, William, who married the heir of the third earl of Anglesey (a granddaughter of James II). Their son Constantine was raised to the Irish peerage as Baron Mulgrave and was the ancestor of the marquesses of Normanby of the second creation. 


@@@@@


doc= 22187


Phipps, Constantine Henry, first marquess of Normanby (1797-1863), politician and diplomatist, was born on 15 May 1797, at Mulgrave Castle, Whitby, Yorkshire, first son of Henry Phipps, first earl of Mulgrave (1755-1831), and his wife, Martha Sophia Maling (died 1849). Styled Viscount Normanby from 1812, he was educated at Harrow School (1811-13) and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a nobleman in 1814, graduating MA in 1818. At the age of fourteen he was trained in debating by his father and while at Trinity College became president of the Cambridge Union (1815). Among other signs of precocity he became allured by the actress Eliza O'Neill, later Lady Wrixon-Becher (1791-1872), and after proposing marriage to her, was threatened with disinheritance by his father. 
On 12 August 1818 Normanby married Maria (1798-1882), eldest daughter of Thomas Henry Liddell, first Baron Ravensworth. She became a powerful whig hostess who partly inspired the character of Berengaria, Lady Montfort, in Disraeli's novel 'Endymion'. Their only child, George Augustus Constantine Phipps, was born a year after the marriage. 
Normanby was elected tory MP for Scarborough in 1818. His first major speech (3 May 1819) urged Roman Catholic relief. As the son of a former cabinet minister he was expected to support the government but during the summer he joined the opposition. On 14 December he seconded a motion put by Lord John Russell in favour of parliamentary reform. These liberal views displeased his family, and in May 1820 he quitted parliament for Italy. There he wrote three volumes of stories published anonymously as 'The English in Italy' (1825). By the 1830s Tuscany had become his adopted land: he bought a country villa there, rented boxes in the three principal Florentine theatres, provided amateur theatricals followed by sumptuous suppers, and enjoyed an intimacy with Grand Duke Leopold II, the mildest of the Italian rulers. 
After his election as MP for Higham Ferrers in February 1822 Normanby became prominent among the advanced whigs. In 1826 he published pamphlets in support of Canning, and was elected for Malton, which he held until 1830. He next wrote 'The English in France' (1828), 'a sketchy kind of book, composed of essays and tales, all intended to throw light upon France, painting it & all it contains 'en beau'', according to John Stuart Mill who observed 'there is much truth in the book, 'though' not much depth' ('Earlier Letters', 12.132). Normanby also wrote four romantic novels, 'Matilda' (1825), 'Yes and No' (1828), 'Clorinda' (1829), and 'The Contrast' (1832). These contain some wittily observed scenes, but his ideas were commonplace and his style almost gushing. 
Having succeeded his father in the earldom in April 1831, Mulgrave was appointed governor of Jamaica in 1832, sworn to the privy council on 30 May, and was made a knight grand cross of the Royal Guelphic Order. When Jamaican slaves were emancipated in 1833 Mulgrave distributed compensation of $19 per slave to their former owners. He also suppressed a rebellion. He resigned office in 1834 expecting cabinet preferment from Grey and was thought conceited for refusing the postmaster-generalship in June despite being 'so poor that any office would be of value' ('Elizabeth... to Her Son', 149). 
Mulgrave owed his appointment as lord privy seal in Melbourne's first cabinet (30 July 1834) to his charm: 'so eager, gay, pleasant & good humoured', he seemed to Lady Holland in 1828 ('Elizabeth... to Her Son', 78); and in 1834 Benjamin Haydon was delighted to find how 'little Phipps we used to play with' had grown into 'a spirited and talented man' ('Diary', ed. Pope, 4.193). When Melbourne appointed him as lord lieutenant of Ireland in 1835, Greville applauded the appointment: 'He has courage and firmness, and no want of ability. He is besides hospitable, generous, courteous and agreeable' (Greville, 'King William IV', 225-6). Brougham, however, mocked the ''impossible' transmutation of our 'theatrical' and excellent friend Mulgrave into a Viceroy' (BL, Add. MS. 37311, fol. 258), and Wellesley resigned the lord chamberlainship in protest at the appointment. Mulgrave's arrival in Dublin on 11 May 1835 was welcomed by Roman Catholics. O'Connell declared that he was the best Englishman that Ireland had ever seen. Mulgrave liberated prisoners, discouraged the most offensive demonstrations of Orange bigotry, and controversially entertained O'Connell at Dublin Castle. Initially his social qualities captivated the Roman Catholic party, but Ireland could not be permanently disarmed by his smiles nor could he indefinitely sustain the cost of his charm offensive: 'Mulgrave has done very well in Ireland', Lord Durham noted in 1836, 'but I fear he is ruining himself by the expense' (Reid, 2.100-01). Mulgrave was sincere in believing that the union could only be based upon equal rights. His manner became more grand and condescending during these viceregal years. 
On the occasion of Queen Victoria's coronation, Mulgrave was created marquess of Normanby, on 25 June 1838. This promotion was evidence of the partiality in which he was held by Melbourne, for his Yorkshire estates were not extensive; only six other marquessates were created in her reign, of which four were held by viceroys of India. 
In February 1839 Normanby was appointed secretary of state for war and the colonies. He was a businesslike administrator but relied on his under-secretary James Stephen in decision-taking. When in May 1839 the ministry was defeated over Jamaican policies in which he had been involved, Normanby in the midst of the so-called 'bedchamber crisis' was summoned to Buckingham Palace by the queen and was considered 'a candidate for the premiership' (Parker, 2.405). This attention was perhaps instigated by his wife, who was a lady of the bedchamber; after Peel refused to take office unless she and Lady Morpeth were removed from their posts in the royal household, the whigs resumed office. Normanby, who was considered too weak for the Colonial Office, was transferred on 30 August 1839 to the Home Office -- a 'very bad and very foolish' appointment, Wellington thought ('Wellington and his Friends', 122). Normanby remained home secretary until the fall of the ministry in September 1841. 
Queen Victoria welcomed Normanby's appointment (August 1846) to the Paris embassy, for his brother Charles Phipps was her equerry, and private secretary to Prince Albert from the following year, and she hoped that Normanby would become 'a family Ambassador' (Longford, 188). Malmesbury and Derby indeed suspected that Normanby's course in Paris was guided by instructions from the prince consort. Though he was rewarded with the GCB (1847) and Garter (1851), his reputation began to decline and his misjudgements to proliferate once he undertook to decide questions of foreign policy. His posting began inauspiciously when the simultaneous marriages in October 1846 of the queen of Spain to the duke of Cadiz and of her sister to the duc de Montpensier destroyed the Anglo-French entente. Thereafter Normanby meddled in French politics. His intimacy with the opposition leader Thiers excited the opprobrium of the Parisian press in 1847, and imperilled harmony with King Louis-Philippe's chief minister, Guizot, who complained of him, 'Il est bon enfant, mais il ne comprend pas notre langue' ('DNB'). His precipitate, indiscreet, querulous, and blundering diplomacy provoked the Madrid ambassador, Lord Howden, to say 'that Normanby was like the month of March -- coming in like a lion and going out like a lamb' ('Greville Memoirs', 3.66). Victor Hugo described him in 1847 as 'tall, fair, with an extremely English appearance -- he could scarcely look more English -- elegant, graceful, high-bred, good-natured and dandyish' (Hugo, 117). Normanby was in Paris during the disturbances of 1848, and in 1857 published his putative journal of 'A Year of Revolution', which in fact relies on his official dispatches. Despite Palmerston's support for Normanby in 1847, the two men diverged in their attitudes to the Bonapartists and quarrelled in December 1851 over Palmerston's hasty recognition of Louis Napoleon's 'coup d'etat'; Normanby's brother Charles Phipps put his complaints before Queen Victoria, thus ensuring Palmerston's dismissal. In February 1852 Normanby retired from Paris as a result of his estrangement from the Russell administration. Charles Greville commented, 'His vanity is very amusing, for he talks of his great influence... when everybody knows that there was never an Ambassador so generally disliked and despised' ('Greville Memoirs', 3.445-6). While in Paris, Normanby had a liaison with an actress, Louise-Agathe Beaudouin (1819-1894), who was usually known by her stage name, Atala Beauchene. 
In December 1854 Normanby was appointed as minister to the courts of Tuscany, Modena, and Parma. In addition to his Tuscan country house, he now rented the Palazzo San Clemente in Florence, once the residence of the Young Pretender. Lord Redesdale describes him at this time 'fussing and fuming' with 'pomposity' (Redesdale, 1.136) -- a sad contrast to 'that light, squally vessel Lord Mulgrave' who had delighted Lady Granville in 1835 (Leveson-Gower, 190). Normanby's local meddling and Austrian sympathies vexed successive foreign secretaries until he was abruptly recalled by telegraph in April 1858. He then reverted to his family's traditional tory allegiance and was considered ungrateful in his conduct to former colleagues. 
In youth Normanby was handsome with dark romantic curls, but he was worn and haggard by the 1850s. Such an effective debater when young, he was partly inaudible in his speeches and motions in the Lords against Italian unification and French policy towards Savoy (24 and 27 January, 7 February 1860). Shortly afterwards, he was disabled by paralysis (like his father before him), and he died on 28 July 1863 at Hamilton Lodge, 9 Kensington Gore, London. He was buried on 5 August at St Oswald's, Lythe, near Whitby. 'Lord Normanby was one of the men who are clever boys and nothing more. There was, in his early life, a promise of excellence, both literary and political, but the promise has never been fulfilled' ('The Athenaeum', 150). 


@@@@@


doc= 22188


Phipps, Constantine John, second Baron Mulgrave in the peerage of Ireland and Baron Mulgrave in the peerage of Great Britain (1744-1792), naval officer and politician, was born in London on 30 May 1744, the eldest son of Constantine Phipps ('bap'. 1722, died 1775) and his wife, Lepell (1723-1780), daughter of John, first Lord Hervey. His father inherited substantial property, including Mulgrave Castle, Yorkshire, from the duke of Buckingham, and in 1766 was created Baron Mulgrave in the Irish peerage during his brother-in-law Lord Bristol's six-month tenure of the lord lieutenancy of Ireland. Phipps attended Eton College from 1755 to 1758, and in January 1759 went to sea with his uncle Captain the Hon. Augustus Hervey. On 17 March 1762, still with Hervey but by this time in the West Indies, he was promoted lieutenant by George Brydges Rodney. Four months later he was wounded in the bold attack which Hervey led on the Morro Castle at Havana. On 24 November 1763 he was promoted commander of the sloop 'Diligence', and on 20 June 1765 he became captain of the frigate 'Terpsichore'. Next year he visited Newfoundland and Labrador with his old schoolfriend Joseph Banks the botanist. Already known for his scientific interests, Phipps was in 1773 appointed (by the Admiralty board, which included his uncle Augustus) to command the bomb vessels 'Racehorse' and 'Carcass' on an expedition to test the theory that in the open sea the Arctic Ocean might be largely free of ice, and offer a route to the Pacific. It did not, of course, and Phipps barely extricated his ships from the ice, but the expedition nevertheless marks an important stage in the progress from exploration to research, and most of his published report is taken up with detailed appendices on its scientific work. 
As MP for Lincoln from 1768 to 1774 Phipps was prominent in opposition, but he was impressed by the experience of working on the Arctic expedition with Lord Sandwich, the first lord of the Admiralty, and in 1775 a political connection was formed between them through the good offices of their mutual friend Banks. In January 1776 Lord Mulgrave (as Phipps had become on his father's death the previous September) was elected to the Huntingdon seat vacated by the death of Sandwich's son, and in December 1777 he joined the Admiralty board. From then until the fall of the North ministry in April 1782 Mulgrave was the Admiralty's principal speaker in the Commons, and one of Sandwich's closest colleagues. 'How much I long for your return to town', Sandwich wrote in January 1779, 'and how lamely business goes on in your absence; when anything in which this office is concerned comes to be agitated in Parliament, I really know not what we shall do without your assistance' (Mulgrave Castle MSS). As a speaker Mulgrave was solid rather than brilliant, but his obvious mastery of his subject seldom failed to convince even a hostile chamber, and he carried a heavy load of parliamentary business. Yet officers were not expected to abandon their sea careers because they sat in the Commons, or at the Admiralty. In 1776 Mulgrave took command of the line-of-battle ship 'Ardent', followed in the spring of 1778 by the 'Courageux', in which he distinguished himself at the battle of Ushant in July, and continued to serve throughout the war under Augustus Keppel, Sir Charles Hardy the younger, Sir Francis Geary, Robert Digby, and finally Lord Howe -- successive commanders-in-chief of the Channel Fleet, each of whom (excepting the last) took their orders from the board of which he was an active member. 
After the resignation of Sir Hugh Palliser in April 1779 Mulgrave was the leading naval member of the board, and Sandwich's principal adviser in all professional matters. The situation was a remarkable one, of which we are particularly well informed because so much of Mulgrave's Admiralty work had to be done by letter while he was at sea, and both he and Sandwich were methodical in keeping their correspondence. As a strategist he was the main architect of the December 1777 plan to abandon the American War of Independence as a sideshow and strike in the West Indies before the French could intervene, which might have changed the course of the war if the ministry had pursued it wholeheartedly. He was deeply involved in managing the crises of 1779 and 1781 when apparently overwhelming Franco-Spanish fleets entered the channel. In June 1781 he was himself named to command a large-scale raid on Flushing, which had to be cancelled at the last minute. By then he was elaborating the bold and perhaps foolhardy strategy which the North ministry adopted, and would have put into effect in 1782 had it not fallen, of moving the main fleet to the Caribbean and leaving only minimal forces to hold the channel and North Sea. 
Although ejected from the Admiralty with Sandwich in March 1782, Mulgrave continued to serve at sea until the end of the war. He remained part of Sandwich's party until December 1783, but they differed over Charles James Fox's 'India Bill', and William Pitt was able to win him to the new administration. At the general election in April 1784 he was brought in for a government seat at Newark, and given the lucrative office of joint paymaster-general. In May he was appointed to both the Board of Trade and the Board of Control. He continued a minor but active member of the Pitt administration, and in May 1788, when Lord Chatham became first lord of the Admiralty, Mulgrave was considered for the post of controller of the navy. On 7 July 1790 he was made a peer of Great Britain as Baron Mulgrave, but in the following year he was compelled by ill health to resign his offices. Mulgrave had not married until 20 June 1787, his wife being Anne Elizabeth Cholmley (1769-1788), daughter of the Yorkshire gentleman and former MP Nathaniel Cholmley of Howsham. She died in childbirth the following year, leaving a daughter who was Mulgrave's only heir. He died at Liege on 10 October 1792, when his English barony became extinct, and his Irish title passed to his brother Henry. He was buried at Lythe, Yorkshire, on 29 October. 
Mulgrave was not an original thinker; his conventional attitude to the rewards of office and influence caused the reforming Sandwich some embarrassment, and he vainly opposed the introduction of carronades, a new type of gun which played a significant part in the navy's recovery from the worst days of the American war. In his virtues, however, he was typical of Sandwich's naval followers; he was not showy or well known, but a thorough seaman with a deep knowledge of the navy, who built up the finest naval library in England and founded his political position on his professional mastery. 


@@@@@


doc= 22189


Edmund Phipps (1808-1857), lawyer and author, was born on 7 December 1808. He went up to Trinity College, Oxford, in 1825, and graduated BA in 1828 and MA in 1831. The following year he was called to the bar from the Inner Temple. In addition to practising on the northern circuit, where he was recorder of Scarborough and then of Doncaster, he wrote several works, both fiction and non-fiction. Among these, of particular importance are 'The Memoirs of the Political and Literary Life of Robert Plumer Ward' (2 vols., 1850) and a number of pamphlets on economic and currency matters. He married Louisa, the eldest daughter of Major-General Sir Colin Campbell (1776-1847), with whom he had one son. Phipps died at his home in Wilton Crescent, London, on 27 October 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 22190


Phipps, George Augustus Constantine, second marquess of Normanby (1819-1890), colonial governor, was born on 23 July 1819 at Portland Place, London, the only child of Constantine Henry Phipps, first marquess of Normanby (1797-1863), and Maria Liddell (1798-1882). He was styled Viscount Normanby from 1831 to 1838, and then earl of Mulgrave until 1863. He was an ensign in the Scots Fusilier Guards (1838-43), major in the North Yorkshire militia (1846-53), honorary colonel of the Tower Hamlets rifle volunteers (1868), deputy lieutenant of Yorkshire (1844), and high steward of Hull. On 17 August 1844 he married Laura (1816-1885), the daughter of Captain Robert Russell RN. They had four sons and three daughters. 
In July 1847 Mulgrave was elected whig MP for Scarborough, but was defeated in July 1851 on presenting himself for re-election on accepting office as comptroller of the (royal) household. He was, however, returned for Scarborough in 1852 and 1857. In the late 1840s he was a Liberal whip in the House of Commons for Lord John Russell, and during the 1850s served as a whip under Aberdeen and Palmerston. He was sworn of the privy council in 1851 and was treasurer of the household from 1853 to 1858. 
Mulgrave was in January 1858 appointed lieutenant-governor of Nova Scotia, the first British colony to have been granted responsible government (1848). There were few established parliamentary conventions, and politics was fought by ferociously personalized factions rather than disciplined parties. The refusal of the Conservative ministry to resign after its election defeat in 1859 caused Mulgrave difficulties; a year later his refusal of a dissolution to the Conservatives resulted in the formation of a Liberal administration. Having had limited success in tempering Nova Scotian politics with the forbearance and training of Westminster, he returned to England on his father's death and resigned his appointment in September 1863. 
Normanby held strong opinions about the duty of parliamentary attendance by members of the House of Lords holding official posts. Russell in May 1866 appointed him lord-in-waiting, but he went out of office with the Liberals two months later. In December 1868, when he accepted the same post from Gladstone, and again in 1869 on his promotion to captain of the corps of gentleman-at-arms, he indicated his preference 'to make the Colonial service my profession' (Normanby to Gladstone, 13 Dec 1869, BL, Add. MS 44423, fol. 302). He became a member of the provisional committee of the Royal Colonial Institute in 1868, and was afterwards vice-president. He was not a rich marquess and colonial work was financially attractive: his Yorkshire estates, which amounted to 6834 acres, yielded $7000 in 1883, when his annual salary as a colonial governor was $10,000. 
In April 1871 Normanby was named governor of Queensland. No sensations were associated with him there, though a speech in 1872 about illegally imported Polynesian labour in its sugar-growing district is satirized by Samuel Butler in 'Erewhon'. He travelled widely in Queensland, where the Normanby and Mulgrave Rivers are named after him. Cardwell suggested his succession to Dufferin in Canada in 1873, and Normanby was disappointed not to receive this post. 'Though not a man of great ability, he had sound judgement, abundant tact, robust common sense, and an imperturbable temper' (des Voeux, 1.145). 
Normanby assumed the governorship of New Zealand in December 1874. After the radical Sir George Grey became prime minister in 1877, the two men clashed in a series of constitutional disputes in which Normanby demonstrated keen political instincts and a strict sense of his duty. He refused to confirm an appointment to the legislative council recommended by Grey on the grounds that a vote of no confidence was pending in the council. Later he declined Grey's advice to dissolve the assembly until every expedient had been tried to secure a working majority. Normanby, who was following practices agreed by the Australian governors, strained his prerogatives to Grey's disadvantage. The contest for supremacy between the two men was watched with interest in other self-governing colonies. 
In 1879 Normanby became governor of Victoria. Notable incidents during his governorship included the Melbourne International Exhibition of 1880, his confirmation of the death sentence on Ned Kelly, a visit in 1881 by the two sons of the prince of Wales, during which he was anxious for their safety, and a dispute with the premier, Graham Berry, after Normanby declined to dissolve the Victorian parliament -- thus enabling Sir Bryan O'Loghlen's stop-gap ministry to take office (1881). Again Normanby proved a confident interpreter of constitutional practice who mistrusted the scruples of reformers. In Melbourne he was considered a parsimonious host: 'his easy-going, listless manner conveyed the impression of indifference, but he was well posted in the traditions of his office' (Turner, 2.210). Opinions varied in London: 'He has done very well and is exceptionally popular', judged Lord Derby (Derby to Gladstone, 10 July 1883, BL, Add. MS 44141); according to Granville, 'Normanby is a very good fellow, but he is much unlikely to make a figure' (minute of 2 July 1884, BL, Add. MS 44768, fols. 59-60). 
As his wife was dying, Normanby left Australia in April 1884 and retired from public office on a pension in August. He believed that his experiences as a House of Commons whip had fitted him for the political duties of a colonial governor. His assertiveness on constitutional issues reflected his wish to bring the practices and discipline of the Westminster parliament to colonial assemblies. He himself said in 1884 that, when facing difficult decisions as a governor, he had always asked himself, 'What would they think upon this question in the House of Commons?' ('Proceedings of the Royal Colonial Institute', 363-4). He admired the constructive energy and initiative of the colonists, and in 1887-8 revisited Australia for pleasure. He had a genial face and (perhaps partly as a result of his whip's training) was a terse public speaker. He took a close interest in his tenantry, liked race meetings, and often drove his coach at a furious gallop with only inches to spare through the back gates of Government House in Melbourne. 
Normanby was created KCMG in 1874, GCMG in 1877, and GCB in 1885. He resigned the chairmanship of Whitby Liberal Association after Gladstone's declaration for home rule. He died on 3 April 1890, at 6 Brunswick Terrace, Brighton, and was buried at St Oswald's Church, Lythe, near Whitby, Yorkshire, on 9 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 22191


Phipps, Henry, first earl of Mulgrave (1755-1831), diplomatist and politician, was born on 14 February 1755, the third son of Constantine Phipps, first Baron Mulgrave of New Ross ('bap'. 1722, died 1775), a landowner, and his wife, Lepell (1723-1780), the eldest daughter of John Hervey, Baron Hervey of Ickworth, and his wife, Mary Lepell. He was educated at Eton College (1767-71) and admitted as a student at the Middle Temple in 1772 before enlisting in the army as an ensign in the 1st foot in 1775. Phipps rose rapidly through the ranks, and, after moving between a number of different regiments, in 1793 he was made colonel of the 31st foot, a post which he held until his death. Subsequent promotions raised him to brigadier-general (1793), major-general (1794), lieutenant-general (1801), and general (1809). He was also the governor of Scarborough Castle from 1796 until his death. During his military career Phipps saw action in the American War of Independence and was stationed in the Caribbean. It was as a diplomatist and politician, however, that he made his greatest impact on public life. 
At the general election of 1784 Phipps was returned to the House of Commons as a government candidate for the borough of Totnes, Devon. In the 1784 parliament he strongly supported the administration of William Pitt the younger and spoke often, especially on military matters. In 1790 he was returned for Scarborough, Yorkshire, on the family interest, and he continued to support Pitt, to whom he was becoming increasingly close in both personal and political terms. He appears to have become such a regular visitor to Pitt's home at Holwood that he had a room reserved there for his use, and Pitt came to value greatly his advice on military matters. Indeed, Phipps may be seen as one of a circle of professional experts outside the cabinet to whom Pitt turned for guidance on a range of issues. Phipps opposed the abolition of the slave trade and supported the government's vigorous response to the rise of domestic radicalism and what he saw as the 'abominable doctrines of equality' associated with the French Revolution (Stokes and Thorne, 799). He spoke in favour of anti-radical measures such as the 'Aliens Bill' (January 1793) and supported the construction of barracks (February 1793). His attitude to such matters is perhaps best summed up in a letter to William Windham in December 1792, in which he wrote that 'those who are the last to exert themselves in defence of their rights frequently are or always ought to be the first to lose them' (Lord Rosebery, ed., 'The Windham Papers', 2 vols., 1913, 1.108). In 1792, on the death of his brother Constantine John Phipps, Baron Mulgrave in the British peerage and second Baron Mulgrave in the Irish peerage, he succeeded to the latter title, his brother having failed to obtain a reversion for the British peerage that he had been awarded in 1790. This rankled somewhat with Mulgrave (as he now became), and he made a number of attempts to obtain a British peerage for himself. 
In 1793 Mulgrave was sent on a special mission to Turin to investigate the intentions and abilities of the Sardinians. When he heard of the Anglo-Spanish landings at Toulon on the southern coast of France, which had taken place on the night of 27-8 August, he saw an opportunity to deploy his military talents and immediately departed from Turin and placed himself at the service of Admiral Hood, who was in overall command of allied forces at Toulon. Hood put Mulgrave in charge of the British land forces at Toulon with the rank of brigadier-general. William Wyndham Grenville, first Baron Grenville, the foreign secretary, noted to Henry Dundas, the home secretary, that: 'Mulgrave will find himself the senior land officer at Toulon. With my opinion of his zeal and talents, I earnestly wish he could maintain that situation, at least for the present; but I am not quite sure how that would be best brought about. (Grenville to Dundas, 16 Sept 1793, 'Fortescue MSS', 2.425)' Grenville's wish for a more permanent role for Mulgrave at Toulon did not materialize for, although Mulgrave made a success of his appointment and worked closely with the Spanish Admiral Gravina, who had been placed in charge of the city of Toulon by Hood, he was reluctant to take a subordinate role when more senior army officers arrived to take charge -- namely Lieutenant-General Charles O'Hara and his second in command, Major-General David Dundas. Mulgrave returned to London, where he was able to report to ministers directly and to advise them about further action at Toulon. 
In 1794 Mulgrave was created Baron Mulgrave of Mulgrave in the British peerage and gave up his parliamentary seat at Scarborough to his younger brother Edmund Phipps on the family interest. Mulgrave made his first speech in the Lords on 30 December 1794 in defence of the recent capture of Corsica, a debut which Grenville described as 'the most brilliant first appearance in that house that perhaps ever was remembered' (E. Phipps, ed., 'The Memoirs of the Political and Literary Life of Robert Plumer Ward', 2 vols., 1850, 1.28n). On 20 October 1795, at Houghton-le-Spring, co. Durham, he married Martha Sophia (died 1849), the third daughter of Christopher Thompson Maling, of West Herrington, co. Durham, and his wife, Martha, the daughter of John Sheels of Middlesex. He and his wife had four sons, including Sir Charles Beaumont Phipps, and five daughters. 
In August 1799 Mulgrave was sent on a second special mission by the ministry. Grenville dispatched him to the Austrian military headquarters in Switzerland with the objective of persuading Archduke Charles not to move his armies from Switzerland to the middle Rhine to besiege Mainz, which would thwart plans for an allied strike by Austrian and Russian troops on the eastern borders of France through the Belfort Gap. Austria, however, was sceptical of the feasibility of the British and Russian strategy of attempting to overthrow France by the end of the year and was more concerned with moving her troops down from Switzerland to the middle Rhine for political reasons; her aim was to keep other powers, particularly Prussia, out of Belgium so that ultimately the Austrians could use it as a bargaining counter to acquire territorial gains in Italy as part of any future peace settlement. This rejection of the fundamental aspects of British strategy by Austria and the mismatch between Austrian political concerns and British and Russian strategic aims help to explain why Mulgrave's mission was probably doomed from the start, although its chances of success were not helped by the changing plans of ministers in London which had delayed his departure for crucial weeks. By the time Mulgrave reached Switzerland, Archduke Charles was already withdrawing into Bavaria, and although he received Mulgrave civilly he avoided substantive discussion with him and refused to respond to the British exhortations to remain in Switzerland which Mulgrave brought with him. 
In 1801 Mulgrave's active military career came to an end when he declined the military command in Ireland. When Pitt resigned the premiership in 1801 Mulgrave remained loyal to his old master and followed his lead in his attitude towards Henry Addington's ministry. Thus he initially supported the peace of Amiens and only gradually became more critical of the ministry. When Pitt returned to office in 1804 Mulgrave was rewarded with a position in the cabinet as the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. George Rose recorded in his diary for 30 October 1804: 'The King... believed Mr. Pitt had been induced to make Lord Mulgrave Chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster under an engagement from his Lordship to give Mr. Pitt all the patronage of the Duchy -- which I happened to know was not true... The King regretted much Lord Mulgrave having the office, and still more his being in the Cabinet. ('Later Correspondence of George III', 4.266n2)' In early 1805 Mulgrave achieved even higher office when he became foreign secretary. His elevation was precipitated by an accident which befell the then incumbent, Dudley Ryder, earl of Harrowby, who suffered a fall on 5 December 1804 which incapacitated him and eventually forced him to relinquish his post. The situation was complicated by two factors: first, it was initially not clear whether Harrowby would recover, and thus whether a replacement would be needed at all; and second, Pitt was at the time in the process of seeking the support of Henry Addington for his ministry. A principal sticking point in the negotiations was Addington's insistence that one of his supporters, Robert Hobart, second earl of Buckinghamshire, join the cabinet. Pitt was initially reluctant to include Buckinghamshire, but when it became clear that Harrowby would indeed have to retire, a solution was found by promoting Mulgrave to foreign secretary and putting Buckinghamshire in the relatively minor post formerly held by Mulgrave: the chancellorship of the duchy of Lancaster. Mulgrave was offered the foreign secretaryship on 31 December 1804 and accepted the following day. 
There was more to this appointment, however, than the desire to solve a problem of political negotiation. Pitt had always valued Mulgrave's advice, and in the interval between Harrowby's accident and his eventual retirement had already begun to consult him on foreign affairs. It has been suggested that Mulgrave had a greater impact than has usually been allowed on a key episode in the development of British foreign policy: Pitt's famous paper of 1805 outlining the British perspective on the third coalition against France and his plan for the future reconstruction of Europe. Written by Pitt, the plan was included in a letter to Vorontsov, the Russian ambassador in London, which was signed by Mulgrave as foreign secretary. Edward Ingram has argued that Mulgrave's contribution went much farther than merely adding his signature to a document written by Pitt, and that his 'views were the origin of Pitt's plans for the territorial reconstruction of Europe' (Ingram, 514). John Ehrman's assessment of Mulgrave's role in the genesis of Pitt's plan, however, is more convincing. Ehrman concedes that Mulgrave may have influenced one aspect of the paper (on the question of Prussian territorial acquisitions in the Low Countries), but he points out that, crucially, Mulgrave made no mention of devising mechanisms for a form of collective security in Europe, which is precisely the aspect of Pitt's plan usually credited with exercising a great influence on Castlereagh and, through him, on the post-Napoleonic congress system of European diplomacy. 
Mulgrave served as foreign secretary for the remainder of Pitt's second ministry. Pitt's death and the formation of the 'ministry of all the talents' under Grenville (1806-7) left Mulgrave, along with the rest of Pitt's former colleagues, out of office. After the fall of the talents, Mulgrave became first lord of the Admiralty in the Portland ministry which succeeded it. As first lord he was closely involved with planning and implementing the successful expedition to capture the Danish fleet at Copenhagen (1807) and the disastrous Walcheren expedition (1809). He appears to have found the heavy administrative duties of the first lord a strain and on one occasion he spoke of the 'impossibility' of meeting all the demands that were put on the navy (Hall, 12). When Spencer Perceval succeeded Portland as prime minister in 1809 Mulgrave remained at the Admiralty, but by early 1810 he was seeking relief from the burdens of his position. In April 1810 Perceval informed George III 'that the laborious duties of the Admiralty have been pressing for some time so heavily upon Lord Mulgrave's health, that he has told Mr Perceval repeatedly that it was impossible that he should be able to hold the office much longer. ('Later Correspondence of George III', 5.573)' In the end Mulgrave was transferred in May 1810 to the cabinet post of master-general of the ordnance, which he held until 1818, when he relinquished it to the duke of Wellington. In September 1812 he was created earl of Mulgrave and Viscount Normanby. 
In his later years as a minister Mulgrave spoke less frequently in the Lords, and by the end of the decade his health was clearly beginning to fail. The painter Joseph Farington records in his diary for 1 March 1820 that he had been told that Mulgrave: 'is affected with 'universal Paralysis' and is in the state both in look and power of a Man aged 90 though but 64. He is so feeble that he cannot write a letter, and in his motion rather shuffles and creeps than walks. His apprehension is dull and his utterance imperfect.... His spirits are somewhat affected. (J. Farington, 'The Farington Diary', ed. J. Greig, 8 vols., 1923-8, 8.243)' However, Mulgrave lived on until 7 April 1831, when he died at Mulgrave Castle, Yorkshire. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Constantine Henry Phipps (1797-1863), politician and diplomatist, who later became first marquess of Normanby. 
Mulgrave's third son, 


@@@@@


doc= 22192


Phipps, Joseph (1708-1787), religious writer, the son of Joseph and Elizabeth Phipps, was born at York and was brought up as a member of the Society of Friends. He was apprenticed to a shoemaker in London but, on account of his extravagant lifestyle, was often driven to 'the necessity of eating his paste till he could finish a pair of shoes' ('The conversion of Joseph Phipps'). In later years he became a coal merchant. While in London he took great pleasure in theatre-going and wrote a play, which came into the hands of the duke of Richmond; he was subsequently offered $100 for the copyright. Phipps was induced by a pious fellow apprentice to go to a Friends' meeting at the Savoy. Under the guidance of Benjamin Kidd, a Quaker minister, Phipps was converted and shortly thereafter rescued his play from the press. 
In the summer of 1753 Phipps accompanied Ann Mercy Bell, a Quaker minister of York, on a street-preaching tour of London, which he recalled in 'A summary account of an extraordinary visit to this metropolis in the year 1753 by the ministry of Ann Mercy Bell' (1754). His written work, produced between 1754 and 1782, mainly consists of tracts in defence of the Quakers, and replies to Samuel Newton of Norwich, who had attacked them. Among his most notable productions are: 'Observations on a late anonymous publication [by Samuel Newton] intituled A letter to the author [James Beezley] of a letter to Dr Formey &c.' (1767); 'Brief remarks on the common arguments now used in support of divers ecclesiastical impositions in this nation, especially as they relate to dissenters' (1769); 'The Original and Present State of Man' (in answer to Samuel Newton) (1773); a further 'Reply to a late publication by S. Newton of Norwich, intituled An appendix &c. in answer to which it is plainly shewn that the Quakers are not Calvinists' (1774); and 'A few reflections occasioned by the injurious treatment of the people called Quakers, on account of their nonconformity to public fasts and festivals [etc.]' (1799). Phipps also edited 'The Journal of George Fox' in 1765. 
In 1760 Phipps married Sarah Kendall of Norwich, with whom he had a son, who died in infancy, and three daughters. In 1766 he moved to Norwich, where he died on 14 April 1787 and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground. Friends wrote that Phipps excelled 'as a clear writer and reasoner. In controversy he avoids calumny, and devotes himself to the statement of evident truth. He is in the great succession of leaders, Robert Barclay, Jonathan Dymond and Caroline Stephen' ('Dictionary of Quaker biography'). 


@@@@@


doc= 22193


Phips, Sir William (1651-1695), adventurer, army officer, and colonial governor, was born on 2 February 1651 at Phips plantation, Jeremisquam Neck, Nequasett, Maine. He was the son of James Phips ('c'.1609-1651x5) of Mangotsfield, Gloucestershire, and Mary, whose origins are unknown. James Phips was a migrant to the northern Massachusetts frontier, a farmer, fur trader, and gunsmith. William was one of the youngest of seven known children of these parents. Eight known younger half-siblings were born after his father died, and his mother married her husband's former partner John White some time between 1651 and 1655. Phips's early life was marked by 'limited material comfort and considerable insecurity' (Baker and Reid, 11). In later years his lack of education and social training prevented his full acceptance into the elite circles of colonial Boston. Tall and corpulent, he had a domineering personality and was prone to angry outbursts, and to occasional violence when his authority was challenged or thwarted. 
Phips apprenticed himself to a ship's carpenter when he was eighteen. He did not learn to read or write until he moved to Boston in 1673 to work as a shipwright. Nevertheless, the Phips family had transatlantic kinship and mercantile ties that facilitated his career. In Boston he married Mary (died 1706), widow of a Boston merchant, John Hull, and daughter of Captain Roger Spencer. They had one adopted child, Spencer (Bennett) Phips, Mary's nephew, who was lieutenant-governor of Massachusetts in 1732-57. 
Kinship ties enabled Phips to gain financial support for an expedition to the Bahama Banks in 1684 in search of sunken Spanish treasure. He suppressed two mutinies when the expedition failed and the crew wanted to turn to piracy. The duke of Albemarle enabled him to outfit another expedition in 1687 to search for the sunken 'Nuestra Senora de la Concepcion', which had recently been sighted. This voyage was an astounding success, and Phips's crew harvested treasure worth some $250,000, of which his own share totalled $11,000. In honour of this achievement he was knighted by James II on 28 June 1687. Phips spent the winter of 1687-8 on another expedition to the 'Nuestra Senora' under the command of Sir John Narbrough, who died at sea that spring. He returned to Boston in June 1688 and was sworn into office as provost marshal-general in charge of military affairs for the dominion of New England in July. Following a confrontation with the governing council he travelled to London. Since the recent deaths of Narbrough and Albemarle had left him without patrons, he allied himself with Increase Mather, who was in London petitioning for the restoration of the Massachusetts charter. 
Following the secession of William III and Mary II to the English throne in February 1689, Phips returned to Boston, arriving in May, one month after Bostonians had overthrown and imprisoned the dominion governor Edmund Andros. Phips was baptized and became a communicant of Mather's North Church in Boston on 23 March 1690. He was soon made a freeman and major-general in a campaign against the French colony at Port Royal (Acadia). He won an easy victory over the French, who immediately surrendered. But having promised his protection to the French general, he dishonourably imprisoned the garrison and allowed his troops to ravage and plunder the settlement. In August 1690 he led an attack on Quebec with thirty-four vessels and 2300 New England troops. Lacking adequate supplies and plagued by severe weather and an outbreak of smallpox, the planned conquest was a dismal failure. In March 1691 Phips returned to London, where Increase Mather was still lobbying for the restoration of the original Massachusetts charter. Negotiations resulted in a new charter for Massachusetts and the nomination of Sir William Phips as royal governor. 
In May 1692 Governor Phips arrived in Boston to find the gaols filled and the courts paralysed by increasing numbers of accusations of witchcraft. He created a special court of oyer and terminer, which accepted testimonies of spectral evidence to convict twenty-six people, of whom nineteen were executed. As criticism of the witchcraft trials mounted, Phips commissioned twelve clergymen, including the Mathers, to examine the validity of testimonies detailing spectral visitations in the shape of accused persons. The committee reported on 15 June 1692 that such evidence was unreliable and inadmissible for conviction. When the witch-hunt threatened to disable his government, and when his wife was accused of witchcraft, Phips placed a moratorium on the trials on 12 October 1692. He dissolved the court of oyer and terminer, and on 25 November the newly constituted superior court of the judicature opened trials on the remaining witchcraft cases. Some months later he issued a general pardon to all persons convicted of witchcraft, released the accused, and banned all publications concerning witchcraft. Despite the ban, Cotton Mather published his disingenuous 'Wonders of the Invisible World' (1693), which upheld the judgments of the magistrates during the witch trials. Appearing with the governor's imprimatur, the book irrevocably damaged Mather's reputation and contributed to Phips's political isolation. 
During the witch trials Phips was preoccupied with plans for another assault on Quebec. Political battles at home, however, and controversies with the neighbouring governors of New Hampshire, New York, and Rhode Island, prevented the realization of his military and entrepreneurial plans for the northern frontier. Summoned to appear before the privy council, he sailed for London on 17 November 1694. The charges against him focused on his violation of the 'Navigation Acts', his use of office for personal gain, and two assaults, one for allegedly caning the customs collector at Boston. Phips never defended his case before the privy council. He became ill and died in London on 18 February 1695. He was buried on 21 February at St Mary Woolnoth, Lombard Street. His wife survived him and in 1701 married Peter Sargeant. She died on 20 January 1706. 


@@@@@


doc= 22194


Phiston, William (fl. 1580-1609), author and translator, describes himself on the title-page of his 'Certain Godly and Very Profitable Sermons of Faith, Hope and Charity' (1580), as 'of London, student'. No further details about his life are known. However, he could have been the William Phiston who matriculated from Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1572. Edmund Grindal, archbishop of Canterbury, to whom 'Certain Godly Sermons' was dedicated, was connected to the same college. 

'Certain Godly Sermons', translated from the Italian (published in Geneva in 1543), indicates Phiston's Calvinist leanings with its emphasis on the word and on understanding 'the truth of the gospel' (Phiston, sig. Aiiij). In an additional epistle the translator praises the queen's ministers for their toleration (ibid., sig. Aiij). 'The Well Spring of Witty Conceit', translated from the Italian in 1584, has no author's dedication but Richard Jones, the publisher, dedicated it to Master David Lewis, doctor of civil laws. The author's preface states his aim as persuasion and he addresses a 'most dear friend M. N.' (sig. Bi). Some material was added to the translation by Phiston. This probably includes 'Certain worthy sentences, very meet to be written about in a bed-chamber', which is written in rhyming couplets. 
Phiston's translation, 'A Testimonie of the True Church of God' from the French original by Simon Voyon, has been tentatively dated to 1560, although the 'Short-Title Catalogue''s conjectured date is much later, 1585. This is dedicated to Alexander Nowell, dean of St Paul's. The book is unequivocally protestant in tone. The dedication states that the book is intended for those who cannot afford to purchase Foxe's book of martyrs. Arranged chronologically, the book traces the history and thought of Christian doctors and martyrs, ending with Calvin. 
In 1595 Phiston dedicated his translation from the Italian and Latin, 'The Estate of the Germaine Empire with the Description of Germanie', to Robert Ratcliffe, earl of Sussex, who was about to travel beyond the seas. The book is a handbook aimed at the diplomat, with tables of precedence and ways in which the states of Germany could be understood. Phiston corrected and amended William Caxton's version of 'The Ancient History of the Destruction of Troy' in 1597. He had also translated 'The School of Good Manners' from the French in 1595, and this was published in a newly corrected version in 1609, with a third, unchanged, edition in 1629. 


@@@@@


doc= 22195


Free, John (c.1430-1464/5), humanist scholar, spelled his name Fre or Free; it was Latinized in the fifteenth century to Frea(s), and in the early sixteenth to Phrea(s). His birthplace was Bristol according to William Worcester, who seems to have known him personally, or London according to John Burton, fellow of Balliol 'c'.1467, and he may have had his schooling in either city. Free probably went up to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1445, since his supplication for BA in December 1448 specifies that he had studied three years there. Admitted in June 1449 and determined in 1450, he was dispensed in June 1453 and incorporated MA on 11 April 1454. On 21 March 1450 Free had been ordained acolyte at St Frideswide's Priory, Oxford; he was in priest's orders not later than 1456; and in April 1459 was admitted 'in absentia' rector of Kelshall, Hertfordshire. In May, as clerk in the diocese of Bath and Wells and holder of benefices in the dioceses of Ely and Lincoln, he was granted extraordinary papal dispensation to hold supplementary benefices; and in July 1464 admitted by proxy rector of St Michael-in-Monte, Bristol. 
By March 1450 Free was a fellow of Balliol. In autumn 1456 he left Oxford for study in Italy at the expense of William Gray, bishop of Ely. Like Gray, he went to Guarino da Verona, at Ferrara, where he was already on 22 October 1456. Free is one of five English pupils commended by name in Lodovico Carbone's funeral oration on Guarino, the others being Gray, John Gunthorpe, Robert Flemming, and John Tiptoft, earl of Worcester. Assimilating Guarino's methods of study and composition, Free began to write the new humanist hand, and to learn Greek, as Guarino encouraged his students to do. Evidence for Free's supposed Hebrew studies is negligible. Among his humanist friends and correspondents from Ferrara were Girolamo Castiglione, Carbone, and the Hungarian Janus Pannonius. 
Free had been provided with money by Gray on setting out, and Gray had promised more; a year later this had not arrived and Free had to pawn books and clothes. Gray was then indulgent enough for Free, in autumn 1458, to ask for an extra sum to buy Greek books, which he could begin to translate. Some time after this he passed to Padua, where he still was in early 1461, being styled 'doctor artium' in a university document of 22 March. There he became friends with Ognibene da Lonigo and the Greek Andronico Callisto. The presentation manuscript of his last surviving work (Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, MS Vat. lat. 3713) makes him MD; Worcester and John Leland credit him with the degree of DCL in addition. 
At Padua, Free probably first encountered Tiptoft; certainly their time there coincided. For Tiptoft he seems to have acted as secretary, making transcripts himself and probably commissioning others to do so, as well as advising the earl in acquiring books even after Tiptoft's return to England, and perhaps aiding Tiptoft in composition. He made corrections, additions (sometimes in Greek), and annotations in some of Tiptoft's manuscripts. Copies made by Free for Tiptoft of Tacitus's 'De oratoribus' and Suetonius's 'De grammaticis' (BL, Harley MS 2639) are most likely the first manuscripts of these texts to have reached England in post-classical times. His Latin poems, dedicated to Tiptoft, are now lost. Free's best-known work, his Latin translation of Synesius of Cyrene's 'Laus calvitii' ('A praise of baldness'), completed by 9 July 1461, was also dedicated to Tiptoft. A handsome manuscript, with the prefaces of Ognibene and Free himself, illuminated in the contemporary Paduan style and bearing the arms of Thomas Beckington, bishop of Bath and Wells, has corrections in Free's hand (Bodl. Oxf., 80). Beatus Rhenanus praised Free's translation and included it, with his own commentary, in editions of Erasmus's 'Praise of Folly' (Basel, Froben, 1515-32); the first English translation, by Abraham Fleming in 1579, used both Free's version and the commentary. 
Free's copies of late antique grammatical pieces discovered in 1433, his notes from Guarino's lectures on Virgil's 'Georgics' and other ancient texts, and drafts of his letters to Gray and his chaplain Elias Cliderow, Pannonius, Guarino, and others (1456-8) are preserved in 'Free's Notebook', a codex later also used by Gunthorpe (Bodl. Oxf., 587). Others of his notes are in a manuscript later in Worcester's possession; his excerpts from Pliny's 'Natural History' and the copy he made of Poggio Bracciolini's Latin 'Diodorus Siculus', attributed to Free by Worcester, its later owner, and initially by Leland, also survive (Balliol Oxf., MS 124). A miscellany volume of Greek tragic and other poetry, also once owned by Worcester, has annotations by Free (Bodl. Oxf., Auct. F. 3. 25). Others of Free's books passed to Gunthorpe, who was in Italy when Free died. 
The date and place of Free's death are not precisely documented. Leland writes that he had been in Florence and in Rome and reports a rumour that he was poisoned by a rival. The only evidence for Free's death in Rome is the sole surviving manuscript of his second Latin translation from Synesius's 'De insomniis' ('On dreams'), dedicated to Pope Paul II (elected 30 August 1464), presumably in the hope of patronage (MS Vat. lat. 3713). The presentation manuscript is in Free's autograph, with decorated initials in the contemporary Roman style; Free was therefore alive in late summer 1464. Worcester's report that he was provided by the pope to the see of Bath and Wells but died within the month is repeated by Leland; the provision is not in the papal registers. If Free was so favoured, he must have died after the death of Beckington on 14 January 1465 and before the provision of Robert Stillington on 30 October 1465. 
Free was the first Englishman to make himself a professional humanist on the Italian Renaissance model. Though not to be compared with the best of his Italian contemporaries, he was outstanding in the generation before that of Grocyn and Linacre as Latin stylist, Greek scholar, and translator. The circumstances of his life -- he had not, as Leland believed, enriched himself by medical practice -- and his death out of England, however, made him less directly influential in Oxford and on English humanists than his contemporaries Flemming and perhaps even Gunthorpe. 


@@@@@


doc= 22196


Phylip, Sion (c.1540-1620), Welsh-language poet, was the son of a Phylip and a Catrin. He had three brothers and four sisters. One of these brothers, Rhisiart Phylip ['see below'], was also a poet. Sion was born in Mochras and lived there. Mochras is situated a few miles from Harlech in north Wales. 
In a 'cywydd ymryson' (poem of contention) between him and his brother Richard about recognition as the poet of the house and family of Nannau, near Dolgellau, Phylip says of Huw Nannau that he was 'cyd ysgol... ag ef' ('in school at the same time as him'; Cardiff Free Library, MS 66, 119 ff). In his MA dissertation W. L. Davies suggests (p. 31) that this means that Phylip was taught by the same 'pencerdd' (master poet) as Huw Nannau, that is, by Wiliam Llyn. This may well be true, but the fact that Phylip was a 'master of three languages' -- Welsh, English, and Latin -- which is mentioned by elegists may indicate that he had been tutored somewhere. Edmwnd Prys's elegy mentions that Phylip had two bardic instructors, Gruffudd Hiraethog and Wiliam Llyn. In his own elegy to Wiliam Llyn, Sion says that Llyn gave him 'true instruction' (Oxford, Jesus College, MS 101, 44). He graduated as a poet in the second Caerwys eisteddfod of 1567. In turn he was bardic instructor to his brother Rhisiart and to his own sons Gruffydd and Phylip Sion. In his elegy to him, Richard Cynwal also calls Phylip 'our teacher' (NL Wales, Peniarth MS 124, 261b). It may be that it was Phylip's role as teacher that led him to compose a bardic grammar. In his elegy to Phylip, the Welsh prose writer and poet Rowland Vaughan of Caer-gai mentions that he could take to his bed, stay there for a while, and get up having composed a 'cywydd' -- usually of about forty to fifty lines in full 'cynghanedd' and rhyme (ibid., 265a-6). This is one of the rare glimpses of the way that the Welsh poets of the gentry composed poems. 
Phylip composed about 200 poems and many 'englynion' (four-line stanzas), many of them to families in north Wales, and especially to the families of Nannau and Corsygedol in Merioneth (there are references to his spending Christmases in Corsygedol), and Gwydir in Caernarvonshire. He took part in bardic controversies with his brother Rhisiart, with his uncle Sion Dafydd Siencyn, with Edmwnd Prys, Tomos Prys of Plas Iolyn, and Sion Tudur. In his elegy to him Edmwnd Prys refers to Phylip as a judge in bardic controversies. He composed poems entitled 'To Wine', 'To Queen Elizabeth', 'The Phoenix', and 'The Gull' -- the last two seem to be his most popular poems, if popularity is to be judged by the number of times they were transcribed by copyists. He also composed a number of religious poems, among which are versifications of biblical texts. He was also recognized as a 'cronigliwr ag achwr gwych' ('a splendid chronicler and genealogist'), to quote Richard Cynwal (NL Wales, Peniarth MS 124, 260b). In fact many of Phylip's poems addressed to noble families contain long lists of pedigrees and family connections and are little more than versifications of such matters. He did not compose free-metre poems, and so did not follow the example of many of his contemporaries in the seventeenth century. Several elegies were composed on Phylip's death. In them 1620 is given as the year of his death, and his age when he died is recorded as eighty. In his elegy Edmwnd Prys, archdeacon of Merioneth, says that Sion, who was 'like a candle', died 'ar wyl Fair' (ibid., 260a), which probably means at Candlemas, 2 February. However, it should be said that the date of his death has also been noted as 13 February 1620, and his age at the time seventy-seven (NL Wales, MS 6499, 28). The circumstance of his death is remarkable enough to be mentioned. In his elegy Evan Lloyd describes Sion's last bardic circuit ('taith glera') when he visited patrons in north Wales who would pay for poems he composed to them and for records of their pedigrees that he drew up (NL Wales, Peniarth MS 124, 2626). Lloyd says that he went over 'Gest', a hill near the present Porthmadog, and on to the vicinity of the Menai Strait. From there he went to Anglesey. Thence he made his way back through the Llyn peninsula as far as Pwllheli. There he was drowned -- 'y dwned aeth dan y dwr' ('the grammar [poet] went under the water'; elegy by Gruffydd Hafren, ibid., 263b). His body was rowed over the sea to Llandanwg, near his home, where he was buried in the church. A wife and six children survived him. Two of the children, Gruffydd Phylip ['see below'] and Phylip John (or Sion) Phylip ['see below'], were poets. Gruffydd Phylip composed an 'englyn' to the four who rowed his father's body from Pwllheli: '
O fwyn ddynion bob yn ddau -- cyfarwydd 

Cyd fwriwch [cyfeiriwch] y rhwyfau 

Tynnwch ar draws y tonnau 

Y Bardd trist yn y gist gau. 
(Ah, gentle men, two by two, -- skilful men, pull the sad poet in the hollow coffin across the waves. NL Wales, MS 6499, 28)' 







@@@@@


doc= 22197


Phylip, William (c.1580-1670), Welsh poet, was the son of Phylip Sion ap Thomas (died 1625) of Hendre Fechan in the parish of Llanddwywe, Merioneth, and his wife, Kathrin Lewys (died 1651). He married Annes about 1598; she died on 30 December 1653. They had two children: a son, Henry William[s], and a daughter, Elsbeth. She died unmarried on 1 August 1654, aged thirty-four. William Phylip and his family lived in Hendre Fechan. Although he was for some years a collector of taxes in Merioneth it is said that he suffered some persecution under parliamentary rule. He was one of the lesser gentleman-poets of Merioneth who composed 'ar ei fwyd ei hun' ('on his own provision'; Fisher). William Phylip was associated with the family of poets known as Phylipiaid Ardudwy. In his elegy to a fellow poet, Rhisiart Phylip (died 1641), William referred to him as his uncle and bardic teacher. Phylip Sion Phylip, nephew of Rhisiart, composed an elegy to William Phylip, who died in Hendre Fechan on 11 February 1670, aged about ninety, and may have been buried in the cemetery of Llanddwywe church. 
Phylip's poetic work which, as far as is known, circulated in manuscript only, consists of some twenty strict-metre poems called 'cywyddau', some forty-five poems in the short 'englyn' metre, and about seventy individual 'englyn' poems. He composed some forty-five free-metre poems. Most of William's 'cywyddau' are elegies and poems of praise -- and a fair number of them are addressed to members of his own family. Among his best-known strict-metre poems were his elegy to Charles I and two poems 'To the Grave'. His free-metre poems deal with political and religious matters -- he was an ardent royalist and Anglican -- and a variety of topics including old age. Among his topics is the 'history of the Britons' where it is clear that he (and others) in his time believed, after Geoffrey of Monmouth and several learned Welshmen of the sixteenth century, that the Welsh were the descendants of Brutus and the true owners of the island of Britain. His most famous poem of all is a series of 'englynion', 'Farewell to Hendre Fechan' (T. Parry, 'The Oxford Book of Welsh Verse', 252). The nature of the poem led readers to think that he composed it on being turned out of his home for his political allegiance, but W. L. Davies suggested that it was composed by the poet in his old age, when he was conscious of his impending death. 


@@@@@


doc= 22198


Picken, Andrew (1788-1833), novelist, was born in Broomlands Street, Paisley, Renfrewshire. He was probably not related to the poet Ebenezer Picken, or only very distantly so (Brown, [7]). Andrew's grandfather James Picken had come from Irvine in Ayrshire to Paisley about 1750 and was a clothier in the High Street. His son, Andrew's father, became a successful manufacturer and intended Andrew for a mercantile career. After leaving school Picken represented a Glasgow merchant firm in the West Indies but did not find the situation congenial. He returned to Scotland and became a clerk, successively, in a factory in Causeyside Street, Paisley, in the Bank of Ireland, Dublin, and in Baird's dyeworks at Pollokshaws, Glasgow. He is listed in the Glasgow directory for 1822 as 'agent and accountant'. He married Janet Coxon (1792-1871), daughter of an Edinburgh bookseller. They had two daughters and four sons including the lithographer Andrew Picken (1815-1845). 
In 1824 Picken, as Christopher Keelivine ('pencil' or 'crayon'), published in one volume 'Tales and Sketches of the West of Scotland' in which his 'Sketch of changes in society and manners, in the west of Scotland during the last half-century' satirized contemporary trading methods (the current 'push' as against eighteenth-century straight dealing) and made him unpopular in certain quarters. One of the stories in the volume, 'Mary Ogilvie', was reprinted subsequently in several editions. He moved to Liverpool and set up as a bookseller, but disappointed in this venture, he went to London, where he soon became popular as a man of letters, associating with William Godwin, Wentworth Dilke, Bryan Waller Procter, John Galt, and others, and regularly attending the literary conversaziones of the painters Henry Pickersgill and John Martin. 
In 1829 Picken's novel 'The Sectarian' powerfully depicted a mind ruined by religious fanaticism, and was well reviewed but did not sell. However, 'The Dominie's Legacy' (1830), which drew largely on the author's knowledge of Paisley characters and his own experience, fairly established his popularity. His 'Travels and Researches of Eminent English Missionaries' (1831) quickly ran through two large editions. In the same year he edited, in three volumes, 'The Club-Book', which included tales and sketches by Galt, Tyrone Power, William Jerdan, Hogg, Allan Cunningham, D. M. Moir, and himself. Two of his own contributions -- 'The Three Kearneys', a vigorous Irish story, and 'The Deer-Stalkers of Glenskiach: a Highland Legend' (based on information from Hogg) -- were instantly popular, the latter being dramatized and successfully played at the Queen's Theatre, London. In 1832, taking advantage of the then current emigration craze, Picken published 'The Canadas', for which John Galt supplied materials. 'Waltham' (1832), another novel, was followed in 1833 by 'Traditionary Stories of Old Families and Legendary Illustrations of Family History', an ambitious work of 'domestic biography', for which he was offered access to the archives of many titled families. 'The Black Watch' (1834) a posthumous novel, set around the battle of Fontenoy in 1745, Picken himself considered his best work. He left a manuscript 'Life of John Wesley' and miscellaneous notes entitled 'Experience of life', which have not been published. Picken is of the school of Galt in his social observation and satire. Where he is strongest is in his delineation of Scottish life and character, and the books thus charged with his own knowledge and opinions are still readable. 
Contemporaries considered Picken to be like the Dominie of his book, amiable, upright, simple-minded and tender-hearted. Chambers described him as having a 'restless and aspiring spirit'. He died of apoplexy on 23 November 1833 at his London home, Gothic Cottages, Regent Park, East. 


@@@@@


doc= 22199


Picken, Andrew (1815-1845), draughtsman and lithographer, was born in London, the second of the four sons of the novelist Andrew Picken (1788-1833) and his wife, Janet Coxon (1792-1871). He became a pupil of the lithographer Louis Haghe, and in 1835 received from the Society of Arts their silver Isis medal for a lithographic drawing of the ruins of the Houses of Parliament after the fire. In the same year he exhibited, at the Royal Academy, a view of a tomb in Narbonne Cathedral. Picken then established himself as a lithographer, but in 1837 he fell seriously ill and was sent to Madeira. He spent two years there and drew a series of views of the island, which, on his return to England, were published under the title 'Madeira Illustrated' (1840), with interesting letterpress edited from his notes by Dr James Macaulay. This work played an important role in popularizing Madeira as a health resort. After a short interval Picken found it necessary to revisit Madeira; but his condition deteriorated rapidly and he returned to London, where he died, unmarried, on 24 June 1845. 
During his brief career Picken produced a large number of landscape lithographs, chiefly illustrations to books of travel and private commissions. His youngest brother, Thomas, was also a landscape lithographer, and provided illustrations for Roberts's 'Holy Land' (1855), Payne's 'English Lake Scenery' (1856), 'Scotland Delineated', and other works. In 1879 he became an inmate of the Charterhouse, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 22200


Andrew Belfrage Picken (1802-1849), second son of Ebenezer Picken, was born at Stevenlaw's Close, Edinburgh, on 5 November 1802, and some time before 1827 became private secretary to Sir Gregor MacGregor of Poyais in Central America. Ruined by MacGregor's fraudulent enterprise, Picken made his way back to Edinburgh where, penniless, he wrote occasionally for the 'Caledonian Mercury', and played small parts in the theatre. At Edinburgh, in 1828, he published 'The Bedouins and other Poems'. The work displays considerable fancy and energy of expression. In 1830 he went to Montreal, where he became an artist and teacher of drawing. He died there on 1 July 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 22201


Picken, Ebenezer (1769-1816), poet, was born in Well-meadow, Paisley, and was named after his father, a silk weaver. He received his elementary education in Paisley, and went in 1785 to Glasgow University, studying there for five years. He preferred literature and good-fellowship to the prospects of a United Secession minister -- the office which his father desired him to fill. Picken wrote poetry while a student which was published in 1788 as 'Poems and Epistles, Mostly in the Scottish Dialect'. Alexander Wilson, poet and naturalist, warmly hailed his gifts in his own 'Poems' (1790). On 14 April 1791 Picken and Wilson debated in the Edinburgh Pantheon 'Whether have the exertions of Allan Ramsay or Robert Fergusson done more honour to Scottish poetry?' Picken eulogized Ramsay, while Wilson defended Fergusson, and they later published their poems in a pamphlet, 'The Laurel Disputed, or, The Merits of Allan Ramsay and Robert Fergusson Contrasted'. 
In 1791 Picken opened a school at Falkirk, and on 23 September married Robina Belfrage, the daughter of the minister of the burgher church there. Towards the end of the year he was appointed teacher of an endowed school at Carron, Stirlingshire, where he remained about five years, struggling with poverty which compelled him to give up his clerical ambitions. 
In 1796 Picken settled in Edinburgh and tried business, first as the manager of a mercantile enterprise, and afterwards on his own account as a draper and music-seller. He travelled to America in 1809. Unsuccessful as a merchant, he returned to teaching, and was known, about 1813, to Robert and William Chambers, his neighbours in Bristo Street, as well-meaning, but 'sadly handicapped' ('Memoir of Robert Chambers', 72). In 1813 he published 'Miscellaneous Poems, Songs,... Partly in the Scottish Dialect, with a Copious Glossary' (2 vols.). In 1815 Picken assisted Andrew Duncan with 'Elogiorum sepulchralium Edinensium delectus', on monumental inscriptions selected from Edinburgh burial-grounds. 
Picken's health gradually failed and he died of consumption in Edinburgh in 1816. He was survived by his wife, three sons and two daughters, including Joanna Belfrage Picken (1798-1859). Four children had died in infancy. Picken's 'Pocket Dictionary of the Scottish Dialect' was published anonymously in 1818 and was used by John Jamieson for his etymological dictionary of the Scottish language. 




@@@@@


doc= 22202


Picken, Joanna Belfrage (1798-1859), poet and teacher, was born on 8 May 1798 at Fountain Close, Edinburgh, the fourth child and third daughter of Ebenezer Picken (1769-1816), 'the poet of Paisley', and Robina Belfrage, daughter of the Revd John Belfrage of Falkirk, Stirlingshire, and sister of the Revd Henry Belfrage DD (1774-1835). She was one of nine children, of whom one of the three daughters and three of the six sons died in early childhood. She and her sister Catherine were well educated, and for a while they had a boarding-school in Musselburgh, Midlothian. It failed, it is reported, in part because of Joanna's poetic satires of local people. In 1842, after the death of their mother, Joanna and Catherine joined their brothers Andrew Belfrage Picken (1802-1849) ['see under 'Picken, Ebenezer (1769-1816)] and Henry Belfrage Picken in Canada. Joanna supported herself in Montreal as a teacher of music. 
As a poet Joanna Picken is best remembered for 'An Auld Friend wi' a New Face', a comic poem, in seven twelve-line stanzas in Scots dialect, about marriage. It begins: '
A queer kind o' lott'ry is marriage -- 

Ye never ken what ye may draw, 

Ye may get a braw hoose an' a carriage, 

Or maybe get nae hoose ava. 

I say na 'tis 'best' to be single, 

But ae thing's to me unco clear: 

Far better sit 'lane' by the 'ingle'


Than thole what some wives hae to bear. 

' The speaker goes on to enumerate the hazards of the institution, from a woman's point of view, concluding with advice to unmarried women similar to that offered in the first stanza. James Grant Wilson included this poem and Joanna Picken's 'The Death Watch' in his anthology 'The Poets and Poetry of Scotland' (1876), noting that her work had appeared in Scottish and Canadian journals (in the latter under the pen-name Alpha) and that at her death she left a 45-piece manuscript. Thus far none of that work has been published except in nineteenth-century periodicals. Indeed, until 1998, only sixteen poems in addition to the two published by Wilson have been recovered, three in the 'Montreal Transcript and Commercial Advertiser', and thirteen in the possession of a great-great-grandson of the poet's brother Henry Belfrage Picken. Most are grave or melancholy in tone and tell of disappointment, loss, sorrow, homesickness, and death as a cherished release from the pains of life. Some can be dated as early as 1829, more than a decade before she emigrated, but others were certainly written in Canada. None is in Scots dialect. Only two, 'To Berwick' and a two-stanza poem set to the music of a serenade, 'The Light Guitar', by John Barnett, show the comic spirit which informs 'An Auld Friend wi' a New Face'. Conceivably among the missing poems were those satirizing citizens of Musselburgh and perhaps some others meant to be sung. 
From the newly recovered poems it can be surmised that Joanna Picken was devoted to her parents, that she mourned the loss of dear friends as well as her parents, and that her hopes were repeatedly disappointed. She started out with great lyric gifts which dwindled over the years. It is doubly sad that probably some of her best work has perished. Joanna Belfrage Picken died of apoplexy in Montreal on 24 March 1859 and was buried five days later in Mount Royal cemetery in that city. 


@@@@@


doc= 22203


Basil Montagu Pickering (1835-1878), publisher and bookseller, was born on 16 June 1835, entered the book trade as an assistant to James Toovey, and set up in business in 1858 at 196 Piccadilly, London. He specialized in rare books, first editions of nineteenth-century poets and copies of his father's publications, and published editions of Blake, Swinburne, J. H. Frere, works by Cardinal Newman, and a variorum edition of Coleridge. In 1864 he married Elizabeth, 'nee' Hubbard. He died on 8 February 1878 at 196 Piccadilly, his wife and children having predeceased him in 1876. 


@@@@@


doc= 22204


Pickering, Danby (fl. 1737-1769), legal writer, was the son of Danby Pickering of Hatton Garden, Middlesex. He was admitted on 28 June 1737 a student at Gray's Inn, where he was called to the bar on 8 May 1741. He re-edited the original four volumes of the authoritative reports of legal cases, 'Modern Reports' (1682-1703), with the supplements of 1711, 1713, and 1716, under the title 'Modern reports, or, Select cases adjudged in the courts of king's bench, chancery, common pleas, and exchequer, since the restoration of his majesty King Charles II to the fourth of Queen Anne' (1757). He also edited Sir Henry Finch's 'Law, or, A Discourse Thereof in Four Books' (1759). His most important work however, in twenty-four volumes, was the abridgement of the statute book entitled 'The Statutes at Large, from Magna Charta to the End of the Eleventh Parliament of Great Britain' (1762-9). His name remained on the title-page of this work until 1807 and it continued without his name until 1809. The date of his death is uncertain. 


@@@@@


doc= 22205


Pickering, Ellen (1802-1843), novelist, was born on 24 March 1802 and baptized at Lyndhurst, Hampshire, on 21 August 1802, the eighth and youngest daughter of the ten surviving children of Isaac Pickering (died 1829) of Foxlease House, Lyndhurst, and his wife, Katharine (1758/9-1855), daughter of Ferdinando Collins of Betterton House, East Lockinge, Berkshire. Isaac Pickering owned sugar plantations and enslaved people (numbering 400 when he made his will in 1826) in Tortola on the Virgin Islands and Trinidad, but they were mortgaged in exchange for an annuity. He sold the Foxlease property in 1827, moving the family to Bath. Ellen Pickering commenced novel-writing about 1825 with a view to a livelihood. She wrote rapidly, acquired some popularity, and earned, it is said, $100 per annum. Her stylized tales of society manners and romance, with occasional injections of history, after the fashion of Sir Walter Scott, received qualified approval from contemporary reviewers. The 'London Spectator', for example, noted, 'We are inclined to place Miss Pickering at the very head of the Circulating Library School, with a much better literature and a chaster taste than the rest of her class' (Allibone, 'Dict.'), while in his satiric 'Hints to authors' in 'Blackwood's Magazine' James White described her as above the run-of-the-mill romancers. Her work included 'The Marriage of the Favourite' (1826), 'The Heiress' (1833), 'The Merchant's Daughter' (1836), 'The Quiet Husband' (1840), 'The Secret Foe: an Historical Novel' (1841), and 'Friend or Foe' (1843). Most of her novels were republished in the United States. 
The most successful of Pickering's books, however, was 'Nan Darrell', published in 1839 at the height of the fashion for Gypsy tales (see Hannah Maria Jones's Gypsy trilogy of 1835-40). The heroine is a crazy Gypsy, described in a 'postscript' as drawn from life, but bearing an obvious resemblance to Scott's Gypsy Meg Merrilies, as well as to other examples in his novels of mad female outcasts. Other editions appeared in 1846, 1853, 1862, and 1865. Pickering died at her home, 13 Prior Park Buildings, Bath, on 25 November 1843, of scarlet fever. She did not live to finish her last novel, 'The Grandfather', which was completed by Elizabeth Youatt, and published in 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 22206


Pickering, George (1794-1857), landscape painter, was born in Yorkshire. He may be the George, son of Robert and Elizabeth Pickering, who was baptized on 3 May 1794 at Kirby Misperton, Yorkshire. A pupil of John Glover, he took over the teaching practice of the drawing-master George Cuitt the younger in Chester about 1820. Between 1815 and 1818 he exhibited eleven landscapes at the Society of Painters in Water Colours (the Old Watercolour Society), including several views painted near Matlock: 'Near the Old Bath, Matlock, Derbyshire: Wood Scene with Cattle Drinking at a River' is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. He also exhibited four landscapes at the Society of British Artists galleries in Suffolk Street, London, in 1827-8. 
Pickering's drawings were engraved by Edward Francis Finden for both series of John Roby's 'Traditions of Lancashire' (1829 and 1831). He also drew many of the landscapes which are engraved in George Ormerod's 'History of the County Palatine and City of Chester' (1819) and Edward Baines's 'History of the County Palatine of Lancaster' (1824). He exhibited watercolours at the Liverpool Academy, and in 1836 he had a studio at 53 Bold Street, Liverpool. He later moved to Grange Mount, Birkenhead, Cheshire, where he died on 8 March 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 22207


Pickering, Sir Gilbert, first baronet, appointed Lord Pickering under the protectorate (1611-1668), politician, was born on 10 March 1611, the eldest son of Sir John Pickering of Titchmarsh, Northamptonshire (died 1628), and his wife, Susannah (died 1661), daughter of Sir Erasmus Dryden. John Pickering (d. 1645) was a younger brother. Gilbert Pickering was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, at Easter 1625 and graduated BA in 1629; he entered Gray's Inn in November 1629. On 15 May 1638 he married Elizabeth Montague, or Mountagu (died 1679), daughter of Sir Sidney Montague, master of requests; there were eight sons and four daughters of the marriage. He was made a baronet of Nova Scotia that June, and sat in the Short and Long parliaments for the county Northamptonshire. 
Supporting parliament in 1642 Pickering joined the Northamptonshire committee, raised a regiment, and was involved in levying the assessment, but was most active on the committee for sequestration and was later remembered as 'a sequester and a committee man'. A Northamptonshire clergyman later called him 'first a Presbyterian, then an Independent, then a Brownist, and afterwards an Anabaptist; a most fiery, furious, implacable man; was the principal agent in casting out most of the learned clergy' (Walker). A friend and ally of Cromwell, he helped to negotiate the surrender of Bristol but took little part in the post-war crises. He was not excluded at Pride's Purge, and was appointed a regicide judge but attended only two sittings of the court and did not sign Charles's death warrant. He also refused to sign the engagement in February 1649, and was unable to take up a seat on the council of state as a result, though he sat on all subsequent councils. 
One of the parliamentary delegation to greet Cromwell on his return from his victory at Worcester in 1651, Pickering was a teller in favour of the abolition of tithes, helped to revive debate on the propagation of the gospel, and to set up the Hale commission on law reform, and was chosen to supervise the government tapestry factory at Mortlake. His increasing pretensions are indicated by his lease of a prime site in Whitehall in 1650 to erect his London residence, Pickering House. He took no part in the fall of the Rump but was soon approached for advice on its replacement and was re-elected to the Nominated Parliament for Northamptonshire. Generally moderate he voted against immediate abolition of tithes but favoured banning Christmas. One of the committee to negotiate with the Dutch ambassadors, on 27 July he joined the council of state's committee for foreign affairs. Popular enough in parliament to take second place to Cromwell in its elections to the council on 1 November, he subsequently joined Lambert's group planning the assembly's early dissolution and put his name to the successful motion requesting its closure. 
Pickering was a natural choice to join Cromwell's protectorate council of state, on which he took a leading role. He helped to frame the ordinance to establish the triers and ejectors, but opposed prosecuting recusants for their 'bare opinion'. Regarding Quakers 'as infectious as the plague', he none the less refused to be vindictive to James Nayler and warned parliament 'I hope there is none here but desires [his] repentance rather than his ruin.' He again took a role in foreign affairs, supporting an alliance with France in order to succour the Huguenots and halt French aid to the royalists. As an opponent of a Spanish alliance he was chosen on 4 April 1654 for the committee to negotiate with their ambassador, Cardenas, but was also told to deliver to the French the unpalatable request for the surrender of Dunkirk as part of the terms for an alliance. After the peace treaty with France he was spoken of as a possible ambassador but was not appointed, possibly as too sympathetic. Significantly, on 28 January 1656 he was chosen to help negotiate with Sweden despite preferring an alliance with their commercially more useful Dutch rivals. For whatever reason he took no part in the subsequent talks. He was also on the council for trade (12 July 1655) and a multitude of council committees, including those for the plantations. 
Pickering was elected to the 1656 parliament for Northamptonshire after blatant intimidation of the assembled freeholders on Kettering Heath by Major-General Boteler, and was summoned to the upper house in December 1657. His most visible role was in the ceremonial office of lord chamberlain, to which he was appointed on 12 August 1655 but was mainly active from October 1657. Jeered at by a republican as 'so finical, spruce, and like an old courtier', he gave employment to his nephew, the poet John Dryden, and organized accommodation for visiting ambassadors and the imprisoned Nayler. In attendance at Cromwell's death and his son and successor Richard's proclamation, he walked immediately before the hearse at the state funeral on 23 November 1658. He supported the army officers rather than most of his civilian colleagues against Richard Cromwell. With the fall of the protectorate Pickering rejoined the restored Rump Parliament. When, within months, it was in turn expelled by the army he was, in October 1659, appointed to the committee of safety established by the military. 
Opposing the Restoration, Pickering was originally marked for exclusion from the 'Act of Indemnity'. However, as recorded by Pepys, he used the influence of his brother-in-law Edward Montague, commander of the fleet, whom he had assisted under Cromwell, to secure his pardon. Banned from office for life Pickering retired to Northamptonshire, but he was still obstinate enough to resist forcibly the return of the former royalist incumbent, Henry Deane, to the parish of Titchmarsh. Deane accused him of having demolished part of the vicarage for obstructing his view and seizing tithes; Lady Pickering refused Deane his keys. Subsequently, 'with an Amazonian courage', she induced her servants to break into the vicarage. Pickering escaped any punishment, and died at Titchmarsh at Michaelmas 1668 after what Pepys described as a 'long lethargy'. He was buried on 17 October in Titchmarsh church, where his son Sir John Pickering erected a monument in 1698. A capable administrator, passionate in religion and high-handed in local affairs, his integrity was commended by Cromwell as 'honest Pickering' (O. Cromwell to O. St John, 1 Sept 1648, quoted in O. Cromwell 'Writings and Speeches of Oliver Cromwell', ed. W. C. Abbott, 1937, 2.645). 


@@@@@


doc= 22208


Pickering, Sir James (d. 1398/9), speaker of the House of Commons and administrator, was probably the son of Thomas Pickering of Killington, near Kendal, Westmorland. Probably of age by 1354, he was knighted by 1361. He later claimed to have served Edward III in Scotland -- perhaps in military operations before the 1357 truce, even in the king's own campaign of 1355-6. Pickering's interests in Yorkshire, around Ellerton, in Swaledale, and Selby, developed later -- although his surname might suggest otherwise; he first became a West Riding justice of the peace and commissioner of array in 1376-7; these connections may have stemmed from his marriage, though the identity of his wife is unknown. 
Pickering was twice elected to parliament for Westmorland (1362, 1365) and then for Cumberland (1368). He served as deputy (1365-6, 1368, 1371-5) to Roger, ninth Lord Clifford (died 1389), hereditary sheriff of Westmorland. At the same time he became involved in Irish affairs, through his Westmorland neighbour, Sir William Windsor (died 1383). In 1369, if not earlier, Pickering joined Windsor when he became lieutenant of Ireland in that year, serving as chief justice, though his legal experience is obscure. Participating in creative expedients to fund Windsor's administration, Pickering was named in several of the eighty-seven charges directed against the lieutenant and his agents, attracting accusations of peculation, extortion, and barratry. He left Ireland before the lieutenant, at an uncertain point in 1370-71, and did not return when Windsor was reappointed. Possibly because of the Irish allegations, he spent some time in London (obtaining a royal pardon in 1377), but he also attended to more local affairs, not that these were devoid of controversy either. In 1378 he procured a royal commission to investigate ambushes laid for him by Sir Thomas Roos of Kendal; he was himself accused of bribing a jury. Though not formally retained by John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster (died 1399), he was associated with those who were, and received money for the duke when the latter had to retire to Scotland in 1381. At some point Pickering joined the duchy of Lancaster's northern council. 
Again representing Westmorland in parliament (October 1377, 1378, 1379, October 1382), Pickering progressed to the office of speaker (1378; conceivably 1379, but the incumbent is unknown). In that capacity he made the first known speaker's 'protestation', disclaiming personal responsibility for any offensive statements. He was caught between Gaunt and a resentful Commons, and this caution was understandable; it is unclear whether his appointment owed anything to Gaunt's efforts to neutralize parliament after its behaviour in 1376. Whatever may have been hoped, in 1378 the Commons produced attacks on the government, but no taxation. Pickering subsequently became member for Yorkshire (February 1383, November 1384, September 1388, November 1390, September 1397) instead of Westmorland; he was again speaker in the first of these parliaments. The fact that this session called for Gaunt to concern himself with Scotland and the north, rather than with his Spanish ambitions, suggests that Pickering had no direct links of patronage with the duke. 
Pickering, an executor of his friend Windsor, was embroiled from 1384 in the latter's tangled affairs (which were brought up in the parliament of November 1384). He also became sheriff of Yorkshire (1389, 1393, 1397-8); Richard II in 1390 granted him an annuity of 40 marks (but not for life), perhaps to compensate for the expenses involved. It was against the background of Richard's purge of his adversaries in 1397 that Pickering was elected to his twelfth and last parliament, that he was then given his last double term as sheriff, and that he returned to the West Riding bench (from which other commitments had presumably forced him). He died in late 1398 or early 1399, apparently during the 1398-9 shrieval term, before he would have had to choose between his royal and Lancastrian connections. He left at least two sons; one of these, Thomas, died in 1406 as escheator of Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 22209


Pickering, John (c.1495-1537), Dominican friar and rebel, was probably born in or near Bridlington, Yorkshire. Nothing is known of his parents or early life. He entered the Dominican house at York on 21 September 1510 and was ordained into the priesthood on 20 September 1516. Pickering entered the Cambridge house of the Blackfriars shortly afterwards but disapproved of both the reformist movement and the 'new learning' that was gaining popularity there. Before Whitsunday 1525 he received his BTh from the University of Cambridge (TNA: PRO, SP 1/118, fol. 284'r'). 
Assertions that Pickering was elected prior of the Cambridge Blackfriars lack adequate documentation. Some time before receiving his degree, he was appointed prior of the Blackfriars in York. Between 12 January and 4 May 1531, he attended the York convocation which debated the royal supremacy and was also present at the northern convocation of 1532, which finally acknowledged the king as head of the church. He was deeply angered both by this capitulation to royal pressure and by the high-handed manner in which the English church was being reformed. After the northern clergy's acquiescence to Henry VIII in May 1532 he wrote a formal protest which he produced at the clerical assembly at Pontefract, Yorkshire, on 4-5 December 1536. He was a friend and possible protege of the influential Dominican friar Dr Marmaduke Waldby, prebendary of Carlisle and associate of the imperial ambassador, Eustace Chapuys. 
Pickering was articulate and intelligent, but also restless, hot-tempered, and impetuous. Although the chronicle of the London Greyfriars refers to him in May 1537 as prior of York, other evidence indicates that he had resigned this office some years earlier, possibly following the clergy's submission of 1532. He appears to have proceeded to a DTh degree, but as no record exists at the universities of Cambridge or Oxford he may have studied on the continent, possibly through Waldby's influence. By 1536 Pickering was back in Yorkshire with a tenuous connection to the Dominican house in Scarborough where he had a number of friends. He may also have held some sort of living in or near Bridlington as he is consistently referred to in contemporary records as 'of Bridlington', although this may also be a reference to his place of birth ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 12/1, nos. 1206, 1207 (8)). When the commons of Lincolnshire rose in October 1536, Pickering was visiting William Wood, prior of the Augustinian house at Bridlington. Both men were in perfect sympathy with the insurrection, and Pickering confided to Wood that the uprising 'was well done for the wealth of the church' (ibid., no. 1019). In the later charges brought against him, it was contended that Pickering had been among the rebels who rallied at Sherburn, Yorkshire, on 10 October, but he denied this. His participation in the first uprising seems to have taken the form of writing seditious letters and passing messages between the various rebel leaders. 
At the beginning of December Edward Lee, archbishop of York, sent for Pickering to attend a meeting of learned clerics being assembled at Pontefract Abbey to discuss the royal supremacy and dissolution of the monasteries. Wood gave him a horse and money for the journey. Pickering was not closely acquainted with Lee; in fact he testified that he had heard the archbishop preach but once, yet he believed him to be an avid supporter of the new and more serious uprising known as the Pilgrimage of Grace. He was present at Lee's sermon on Sunday 3 December in All Hallows Church, Pontefract, and, like the commons who crowded the upper galleries, fully expected the archbishop would encourage them to rebel. When the Lancaster herald entered the church, however, Lee, according to an angry Pickering, suddenly 'did resist from his purpose of pilgrimage and [swore] to show how it was not lawful for us to make battle without commendation of our prince' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/118, fol. 279'r'). Over the next two days Pickering played a prominent part in the clerical council's discussions and disputations based on those discussed at convocation in 1531-2, and on the afternoon of 5 December, they took the finished articles summing up their opinions to Lee. When the archbishop came to the article which stated that 'the Bishop of Rome should be Supreme Head' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 12/1, no. 786 3), he wanted to cross it out as unnecessary but both Pickering and Cuthbert Marshall, Lee's own chancellor, insisted that it be maintained. He reluctantly agreed to leave it in as expressing 'the consent of Christian people'. 
Pickering had brought with him to Pontefract copies of his most important contribution to the Pilgrimage of Grace. This was a 150-line poem written at the end of October at Bridlington which expressed his feelings of anger and resentment at the 'Southern Turks perverting our law [and] spoiling Christ[s] church' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/118, fol. 292'v'). The poem, which in effect called for a crusade against southern heresy, captured in verse much of the general feeling of outrage prevalent in the north during the pilgrimage. Some of the rhymes which Pickering incorporated into his work were being sung by itinerant minstrels and turned into handbills, samples of which were given to him by the rebel leader John Hallam while on a visit to Bridlington. At Hallam's insistence Pickering took the popular rhymes and rewrote them in a scholarly yet vituperative style, adding suitable Latin tags and additional material from Jewish history. Although the work was often referred to as 'the marching song of the revolution' (Bush, 62), Pickering himself stated that it was not his intent that it should be set to music or 'sungen by any minstrels' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/118, fol. 284'v'). The poem focused on a vigorous and uncompromising call to arms of the 'faithful people of the boreal region' to fight 'these Southern heretics devoid of all virtue' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/118, fol. 292'r'). Pickering also incorporated paraphrases of an earlier, anonymous play that was thought to have been written originally as an attack on Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, probably by John Skelton, entitled 'Godly Queen Hester'. However, Pickering is the likely author of this attack on 'naughty Cromwell' (ibid., 292'v'), who in his poem was compared to Haman in the book of 'Esther', who ended on his own gibbet. The poem ends with a call 'diligently for to pray our king for to save and his undoubted wife Queen Lady Jane', but this pious pledge of loyalty was tempered some lines before not only by the undoubted urging of the commons to civil disobedience but by the ominous threat of foreign intervention -- 'I fear aid will come out of a strange land, the English commontie now may so be sure' (ibid., 293'v'). His poem enjoyed enormous popularity in the East and West Ridings of Yorkshire and, according to the prior of Bridlington, was heard 'in every man's mouth about Bridlington and Pomfret' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 12/1, no. 1019). It was undoubtedly the very popularity of this work which made Pickering a particular target of Henry's animosity. 
Pickering was demonstrably active as well during the second rising instigated by Sir Frances Bigod in January 1537. James Cockerell, former prior of Gisborough, urged Bigod to show Pickering his journal in which Bigod had recorded his opinions of the questions argued at Pontefract. Pickering passed news on to Bigod of the attack on the Lancaster herald at Durham in late December. He carried letters between Bigod and John Hallam and was present at the final strategy meeting on 14 January at Bigod's home in Settrington, Yorkshire, between Bigod, Hallam, and Robert Esch, a friar of St Robert's, Knaresborough, in which it was decided to attempt the capture of the cities of Hull and Scarborough. After Hallam's betrayal and capture at Hull on 16 January, Pickering seems to have joined Sir George Lumley, son and heir of John Lumley, fifth Baron Lumley, in his brief occupation of Scarborough, and he apparently was still in that city when Bigod's rising collapsed shortly afterward. 
Together with five others, Pickering was singled out for special prosecution by the king in a letter written to Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk, on 22 February 1537. On 8 March Norfolk responded from Newcastle that he had not yet been able to arrest the friar. This event probably took place during the second week of March while the duke was in Scarborough, and Pickering was indicted on 9 May at York. Norfolk, however, was careful not to let Pickering know just how bad his case was. He wanted incriminating evidence against both Wood and his close associate Sir Robert Constable, and expected Pickering to provide it. On 22 March he wrote to Sir Thomas Cromwell, principal secretary, suggesting that 'if you handle [Pickering] with fair words you will get much of him' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 12/1, no. 698). Pickering went up to London under the illusion that he might still expect the king's mercy. He does not appear on the list of alleged rebels who were incarcerated in the Tower of London and so was probably held either at Newgate or at the Marshalsea. On Thursday 17 May Pickering was taken to the Guildhall and found guilty of high treason. He was hanged at Tyburn on 25 May 1537. What became of his remains is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 22210


Pickering, John (bap. 1615, d. 1645), parliamentarian army officer, was baptized at Titchmarsh, Northamptonshire, on 3 December 1615, the second son of Sir John Pickering (died 1628) and his wife, Susannah (died 1661), daughter of Sir Erasmus Dryden. His elder brother was the politician Sir Gilbert Pickering. John attended Oundle School, Northamptonshire, before going to Cambridge, where he matriculated from St Catharine's College as a fellow-commoner in 1631. In October 1634 he was admitted to Gray's Inn. Pickering was employed in diplomatic work for parliament late in 1641, carrying messages to its committee in Scotland, and was back there between December 1642 and January 1643 acting as an agent for the English parliament and reporting back on events in the Scottish privy council. 
Pickering's first military appointment, in August 1643, was the administrative post of commissary-general of the musters in the army of the eastern association, but by late 1643 or early 1644 he was colonel of a weak regiment of dragoons (mounted infantry). He was wounded on 3 March 1644, while serving under Oliver Cromwell at the storming of Hillesden House, Buckinghamshire, and was already seen as a significant enough figure to warrant mention by name in a royalist report of the storm. Shortly after this the dragoons of the eastern association army were reorganized to form a new regiment under Lieutenant-Colonel John Lilburne. On 25 March 1644 Pickering was appointed colonel of a newly raised infantry regiment which he commanded at the battle of Marston Moor (2 July) and the second battle of Newbury (28 October). Pickering was noted for his personal bravery, and this, together with his leadership qualities and zealous puritanism, earned him the respect of both officers and soldiers among the Independent faction of the army of the eastern association, and made him an influential figure in its internal politics. The support of Pickering and other officers of his seniority provided the power base which brought Oliver Cromwell to prominence, and Pickering was a leading witness in Cromwell's attack on their commander, the earl of Manchester. 
With the creation of the New Model Army in 1645 Pickering was nominated colonel of one of its twelve infantry regiments by the army's newly appointed commander, Sir Thomas Fairfax. Fairfax's choice of officers was subject to approval by both houses of parliament, and Pickering was one of several radical officers approved by the Commons but queried by the Lords. The dispute was not simply one of the Commons against the Lords but involved a range of different considerations -- patronage, kinship, politics, and religion: radical opinion saw the Lords acting to put out 'not only Independents but such as were good, and putting in most vile persons' (Gentles, 19). The practical necessity of forming an effective army to end the war, and a very tight vote in the Lords, finally secured the approval of Fairfax's list. Pickering's preaching to his regiment rapidly caused trouble when the presbyterian elements in his regiment, probably among men from another regiment which had been incorporated into his in the reorganization of the army, mutinied; this led to a parliamentary ordinance forbidding lay preaching in the New Model Army. That early disruption notwithstanding, Pickering's regiment by June 1645 was described as one of the seven 'chiefest praying and preaching regiments in the army', and Pickering's own fervent religious commitment, his competence, and his commitment to the cause made him a popular and influential figure in the New Model Army (Gentles, 100). According to one posthumous newsletter account, 'instead of drinking, swearing, roaring, carding, dicing and drabbing, he spent that little time he had to spare in the study of the scriptures and exercising to his regiment, labouring to distil good discipline by his counsel, as he did valour by his practice' ('Moderate Intelligencer', 39, 27 Nov - 4 Dec 1645, 209). To the contemporary historian of the New Model Army, Joshua Sprigge, he was 'a little man, but of a great courage' (Sprigge, 156n.). 
Pickering served with his regiment at the decisive battle of Naseby (14 June 1645) and a series of successful sieges at Leicester, Bridgwater, Sherborne, Bristol, Devizes, Laycock House, and Basing House. He died at Ottery St Mary, Devon, while engaged at the siege of Exeter on 24 November 1645, of the 'New Disease' which had recently been rife among besiegers and besieged at Bristol and which was typhus, the 'camp fever' common in army encampments, or bubonic plague. At the request of his brother Sir Gilbert, Cromwell gave orders for Pickering to be buried at Lyme Regis Castle. A contemporary news-sheet provides a compelling last word on John Pickering: 'The Souldiers are overwhelmed with grief, deare, gallant, Pickering is dead... glorious Pickering is gone; the heaviest blow that England received this Winter' (Foard, 111). 


@@@@@


doc= 22211


Pickering, Thomas (fl. 1458-1475), abbot of Whitby and genealogist, in 1458, while precentor of Whitby Abbey, wrote a brief account of the Eure family, tracing its descent to an eleventh-century Gilbert Tyson, and showing its links with several great northern baronial families, at the request of Ralph Eure, son and heir of Sir William Eure. Ralph Eure was one of the Eures of Stokesley, Yorkshire, and of Belton, Lincolnshire: he was killed at Towton on Palm Sunday (29 March) 1461. 
Accounts of the early generations of the Tysons contain many fictions, including Gilbert Tyson's alleged foundation of the abbeys of Bridlington, Watton, and Malton: Pickering knew the foundation legends (current since at least the reign of Edward II) from 'certain writings' and dismissed them as untrue. Copies of the genealogy exist in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century collections of miscellanea in the British Library (BL, Cotton MS Cleopatra C.iii; BL, Harley MS 3648; and BL, Add. MS 5937); a further copy once in the Gurney manuscripts ('Beaufort MSS') has not been traced. As Pickering noted that he wrote the genealogy on one day, and as two of the copies conclude 'Finis', it seems unlikely that it was ever part of a larger work; nor is there any obvious relationship between it and other material found in the same miscellanea. Thomas Pickering became abbot of Whitby in March 1463: he had resigned by 13 September 1475, when the king granted the abbey licence to elect his successor. The date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 22212


Pickering, Sir William (1516/17-1575), courtier and diplomat, was, according to his father's inquisition post mortem, born in 1516 or 1517, the son and heir of Sir William Pickering (died 1542) and Eleanor, daughter of William Fairfax of Bylands Park, Yorkshire. His father was knight marshal to Henry VIII, whose grants to him included a lease on lands formerly belonging to the Denbighshire monastery of Valle Crucis. Pickering was tutored by Sir John Cheke at St John's College, Cambridge, and appears on a list of the young radical scholars who adopted Cheke's new method of pronouncing Greek, but there is no record of his graduation. In 1538 he was nominated to be one of those 'most mete to be daily waiters' on Henry VIII and 'allowed in his house' ('LP Henry VIII', 13/2, no. 1184). On 1 April 1543, together with Thomas Wyatt and Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, his patron, he was brought before the council charged with eating flesh in Lent and breaking the windows of houses and churches in London around Candlemas time. Next day he confessed, and was imprisoned in the Tower. He was released on 3 May on entering into recognizances for $200. During the French wars he is said to have served Henry VIII at Calais with Anthony Pickering, its constable, who was probably a relative. 
With the imprisonment and execution of Surrey on 21 January 1547, Pickering found a new patron in John Dudley, Viscount Lisle (created earl of Warwick in 1547), who helped him secure promotions and office during Edward VI's reign. On 22 February 1547 he was dubbed knight of the carpet. William Patten refers to him as a sergeant of the band in Somerset's expedition to Scotland in 1547. He sat on the commission of the peace for Cumberland in May 1547, and was elected the senior MP for Warwick the following October. In the summer of 1550, after Warwick's seizure of power, he went briefly on a diplomatic mission to France. In February 1551 he was sent again to France, as special ambassador to discuss peace terms between England and Scotland. He arrived at Blois on 26 February and had an interview with the king at Vendome on 3 March, but on the 15th returned to England on the plea of urgent private affairs. Although he promised to be back within a fortnight or three weeks, the council detained him to deal with Anglo-Scottish negotiations. Edward VI's journal entry for April 1551 notes that he was to be sent to France as 'ambassador legier', but when he returned to France in May, it was as part of the earl of Northampton's embassy. He was only officially notified of his appointment as resident ambassador and given his instructions on 30 June. 
As ambassador Pickering earned the respect of Henri II, but he did not enjoy his service in France. He was soon complaining of shortness of funds and that his allowance was 7 crowns a day while he had to spend 13 or 14 to live. Furthermore, he found the work tiring and unproductive. His time spent accompanying the king on his campaign in Lorraine in February 1552 so exhausted him that his health began to suffer. When he raised the grievances of English merchants with the French, they failed to listen to any of his demands and only offered him 'fair words': 'The more I cry out, the worse words I give these men, the more am I cherished, banqueted, and presented with venison' ('CSP for.', '1547-53', 214, 233). From May 1552 onwards, he begged Sir William Cecil to secure his recall. Pickering was not alone in finding foreign service difficult and unrewarding in the last two years of Edward's reign; the diplomats Thomas Chamberlain and Richard Morrison also pleaded for their recall. 
Pickering was not replaced immediately. On 1 April 1553 Dr Nicholas Wotton and Sir Thomas Challoner were sent as commissioners to France, and on the following day Challoner was designated resident ambassador. Pickering, however, continued in France until a month after Mary's accession, when Wotton took his place, but his debts by then were so great that he had difficulty in leaving Paris. 
During Edward VI's reign, Pickering was considered to be a committed protestant. The imperial ambassador described him as a zealous protestant and a creature of the duke of Northumberland, as Warwick had become. In early 1553 he was appointed to sit on two commissions in Cumberland to oversee the removal of church ornaments. His absence abroad, however, prevented his becoming actively involved in their work, as it did in Northumberland's attempt to place Lady Jane Grey on the throne. 
Back in England, Pickering soon became implicated in the conspiracy against Queen Mary's Spanish marriage. In October 1553 the imperial ambassador reported that he had spoken to Elizabeth and was in contact with the French ambassador. Soon afterwards Pickering began conspiring with his old colleague, Sir Thomas Wyatt, and during the latter's rebellion the government believed that he was plotting to capture the Tower. In March 1554 he escaped with Sir Peter Carew and other associates to Caen in Normandy, where it was rumoured that they were working to intercept the Spanish fleet transporting Prince Philip to England. Wotton asked the French king to arrest them, but without success. On 7 April 1554 Pickering was indicted for treason, but he was then in Paris. Fearing that he would turn the English cipher over to the French, Wotton suggested that Mary should grant him a pardon. In fact, Pickering had no wish to betray his monarch, and he revealed to Wotton information about the plans of the other English conspirators. Suspecting his deceit, some of his old associates plotted to assassinate him, but he was able to slip out of Paris secretly on 25 April 1554 and he spent the next year travelling in Italy and Germany. 
Thanks to the intercession of Sir John Mason, Sir William Petre, and Wotton, Pickering was pardoned on 4 December 1554. Early in March 1555 he was in Brussels and soon afterwards he was allowed home. It was not until 1558 that he was again employed on governmental business. In March 1558 he was sent to recruit 3000 foot soldiers in Germany for the queen's service in defence of Calais, but the order was countermanded after he had begun the negotiations. As a consequence, he found himself financially embarrassed and the debts he ran up were still outstanding five years later. In October 1558 he was sick with ague at Dunkirk, and he did not return home until 4 May 1559, six months after Elizabeth's accession. 
As early as 26 November 1558, Pickering had been mentioned as a possible husband for Elizabeth, and on his return to England he was evidently taken seriously as a suitor. In the Spanish ambassador's dispatches are reports that Elizabeth had visited Pickering secretly at his own house and had later on given him lodgings at court. De Quadra also recounted that he was living extravagantly, had quarrelled with the twelfth earl of Arundel (another English candidate for her hand), and challenged the earl to a duel for speaking ill of him. Bets placed in London were said to be at 25 to 100 that Pickering would be king. He, however, took himself less seriously, and stated his personal view that the queen intended to die a maid. 
Pickering soon faded from the public eye and thereafter lived quietly at Pickering House in London and on his estates in Yorkshire, where he probably devoted himself to study. His public appearances were few. Just before the outbreak of the 1569 northern rising, he reported rumours of unrest to the queen's representative in the north and left for London, where he was appointed one of the queen's lieutenants. In 1570 he was on the special commission to try the Catholic activist John Felton for treason, and was appointed a JP for Middlesex. 
Pickering died, unmarried, on 4 January 1575 at his house in London and was buried on the north side of the chancel of St Helen's, Bishopsgate. His father's body was disinterred and buried with him, in a tomb which in his will he ordered should be made at a cost of 200 marks and 'garnished and decked with the armes coates of me and my auncestors' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/57, fols. 2-3). Clearly a very wealthy man, he disposed of quantities of plate, fine clothes, armour, and household furnishings, as well as money. His residuary legatee was his illegitimate daughter, Hester, whom he directed was to live and be educated in the house of his executor, Thomas Unton. Other bequests went to friends who included Lord Keeper Bacon, John Astley and his wife, Katherine, Thomas Norton and Thomas Heneage, servants, and relations, among whom his sister Anne received favoured treatment. His executors were to 'provide a Jewell' worth 200 marks for the queen. He left Lord Burghley 'all my papers of Antiquities that are pasted together of the monuments of Rome and other places', as well as globes, compasses, and a horse. Pickering was clearly proud of his library, and instructed that it was not to be 'spoiled nor dispersed', but should pass to his daughter's future husband. As well as leaving money to the poor of his parish and to St Bartholomew's Hospital, Smithfield, he bequeathed $30 per annum for seven years to maintain poor scholars at one of the universities. His proposed benefactions went further, for after various elaborate schemes had been drafted and discarded he settled his estates on Oxford and Cambridge universities should his daughter die childless. However, she married and had children, so this reversion did not take effect. His library, in so far as it can be traced through subsequent sales, descended with the Wotton library to the fifth earl of Carnarvon. Some of the books had been bought while he was in Paris, while his copies of Italian classics printed in Venice were probably bought during his sojourn in Italy. 


@@@@@


doc= 22213


Pickering, William (1796-1854), publisher and bookseller, was born on 2 April 1796; his parentage and place of birth are obscure. In 1810 he was apprenticed to John and Arthur Arch, Quaker booksellers and publishers of 61 Cornhill, London. He left in 1818 and after a short spell with Longmans he joined John Cuthill of 4 Middle Row, Holborn. In July 1819 he married Mary Ann Gubbins (1796-1849) with whom he had three daughters and one son. In June 1820 he set up his own bookshop at 31 Lincoln's Inn Fields, specializing in the antiquarian trade. The capital was provided by John Joseph Thornthwaite, an older fellow apprentice, and Pickering subsequently relied on him for credit. He started publishing immediately, and his first major project was to begin issuing the miniature 'Diamond Classics', reprints of Latin, Italian, English, and Greek literature, mostly printed by Charles Corrall, who had the diamond type available. Many were dedicated to Earl Spencer. With these little volumes he made his first experiments with cloth binding. 
In 1823 Pickering moved to 57 Chancery Lane, London, and his next venture was the series 'Oxford English Classics', which included works by Edward Gibbon, Samuel Johnson, and James Boswell, published jointly with Talboys and Wheeler of Oxford. There followed attractive new editions of Spenser, Milton, Bacon, and Shakespeare with a wreath device on the title-pages. In this early period he was aiming at a select market, but in 1828 he entered the field of popular literary annuals with 'The Bijou'. In the same year he met Charles Whittingham the younger of Took's Court, Chancery Lane, who was to become his chief printer, and at about the same time he adopted the famous dolphin and anchor device, emulating the sixteenth-century printing house of Aldus Manutius, adding the motto 'Aldi Discip. Anglus'. This appeared in the editions of the dramatists George Peele, John Webster, and Robert Greene, and in 1830 he began publishing the 'Aldine Edition of the British Poets', securing the services of the reputable scholars Alexander Dyce, Nicholas Harris Nicolas, and John Mitford as editors. The last-named also edited the new series of the 'Gentleman's Magazine', which Pickering took over jointly with J. B. Nichols in 1834. 
Pickering was a supporter of the Church of England and published several editions of seventeenth-century divines such as George Herbert, as well as launching the 'Church of England Quarterly Review' in 1837. His most memorable productions in this field were the historical and Victorian books of Common Prayer of 1844, set in gothic type and said to represent Whittingham's finest printing. The Victorian prayer book was exhibited at the Great Exhibition in 1851. 
Pickering's publishing was not confined to older works, but included contemporary authors such as Jeremy Bentham, Robert Malthus, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Coventry Patmore, Edward Fitzgerald, and Arthur Helps. In 1842 he had moved to 177 Piccadilly, and many of his books were now characterized by the increased use of wood-engraved ornaments, initials, and architectural frames for title-pages, adapted from Renaissance printers' models, and a more varied range of devices including the punning 'pike and ring'. Of exceptional artistic quality were the historical art works of Henry Shaw, with fine plates, often hand-coloured. 
As a bookseller Pickering was a major supplier to the British Museum and the Bodleian, having connections with Antonio Panizzi, the chief librarian of the British Museum, and with Philip Bliss, the Oxford University registrar. He became the museum's auction agent in 1849. His large stock also acted as a publisher's archive for both text and design. The year 1845, however, saw the beginning of a financial crisis, due partly to the high cost of some publications, and heavy purchasing. Thornthwaite claimed he was owed $19,000, but Pickering denied owing such a sum and, instead of having a sale to pay part of the debt, he allowed the matter to go to court, a decision which resulted in bankruptcy on 9 May 1853. After his death, however, the sales of his stock enabled all his debts to be paid in full. 
In appearance, Pickering was said to have been short and stocky and fond of maroon waistcoats. He was kindly and helpful and when the American bookseller James Brown visited London in 1845, he recorded: 'Went with Mr Pickering to Hampstead... had a delightful ramble with a most intelligent and kind-hearted man... returned to his house and supped with him, talking over literary anecdotes' (Hillard, 19-20). A keen angler and a collector of angling books, Pickering published in 1836 a fine edition of Izaak Walton and Charles Cotton, commissioning the artist Thomas Stothard to visit Dovedale to produce sketches. He died on 27 April 1854 at his home at 5 Wellington Place, Turnham Green, Middlesex, from illness brought on by financial anxiety, and was buried on 3 May at Kensal Green cemetery. His achievements are now well acknowledged: the introduction of cloth binding, leading to the wider availability of books at lower prices; the publication of reputable editions of both standard and neglected works; and a close attention to book design which had a lasting influence. 
Pickering's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 22214


Pickersgill, Frederick Richard (1820-1900), history painter, was born in London, probably at 6 Northampton Street, on 25 September 1820, the son of Richard Pickersgill ('fl'. 1818-1853), a naval officer and amateur marine and landscape painter, and his wife, Anne Witherington, the sister of the painter William Frederick Witherington (1785-1865). His paternal uncle was the portrait painter Henry William Pickersgill (1782-1875), and his cousin Henry Hall Pickersgill (1812-1861) ['see under 'Pickersgill, Henry William] was also a painter. Pickersgill received his first instruction as an artist from his uncle W. F. Witherington. He entered the Royal Academy Schools on 21 April 1840, having already exhibited a watercolour, 'The Brazen Age', at the Royal Academy in 1839. In 1843 he achieved early success, winning a prize of $100 for his cartoon 'The Death of King Lear' in the competition to decorate the new houses of parliament. His entry the following year, 'Sir Calepine Rescuing Serena', was not successful, and Pickersgill acknowledged that he had not mastered the technique of working in fresco. However, in 1847 he won a first-class prize of $500 for 'The Burial of Harold', and the work was purchased for the houses of parliament for an equal amount. Pickersgill was elected an associate of the Royal Academy on 1 November 1847 at the early age of twenty-seven. Earlier that year, on 5 August, Pickersgill married Mary Noorouz Elizabeth (1824/5-1886), the eldest daughter of James Hook, a judge in the mixed commission courts of Sierra Leone, and his wife, Eliza Frances Clarke; Mary was the sister of the landscape and history painter J. C. Hook (1819-1907). The couple had one son. 
Pickersgill exhibited fifty works at the Royal Academy between 1839 and 1875, of which the majority were subjects taken from literature, especially authors such as Spenser and Milton, religious subjects, and scenes from ancient history and the Italian Renaissance period. His early work included restrained compositions such as 'Amoret, Aemylia, and Prince Arthur in the Cottage of Sclaunder' (exh. RA, 1845; Tate collection); typically they were distinguished by 'careful and accurate drawing (we should think he had studied Flaxman with some attention,) and by judicious colouring, although in a few of his works this latter quality would be improved by more power' ('Art Journal', 12, 1850). The influence of William Etty is also apparent in works such as 'Samson Betrayed' (exh. RA, 1850; Manchester City Galleries) and 'The Pearl Boat' (1850s; ex Sothebys, 14 November 1990), in which Pickersgill delighted in contrasting fair-skinned female nudes with muscular dark-skinned male forms. Critics felt that 'his productions exhibit brilliant and sparkling colours, good though rather academic drawing', but that his figures 'were certainly less vigorously conceived' ('The Athenaeum', 29 Dec 1900). In 1854 his only exhibit at the Royal Academy, 'The Death of Francesco Foscari, Doge of Venice' (1854; Royal Collection), was bought by Prince Albert as a birthday present for Queen Victoria. The composition of this work is skilfully constructed, but the drama of the scene is lessened by the prominence of beautifully dressed women. Contemporary critics, while being impressed by the tasteful design, thought that 'his personages want life-blood... They are costume figures -- drapery holders -- poetical vacuities, and one has no firm belief in their vitality or 'bona fide' existence' ('The Athenaeum', 19 May 1855). 
Pickersgill seems to have experimented with photography, as an albumen print, 'Sunshine and Shade', was included in 'The Sunbeam: a Book of Photographs from Nature' (1859), which was compiled and edited by Philip Henry Delamotte. Pickersgill's photograph shows two figures sitting by an overgrown path and captures in fine detail the play of sunshine and shade across the scene. He himself sat for the photographer David Wilkie Wynfield; his striking appearance, with his narrow face, long thin nose, and arched eyebrows, is clearly seen behind the fancy dress typical of Wynfield's photography. Pickersgill also drew illustrations to various publications, among them P. Massinger's 'Virgin Martyr' (1844), Milton's 'Comus' (1858), and 'The Poetical Works of E. A. Poe' (1858). Pickersgill's designs for 'The Life of Christ' were engraved on wood by Dalziel in 1850, and he also contributed to Dalziel's 'Bible Gallery' (1881). His illustrative work was influenced by John Flaxman with its emphasis on line, but the effect was softened by the use of shading to give his figures more volume. Examples of his excellent draughtsmanship may be seen in a collection of drawings at the Barber Institute, Birmingham. 
On 14 June 1857 Pickersgill was elected a full Royal Academician. His diploma piece, 'The Bribe' (1857; RA), is typical of his work during the 1850s and 1860s, in its precise draughtsmanship, its minute attention to detail, and the evident enjoyment of contrasts -- in this case a young woman with an old man and a velvet dress with a suit of armour. Perhaps in response to criticism that some of his literary subjects had too little 'poetical fancy and too much of daily association' ('Art Journal', 17, 1855, 234), Pickersgill expanded his range of subjects in the 1860s to include modern life scenes. 'The Path where the Brown Leaves are Spread' (1862; ex Phillips, 20 June 1995) depicts a mother and child in a wood which is clearly influenced by the Pre-Raphaelites in its careful delineation of every leaf and bramble. He also exhibited in 1869 'A Honiton Lace Manufactory' (ex Christies, 6 November 1995), in which three women are shown lace-making out of doors. 
Pickersgill was commissioned in 1871, for a fee of $1000, to design a lunette fresco for the Victoria and Albert Museum on the subject 'The Industrial Arts in Time of Peace'. He executed a full-size oil (V&A), but the fresco was never executed as a design by Frederick Leighton was later preferred. Pickersgill was elected keeper of the Royal Academy Schools on 10 July 1873 and served in this post until 3 August 1887. He presided over the schools during a period of change, and on his resignation it was noted that 'gratitude [was] due to him for his conscientious devotion to the duties of his office as Keeper, which have become greatly more responsible and onerous during the development of the Academic schools and curriculum during the last two decades' ('The Portfolio'). 
Pickersgill's wife died on 21 June 1886, and on 7 February 1888 he retired from the Royal Academy. He spent the remainder of his life at The Towers, Yarmouth, on the Isle of Wight, where he died on 20 December 1900 after suffering a long and painful illness. He was buried on 24 December in Yarmouth. His obituarist remembered him as an 'excellent painter, amiable gentleman and good friend' ('The Athenaeum', 29 Dec 1900). 


@@@@@


doc= 22215


Henry Hall Pickersgill (1812-1861), painter, one of the five children and the eldest son of H. W. Pickersgill and his wife, Maria, was born in London and baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 25 June 1812. He gained some reputation as a painter of historical and fancy works. He studied abroad for some years and first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1834 with 'The Troubadours'. He exhibited 'Holy Water' in 1837, 'Charity' in 1838, and similar subjects in subsequent years. He spent two years in St Petersburg and subsequently resumed painting in London, though working largely for a clientele in manufacturing cities, such as Manchester and Wolverhampton. His wife, Jeannette Caroline Grover ['see below'], whom he married on 20 July 1837 at St Anne's, Soho, Westminster, was also a painter. H. H. Pickersgill died in Berkeley Street, Portman Square, on 7 January 1861 and was buried in the family vault at Barnes Common cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 22216


Pickersgill, Henry William (1782-1875), portrait painter, was born on 3 December 1782 in London, and baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 23 June 1808, the son of Thomas Pickersgill and his wife, Mary. The register is annotated 'born 3 Dec 1782'. Early in life he was adopted by Henry Hall, a silk manufacturer in Spitalfields. He began an apprenticeship as a silk weaver, abandoning this apparently on account of the decline in the silk trade as a result of the wars with France. 
Pickersgill then determined to become a painter, an occupation at which he had already shown some skill. He studied under the landscape and marine painter George Arnald ARA (1763-1841) from 1802 to 1805. After this he became a student at the Royal Academy Schools, which he entered on 28 November 1805, through the good offices of Henry Fuseli. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1806, when he sent in a portrait of Hall. He exhibited a self-portrait in 1808, and a portrait of Mrs Hall in 1809, as well as a view of Minster Point, Isle of Sheppey. As well as some landscape views, he painted historical and mythological subjects at this time. Often his subjects were inspired by contemporary poetry; examples are 'The Shepherd Boy' (1812) from a poem by Robert Bloomfield and 'The Death of Blanche' from Walter Scott's 'Lady of the Lake' (1814). It was at this time that his reputation as a portrait painter began to grow. He was felt by many at the time to offer a refreshingly sober alternative to the stylish work of the leading portraitist of the day, Sir Thomas Lawrence. The landscape painter Constable, with whom he struck up a friendship, commented in a letter of 1828, 'Pickersgill is an honourable man, and his art is sound and good' ('Constable's Correspondence', 283). 
It would seem that Pickersgill's wife, Maria Price (1784/5-1857), whom he married at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 8 July 1805, before becoming a student at the academy, was a key figure in negotiating his professional success as a portrait painter. 'He has a clever wife, who manages all matters for him', observed Constable in his journal on 31 May 1824 (ibid., 282). Mrs Pickersgill was a lady of literary talents, and published a volume of verse, 'Tales of the Harem', in 1827. This book shows a considerable knowledge of oriental customs and it was presumably this interest that encouraged Pickersgill to paint several studies of young ladies posing in Greek and Near Eastern costume, such as 'The Greek Girl' (1827; Benaki Museum, Athens) and 'The Syrian Maid' (exh. 1837; Tate collection). In his journal entry of 31 May 1824 Constable further gave a picture of Pickersgill suffering from overwork: 'He is involved in business -- but almost dead with work & so nervous that when a knock came to the door he danced like a top & could not hold a limb still' (ibid.). At that time he was living and working in 18 Soho Square, London. 
In 1822 Pickersgill had been finally elected an associate of the Royal Academy, a position he had first sought in 1814. In 1826 he became a Royal Academician. He was a constant and prolific exhibitor at the academy, showing nearly 400 pictures over a period of more than sixty years. During the 1820s Pickersgill's reputation for sober and accurate portraiture was confirmed with the success of his portraits of Hannah More (1822; NPG) and Jeremy Bentham (1829; NPG). Another noted success was his portrait of Wordsworth, which inspired the poet to write a sonnet, now preserved (together with the portrait) at St John's College, Cambridge. From surviving correspondence it would seem that Wordsworth enjoyed the company of the portraitist, who was noted for his lively and sympathetic conversation. As well as the portraits of More, Bentham, and Wordsworth, the National Portrait Gallery contains thirty-two portraits by H. W. Pickersgill including those of William Godwin, M. G. Lewis, and George Stephenson. He painted the celebrated naturalists Richard Owen, Cuvier, and Humboldt for Sir Robert Peel, the botanist Robert Brown for the Linnean Society, and Faraday for the Royal Institution. He also excelled in military portraits, painting General Lord Hill and the duke of Wellington for Lord Hill. There are innumerable portraits by him in Oxford and Cambridge colleges, including one of Sir John Herschel at St John's College, Cambridge. His position as a painter of eminent men and women became almost unchallenged after the death of his rival Thomas Phillips in 1845. As a result of his increased success he moved from his Soho Square dwelling to a larger studio in Stratford Place. 
In 1856, on the resignation of Thomas Uwins RA, Pickersgill became librarian of the Royal Academy, a post he held until his death. He last exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1872, and placed himself on the list of retired academicians in 1873. By this time his art had fallen out of favour. This can be seen in the harsh judgement of Richard and Samuel Redgrave in the second edition of their 'Century of Painters of the English School' (1890). Pickersgill, they declared, was 'a portrait painter whose works are distinguished more for their being satisfactory likenesses than for any artistic qualities they possess' (Redgrave and Redgrave, 326). Pickersgill left central London about 1870 to settle at Fern Lodge, Church Road, Barnes. He died at his London address, 3 Blandford Square, on 21 April 1875 and was buried in Barnes Common cemetery. 


H. H. Pickersgill's widow, 
There were a number of other members of the Pickersgill family who were artists in the nineteenth century, notably Henry William's nephew Frederick Richard Pickersgill (1820-1900) and his daughter M. A. Pickersgill ('fl'. 1832-1838). 


@@@@@


doc= 22217


Pickworth, Henry (c.1673-c.1738), religious controversialist, was born in New Sleaford, Lincolnshire, the son of Henry Pickworth, a farmer of New Sleaford, and his wife, Sarah Everitt. He entered into business as a tanner and joined the Quakers, becoming an elder and overseer of the local monthly meeting. On 28 March 1696 he married Winifred (1674-1752), daughter of John Whitchurch of Warwick Lane, London; they had five sons, all born at Sleaford. A staunch defender of Quaker beliefs and principles, Pickworth challenged Francis Bugg, one of the bitterest and most persistent of opponents of Quakerism, to an open debate at Sleaford. In the debate, held on 25 August 1701, Pickworth proved no match for his adversary, an experienced and skilful debater, although both parties to the dispute claimed victory and published their versions of the proceedings, Pickworth's 'A narrative of a charge against Francis Bugg and his evasions and shufflings at Sleaford in Lincs'. (1701) being answered by Bugg's 'A Brief Answer to the Quaker Narrative Written by Henry Pickworth of Sleaford' (1701). 
Within a few years Pickworth had become an open and bitter opponent of Quakers. The reasons for this 'volte face' are not entirely clear but Joseph Smith was probably near the truth when he wrote that Pickworth 'got so entangled in [Bugg's] net that he was unable to extricate himself' (Smith, 2.416). Pickworth was also clearly familiar with, and influenced by, the writings of other opponents of the Quakers such as Charles Leslie, Thomas Crisp, and George Keith. His first published attack on the Society of Friends was 'An Open Letter to the Friends' Yearly Meeting Attacking Quakerism' (1713), and during the following twenty-five years there followed a stream of malicious material denouncing what he considered to be the anti-Christian doctrines, false prophecies, and seditious practices of the Quakers. His strongest piece of invective, published shortly after his expulsion from the society in 1714, was 'A Charge of Error, Heresy etc.... Against the Most Noted Leaders of the Quakers' (1716), in which he claimed that William Penn had been a papist and had died insane. In 1732 there appeared his 'Narrative to the Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry', outlining what he considered to be Penn's and Richard Claridge's acknowledgement of gross errors in Quaker beliefs. This drew a response from Joseph Besse entitled 'A Cloud of Witnesses' (1732), to which Pickworth replied with 'A Defence from one Besse' (1734), in which he repeated his accusations about Penn. His last known publication was 'Vindication of a former defence of a certain narrative presented to the bishop of Lichfield and Coventry' (1738). 
In his published works Pickworth may not have demonstrated the same quality of writing and argument as Charles Leslie and George Keith, nor the same sustained venom as Francis Bugg, but his inside knowledge of the Society of Friends made him an adversary who could not be ignored. He died at King's Lynn, Norfolk, in or about 1738. 


@@@@@


doc= 22218


Picton, Sir James Allanson (1805-1889), antiquary and architect, the son of William Pickton, a joiner and timber merchant, was born in Highfield Street, Liverpool, on 2 December 1805. After an elementary education at Richard Prior's school, Church Lane, St Peter's, Liverpool, he entered his father's business at the age of thirteen. A few years later he joined the office of Daniel Stewart, an architect and surveyor, to whose business he ultimately succeeded. On 28 April 1828 he married Sarah (died 1879), daughter of Henry Pooley, a Liverpool iron-founder; they had six children. Their eldest son, James Allanson Picton, was MP for Leicester from 1884 to 1894; another son, William Henry Picton, was later the architectural partner of his father. Picton executed some important buildings in and about Liverpool, including the corn exchange and Richmond Buildings, an office block where he used three storeys of round-arched openings forming arcades, 'a good solution to the problem of letting in light' (Dixon and Muthesius, 127). He also became an authority on land arbitration, an expertise which he subsequently used to good effect for the city council. 
Picton soon became involved in the public life of Liverpool, and became a member of the town council in 1849; he was also a member of the Wavertree local board from its establishment in 1851, and its chairman from soon after this date. Immediately after joining the Liverpool town council, Picton started campaigning for a public library for the borough, an idea which had first been mooted in 1848. Claiming that public libraries performed a vital civic role, fostering social unity and cultural harmony, he advocated support from public funds rather than private philanthropy. In 1852, as a result of his advocacy, a special act of parliament was obtained to authorize the levying of a penny rate for the support of a public library and museum. The pioneering new institution thus founded grew to be one of the most important of its kind. Sir William Brown subsequently provided magnificent buildings for the library and museum in 1860, and in 1879 the corporation added the fine Picton Reading Room, modelled on that of the British Library in London. Picton was appointed as first chairman of the library and museum committee in 1851, a position which he retained until death. 
Although a Gladstonian Liberal in politics, Picton believed that party loyalties should not influence the conduct of local affairs; on certain matters he voted with the Conservative members of the town council. His colleagues were not so minded, and it is probable that his Liberalism prevented his appointment as mayor, alderman, or MP; his attainments and public services did, however, earn him a knighthood in July 1881. By the mid-1880s Picton was increasingly concerned by the growth of the immigrant Irish community in Liverpool and the accompanying spread of slum districts; he believed, moreover, that the homeless Irish of the city had links with the Fenian movement. 
Picton's political commitment was combined with a strong Christian faith. He took part in local religious and philanthropic work, and edited a controversial magazine, the 'Watchman's Lantern', started in 1834 by the Liverpool Methodist Association. Picton was, in fact, a Congregationalist who attended the Great George Street Chapel of the famous Thomas Raffles, but he as readily accepted diversity in religion as he did in politics: he once declared that he could worship with fellow Christians ranging 'from Roman Catholics to Ranters'. His publications included 'Modern Christian Faith' (1884), and the 'Liverpool Pulpit' of February 1895 praised him for his 'civic patriotism'. 
Picton had wide-ranging historical, scientific, and linguistic interests. He was a promoter of the Liverpool Mechanics' Institution, founded in 1824, a president of the Liverpool Philomathic Society, founded in 1825 to promote 'learning by discussion', the literary and philosophical society, the architectural society, the geological society, and other local societies. He was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and of other archaeological and scientific associations, and a frequent contributor to their journals, as well as to 'Notes and Queries'; between 1853 and 1876 he also published pieces in the 'Proceedings' of the Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire, founded in 1848. In 1858 he published his 'Architectural History of Liverpool', which was followed by his well-known work 'Memorials of Liverpool, Historical and Topographical' (1873-5), which became an inspiration to subsequent local historians of Liverpool. He subsequently edited 'Selections from the Liverpool Municipal Archives and Records, 1207-1835' (2 vols., 1883-6). Picton's linguistic interests were diverse: well read in the classics of Greek and Roman literature, he had a good knowledge of modern languages, and even of Hebrew and Sanskrit. His publications reflected his wide range: they include 'Philosophical Papers, comprising Notes on the Ancient Gothic Language... and Sanskrit Roots and English Derivations' (1864), 'Our Mother Tongue' (1869), and 'The South Lancashire Dialect' (1865). Some of Picton's many other interests are indicated by the titles of such works as 'An Inquiry into the Changes of Sea-Levels on the West Coast of England' (1849) and 'On the Origins and History of the Numerals' (1874). 
Picton died on 15 July 1889 at his home, Sandyknowe, Wavertree, near Liverpool, and was buried at Toxteth Park cemetery. He played a prominent role in Liverpool in forging and maintaining the fruitful links between local history, civic pride, and liberal learning. 


@@@@@


doc= 22219


Picton, Sir Thomas (1758-1815), army officer and colonial governor, was born on 24 August 1758 at the house later known as the Dragon Hotel in Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire, the seventh of the twelve children of Thomas Picton (1723-1790), a landowner and sheriff, of Poyston, Pembrokeshire, and his wife, Cecil (1728-1806), the daughter of the Revd Edward Powell of Llandough, Glamorgan. 
Picton enjoyed a country upbringing at Poyston, 3 miles north of Haverfordwest, and attended Haverfordwest grammar school. At the age of thirteen he was gazetted an ensign in the 12th foot, commanded by his uncle William Picton. He studied for two years at a military academy in Little Chelsea under Louis Lochee before joining his regiment in 1773 at Gibraltar, where he took the trouble to learn Spanish. After three years of inactive service at Gibraltar he exchanged into the 75th foot, whereupon he returned to England and missed the memorable siege of Gibraltar. A rare opportunity to show his mettle arose in Bristol in 1783, when he quelled a riot of his own troops who had grown mutinous on hearing notice of their disbandment. His action saved an ugly situation in College Green Square, but the promise of promotion on the strength of it was not fulfilled. 
Picton was placed on half pay; he returned to Poyston and remained for twelve years in obscurity. About 1793 he fought a duel with an Irishman, Charles Hassall, in which he suffered a gunshot wound to the throat that permanently affected his voice and rendered him hoarse. Towards the end of 1794, frustrated that his applications to London brought no offer of employment, he boarded a merchant ship bound for the West Indies, trusting that Sir John Vaughan, commander-in-chief of the Leeward Islands and a fellow Welshman, would make him welcome. 
Picton quickly impressed Vaughan with his unaffected manner and imposing physical presence. He was just the kind of disciplinarian needed in the unhealthy conditions that saw 35,000 British troops perish in the Caribbean between 1793 and 1798, mostly from yellow fever. When Vaughan himself died in Martinique in August 1795 Picton's position became precarious; but since Vaughan's replacement was the no-nonsense Scot Sir Ralph Abercromby, who had known his uncle William, Picton decided to await his arrival. Abercromby placed a high priority on 'esprit de corps', and his good impressions of Picton were confirmed during the campaign at St Lucia in May 1796, when Picton distinguished himself sufficiently to be recommended for a lieutenant-colonelcy. After accompanying Abercromby in the attack on the island of St Vincent, he sailed with him for England. It was during their return voyage to England that Spain entered the war on the French side and the island of Trinidad took on greater strategic significance. On 17 February 1797, having returned to the Caribbean, Abercromby led a fleet bearing 8000 men into the Gulf of Paria, and the following day the governor of Trinidad, Don Jose Maria Chacon, signed the terms of capitulation. When Abercromby left Trinidad shortly afterwards he appointed Picton commandant and military governor, with instructions to administer Spanish law as well as he could and to do justice according to his conscience. 
Picton applied himself to remedy the civil disorder that prevailed on an island renowned as a haven for runaway slaves and deserting soldiers. Hampered by the smallness of his force of only 520 fit men, he made an early example of mutineers and established a system of police over the whole island by improving the road communications. There were thirty-five executions during Picton's governorship, the majority in his first year. The gallows were conspicuous on Port of Spain's busy waterfront and the governor was often there to inform new arrivals of his penal system. He was equally severe with the slaves, who amounted to 10,000 of the island's total population of nearly 18,000. Port of Spain's steamy gaol had long served as a correction centre that administered flogging, branding, ear-clipping, and the staking out of reprobates in the infamous 'cachots brulants'. It was now full to overflowing as Picton, who published his own slave code, sought to make slave discipline the backbone of his new order. In April 1797 he reported that perfect tranquillity prevailed throughout the colony. Some time later he took a mistress to live with him at Government House on the strand of Port of Spain: Rosetta Smith was a vivacious, Spanish-speaking woman of mixed race, half his own age, with whom he would have four children in five years. 
With the island peaceful, Picton wrote to London extolling Trinidad as the perfect centre for trade with the South American continent. Aware of the discontent of 'americanos' with the dead hand of Spanish mercantile protectionism, he suggested that a small invasion would be sufficient to mobilize an insurrection that would spread throughout the continent. He entertained 'americanos' at Government House and sent small raids across the gulf. The governors of Caracas and British Guiana put $20,000 on his head, which prompted an ironic reply from the now confident Picton. London raised his annual salary to $1200, though his actual income from investments in the island was doubtless several times that figure. His deeper plans came to nought, however, since London was more concerned about Britain's ability to resist invasion by Napoleon than about launching one of its own. None the less, his dispatches on the subject probably helped Trinidad remain a British possession in the peace of 1801, and he was promoted brigadier-general on 22 October 1801. 
The vigour of Picton's rule had made him enemies, however, especially among the new British immigrants. A liberal wind was blowing and concessions had to be made to the constitutionalists. Picton was informed that the island would henceforth be under the control of three commissioners, with Colonel William Fullarton and Commodore Samuel Hood above him. He felt 'degraded in the eyes of the world' (Picton, 'Evidence', xv). Fullarton, a well-connected Scot, arrived on 4 January 1803 and within weeks visited the gaol, which he found so wretched that he urged the building of a new one. He moved in council for certified statements of all the criminal proceedings that had taken place since the island became British territory. On 18 February, the sixth anniversary of the conquest, Picton tendered his resignation, remaining in post only until London notified its acceptance. Four days later Samuel Hood arrived, but within a short time he too had resigned in sympathy with Picton. The Spanish and French planters, who had never known such stability on the island, petitioned the king to reject Picton's resignation. On 14 June Brigadier-General Frederick Maitland arrived with the news that he was to supersede Picton as military commander. That same evening Picton said farewell to Rosetta and his children and sailed from Port of Spain, never to return. 
After serving briefly under Lieutenant-General Grinfield in the recapture of St Lucia and then Tobago from the French, Picton pressed on to London, where he learned that Fullarton had left Trinidad and had preferred criminal charges against him. In December 1803 he was arrested by order of the privy council and bailed by his uncle William for $40,000, an enormous sum that virtually presumed his guilt. The main indictment charged him with the unlawful application of torture to extort confession from one Luisa Calderon respecting a robbery in Port of Spain, the woman being thirteen years old, it was alleged, at the time of her imprisonment in December 1801. Luisa Calderon in fact had cohabited with a trader, Pedro Ruiz, and she had conspired with her paramour, Carlos Gonzalez, to rob Ruiz. There was little doubt of their guilt, but the woman had refused to give evidence. In accordance with Spanish law the 'alcalde', Monsieur Begorrat, requested recourse to the 'picket' in order to 'apply the question', to which the governor acceded as a matter of routine. The picket consisted in hoisting the prisoner on a pulley in such a way that the big toe of one foot stood on a sharp-pointed picket. In this position Luisa Calderon soon confessed. Gonzalez was convicted and punished by banishment, while Luisa was released in consideration of the imprisonment that she had already undergone. 
Picton's trial came up before Lord Ellenborough in the court of king's bench on 24 February 1806, the two intervening years having seen an exchange of pamphlets on the part of Fullarton, Picton, and their respective supporters. The prosecutor, William Garrow, was renowned for his bruising style of cross-examination. During the trial he displayed a lurid illustration of the picket both to the jury and Luisa Calderon, whom he asked to demonstrate the torture, adding that it should henceforth be known as 'Pictoning' rather than 'picketing'. As a final ploy he produced a copy of the 'Recopilacion de las leyes', an ancient schedule of Spanish law as it applied in the colonies. He summoned a lawyer, Pedro Vargas, who, like Luisa, had been brought over by Fullarton especially for the trial, and had him confirm that the 'Recopilacion' made no mention of the picket. Picton's defence lawyer, Robert Dallas, was outmanoeuvred, especially as he was denied access to the 'Recopilacion'. A technical verdict of guilty was returned and a new trial moved for. 
Before the second trial on 11 June 1808 matters changed in Picton's favour. He gained from the support of Hood, now a national hero after his daring exploits against the French off Rochefort, where he lost an arm. Hood was the popular choice when he stood at the hustings for the Westminster by-election. His opponents retaliated with a poem published anonymously, 'The Picton Veil, or, The Hood of Westminster'; but when Fullarton interceded at the hustings in an attempt to associate Hood with misdeeds in Trinidad, he was shouted down by the mob. Fullarton died an unhappy man in February 1808, leaving his wife the forlorn hope of repairing his reputation. In the second trial Dallas was sufficiently well versed in the 'Recopilacion' to discredit Vargas's evidence. A special verdict was returned: 'That by the law of Spain torture existed in the island of Trinidad at the time of the cession to Great Britain, and that no malice existed in the mind of the defendant against Luisa Calderon independent of the illegality of the act. ('State trials', 30.870)' This partly exonerated Picton, though it still found him guilty of an illegal act. Effectively it said that he had the right to sanction torture under Spanish law, but not as the island's 'British' governor. When the people of Trinidad subscribed $4000 towards Picton's legal expenses, he returned the money to relieve those who had recently suffered in the disastrous fire in Port of Spain. The old duke of Queensberry offered to assist Picton in his legal expenses with a sum of $10,000, but Picton again graciously declined, as his uncle had supplied him with the necessary funds. 
In July 1809 Picton joined the 'grand expedition' to Flushing (Vlissingen). Glad to be back on active duty, he had misgivings about sending so large a force on a diversionary exercise in support of Britain's Austrian allies. Although he was appointed governor of Flushing after participating in the siege and capture of the town, he was soon invalided home, suffering from the epidemic Walcheren fever which thereafter affected his eyes. In January 1810 he received orders to join the army in Portugal and was placed in command of the 3rd division, which consisted of the brigades of Colonel Henry Mackinnon and Major-General Stafford Lightburne. At a welcoming parade Picton singled out two straggling Connaught Rangers who had arrived with a stolen goat. A drumhead court martial saw the men flogged in the presence of the entire division. Picton had started as he meant to go on, imposing the rule of discipline. He was acutely aware of the fragility of Wellington's 24,000-strong army and saw the need for discipline in fighting what would be a prolonged, defensive campaign. The army's spirit, however, was helped by the daring manoeuvres of Robert Craufurd and the light division, though Picton sometimes thought them foolhardy. On 24 July 1810 Craufurd overextended himself by engaging the enemy at the River Coa before Almeida fortress. Picton has been blamed by some for not bringing up the 3rd division to support Craufurd, but this was consistent with Wellington's strategy of avoiding a general action. Wellington said as much when he remarked that Craufurd had enough time to retreat across the river 'twice over' ('Supplementary Despatches', 6.564). 
After Massena entered Portugal and secured Coimbra, Wellington took up a position on the reverse slope of the Busaco Ridge, where Picton was posted to defend the pass from Sao Antonio de Cantaro to Palheiros, an area about a mile and a half in extent. The French attack on 27 September 1810 was directed mainly on the pass, but so incessant a fire was maintained by the 3rd division that the French were ultimately compelled to abandon the attempt. The 3rd's role in this battle led to their being known henceforth as 'the fighting division'. Picton himself, in his first major battle, was sorely pressed co-ordinating his defensive positions over the extended line. By 7 October the allied army had retired behind the virtually impregnable lines of Torres Vedras, leaving Massena, whose army was more than twice as strong, to forage land that had been laid waste. During the winter the French made no serious attempt on the allied lines, and on 4 March 1811 their retreat began, with the allies in hot pursuit. In this the 3rd division was again prominent, encountering the enemy's rearguard near Pombal and then harassing them all the way to Guarda. By 5 April only Almeida remained in French hands in the whole of Portugal. The battle of Fuentes de Onoro on 3 and 5 May saw the Connaught Rangers, a mainstay of Picton's command, distinguish themselves once more. 
Picton then proceeded to take up his position for the investment of Badajoz, having been too far removed to participate in the indecisive battle of Albuera. Five weeks later the siege was raised after two assaults on the battlements came to naught, partly because of inadequate ladders. This debacle left Picton in low spirits for some time, his eyes streaming again with a recurrence of the Walcheren fever. Having moved his division in the direction of Ciudad Rodrigo, he was caught unprepared on 25 September, when Montbrun at the head of fifteen squadrons of cavalry pressed him hard. Picton saw that nothing but a rapid and regular movement upon Fuenteguinaldo could save his men from being cut off. For 6 miles he led the 3rd division across a level plain, inspiring it with his coolness as the enemy's cavalry probed for weakness. Each battalion had in turn to form the rearguard and keep back the cavalry by a volley. In this way the division was saved by its discipline and by Picton's determination to continue his march. 
In January 1812 Picton joined the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo. On the icy evening of the 19th his division assaulted the right or great breach, while Craufurd's division stormed the smaller breach. Both assaults were successful, though Craufurd was killed, as was Mackinnon. The subsequent sack of the town was much restrained by Picton's presence. In March 1812 the formidable fortress of Badajoz was again invested, the assault taking place on 6 April. The 3rd division was led in person by Picton, who, though wounded in the action, continued to urge on his men from the ditch until the stupendous walls were scaled and the castle stronghold taken. This triumph, in what was intended to be a secondary assault, came at a timely moment, for Wellington, appalled at the loss of life incurred by the main attack, had thought of withdrawing. Picton's wound laid him up during the shameless sack that followed. Later he gave a guinea to each survivor in his division, but, conscious of the terrible losses that the 3rd had suffered, he wrote home in sombre vein: 'military reputation is not to be purchased without blood, and ambition has nothing to do with Humanity' (Edwards, 13.12). 
Picton went to Salamanca, but was too ill with fever to take part in the ensuing battle. In July he was invalided home, where rest at Cheltenham restored his health. By November he was well enough to stand for parliament as prospective tory member for the Pembroke boroughs, and that winter he bought a stately pile with much land attached at Iscoed, on the Tywi south of Carmarthen, which cost him $30,000. By the time he returned to the Peninsula in the spring of 1813 he had been invested as a knight of the Bath and duly elected to the Commons. On 21 June the retreating French turned to hold a strong position in front of Vitoria. The battle began early in the morning, but by noon, Picton, who had been instructed to wait for Dalhousie's 7th division, was so impatient at the latter's tardiness that he decided to force the passage of the River Zadorra and carry the heights in the centre. This manoeuvre was executed so rapidly that he was in possession of the commanding ground before the enemy were aware of his design. The 'fighting division' was the most heavily engaged in the action and sustained losses of nearly 1800 men in killed and wounded, more than a third of the total allied loss in the battle. 
Picton saw relatively little action in the Pyrenees and returned for a time to take his seat in the Commons, where, on 11 November 1813 the speaker delivered the house's unanimous thanks for his exertions in the Peninsula. He replied with difficulty, stressing the quality of the men whom he was proud to lead. In December he resumed command of the 3rd division, having declined command of the Catalonian army. Pamplona had now fallen and the allied army poured into the plains of France. When Soult took up a defensive position at Orthez, Wellington attacked on 27 February 1814 and, much as at Vitoria, employed Picton's 3rd against the centre and left flank of the French, which, after several hours' fighting, they succeeded in forcing back. Soult covered his retreat with infantry and the allied army followed him to Tarbes and then Toulouse, delayed by swollen rivers and demolished bridges. On Easter day, 10 April 1814, Picton was instructed to make a series of feint attacks across the Languedoc Canal on the northern side of Toulouse. However, with William Carr Beresford delayed by mud and the Spanish driven back by Soult, he took matters into his own hands and impetuously decided on a committed assault. This met with less success than at Vitoria and, after three charges at the redoubts covering the Jumeaux Bridge, he was obliged to retreat with heavy loss. The victorious allies nevertheless entered Toulouse on the 13th, just days before the news arrived of Napoleon's abdication. 
On the breakup of the 3rd division the officers presented Picton with a plate service. Peerages were conferred on Beresford, Thomas Graham, Rowland Hill, John Hope, and Stapleton Cotton, but Picton's friends were greatly disappointed that he was left unrewarded. Picton pointedly observed: 'If the coronet were lying on the crown of a breach, I should have as good a chance as any of them' (Robinson, 2.323). Correspondence took place in the newspapers, and it was implausibly stated that the honours had been bestowed only on those officers who had held 'distinct' commands. On 24 June 1814 Picton received, for the seventh time, the unanimous thanks of the Commons. He retired to Wales and devoted himself to the improvement of his estate. Upon the extension of the Order of the Bath, early in 1815, he was promoted to be a knight grand cross. 
On Napoleon's escape from Elba, Picton was called upon to join Wellington, having been assured that he would be employed under the duke's orders alone. After arriving at Brussels on 15 June 1815, he was appointed to the command of the 5th division, which consisted of brigades under generals James Kempt and Denis Pack, together with a Hanoverian brigade and a mixed British-Hanoverian battery -- some 7000 men in all. Picton was attending the duchess of Richmond's ball in Brussels when news came that the French had crossed the Sambre at Charleroi. Before daylight on the 16th his 5th division was marching south towards the enclosed field of Quatre-Bras. Picton arrived at 2.30 p.m. and pushed his men forward to restore the fortunes of the failing Dutch and Belgian troops and then held them defiant in the face of repeated cavalry charges by the French under Ney. The decisive moment came when Picton unexpectedly ordered his infantry to charge the French cavalry. During the fight Picton was hit by a ball, which broke his ribs, but he kept knowledge of the wound from all but his aide-de-camp, Tyler, who helped bind it up. On the morning of 17 June, with the Prussians defeated at Ligny, Picton fell back on Waterloo in pouring rain. While the allies slept on their arms at Waterloo, Picton spent the night in lodgings in severe pain. 
On the morning of the 18th Picton's division was posted on the Wavre Road, behind the broken hedge that stood 400 yards above La Haye-Sainte Farm and close to the crossroads with an elm tree that served as Wellington's command post. Delayed by the wet conditions, the French cannonade did not commence until 11.30 a.m., while the first major attack by D'Erlon's 18,000-strong infantry came at 1 p.m. When these masses came up the ridge to the constant drumming of the 'pas de charge', the Dutch-Belgian light brigade in front fired only token shots before it turned and fled. At this critical moment Picton ordered the Peninsular generals Pack and Kempt to advance their brigades and fill the gap. A desperate struggle ensued, and Picton, seeing them swallowed up by the sheer weight of enemy ranks, gave his last command astride his cob: 'Charge!' he bellowed, waving them on with his sword -- 'Charge! Hurrah! Hurrah!' -- whereupon a musket ball struck him on the temple and he fell back dead. 
Picton's corpse was conveyed to London, via Deal and Canterbury. The funeral took place from his house, 21 Edward Street, Portman Square, on 3 July 1815, and he was buried in the family vault in St George's, Hanover Square. In 1828 a monument was erected to his memory at Carmarthen by public subscription, the king contributing 100 guineas. The statue of Picton it originally bore was removed in 1846, when the monument was made sturdier. On 8 June 1859, after some debate in the newspapers, a reinterment ceremony took place, and Picton's remains were removed to St Paul's Cathedral in a formal procession and placed near Wellington's with a monument showing a bust of Picton. He is the only Welshman to be buried at St Paul's, and a marble statue of him stands in the City Hall, Cardiff, alongside eleven others known as the 'Heroes of Wales'. On 9 June, a day before his departure for Flanders, Picton had made a new will. In this he appointed his brother the Revd Edward Picton his major beneficiary, but he also left $1000 each to his four children by Rosetta Smith in Trinidad. 
Picton arguably did not receive the recognition he was due in his own lifetime, his overzealousness in Trinidad having cast a long shadow. He was not the sort of man to be favoured by society. As Wellington famously said on one occasion: 'I found him a rough, foul-mouthed devil as ever lived, but', the duke added, 'no man could do better in different services I assigned to him' (Stanhope, 50). If sometimes impetuous, he was a soldier of undaunted courage, as he showed at Badajoz and when concealing his wounds at Waterloo. A stern disciplinarian, he was quick to understand his commander's deep-laid plans and he proved himself the most valuable of Wellington's generals in the Peninisula. 


@@@@@


doc= 22220


Pidding, Henry James (1797-1864), painter, was born in Cornwall, one of at least two sons of a stationer and lottery-office keeper at 1 Cornhill, London. He is said to have been a pupil of Agostino Aglio. He attained some note with his paintings of humorous subjects from domestic life and was a very prolific exhibitor at the Society of British Artists in Suffolk Street, London, of which society he was elected a member in 1844 when he resided at Lloyd's Place, Blackheath, Kent. He also exhibited pictures at the Royal Academy, the British Institution, and various local exhibitions. About 1860 he attempted to make a sensation with a larger painting, 'The Gaming Rooms at Homburg'. His picture 'The Enthusiast' is in the collection of the Leicestershire Museum and Art Gallery. Several of his paintings were engraved, some by himself in mezzotint, such as 'Battle of the Nile Re-Fought', showing two Greenwich pensioners discussing the engagement using pieces of tobacco-pipe to show the positions of the fleets (formerly Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire; sold 1951); 'Massa Out, Sambo Very Dry' (exh. Society of British Artists, 1828; formerly Lord Charles Townshend Collection); 'A Negro in the Stocks'; and 'A Fair Penitent' (exh. Society of British Artists, 1830). In 1836 Pidding etched a series of six humorous illustrations to 'The Rival Demons', an anonymous poem. Pidding lived at Greenwich, where he died, unmarried, on 13 June 1864 at 4 Ashburnham Grove, at the age of sixty-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 22221


Piddington, Henry (1797-1858), meteorologist, was born on 7 January 1797 at Lewes, in the maritime county of Sussex, the third of the eight children of James John Piddington (1757-1837), an innkeeper, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann (1762-1835). There was a further child, John ('b'. 1801), who died in infancy. In 1802 or 1803 the family moved to Uckfield, a busy post town on the main London-Brighton road, frequented by sailors passing through 'en route' between capital and coast. Here James Piddington took over as innkeeper of the Maidenhead Hotel, which also acted as the corn exchange and posting house. All this must have given his young children a flavour of life at sea, for Henry Piddington soon gave up a life on land and joined the mercantile marine. 
Of this time (possibly in the service of the East India Company) when, according to his memoirs, he sailed and commanded a ship, little is known. It is certain, though, that from 1824 he was living in Bengal and that by 1831 he had settled in Calcutta, the place where his mariner ancestors had lived until the middle of the eighteenth century. It is here, working first as a tropical agriculturist and sugar refiner and serving as foreign secretary with the Agricultural and Horticultural Society of India until 1837, that the life for which he is most remembered and celebrated really began. Piddington was appointed curator of the newly founded Museum of Economic Geology in Calcutta in 1844, a post he held for over ten years. He also served as curator of the geological and mineralogical departments. He was sub-secretary to the Asiatic Society of Bengal from 1844 to 1847 and later became an associate member, serving on its subcommittee for meteorology. He retained links with the Agricultural and Horticultural Society, and from 1842 to 1846 was a member of its standing committee for sugar. 
Piddington published over fifty articles in the 'Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal' on a wide range of topics. Initially his research focused on aspects of tropical agriculture; one of his earliest articles, published in 1836, was concerned with the manufacture of indigo. Others dealt with geology, particularly the discovery and investigation of mineral substances. Coal, resin, meteorites, and atmospheric dust all claimed Piddington's attention. He also gave papers on tropical medicine and native remedies to the Medical and Physical Society of Calcutta. All these activities -- typical of the enthusiasm for 'new science' in the early Victorian period -- won him a wider audience: in 1840 the 'India Review' featured him in their series on prominent Europeans in India, where he is portrayed as a 'gentleman... constantly attracting public attention by the novelty and value of his scientific labours' (4, facing p. 921). 
Piddington's most abiding contribution, however, was to the understanding of maritime meteorology, and to the appreciation of tropical cyclones as a natural hazard of titanic impact on land. In 1839 he began research on the hurricane which occurred in the Bay of Bengal on 3-5 June that year, the first in a series of influential memoirs on the storms of the Indian seas. Inspired by the publication of Colonel William Reid's 'Attempt to Develop the Law of Storms' (1838), Piddington's research was based on logs, data, and information from ships' captains, interpreted in the light of his own maritime experience. This work came to the attention of the government of India, which on 11 September 1839 invited observations of extreme meteorological phenomena; these would be sent to Piddington for his collation. Piddington also corresponded with R. W. Redfield, who was actively investigating the formation of storms in and around North America. 
The result was 'The Horn-Book for the Law of Storms for the Indian and China Seas' (1844). Written in terms seamen could understand -- 'in sailor language', as Piddington put it -- the book was immediately adopted by mariners and the shipping world generally. An expanded edition, entitled 'The Sailor's Horn-Book for the Law of Storms' -- the work for which he is now chiefly remembered -- was published in 1848. In it Piddington introduced the term 'cyclone', derived from a Greek word meaning coiled like a snake, to emphasize the helical character of cyclonic air movements. (While this term gained acceptance, the study of 'cyclonology', alas, did not.) The traditional character of a hornbook was maintained by placing within the dust jacket thin plates of translucent horn, each engraved with the diagram of a cyclone and the points of a compass. When one of these plates of horn was placed on the ship's chart, a comparison of the existing wind direction with the diagram indicated the source of an approaching cyclone, and allowed the vessel to take an avoiding course. The reviewer for 'Nautical Magazine' (1848) complained that the title reminded him of the children's horn alphabets of former times, but gave the book a grudging welcome, and G. Jinman, in 'Winds and their Causes' (1861) criticized Piddington at length, supposing him never to have been at sea. These cavils did him no harm: 'The Sailor's Horn-Book' ran to six editions and was recognized as the standard book on the subject for thirty years. Its success probably led to Piddington's appointment as president of the marine court of enquiry at Calcutta in 1851. 'Conversations about Hurricanes for the Use of Plain Sailors' (1852) was also a hornbook. His last significant work was the admirable 'Letter to the governor general of India, on the storm-wave of the cyclones in the Bay of Bengal' (1853), which advised against plans to build Port Canning on the south-eastern side of Calcutta, a site which Piddington's research had proved vulnerable to sea storms. Despite his efforts the project went ahead: Piddington was not alive to see the port opened in 1864. Indeed, it was devastated by storms in 1867 and was abandoned four years later. 
Up until his death at Calcutta on 7 April 1858, Piddington served as her majesty's coroner of Calcutta, a post to which he had been appointed in 1844. It is not known when and where he married, but he was survived, in Calcutta, by his widow, Jeanne Julie Piddington ('nee' Lavalette) and two sons, Alfred (1831- 'c'.1880), who became a crier and keeper of the high court of Calcutta, and Edmund (1832-1869), who became a solicitor of the high court. He was also survived by his younger brother John ('b'. 1803) -- named after the child who died -- who became an attorney in London's Cheapside, and by his youngest brother, Benjamin ('b'. 1808), who made a successful career back in Uckfield as the town postmaster, marrying in 1840. Of his other brothers, James ('b'. 1795), for a time a currier in Lewes, who married, William ('b'. 1798), and Charles ('b'. 1805) little is known. His elder sister, Ann (1794-1844), who was disabled, and sister Maria (1799-1840) both died unmarried. Piddington's collection of maritime charts and instruments, his scientific papers, and his geological books (as well as other books from his library of English, French, Spanish, and Italian literature) were left to friends, and he instructed that a silver testimonial vase, given to him by P. & O., remain in the family. 


@@@@@


doc= 22222


Pidgeon, Henry Clark (1807-1880), watercolour painter and antiquary, was born in March 1807. He was educated at Reading under Dr Valpy. He abandoned an early plan to enter the church and after a short trial in business at Isleworth adopted art as his profession. He had shown an interest in painting from an early age but was 'perhaps by inclination more of an antiquary than an artist' (Marillier, 196), and for some time edited the 'Berkshire Chronicle'. He studied art in Paris and became a painter of landscapes, architectural subjects, and portraits, as well as an engraver and lithographer. 
Pidgeon taught drawing and practised art in London before moving, about 1843, to Liverpool, where he gave private lessons and drew numerous local scenes and antiquities. His sketches were exhibited at the Liverpool Academy in 1843-8: he became a member of the academy in 1847, and honorary secretary in 1850. In 1847 he was appointed professor of the school of drawing at the Liverpool Institute. In the following year he joined Joseph Mayer and Abraham Hume in founding the Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire. He contributed many etchings and lithographs to the society's publications. After his return to London in January 1851 he became a non-resident member of the Liverpool Academy, where he continued to exhibit until 1865: some fifty of his works were hung at its annual exhibitions. In London, Pidgeon worked 'with great success' ('The Athenaeum') in preparing on wood images of the Great Exhibition for the 'Illustrated London News', which gave extensive pictorial coverage of the event. He also continued his practice as an art teacher, painted landscapes of the upper Thames valley, and spent at least one season abroad, visiting Switzerland. 
Pidgeon, who worked mostly in watercolour, sent 258 works to the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours. They included 'Sunset on the Bernese Alps, as Seen from Lucerne' (1859), a painting praised for its accurate and truthful treatment of a subject that tempted artists to romantic excess. He was an excellent draughtsman and his work, which is both broad in treatment and good in colour, has much of the depth and tone of John Varley. He was elected an associate of the institute in 1846 and a full member in 1861. He was also president of the Sketching Club. Pidgeon exhibited four pictures at the Royal Academy, two at the British Institution, fifteen at the Suffolk Street Gallery, and some twenty works at the Royal Manchester Institution. He also contributed papers and drawings to the journals of the Archaeological Institute, the British Archaeological Association, and the Liverpool Literary and Philosophical Society. He died at University College Hospital, Gower Street, London, on 6 August 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 22223


Pearce, Edward (c.1635-1695), architect and sculptor, was the son of Edward Pearce (died 1658), a painter and member of the Painter-Stainers' Company who was employed on the interiors at Somerset House and St Paul's, Covent Garden, in London and at Belvoir Castle, Leicestershire. His father's work was accorded a favourable mention in George Vertue's 'Note Books', but most of it has been destroyed by fire. A volume of his designs for friezes, first published in 1640 and reprinted several times, was a likely source of ornament for his son's carved work, such as the staircase at Sudbury Hall, Derbyshire. 
The 'Dictionary of National Biography' refers to Edward Pearce junior's apprenticeship with Edward Bird 'the sculptor'; this was possibly the Edward Bird who became upper warden of the Painter-Stainers' Company in September 1656 or the William Bird who was master when Pearce was chosen of the livery in 1688. An Edward Bird appears to have had a near-monopoly of painting and gilding balls and vanes for Wren's churches, and Pearce made the models for the vanes of a number of these. In August 1680 he was paid $4 'for a carving of a wooden dragon for a moddell for the Vane of Copper upon the top of the Steeple and for cutting a relive in board to be proffered up to dycerne the right bignesse' for the church of St Mary-le-Bow (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. B.387, fol. 125; and B.388, fol. 134'v'). 'Edward Pearse sonne of Mr Edward Pearse' was 'made free by patrimony' of the Painter-Stainers on 16 January 1656 and 'chosen of the livery' on 20 February 1668 (court minute book, fols. 46, 96, 285, and 333, GL, MS 5667/2/Part 1). He became a warden of the company in October 1683 and thereafter appeared intermittently as a member of the court until, on lord mayor's day 1693, he became master. This position he held for only a year, resigning perhaps through ill health on 24 October 1694. A licence was granted on 22 October 1661 to Pearce 'of St Botolph, Aldersgate' and Anne Smith (died 1703) 'of St Bride's, London, widow' to be married at St Michael Bassishaw. In 1678 Pearce was living in the parish of St Andrew, Holborn, though in the 1680s he moved west to the redevelopment of Arundel House, south of the Strand, on which he had been engaged, and he is recorded in the rate returns for St Clement Danes' duchy liberty as resident in Arundel Street. 
The picture that emerges from a host of references in contemporary financial records is of Pearce's thriving and wide-ranging business practice in the building boom that followed the Restoration and the great fire of London. It encompassed to an unusual degree both architectural design for ecclesiastical and domestic patronage and building contracting, with the execution of ornament in both wood and stone. Richard Crutcher ('c'.1660-1725), William Beard, and William Kidwell ('c'.1664-1736), who later worked in Ireland, were his apprentices. Pearce worked with the leading architects of the day. Early records of his work are a copy of his letter to Sir Roger Pratt dated 24 April 1665 concerning 'the Molds of ye Great & lesser scroles' (Gunther, 130) and a bill for masons' work at Horseheath, Pratt's house for Lord Alington, completed in 1666. In relation to Wren, Pearce is referred to merely as the executor of the portrait bust of the latter (AM Oxf.), whereas the relationship was more complex and may have centred on a mutual regard for draughtsmanship. Pearce was one of the signatories endorsing the costs for the Monument, 'The Great Column of London', on the demise of the main contractor, Joshua Marshall, on 31 March 1679 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. B.363, fols. 7-8 and 13). He worked with Wren on the chapel at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, supplying drawings for the ground plan, wainscot, and seats, and in July 1676 was paid $2 for '5 several draughts', though the work was done by Cornelius Austin (Willis and Willis Clark, 2.707). Although not the contractor, Pearce similarly provided drawings for the front elevation of St Edmund the King, Lombard Street (1670). 
In London Pearce was the master mason, or main building contractor, for four of Wren's churches and for parts of St Paul's Cathedral. He was sole contractor at St Lawrence Jewry from January 1670 and was paid $11,870 1's'. 9died Here he was responsible for pulling down the fire-wrecked old church and steeple, clearing the site, and laying the foundations, as well as for the overall building programme, providing labour and all the materials. He was also responsible for the detail of carved ornament. On the death of Joshua Marshall in 1679, he became joint master mason with John Shorthose to complete the rebuilding of St Clement Danes. From 1682 to 1685 he was the site contractor at St Matthew's, Friday Street, and at St Andrew's, Holborn, he was the joint contractor with William Stanton from August 1684. At St Paul's he was one of thirteen master masons, and his was one of six teams of masons. In 1678 he had the contract to build the south portico of the cathedral. On the death of Marshall construction work was divided between Pearce, Latham, and Strong, none of whom had the capital to undertake the whole programme: Pearce was responsible for the cornice in the choir. Rivalry between him and other contractors meant that he was not awarded the contract for the west end. Lang has suggested that Pearce quitted in dissatisfaction at the rates of pay, and that an unhappy relationship with Wren had developed when Pearce supported William Talman over a building disagreement at Hampton Court. 
Correspondence for the year 1683 between William Craven and William Winde relating to the rebuilding of Combe Abbey, Warwickshire, for the earl of Craven refers to 'Edward Pearce the Stone Carver' and his involvement in the preparations for carving the Craven coat of arms and a rebus on the site (Bodl. Oxf., MS Gough Warwick 1, fol. 31). Drawings signed by Pearce and endorsed by Winde suggest he was responsible for both the design of the dining-room ceiling at Hampstead Marshall, Berkshire, dated 1686, and the chimney-piece of the parlour chamber at Combe Abbey. Other designs in the series, which may be attributed on stylistic grounds, indicate a greater involvement in the design of interior decoration at Combe Abbey than Pearce has hitherto been credited with. At Winchester College he appears to have been working independently on designs for the refitting of the chapel. The only complete building known to have been designed by Pearce is the former bishop's palace at Lichfield (1686-7). Correspondence concerning the deanery business from Dean Addison to Archbishop Sancroft refers to the taking down of war-damaged buildings and their replacement by a house according to 'the model drawn by Mr Pierce', for which the ground plan and elevation survive (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 131, fol. 185'v'). 
The full extent of Pearce's involvement with William Talman has yet to be established, but it seems to have been more extensive than scholarship has hitherto allowed. He worked with Talman at Chatsworth, Derbyshire, being named as a mason contractor in Wren's report of 1692 to the fourth earl of Devonshire on the costs of the south and east fronts, and at Hampton Court, where he was paid $250 for 'a great Vauze of white Marble, all the figures enricht with leaves and festoons of shells, and Pedestal of Portland, likewise all members enriched', and $745 10's'. for 'a white great marble Urne with diverse figures and other ornaments'. For the reassembling of the Diana or Arethusa fountain in the privy garden at Hampton Court he was paid $1,262 3's'. (declared accounts, 1 May 1689 to 24 March 1696, pipe roll 4, 'Wren Society', 4, 1927, 32-3). The two men clearly held each other in high esteem, and when Talman's son, John, entertained in Rome in 1711, he included Pearce in a painted pantheon, as a sculptor to vie with Glycon and 'Bonarota'. 
Numerous drawings, formerly attributed to William Talman and others, have been reattributed to Pearce (AM Oxf., BM, V&A, and Sir John Soane's Museum, London), and a volume from the Talman series sold at Sothebys, London, on 24 April 1989 (lot 737, photographs, Courtauld Inst., Conway Library) provides an important corpus of work by him. He always signed himself Pearce, although contemporary and later documentation by others often gives his name as Pierce. 
As with other master masons of the period, the production of church ornaments was a significant aspect of Pearce's work. While there are no known monuments signed by him, some, such as that to Margaret Vernon (1676; Sudbury, Derbyshire), are documented, while others, such as those to Viscount Irwin (died 1688; Whitkirk, Yorkshire, completed by John Nost), John Withers (died 1692; Arkesden, Essex), and Lady Warburton (died 1693/4; St John's, Chester), have been attributed from designs in Pearce's hand. 
Pearce's reputation as a sculptor survives on the basis of a number of individual works: a series of full-length kings and queens for the royal exchange and the Skinners', Goldsmiths' and Fishmongers' halls, the figure of William Walworth in wood (1684; Fishmongers' Hall, London), and documented busts of Dr Hamey (1675; RCP Lond.) and Thomas Evans, master of the Painter-Stainers' Company (1688). The marble bust of Christopher Wren in the Ashmolean Museum is regarded as the most outstanding portrait bust in England in the second half of the seventeenth century. It was presented in 1737 to the University of Oxford by the sitter's son, who, in a letter to George Vertue in 1742, gave it a date of 1673 and an attribution to Pearce. A marble bust of Oliver Cromwell (AM Oxf.), while inscribed 'E. Pierce Fecit', has had a convincing case made against its being by Pearce, and it is likely to have been made later in the next century. A clay head of Milton (Christ's College, Cambridge) has all the veracity of a contemporary portrait, but the attribution to Pearce is late and hopeful. 
Pearce died in Arundel Street, Strand, London, in March 1695 and was buried at St Clement Danes. He was survived by one son, John, and a daughter, who married John Killingworth; both were beneficiaries, with his widow, of his will, dated 2 July 1694. Probate was granted on 20 April 1695. It is clear that Pearce was a man of substance. His portrait and that of his wife were, according to his son, 'of Mr Fuller's Painting', and he collected works of art. In his will Pearce stated that 'Mr William Tallman Comptroller of their Majesties works my very good friend to whom I have ben much oblidged' was 'to have ye Choise & picking of what therin shall seeme to make up ye worthy Collection he intends' (will, LMA, x001/160). The drawings Talman chose became part of the distinguished collection amassed by John Talman, which subsequently lost their provenance and with it their attribution, to the detriment of Pearce's reputation. The 'sirpluss of my Clositt', a collection 'of Books, Drawings, Prints, models & Plaster Figures', was sold with that of Mr Manby in January-February 1696 (Poole, 36). 


@@@@@


doc= 22224


Peirce, Robert (bap. 1622, d. 1710), physician, the only son of the Revd Robert Pierce (1592-1641), rector of Combe Hay, Somerset, and his wife, Elizabeth (1597-1657), daughter of Chiddiock Tutt of Salisbury, was born at Combe Hay and baptized there on 6 March 1622. After attending King Edward's School, Bath, he was sent to Winchester College, and from there to Lincoln College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 26 October 1638. He graduated BA on 15 June 1642, MA and MB on 21 October 1650, and MD on 12 September 1661. His boyhood and youth were sickly: at ten he had general dropsy, at twelve smallpox, at fourteen tertian ague, and at twenty-one measles with profuse bleeding from the nose. In 1651 Peirce married Anna (1621-1688), daughter of David Trym (or Tryme) of Wookey, Somerset. They had two sons and two daughters. The first child, Elizabeth, died aged nineteen years. The second, Robert, died aged one year. The third, Mary, survived twenty-three years and produced for her parents a grandson, Pierce A'Court. Their fourth child, Charles, died aged four years. 
After a short residence in Bristol Peirce settled in practice near the Somerset levels, where in 1652 he became ill again, this time with a 'quartan ague' (probably malaria, which was endemic in this area at that time). This weakened him so much that he decided to leave the district. His fellow collegian, Christopher Bennet, advised him to try London; but, though there were then three physicians in full practice at Bath, Peirce decided to settle there in 1653, and built up a 'riding practice', making visits to patients living between 10 and 30 miles from the city. On 15 April 1660 he was elected to the office of physician to poor strangers. As the older physicians died, Peirce established himself as a specialist in Bath mineral water treatment, taking patients of distinction to reside with him in the Abbey House, which he rented as a private lodging. Richard Talbot, earl of Tyrconnell, stayed with him for five weeks from April 1686, and was given Quercetanus's tartar pills for several nights, followed by two quarts of the King's Bath Water in the morning for several days, as severe measures were needed to get him fit within two or three months, so that he could take up his post in Ireland. The duke of Hamilton, the duchess of Ormond, the marchioness of Antrim, Lord Stafford, and General Talmash or Tollemache, were among Peirce's patients. He also cured Captain Harrison, son-in-law of Bishop Jeremy Taylor, of lead palsy. Sir Charles Scarborough, Sir William Wetherby, Sir John Micklethwaite, Phineas Fowke, Gideon Harvey, Richard Lower, Thomas Short, and many other famous physicians sent patients to him. 
In 1689 Peirce visited London, and, having been nominated in James II's new charter to the Royal College of Physicians, was admitted a fellow on 19 March 1689. He had earned this honour by many original observations, which he eventually published in 1697 in his 'Bath Memoirs'. He is probably the first English writer to note the now well-known occurrence of acute rheumatism as a sequel to scarlet fever; and his account of Major Arnot's case, in which muscular feebleness of the arm followed the constant carrying of a heavy falcon on one fist, is the first suggestion of the condition later described as 'repetitive strain syndrome'. He carried out post-mortem examinations on some patients, one of which was on the body of Sir Robert Craven, who had a mediastinal tumour; and another on a man with osteomyelitis of the hip. These original observations entitle him to a high place among English physicians. Peirce died in Bath in June 1710 and was buried in Bath Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 22225


Pierce, Samuel Eyles (1746-1829), Independent minister, was born at Upottery rectory, near Honiton, Devon, on 23 June 1746, the son of Adam Pierce (1717-1785), cabinet-maker, and Susannah Chilcott ('c'.1710-1770). Of retiring disposition as a boy, he was brought up in a church home, his maternal grandfather being vicar of Upottery and master of the grammar school in Honiton, where Pierce himself was educated. In this early experience of church, home, and school he confessed that he did not encounter spiritual religion. Unhappily apprenticed to a trade he himself had chosen, he lived with a real sense of dark forebodings, heavily influenced by events like the Lisbon earthquake, the Sherborne comet of 1768, several severe fires in Honiton, and a lightning strike on Moorfields Tabernacle which killed a worshipper. Very susceptible to guilt, he was prompted by his first communion to question whether he had 'consumed unworthily' (Pierce, 17). He was first 'brought under divine influence' by reading Anthony Horneck's 'The Crucified Jesus', which brought him to understand that he was 'a regenerate man, one born into Christ, one born from above' (ibid., 17), though he does not allow that this was 'a gospel book', and the understanding seems to have been cerebral rather than experiential. Soon he was reading St Augustine, Doddridge's 'Rise and Progress', sermons by James Hervey and George Whitfield; he frequently walked the 5 or so miles to Broad Hembury to hear Augustus Toplady, who was one of the shaping influences in his life. Between February 1772 and August 1775 Pierce spent much time in London, where he was greatly influenced by William Romaine, the second major influence in his life: by contrast he was unimpressed by worship led by Charles Wesley at the Foundry Chapel. 
An almost chance meeting with a group of female believers at Somerton in Somerset challenged Pierce to reflect seriously on seeking training for the ministry. Thus late in 1775 he was admitted to the countess of Huntingdon's college at Trefeca, where his experiences were unhappy. When first called upon to preach he dried up after only five minutes. Nevertheless he was soon found supplying churches in Hay-on-Wye and at Brecon. Witnesses indicate that his style approximated to that of Romaine; he himself confessed, 'I was all for preaching a finished salvation' ('DNB'). After unsuccessful attempts to escape from college, he came to the personal notice of Lady Huntingdon, who sent him to serve the church in Gainsborough, but he soon transferred to Lincoln because the Gainsborough people accused him of antinomianism, a recurring charge against his preaching. Between 1776 and 1779 he was several times recalled to Trefeca and then dispatched on various itinerancies including time in Lincolnshire, Somerset, Sussex, Kent, and Cornwall, where Mr James Paynter of Boskenna became a loyal supporter and refuge. When Lady Huntingdon was not at Trefeca, and without resort to Romaine, Pierce described the college as a dungeon and thus resolved to abort all ideas of a preaching ministry. On completing an itinerant ministry for the countess of Huntingdon, he became free to take a fixed pastorate and settled with an Independent congregation in Truro in August 1783. He enjoyed immediate success, for the membership grew from thirty-six to ninety, and the chapel had to be extended. 
Pierce's ordination took place on 15 September 1784, alongside that of Isaiah Birt, who was to have a distinguished Baptist ministry, at the Plymouth Dock Baptist Church with four senior Baptist ministers from Plymouth, Wellington, and Bristol participating under the leadership of Caleb Evans. Pierce married on 28 October 1784 a member of his Truro congregation, Mary Randall ('c'.1729-1807/8), the widow of John. She kept a school and this clearly helped the family income. Pierce used the Truro church as a base for itinerancy, so his deacons were often responsible for weekday services. Pierce frequently supplemented his own preaching by reading the sermons of others; the congregation's favourite was John Gill followed by Romaine. 
It was not long before accusations of antinomianism re-emerged, this time with the counter-accusation that the Arminians, presumably the local Methodists, were stirring up hostility. Pierce's congregation split, and it appears that Pierce's wife sided with his opponents, for he claims that because of this dispute he was 'driven from church, wife and home', and that his wife withdrew her financial support of his ministry. Because of physical illness, he retreated to Mr Paynter's residence at Boskenna, which in its turn led to the accusation that he had abandoned both his wife and his church. He became tutor to Mr Paynter's sons, but returned to Truro fairly frequently to preach in his old church and to celebrate communion. At the same time he conducted a wide itinerant ministry in the west country, responding to invitations that followed in the wake of the publication of his discourses from 1796 onwards. Pierce continued to care for Mr Paynter's two sons for about two years after the latter's death in 1800. 
Pierce then extended his itinerancy to the London area, where he met with a mixed reaction to the high Calvinism he preached. One congregation, which included a considerable number of wealthy families who had previously attended on Romaine, was particularly attracted to his ministry, and this led to a settled pastorate for Pierce at Printer's Court, Shoe Lane, where in 1805 a new chapel was built for him by a Mr Arnold; the chandelier and accommodation for the pastor were provided by Mr Bailey of Stockwell. Walter Wilson wrote of the congregation, 'The people who assemble here, some of whom possess considerable substance, are double distilled Calvinists. And great admirers of some of the writers of that stamp, particularly Dr Goodwin' (Wilson, 3.416). 
Pierce was still spending most summer months ministering in Truro, at least until the death of his first wife on 12 March 1807 or 1808. Wilson noted, 'As his people cannot endure any other preacher, they meet together during his absences and employ themselves in reading his sermons' (Wilson, 3.416). Pierce's patron, Mr Bailey, had also opened a chapel in Brixton, where Pierce preached on alternate Sunday evenings except on communion Sundays, when he spent the whole day at Shoe Lane. On 5 November 1819 he married Elizabeth Turquand ('b'. 1783/4), daughter of Leonard, a sugar baker of Whitechapel, at Clapham parish church. Elizabeth, who was much younger than Pierce, had been converted under her future husband's ministry. Mr Bailey provided lodgings for the couple, who soon found an itinerant ministry too burdensome. 
Most information about Pierce derives from his 'A true outline and sketch of the life of Samuel Eyles Pierce, minister of the everlasting gospel', published in 1824, though clearly completed two years earlier. He gave full instructions for his funeral, including a funeral sermon which he started in April 1794 and last reworked in September 1819, with clear instructions that no other be preached. He in fact died full of years on 10 May 1829 in Acre Lane, Clapham, where he had lodgings with Mr Bailey, long-time patron of his London ministry. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 22226


Pierce, Thomas (1621/2-1691), dean of Salisbury and religious controversialist, was the son of John Pierce, or Peirse, a woollen draper and mayor of Devizes, Wiltshire. A gifted musician, Pierce was appointed chorister of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1633 and attended the grammar school adjoining the college under the care of William White. Pierce matriculated from Magdalen on 7 December 1638, aged sixteen, his father being described as 'plebeius', and in 1639 he became a demy. He graduated BA on 4 December 1641 and became a fellow of Magdalen in 1643, proceeding MA on 21 June 1644. Pierce appears to have been a convinced Calvinist in his younger years, but at Oxford he rejected these views, possibly under the influence of his friend and colleague Henry Hammond. Hammond encouraged Pierce to take orders in 1646, and he was priested by Bishop Skinner in a clandestine ordination held in Trinity College on 24 August (St Bartholomew's day). 
Pierce became and would remain a staunch royalist throughout his life, and this led to his ejection from his fellowship on 15 May 1648 by the parliamentary visitors. He responded to this by producing a satire upon them, entitled 'A third and fourth part of Pegasus, taught by Bankes his ghost to dance in the Doricke moode, 1 July 1648' and signed Basilius Philomusus. He further demonstrated both his literary talents and his devotion to the crown in his poem 'Caroli tou makaritou palingenesia' (1649), in which he likened Charles's sufferings to those of Christ. Like other ejected royalist divines, Pierce managed to find employment with sympathetic aristocrats, and he joined the household of Dorothy, countess of Sunderland, at Althorp House in Northamptonshire as tutor to her only son, Robert Spencer, who would later become secretary of state to James II. As Spencer's tutor, Pierce spent periods during the 1650s travelling with his student through France and Italy. In 1656 the countess presented Pierce to the rectory of Brington in Northamptonshire, which he held until 1676. 
The 1650s saw Pierce turn his polemical abilities to use in theological controversy, and alongside his Oxford colleagues Hammond and Peter Heylyn he became one of the most forceful apologists for anti-Calvinist theology and episcopal Anglicanism during the period of its suppression. Pierce's Arminianism sparked controversy in 1654 and led him to publish 'A Correct Copy of some Notes Concerning God's Decrees, Especially of Reprobation' under the initials 'T. P.' in 1655. This work generated hostile responses from theological opponents such as Henry Whitfield, William Barlee, and Henry Hickman, and a pamphlet war led to further editions of Pierce's work being published in 1657 and 1658, with a fourth edition in 1671. Pierce further defined his position in 'The sinner impleaded in his own court, wherein are represented the great discouragements from sinning which the sinner receiveth from sin itself' (1656; 2nd and 3rd editions with additions, 1670). He progressively became embroiled in skirmishes with a growing number of opponents including Edward Bagshawe and Richard Baxter. Partly this was to do with Pierce's determination to tar all brands of anti-episcopal protestantism as seditious and/or atheistic, thus glossing over the nuances of doctrinal subtlety in the interests of polemic. Baxter, who suffered particularly from Pierce's malicious style, characterized him as 'a confident man, that had a notable Stile and Words at Will, and a venomous railing Pen and Tongue against the Puritans and Calvinists' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', bk 2, p. 280). 
Pierce's loyalty was amply rewarded at the Restoration. He became a chaplain-in-ordinary to the king, as well as receiving royal patronage in the form of a canonry at Canterbury on 9 July 1660 and the prebend of Langford Manor in the diocese of Lincoln on 11 September 1660 -- he was installed on 25 September by proxy. Pierce could not be restored to his fellowship at Magdalen because he had married his wife, Susannah (died 1696), after being ejected from Oxford (an infant son died in February 1657), but he was made reader in theology and was created DD through the king's letters on 7 August 1660. From these positions of strength, Pierce heralded the Anglican campaign to restore episcopacy, asserting in 1660 that 'Until our bishops receive their right though we are glad to have our King, we may rationally fear we shall not hold him' (Pierce, 'England's Season for Reformation of Life', 14). He appeared on the episcopal side at the Worcester House conference in 1660 and had to be discouraged from raising the polemical temperature at the Savoy conference by more level-headed colleagues. He managed to preach a more cautious sermon at the opening of the restored convocation on 8 May 1661. 
On 9 November 1661 Pierce was elected president of Magdalen. His candidacy was unpopular and had to be forced through with letters from the king. His presidency was an unhappy period for all connected with the college: he was a poor administrator, and his talent for satire and invective did not serve him well in his new post. The period was marked by a series of disputes and appeals and the situations were nearly always compounded by Pierce's arbitrary methods and his frequent recourse to print and manuscript. The most notorious example was his dispute with the troublesome Dr Henry Yerbury, whom Pierce expelled from the college. The irregularities of the expulsion led to the involvement of the college visitor, the bishop of Winchester, George Morley, who overturned Pierce's judgment. Pierce endeavoured to justify his action in 'A True Account of the Proceedings, and of the Grounds of the Proceedings' (1663) against Yerbury, who promptly vindicated his own conduct in a manuscript defence. Pierce also assisted another fellow, John Dobson, in producing lampooning vindications of his own conduct. Pierce's indulgence in such activities, when set alongside his discourtesy towards Morley in the course of his campaign, earned him a royal rebuke; he was ordered to desist from publishing anything else on the matter. 
Pierce's presidency continued to be characterized by discord and conflict until at last in 1671 he expressed a wish to retire. There seem to have been three motives: first, he wanted to leave on health grounds -- Oxford's damps had caused both him and his family health problems; second, he wanted to finish his revision and expansion of Hugh Robinson's 'Annalium mundi universalium' (or 'Universal history', later published in 1677); and he claimed the third to be his affection for the college ('CSP dom.', '1671-2', 166-7). The manner of Pierce's departure was no less controversial than any other act of his presidency. Unusually, he wished to nominate his successor, and he obtained a royal mandate for Henry Clerke, a man deeply unpopular among the fellowship. When the fellows demurred, Pierce made his own resignation conditional upon their acceptance of Clerke. Pierce resigned on 4 March 1672 and the fellowship reluctantly accepted Clerke. Ugly rumours circulated that Pierce had taken several thousand pounds from Clerke in order to secure the position for him ('Letters of Humphrey Prideaux', 137). 
In spite of Pierce's problems at Oxford during the 1660s, he continued to make an impact on a wider stage, particularly through his sermons. On 16 June 1662 he had been appointed to the lectureship at Carfax. During 1661 and 1662 he also preached many notable sermons in London. Perhaps the most important of these was 'The Primitive Rule of Reformation', delivered to the king at Whitehall on 1 February 1663. The sermon, attacking the Roman Catholic church, ran through eight editions in 1663 alone and was translated into several foreign languages. It provoked book-length responses from the English Catholic writers Hugh Cressy and John Sergeant, igniting a long-running controversy. Pepys heard Pierce preach on 8 April 1663, and described him as having 'as much of natural eloquence as most men that I ever heard in my life, mixed with so much learning' (Pepys, 4.98). 
Pierce returned to prominence in the mid-1670s, probably as a consequence of Charles II's return to ruling through those committed to maintaining the Anglican confessional state. At the king's recommendation, Pierce was admitted and installed as dean of Salisbury on 4 May 1675, a position which included extensive and almost quasi-episcopal powers over extensive peculiar jurisdictions. This set the scene for Pierce's most notorious controversy, with the bishop of Salisbury, Seth Ward. The conflict between the bishop and the dean went further than purely personal animosity. In contrast to Pierce, Ward had profited from interregnum expulsions, taking chairs in Oxford from ejected royalists. His career had only prospered during the Restoration period, and there is no doubt that Pierce resented the disparity in their relative fortunes. Although there was little open hostility between the two men until the 1680s, from 1676 Pierce was already collecting materials to demonstrate that the cathedral was a royal free chapel, that the cathedral was directly under the jurisdiction of the king rather than the bishop. 
The dispute blew up in October 1682 over the right to distribute prebends. Ward had used his available patronage to assist relatively unqualified nephews to obtain prebends in the cathedral. Pierce, who had failed to obtain a similar post for his son Robert, allowed his work to be used in an attack on Ward by a similarly disappointed clergyman. Ward received an anonymous paper of four articles insinuating that the bishop had usurped the rights of the king, an explosive charge in the wake of the Restoration crisis of 1678-81. Ward rejected Pierce's claims and in the spring of 1683 an ecclesiastical commission found in favour of Ward. This might have been the end of the matter, but Ward then decided to visit the cathedral, a clear declaration of war on Pierce's authority as dean. Pierce complained to the king and to the archbishop of Canterbury, claiming that only the king could undertake such a visitation, but he was overruled. On 16 October 1683 Ward began an acrimonious visitation which included enquiries as to Pierce's ordination and his offices. For an enraged Pierce, Ward's visitation was a recurrence of the inveterate enmity between old Cromwellians and old royalists. Pierce published 'A Vindication of the King's Sovereign Right' in 1683 anonymously, owning up to his authorship in August 1684 and thus perpetuating the conflict. 
For Pierce, James II's accession in 1685 seemed to offer a golden opportunity to reassert his ultra-royalist claims against Ward and he lost no time in composing a loyal address of welcome to a monarch whom he felt would be sympathetic to his local cause. Unfortunately for Pierce, he had miscalculated: James noticed Pierce's subversion of ecclesiastical order rather than his royalism, and in May 1685 the king referred the matter to an unsympathetic Archbishop Sancroft. Pierce's address was investigated by the attorney-general, who produced a hostile report, and Sancroft engineered a metropolitan visitation which took place in July 1686 to draw a line under the matter. The process vindicated Ward's right to visit the cathedral every three years and the dean was forced to apologize to the bishop. The protracted struggle left the cathedral in a state of near anarchy and accelerated Ward's descent into senility. The dean's 'black and dismal malice' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.251) is often blamed for this turn of events but it seems unfair to attribute all of the blame to Pierce alone. Pierce seems to have had a genuine concern for the welfare of what he saw as his cathedral, as evidenced in his plans to restore the building and his generous donations and bequests to the church. 
Pierce died on 28 March 1691 in his house on his patrimonial estate at North Tidworth, a few miles north of Amesbury in Wiltshire. He was buried in the churchyard at Tidworth. Instead of the customary rings or gloves, each mourner received his volume 'Death Considr'd as a Door to a Life of Glory, Penn'd for the Comfort of Serious Mourners' (1690). 


@@@@@


doc= 22227


Pierrepont, Evelyn, first duke of Kingston upon Hull (bap. 1667, d. 1726), politician, was born at West Dean, Wiltshire, and baptized on 27 February 1667. He was the third son of Robert Pierrepont of Thoresby, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1692), the daughter and coheir of Sir John Evelyn of West Dean. He was educated at Winchester College and at Christ's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated on 19 May 1683 and received an LLD on 16 April 1705. By licence dated 27 June 1687 he married Lady Mary Feilding (died 1697), the only daughter of William, third earl of Denbigh; they had one son, William, earl of Kingston, who died on 1 July 1713, and three daughters, including Mary, a celebrated scholar, who married Edward Wortley Montagu in 1712. 
Pierrepont sat in the Convention Parliament in January 1689 as MP for East Retford, a seat which he held at the general election in March 1690. On 17 September of that year he succeeded his brother William as fifth earl of Kingston upon Hull. In 1701 he became deputy lieutenant of Wiltshire; he also held the post of recorder of Nottingham from 1707 until his death. He was appointed one of the commissioners for the union with Scotland on 10 April 1706, and was created marquess of Dorchester on 23 December of that year. He was admitted to the privy council on 26 June 1708, and in November presented the address of condolence and thanks to the queen. Dorchester, a member of the Kit-Cat Club, appears to have been popular as well as successful in these years. John Macky, writing in 1705, described him as a 'very fine gentleman, of good sense, well-bred, and a lover of the ladies; intirely in the interest of his country; makes a good figure, is of a black complexion, well made, not forty years old' ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 75). 
In 1711 Dorchester voted against the ministry on the 'No peace without Spain' motion, and on 28 May the following year signed a strongly worded protest against 'the restraining orders' sent to the duke of Ormond, together with a protest against the peace. His whig credentials were again apparent when on 15 June 1714 he signed the protest against the passing of the 'Schism Bill', which had been carried by a small majority in the Lords. He was sworn a member of George I's privy council on 16 November 1714, and served as warden and chief justice in eyre of the royal forests north of the Trent from 4 November 1714 until December 1716. On 1 December 1714 he was promoted lord lieutenant of Wiltshire, which office he held until his death. He married his second wife, Lady Isabella Bentinck, the fifth daughter of William Bentinck, first earl of Portland, on 2 August 1714. Lady Belle Bentinck was apparently one of the most admired beauties in London; they had two daughters. 
Kingston was created duke of Kingston upon Hull on 10 August 1715, and it was in this capacity that, on 10 April 1716, he supported the second reading of the 'Septennial Bill'. Further evidence of his loyalty to the whig ministry is to be found in his initial vote for, and then against, Oxford's impeachment in June 1717 in line with the government's change of policy. His service was rewarded with a number of appointments. Between December 1716 and February 1718 he was lord privy seal, on 6 February 1719 he became lord president of the council, and on 29 April he was elected a knight of the Garter. He resigned the post of lord president on 11 June 1720 and resumed his former office of keeper of the privy seal. He also acted as one of the lords justices during the king's absence from England in 1719, 1720, 1723, and 1725-6. He died at his house in Arlington Street, Piccadilly, London, on 5 March 1726, and was buried at Holme Pierrepont, Nottinghamshire. He was survived by his widow, who died in Paris on 23 February 1728 and was buried at Holme Pierrepont on 3 May. Following the death of his only son in 1713, the dukedom passed to his grandson, Evelyn. 


@@@@@


doc= 22228


Pierrepont, Evelyn, second duke of Kingston upon Hull (1712-1773), landowner, was born on 3 April 1712, probably in London, the only son of the two children of William Pierrepont, earl of Kingston (1692-1713), and his wife, Rachel ('bap'. 1695, died 1722), the daughter of Thomas Baynton of Little Chalfield, Wiltshire. He succeeded his grandfather Evelyn Pierrepont, first duke of Kingston, on 5 March 1726. Known as the marquess of Dorchester from 1715, in 1725 he was inoculated against smallpox (from which his father had died) under the supervision of his aunt Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. She described his early education as deplorable, but he was at Eton College by 1725, and after succeeding to the dukedom was sent on the grand tour from 1726. His travels lasted ten years and gave him a scandalous reputation, along with a love of gambling, sport, and French tastes. He came of age in 1733, when he assumed control of his estates from three trustees. These included Thoresby Park and Holme Pierrepont Hall in Nottinghamshire, his principal residences, as well as property in Derbyshire, Somerset, Buckinghamshire, Wiltshire, Lincolnshire, Yorkshire, and Shropshire. The estates had been well managed during his minority, but Kingston cast aside prudence and used them to extend the extravagant lifestyle he enjoyed on the continent. By 1745 his debts exceeded $66,000, four times his income. 
Kingston returned from France in autumn 1736 with his mistress, Marie-Therese de Fontaine de la Touche, who had been married for ten years and had three children when she met him. The relationship endured for about fourteen years; by 1741 de la Touche had been naturalized as a British subject and become a member of the Church of England, demonstrating the apparent permanence of the affair. However, it was not an exclusive one. In March 1737 Kingston was reported in Paris with Frances Anne Vane, Viscountess Vane, as his lover. 
Kingston took little part in political or state activities. Installed as a knight of the Garter in 1741, he modestly folded back the front of his coat to hide the star. In the same year he became a lord of the bedchamber to George II, but by August 1742 he was begging to be allowed to resign on the grounds of ill health. His political correspondence consists mainly of deferential letters to the duke of Newcastle, from whom he frequently asked favours for friends and relations. He was consulted about Nottinghamshire parliamentary candidates but took little initiative in their selection. He is not recorded as speaking in the House of Lords, though he bore the staff of St Edward at George III's coronation in 1761. 
However, he did collect a series of local offices appropriate to his rank. He became master of the staghounds north of the Trent in 1738, and served as head ranger of Sherwood Forest under Newcastle's stewardship. After the latter's dismissal he became lord lieutenant of Nottinghamshire and was steward of Sherwood Forest between 1763 and 1765. Following Newcastle's death in 1768 he was recorder of Nottingham from 1769. 
The Jacobite rising of 1745 revealed that Kingston could be a man of action. Newcastle charged him with the preparation of Nottingham in case of a siege, and he raised a regiment of light cavalry, contributing $1000 to the costs. Under his colonelcy his troops saw action at Culloden in 1746 and were subsequently involved in the seizure of cattle 'after having burnt every house they could find' ('Rutland MSS', 2.199). Kingston became major-general in 1753, lieutenant-general in 1759, and general in 1772. 
In April 1745 the hall at Thoresby Park was largely destroyed by fire, but most of Kingston's best furniture was saved along with essential estate papers. A new house, designed by John Carr of York, was built between 1767 and 1771 at a cost of $17,000. The offices and contents brought the total to $34,000. Thoresby Park was noted for the duke's venison, fishing, racehorses, lake, and boats. 
Kingston's relationship with Marie-Therese de la Touche ended about 1750 when he fell in love with Elizabeth Chudleigh (c.1720-1788), the notorious society figure who became his mistress. He, and the world at large, were unaware that Chudleigh had secretly married Augustus John Hervey, later third earl of Bristol, in 1744. Following a court case in which Hervey's claims to be married to Chudleigh were rejected, on 8 March 1769 Kingston married Chudleigh, either at St Margaret's, Westminster, or at his London home in Arlington Street. His valet claimed that he never enjoyed a week's happiness again. 
Kingston died at his house in Bath on 23 September 1773, either from palsy or a paralytic stroke, and after an impressive funeral he was buried on 19 October at Holme Pierrepont, Nottinghamshire. The duke was summed up by Horace Walpole as a very weak man, but of the greatest beauty and the finest person in England. His titles became extinct, but the estates were left to the duchess of Kingston for her lifetime, as long as she remained a widow, and then to Charles, the younger son of Kingston's sister, Frances Medows. The House of Lords judged the duchess guilty of bigamy in April 1776, but Kingston's elder nephew Evelyn Medows failed in his attempt to use this ruling to overturn the will in his favour. The estates, as Kingston intended, were eventually inherited in 1788 by Charles Medows, who changed his name to Charles Pierrepont. 


@@@@@


doc= 22229


Pierrepont, Henry, marquess of Dorchester (1607-1680), royalist nobleman, was born in March 1607, the eldest son of Robert Pierrepont, first earl of Kingston upon Hull (1584-1643), and his wife, Gertrude Talbot (1587/8-1649). He entered Emmanuel College, Cambridge, with his brother William Pierrepont at Easter 1624; another brother was the politician Francis Pierrepoint. In November 1627, after a majority of the Company of Nottingham decided that the Pierreponts were one of two noble families whose 'frendshipp and favour' they wished to secure, Henry was nominated and eventually elected to represent the town. There is no record of Pierrepont's speaking or being appointed to a committee in the parliament of 1628. By 1630 he was married for the first time, to Cecilia (1613-1639), daughter of Paul, first Viscount Bayning, with whom he had two daughters. After his father was created an earl on 25 July 1628 he was styled Viscount Newark but in January 1641 was called and referred to in the House of Lords as Baron Pierrepont of Holme Pierrepont (the family seat in Nottinghamshire). Pierrepont became an active member of the house and was appointed to numerous committees. On 21 May 1641 he defended the right of the bishops to sit in parliament and argued that they must participate in the making of laws they had to obey. A second speech of 24 May claimed it was lawful and convenient for the bishops to 'intermeddle' in temporal affairs. During an increasingly heated debate on 14 December 1641 about a breach of privilege his complaint that it was not honourable for the Lords to be in such a tumult was construed as offensive to so great a high court and he was ordered to withdraw and committed to the custody of the gentleman usher. After he asked the pardon of the house on 16 December the suspension was lifted. He was one of only four lords to protest at the decision of the house to order the lord mayor of London to call a common council whenever instructed by the committee of safety. On 4 February 1642 he was given a month's leave of absence but on the twenty-fifth of the month he was among the lords asked by Charles to return to the upper house. Leave of absence was granted to him on 2 April and by 15 June he was with Charles at York, where he signed the declaration that the king did not intend to make war on parliament. 
In the summer of 1642 Pierrepont became the leading member of the Nottinghamshire commission of array. After an address by Charles to the knights and gentry of the shire Pierrepont, who had already subscribed to the costs of raising and maintaining horse troops, led a similar appeal in Nottinghamshire. At a muster of the Nottinghamshire militia on 13 July he explained the reasons for the king's issue of a commission of array, his speech being subsequently published. On 3 August his attempt to take possession of the shire militia's gunpowder, which was kept in Nottingham, was defeated but the town prudently made a contribution from its store. The next month he was listed among those royalists against whom parliament took a particular exception. He was a member of the king's council of war in December 1642 and of the upper house of the royalist Oxford parliament. He was one of the peers who signed the letter warning the covenanters that it was a small minority of the peerage who invited them to England. In 1645 he was a commissioner for the king at the treaty of Uxbridge. In recognition of his support for the king the University of Oxford conferred on him an honorary MA degree in November 1642. Charles rewarded him in March 1645 by creating him marquess of Dorchester and a privy councillor. His request in September 1646 to compound on the terms of the Oxford articles surprised many royalists but can be explained by his serious financial difficulties. On the death of his father in 1643 he had inherited a substantial estate, mainly in Nottinghamshire, but sequestration had deprived him of most of his rental income. He claimed to have debts of $15,000 without interest, which included $5000 to his brother William, the parliamentarian MP for Much Wenlock, who had an interest in the estate as immediate remainder. It was William who rescued his brother and the estate when he realized Dorchester was unable to pay his composition fine of $7467. In March 1647 William asked for and was granted the fine in compensation for his own losses in the war. Whether or not Dorchester had paid his creditors by 1662 cannot be established but he was in possession of estates in Nottinghamshire which he certified produced an annual revenue of $8000. 
From an early age Dorchester had been an enthusiastic bibliophile; he also established a botanical garden with an estimated 2600 species, and had a chemical laboratory. The catalogue of his library of 2101 titles, which was left to and remains with the Royal College of Physicians of London, establishes the breadth of his interests. Approximately a third of his books can be placed in the categories of law and medicine which, after the civil war, became his consuming studies. He was admitted to Gray's Inn in June 1651 and called to the bar in the following year. The decision of a peer to practise law amazed Sir Edward Nicholas, who commented: 'I see abundance of wealth doth not satisfy all men's minds' ('Nicholas Papers', 1.307). The marquess's study of physic resulted in more adverse comment but was appreciated, as were his donations, by the College of Physicians, which in 1658 made Dorchester its first honorary fellow. He was admitted to the Royal Society in 1663 and later in the year appointed to its council but played no part in its proceedings. 
After the Restoration, Dorchester was appointed a privy councillor in August 1660 and remained a member until 1673. An active member of the Lords, where his legal knowledge on the committee for petitions was particularly valuable, he was in 1662 and 1676 a commissioner to execute the office of earl marshal. In 1666 he became recorder of Nottingham. The combative side of his character, which first appeared publicly in 1633 and eventually led to a pardon for assault on Philip Kinder, reappeared in 1666 during a conference between the two houses. After the duke of Buckingham, in a scramble for a comfortable seat, had rudely removed Dorchester's elbow the exchanges descended into insults and a scuffle in which the marquess, in retaliation for the loss of his periwig, pulled the duke's hair. The peers were sent to the Tower and later brought to the Lords as delinquents but were restored to their places after they had expressed contrition for their behaviour. 
Dorchester vigorously defended the interests of his family and their relations. In 1639 his opposition to Lord Grandison's marriage to his sister-in-law Mary Banning led to a duel but no serious injury to the combatants. His dispute with John Manners, Lord Roos (later ninth earl and first duke of Rutland), who had married Anne, his daughter and coheir, brought unwelcome publicity. When Anne returned to her husband after a separation she was found to be pregnant and was accused by Roos, who kept her a virtual prisoner, of adultery. Dorchester, who believed his daughter to be innocent of these charges, exchanged written insults and eventually challenged Roos to a duel. He used his influence at court to have her case heard by the king in privy council in 1662. Though it was decided the charge of adultery could not be proved a separation was recommended, but no settlement was agreed. When in April 1663 Anne was again pregnant Dorchester had to accept this evidence of her promiscuity and a divorce ensued. In September 1652 Dorchester had married his second wife, Catherine Stanley, daughter of James Stanley, seventh earl of Derby, but with no surviving male heirs the marquessate became extinct at Dorchester's death, on 8 December 1680 at Charterhouse Yard, London. Dorchester was buried at Holme Pierrepont. 


@@@@@


doc= 22230


Pierrepont, Robert, first earl of Kingston upon Hull (1584-1643), landowner and royalist army officer, was born on 6 August 1584, the son of Sir Henry Pierrepont (1546-1616) of Holme Pierrepont, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Frances Cavendish, daughter of Sir William Cavendish of Chatsworth. Pierrepont matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, in 1596 but did not graduate, and was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1600. His marriage in 1601 to Gertrude Talbot (1587/8-1649), the daughter and coheir of Henry Talbot, maintained the Pierrepont family's association with their patron, Gilbert Talbot, seventh earl of Shrewsbury, for his wife was a niece, and Robert himself a nephew, of the earl. 
When Pierrepont was elected for Nottinghamshire in 1601 he was just seventeen and his youth underlined that he was Shrewsbury's nominee. As befitted a teenager he played an insignificant part in the proceedings of the Commons. It was not until October 1608 that Robert joined his father as a justice of the peace at a meeting of the Nottinghamshire quarter sessions. Pierrepont attended on average two meetings of quarter sessions each year until his elevation to the peerage, after which he became an occasional attender. He acted with his father as a subsidy commissioner in 1610 and in 1614 was appointed to collect the benevolence in Nottinghamshire. Pierrepont later claimed that a third of the money returned upon the benevolence was due to his efforts but neither this claim nor the amount collected can be established. The privy council considered the work of the Nottinghamshire commissioners so unsatisfactory that they were ordered in November 1614 to appear and explain their performance, but illness prevented Pierrepont from attending. If his appointment as sheriff of Nottinghamshire in November 1615 was a punishment for his performance it was the only penalty he received. Pierrepont was again appointed to raise a benevolence in 1622 and 1626. In Nottinghamshire, as elsewhere, the disappointing response to the latter led the crown to raise a forced loan. Pierrepont again served as a Nottinghamshire commissioner, but its success was largely due to the leadership and determination of the earl of Newcastle. 
It was the management and increase of his estates which was Pierrepont's main and constant concern. He inherited properties in the south of Nottinghamshire in the vicinity of the family seat at Holme Pierrepont and in the north-west of the shire and adjoining parts of Derbyshire around their second residence at Hodsock. At first Pierrepont's purchases were in south Nottinghamshire until the acquisition of Fledborough in 1621 in the north-east of the shire opened a new area of interest. He also bought with his son William manors in Derbyshire, Lincolnshire, and Yorkshire. The total cost of his purchases, which can be established from 1610, was $56,171, of which $40,071 was spent on the acquisition of lands in Nottinghamshire. The absence of a sequence of rentals and Pierrepont's accounts means that his income and its use cannot be established in even the broadest terms. From contemporary comments it appears that most of his income was used to purchase land. When Lord Capell visited Pierrepont he was entertained by him 'as well as the ill accommodations in his house and his manner of living would admit' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.332). His neighbour, later the duke of Newcastle, accepted that because of his many purchases he was not a 'monied man' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/55/26). At his death Kingston was the largest landowner in Nottinghamshire. 
It was not until 1627 that Pierrepont joined other leading Nottinghamshire families in the purchase of honour. In February Newcastle reported that Pierrepont would not buy a barony as there were so many but would consider a viscountcy. On 29 June 1627 he was created Baron Pierrepont of Holme Pierrepont and Viscount Newark. In the next year Newcastle again acted as the broker and after Pierrepont had expressed his willingness to make a further purchase he was elevated in July 1628 to the earldom of Kingston upon Hull. Though the cost of peerages cannot be established it is clear from Newcastle's correspondence that these were essentially financial transactions. 
On 25 April 1628 Pierrepont, as Viscount Newark, took his seat in the House of Lords. He was appointed to only one committee and is not reported to have spoken in debates. His main concern characteristically was to defend his remainder to the estates of the earl of Devonshire. In June 1628 Pierrepont and his wife were included in the list of recusants presented to the Commons. Pierrepont was vulnerable to such accusations: his father, Henry, had helped the Jesuits, he was not well reported of for religion, and an unsuccessful attempt had been made to remove him from the commission of the peace for recusancy. In July 1626 his mother, who had been noted as a recusant, heard divine service in the presence of the archbishop of York and took the statutory oaths. Pierrepont, who presented a certificate to this effect to the Nottingham quarter sessions, was trying to clear his family of these charges and there is no evidence that he had recusant sympathies. 
In the 1630s Kingston was heavily fined for illegal enclosures and joined the Nottinghamshire landowners in their preparations to fight any attempt by the crown to extend the boundaries of Sherwood Forest. His letters in these years show that his interests remained his estates and country pursuits, with a constant concern about his health. In 1639 he excused his failure to join the king at York with a plea of ill health, and he was frequently absent from the House of Lords in the years 1640-42. Apart from negotiating with the Nottinghamshire elite to secure his son Francis's nomination for East Retford at the Short Parliament, Kingston played an insignificant part in Nottinghamshire politics before the outbreak of the civil war ['see 'Pierrepoint, Francis]. Lucy Hutchinson claimed that he deliberately divided his sons' support to protect his estates. Unlike their father, Henry Pierrepont, who became a royalist, and William Pierrepont, a parliamentarian, were active in parliament and of sufficient independence to make their own decisions. 
Kingston's support and financial aid was actively solicited by both sides. According to Lucy Hutchinson, he turned down an appeal from the parliamentarian committee at Nottingham by declaring ''When... I take arms with the King against the Parliament, or with the Parliament against the King, let a cannon-bullet divide me between them'' (Hutchinson, 107): a curse upon himself which she and parliamentarian propagandists were later to report with grim providentialist satisfaction. For in the spring of 1643 Kingston did begin to play an active role for the king: appointed colonel of an infantry regiment at the end of March, in May he was appointed lieutenant-general of the king's forces in Lincolnshire, Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, Norfolk, and Rutland. In July 1643 his troops captured Gainsborough. When the garrison was surprised by parliamentarian forces, Kingston was captured after a gallant struggle. It was as he was being taken as a prisoner in a pinnace to Hull on 25 July 1643 that cannon-fire from unsuspecting royalists killed him. He was buried in Cuckney, Nottinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 22231


Pierrepont, William (1607/8-1678), politician, was the second son of Robert Pierrepont, first earl of Kingston upon Hull (1584-1643), of Holme Pierrepont, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Gertrude (1587/8-1649), daughter and coheir of Henry Talbot, a younger son of George Talbot, sixth earl of Shrewsbury. His brothers were Henry Pierrepont, first marquess of Dorchester, and Francis Pierrepoint, politician. 
Pierrepont attended Emmanuel College, Cambridge, from 1624, and Lincoln's Inn from 1627. At an unknown date he married Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Harris of Tong Castle, Shropshire; they had ten children. He was normally resident at the Thoresby estate in Sherwood, Nottinghamshire, settled on him by his father in 1633, and he maintained an aristocratic lifestyle. He also had lands in Lincolnshire, and in Huntingdonshire through his mother, and his marriage gave him interests in Shropshire. In 1637 he was made sheriff there, at a time of rising discontent with the imposition of ship money. In 1638 he had to apologize to the privy council for the delay in collecting Shropshire's quota. His attempts to revise the assessments had little effect, and he concluded that the resistance was endemic: 'Many complain of unequal assessing, but most do it only to delay. Very many refuse to pay' ('CSP dom.', '1637-8', 42). He was elected MP for Shropshire in the Short Parliament of March 1640, in a contest following the breakdown of an electoral pact with future royalists in the county. He lost his county seat for the Long Parliament of October 1640, but was returned for Much Wenlock instead, and presented Shropshire's petition of grievances to the Commons. 
Pierrepont established an unrivalled reputation for statesmanship in the momentous politics of the Long Parliament, with the sobriquet of Wise William among his contemporaries. He was immediately at the forefront of the opposition to the policies of the 1630s. In the debate over ship money in December 1640 he denounced the judges who had denied parliament's right to make the tax illegal. He then chaired the committee for the impeachment of Sir Robert Berkeley, the judge who had defended ship money most vociferously. Pierrepont's major speech against ship money has survived and illustrates his political beliefs. Objecting to it as an unparliamentary tax he said that the 'unlimited power' to make binding law and raise taxation could only be exercised through consent in parliament: 'and so long as we are often reduced to this main foundation our King and we shall prosper' (Rushworth, 4.326). Pierrepont was active in promoting initiatives to give parliament a new degree of independent authority. Lucy Hutchinson noted that he introduced and 'carried on the bill for the continuation of the present parliament' (Hutchinson, 118). This was a reference to the act, rushed through in May 1641 in the wake of the first army plot, that laid down that the Long Parliament could not be dissolved without its own assent. 
Pierrepont came to real prominence through his part in parliament's assumption of military authority in 1642. From early January he was the Commons' principal envoy in persuading a hesitant House of Lords that the lieutenant of the Tower should be replaced by parliament's own nominee, and that the conditions of tenure should be defined by parliament. Pierrepont was then chosen on 14 January to chair the vital committee to settle the militia. He managed it with skill and vigour, taking soundings among MPs to identify the loyal peers on whom parliament could rely. Within four days the committee produced the framework of the radical militia ordinance, by which the lords lieutenant were to be appointed simply by order of parliament. Many believed that this step made civil war inevitable. Pierrepont continued to oversee the organization of the militia and fortresses for parliament as the two sides slid towards open conflict. In the debate on the king's response to the nineteen propositions at the end of June he was offended by Charles's contemptuous rejection of parliament's demand for a voice in the appointment of ministers. 
On 4 July 1642 Pierrepont was one of ten MPs named to form the committee of safety, in effect a government for the parliamentarian cause. In the winter of 1643, when the military situation was most critical, he seems briefly to have turned towards the peace party. But in general he was associated with a 'middle group' of MPs who, while not favouring extreme puritan or republican views, were still determined to prosecute the war vigorously and impose a settlement with permanent restraints on the royal government. Pierrepont's diplomatic and debating skills gave him an important role in peace negotiations. He was among the first group of parliamentary commissioners in October 1642, and took part in the talks at Oxford in March 1643, where: 'he acted his part with great foresight and prudence and was exceeding courteous to his fellow commissioners' (Whitelocke, 69). He put forward a compromise to resolve the impasse at the talks, suggesting that if the king would agree to parliament's retaining control of the militia, the other central demand for the abolition of episcopacy might be shelved. The royalist commissioners approved the deal, but Charles refused. 
Pierrepont's concession to episcopacy suited his own religious preference, which was for a moderated form of the existing system, shorn of the power to interfere in secular affairs as the Laudians had done in the 1630s. In November 1643 Pierrepont objected to the solemn league and covenant with the Scots, because it implied a presbyterian system with even greater clerical powers. On 7 November he asked leave from the house to consider his position, but was persuaded to set aside his scruples: 'they were so desirous of his assistance, being a gentleman of wisdom and integrity, that they gave him a friendly denial' (Whitelocke, 77). He was appointed to the committee of both kingdoms in February 1644. But the Scottish alliance had a destabilizing effect in parliament, and by the end of 1644 Pierrepont and the middle group were making common cause with the Independent generals to oppose Scottish and presbyterian plans for an intolerant theocratic church and a settlement without political limits on the king. At the Uxbridge talks in January 1645, Clarendon recalled, Pierrepont 'seemed to have contracted more bitterness and sourness than formerly... and insisted that the king yield to whatsoever was demanded' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.497). Pierrepont now had less leeway to vary the proposals on religion and together with other leading parliamentarian commissioners he continued to press the king to agree to parliamentary control of the militia. Charles's refusal again ended the prospects for a treaty. Pierrepont was prominent in advancing the military reorganization which was to bring the war to a close in 1646. He promoted the self-denying ordinance which aimed to remove the peace party lords Essex and Manchester from their commands, and he carried the ordinance up to a reluctant House of Lords. 
The end of the war did not bring a settlement, and in May 1646 Pierrepont had to inform parliament that Charles had taken refuge with the Scots. In October parliament enlisted Pierrepont's pen for a pamphlet denying that the Scots had the right to assume a joint interest in negotiations with the king. Throughout 1647 Pierrepont and the middle group supported the Independents in resisting Scottish and presbyterian demands for disbanding the army. On 4 August Pierrepont was among fifty-seven MPs who signed an engagement to stand by Fairfax and the army, and he was noted as a member of a powerful cabal which included Cromwell, Henry Ireton, and Henry Vane. He joined the generals in their attempt to persuade Charles to accept 'The Heads of Proposals', the terms of which reflected Pierrepont's own priorities of guaranteed parliaments, control of the militia, and episcopacy without coercive powers. After Charles had rejected this and parliament's own rather stricter four bills and confirmed his preference for the Scots, Pierrepont spoke in favour of the vote of no addresses in January 1648. 
Unlike the generals, however, Pierrepont could not really abandon the search for a settlement, and he was soon involved in middle-group plans for new overtures to the king. On 28 April 1648 he voted with the majority in parliament against altering 'the fundamental government of the Kingdom by King, Lords and Commons', but he had not forsaken parliament's radical aims. The treaty which he and the middle group proposed at Newport stood firm on the essential demand for parliamentary supervision over ministers and militia, and in early October Charles pretended to consent. Pierrepont then resumed his attempt to reach a compromise with the king over episcopacy, staying on at Newport until the eleventh hour trying to persuade Charles to accept a church settlement which retained some elements of the old establishment. Cromwell gently reproved him as 'my wise friend, who thinks that enthroning the King with presbytery brings spiritual slavery, but with a moderate episcopacy works a good peace' ('Writings and Speeches', 1.677). 
Pierrepont was not among the MPs excluded at Pride's Purge on 6 December 1648, but he greatly disapproved of this invasion of parliamentary liberties, and chaired a committee to negotiate for the release of the arrested MPs. Thereafter he absented himself from the house, and 'expressed much dissatisfaction' at the proceedings of the army and at those MPs who continued to sit (Whitelocke, 362). He was finally excluded by the Rump Parliament in January 1651. He was returned to Cromwell's second parliament as the member for Nottinghamshire, but did not take his seat. Nor did he sit on the council of state, or in the new protectoral other house as Cromwell wished. But he remained among the protector's intimate associates, sharing his leisure activities, including the making of verses, and making his political expertise available to Cromwell on an informal but regular basis. Pierrepont was one of a handful of trusted advisers whose 'counsel was accepted and followed by him in most of his greatest affairs' (Whitelocke, 656). He was probably instrumental in persuading Cromwell to phase out the decimation tax, and he advised him to accept the crown in 1657. One particular shared objective was the resettlement of Ireland under English rule, which Pierrepont had strongly endorsed in a treatise. 
Pierrepont gave even closer support to Cromwell's son Richard. Although he still had no formal office, Pierrepont was part of a triumvirate, with Oliver St John and John Thurloe, which managed the government during Richard Cromwell's brief reign. Pierrepont was said to be attempting to reconcile political divisions, and he proposed a scheme to resolve the problem of debt and reduce the burden of the army. Some thought that he found Richard easier to deal with personally than his unpredictable father, but it was principally Richard's independence from the army that made Pierrepont hopeful of 'bringing the nation into freedom under that young man' (Hutchinson, 377-8). John Hutchinson feared that if the army and republicanism were rejected the Stuarts would return, but Pierrepont assured him that the nation valued its liberty too much to recall them. 
When that confidence proved misplaced and a restoration threatened, Pierrepont retired into the background. But at the end of February 1660, with the return of the excluded MPs to the Commons and his own election at the top of the list for the new council of state, he saw another opportunity to influence affairs. He did everything he could to resist or restrict the restored monarchy. Clarendon regretted that he had 'never shown the least inclination' to the king's cause. Other royalists feared that he was trying to engineer the return of Richard Cromwell, or 'any single person save the Stuart line'. He was said to be 'impertinently violent' against the king and conspiring with other parliamentarian leaders to ensure that Charles II would be held to the terms of the treaty of Newport, and 'be so fettered as he should not write a letter but they must know of it' (Scrope and Monkhouse, 3.686, 693, 701, 705). For a while it seemed that the parliamentarians might be able to impose such a settlement, but they were foiled when General Monck declared for a new and inevitably less radical parliament. It was then said that Pierrepont was trying to persuade Monck himself to accept the sovereignty. 
Pierrepont was elected to the Convention Parliament for Nottinghamshire and remained active in suggesting reforms as the Restoration took shape. He persuaded the Commons to offer the king a settled revenue to compensate for the abolition of feudal dues, and to raise the money not by a land tax but by a liquor excise, an important precedent. He also continued to defend parliamentarian aims, leading the initially successful opposition to the 'Militia Bill' because it threatened to take control out of the hands of the local gentry. He also interceded for some of the republicans, gaining a degree of leniency for Hutchinson and Vane. Pierrepont himself was probably saved from retribution by Lucy Hutchinson's steadfast refusal to inform about his persistent championing of Richard Cromwell. 
Pierrepont was defeated in the Nottinghamshire election for the Cavalier Parliament in 1661, and again retired from politics. He did, however, take part in December 1667 in what was described as the one great success of 'those who opposed the Court'. He sat on the Brook House committee to 'examine the accounts of the money that was given in the Dutch war', an exercise which would in future limit the crown's discretion in foreign policy ('Bishop Burnet's History', ed. Burnet and Burnet, 1.267). Pierrepont's final contribution to public affairs was a treatise written in the early 1670s opposing suggestions of a systematic register of 'Estates, Land and Bills'; he thought that this would be too rigid and invasive ('Harleian Miscellany', 3.320). He died in the summer of 1678, and asked to be buried 'without pomp' at the family's ancestral base of Holme Pierrepont. His will, of which his wife was named an executor, simply confirms his great wealth, with landholdings in five counties. His three grandsons Robert, William, and Evelyn Pierrepont succeeded in turn to the earldom of Kingston after the death of his brother Henry in 1680. In 1715 Evelyn was made the first duke of Kingston upon Hull. 


@@@@@


doc= 22232


Sir Henry Piers (d. 1623) of Tristernagh, co. Westmeath, the son of William Piers (d. 1603) and Anne Holt, married Jane, daughter of Thomas Jones (died 1619), protestant archbishop of Dublin; he visited Rome and became a Roman Catholic and also wrote about his continental travels. 


@@@@@


doc= 22233


Piers, Sir Henry, first baronet (1628-1691), chorographer and natural historian, was the son of Sir William Piers and his wife, Martha, daughter of Sir James Ware (died 1632) and sister of Sir James Ware (1594-1666). His grandfather 
In the late 1640s Henry Piers the younger commanded a military company, and probably continued in the army for some years since he later held arrears land in both Wexford and Kilkenny; three of his sisters married leading English officers. About 1653 he married Mary, daughter from an earlier marriage of Henry Jones (1605-1682), then archdeacon of Killaloe and a government commissioner but from 1661 bishop of Meath, who had married one of Piers's sisters in 1646. Piers was sheriff of Longford and Westmeath in 1657 and 1658, and in the latter year was knighted by Henry Cromwell. In 1659 he represented the area in the union parliament, and in 1660 was made a baronet. 
Piers's fame rests mainly on his 'A chronological description of West Meath' of 1682, written at the behest of Anthony Dopping, who that year succeeded Jones as bishop of Meath, and to whom it is dedicated. In the 1680s Piers was associated with William Molyneux and the Dublin Philosophical Society, and his account of Westmeath was intended as a contribution to the Irish part of Moses Pitt's 'English atlas', for which Molyneux collected material from 1682 to the demise of the project in 1685. Of the material collected by Molyneux for twenty-two Irish counties, Piers's manuscript was the largest and most comprehensive contribution, but it did not appear in print until published by Charles Vallancy as the first part of 'Collectanea de rebus Hibernicis' (1770). 
Piers's manuscript was mainly concerned with the history and condition of Westmeath, dealing with the customs and manners of the Irish in that county, including their language, learning, habits, and rituals, as well as physical geography and aspects of economic and social life such as land tenure, the behaviour of landlords, husbandry, and the draining of bogs. Piers acknowledged the influence of Robert Boyle's writings on the weight and pressure of air, and his observations on the natural history of the county are of particular interest. He remarked on species of fish found in lakes, on animals and mussels found in bogs, and on the absence in general of poisonous animals. His entomological description of a venomous caterpillar which he called the 'connogh' worm, and the superstitions surrounding this insect, is a highlight of the work, and predates Molyneux's communication on that topic to the Royal Society (PTRS, February 1685), published as 'Observatio de insecto Hibernico, vocato Connough worm' in the 'Acta Eruditorum' (June 1686) of Leipzig. Piers's original description was of: 'a certain reptile found in our bogs and moorish pastures... an ugly worm, sometimes as thick as a man's thumb, about two or three inches long, having, as all reptiles have, many short feet, a large head, great goggle eyes and glaring, between which riseth or jetteth forth, one thick bristle almost in shape like a horn, which is prominent and bendeth forward about three quarters of an inch. ('Chronological Description', ed. C. Vallancy, 1770, 56)' Martin Lister identified Piers's monster as an 'elephant caterpillar' in the 1685 London edition of Johannes Goedart's 'De insectis'. 
Piers died in June 1691 and was succeeded as second baronet by his son William; the title was still extant in the twentieth century. A daughter, Elizabeth, had married her cousin Robert, second son of Sir James Ware (died 1666). Piers's manuscripts have survived in the Ormonde collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 22234


James Piers (fl. 1631-1635), writer, identified in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' as a possible son of Henry Piers (died 1623), was the grandson of James Piers, bishop of Ardfert, through his son Maurice. James Piers went to France, graduated DD, and became 'royal professor of philosophy in the Aquitanick College', the Irish college at Bordeaux. His two works on logic were published in that town in 1631 and 1635. Nothing else is known of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22235


Piers, John (1522/3-1594), archbishop of York, was born of humble parents at South Hinksey, near Oxford. He received his education first at Magdalen College School and then at Magdalen College itself, which he entered as a demy in 1542, graduating BA in 1545, MA in 1549, BTh in 1558, and DTh in 1566. Immediately after taking his BA he was elected to a fellowship at Magdalen which, apart from a year spent as a senior student at Christ Church in 1547, he enjoyed until 1559. After ordination he may possibly from 1545 to 1557 have held the living of St Edmund, King and Martyr, Lombard Street, London, and under Mary that of West Ham, Essex, before becoming rector of Quainton in Buckinghamshire in 1558. Anthony Wood relates the anecdote of how early in his career, while ministering to one of his rural cures, 'twas usual with him to sit tipling in a blind ale-house with some of his neighbours' and how he 'was in great hazard to have lost all those excellent gifts that came after to be well esteemed and rewarded in him' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.713). Rebuked for these excesses by a clerical friend, he renounced his former way of life and was thereafter noted for extreme sobriety. In 1567 he resigned Quainton when collated to the rectory of Laindon in Essex by Edmund Grindal, bishop of London. 
While still largely engaged in teaching at Oxford, in the first decades of Elizabeth's reign Piers acquired a series of promotions. In 1567 he secured the deanery of Chester, to which in 1571 he added the deanery of Salisbury, where he took pains to purge the cathedral statutes of popish accretions and make them conformable to the laws of the realm. In 1570 he obtained the mastership of Balliol together with the college rectory of Fillingham in Lincolnshire, and the following year was appointed by the crown to the deanery of Christ Church with licence to hold his other two deaneries and livings 'in commendam'. In practice he retained the deanery of Chester until 1573 (when he also resigned Laindon) and that of Salisbury until 1578. At Balliol the fellows found him, as they subsequently informed Cecil, 'excellently furnished in all arts, and... the great instrument of the progress of good learning in that house' (Strype, 'Whitgift', 1.549). 
Piers left Oxford permanently in 1576 when, having been unsuccessfully nominated by Parker with two others for the bishopric of Norwich, he gained the much less important see of Rochester, being consecrated on 15 April. Although at Rochester for little more than a year he nevertheless issued very detailed articles and injunctions for the eradication of all traces of popery within the cathedral, together with proposals for more efficient capitular administration. In 1576 the queen also made Piers her almoner, which brought him into close contact with the royal court. On the death of Edmund Guest in 1577 he was translated to the much more important bishopric of Salisbury, where he was enthroned on 8 December, but remained almoner and continued to preach regularly at court. 
Sharing John Whitgift's churchmanship, Piers worked behind the scenes after Archbishop Grindal's sequestration in 1577 to procure his resignation, Grindal's death in July 1583 putting an end to the undertaking. Two years later, when the Dutch appealed to the crown for aid in their revolt against Spain, Whitgift, the better to satisfy the queen, consulted Piers on a point of divinity: 'Whether a prince may defend the subjects of another prince from being forced to commit idolatry' (Strype, 'Whitgift', 1.437-8). At Whitgift's request in 1586 he granted a prebend at Salisbury to Samuel Foxe, the son of the martyrologist, also promising an exhibition towards his younger brother's maintenance at the university. In 1587, in an effort to prevent Toby Matthew, then dean of Durham, from succeeding Richard Barnes as bishop there, the earl of Leicester tried to procure Piers's translation from Salisbury to Durham, but nothing came of the scheme. In 1588 he received a signal mark of royal recognition when, after the defeat of the Spanish Armada, on 24 November the queen, attended by the privy council, the nobility, the French ambassador, the judges, and the heralds, came in a chariot with the noise of trumpets to a service of thanksgiving at St Paul's and heard a sermon from her almoner, dining afterwards at the bishop's palace. 
The reasons behind the elevation of Piers, a southerner with no previous connections with the north, to the archbishopric of York early in 1589 remain mysterious, but the move may well indicate Whitgift's increasing strength. Already sixty-six years old when he came to the see, Piers lost no time in issuing in 1590 articles for his metropolitical visitation, placing special emphasis upon the observance by the beneficed clergy of the orders concerning ceremonies and the administration of the sacraments in the 'Book of Common Prayer', and upon prompt and effectual action against Catholic recusants, and in particular those among the gentry. Present at the court of high commission on major occasions, he similarly pursued a middle way there between protestant nonconformity and Catholicism, condemning both ministers unwilling to wear the surplice and the recusant wives of gentlemen who obstinately refused to attend church. Harking back to his days as the queen's almoner, in 1593 he and the president of the council in the north intervened to persuade Owen Oglethorpe's heirs to fulfil the proposals to found a school and hospital at Tadcaster which the bishop, who died in 1559, had set down in his will. His ordination sessions suggest that the archbishop at first moved between his manor houses at Bishopthorpe and Cawood, before in 1592 settling permanently at Bishopthorpe. 
In his last years Piers used to ask 'where shoulde a preacher die but in the pulpit?' and even when ground down by infirmity insisted upon continuing to preach (King, 681). On his deathbed he confessed to his chaplains: 'I have read much, written much, often disputed, preached often, yet never could I finde in the booke of God any ground for Popery: neither have I knowne any point of doctrine received in the church of England, that is not consonant unto the Word of God. (ibid., 682)' He died at Bishopthorpe, aged seventy-one, on 28 September 1594. In the funeral sermon he preached before Piers's burial in the minster on 17 November, John King reminded his auditory how: 'from the first houre that he came into this province, you know his behaviour amongst you at al seasons, how he kept nothing backe that was profitable, but taught you openly and throughout every church, witnessing both to Jews and Grecians, Protestants and Papists repentance towards God, and faith towards Jesus Christ. (ibid., 680)' Piers never married and so, unlike his immediate predecessor and successor at York, felt no pressing need to provide for his family out of the revenues of the see. King, among others, commented approvingly on the fact that when he died he had 'not a shoe-thread more than he brought at his first comming' (King, 680). As a final favour the queen permitted his executors to use certain rents due to the crown to discharge his funeral expenses, legacies, and debts. His nephew William Piers, after proceeding BA from Christ Church, was for a time one of Bishop King's chaplains, and then followed his uncle both as a canon of Christ Church and dean of Chester before, a staunch Laudian, becoming in the 1630s successively bishop of Peterborough and of Bath and Wells. According to Wood, Archbishop Piers left his estate to his nephew John Piers, son of Thomas Piers of South Hinksey and registrar to the archbishop of York, who married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Bennet and sister of Sir John Bennet, judge of the prerogative court of Canterbury. Out of gratitude for his patronage Dr John Bennet, the York ecclesiastical lawyer, erected a memorial in the minster extolling Piers's learning, evangelical preaching, defence of the church's patrimony, hospitality, and liberality to the poor. 


@@@@@


doc= 22236


Piers, William (d. 1603), soldier and founder of the town of Carrickfergus, was the son of Richard or Henry Piers of Piers-Hall, near Ingleton, Yorkshire. Nothing is known about his education. He may have been a younger son, which would explain his early career as a soldier. 
In 1591 Piers wrote that he had had sixty years' experience in Ireland, which suggests that he first went to the country in the early 1530s. His earliest contact was through the sea and may have been semi-piratical in nature. A deposition in the high court of admiralty, dated 27 November 1555, described him as 'a tall burly man with a big, brown beard' (Appleby, 11) who was captain of a ship which he said that he had got from James Fitzgerald, thirteenth earl of Desmond. About the same time Piers and a group of other Englishmen received a licence from the Irish privy council to fish in the River Bann and take land for their defence along the north-east coast. It was while he was fishing in the area in the summer of 1556 (with two ships and three pinnaces) that Piers was recruited by Thomas Radcliffe, Lord Fitzwalter, who was acting as governor of Ireland, to assist in a naval expedition against the Scots in the North Channel and the Hebrides. Subsequently, he remained in the north-east as constable of Carrickfergus Castle, co. Antrim, an office which he shared initially with one of his fellow fishermen, Richard Bethell. In the spring of 1558 Piers took part in a second maritime attack on the MacDonalds, who were emigrating to Ulster in large numbers. His next official contact with the Scots was more diplomatic. In 1562 he was engaged in negotiations with James MacDonald to persuade him to make an agreement with the crown, and in the spring of the following year Piers travelled to Kintyre to meet with him. On 10 December 1562, in recognition of his services in the north-east, Piers was granted a lease of Tristernagh Priory, Westmeath, which he converted into a family home. 
Through the 1560s Piers maintained his contacts with the Scots in Ulster, and it may have been at his urging that the MacDonalds killed Shane O'Neill in 1567. Within days of O'Neill's death Piers was reported to have dug up the body and cut off the head, which he sent to Sir Henry Sidney, lord deputy, who displayed it on the gates of Dublin Castle. In the aftermath of O'Neill's killing Piers, with the assistance of other Elizabethan army captains, attempted to limit further Scottish incursions into the north-east. They met with little success but in the spring of 1569 a major defeat was inflicted on 400 Scots in Clandeboye. Sidney demonstrated his support for Piers by appointing him seneschal of Clandeboye. 
Piers's function as constable and seneschal was similar to that of other captains in the Elizabethan army in Ireland. He was the local representative of the crown and as such combined a military and, in his case, a maritime role with that of diplomatic intermediary between the central administration and local political leaders in the Irish community. At the same time a permanently based captain such as Piers was concerned to advance his own career and to influence the direction of crown policy in such a way as to reap private profit from its implementation. In the 1560s and early 1570s he exploited his position at Carrickfergus to establish an economic and political network in the Clandeboye region. He developed the commercial potential of Carrickfergus and petitioned for it to be walled. In 1566 he was granted a lease of the town customs, and in 1572 he was granted the office of collector of the customs of wine. In 1572-3 he served as mayor of Carrickfergus. He also had a lease of the fisheries of the River Bann. Piers consolidated his position by attempting to win the support of local chiefs, particularly Brian mac Phelim O'Neill, lord of Clandeboye. 
From his earliest contacts with the north-east Piers was interested in the possibility of settling Englishmen in the area and devised a number of plantation proposals which he submitted to the London authorities. All his colonial projects shared three key characteristics: a plan to expel the Scots from Ulster and defend the north-east coast from further Scottish incursions, a scheme to settle parts of Ulster with English people, and suggestions for winning support from selected local chiefs for the project. Piers's proposals usually also included a request for military and naval support from the crown. His plans for the north-east were threatened by the plantation scheme of Sir Thomas Smith, secretary of state, for the Ards peninsula, co. Down, which he advised Sir William Cecil, Lord Burghley, lord treasurer, not to support. When Smith's son Thomas Smith was killed in 1573 the colonial project for Ulster was incorporated into the 'enterprise' of Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex. Essex arrived in Ulster in 1574, and quickly became suspicious of Piers, accusing him of passing military intelligence to Brian mac Phelim O'Neill. Piers did maintain good relations with Brian mac Phelim O'Neill in return for a free hand in extorting cess from his neighbours. Essex ordered Piers's arrest and detention in Carrickfergus Castle in December. Subsequently, he was released and travelled to London to plead his innocence. Following the failure of Essex's Irish adventure and the nomination of Sidney again as lord deputy in 1575, Piers was reappointed to the constableship of Carrickfergus. He was able to appoint members of his family to local office and his nephew William Piers was subsequently mayor of the town. With Sidney's approval, Piers continued to support the local power structure in Clandeboye, particularly Brian Mac Fertagh O'Neill, the successor to Brian mac Phelim O'Neill, whom Essex had had executed for treason. 
Piers also maintained his interest in plantation projects in the north-east. In 1578 he submitted to the London administration a proposal to settle the Ards peninsula. The plan involved the creation of an incorporated company which would control the trade of the coast from Strangford to Sligo, an undertaking to banish the Scots from Ulster, leasing land to local chiefs, and the settlement of Englishmen in the region. Like all his proposals, it did not become a reality. Despite his lack of success in implementing his colonial projects, Piers's strategy of co-operation with local chiefs was identified as politically useful by the crown. In summer 1580 Piers negotiated with Turlough Luineach, chief of the O'Neills of Tyrone, on behalf of the crown. He found him 'very tractable' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/75, no. 58) and agreed to conditions which would have involved Elizabeth I recognizing Turlough Luineach's rights over his 'ur-riogha', or vassal chiefs. In return, Turlough Luineach promised to assist the crown in banishing the Scots from Ulster. The proposed agreement received support from the queen and privy council but was strongly opposed by Arthur Grey, fourteenth Lord Grey of Wilton, lord deputy, who, resentful of what he perceived as a snub to his authority, recommended a much tougher military policy against Turlough Luineach. The negotiations were consequently abandoned. 
Piers's failure to have his agreement with Turlough Luineach implemented led to a decline in his status in Clandeboye. By the mid-1580s he had retired to Tristernagh. He was also by this stage in declining health and reported in 1593 that he had lost the use of his legs. He did not, however, abandon his interest in Ulster and in 1594 he made another attempt to propose a scheme for settling the region. He continued to argue for the necessity of banishing the Scots and for the naval defence of the north-east coast. He also proposed limiting the power of Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone, by establishing a series of forts and encouraging some of the lesser chiefs in the province through their ennoblement as barons. As Piers acknowledged, his proposal borrowed some ideas from an earlier scheme recommended by Sidney in the 1570s. His last proposal, like his first, did not receive government backing. 
Piers died in 1603 and requested that he be buried at Carrickfergus. He had married Anne Holt of Holt Castle, Cheshire, who came to Ireland as part of the household of Mary Sidney, wife of Sir Henry Sidney. They had one son, Henry Piers (d. 1623) ['see under 'Piers, Sir Henry], and two daughters, Mary and Anne. 


@@@@@


doc= 22237


Piers, William (bap. 1580, d. 1670), bishop of Bath and Wells, was born at South Hinksey, near Oxford, and baptized at All Saints, Oxford, on 3 September 1580, the son of William Piers, haberdasher and kinsman of John Piers, archbishop of York. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 17 August 1599, graduated BA on 7 July 1600, and proceeded MA on 7 July 1603, BD on 5 July 1610, and DD on 27 June 1614. In 1609 James I gave Piers the living of Grafton Regis, Northamptonshire, but he resigned in 1611. Licensed to preach on 31 January 1612, he afterwards became chaplain to John King, bishop of London, who had himself been a chaplain to Archbishop Piers. Through him Piers received the livings of Northolt, Middlesex, in 1611, St Christopher-le-Stocks in 1615, and in 1618 the prebend of Wildlander at St Paul's Cathedral, where he was already a reader in divinity. He became a canon of Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, in 1616, holding this and Northolt 'in commendam' until 1632. He was a chaplain-in-ordinary to James I at least by 1621 and during Charles I's reign he was one of the Lenten preachers for 1631, 1633-6, and 1639. He was also rostered for 1638 but was too ill to preach. 
From 1621 to 1624 Piers was vice-chancellor of Oxford University and in that capacity he and other college heads charged Gabriel Bridges with 'false and offensive doctrine' after he had preached a sermon advocating the Arminian doctrine of grace. In 1622 a sermon upholding predestination, by Immanuel Bourne, rector of Ashover in Derbyshire, was dedicated to Piers. These events suggest that at this date Piers had Calvinistic sympathies, and contradict Anthony Wood's comment that while he was vice-chancellor he was 'too officious against such that were then called 'anti-arminians'', and thereby 'he gained the good will of Dr. Laud' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.839). Probably through the influence of Bishop John Williams, in 1622 he was appointed dean of Peterborough; he was consecrated bishop of Peterborough on 24 October 1630 and installed on 14 November. In his brief time there he provided an episcopal house for the diocese. He was translated to the see of Bath and Wells in 1632. 
In contrast to his earlier stance, during the 1630s Piers, with Matthew Wren, was the most ruthless of all bishops in supporting the Caroline and Laudian church policies. Laud reported to Charles that Piers had taken great pains to see that all his majesty's instructions had been obeyed, and that 'a great reformation hath been wrought there by his care and industry' ('Works', 5.349). Piers relentlessly pursued the nonconforming clergy. In Peterborough he restricted lectures for the Kettering lectureship to those who conformed, hoping to win over from their more radical ministers the chief sponsor of the lectureship, Edward, Lord Montagu, and his clergy who were moderate puritans. In Somerset he exceeded the king's instructions of 1629 on curbing lecturing, as evident in his remark in 1635, 'I thank God that I have not one lecturer left in my diocese'. On the grounds that 'they may cloak their secret meetings... under pretence of market business' (Davies, 153), he not only implemented Laud's instruction for catechizing to replace the afternoon lecture, but also suppressed sermons at evensong. There was also to be no instruction on the catechism, and clergy were punished whose only offence was to pray before and after catechizing. When the 'Book of Sports' was reissued in 1633 Piers gave it his wholehearted support by excommunicating or suspending those clergy who refused to read it on Sunday mornings. 
In 1633 Justice Richardson had reissued the order prohibiting the holding of wakes, and directed this order to be read in church at Sunday services in Somerset. Laud disapproved of this and sought the help of Piers, who collected the opinion of seventy-two ministers who favoured the wakes and recreation after the evening service as it kept the laity from conventicles and alehouses. Piers's own observation was that the people generally would not have these feasts repressed. They wanted to be with 'their kindred and friends once a year to praise God for his blessings;... and they said they would endure the judge's penalties rather than they would break off their feast-days'. However, Piers believed that the real issue was that 'the 'precise sort' disliked the feasts as they were held on Sundays which they regarded as the Sabbath' ('Works', 6.319-20). 
Piers was the first bishop in the Canterbury province to enforce the ruling from the St Gregory's case of 1633 that the altar be placed against the eastern wall or window and be railed in. He tried to implement Charles's statement that 'parochiall churches should be like the cathedrall churche'. He believed that his parishes fell into two groups: 'those whom he spoke to and they no sooner obeyed; and others which refused at first but were soon quickly satisfied and then submitted' (Davies, 226), but this does not tally with the figures for 1636 when there were only 140 churches out of 469 which had conformed. Some may have been awaiting the outcome of the Beckington appeal to the court of arches: in that parish when the churchwardens, James Wheeler and John Fry, refused to obey Piers's order to move the altar he excommunicated them. Laud supported Piers and sentenced them to a year's imprisonment and acts of public penance. Piers sought out not only puritans but also recusants -- a list of those presented at his visitation in 1633 was sent to Laud. For the size of the county he believed that there were not many, and 'for the most part of mean condition' ('Works', 5.319). 
As visitor of Wadham College Piers supported Laud's reform for Oxford University. In 1633 he wrote to the college reproving the fellows for their dissension in the recent elections, and suggested that the officers he nominated be accepted. After his visitation in the same year he issued a series of injunctions to enforce discipline and order, and these were updated in 1637. Phyllis Hembry described Piers as 'meticulous, orderly, [and] a little mercenary' (Hembry, 227). He took his predecessor at Bath and Wells, Walter Curll, to court even though he himself was called to account by John Cosin at Peterborough for money which should have been spent on repairs to the cathedral. Piers paid careful attention to the accounting of his estates and kept a notebook of all income from leased and rented property. As a result of his astuteness he gained a considerable income which was augmented after the Restoration. 
Piers was also an able administrator and held commissions in local government. As sheriff of Somerset in 1637 he dealt with disputes over payment of ship money, and when inhabitants of Wells Cathedral close, which by charter had its own liberty, requested exemption from this tax, Piers refused. His attempts to impose his authority on the dean and chapter led to accusations that he had wanted to take from 'the Dean and Chapter their rights by charter from the crown', and complaints that canons were cited for small misdemeanours. However, when parliament attacked cathedrals in 1640 Piers managed to patch up the dispute (TNA: PRO, SP 16/459/45). 
By 1640 Piers had alienated many of the Somerset gentry. For example, he clashed with Sir Francis Popham, patron of the parish of Buckland St Mary, when he appointed his own son, William, as the incumbent upon its vacancy in 1636. The articles of accusation against Piers presented to the House of Commons on 24 December 1640 also reflect this alienation. They concluded by denouncing him as a 'desperately prophane, impious, turbulent Pilate' ('Articles of Accusation', 8). Yet from the Tower, Laud had stated that Piers had done nothing 'but what became an obedient 'Diocesan' to his 'Metropolitan'' ('Works', 3.243). Piers was impeached on 30 December 1640 and imprisoned. Later, he was reimprisoned in the Tower, with eleven other bishops who had petitioned the king against legislation being passed in the House of Lords during their absence. While there he preached two sermons, on Sunday 20 January or February, and 24 April 1642, telling his fellow bishops that 'every child of God must have some affliction to humble himself and call him home to God'. However, there was a remedy for affliction -- prayer, and receiving God's grace which 'is an ever-flowing fountain' (Pierce, 'Sermon', 6, 7, 11). 
When released Piers retired to Sunbury, Middlesex, until the death of his wife, Anne, about 1655. Later, in his will, he gave $20 to St Mary, Sunbury-on-Thames, for silver altar plate in her memory. Piers then retired to Denton, near Oxford, where he married a much younger woman, Mary. At the Restoration, Piers had his episcopal see restored to him but its palace was in need of repair. He subsequently spent $5000 on it and $400 on the cathedral's repairs, but his wife persuaded him to retire to Walthamstow in Essex (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.840). His elder son from his first marriage, William, a clergyman, received prominent positions in the Bath and Wells diocese from his father, while the younger, John, was a lay prebendary at Wells Cathedral. 
In 1668 Piers was involved in a dispute with the warden and fellows over the dismissal of a disorderly student at Wadham. Piers's sympathy with the student brought disapproval from the chancellor, Archbishop Sheldon, who chided him for not supporting the college. Eventually Piers backed down, informing Sheldon that he would do whatever his grace thought 'was just for him to do' (Wadham MS 2/1, fols. 132-46). Piers died at Walthamstow, aged ninety, the oldest bishop in Christendom, and was buried in the parish church there on 19 May 1670. He was survived by his wife, Mary, who inherited most of his properties. 


@@@@@


doc= 22238


Pierson, Abraham (bap. 1611?, d. 1678), minister in America, was possibly the person of that name baptized on 22 September 1611 at Guiseley, Yorkshire, the son of Thomas Peerson. He matriculated, described as 'of Yorkshire', as a pensioner from Trinity College, Cambridge, in Michaelmas 1629 and graduated BA in 1632. On 23 September 1632, at the collegiate church of Southwell, he was ordained deacon in the diocese of York. At the visitation of that year, together with Henry Ayscough, rector of All Saints, Pavement, York, he was reported for failing to warn churchwardens of their duty to identify absentees from church. On 8 December 1632 he appeared at the chancery court (the court of the archbishop's vicar-general) at York for preaching unlicensed as curate in the same parish. 
On 19 March 1640 Pierson failed to attend when summoned before the high commission at York; despite further orders he had still not appeared by 30 April, when the court appears to have accepted his disappearance. It is clear that he had set sail for America, probably in the early months of 1640. He joined the Congregational church at Boston on 5 September 1640. Earlier in the year a group of colonists from Lynn, Massachusetts, had settled on the east side of Long Island, but were displaced by the Dutch, and shortly afterwards founded a colony on the west side, at Southampton. Meanwhile, the settlers who remained at Lynn requested Pierson to join them as pastor, and the Boston church granted him permission. Hugh Peter recorded the gathering in November 1640 of a church at Lynn and 'the ordination of Abraham Pierson as their guide in the spread of Gospel knowledge' ('DAB', 14.588). The Lynn settlers shortly proceeded to the new settlement at Southampton, where Pierson married Abigail, daughter of John Wheelwright, a merchant of Exeter, with whom he had a son, Abraham (1645-1707), the first president of Yale College. Southampton was then part of the Connecticut colony, but Pierson sought a stricter religious environment and moved to the colony of New Haven, which had fallen under the influence of the puritan John Davenport. Settling in Branford, he shared ministerial responsibilities with John Sherman for three years before his ordination as the community's pastor in 1650. 
Part of Pierson's pastoral brief involved evangelical activities among the Native Americans, for which he was paid a salary by the commissioners of the united colonies; he learned Quiripi, and with the help of Thomas Stanton translated into that language 'Some Helps for the Indians, Shewing them how to Improve their Natural Reason and to Know God' (1658). His distaste for the loose religious principles of Connecticut did not abate. When in 1662 the Connecticut governor received a royal charter that included the New Haven territory, Pierson was prominent in the battle against absorption. He and his church signed a covenant for their settlement stating that only church members could act as burgesses or magistrates in its civil government, but by 1665 their efforts to fight off Connecticut had failed. In response Pierson led a number of Branford residents to the banks of the Passaic River, where they founded a new settlement, New-work, or Newark. He served as the town's minister from 1666 until his death there on 9 August 1678. 


@@@@@


doc= 22239


Pierson, Henry Hugo (1815-1873), composer, born at Oxford on 12 April 1815, was the third son of Hugh Nicholas Pearson (1776-1856), then vicar of St Helen's, Abingdon, and later dean of Salisbury, and his wife, Sarah Maria (1781-1858), the daughter of Charles and Sarah Ann Elliott of Clapham, Surrey. His brothers were William Henley Pearson-Jervis, Charles Buchanan Pearson, and Hugh Pearson ['see under 'Pearson, Hugh Nicholas]. Until the age of sixteen he was educated at Harrow School, where he won the governor's prize for Latin hexameters. Shortly afterwards he studied medicine in London for two years. Despite his father's objection to a musical career he studied with Arthur Thomas Corfe (organist of Salisbury Cathedral), Thomas Walmisley, and Mozart's pupil Thomas Attwood. In 1836 he matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where his first published works, 'Thoughts of Melody' (1839) and five 'Characteristic Songs of Shelley' (1840), were apparently composed. 
In 1839, after leaving Cambridge without a degree, Pearson went to Paris and then to Germany. In Leipzig he became acquainted with Mendelssohn and Schumann, and when he moved to Dresden early in 1841 he asked Mendelssohn for a letter of introduction to the Dresden Hofkapellmeister C. G. Reissiger, with whom he continued his musical studies. His overture to Schiller's 'Maria Stuart' was successfully performed in Dresden. About this time he also received musical tuition from J. C. H. Rinck in Darmstadt and V. J. K. Tomasek in Prague. In 1842 his six lieder (Burns, trans. Freiligrath), op. 7, were favourably reviewed by Schumann in the 'Neue Zeitschrift fur Musik' and by Lewinsky in the 'Allgemeine Wiener Musik-Zeitung'. In July of that year he joined Shelley's widow, Mary, on a trip to Italy, during which she found him a troublesome companion. About this time he met the poet J. P. Lyser, with whose wife, Caroline ('nee' Leonhardt), he soon became emotionally involved. He was in Vienna by late autumn 1842, and in March 1843 contributed an article, 'Deutsche Oratorienmusik in England', signed Henry Hugh Pearson, to the 'Allgemeine Wiener Musik-Zeitung' (3, 1843, 121-3). The issue of 22 April began with a short biographical article on him, which commented that, unlike W. S. Bennett, who had chosen Mendelssohn for his model, Pearson 'belongs wholly to the new-romantic school, in the best sense of the word' ('Allgemeine Wiener Musik-Zeitung', 3, 1843, 197); it also remarked that, if he wanted, he 'could certainly have a great reputation as an organist' (ibid.), and mentioned that he had written a book on German musical life and activities, which seems, however, not to have been published. His later literary work included an edition of Schumann's 'Musikalische Haus- und Lebens-Regeln' (1850) and an edition and translation of Beethoven's 'Studies in Thorough-Bass' (1853). 
Back in Dresden, Pearson wrote to Mendelssohn on 2 April 1844: 'I have been wandering about the Continent having staid some months in Italy (Venice & Florence in particular) & still longer at Vienna -- & now I find it is nearly time to think of returning to old England... [Prince Albert] has been pleased to express his (sublime) admiration for some compositions of mine which were presented to him... Can you then be so kind as to write me a few lines intimating, that you consider me qualified to teach the science of composition, & perhaps to direct the studies of others, in case they were committed to me? (Bodl. Oxf., MS M.D.M. d.39, xiii, 90)' The new-romantic tendencies attributed to Pearson were rather those of Spohr, as his article of March 1843 implies, than of Wagner, with whose music he was scarcely in sympathy at that time, for in the same letter to Mendelssohn he observed, referring to Mendelssohn's 'Antigone', 'I do not know whether the Dresden taste will appreciate it seeing that Wagner has deteriorated it (the general taste) fearfully by his drum-trumpet-&-thunder operas' (ibid.). Shortly after this he applied for the vacant Reid professorship of music at Edinburgh University, in succession to Sir Henry Bishop, and he wrote again to Mendelssohn on 13 April 1844: 'my principal opponent is 'W. S. Bennett', who is generally supposed to be a sort of protege of yours... I think it is probable that you may exert your very great influence in his favour, & I write to inform you that I am also a candidate for the place, in order that everything may be 'fair and above board' as the sailors say --. (Bodl. Oxf., MS M.D.M. d.45, xix, 201)' However, he went on, ill-advisedly, to disparage Bennett. Mendelssohn's reaction is preserved in the draft of a letter to Professor Robert Jameson in Edinburgh in which he wrote (in English): 'he spoke in such a tone of Bennett, & his character as well as his talents, that I did not chose to return any answer to his letter' (Bodl. Oxf., MS M.D.M. d.45, xix, 225). Nevertheless, Pearson was the successful candidate, and was appointed on 1 June 1844. His tenure of the chair was short-lived; after eight months he returned to Germany and married Caroline Lyser (1811-1899), who had by then obtained a divorce, and they settled in Vienna. 
On 7 May 1845 Pearson's opera 'Die Elfensiege', to his wife's libretto, was given its premiere at Brunn (Brno), but, apparently in deference to his father's objections to the family name being associated with opera, he assumed the pseudonym Edgar Mannsfeldt (from his wife's family) for the publication of a piano arrangement of the overture and for other works that appeared at about this time. Pearson and his circle in Vienna seem to have created a deliberate cloud of obfuscation about Mannsfeldt's true identity, which resulted in a series of acrimonious exchanges in the press. In 1847 he moved to Hamburg, where on 22 February the following year his opera 'Lelia', with a libretto by his wife, based on her 'Schneewitchen', was produced and favourably reviewed. During these years Pearson was a controversial figure; a review of 'Lelia' in 1848 referred to him as 'persecuted by opponents', and observed: 'In a few years Mannsfeldt will have obtained a considerable reputation for himself by main force, for he is not personally liked, since most people cannot accept his withdrawn, inward-looking nature and his manner of holding people at a distance. ('Wiener Allgemeine Musik-Zeitung', 8, 1848, 163-4)' During the 1840s, and for the rest of his life, Pearson made a distinguished contribution to the literature of nineteenth-century song. He composed many pieces with German texts, though he continued to set verses by British authors in translation, and often included alternative English and German words. In 1852 he attempted to gain attention in his own country with the oratorio 'Jerusalem', performed at the Norwich festival. The work was stigmatized as a product of the 'New German School' and violently attacked by many in the press, though G. A. Macfarren wrote a more balanced review in the 'Musical Times' (27, 1852, 568). The oratorio was repeated in London the following year and at Wurzburg in 1862. Shortly after the Norwich debacle, which Pearson deeply resented, he formally adopted the German spelling of his family name, which he had used informally since at least 1843. In 1854 he composed one of his finest large-scale works, the incidental music to part 2 of Goethe's 'Faust'. This was given its premiere in Hamburg and gained significant recognition on the continent. A selection from it was given at Norwich in 1857. During the 1850s Pierson spent time in Mainz and Frankfurt before settling in Wurzburg in 1857; then in 1863 he moved to Stuttgart, where in summer 1867 Hubert Parry studied with him briefly. Among his larger works published at that time was an overture, 'Die Jungfrau von Orleans' (1867). 
In 1869 Pierson made a final effort to win recognition in England. He presided at the organ in a performance at the Norwich festival of parts of his oratorio 'Hezekiah', which, like 'Jerusalem', was savaged by the critics; he never completed 'Hezekiah'. The English musical press, especially the 'Musical Standard', contained many contributions both for and against Pierson at about this time. In April 1872 his opera 'Contarini', substantially composed almost twenty years earlier, was given its premiere at Hamburg after a production in Paris had been aborted by the Franco-Prussian War of 1870. This opera was revived as 'Fenice' in 1883. Pierson died of a heart attack on 28 January 1873 in Leipzig, 'en route' from Hamburg to Stuttgart, and his body was returned to his family for burial at Sonning, Berkshire. Some years after his death a number of his orchestral works, including 'Macbeth', 'Romeo and Juliet', and 'As You Like It', were given at the Crystal Palace concerts in London; but, apart from the glee 'Ye Mariners of England', his works were largely neglected in his native land and, according to his brother Hugh's article on him in the first edition of Grove's 'Dictionary of Music and Musicians', a vast quantity of his music remained in manuscript. 


@@@@@


doc= 22240


Pierson, William Henry (1839-1881), army officer, was born at Le Havre, France, on 23 November 1839, the eldest son of Charles Pierson of Cheltenham and his wife, Louisa Amelia, daughter of William Davidson of Le Havre. He was educated at Southampton and at Cheltenham College (1853-6), of which he was head boy. In 1856 he won the gold medal of the British Association; because of this, Captain Eastwick, a director of the East India Company, without knowing him, gave him a nomination for Addiscombe College, where he gained the Pollock medal and six prizes. He obtained his commission in three terms (1857-8), competing against four-term men, was first in mathematics, and was gazetted lieutenant in the Bengal Engineers from 10 December 1858. The lieutenant-governor, Major-General Sir F. Abbott, described him as 'the most talented scholar I have seen at Addiscombe, and his modesty would disarm envy itself'. At Chatham, where he did the usual professional course, he studied German privately, and was an admirable chess player, musician (on piano, cornet, and concertina), and oarsman. 
Pierson went to India in October 1860, and soon went on active service with the Sikkim field force; from January to May 1861 he did such good engineering work in bridging the Teesta and Riman rivers, under great local difficulties, that he was three times mentioned in dispatches, and received the thanks of the viceroy. After returning from Sikkim, he joined the public works department in Oudh, where his successful construction of the Fyzabad Road gained him promotion in the department. He was fond of sport, and while in Oudh was noted for his skill in pig-sticking. 
When the Indo-European telegraph was begun in 1863, Pierson was selected for employment under Colonel Patrick Stewart. In the winter of 1863-4 he served at Baghdad under Colonel Bateman-Champain, who placed him in charge of 220 miles of line, from Baghdad to Kangawar. His work was very arduous. Bateman-Champain recorded that the eventual success of the telegraph was chiefly due to Pierson's indefatigable exertions, and to his personal influence with the Persian authorities and the Kurdish chiefs of the area. In 1866 Pierson was sent on telegraph duty to the Caucasus, and on his return march narrowly escaped being murdered by a dozen disbanded Persian soldiers. After a short leave in England he acted at Vienna as secretary to the British representative at the International Telegraph Conference of 1868. He was then placed at the disposal of the Foreign Office to design and construct the new residence of the British legation at Tehran. The building demonstrated both his taste as an architect and his skill as an engineer. He was promoted captain on 14 January 1871. He married, at Hollingbourn, Kent, in August 1869, Laura Charlotte, youngest daughter of Richard Thomas, nephew and heir of Richard Thomas of Carmarthenshire, and of Eyhorne, Kent. They had no children. 
Pierson was director of the Persian telegraph from October 1871 to October 1873, and his reports and administration repeatedly evoked the special thanks of the government of India. During the 1871 famine he worked, in addition, with desperate energy to relieve the starving population in Persia, a duty for which he was well fitted by his thorough knowledge of the country and its language. He also designed, at the shah's request, some beautiful plans for public offices in Jekran, sketching and working out every detail himself. 
On his return to England in 1874, Pierson applied himself to the question of harbour defences and armour-plating, and studied at Chatham, acting for a time as instructor in field works. He left Chatham the following year, and until his return to India from furlough in November 1876 devoted himself to music and painting. In July 1877 he was appointed secretary to the Indian defence committee, and was the moving spirit in the consideration of the proposed defences for the Indian ports of Aden, Karachi, Bombay, Madras, Calcutta, and Rangoon. During the Afghan campaigns of 1878-81 Pierson's services were several times applied for by the military authorities, in one case by General Sir Frederick Roberts. He was actually appointed assistant adjutant-general Royal Engineers with the Kabul force, but could not be spared from his post on the Indian defence committee. In September 1880 he was appointed military secretary to Lord Ripon, the viceroy, in succession to Sir George White (afterwards commander-in-chief in India and field marshal). Pierson mastered the work, and the viceroy publicly thanked him on the occasion of his winning prizes for painting at the Simla Fine Arts Exhibition in 1880. 
Pierson was promoted regimental major on 25 November 1880, and in March 1881 was appointed commanding royal engineer of the field force proceeding against the Mahsud Wazirs. He joined the expedition in weak health, but in high spirits at the prospect of command on active service, to which he had long looked forward. Throughout the expedition the Royal Engineers were much exposed, in road-making, mining, and other arduous duties, to the great heat; on returning to Bannu, Pierson fell ill with dysentery. He died on 2 June 1881, and was buried in Bannu. His wife survived him. Pierson was commemorated by the Royal Engineers in the Afghan memorial in Rochester Cathedral, and by a marble tablet, with a medallion of his head, in Cheltenham College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 22241


Pigg, Oliver (b. c.1550, d. in or after 1591), Church of England clergyman, came from an extended family of that name in and around Colchester, Essex. He was perhaps the son of Oliver Pigg, tailor, found in the parish of St Nicholas in 1563. Another man of these names, rector of All Saints' from June 1569, had relinquished the cure by 17 October 1571, but 'Oliver Pigg, vicar of St Peter' (1569-79), is a creation of Richard Newcourt, who substituted his name for that found in the episcopal register, John Clyatt. 
Pigg matriculated pensioner from St John's College, Cambridge, on 6 October 1565, was made scholar on 8 November 1566, and graduated BA early in 1570. Ordained deacon by William Downham, bishop of Chester, on 5 March 1571, he was the following day instituted rector of Abberton, near Colchester, on the presentation of Katherine Audley. 
Pigg resigned Abberton no later than 2 December 1578, and about 1580 took charge of the parish of Rougham, Suffolk, on behalf of its absentee rector, William Tay, who was also rector of Peldon, Essex, and a founder member of the conference of dissident clergymen known as the Dedham classis. Tay seems to have ceded him all, or most, of the tithes. Pigg's nonconformity aroused the animosity of the patron, Robert Drury, who had the backing of Edmund Freake, bishop of Norwich. When Freake suspended Pigg in May 1581 Drury seized the opportunity to withhold his tithes. The privy council sided unequivocally with Pigg and when Freake refused to restore him went so far as to examine him themselves. They found in his favour, frankly informing Freake that the proceedings against him resulted from malice. This, and their rigorous pursuit of Drury, seem to have been enough to secure Pigg's restoration. 

'A comfortable treatise upon the latter part of the fourth chapiter of the first epistle of Saint Peter' was dated at London on 6 April 1582. Pigg had perhaps come to the capital to consult with John Field, organizing secretary of the clerical conference movement, for on 16 May following he reported to Field that sixty ministers from Cambridgeshire, Norfolk, and Essex had the previous week met secretly at Cockfield, Suffolk, where John Knewstub was rector, to discuss how far the prayer book should be tolerated for the future. This meeting may have represented a significant advance in Field's attempts to co-ordinate nonconformist activity throughout the home counties and thereafter to press for ecclesiastical reform by parliamentary means. 
Pigg practised what he preached and in February 1583 Robert Drury brought a suit against William Tay for permitting his curate's liturgical irregularities, again withholding the tithes. In July Pigg was duly imprisoned at Bury St Edmunds for altering the baptism service. Since in a petition for release to the Bury justices he declared his detestation of the doctrines of Robert Browne and Robert Harrison, it would seem that Drury had accused him of separatist beliefs. Pigg sent a copy of his petition to Francis Walsingham, with a covering letter complaining of the justices' severity in refusing him bail, and requesting another hearing before the privy council. 
Although none is recorded Pigg's appeal was evidently successful for, while Drury ensured that he did not return to Rougham, he was in 1584 among the Suffolk ministers who refused to subscribe to Archbishop Whitgift's three articles, newly introduced as his yardstick of conformity. This refusal perhaps spelt the end of Pigg's public ministry in Suffolk, and of the privy council's ability to protect him, for he seems to have briefly become chaplain to Sir Dru Drury, thereafter departing for Hertfordshire. 
Pigg was evidently one of those upon whom John Field relied in co-ordinating the conference movement. In 1587 he and William Dyke were the Hertfordshire delegates to a synod held in Cambridge and it was presumably about this time that the French church in London solicited them 'and the rest of the brethren in Buckinghamshire and Bedfordshire' for financial relief (Peel, 1.156). In April 1589, when his preaching caused contention in Dorchester, Pigg again engaged the government's sympathy on his behalf. That year he published 'Meditations concerning praiers to Almighte God, for the saftie of england, when the Spaniards were come into the narrow seas, August 1588', which advocated the annual observance of armada day. 'Sermons upon the 101. psalme, conteyning profitable instruction for all, especially for such as have any governement over others' appeared in 1591 and since no more is known of Pigg's activities he probably died shortly afterwards. 
As his frequent recourse to the privy council suggests, Pigg's radicalism never gave the central government any real cause for alarm. He seems to have been valued more for his preaching than distrusted for his activities as one of Field's most constant supporters. 


@@@@@


doc= 22242


Pigot, David Richard (1797-1873), judge, was the only son of Dr John Pigot, a physician of high reputation, resident at Kilworth, co. Cork, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Nagle. He received his early education at Fermoy, and graduated BA at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1819. For a time he studied medicine in Edinburgh, but he later turned to the legal profession, having entered the Middle Temple, London, in 1818, and he was for a period a pupil of Sir Nicolas Conyngham Tindal, subsequently chief justice of England. He was called to the bar in Ireland in 1826, and joined the Munster circuit. He married, in 1821, Catherine, eldest daughter of Walter Page of Araglin Mills, co. Cork. There were children of the marriage. 
Through his profound legal knowledge and skill in pleading Pigot rapidly acquired an extensive practice. He was made king's counsel in 1835, solicitor-general for Ireland and a bencher of King's Inns in 1839, the elected member of parliament for Clonmel, as a Liberal, on 18 February in the same year, and attorney-general from August 1840 to September 1841. He was re-elected for Clonmel in August 1840 and again in July 1841; and in 1840 he was sworn of the Irish privy council. He was not, however, inspired with political ambition, and hardly ever attended parliament when in opposition. He was made chief baron of the exchequer in Ireland in 1846, in succession to Sir Maziere Brady. 
Pigot was a member of the senate of the Queen's University in Ireland, a visitor of Maynooth College, and a commissioner of national education. He was a member of Brooks's, Arthur's, and the Reform clubs in London, and in 1870 he received from Dublin University an honorary DL degree. He served as chief baron until his death at his residence, 15 Merrion Square East, Dublin, on 22 December 1873. He was buried at Kilworth. 
Pigot was a most learned and conscientious judge, though he was wont to delve too deeply into the minutiae of litigation, thereby prolonging it quite unnecessarily. Nevertheless, his judgments displayed legal ability of a high order, and some would maintain that even today, a case is all the stronger for having Pigot on one's side. Pigot had a number of interests outside the law and was possessed of great literary and musical ability; he wrote some of the Irish sketches published by Crofton Croker. 


@@@@@


doc= 22243


Pigot, Elizabeth Bridget (1783-1866), friend and correspondent of Lord Byron, was born on 20 September 1783 and baptized on 10 October 1783 in the parish of St Werburgh's, Derby, the daughter of John Hollis Pigot (died 1794), physician, and his wife, Margaret (died 1833), 'nee' Becher. She had two brothers, Captain R. H. H. Pigot, who fought at the battle of the Nile, and Dr John Pigot, a friend and correspondent of Byron whose manuscript account of his recollections of Byron, used by Thomas Moore in preparing his life of the poet, is now at Newstead Abbey. Miss Pigot lived at Southwell, Nottinghamshire, with which place her mother's family was connected, for nearly all her life. She was educated at home and possibly at a school for girls in Southwell. 
In 1804 the sixteen-year-old Byron arrived in Southwell with his mother and lived at Burgage Manor, opposite Mrs Pigot's house on Burgage Green. Following his death in 1824 Elizabeth Pigot recalled her friendship with Byron for Thomas Moore, then gathering materials for his life of the poet. She described Byron as 'a fat, bashful boy' ('Letters and Journals of Lord Byron', ed. Moore, 1.99) whom, in their first meetings, she would accompany on the piano while he sang. 'I sing much better to your playing than to anyone else's', he confided to her. 'That is', she answered, 'because I play to your singing' ('Works of Lord Byron', ed. Coleridge and Prothero, 5.295-6). Her accommodating (yet witty) reply conveys the essence of their friendship. The following year Byron left for Trinity College, Cambridge, but returned to Southwell from time to time until 1807, and regularly corresponded with Elizabeth Pigot until 1811. Jerome McGann, editor of 'The Complete Works of Byron', notes that 'Elizabeth Pigot made fair copies of all the poems Byron printed when he was at Southwell', and he drew on these and on her notes in his edition ('Complete Poetical Works', ed. McGann, 1.368). These fair copies were sent to the Newark bookseller John Ridge and were first published in Byron's 'Fugitive Pieces' (1806), 'Hours of Idleness' (1807), 'Poems on Various Occasions' (1807), and 'Poems Original and Translated' (1808). Manuscript copies of these poems, annotated by Elizabeth Pigot, are now in Newstead Abbey collections. 
Five years older than him, outwardly Miss Pigot avoided the pitfalls of romantic entanglement with Byron, a danger to which several of the 'Southwell belles' fell victim. He addressed her affectionately in his letters as 'My dear Bridget' and later as 'Dear Queen Bess', and she addressed him by several nicknames including Tristram Fickle (the lead character in J. T. Allingham's farce 'The Weathercock' which formed one of the private theatricals in which Byron participated in Southwell). To her, Byron addressed his poem beginning 'Eliza, what fools are the Mussulman sect!' -- about 1807 she had been engaged to a Captain Basil Hall (1788-1844), then in India, but the engagement was broken off. Of other poems he wrote to Eliza, 'A Woman's Hair' which he inscribed in her copy of Burns's works in 1806, 'As relics left of saints above', 'Your Motto is l'Amitie', and those addressed to 'M. S. G.' (my sweet girl), celebrate their mutual interest in symbolic tokens of friendship (Byron entrusted to Elizabeth's care the cornelian heart he had been given by the Cambridge chorister John Edleston, the 'Thyrza' of some early poems). 
Elizabeth Pigot was a competent watercolour artist and herself a writer of amusing verse: in a small hand-sewn booklet she provided ten delightful illustrations to accompany her manuscript poem, dated '26th March 1807', 'The Wonderful History of Lord Byron & his Dog' (Ransom HRC). A pastiche of 'The Wonderful Adventure of Old Mother Hubbard and her Dog' (of which an illustrated second edition was published in 1805), this playful poem is also similar to Byron's 'Parody upon 'The Little Grey Man' in Lewis's 'Tales of Wonder''. The worldly humour of both poems is one that Byron was later to develop in 'Beppo' and further in 'Don Juan' as well as in his celebrated letters, and is founded on a world-view that generated in both an impetus to write. The illustrations to her verse include several portraits of Byron, and show him playing at cricket, being preached to by his dog, Boatswain, and going 'into the bath to boil off his fat' (Ransom HRC). Elizabeth Pigot designed a bookplate for Byron, and her design of a 'B' surmounted by a coronet embellishes each volume of Leslie Marchand's magisterial edition of 'Byron's Letters and Journals' and his 'Life of Byron' (3 vols., 1957), both published by John Murray. Her delicate execution of a miniature in watercolour of Byron's right eye (1807; priv. coll., Southwell), a form of painting that comprises an unusual subgenre of portraits in miniature that were, at that time, exchanged as intimate love tokens, suggests that Elizabeth's feelings for Byron were possibly more than those of a dispassionate friend. She kept locks of his hair (one, kept with her eye portrait, was formerly enclosed in a tiny circle of seed pearls, and another, carefully wrapped in a slip of paper inscribed by Elizabeth with the date it was cut from his head, and subsequently kept in a pearwood watch-case, is now at Newstead Abbey). After her death at her home, Greyfriars, Easthorpe, Southwell, on 11 December 1866, a packet of Byron's letters is said to have been buried with her, on 15 December, under the north-west tower of Southwell Minster. These memorials bear out the inscription which she added in 1854 inside the back cover of her manuscript booklet 'The Wonderful History of Lord Byron & his Dog': '
Out upon Time!- 

It forever will leave, 

but enough of the past, 

for the future to grieve. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 22244


Pigot, George, Baron Pigot (1719-1777), colonial governor, was born on 4 May 1719 in London, probably at King's Mews, Westminster, the eldest surviving son of Richard Pigot ('bap'. 1679, died 1729), clerk of the stables to the prince of Wales, and Frances (1695-1769), dressmaker to Caroline, princess of Wales, and daughter of Peter Godde, a Huguenot who had come to England in the late seventeenth century. George's younger brothers Robert and Hugh Pigot had distinguished careers in the army and the navy respectively. George Pigot was brought up in his father's household at Westminster and later, after his father's death in December 1729 and his mother's remarriage, in that of his stepfather, John Wyvill, an army officer, at Walton in Surrey. 
With the support of Colonel Wyvill, Pigot obtained an appointment as writer in the East India Company's civil service at Madras, where he arrived on 26 July 1737, aged eighteen. In 1746 he was involved in the British debacle when the French captured the settlement. As a prisoner Pigot was permitted to go to Britain. In 1750 he returned to Madras and rose though the company's service to become governor in January 1755. 
As governor Pigot inherited the policy of resistance to what were taken to be French designs of aggrandizement throughout southern India. Anglo-French rivalry was at first fought out through Indian proxies, the British successfully supporting the claims of Muhammad Ali Khan to be the nawab of the Carnatic against French-backed rivals. Support for Muhammad Ali Khan involved the British in military operations to establish the nawab's authority throughout the Carnatic and thus to enable him to collect the revenue that would pay off the obligations that he owed to his British protectors. In 1756 Pigot and his council at Madras detached a large part of their forces on what turned out to be a triumphantly successful expedition under Robert Clive to restore the British position in Bengal after the disaster of the loss of Calcutta. 
Two years later, in 1758, the conflict in south India entered into a new phase. With the arrival of a large French expeditionary force, war would no longer be conducted by Indian proxies. The French under the comte de Lally moved against Madras. Pigot had, however, anticipated them, greatly strengthening the town's fortifications. From December 1758 until February 1759 he organized a vigorous defence in which he personally took a conspicuous role. As Lally withdrew, a reinforced British army under Eyre Coote pursued him, defeated him at Wandiwash, and drove him into the main French settlement at Pondicherry. There the French surrendered in January 1761, Pigot subsequently facing down the royal officers who claimed Pondicherry for the crown and asserting the company's right to annex and raze it to the ground. 
With the defeat of the French, Pigot's main task was to settle relations with the nawab of the Carnatic, who was committed to paying large sums for the support rendered to him by his British allies. From time to time solutions were contemplated resembling those that were evolving in Bengal, whereby the company would recover what was owed to it by annexing the nawab's territory, but Pigot left the nawab's territorial authority substantially intact. Muhammad Ali Khan was to survive as a nominally independent ally of the company, although on the eve of his departure in 1763 Pigot forced him to grant valuable territory near Madras to the company. 
Pigot resigned his office on 14 November 1763. He returned to England with an assured place in the pantheon of heroes of the Seven Years' War, recognized by the baronetcy conferred on him a year later -- and with a great fortune, including a notoriously large diamond. Neither the precise extent of his fortune nor how it had been obtained can be ascertained beyond rumour. It seems highly likely, however, that a large part of what he acquired came from Muhammad Ali Khan, to whom he had rendered signal services in establishing him on the throne and sustaining his authority. The nawab had evidently committed himself to paying Pigot a regular pension in Britain after his return. 
Towards the end of his governorship Pigot was described, not unfairly, by the naval officer Samuel Cornish, with whom he had crossed swords, as 'a man of supreme vanity and vaunt' (to Lord Anson, 24 June 1761, TNA: PRO, Adm. 1/162, fol. 138). He was also a man of superabundant physical energy, apparently disregarding normal European inhibitions about the midday sun in directing the fortification of Madras and in gardening at the end of his life. He was ruthless in the pursuit of his objectives, decisive and domineering in office, acquisitive of material wealth to enable him to live in a high style in both India and England, and, it would seem, a considerable sexual predator. He never married but fathered ten children by six different women, forming lasting attachments with only two of them: Leonora Jane Jackson, 'nee' Hepburn ('c'.1738-1761), at Madras and Catherine Hill ('c'.1750- 'c'.1831) later in England. Their children, especially his two beloved elder daughters, Sophia and Leonora, became full members of his family. Pigot was a dangerous man to cross, as the historian of India Robert Orme, for instance, was to find, but he was a generous patron to a number of younger people. 
In England, Pigot pursued the usual avocations of the very rich, leasing grand houses in London, collecting pictures, buying a country estate, and entering the House of Commons. The estate Pigot chose in 1765 was Patshull Hall in Staffordshire with a house recently built by James Gibbs. He paid $80,000 for it. In January 1765 he entered parliament for Wallingford in the interest of the then government of George Grenville. He shifted his support to the new administration of the marquess of Rockingham, from whom he obtained his Irish baronage in January 1766. Two years later he transferred his seat to Bridgnorth, a borough near his Patshull estate. 
By the early 1770s Pigot's mind was evidently turning to India once more. Why a man now over fifty should have contemplated such a course is puzzling. There was much speculation that he had run through his fortune and needed to make another one. This cannot be substantiated. If his original fortune had been as large as rumoured, it suggests extravagance on a heroic scale. Perhaps driven as much by a desire to return to public life as by financial need, he showed an interest in the new office of governor-general, created by an act of 1773, when it was awarded to Warren Hastings. He then competed for his old post of governor of Madras, beating a government-backed rival, Thomas Rumbold, by four votes in a ballot of the company's shareholders in March 1775. 
The Madras to which Pigot returned in December 1775 was not the Madras he had left twelve years before. Muhammad Ali Khan was still nawab of the Carnatic, but his position had changed greatly. He had been able to build up a considerable influence over the company's servants at Madras, many of whom had invested in the loans at high interest which sustained his government, and he was reaching beyond the company to establish direct links with the British government through agents posted to London. The most striking demonstration of Muhammad Ali Khan's apparent capacity to manipulate British policy had occurred in 1773, when the company's army had conquered for him the territory of the raja of Tanjore, whose autonomy, subject to payment of tribute to the nawab, had been guaranteed in a treaty of 1762 under Pigot's previous governorship. 
Pigot carried out with him instructions from the company's directors for a thorough reform of the government of Madras. He was personally committed to carrying through this programme and reducing the influence of the nawab. In particular, the raja of Tanjore was to be restored to full control of his territory with a British garrison in his main fort. Both Pigot and the policies that he was to carry out seem at first to have been widely welcomed among the British at Madras. Within a very short time, however, the execution of the policies was to provoke violent opposition, which culminated in a coup that brought Pigot's government to a premature end. 
The nawab could neither be cajoled nor intimidated into consenting to restore the raja of Tanjore. Pigot therefore determined to carry out the restoration regardless, and went to Tanjore in person to do so. The restoration raised the question of what safeguards if any would be given to those who had lent money to the nawab and had been given assignments on the revenue of Tanjore after its conquest in return. Very large sums were involved, the equivalent of some $750,000. The biggest claimant was Paul Benfield, who had until recently been the main financier of the nawab's government. He had some $225,000 secured on Tanjore. Pigot quickly dashed the creditors' hopes that stipulations on their behalf would be included in the restoration of the raja of Tanjore. He evidently believed that the creditors were encouraging the nawab in his intransigence and declined to insist that the restored raja must honour the nawab's assignments. 
Opposition to the governor began to grow within a once supportive council and turned into a strong majority against him. Alarm for the safety of their own loans to the nawab was clearly predominant in turning the council against Pigot, but they seem also to have been concerned about the total breakdown of his relations with the nawab and about his increasingly dictatorial ways of conducting business. Pigot would not allow a majority of the council to determine policy against him, and so deadlock ensued. Disaffection spread to the officers of the army, who were concerned about their allowances and some of whom apparently had money invested with Benfield. Army officers, headed by Colonel James Stuart, executed a coup against Pigot to which the dissident councillors, Paul Benfield, and the nawab were clearly parties. Pigot was seized while driving in a chaise with Stuart and taken by force to St Thomas's Mount outside Madras, where he was kept in not very rigorous confinement, while the majority of the councillors assumed the power of government. Appeals were sent by both sides to Britain. Before any outcome could be known in Madras, however, Pigot was dead. In March 1777 he became ill after excessive exposure to the sun gardening on the Mount. He was moved to the company's garden house at Madras, where he died on 11 May and was buried in St Mary's Church at Fort St George on the same day. 
Pigot's enemies had undoubtedly chosen to overthrow a legally constituted government by force in order to protect their private interests. They tried to defend themselves by charging that Pigot's motives for restoring Tanjore had been corrupt. Allegations were made that he had accepted large presents from the raja of Tanjore. Such accusations do not altogether strain credulity, but no evidence to support them was ever found. Pigot's determination to curb the nawab's influence did not need to be bought. In the way that he carried out his orders, however, he contributed materially to his own downfall. He had not changed much since 1763; an observer noted his 'great spirit' mixed with 'excessive vanity and overbearing despotism' (HoP, 'Commons, 1754-90', 3.280), but Madras had changed. The nawab could no longer be browbeaten as of old, and although there was much that was corrupt and collusive about his loans, the creditors were a legitimate interest. As subsequent attempts to settle the nawab's debts were to reveal, money had genuinely been advanced to him. Without such loans he would not have been able to meet his obligations, above all to the East India Company. Bringing order to a disordered Madras presidency in 1776 required more finesse than Lord Pigot could muster. 


@@@@@


doc= 22245


Sir Henry Pigot (1750-1840), army officer, who entered the army as a cornet in 1769. He became lieutenant-colonel in 1783, major-general in 1795, lieutenant-general in 1802, and general in 1812. He served in the Netherlands in 1793-4, was at Gibraltar (1796-8), went to Minorca in 1800, and accepted the surrender of Valletta, Malta, in September 1800. In 1836 he transferred from the colonelcy of the 82nd to that of the 38th regiment, with which his uncle Sir Robert had been connected. He was made GCMG in 1837 and died in London on 7 June 1840. Hugh Pigot's second wife, Frances (died 1811), was the daughter of Sir Richard Wrottesley; their children included Hugh Pigot, naval officer. Hugh Pigot the elder died at Bristol on 15 December 1792. 


@@@@@


doc= 22246


Pigot, Hugh (1722-1792), naval officer, was born on 28 May 1722, the third son of Richard Pigot ('bap'. 1679, died 1729) of Westminster, and Frances (1695-1769), daughter of Peter Godde. He was the brother of George Pigot, Baron Pigot, later governor of Madras, and General Sir Robert Pigot, army officer. He entered the navy in 1735 and on 9 February 1742 was promoted lieutenant. On 2 November 1745 he was promoted commander of the 'Vulcan', and on 22 April 1746 he was posted captain in the 'Centaur'; he went on to command the 'Ludlow Castle' in the West Indies in 1747. In 1758 he commanded the 'York' at the capture of Louisbourg and in 1759 the 'Royal William' at the conquest of Quebec. During the Falkland Islands crisis of 1771 he commanded the 'Triumph' for a short period. On 31 March 1775 he was promoted rear-admiral and on 5 February 1776 he became vice-admiral. 
In 1768 Pigot was elected MP for Penryn, which he represented until 1774; between 1778 and 1784 he sat for Bridgnorth. He opposed Lord North's ministry -- especially after his brother Lord Pigot was illegally deprived of the governorship of Madras -- and was a supporter of Admiral Augustus Keppel. After North left office in March 1782 Keppel became first lord of the Admiralty in the new administration. In April Pigot was appointed a commissioner of the Admiralty, and on 24 April he was promoted admiral. Keppel then appointed him commander-in-chief on the Leeward Islands station, and on 18 May he sailed in the 'Jupiter' to supersede Admiral George Rodney. News of Rodney's victory at the battle of the Saints (12 April) then arrived and the government tried to cancel Pigot's orders, but he had already sailed from Portsmouth. 
Rodney and his fleet were at Jamaica, which Pigot reached on 10 July. Having last seen active service twenty years before as a captain, Pigot had no experience of commanding a fleet. The discipline imposed by Rodney was undermined by Pigot's laxness, much to the disgust of his second in command, Admiral Sir Samuel Hood. Deciding to take the fleet to North America to avoid the hurricane season, Pigot, in the 'Formidable', left Jamaica on 26 July 1782 with more than twenty-five ships of the line. On his way north he took the fleet off Havana and captured a number of enemy merchant ships. Determined to keep these prizes with him, Pigot slowed the progress of his fleet. He did not reach New York until early September, and news of his slow passage moved George III to write to Keppel questioning Pigot's competence. 
Despite Rodney's victory at the Saints, the French and Spanish decided to make another attempt to capture Jamaica in 1783. To defeat this plan the British intended to withdraw troops from North America and send them to the Caribbean. Pigot was to be effectively commander of all British naval forces in the West Indies and was to make dispositions to meet the new Franco-Spanish threat. On 25 October 1782 Pigot left New York with thirteen ships of the line bound for Barbados, while Hood sailed with the rest of the fleet in November to cruise off Cap Francois. In January 1783 Pigot cruised off Martinique and then, early in February, took his fleet to St Lucia. The enemy fleet failed to appear, and by the end of March Pigot knew this was because the war was over. 
Pigot left the Admiralty on the change of ministry in December 1783 and was not returned to the new parliament. He was twice married, his first wife being Elizabeth, daughter of Peter le Neve; the couple had more than one child, the eldest being 


@@@@@


doc= 22247


Pigot, Hugh (bap. 1769, d. 1797), naval officer, was baptized in the parish church of Patshull in Staffordshire on 5 September 1769, the second of the five children of Admiral Hugh Pigot (1722-1792) and his second wife, Frances (died 1811), daughter of Sir Richard Wrottesley of Tettenhall, Staffordshire. Pigot entered the navy in May 1782 in the 'Jupiter' with his father, the newly appointed Admiralty commissioner and commander-in-chief of the West Indies, following him into the 'Formidable'. From October 1783 to August 1785 he served in the 'Assistance' on the North American station, with Sir Charles Douglas. He was afterwards in the 'Trusty', flagship of Sir John Laforey, on the Leeward Islands station, and the 'Southampton', passed his examination on 31 August 1789, and then returned home for leave. 
On 21 September 1790 Pigot was promoted lieutenant of the 'Colossus' (Captain Hugh Cloberry Christian) in the channel, and in 1793-4 he was in the 'London' with Captain Richard Goodwin Keats. 
Pigot was made commander of the sloop 'Swan' on the Jamaica station on 10 February 1794. In May she collided with the merchant ship 'Canada', an action which Pigot blamed on the latter's commander, accusing him of 'most insolent Provoking and Abusive Language' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/2310, 15 May 1794). In September 1794 he was posted to the frigate 'Success', and in July 1796 she was engaged in convoying merchant ships near Santo Domingo. When Pigot collided with the American merchant ship 'Mercury', he had the latter's rigging cut away, and her captain seized and flogged. The American captain, Jesup, protested to the American consul in Port-au-Prince, accounts from the 'New York Diary' were sent to the Admiralty, and Robert Liston, British envoy in Philadelphia, complained to the secretary of state, Lord Grenville. In January 1797 an inquiry was held 'into the conduct of Captain Pigot of the Success... for Cruel treatment of an American master' (TNA: PRO, ADM 50/65, 19 Jan 1797). Pigot blamed Jesup for the affair but apologized for his behaviour and was thereafter exonerated. According to Vice-Admiral Hyde Parker, 'however unjustifiable his conduct may have been, and which the Captain acknowledges with great contrition, it falls infinitely short of what has been alledged against him' (Parker to R. Liston, 9 April 1797, TNA: PRO, ADM 1/248). 
The 'Success' was due to return to England but Parker allowed Pigot to exchange with Captain Philip Wilkinson of the 'Hermione' (32 guns). Pigot invited twenty-four of the 'Success''s crew to accompany him, saying: 'My Men I am going to Inform you of my leaveing this Ship but I should be Glad to go home as well as you but dare say you Know the Reason' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/5348, Redman's statement). On 10 February he and his former crew transferred to the 'Hermione'. In March her boats successfully cut out sixteen vessels at Punta Jiguero, capturing a brig. However, her existing crew 'Seemed to be Charegrined or dissatisfyed by granting favours [including prize money and the grant of liberty at Port Royal] to them that Came with Captain Pigot'; those who protested were meanwhile 'Confined and three he threatened to try by Court Martial at the Mold [Cape Nicolas Mole, modern day Cap Haitien]' (ibid.). In the following month Pigot, commanding the 'Mermaid', 'Quebec', 'Drake', and 'Penelope', took 'in the most complete manner' fourteen American ships from French privateers at Juan Rabal near Cape Nicolas Mole, recovering nine prizes (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/248, 27 April 1797). In May the 'Hermione' was cruising the South American coast between Caracas and Curacao when a Lieutenant Harris prevented her from running aground, though the 'Ceres', also under Pigot's command, could not be saved. Pigot irrationally requested 'further enquiry' into why the 'Ceres' had run aground, and claimed that 'a great measure [was] to be imputed to his [Harris's] neglect' for not keeping 'a proper lookout' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/248, 9 June 1797). However, Rear-Admiral Rodney Bligh acquitted and praised Harris, who left the 'Hermione'. 
In August 1797 the 'Hermione', 'Renomme', and 'Diligence' patrolled the Mona Passage between Santo Domingo and Puerto Rico, taking prizes. The 'Renomme' left after being struck by lightning on 11 September. During the cruise Pigot accused Midshipman Casey of contempt because one reefpoint had not been tied, had him flogged for not apologizing on his knees, and relieved him of duty. On the evening of 20 September Pigot's unpredictability and irrationality were again evident when he told the mizentopmen then reefing topsails that he would flog the last man down. In their hurry three fell on the quarterdeck and died, their bodies being thrown overboard on the orders of an unrepentant Pigot. The remaining mizentopmen who had ceased reefing were ordered to be started with rope ends and a dozen to be flogged next day. On the evening of 21 September, as the 'Hermione' drew away from the 'Diligent', her crew, fortified by drink, attacked the officer of the watch. About 10.30 p.m. Pigot was killed in his cabin by repeated blows and knife-wounds; his body was in turn thrown into the sea. They called 'out from all parts of the Ship 'that the Ship was their own that Hughy was overboard'' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/5348, Edward Southcott, 13 March 1799). Arguing 'they may as well be hung for a Sheep as a Lamb' (ibid.), the mutinous crew stabbed and threw overboard nine more officers, but the next day spared five warrant and petty officers. Having divided the officers' possessions, they changed their names and swore: 'in case of meeting with any part of the Ships Company in any part of the Globe we were not to know them or bring them to England' (ibid.). A week later the ship arrived at La Guaira, near Caracas, where the crew delivered her to the Spanish governor who fitted her out as a ship of war under the Spanish flag. Vice-Admiral Hyde Parker heard the news from the 'Diligence' on 31 October. Similar plots were discovered on her, as well as the 'Ceres' and 'Renomme', where 'The intention was to perform the same Tragedy as that of the Hermione, by the Murdering all the Officers, and carrying the Ship into the Havannah' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/248, 19 March 1798). 
The 'Hermione' mutineers received 25 dollars apiece for food and clothing from the Spanish, followed with a choice between hard labour, refitting their ship, or joining the Spanish army. The officers were exchanged, arriving at Martinique in April 1798. 'Conceiving it impossible for the Perpetrators of that horrid Act to be at rest, and therefore most probably will ship themselves on board Neutral Vessels, to America and these Islands', Parker offered rewards for their capture and pardons for evidence (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/248, 15 Nov 1797). Key witnesses were kept in Port Royal and Portsmouth. Between March 1798 and October 1806 thirty-three mutineers were charged and tried with 'having murdered her officers, or been aiding and assisting therein, and for having aided and assisted in carrying the said ship to La Guira ['sic'], and delivering her up to the Enemy' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/5348, 13 March 1799). Twenty-four were hanged and gibbeted as an example (one within an hour of his trial), one transported, and eight acquitted or pardoned. In October 1799 Captain Edward Hamilton of the 'Surprise' heroically cut out the 'Hermione' which was subsequently renamed the 'Retaliation' by Hyde Parker and later the 'Retribution' by the Admiralty. In many ways Hamilton proved a far harder captain than his predecessor Pigot who amid his brutality was also known for acts of generosity. It was precisely this capriciousness and unpredictability, condoned by Hyde Parker, which had prompted the 'Hermione''s isolated crew to seek redress. Surrounded by enemy ships and ports, they chose mutiny to resolve their grievances, though to the Admiralty theirs were acts of 'Mutiny, Murder and Piracy' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/248, 2 March 1798). 


@@@@@


doc= 22248


Pigot, Sir Robert, second baronet (1720-1796), army officer, was born on 20 September 1720, probably in Westminster, the fourth but second surviving son of Richard Pigot ('bap'. 1679, died 1729) and his wife, Frances (1695-1769), a servant of Caroline, princess of Wales, and daughter of Peter Godde. He was the brother of Sir George Pigot, Baron Pigot, and Admiral Hugh Pigot. Small and sturdily built, he was a brave and competent soldier. He first served with the 31st regiment in Flanders during the War of the Austrian Succession, and was present at the battle of Fontenoy in 1745. In October he returned to England and in 1749 he began a tour of duty in Minorca and Scotland. He was promoted captain on 31 October 1751. In 1758 his battalion of the 31st regiment was transferred to the 70th regiment, and on 5 May he was promoted major. On 1 October 1764 he became lieutenant-colonel of the 38th regiment. He married Anne (died July 1772), daughter of Allen Johnson, of Kilternan, co. Dublin, on 18 February 1765; they had four children. In 1768 he succeeded his brother George as MP for Wallingford. He was not very active, though he is recorded as having voted with the government on the Middlesex election. He was appointed warden of the Royal Mint in January 1772, but failed to win re-election in Wallingford, and an attempt to return to the Commons at Stafford in 1774 was also unsuccessful. 
In 1774 Pigot was ordered to Boston, Massachusetts, with the 38th regiment to help quell the political ferment in America. On 19 April 1775 he accompanied a relief force commanded by Hugh, Earl Percy, sent to support the withdrawal of Lieutenant-Colonel Francis Smith from Lexington and Concord. He distinguished himself in the battle of Bunker Hill on 17 June. The previous night the rebels had constructed a redoubt on Charleston Heights, and General William Howe resolved to remove this threat to his position. Pigot was given command of the army's left wing with the local rank of brigadier-general, while Howe led the right wing in a flanking attack. In a series of direct assaults Pigot and his men broke the Americans' resistance, but with huge losses. For his distinguished service and bravery Pigot was promoted by George III on 11 December to the colonelcy of the 38th regiment. When the British army evacuated Boston in March 1776 Pigot accompanied Howe to Halifax, Nova Scotia. On 27 August he commanded the 2nd brigade in the battle of Long Island, New York. 
At the death of his brother George on 11 May 1777 Pigot inherited his baronetcy, his estate at Patshull in Staffordshire, and a one-third share of the famous Pigot diamond, which was valued at $30,000. On 15 July 1777 he took command of the important British garrison at Newport, Rhode Island, and on 29 August he was promoted major-general. In March 1778 he was considered for appointment as Howe's second-in-command, but nothing came of the idea. A bon vivant, he missed the society and entertainments of New York. During August 1778 he struggled tenaciously to defend Newport against combined operations by John Sullivan's army and a French fleet commanded by the Comte d'Estaing. Remaining cool and quiet, according to Sir Henry Clinton, he was rescued on 8 August by the arrival of a British fleet commanded by Admiral Lord Howe and by reinforcements from Clinton three weeks later. On 29 August he fought a sharp battle with Sullivan at Butt's Hill, but was repulsed with heavy losses. He relinquished his command in October and in 1779 returned to England. On 20 November 1782 he was promoted lieutenant-general. He died at Patshull on 2 August 1796 after a long and painful illness. He was succeeded in his title and estate by his eldest son, Lieutenant-Colonel (later Major-General) George Pigot. 


@@@@@


doc= 22249


Pigott, Sir Arthur Leary (1749-1819), lawyer and politician, was born on 19 October 1749 in Barbados, the eldest son of John Piggott (died 1776?) and his wife, Jane. A Yorkshireman, his father had emigrated in the 1730s, settling first in Barbados and later in Grenada. 
Arthur Pigott's early life was spent in England and the West Indies. In 1767 he enrolled as a student at the Middle Temple, and in or about 1773 he married Jane Dunnington (1752?-1841), of Manchester. The couple had at least one child, a daughter. In 1778 he matriculated at Oxford University from Trinity College, though he did not take a degree. He commenced his legal career in Grenada, however, and in 1780 was appointed attorney-general for the island. Even after settling in England he maintained professional ties with the West Indian plantation community, regularly acting as their parliamentary counsel on the slave trade question. 
This toleration of slavery contrasted with Pigott's generally whiggish political creed. He owed his entry into politics to Lord North who, upon Pigott's return to England in 1780, appointed him to the newly formed public accounts commission. Thereafter, however, Pigott's views gravitated more nearly toward those of North's coalition partner, Charles James Fox. A charter member of the Whig Club, Pigott was also active in the Revolution Society, the Society of the Friends of the People, and the Friends of the Liberty of the Press. Fox's good opinion secured him the post of solicitor-general to the prince of Wales in 1783, and a too pronounced adherence to Foxite principles cost him that post in 1792. 
Pigott's career at the English bar began in the common law courts. After being called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1777 he attended the home circuit, and in May 1783 he received a patent of precedence. Despite his silk gown he did not achieve great professional eminence in the king's bench. Commentators have blamed this variously on his inability to assess evidence rapidly before a jury, and the resolution of attorneys on his circuit, one of whom he had offended, to deny him briefs. Whatever the reason, in 1793 he migrated to the court of chancery, where his practice flourished. Henry Brougham described Pigott's knowledge of the law as accurate and profound in all its branches, and his legal opinions as deliberately considered (Brougham, 407). The 'Gentleman's Magazine' praised his ability 'to compress into a smaller compass than is usual with equity pleaders the merits of his case' ('GM', 1st ser., 89, 372). His powers of oratory were not remarkable, and perhaps not surprisingly he had scant respect for rhetorical ornamentation, which he dismissed as 'air', 'fringe, as it were', and 'all that sort of thing, you know' (Brougham, 413). 
On formation of the coalition government in February 1806 Pigott was appointed attorney-general as part of the Foxite contingent. Fox also secured his return to parliament for Steyning, in Sussex, interceding with the borough's patron, the duke of Norfolk. Less congenial was the intervention of the king, who insisted upon knighthoods for Pigott and the solicitor-general, Samuel Romilly. During his year in office Pigott spoke regularly in debate on legal issues, and he particularly distinguished himself by his capable management of Lord Melville's impeachment for malversation of funds. The latter was not Pigott's first experience of parliamentary litigation; in the 1790s he had been one of six lawyers retained to assist the impeachment of Warren Hastings, the former governor-general of Bengal. 
Pigott's professional aspirations had largely been achieved by his appointment as a law officer. In the autumn of 1806 he informed Brougham that, supposing the ministry were to continue after Fox's death, he should prefer the office of accountant-general to a judgeship. He particularly objected to a judicial appointment that would require enforcement of the criminal law, which he regarded as unduly harsh. Consequently, upon the government's resignation in March 1807, Pigott did not pine for public legal office. In 1811 he resisted suggestions that he might become either lord chancellor of Ireland or chief baron of the exchequer, were his political associates to form a regency government. Instead, he was content to express moderate whig views from the back benches. He supported legislation to limit the sale of parliamentary seats, though he favoured the duke of York's reinstatement as commander-in-chief in 1811 -- two years after an inquiry into the sale of military offices had led to the duke's resignation. In 1817 he served on the secret committee investigating civil unrest and, while acknowledging the threat to public order, he opposed suspension of the 'Habeas Corpus Act'. A committed Anglican, he nevertheless advocated Catholic emancipation. 
Friendship with the duke of Norfolk, and not merely his status as Fox's protege, secured Pigott's return in successive parliaments for Arundel and Horsham, and he gradually assumed the mantle of elder statesman within his party. His private legal practice also remained steady, and as Old Pig and the Learned Pig he became one of the fathers of the equity bar. He afforded the lord chancellor, Eldon, professional respect and political aversion. Like Romilly, he objected to the long delays that marred chancery practice, but likewise felt that his own professional situation must restrict public criticism of the chancellor. 
Pigott's last public appointment, to the civil list committee, came just weeks before his death. He died on 6 September 1819 at his home, Rose Cottage, Grove Road, Eastbourne, Sussex, and was buried in St Mary's Church, Eastbourne, six days later. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22250


Charles Pigott (d. 1794), radical and satirist, was also an ardent champion of the French Revolution and, like many other radicals, published in 1791 a reply to Edmund Burke's 'Reflections on the French Revolution'. He issued, anonymously, the popular satire, 'The Jockey Club' (1792) and, in 1794, 'The Female Jockey Club' and 'The Whig Club', both of which offered a scurrilous account of elite London society, with which he seems to have been well acquainted. He died at Westminster on 24 June 1794, leaving a satire entitled 'The Political Dictionary', published posthumously in the following year. Robert's and Charles's niece, Harriet Pigott, was a celebrated nineteenth-century memoirist. 


@@@@@


doc= 22251


Edward Pigott (1753-1825) and Charles Gregory Pigott (died 1845), both educated in France. The Pigotts led a vagrant life in various parts of Britain and on the continent, where, like many other English Catholics, they found life more congenial. For some years they resided at Caen, in Normandy, and counted among their friends several of the Paris academicians. 


@@@@@


doc= 22252


Pigott, Sir Gillery (1813-1875), judge, was born at Oxford, the fourth son of Paynton Pigott (1770-1862) of Archer Lodge, Sherfield, Hampshire, and Banbury, Oxfordshire, who in 1836 assumed the additional names of Stainsby-Conant, and his wife, Lucy (died 1860), third daughter of Richard Drope Gough. Pigott was educated at the school of the Revd William Carmalt at Putney before entering the Middle Temple on 20 January 1836. A few months later he married Frances (died 1894), only child of Thomas Drake of Ashday Hall, near Halifax; they had two sons and six daughters. 
Pigott was called to the bar on 3 May 1839, and went on the Oxford circuit. With H. Rodwell he published a volume of reports of appeals from revising barristers (1844-6). He was made counsel to the Inland Revenue in May 1854, and became a serjeant in February 1856, receiving a patent of precedence the following year. He was recorder of Hereford from December 1857 to December 1862. A Liberal in politics, he came forward for Banbury in 1859 but retired before nomination day. He became member of parliament for Reading in November 1860 and his most notable endeavour in that capacity was an unsuccessful bill to correct anomalies in the laws of Jersey. 
On 3 October 1863 Pigott was made a baron of the court of exchequer, was knighted on 1 November, and thereby forfeited his parliamentary seat. According to an obituarist his appointment 'was received with some degree of disfavour by the Bar' ('The Times', 29 April 1875). But he became well liked, being distinguished for his strict impartiality and conscientiousness rather than for any special abilities. Overshadowed by Pollock and Bramwell, he left little mark in the law reports. He died at his home, Sherfield Hill House, near Basingstoke, Hampshire, on 27 April 1875 following a fall from his horse, though according to the doctor who attended him he suffered no internal injury and the cause of death was heart disease ('The Times', 1 May 1875). Late in life, Pigott had joined the Plymouth Brethren, having 'for a long while been a dissenter from the church of England liturgy' (Pigott, 3). He was buried at the parish church at Sherfield upon Lodden on 28 April 1875; with the concurrence of his widow, his eldest son, Arthur Gough Pigott ('b'. 1850), prevented the Anglican burial service from being read over the coffin, for which he was later fined $1 with costs ('The Times', 3 June 1875). 


@@@@@


doc= 22253


Pigott, Harriet (1775-1846), writer, was the youngest daughter of William Pigott, rector of Chetwynd, Shropshire, and his wife, Arabella Mytton (died 'c'.1779). Her two paternal uncles were notorious figures in later eighteenth-century society. Charles Pigott, the younger of the two ['see under 'Pigott, Robert], was the author of 'The Jockey Club' and 'The Female Jockey Club', scandalous accounts of the self-indulgent lives of the aristocracy, while the elder, Robert Pigott, became a passionate convert to French enlightenment ideas during his travels on the continent. Harriet Pigott, who claimed to trace her ancestry back to the Norman conquest and was intensely proud of her family, seemed to disapprove almost equally of her uncle's politics and his dissipation of the family estates while following his republican enthusiasms. Despite this dislike of later eighteenth-century radicalism, she was a strong admirer of Charles James Fox and claimed to be a friend and one-time schoolmate of his illegitimate daughter Henrietta Willoughby. 
Pigott's first publication, 'The Private Correspondence of a Woman of Fashion' (2 vols.), appeared anonymously in 1832. The book, a collection of what are supposedly the letters Pigott wrote during a residence in France from the summer of 1814 to December 1815 as well as during travels in England in 1816, seems calculated to appeal to a taste for gossipy anecdote, as it documents her encounters with the titled and the famous. Yet if her version of events is trustworthy, Pigott was also a witness of many of the dramatic historic events of that time, including the return of Napoleon to Paris and the days following the battle of Waterloo in Brussels. A glimpse of Napoleon, she reports, left her 'dazzled, as if beholding a supernatural being', albeit one marked by 'something of the Satanic' (Pigott, 'Correspondence', 1.331-2). While horrified by the reports of Waterloo and the sight of the wounded soldiers, she nevertheless suggests the speed with which the battlefield was transformed into a tourist site, as, within two weeks of the battle, she reports that she and some companions were heading there for a picnic, picking up buttons and letters as souvenirs. Pigott's account of England in 1816 includes descriptions of the Ladies of Llangollen, of Sarah Siddons performing Shakespeare, and of Princess Charlotte and Prince Leopold attending a play together shortly after their marriage. 'Records of Real Life in the Palace and the Cottage' (3 vols., 1839), Pigott's next publication, appeared under her name and continued her epistolary autobiography, describing her lengthy stays in the Netherlands, Switzerland, and Germany, as well as in France. While working on this second collection, Pigott persuaded John Galt, whom she met late in his life and visited frequently when she settled near him in Scotland in 1838, to revise the volumes for her. According to the unsigned introduction of 'Records of Real Life', Pigott 'cast a cheering beam over [Galt's] monotonous days' (1.vii), and she later wrote a preface for Galt's final collection of poems ('The Demon of Destiny', 1840), in which she gave him credit for 'the extensive circulation' of her own book. Galt's critics have not been kind to Pigott, one complaining about the 'selfish importunity' with which she 'press[ed] her literary concerns' (Gordon, 106) on a dying man, and another dismissing her as 'a pedantic spinster who thrust herself upon Galt' (Aldrich, 21). Yet Pigott's interest in Galt's writing was genuine enough for her to begin work on a biography of him following his death, although she abandoned the book when she was forestalled by another biographer in 1841 (the manuscript is now in the Bodleian Library). Her final work, a brief, romantic fairy tale called 'The Three Springs of Beauty', was published in 1844. While a lively chronicler of Regency and early Victorian high society, Pigott never achieved either as much success or notoriety in that genre as did her friend and contemporary Lady Charlotte Bury, and her books did not receive any lasting attention. She died, unmarried, in Geneva in July 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 22254


Pigott, Nathaniel (1725-1804), astronomer, was born at his grandfather's house in Whitton, Middlesex, probably the only son of Ralph Pigott (died 1731), a lawyer of the Middle Temple, and his wife, Alethea, the daughter of William, ninth Viscount Fairfax. His grandfather Nathaniel Pigott (1661-1737), renowned as a barrister and a friend of Pope, legally assisted William Fairfax, eighth viscount, of Gilling, Yorkshire, and acted as conveyancer to most of the Yorkshire Catholic families. The Pigotts were staunch Catholics and maintained a Jesuit chaplain in their private chapel at Whitton. Ralph was the only son not educated at Douai; two of his brothers became Benedictines, while another, Nathaniel, was in business as a druggist at Brownlow Street, Holborn, London. After Ralph's unexpected death, Alethea and her children moved to Ormonde Street, Holborn, and before 1752 she left England and settled in Brussels, near the English Benedictine convent where her daughters Rebecca and Catherine professed as nuns. 
Nathaniel Pigott attended school at St Gregory's Benedictine College, Douai, about 1737, and later joined his mother. He married in Brussels, on 29 September 1749, Anna Mathurine De Beriot (1727-1792) of Louvain. Of at least four children born, two sons survived infancy: 
It is not known how Pigott became interested in astronomy, but he had sufficient money to acquire a number of fine instruments from the best London makers, and he gained a reputation for his observing and computational ability. He was in regular communication with J. H. Magelhaens, the so-called Portuguese agent, who negotiated the procurement or repair of scientific instruments for those who were unable to deal in person with the London makers. 
Our knowledge of Pigott's movements comes from the meteorological and astronomical journals which he kept with the assistance of his wife and Edward. He was still at Whitton in 1760, but at Louvain in 1761 and at Caen from 1764 to 1768, where he built an observatory at his house near L'Abbatiale. In 1771 he was in London and at Gilling, where Edward's French style of dress and manners caused some comment, and in 1772 he was in Brussels, where he took delivery of a new 21/2 foot reflecting telescope by Heath and Wing, ordered previously in London. In April that year both he and Edward were presented at court to Prince Charles of Lorraine and to his prime minister, Prince Staremberg, before returning to England. 
Pigott chanced to pass through Brussels on his way to Spa at a time when a cartographic survey of the Austrian Netherlands was being proposed. His assistance was sought, probably at the recommendation of John Turberville Needham FRS, principal of the Imperial Academy in Brussels, to determine astronomically, by timing eclipses of Jupiter's satellites, the geographical positions of the principal towns. Pigott immediately cancelled his visit to Spa, sent to England for his instruments, and devoted five months to this task. Equipped with a clock with a gridiron pendulum by Le Paute, a quadrant by Bird, which Pigott borrowed from the Royal Society, a 6 foot Dollond achromatic telescope, two barometers by Ramsden and one by Wing, Needham and the Pigotts proceeded slowly via Namur, Luxembourg, Antwerp, Ostend, Tournai, Brussels, and Louvain, where they arrived in the summer of 1773. Pigott took the meridian heights of many stars. He also undertook an unusual experiment to see what effect the sound of the great bell of Ste Goedule in Brussels had on the barometer, later described by Sir Henry Englefield, who had joined them in Brussels. Pigott was elected a foreign member of the Imperial Academy in 1773 and a correspondent of the Paris Academy of Sciences in 1776. He freely communicated his observations, which included transits of Venus and Mercury, and sightings of comets, some of which were published by learned societies and others incorporated into anonymous records. He was among the first to study double stars and those which had a proper movement. 
The Pigotts arrived at Gilling in 1774 in order to press claims to the Gilling estate, but, failing to resolve the affair by means of a private act of parliament, in the summer of 1777 they lodged with another relative, Lady Widdrington, at Wickhill in Gloucestershire, where Pigott determined the longitude. He then moved to Frampton House, Glamorgan, on his own estate, where he erected an observatory with a transit by Sisson, the 6 foot Dollond achromatic, and several smaller telescopes. During this time Edward occupied himself with a survey of the Severn estuary, finding it to be far less broad than most maps indicated. In 1781 the Pigotts returned to York in the hope of succeeding to what was left of the Gilling estate. They leased a house just outside Bootham Bar, close to the minster, and built a substantial two-storey stone observatory in the garden to house the instruments from Frampton. Nathaniel observed there until 1785, when they went again to Louvain. It was a fruitful time too for Edward, who became fast friends with his distant cousin John Goodricke (1764-1786), said to have become a deaf mute in early youth. For his discovery of periodicity and variation of certain stars, Goodricke was elected to the Royal Society at the age of twenty-one. Edward shared his passion, and on one remarkable occasion, the night of 10 September 1784, first Edward, then a few hours later Goodricke, each made new discoveries of variable stars. Their brief partnership was ended by Goodricke's premature death. During the 1780s, the result of a lengthy family quarrel, Edward was cut out of his inheritance. When Ann Fairfax died in 1793, Charles Gregory Pigott inherited Gilling Castle. He took the name of Fairfax and married in 1794 a protestant, Mary, the sister of Sir Henry Goodricke of Ribston, and died in 1845. Nathaniel Pigott died at his home in York on 4 June 1804 and was buried the following day in Gilling churchyard. In his latter years he was being looked after by Lavinia Goodricke, who as sole executrix declared his personal estate at the time of his death to be under $600. 
Edward Pigott continued a somewhat vagrant life but, after brief pauses in Louvain, York, and London, he settled about 1796 at Bath, where he set up the instruments from York in an observatory at 15 Belmont, the house he occupied from about 1808. He corresponded with the botanists John Stackhouse and Dawson Turner, with whom he shared an interest in seaweeds. When travelling again to France he was detained in Fontainebleau about 1803 during the Anglo-French hostilities. In May 1806 he wrote to old friends at the Academy of Sciences, begging their help in securing permission to return to England, where his astronomical apparatus and botanical collections were being neglected; in July the emperor acceded to their request and his passport was returned. He continued to make observations from Bath for some years, and his letters to Sir William Herschel report sightings of comets in 1799, 1807, and 1811. In his letter of 10 August 1821, addressed to John Herschel, he mentions his own poor health and sends greetings to the elderly Sir William, who had befriended his father. He died unmarried at his home on 27 June 1825. His body was transported to Bridlington, Yorkshire, in accordance with his wishes, and was buried close to the grave of his mother on 11 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 22255


Pigott, Richard (1828-1889), journalist and blackmailer, was born at Ratoath, co. Meath, the youngest son of George Pigott; his mother is believed to have come from Roscommon. His father, initially a clerk to a Dublin coach proprietor, worked for 'The Tablet' newspaper. Richard Pigott's career began as an errand boy on 'The Nation', established in Dublin in 1842. He next worked in Belfast for the Catholic nationalist 'Ulsterman', founded by Denis Holland. In 1858, Holland moved the paper to Dublin, renamed it 'The Irishman', and employed Pigott as manager. During this period Pigott also ran a photographic business and began a lifelong trade in pornography. 'The Irishman' failed to prosper, and Pigott was suspected of embezzling the accounts. 
The founding of the Fenian 'Irish People' in 1863 severely affected the circulation of 'The Irishman'. Holland sold his newspaper to Patrick James Smyth, the former Young Irelander, but Pigott remained in control. In 1865 Smyth sold 'The Irishman' to Pigott for $700. Three months later the 'Irish People' was suppressed. Its disappearance meant prosperity for 'The Irishman', whose weekly circulation between 1865 and 1869 was said to be 50,000 copies. In 1866 Pigott started two magazines, 'The Shamrock' and the 'Flag of Ireland'. 
Pigott's 'Irishman' was hostile to A. M. Sullivan's 'Nation', and in 1862 Sullivan successfully sued Pigott for libel. In 1868 both men were prosecuted for seditious libel for their reporting of the trial of the 'Manchester martyrs'. Pigott was found guilty and imprisoned. His prosecution made him a nationalist hero, and in 1868 electors from the city of Limerick asked him to stand as a candidate in the forthcoming election to gain Fenian support. Pigott accepted but came bottom of the poll. In 1869 Sullivan again threatened to sue Pigott for an article alleging that in 1858 he had given the names of members of the Phoenix Society to the government, leading to their arrest. Isaac Butt and G. H. Moore arbitrated in the dispute; they acquitted Sullivan, and said that Pigott had given voice to opinions then widely held. Despite this Pigott's reputation was damaged; he was thought to be motivated only by money, and the circulation of his newspapers was damaged. In 1871 he was prosecuted for contempt, found guilty, and imprisoned. 
Both the Irish Republican Brotherhood and Clan na Gael were increasingly dubious about Pigott. He was known to have abstracted money from appeals in support of Fenian prisoners and their families, and in 1869 he had taken money sent from New York to the Irish Republican Brotherhood in Dublin. Butt had acted as Pigott's guarantor for successive loans, and the coincidence of Butt's death and the founding of the Land League in 1879 brought matters to a head. It was now hoped that Pigott's desperate situation could be used to gain control of his papers and silence his attacks on the league. In 1881 Patrick Egan, treasurer of the league, negotiated with Pigott for their sale to the Irish Parliamentary Party; they were bought for $3000. Charles Stewart Parnell closed them down and founded 'United Ireland'. 
Deprived of money from nationalist sources, Pigott began to sell articles attacking the league to the Conservative press in London and Dublin. In 1882, in 'Macmillan's Magazine', he condemned the league, declared that Fenianism was dead, and urged all Irishmen to support the union. It was at this time that he first made links between the Irish party and violence. 
In 1885, Pigott was again in difficulties. He approached Lord Richard Grosvenor, the Liberal chief whip, to ask for money to finance a pamphlet, 'Parnellism unmasked'. Grosvenor sent him to Edward Caulfield Houston, secretary of the Loyal and Patriotic Union and a former Dublin correspondent of 'The Times', who paid him to research the links between Parnellism and crime. Pigott's failure to find evidence was the spur to forging letters associating Parnell with crime, which he sold to Houston in 1886. Houston now approached George Buckle, editor of 'The Times'. Buckle's proprietor John Walter, after taking legal advice, agreed to their purchase, despite warnings given by the attorney-general, Sir Henry James. The letters were published in 'The Times' in March 1887. The paper was sued for defamation by Frank Hugh O'Donnell MP, and evidence was given that connected Pigott with the letters. A special commission was set up to examine the alleged links between Parnellism and crime, and Pigott was interviewed by Henry Labouchere, and by Parnell's solicitor, Sir George Lewis. He told them that 'The Times' had offered him $5000 to testify against Parnell. Accused of forging the 'Times' letters Pigott denied it but then agreed to sign a written confession, at the same time attempting to get $1000 out of Labouchere, who demanded to see the original 1881 correspondence with Egan. Pigott now told 'The Times' that Labouchere had tried to bribe him, but the solicitor to 'The Times' insisted that Pigott should appear as a witness. Telling Labouchere that he was vulnerable to cross-examination, he was advised to ask for an indemnity against prosecution. Pigott's response was that he was totally dependent on the 'Times' money. These events occurred over several days running up to 25 February 1889, when Pigott appeared in the witness box where he was cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell, counsel for Parnell. Russell asked Pigott to write words at his dictation; these included the word 'hesitancy', which Pigott spelt with an 'e', as in one of the 'Times' letters. Pigott then denied that he was aware that 'The Times' wanted to destroy Parnell, but Russell demonstrated that this was untrue and exposed Pigott's long history of blackmail. The next day, Pigott failed to appear in court, and Russell told the hearing of Pigott's confession of forgery to Labouchere. Pigott later told Shannon, a Dublin solicitor, that he had confessed because he feared prosecution for perjury. His confession could have meant that prosecution would be stayed and his children would receive $2000. He also claimed that he had not forged all the letters. 
Pigott had left for Paris on 26 February, and travelled to Madrid the following day. Arriving on 28 February he took room 13 at the Hotel de los Embajadores, in Calle de la Vittoria, as Roland Ponsonby. The following day, 1 March, he sent a telegram to Shannon, which was intercepted by the London police; they asked the Madrid authorities to detain him until their arrival. On his return to the hotel, the Madrid police were expecting him. Asking them to wait, Pigott went into the bedroom and shot himself. He was buried on 9 March 1889 in the civil cemetery of Nuestra Senora de la Almudena, Madrid; his funeral expenses were paid by the British ambassador, Sir Clare Ford. 
A large man, bald in later life with a huge white beard, Pigott had always been a devout Roman Catholic, and he died wearing a number of religious medals. His wife, Theresa McDermott of Blackrock, co. Dublin, whom he had married on 17 February 1874, had predeceased him in August 1886; Pigott's suicide left their four children as orphans. It is still debatable whether Pigott was the author of all the letters sold to 'The Times' in 1888. Parnell thought that Captain William O'Shea had a hand in them, and it is known that O'Shea, whose family had business connections in Spain, was in Madrid during the week of Pigott's death. His death in disgrace contrasts ironically with his own aspirations: Pigott had always described himself as a gentleman; he lived in the fashionable Sandymount area of Dublin, and probably enjoyed an annual income of $2000 in his prime. W. B. Yeats elegiacally commented at the time of his death: 'Poor Pigott.... There was something pathetic in the hopeless way the squalid, latter-day 'Erinnyes' [furies] ran him down' ('Collected Letters', ed. J. Kelly and E. Domville, 1986, 1.151). 


@@@@@


doc= 22256


Pigott, Robert (1736-1794), food and dress reformer, was born at Chetwynd Park, Shropshire, the son of Robert Pigott (died 1770) and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Peers, of Criggion, Montgomeryshire. Chetwynd Park had been in his family's possession for three centuries. There Robert's great-grandfather Walter Pigott had entertained Charles I, 'en route' from Oxford to Naseby, in 1645. A grandson of Walter Pigott, also named Robert (1664-1746), had been MP for Huntingdonshire (1713-22, 1730-41). A staunch Jacobite, he had met the Pretender in Rome in 1720. 
Robert Pigott followed a markedly different political philosophy and was given to outlandish social conduct. At Newmarket in 1770 he and the son of Sir William Codrington made a bet of 500 guineas as to which of their fathers would outlive the other. It turned out that the elder Pigott had died at Chetwynd a few hours prior to the bet. Pigott consequently maintained that the wager was void, but Lord March, as Codrington's assignee, sued for the money, and Lord Mansfield decided that the bet was valid, inasmuch as neither party knew at the time of anything to vitiate it. 
In 1774 Pigott became high sheriff of Shropshire. In 1776, imagining that the outbreak of the American War of Independence heralded England's imminent ruin, he sold his Chetwynd and Chesterton estates, worth $9000 a year, and retired to the continent, where he made the acquaintance of Voltaire, Brissot, and Benjamin Franklin. He lived mostly at Geneva but paid occasional visits to England. While on the continent he became a zealous Pythagorean or vegetarian, and was an advocate of the benefits to be had from James Graham's 'celestial bed', displayed in London in 1780. 
Pigott was enraptured by the French Revolution, especially in its more extravagant aspects. He protested against Sieyes's press bill and published his protest, which in February 1791 he had read to the revolutionary club at Lyons. In an appendix he advocated a vegetarian diet for prisoners as a means of reclaiming them, and at a meeting of the Dijon assembly of the Friends of the Constitution he condemned the use of bread, recommending instead potatoes, lentils, maize, barley, and rice. Another address to the assembly, 'en faveur du bonnet de la liberte', delivered on 26 December 1791, was directed against the wearing of hats, a practice which he claimed had been introduced by priests and despots, and that they concealed the face. In their place he encouraged the wearing of caps, which, he maintained, left the natural dignity of the countenance untouched. For some weeks the cap movement was very popular in Paris but the remonstrance addressed by Petion to the Jacobin club put an end to it, and the 'bonnet rouge' introduced later had no connection with Pigott's treatise. Pigott contemplated the purchase and occupation of a confiscated estate in the south of France, but this came to nothing. In 1792 he probably settled at Toulouse, where he died on 7 July 1794, leaving a widow, Antoinette Boutan, about whom no further details are known. 
His brother 


@@@@@


doc= 22257


Pike, John (fl. c.1310-c.1330), annalist, was probably born in the last quarter of the thirteenth century in southern England. Nothing is known of his education, career, or status, whether religious or secular, and his work survives only in a handful of manuscript fragments. Earlier historians believed him to have lived and worked at the end of the twelfth century, and associated him with Ralph de Diceto and other secular London chroniclers. This identification rested, however, on the mistaken association of Pike with one 'John Pyk, schoolmaster of St Martin le Grand' in the city of London, who owned BL, Royal MS 13 C.xi, a late twelfth-century copy of the chronicle of Robert de Torigini. Although Pike made use of that chronicle in his own work, there is no evidence, save the coincidence of names, to connect the fourteenth-century annalist with this twelfth-century book. 
Pike seems in fact to have been active in the second and third decades of the fourteenth century. His account of the Anglo-Scottish wars continues to the death of Thomas of Lancaster in 1322, and his annals of the English bishoprics include Walter Reynolds, archbishop of Canterbury between 1314 and 1327. The earliest surviving manuscripts of his works, BL, Arundel MS 220, and BL, Cotton MS Julius D.vi, date from the first quarter of the fourteenth century: the Cotton manuscript was probably copied 'c'.1327. It is possible that Pike was a Londoner: his histories do reveal strong attachment to the St Paul's chronicler Ralph de Diceto. But his work draws on a wide range of sources, including the Bridlington chronicle, the St Albans chronicle, and the annals from the Cistercians at Kingswood near Bristol. This suggests that he was a secular priest, or perhaps even a friar, with both reason and opportunity to travel in search of material. In two manuscripts Pike's work appears together with very early copies of the chronicles of the Dominican Nicholas Trevet. Trevet completed his histories in retirement at the London Blackfriars in the late 1320s. That the two authors' histories should circulate together gives further grounds for thinking that Pike lived and worked in London. It may even suggest that, like Trevet, he was a member of the Dominican convent. 
Pike was the author of at least four historical compilations. His best-known work, which survives in three manuscripts, was the 'Suppletio historiae regum Anglie', a history of the Anglo-Norman kings from William I to John. He also compiled annals of the English bishoprics, based on Diceto, and of the British kings, based on Geoffrey of Monmouth's 'Historia regum Britanniae'. Like a number of other chroniclers at this time, Pike also wrote a short account of the Scottish campaigns of Edward I and Edward II. Intended as an examination of 'what kind of right our king of England sought to claim in the land of Scotland' (BL, Cotton MS Julius D.vi, fol. 67'r'), his narrative wove together several of the most detailed accounts of the Anglo-Scottish wars, including the Bridlington chronicle and the chronicle of William Rishanger, a monk of St Albans. Pike's annals were derivative and unimaginative works, but they do provide an important witness to a number of now lost histories, such as the Kingswood annals and the unidentifiable 'Compendio Breom'. His annals can be placed alongside the work of a growing number of non-monastic historians (many of them working in London) active in the first quarter of the fourteenth century, such as Andrew Horn, the compiler of the 'Annales Londonienses', Adam Murimuth, and the author of the 'Vita Edwardi secundi'. 
Pike completed his histories between 1322 and 1327, and he probably died before the end of the 1320s. 


@@@@@


doc= 22258


John Baxter Pike (1745-1811), was the son of Thomas Pike, a class leader among the early Methodists, and his second wife, Eleanor. He was ordained a deacon in the Church of England, but subsequently came under the influence of Andrew Kippis (1725-1795), and in 1777 became a Unitarian preacher. Later he fluctuated between Presbyterian and rationalist views, and for a time ran a boarding-school, first at Stoke Newington and later at Edmonton. About 1791, however, he was practising as a doctor in London, while his wife, Sarah (died 1838), kept a girls' boarding-school at Enfield. Subsequently he appears to have taught 'geography and belles-lettres' at his wife's school, but according to Watkins and Shoberl he was 'obliged to withdraw on a charge which affected him very seriously'. He died at Edmonton on 11 December 1811, and was buried in East Barnet. He contributed letters on a variety of subjects, including horticulture and poultry farming, to the 'Monthly Magazine'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22259


Pike, John Deodatus Gregory (1784-1854), minister of the New Connexion of General Baptists, the eldest son of John Baxter Pike and his wife, Sarah Kirk, daughter of James Gregory, a London merchant, was born at Edmonton on 6 April 1784. He had six brothers and three sisters. 
His father, 
After being educated chiefly at home, the younger John Pike attended the nonconformist Wymondley College, London, from 1802 to 1806. Although he knew few Baptists, he studied their principles and was baptized in August 1804 by the General Baptist John Evans (1767-1827) of Worship Street Chapel, London. Having declared himself a Baptist, however, he joined no church. On leaving the college he acted for three years as assistant classical master in a school kept by his uncles G. and R. Gregory at Lower Edmonton. In 1807, after exploring the possibility of membership in a Particular Baptist church, his firm belief in the availability of salvation for all led him to join the New Connexion of the General Baptists at the church of Dan Taylor (1738-1816) in Whitechapel. He remained a General Baptist for the rest of his life. At Taylor's church he first began to preach, and in 1810 he accepted the pastorate of the Baptist church in Brook Street, Derby. On 22 June 1811 he married Sarah (died 1848), daughter of James Sandars of Derby, and they had four sons -- all of whom became Baptist ministers -- and two daughters. His ministry at Brook Street was very successful: a new chapel was opened in April 1815, three times as large as the first. Four years later it was enlarged, and in 1842 a larger building was secured at St Mary's Gate. 
Pike's greatest achievement was the establishment of the General Baptist Missionary Society in 1816. The Particular Baptists had founded a missionary society in 1792 and Pike felt keenly the lack of a General Baptist equivalent. In 1809 he anonymously proposed to the annual association of the New Connexion that a missionary society be formed. Although nothing came of this initial suggestion, Pike laboured to raise enthusiasm for the missionary cause and, before he had obtained the pastorate at Brook Street, even contemplated becoming a missionary to Africa himself. In the early days of his ministry his church supported an Indian preacher connected with the Particular Baptist mission in Serampore. When the General Baptist Missionary Society was instituted, Pike was invited to become its secretary; he held the appointment until his death. He devoted much time and energy not only to attending society meetings and to handling correspondence from the missionaries in Orissa, north-east India, but also to preaching on behalf of the society. For some years he acted as tutor to prospective missionaries, lodging them in his own home. Although forward thinking on matters concerning foreign missions, he remained a staunch opponent of Catholic emancipation. 
From 1822 to 1834 Pike was joint editor of the 'General Baptist Magazine, Repository, and Missionary Observer'. He was best known for his 'Persuasives to Early Piety' (1819), an evangelistic booklet for young people which appeared in several editions and was translated into French in 1841. 'A Guide for Young Disciples of the Holy Saviour' (1823) was a popular sequel. Pike presented the copyrights of his most popular works to the Religious Tract Society and the American Tract Society in 1847. He died suddenly at Derby on 4 September 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 22260


Pike, Richard (fl. 1620-1658), soldier and adventurer, was probably the son of Richard Pike, an attorney practising in Tavistock, Devon, in 1597; unfortunately the Tavistock parish registers do not begin until 1620. In that year Pike served as a common soldier in the attack on the Barbary pirates in Algiers commanded by Sir Robert Mansell. Having returned in 1621, 'my purse, never the fuller, nor my pockets thicker lined' (Arber, 279), he took part in the expedition to Cadiz led by Viscount Wimbledon in October 1625. According to his own account he sailed on the 'Convertine', under Captain Thomas Portar, and witnessed the capture of the fort of Puntal, 3 miles from Cadiz, on 22-3 October; but on going ashore to seek fruit he received severe back and facial wounds and was captured by fourteen Spanish musketeers. An attempt to ransom him by the vice-admiral, the earl of Essex, was spurned by the Spaniards, and the English fleet sailed away without him on 27 October. 
After eighteen days' imprisonment in Cadiz, his account continued, Pike was taken to Jerez and on 15 November brought before the duke of Medina Sidonia and other Spanish grandees, who examined him closely, through two Irish friars, about the ordnance on his ship and the defences of Plymouth. Angered by their likening Englishmen to hens, Pike made a counter-taunt that Spaniards fought like pullets, which led him to accept a hand-to-hand contest with a Spanish champion, using rapiers and daggers. Having easily disarmed his opponent, Pike then offered to fight, using a quarter-staff with a short iron pike at one end, any number of Spaniards up to six. Three presented themselves; he killed one and disarmed the others. The Spanish dignitaries were so impressed that he was given gold worth $9, entertained at home by the marques de Alquenezes and his wife, and pardoned. On Christmas day 1625 Pike appeared before Philip IV, his queen, and the infante Don Carlos; he declined an annual pension to serve the Spanish crown, but gratefully accepted 100 pistolets for his journey home. After passing through France he arrived at Fowey, Cornwall, on 23 April 1626. On 18 May he delivered in London a challenge to the duke of Buckingham from the brother-in-law of the conde d'Olivares, the Spanish chief minister. 
Pike appears to have spent the remainder of his days in Tavistock: he was churchwarden in 1638; his wife, Abigail, died in 1643, and a son, Richard, in 1655; by 24 August 1658 he had remarried. He may have been the Richard Peeke who died or was buried there on 13 June 1690 -- the only instance of the name in the register since 1655. In July 1626 Pike published a vigorous narrative of his Spanish experiences in a tract entitled 'Three to one', which he dedicated to Charles I. His adventures were also dramatized in 'Dicke of Devonshire, a Tragi-Comedy' (BL, Egerton MS 1994), probably written not long after 1626 (but not published until 1883) and usually assigned to Thomas Heywood. One modern authority suggests that it may be attributable to John Ford, since the main plot, a story of rape and its aftermath set in Spain, was Ford's sort of subject-matter, and that the rather unrelated Pike episodes may have been inserted prior to a Devon tour, Ford being a Dartmoor man. Later in the seventeenth century, Pike's exploits were commemorated in a broadside ballad, 'A Panegyric Poem, or, Tavestock's Encomium', which contains the lines: '
Search whether can be found again the like 

For noble prowess to our Tav'stock Pike, 

In whose renown'd never-dying name 

Live England's honour and the Spaniard's shame. 
('DNB')' 



@@@@@


doc= 22261


Pike, Richard (1834-1893), master mariner, born at Carboniere in Conception Bay, Newfoundland, was brought up in the northern fisheries, in whaling and sealing. In 1869 he obtained command of a steamer engaged in that trade and by 1875 he was captain of the 'Proteus', a stout-built vessel of 467 tons and 110 horsepower. In June 1881 his ship was chartered by the United States government to carry Lieutenant Adolphus W. Greely and his party of twenty-five men through Smith Sound to the most remote of the Arctic stations set up for the International Polar Year. This was at Fort Conger on the north coast of Lady Franklin Bay, north Ellesmere Island. The mission was safely effected; and, in 1883, the 'Proteus', still commanded by Pike, was again chartered to carry relief to the expedition, the United States ship 'Yantic' being ordered to accompany her as a depot, as far as was prudent, but not to venture into the ice, for which she was not fitted. The inexperienced Lieutenant Ernest A. Garlington gave instructions to steam north, and on 23 July, off Cape Sabine, the 'Proteus' was nipped in the pack and sank almost immediately; no lives were lost, but there was scant time to save some provisions and clothes. Sometimes in the boats, sometimes painfully dragging them over the rough ice floes, Pike and his companions succeeded, after extreme hardship, in reaching Upernavik, where they were taken up by the 'Yantic', which, unknowingly, had passed them in fog shortly after the shipwreck. For that year there was no relief to Greely's party, among whom starvation, illness, and ill discipline took their toll; but the seven survivors were rescued in the following year. 
In 1891 Pike, in the steamer 'Kite', was engaged to carry Robert E. Peary and his party, which he put on shore in McCormick Bay in Murchison Sound (lat. 77 degree 43' N), and returned without misadventure. In the next year he brought the party back, and was to have taken Peary out again in the summer of 1893; but the arrangement was cancelled by Pike's death, at St John's, on 4 May. 'A typical Newfoundlander,' wrote his shipmates in the 'Kite', 'as active in mind and body as many men of half his years'. 'A quiet, unassuming man,' wrote a correspondent of 'The Times', 'thoroughly capable and reliable, unequalled as an Arctic navigator, and in the front rank of our sealing captains.' 
Pike's achievements are seldom remembered, being overshadowed by more famous names such as Greely and especially Peary: but his skill contributed materially to their achievements. 


@@@@@


doc= 22262


Pike, Samuel (1717?-1773), Sandemanian minister, was probably born at Romsey, Hampshire. He was educated for the Independent ministry, receiving his general training from John Eames of the academy in Tenter Alley, Moorfields, which was supported by the Congregational Fund board, and his theology from John Hubbard at the Independent academy, Stepney. His first ministry was at Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, about 1740. He moved in 1747 to succeed John Hill (1711-1746) as pastor at the Three Cranes Meeting-House in Fruiterers' Alley, Thames Street, London. 
Early in his London ministry Pike established, at his house in Hoxton Square, an academy for training students for the ministry. He adopted the principles of the biblical critic John Hutchinson, and defended them in a laborious work entitled 'Philosophia sacra, or, The Principles of Natural Philosophy Extracted from Divine Revelation' (1753). In 1754 he succeeded Zephaniah Marryat (1684?-1754) as one of the Tuesday lecturers at Pinners' Hall. About the same time he joined Samuel Hayward (1718-1757), Independent minister at Silver Street, Wood Street, Cheapside, in a Sunday-evening lecture, dealing with 'cases of conscience', at Little St Helen's, Bishopsgate. He published 'A Form of Sound Words, or,... Body of Divinity' (1755), which was solidly Calvinist and was criticized by Caleb Fleming, the religious controversialist. 
In 1757 Pike became acquainted with the views of Robert Sandeman, the son-in-law and follower of John Glas. Sandeman had published in 1757 a series of 'Letters' dealing with the 'Dialogues between Theron and Aspasio' (1755) by James Hervey. Sandeman's 'Letters' were admired by members of Pike's church; and Pike, on reading them, began on 17 January 1758 a correspondence with Sandeman, then in Edinburgh. He communicated their correspondence to his congregation, a number of whom, with Pike himself, gradually came to adopt Sandeman's views, particularly on the question of popular preachers; others showed such dissatisfaction that Pike ceased the correspondence, suppressing his fourth letter, but the others were published in 1758. 
Pike began, none the less, to adopt Glassite or Sandemanian usages in his church, including a weekly communion. This led to rumours in August 1758 of his unsoundness; his discourses at Pinners' Hall gave offence, and he was excluded from the lectureship in 1759 by forty-four votes to one; the Congregational minister Dr John Conder was chosen to succeed him on 3 October. In his own church Pike was hotly opposed by William Fuller and Thomas Uffington. A church meeting on 9 October 1759 came to no conclusion; church meetings on 13 January and 21 April 1760 were equally divided, but Pike's casting vote carried the exclusion of the malcontents, who formed a new church under Joseph Barber. Disputes then arose about possession of church property, and a lawsuit was begun in 1761 by Pike for recovery of an endowment of $12 a year. 
At length Pike resigned his charge on 14 December 1765, left the Independents, and became a member of the Sandemanian church in Bull-and-Mouth Street, St Martin's-le-Grand. In 1765 he published anonymously 'A Plain Account of the Practices Observed by the Church in St Martin's-Le-Grand'. This pamphlet is the basis for many subsequent accounts of Sandemanian practice -- the last being published in Edinburgh in 1905. The London board of Congregational ministers excluded him in March 1766 on the grounds that he was not a proper person to be continued on the list. Pike wrote about his change of sentiments in a letter to Revd John Smart of Cerne Abbas in May of the same year. He was chosen elder of his St Martin's congregation in 1766, and ministered with great acceptance. 
Pike moved in 1771 to become minister to a Sandemanian congregation at Trowbridge, Wiltshire. He was a man of character and ability and considerable biblical scholarship, as testified by his Hebrew lexicon and grammar, published in 1766. A curious reaction led him from the doctrines of Hutchinson, who found in scripture a system of physical science, to those of Glas, who held that biblical authority did not extend to such topics, and who, as did Robert Sandeman, vehemently opposed Hutchinson's views. Pike, who was married, died at Trowbridge in January 1773, and was buried on 10 January in the parish churchyard. He was survived by his children. 


@@@@@


doc= 22263


Pilch, Fuller (1804-1870), cricketer, youngest son of Nathaniel Pilch and Frances Fuller, was born at Horningtoft, near Fakenham, Norfolk, on 17 March 1804. He learned the trade of a tailor and showed his enthusiasm for cricket as a boy. He went north to Sheffield to earn his living and was said to have been coached in the game by William Fennex, one of the old Hambledon players. 
In 1820, at the age of seventeen, with his brothers Nathaniel and William, Pilch played in his first match at Lord's for Norfolk against the MCC. Although he failed with the bat, he took four wickets, and William Ward, who made 278 for the MCC, predicted his future success. After returning south to Bury St Edmunds in 1825, he joined the powerful Bury club, for which he made his first century -- 137 not out against Woodbridge in 1830. He again appeared at Lord's in 1827 for England against Sussex in one of the three 'experimental' matches, when the new round-arm bowling was publicly tested; he was the highest scorer with 38. When, in the following year, round-arm bowling was legalized, he learned both to play it as a batsman and to bowl it himself. 
After moving to Norwich in 1829, Pilch twice defeated Thomas Marsden, the Yorkshire champion, in single-wicket contests in 1833. 1834 was a spectacular year, in which he made 87 not out, and 73 and 153 not out in two matches for Norfolk against Yorkshire. He also scored 105 not out for England against Sussex, and his aggregate of 811 runs in major matches was not surpassed for twenty-seven years. 
These successes led Pilch to move to Kent, where he made eighty-four appearances for the county side (1836-54), for which he was paid $100 a season. He also played (1846-51) for William Clarke's All England eleven, taking his own scythe to cut some of the rough pitches encountered in matches against 'odds' up and down the land. Between 1827 and 1849 he represented the Players against the Gentlemen on twenty-four occasions. In July 1837, when Victorian England was less than a fortnight old, he was dismissed 'hat knocked on wicket'; he remained one of the last players to bat in a top hat. He continued to score heavily in club matches, prizing most his 160 for his home town of Malling against Reigate, also in 1837. He was one of the great players in the great Kent eleven of the time and the county benefited not only from his batting but also from his 'management and knowledge of the game'. His last appearance at Lord's was in 1854. 
In 1862 (when W. G. Grace was only fourteen) Haygarth's 'Scores and Biographies' called Pilch 'the best batsman that has ever yet appeared', with a style of batting which was 'commanding, extremely forward' and able to crush the best bowling before it could 'shoot, rise or do mischief'. James Pycroft used Pilch as his model of classical batting and scientific play in his 'The Cricket Field', and G. F. Watts used him as a model in another sense in his lithograph ('c'.1840) entitled 'The Batsman'. He was also portrayed in a water-colour by J. C. Anderson in 1851, but it is Watts who best conveys the image of a tall, slim, and graceful performer. 
Pilch was popular, respected, and kind. In his old age he was landlord of the Saracen's Head in Canterbury, where 'an accurate account of his sayings and doings' was gathered by Frederick Gale for his 'The Game of Cricket'. He also ran a shop selling cricket equipment. In 1870, shortly before his death, he published his 'Whole Art of Cricket', a brief manual of instructions on how to bat and bowl, with diagrams. He died, unmarried, at Lower Bridge Street, Canterbury, on 1 May 1870; he was buried at St Gregory's Church, also in Canterbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 22264


Pilcher, George (1801-1855), ear surgeon, son of Jeremiah Pilcher, of Winkfield, Berkshire, was born on 30 April 1801. He was admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons on 2 April 1824 and immediately afterwards began to practise as a surgeon in Dean Street, Soho, London. He was appointed lecturer on anatomy, physiology, and surgery at the Webb Street school of medicine, Snow's Fields, Bermondsey, then belonging to his brother-in-law, Richard Dugard Grainger, and became consulting surgeon to the Surrey Dispensary. In 1838 he was awarded the Fothergillian gold medal at the Medical Society of London for a treatise, published as 'The Structure, Economy, and Diseases of the Ear', and in 1842 he was elected president of the Medical Society. When the Webb Street school was reabsorbed into the Borough hospitals from which it had emanated, Pilcher became attached to Lane's School, which was affiliated to St George's Hospital, where he became lecturer on surgery in 1843. In the same year he was made one of the first honorary fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, and from 1849 until his death he was a member of its council. 
Pilcher was an able surgeon and a good physiologist. He played a leading part in raising the standards and status of aural surgery in England. He published three works on the structure, function, and diseases of the ear, which were notable for their attempt to base treatments on thorough anatomical knowledge and good surgical principles. 
Pilcher died suddenly, probably of a stroke, on 7 November 1855 at his home, 2 Harley Street, London, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 14 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 22265


Pilfold, John (bap. 1769, d. 1834), naval officer and uncle of the poet Shelley, was baptized on 20 January 1769 at Horsham, Sussex, the third son of Charles Pilfold (1726-1790), yeoman, and his wife, Bathia White (1739-1779). He first went to sea about 1781 as a 'captain's servant' or cadet. He had a long tour of duty in the East Indies in 1788-92 as a midshipman on the 'Crown' (64 guns) with Commodore Cornwallis. Pilfold attracted favourable notice at Lord Howe's victory of 1 June 1794 when serving as master's mate in the 'Brunswick' (74 guns), which suffered heavy casualties. The commendation of Pilfold's dying commander, Captain John Harvey, prompted Howe to promote Pilfold lieutenant. 
In 1798 Pilfold was appointed to the 'Impetueux' (78 guns), and served as its first lieutenant until the cessation of hostilities in 1802, when the ship's company was paid off at Plymouth. He was then thirty-three and unmarried; both his parents were dead and the family farm was occupied by his married brother James. He seems to have decided to visit two of his married sisters, Charlotte Grove and Bathia Jackson, who both lived at Donhead in south Wiltshire. He was perhaps influenced by the presence in the 'Impetueux' of Charlotte's son William Grove, aged twelve and serving as a first-class volunteer. At Donhead, Pilfold met Mary Anne Horner (died 1832), daughter of Thomas South of Donhead, and married her on 20 June 1803; they had two daughters. His other married sister, Elizabeth, was the wife of Timothy Shelley of Field Place near Horsham, and it was in that vicinity, close to his birthplace, that he decided to make his home. 
The resumption of war with France in 1803 brought him back to active service. As first lieutenant of the 'Ajax' (third rate) in the engagement off Cape Finisterre in July 1805 he was subsequently left in command when his captain was recalled temporarily -- an unexpected opportunity which brought his career to a triumphant climax in October as one of the heroes of Trafalgar. He was confirmed in the rank of post captain, presented with a gold medal, and in 1815 nominated CB. 
As Pilfold settled into private life after Trafalgar, his neighbourly relationship with his brother-in-law Timothy Shelley became strained by 1810. When Shelley's son Percy Bysshe Shelley was expelled from Oxford in 1811 and eloped with a schoolfriend of his sisters to make an imprudent marriage in Scotland his father denied him entry at Field Place and he took refuge nearby with his uncle Pilfold at Cuckfield. A warning from Timothy Shelley to Pilfold not to interfere put them in open antagonism. 
Assuming the role of surrogate father Pilfold gave financial support to his nephew and later played a part in negotiating the restoration of a paternal allowance. When Shelley and his young wife were striving to establish an idealistic community in Wales in 1812 Pilfold was prepared to put up a substantial sum to secure for them the tenancy of a small farmstead. The fact that Shelley was legally a minor proved to be an obstacle; even more serious was the recklessly ardent invitation to join the community that he made to Elizabeth Hitchener, an unmarried schoolteacher who taught one of Pilfold's daughters. Local gossip in Cuckfield that she was Shelley's mistress cast an added shadow; Pilfold became uncharacteristically cautious, and the Welsh scheme collapsed. Shelley's last ties with his Sussex background were loosened and he gradually lost touch with that 'very hearty fellow', of whom he wrote, 'he has been an uncle to me, I owe him gratitude for his kindness' ('Letters', nos. 69, 182). 
Little is known of Pilfold's later years apart from his continuing contacts with his Grove relatives at Donhead. In financial difficulties in 1824 he sold his farming interests and left Sussex with his wife and daughters to live more economically in Wales and Devon. In 1828 he was appointed to a care and maintenance command at Plymouth. A stroke in 1831 left him 'quite childish' ('Grove Diaries', 170). His wife died in 1832 and a second stroke ended his own life on 12 July 1834 at Stonehouse, Plymouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 22266


Pilkington, Sir Andrew (c.1767-1853), army officer, obtained his first commission in the army on 7 March 1783, and was promoted lieutenant on 24 January 1791, captain on 2 March 1795, major on 31 March 1804, lieutenant-colonel on 5 October 1809, colonel on 12 August 1819, major-general on 22 July 1830, and lieutenant-general on 23 November 1841. Pilkington saw much and varied service. With the Channel Fleet in 1793-4 he commanded a company of the Queen's Royals on board the 'Royal George' at the battle of 1 June 1794 in the north Atlantic, when Lord Howe defeated the French off Ushant. Pilkington received two splinter wounds. He was next employed in the West Indies, and was present at the capture of Trinidad in 1795-7. He served in Ireland during the suppression of the 1798 uprising, and was with the expeditions to The Helder in 1799 and 1805. In 1800 he was severely wounded in defending the 'Kent', an East Indiaman, against a French privateer while 'en route' for India. He served on the staff at the Horse Guards in 1807-8. On 9 May 1808 he married Maria Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Vicary Gibbs, at Hayes; they had two daughters. 
Pilkington served in Nova Scotia from 1809 to 1815. During the Anglo-American War, he subdued the islands in Passamaquody Bay, between New Brunswick and Maine. He was created KCB on 19 July 1838. Pilkington died on 23 February 1853 at his home, Catsfield Place, Battle, Sussex, a property he had purchased from James Eversfield. His wife and daughters survived him. One of his daughters, Maria Georgina, married Burrell Hayley, rector of Catsfield in Sussex, on 18 July 1848; the other, Louisa Elizabeth, married Richard Thomas Lee on 1 September 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 22267


Pilkington, Francis (d. 1638), composer and lutenist, graduated BMus from Oxford University in 1595, stating that he had been a student of music for sixteen years. By midsummer 1602 he had been appointed a conduct (lay clerk) at Chester Cathedral; he was nominated as precentor in 1623 and retained this position until his death. Nevertheless Pilkington also had a parallel charge as parish priest. He was ordained in 1614 (curiously, in 1612 he had already been made a minor canon of the cathedral) and was given the curacy of Holy Trinity, Chester, to which he added those of St Bridget's by 1616 and St Martin's in 1622. In 1631 he also became rector of Aldford, near Chester, but resigned this living at some time between 1634 and 1636. 
Pilkington's father and a brother had been in the service of Henry Stanley, fourth earl of Derby, and it was to the fourth earl's son William, the sixth earl, that Pilkington dedicated his first publication, 'The first book of songs or ayres of 4 parts: with tablature for the lute or orpharian, with the viol da gamba' (1605), Pilkington also acknowledging the favour he had himself enjoyed from the earl's brother. Its twenty-one songs (to conclude, Pilkington slipped in a pavane for lute and bass viol) show some awareness of the heightened expressiveness established in English song by John Dowland, and Pilkington's choice of verse reveals much discrimination. Yet most of his songs lie closer to the tuneful ayres of Thomas Campion and Philip Rosseter which had appeared jointly in the latter's volume of 1601, and some of his shortest songs are the best: 'Rest, sweet nymphs' has long been one of the most popular of lute ayres. Three songs are occasional pieces, all dedicated to friends, one being an elegy. 
Pilkington's 'first' volume of lute songs had no successor, for he now concentrated his attention on the madrigal, 'The First Set of Madrigals and Pastorals of 3, 4, and 5 Parts, Newly Composed' appearing in 1613. Its style seems oddly retrospective, being founded upon the light madrigalian manner established by Thomas Morley in the 1590s, and ('pace' the title-page) raises a suspicion that some of its contents were not recent compositions. Indeed, 'When Oriana walked' used the text also set by Pilkington's cathedral colleague Thomas Bateson in his intended contribution to 'The Triumphs of Oriana', the collection of madrigals published in 1601 in honour of the ageing Queen Elizabeth. But Bateson's tribute had arrived too late for inclusion, and he had incorporated it into his own first madrigal volume (1604), adding a second madrigal, entitled 'Oriana's Farewell', with the final line changed to 'In heaven lives Oriana'. Pilkington's setting of 'When Oriana walked' had, presumably, a parallel history though, on publication, for his own final line he now substituted that from Bateson's 'Oriana's Farewell'. For the rest, his 1613 volume is undistinguished, its twenty-two items sometimes technically unsure and faceless. Its successor, 'The Second Set of Madrigals and Pastorals, of 3, 4, 5, and 6 Parts: Apt for Viols and Voices' (1624), is much superior, its finest composition, the deeply affecting 'Care for thy soul', blending something of the 'gravitie' of earlier music with a more modern 'affective' manner, and employing chromaticism impressively. The volume's twenty-six items include a duet and a 'dialogue', each viol-accompanied, and a six-part viol fantasia; appended is a pavane by Pilkington's earlier patron, William, earl of Derby. 
It is surprising that, apart from two contributions to Sir William Leighton's 'The Tears or Lamentations of a Sorrowful Soul' (1614), Pilkington seems to have composed little or no church music. All three of Pilkington's published volumes describe him as a lutenist, and a small quantity of lute music by him is extant. It is probably early work, well written, but of little importance. Pilkington died in 1638. 


@@@@@


doc= 22268


Pilkington, Gilbert (fl. c.1450), scribe, was once thought to be the author of the mid-fifteenth-century English burlesque poem 'The Tournament of Tottenham', a comic description of a 'tournament' in which a group of rustics compete for the hand of Tyb, the Reeve's daughter, which survives in two manuscripts (CUL, MS Ff.5.48, and BL, Harley MS 5396). He seems in fact to have been simply the scribe of the copy now in Cambridge University Library, where his name, Gilbertus Pylkyngton, is appended to another text. The oldest catalogue of the library's manuscripts ascribed all the poems in the volume to him. However his spurious fame as author of the 'Tournament' is due to the scholar William Bedwell, vicar of Tottenham in the early seventeenth century, who printed the Cambridge text together with a survey of Tottenham in 1631, describing it on the title-page as 'written long since in verse by Mr. Gilbert Pilkington, at that time, as some have thought, Parson of the Parish'. There is no evidence for the latter claim either. But Bedwell's text was reprinted by other antiquaries in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries before Pilkington was stripped both of his poem and of his parish. 


