@@@@@


doc= 22269


Pilkington, James (1520-1576), bishop of Durham, was the third of seven sons of Richard Pilkington ('c'.1486-1551) of Rivington, Lancashire, and his wife, Alice, daughter of Laurence or Lawrence Ashawe of Hall on the Hill, Heath Charnock, in the same county; Leonard Pilkington (1527-1599) was one of his younger brothers. 
At the age of sixteen Pilkington entered Pembroke College, Cambridge, but he soon transferred to St John's College, from where he graduated BA early in 1539. At about the same time he became a fellow. Having proceeded MA in 1542, six years later he became senior fellow and preacher, and in that capacity took part in a disputation on transubstantiation; he also delivered a series of lectures on the 'Acts of the Apostles'. Ordained some time between 1547 and 1550, he was presented by Edward VI in the latter year to the vicarage of Kirby in Kendal, Westmorland, but he soon resigned and continued his studies at Cambridge, where he proceeded BTh in 1551. 
On the accession of Mary, Pilkington went to the continent and stayed successively in Zurich, Geneva, Basel, and Frankfurt am Main. During this period he stood 'studiously aloof' from the dissensions of the English exiles and won a reputation for wisdom and moderation, being nominated in December 1558 as a member of Sir Thomas Smith's committee for the revision of the prayer book. However, it is doubtful whether he played a very active role because he remained in Frankfurt until at least March 1559, only a month before the committee concluded its deliberations. 
On 20 July 1559, soon after his return to England, Pilkington was appointed master of his old college and regius professor of divinity. In the three years that followed he was a prolific author and preacher, both at Cambridge and London. He preached sermons before the queen and at Paul's Cross and delivered the funeral oration at the commemorative service for Martin Bucer and Paul Fagius at Cambridge on 20 July 1560. He contributed to the prayer book of 1559, the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', and the 'Book of Homilies', and published commentaries on the prophets 'Haggai' (1560) and 'Obadiah' (1562). But his most memorable contribution was his involvement in the debate over the destruction of St Paul's Cathedral by lightning on the afternoon of 4 June 1561. Four days later, while the ruins smouldered behind him, Pilkington preached a sermon at Paul's Cross ascribing the event to the wrath of God and 'warning of a greater plague to follow if amendment of life were not had in all estates' ('Works', v). The sermon provoked an angry reply from an anonymous Catholic apologist in 'An Addition to the Causes' alleging, not surprisingly, that God's wrath had indeed been stirred but the cause was 'that the old fathers and the old ways were left, together with blaspheming God in lying sermons preached there' (ibid., v-vi). Pilkington, clearly rattled by this attack, responded with a 'Confutation of an Addition' (1563), which comprised an uncompromising onslaught on the 'strong delusions' and 'lying wonders' of the Catholic church. 'I would not have blotted so much paper with so much wickedness, nor filled your ears and eyes with so much filthiness, but that he provoked me to it, and calls that good which is evil, and light darkness' (ibid., vi, 591). The 'Confutation' was Pilkington's most polemical work and the controversy over the destruction of St Paul's provides a good illustration of the attempts of theologians on both sides of the Reformation divide to fathom the mind of God from his apparent actions on earth. 
Late in 1559 Pilkington had been nominated bishop of Winchester, but he is reported to have refused the promotion owing to unhappiness about certain proposed alienations of land from the see. In March 1560 he was arguing that bishops should have a 'better living' and the matter remained in limbo until October, when Matthew Parker, archbishop of Canterbury, prompted the secretary of state, William Cecil, about the 'strange delays' in episcopal appointments. If the queen was determined to promote the gospel, he asked, 'why should other[s] hinder her good zeal for money sake, as is most commonly judged?' (Usher, 396). Since Pilkington was clearly reluctant to take on Winchester because of potential financial losses, Robert Horne, dean of Durham, was offered the position, and Pilkington was induced to accept the bishopric of Durham, which had previously been earmarked for Horne. He received the royal assent for Durham on 20 February 1561, was consecrated on 2 March, and enthroned on 10 April, but it was not until October that he resigned his mastership at St John's, in which he was succeeded by his brother Leonard. 
The issue of episcopal endowments remained unresolved, however. The government was anxious to cut the wealthier bishoprics down to size, and Durham was a target for this sort of pruning, just as Winchester was. When Pilkington received his temporalities on 15 March estates valued at $1000 remained with the crown, though most of these, with the exception of Norham and Norhamshire, were returned 'during pleasure' on 21 May. Nevertheless, because the bishop was merely a crown tenant of these lands, horrendous and unprecedented legal difficulties ensued, causing Pilkington to complain to both Cecil and the treasury. It was only Cecil's request for a lease of Craike (one of the detained properties) for his son in March 1566 that led to the situation's being resolved, and on 13 June Pilkington eventually received his temporalities (though still with the exception of Norham and Norhamshire). Finally Pilkington had 'bargained and won' in his refusal of Winchester and acceptance of Durham. He managed to persuade the government that it had acted 'opportunistically, hastily and unwisely' and that the interests of good government were best served by the restoration of the 'status quo' (Usher, 403, 406). In the meantime, in or before 1564, he married Alice (died 1596), daughter of Sir John Kingsmill ('c'.1497-1556) of Sigmanton ['see 'Kingsmill family]. This alliance with a strongly protestant Hampshire family may not have been unconnected with Pilkington's interest in the bishopric of Winchester, but on the other hand, Alice's brother Richard ('c'.1528-1600) was a commissioner for the establishment of religion in the north of England from 1559. The marriage appears to have been kept secret at first, but was presumably known by the time the Pilkingtons' daughter Deborah was baptized at St Andrew's, Auckland, Durham, on 8 October 1564. 
Pilkington's arrival in Durham in 1561 was undoubtedly something of a culture shock. He complained bitterly to Cecil about the disordered state of the diocese, comparing himself with biblical characters forced into exile or obliged, against their will, to carry out impossible tasks. The difficulties of Durham diocese were, indeed, greater than those encountered by other Elizabethan bishops. There was a shared concern with issues such as Catholic survivalism, pluralism, and non-residence, but Durham also had a number of large impropriate parishes and livings of small value, a problem that was particularly acute in the border areas of Northumberland. Here the shortfall of clergy was often compensated for by Scots, of whom Pilkington had a particular distrust, 'vagabonds and wicked men which hide themselves there because they dare not abide in their country and serve for little or nothing' (TNA: PRO, SP 15/12, 108). Since Durham was a palatine see, he also had a secular jurisdiction and was pitched into the middle of an ongoing conflict between the crown and the two leading magnates of the north, the earls of Westmorland and Northumberland. Most of the officers of the palatinate and diocese reflected the conservative views of his predecessor, Cuthbert Tunstall, or were in some way deferential to the two earls. In despair he wrote to Cecil in November 1561: 'I know not whether they like me worse or I they... where I had a little wit at my coming, now have left me almost none' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/20, 25). 
Pilkington's first challenge was to procure loyal and reliable administrators and in this objective the visitation of 1561, in which the oath of supremacy was put to officials and clergy, was a major watershed. The old palatinate officers were removed and replaced by more amenable protestants, such as Thomas Calverley and William Fleetwood. In 1563 William Whittingham arrived as dean of the cathedral and soon struck up a good working relationship with the bishop. Moreover, Pilkington had ample opportunity in the 1560s and 1570s to exercise his patronage of cathedral prebends and invariably nominated zealous protestants, many of them being his kinsmen or friends. Robert Swift, chancellor and linchpin of the diocesan administration, was appointed soon after the bishop in 1561, but in other instances Pilkington had first to engineer the removal of non-residents. John Ebden was persuaded to exchange the archdeaconry of Durham for John Pilkington's prebend at St Paul's in 1563; but William King stubbornly held on to the archdeaconry of Northumberland until he was finally deprived in 1566, thus making way for Ralph Lever. The appointment of Lever was Pilkington's only misjudgement among his senior secular and diocesan officers and he resigned in 1573 following an unedifying argument with Swift over visitation articles. Pilkington's active use of patronage was also evident in the diocese, where he was constantly seeking to bring committed protestants to the north. He was a determined protector of the rights of his see and resisted the attempt of Thomas Young, archbishop of York, to visit the diocese of Durham in 1561, telling the archbishop's apparitor, 'If thy master will needs come to visit me bade him send me word and I will meet him in the midst of Tees' (Durham Cathedral Library, Hunter MS 35A, fol. 40). 
Only a limited picture of Pilkington's diocesan administration can be drawn because of poor archival survival, but what there is suggests an active involvement in maintaining churches in good repair and ensuring the supply of prescribed protestant texts. He also issued new statutes to regulate the conduct of the consistory court in 1573. Despite poor health, the bishop maintained a personal involvement and one of his last acts, in December 1575, was to write to the archdeacons requesting them to bring before him at Auckland all those who did not attend church or 'godly exercises of religion' (Durham University Library, DR VIII/1, fol. 245). Sir Francis Knollys summed up the situation succinctly when he stated in 1568 that 'The Bishop of Durham has his diocese well instructed, though there be obstacles in his way' ('CSP Scot.', '1563-9', 514). What these obstacles were Pilkington never wearied of explaining to anyone prepared to listen to him. They were the indifferent support given to protestantism by the central government; the attempts of secular forces to profit at the expense of the church; and the continued survival of Catholicism and crypto-Catholicism due to inadequate efforts to suppress it. 
Despite his acceptance of high office in the Elizabethan church, Pilkington was uneasy about certain aspects of the settlement of 1559 which did not satisfy his protestant convictions. As the controversy over the imposition of vestments loomed in 1565, he wrote twice to the earl of Leicester about the issue and Parker was of the opinion that he 'will give over his bishopric rather than it shall take place in his diocese' ('Correspondence of Matthew Parker', 237). Durham was therefore regarded as a test case, which explains why, during 1566 and 1567, six leading figures in the diocese -- including the dean, chancellor, and archdeacon of Durham -- were called before the ecclesiastical commissioners at York accused of vestiarian offences. Despite the fact that two of the accused were deprived of their cathedral prebends (Thomas Lever and William Birche), the bishop did not 'give over' his diocese, the compromise, perhaps, being that they were allowed to retain their other preferments. Yet Pilkington's administration does not display overt puritanical zeal. The only charge of iconoclasm levelled against him refers to the secularization of the redundant collegiate church of Auckland where 'he allowed both shooting and bowling' (J. F. Hodgson, 169) and in 1566 he prudently wrote to Cecil before he issued a preaching licence to Christopher Goodman, who was making a temporary stay in Newcastle. In a letter to Rodolph Gualter in 1573 Pilkington expressed dismay at the tactics of the new generation of puritan leaders who threatened to see the church 'wholly rent in pieces' (Robinson, 286.8). 
Pilkington probably saw his chief contribution to protestantism being made by means of education, which he always promoted earnestly. On his going to Durham in 1561 he informed Cecil that he was considering starting a school in his house, and in 1567 he and the earl of Westmorland petitioned the queen for the foundation of the Free Grammar School of Queen Elizabeth at Darlington. But his main achievement was the foundation of Rivington School, Lancashire, on 13 May 1566. The school, 'for the bringing up, teaching and instructing children and youth in grammar and other good learning' ('Works', xi), adjoined the chapel which had been founded by his father and was endowed with copyhold lands at Heighington and Cockfield in Durham. The chapel itself was at the same time freed from the jurisdiction of Bolton parish church and a remarkable portrait of Pilkington's parents, along with their twelve children, was painted to commemorate the occasion. 
Although Pilkington was capable of working constructively with the secular authorities and the confrontational aspect of his personality has been exaggerated in the past, he was, as has been seen, a firm upholder of the financial prerogatives of the church. A second conflict with the treasury centred on the forfeitures following the rebellion of 1569, which were claimed by Pilkington as part of his prerogative and only secured for the queen by virtue of an act of attainder. Similarly, Leicester had been rebuffed by the bishop when he attempted to obtain a lease of Howden for Walter Jobson in 1561. 'We may preach here and do what we will', he wrote to Cecil, 'but if we fill not their bellies all is in vain... I would I had been whipped when I left Cambridge' ('CSP for.', '1561-2', 224-6). Local people too felt the brunt of the bishop's determined protection of church endowments. There were quarrels over coal-producing lands at Chester-le-Street and Ryton, and the hospitals of the diocese were particular points of friction. Here charitable institutions had been suppressed or endowments spirited away as a result of the changes of the Reformation period. The most serious case was Sherburn, Durham's largest hospital, where Thomas Lever became master in 1562. Lever was determined to undertake reform and Pilkington gave him his full support, much to the discomfort of local gentry who had benefited from leases made by previous masters. 
Another area of tension was Catholicism. The visitations of 1559 and 1561 had gone some of the way to removing persistent reactionaries, but the problem of Catholic survivalism was far from solved. Some Catholics remained in the church by making a pretence at conformity, while others, deprived of their livings, joined the households of the nobility and gentry of the north. But the most serious difficulty, from Pilkington's point of view, was caused by those individuals who had gone overseas to Louvain and were acting as intermediaries between the forces of international Catholicism and their old friends and associates in the region. One of those giving support to the Louvain exiles was John Raymes, master of St Mary's Hospital, Newcastle, who was using the resources of the institution to help supply seditious literature. In 1565 Pilkington sent a sample of this to Cecil commenting that 'wise men do marvel that policy can suffer such seed of sedition... surely, evil men pick much evil out of such books' (BL, Lansdowne MS 8, fol. 87). Nevertheless, attempts to dislodge Raymes in 1564 and 1567 failed, and the relative strength of Catholicism was demonstrated by incidents at Sedgefield and Barnard Castle in 1567 when conservative parishioners clashed with puritan clergy. In November and December 1569 these forces came violently to the fore during the rebellion, when Catholicism was briefly restored in the diocese. Pilkington was forced to flee in face of the rebel advance and in his absence his house and property were plundered. Even after the suppression of the rising his problems with the local Catholics were not over. In 1571 Stephen Marley, prebendary of Durham, was deprived for failure to subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', and in the same year the bishop reported to Cecil continuing problems with former rebels and their wives and the ongoing flow of materials to and from Louvain. 'This people grows wild and I am left alone' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/81, 48), was his typically pessimistic conclusion. 
By the standards of Elizabethan bishops, Pilkington did not have a large family. Two sons, Isaac ('bap'. 8 March 1567/8) and Joshua, died young and the bishop was survived by only two daughters, Deborah and Ruth ('bap'. 3 July 1569). He made his will on 4 February 1571, entrusting his wife to distribute his goods 'according to such talk as I have declared unto her' (Greenwell, 2.8-11). The will was accompanied by two codicils, one (dated 1 January 1576) noting Deborah's (surprisingly early) marriage contract with Thomas Gargrave and marriage portion of $800; the other (undated and not included in the grant of probate) probably comprising a summary of the bishop's verbal instructions to his wife. He left legacies to his family, servants, Rivington School, and the poor, reserving various items of furniture for his successor (if he would accept them) in lieu of dilapidations. This offer was not accepted by Richard Barnes, who commenced action against the bishop's executors concerning the decayed state of some of the episcopal residences. Later Thomas Fuller alleged that each of Pilkington's daughters received $4000 on marriage and that this antagonized the queen, but the statement is not borne out by the bishop's will. Elizabeth's hostility, if it existed, was more likely rooted in Pilkington's puritanism and his attitude to church endowments. 
Pilkington never enjoyed a robust constitution. As early as 1556 he took a journey to the Cevennes for his health and in 1573 commented to Gualter about his 'frequent infirmities' and how he was 'perpetually struggling with disease and death' (Robinson, 286). He died, probably at Bishop Auckland, on 23 January 1576 at the age of fifty-five, Swift remarking that 'this wicked country... caused Mr James Pilkington to spend his life in continual pains and mournings and at length ended him'. He was initially buried in the church of St Andrew, Auckland, no doubt in response to his own request that he should be laid to rest 'with as few popish ceremonies as may be or vain cost' (Greenwell, 8), but, apparently on the initiative of Swift, he was exhumed and moved to Durham Cathedral, where he was reburied on 24 May 1576 at the head of Bishop Beaumont's tomb in front of the high altar. A Latin epitaph accompanied his monument, which has not survived. Pilkington's 'Exposition on Nehemiah' was left unfinished at his death and was published by his friend John Foxe in 1585 with a preface by him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22270


Pilkington, Laetitia (c.1709-1750), poet and autobiographer, was born in Dublin or co. Cork, the eldest surviving child of John van Lewen (1684-1737), a physician and man-midwife, and Elizabeth Corry 
(or Casey; died 'c'.1742)
. Laetitia's father had moved from co. Cork to Dublin by 1711, attracted a fashionable clientele, and eventually rose to be president of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland. Her mother was a niece of Sir John Meade MP, a former attorney-general in Ireland and progenitor of the Meade earls of Clanwilliam, a connection which in later years opened as many doors to Laetitia as her father's contacts in Dublin. Probably born in 1708 or 1709 -- she herself claimed 1712 -- Laetitia was married off on 31 May 1725 to an ambitious young clergyman, the poet Matthew Pilkington (1701-1774). 
Through Patrick Delany, a Trinity College classmate of van Lewen's and one of Matthew's early patrons, Mrs Pilkington obtained an introduction to Jonathan Swift about 1729, not long after Matthew did. The couple soon became fixtures at Swift's deanery. By October 1730 Swift was affectionately referring to them as 'a little young poetical parson, who has a littler young poetical wife' -- both Pilkingtons were diminutive in size -- for whom he meant the profits of a projected miscellany of Irish wit ('Correspondence', 3.411-12). A year later, visiting Dublin, Lord Lansdowne's niece, Mary Granville (later Mrs Delany), found Mrs Pilkington 'a bosom friend' of the dean's, well worth cultivating. She reported spending convivial evenings with the Pilkingtons on Lazer's Hill and the van Lewens in Molesworth Street ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 1.301, 335-6, 327). 
Thereafter Mrs Pilkington's path tended downwards. Swift's good offices procured Matthew a term in London as chaplain to the lord mayor for 1732-3, but when Mrs Pilkington briefly visited him there in October 1733 she found him knee-deep in intrigue, smitten with a Drury Lane actress -- and herself fobbed off on his libertine friend James Worsdale, a painter from whose generosity and connections Matthew hoped to profit. Their marriage survived Matthew's arrest and return in disgrace to Ireland, in April 1734, but not the death of her father less than three years later. In September 1737, having taken up with a wealthy widow, Matthew caught Mrs Pilkington alone in her bedroom with a young surgeon named Robin Adair, much later surgeon-general in England and hero of the ballad bearing his name. Adair fled Dublin, a noisy and acrimonious divorce ensued, and with it the loss of Swift's friendship. Having previously written occasional verse to amuse herself, Mrs Pilkington now turned author in good earnest. With Worsdale visiting Dublin that season, she sold him poems to pass off as his own, produced what she called a 'flaming' feminist prologue for his one-act ballad opera 'A Cure for a Scold' (its text independently revised by Matthew), and apparently wrote the much-anticipated 'operatical farce', never published, called 'No Death but Marriage', by 'a Lady', acted at Smock Alley on 3 May 1738. 
By the following winter -- harassed by Matthew, tired of her notoriety, and alarmed by the would-be seducers it brought her -- Mrs Pilkington had fled Dublin for London, where she passed the next eight years, much more quietly, as Mrs Meade. After a brief stint in 1739 as a hack writer for the opposition party she came to the attention of the elderly playwright Colley Cibber. His patronage, and her own amusing conversation, brought her an intermittent stream of ghost-writing commissions from his aristocratic clubmates at White's. At one point she opened a print and pamphlet shop in St James's, at another found herself imprisoned for a $2 debt in the Marshalsea prison (October-December 1742). Originally she sought subscribers for an edition of her collected poems, but by 1743 she instead began soliciting subscriptions for her 'Memoirs', where almost all her verse eventually appeared. Though patronized up to a point by the novelist and master printer Samuel Richardson -- who consulted her about 'Clarissa' and more than once relieved her in emergencies during 1745 and 1746 -- Mrs Pilkington never succeeded in finding a publisher for the work in London. 
To see the 'Memoirs' into print -- and to drum up more subscriptions, sometimes from former friends who feared exposure in them -- Mrs Pilkington returned to Dublin in May 1747. On the advice of Cibber she divided the work into volumes. Despite her former husband's best efforts, the first appeared in February 1748 and the second that December. A third volume -- apparently detached in part from the original volume 2 and padded out with miscellaneous anecdotes from earlier periods of her life -- she left unfinished at her death, though advertised as 'In the Press' as early as November 1749. This her son Jack ['see below'] finally published in 1754, from London, with a long appendix concluding her life. Mrs Pilkington died in Dublin on 29 July 1750, in modest lodgings on Phraper Lane, of the same digestive disorder (probably ulcers) which had felled her in London in 1744 and again in 1746-7. She was buried at St Ann's, Dawson Street, Dublin. 
Though decried by Richardson and his fellow bluestockings, it was the 'Memoirs' which ultimately secured Mrs Pilkington's reputation. Celebrated for their lively anecdotes of Swift, not as a public figure but as he appeared in private life, they anticipated Samuel Johnson's precepts for biography in 'The Rambler', number 60. Besides their oft-quoted material on Cibber, Richardson, Swift, and his circle, they provide useful information about such disparate figures as the army generals Charles Churchill and Sir John Ligonier, the scientist Stephen Hales, the publisher Edmund Curll, the collector-physicians Richard Mead and Sir Hans Sloane, the noted jurist Philip Yorke (later Lord Hardwicke), and, apparently, the young William Blackstone, then reading law at the inns of court. They exhibit a breezy conversational style -- 'write it out just as you relate it', Cibber had urged her (L. Pilkington, 160) -- and a mastery of dialogue uncommon in narrative at so early a date. Apart from 'An Apology for the Minister' (1739), an anonymous opposition satire, the 'Memoirs' incorporate almost all her surviving works, including a fragmentary tragedy called 'The Roman Father'. In April 1748 she and her son Jack briefly turned impresario and rented the little Capel Street theatre in Dublin, for which she wrote a comedy called 'The Turkish Court', unpublished and now lost, as well as one or more satiric monologues for Jack to perform in the style of Samuel Foote. Richardson preserved and edited a selection of her letters to him, eventually published by Anna Laetitia Barbauld in 'The Correspondence of Samuel Richardson' (vol. 2, 1804). A literary-minded young schoolmaster, Bernard Clarke, published his correspondence with her in his 'Collection of Poems upon Various Occasions' (nos. 2-3, 1751). 
Better known as Jack, Mrs Pilkington's younger surviving son, 
Escaping from his father's custody about 1741 Jack had found refuge with his mother's uncle in Cork, but then turned to the stage as a boy soprano and struck out again on his own. At various times he attached himself to the eccentric Richard Poekrich, inventor of the musical glasses; to the composer Thomas Arne, in whose troupe he sang and acted in Dublin during 1743; and to a travelling nobleman, Charles O'Neill of Shane's Castle (senior representative of the Clanaboy O'Neills), who allegedly professed his devotion to the boy, offered him a lifetime annuity, but finally dropped him when his voice began to break into a 'hoarse disagreeable tenor' (J. C. Pilkington, 'Real Story', 149). The 'Real Story' ends in 1744, when Jack left Ireland for Scotland. 
By 1746, after brief stints as a naval volunteer, Jack had fetched up in London with his mother, whom he accompanied back to Dublin in 1747. By the 1750s, now married, he was back in London writing miscellaneous verse for magazines, following his late mother in and out of the Marshalsea prison (not once but three times), and picking quarrels with Foote and the theatre manager David Garrick. He died on the continent some time during the summer of 1763. 


@@@@@


doc= 22271


Pilkington, Leonard (1527-1599), Church of England clergyman, was born at Rivington, Lancashire, the fifth of seven sons of Richard Pilkington, esquire ('c'.1486-1551), and his wife, Alice, daughter of Laurence or Lawrence Ashawe of Hall on the Hill, Heath Charnock, Lancashire. Pilkington matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, as a sizar, and graduated BA there in 1544. Appointed a fellow at St John's on 24 March 1546, he proceeded MA the following year. He was named mathematical examiner at St John's on 5 September 1548, lecturer in mathematics in 1550, and a senior fellow on 4 September 1551. Nicholas Ridley ordained him deacon at St Paul's, London, on 15 May 1552, and Pilkington was appointed preacher at St John's at Michaelmas in the same year. Shortly after Mary's accession he was ejected from his fellowship, and like his brother James Pilkington fled to the continent. He may have gone to Frankfurt am Main, for one of the Pilkingtons arbitrated in a dispute concerning the eucharist in that city's French congregation in late March 1559. While he was in exile Pilkington married his first wife, Katherine; they had five children, Alice (died after 1602), Grace (died 1632), Barnabas (died 1607), Nehemiah (died 1602), and Joseph (died 1622). 
Following Elizabeth's accession Pilkington returned to England. After his wife died, the visitors restored him to his fellowship at St John's on 27 December 1559, and he was ordained priest at Ely in November 1560, appointed Hebrew lecturer at St John's on 14 January 1561, and collated to the rectory of Middleton in Teesdale, Durham, including the chapel at nearby Eggleston, on 20 March 1561. He was licensed as a university preacher on 6 June 1561, and, at Robert Beaumont's suggestion, named master at St John's on 19 October 1561, succeeding his brother James, who was now bishop of Durham. In the same year Pilkington received the degree of BTh and was named regius professor of theology, but he resigned this post the following year and was succeeded by Matthew Hutton. On 28 August 1563 James Pilkington collated Leonard to the rectory of Whitburn, Durham, where he amassed a substantial copyhold estate, and where in 1575 he became enmeshed in a dispute with a parishioner over tithes owed for a windmill. He became DTh on 28 January 1564. After securing William Fulke's election as fellow and preacher at St John's in March 1564, Pilkington resigned his mastership in May, having worked to obtain the appointment of Richard Longworth as his successor on the 11th. He was collated to a canonry in Durham Cathedral on 1 August 1567; installed on 6 September, he held this prebend until his death. 
Following James Pilkington's death in 1576, Leonard and his younger brother John became overseers of the grammar school at Rivington which James had founded. For failing to attend a visitation conducted by Robert Swift, chancellor of Durham, at Middleton in Teesdale, Pilkington was excommunicated on 6 February 1578, though he was absolved five days later and excused from another visitation in July. By this time the diocese of Durham had become a centre of controversy, having attracted a number of forward protestants, including Dean William Whittingham and such prebendaries as Pilkington himself, his brother John, Ralph Lever, Thomas Lever (deprived in 1567), and John Foxe (who resigned in 1573). The visitations in early 1578 were the forerunners of another in October, when Archbishop Sandys of York quarrelled first with Whittingham, who denied Sandys's right to visit, and then with Dean Matthew Hutton of York, who had supported the dean of Durham. Pilkington weathered the storm, and in June 1579 he and his brother John sought Sir Francis Walsingham's assistance in finding a new dean. In 1592 he was appointed cathedral treasurer. 
On 30 September 1597 Pilkington married his second wife, Jayne ('nee' Dyllycotes), widow of Richard Barnes, bishop of Durham. They had no children. He died in August 1599, probably at Durham, and was buried in the cathedral there. In his will, dated 16 November 1598 and proved on 8 September 1599, he noted that four of his children had already received their inheritances: Barnabas, a house and copyhold at Whitburn and nearby Cleadon, with other gifts, amounting to approximately $600; Joseph, money, three farms, and stock worth at least $400 altogether; and Grace, wife of Dr Robert Hutton (Matthew Hutton's nephew), and Alice, wife of Francis Laycock, portions of $200 apiece. To Nehemiah, a minor, Pilkington gave a farm at Hedworth, tithes at Harton, Durham, and half his personal property. Small bequests were given to his widow, relatives, and the poor, and 20 nobles were provided for road repair in the Durham area. To Cambridge he bequeathed seventeen books and a manuscript of AElfric's homilies. Jayne Pilkington was buried next to her husband on 20 June 1605. 


@@@@@


doc= 22272


Lionel Scott Pilkington (1830-1875), sportsman and eccentric, was born on 5 May 1830. Entered at Rugby in 1844, he was soon expelled for his nightly expeditions to pubs. Pilkington early in life developed a strong love of stable life and habitually dressed as a groom. Travelling in Italy with a tutor, he ran away and was found working in the duke of Parma's stables; subsequently he served as a seaman on an India merchantman. He served Sir Joseph Henry Hawley as groom, and, being known in the stables as Jack, he adopted the surname of Hawley. When he came of age, he sold part of his father's property and built a house in Hatfield, living there all his life. In appearance he was 'short, strongly built, dark, and very round-shouldered' ('The Life and Eccentricities', 9). Well-read despite his addictions to stables, racecourses, fox-hunting, and labouring on his farm, he was overpoweringly hospitable to his acquaintances. A Roman Catholic, he was violently hostile to church rates and other manifestations of the Church of England. He claimed to have married in Italy and had three children. Hard drinking shortened his days and he died on Christmas day 1875 at Hatfield. He insisted that he be buried there, fully dressed in his riding clothes, in a stone coffin alongside his favourite horse in a paddock in which his rinderpest-infested stock had been interred. He left his Yorkshire property to his groom. 


@@@@@


doc= 22273


Pilkington, Mary Susanna (1761-1839), educational and children's writer, was baptized on 6 April 1761 at St Michael's, Cambridge, the daughter of Allen Hopkins (died 1773), a surgeon, and his wife, Mary Thornhill, of Stilton. Her parents had married on 7 December 1759; she gave her age as sixty-three in January 1825. According to her own account, she was 'educated under the prospect of enjoying an Independent, if not an Affluent, Fortune' (Mary Pilkington to Charles Lambourn, 20 June 1810, Royal Literary Fund archive, BL), but these prospects were dashed after the death of her father in London on 20 April 1773. Owing to either a mistake in the title deeds to her father's estates, or the 'illegal conduct' of her uncle, Allen Hopkins's estates were inherited by his brother, leaving Mary and her mother destitute but for a legacy of a few hundred pounds from her grandfather, a clergyman. Their predicament sent her mother insane and therefore utterly dependent on Mary; 'at length' (ibid.) she recovered after being treated by Dr Monro of Bethlem Hospital. 
On 6 July 1786 at St Clement Danes, Westminster, Mary Hopkins married her father's successor, John Pilkington, a man 'endowed with an amiable Disposition & a generous Heart, but alas! totally devoid of Worldly Prudence' (Mary Pilkington to Charles Lambourn, 20 June 1810, Royal Literary Fund archive, BL). They lived for a short while in Ely but John Pilkington's practice seems to have failed and he was compelled to make a living as a naval surgeon. After considering her limited options, Mary Pilkington became governess to four motherless children in a family referred to only by the initial 'W'. She proved to be well suited to her employment and remained in the family for several years until, overcome by ill health, she resigned. On recovering her health she decided to take advantage of her experience as a teacher and her interest in education and to become a professional writer for children. She had already published a volume of poetry in 1796 and now turned her hand to writing the first of many morally didactic tales. Three were published by Elizabeth Newbery in 1797: 'Edward Bernard, or, Merit Exalted'; 'The Force of Example, or, The History of Henry and Caroline'; and 'Obedience Rewarded, and Prejudice Conquered, or, The History of Mortimer Lascelles'. 
Pilkington quickly branched out into educational literature and wrote a succession of works designed for the growing market of girls' boarding-schools, including 'A Mirror for the Female Sex: Historical Beauties for Young Ladies' (1798), 'Biography for Girls' (1798), and 'Mentorial tales for the instruction of young ladies just leaving school and entering upon the theatre of life' (1802). Although she regarded the religious and moral dimensions of education as paramount, she echoed both Hannah More and Mary Wollstonecraft in arguing that girls should be given an intellectual education and in asserting that 'the female mind is certainly as capable of acquiring knowledge as that of the other sex' ('A Mirror for the Female Sex', 61). Convinced that biography could be morally instructive, she published 'Memoirs of Celebrated Female Characters' (1804) to inspire her readers to emulate the heroism, learning, piety, stoicism, and artistic achievements of illustrious women from both the past and the present. Pilkington's religious and political conservatism unsurprisingly coloured her biographical judgements, yet did not prevent her from praising the abilities, if not the conduct or politics, of such morally controversial subjects as Mary Wollstonecraft, Mary Robinson, and Helen Maria Williams. Although she successfully targeted a female readership, Pilkington also published a biographical compilation for boys and an abridgement of Oliver Goldsmith's natural history, which proved the most long-lived of all her works and was still being reprinted in Philadelphia in 1846. 
For over a decade from 1798 Pilkington was a regular contributor to the 'Lady's Monthly Museum', a popular women's magazine owned by her principal publishers, Vernor and Hood. Her contributions, which were mostly anonymous or signed either 'M.P.', 'P.', or 'Mrs P.', ranged from poetry and stories to biography and snippets of society gossip, and she also undertook editorial work on the magazine. The 'Museum' was a source of steady yet lowly paid work (24 guineas per annum), and Pilkington repeatedly asked for her salary to be increased to reflect her continued commitment to a publication that she viewed as 'the Child of my Adoption' (Mary Pilkington to Sharpe, 22 Jan 1810, Royal Literary Fund archive, BL). The loss of 30 guineas for a commission when another of her publishers, Hughes, went bankrupt in 1804 and the fading fortunes of her principal publishers (from 1806 Vernor, Hood, and Sharpe) dramatically altered Pilkington's circumstances. A debilitating illness in 1810 forced her, by now a widow, to apply to the Royal Literary Fund for financial support; she received 20 guineas that year. Her second collection of poems, which had been in the pipeline for several years, was published in 1811 with a portrait of her by Playfer. 
The last twenty years of Pilkington's life were clouded by frequent and prolonged bouts of ill health which she described as nervous disorders or fevers. Aggravated by financial worries and the failing health of her mother, who was over eighty in 1815, her own health deteriorated to such a degree that she struggled to keep writing. Moreover she could no longer find a ready market for her stock-in-trade didactic works and had to diversify. Early in 1815 she wrote: 'Finding that Necessities were very pressing and that Mr Harris was not inclined to purchase my Productions as fast as I could compose them, I was induced to place greater Confidence in a species of Novel which I disposed of to Mr Newman. (Mary Pilkington to James Anderson, 7 Feb 1815, Royal Literary Fund archive, BL)' This novel was 'Celebrity, or, The Unfortunate Choice' (1815), which was published by the Minerva Press. A week later, when applying for another grant from the Royal Literary Fund, she despairingly predicted that she would never 'again derive support from my Talent' for she grew 'more Confused and Impaired' (Mary Pilkington to James Anderson, 14 Feb 1815, ibid.). She nevertheless published two further works, the last of which was feelingly entitled 'The Shipwreck, or, Misfortune the Inspirer of Virtuous Sentiments' (1819). In January 1825 she again applied to the Royal Literary Fund for aid and received $25; thereafter nothing is known of her until her death in 1839. Four novels by Miss or Mrs Pilkington and published by the Minerva Press, the best-known of which was her first, 'Delia: a Pathetic and Interesting Tale' (1790), have mistakenly been attributed to Mary Pilkington. 


@@@@@


doc= 22275


Pilkington, Matthew (bap. 1705, d. 1765), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was born in Stanton-le-Dale, Derbyshire, where he was baptized on 25 May 1705, the eldest son of Middlemore Pilkington (1670-1752) and his wife, Susannah Smith. In 1723 he matriculated from Jesus College, Cambridge, where he was elected a scholar and graduated LLB in 1728. In 1747 he was appointed rector of Fenny Bentley in Derbyshire; the following year he was collated to the prebend of Ruiton in Lichfield Cathedral. 
Pilkington's earliest known publication was 'The Evangelical History and Harmony' (1747). This was followed by a sermon, 'The Passages on Moses and the Prophets which are Expressive of Eternal Life', which he preached on the occasion of the bishop of Lincoln's visit to Derby in 1756. His 'Remarks on an Address to the People called the Quakers and a Sermon on Baptism' (1762) drew several responses, including a short discourse from the Revd John Johnson (1705/6-1791) of Liverpool. Pilkington's most significant work was 'A Rational Concordance, or, An Index to the Bible' (1749), which, though it did not rival Alexander Cruden's 'Concordance', contained many words not included in Joseph Priestley's 'Index to the Bible' (1804). He also published 'Remarks upon Several Passages of Scripture' (1759). 
At the time of his death in 1765 Pilkington was moderately affluent: he owned several small estates in Lincolnshire, Warwickshire, Derbyshire, and Nottinghamshire. In accordance with his will, drawn up on 17 November 1764 and proved on 5 November 1765, the bulk of his estate passed to his wife, Frances, and then to his nephew Thomas Pilkington, there being no surviving children of his marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 22276


Pilkington, Matthew (1701-1774), satirist and art historian, was born in Ballyboy, King's county, the son of William Pilkington, a watchmaker. The father moved to Dublin in time for the boy's schooling, acquired rental properties in the eastern suburbs, and eventually (according to Laetitia Pilkington) turned alehouse keeper. Admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, in 1718, the son was elected scholar in 1721, graduated BA in 1722, and the following March was irregularly ordained deacon by the high tory bishop of Ossory, Sir Thomas Vesey. By 25 May 1725, when he qualified for his MA at Trinity, Pilkington was serving as reader at St Andrew's, Dublin, and courting Laetitia ('c'.1709-1750) ['see 'Pilkington, Laetitia], the daughter of a prominent parishioner, Dr John Van Lewen, to whom he had laid claim that spring as his beloved 'Laetitia' in his earliest published poem, 'A Pastoral Elegy on the Death of a Lady's Canary-Bird'. On 31 May the couple were hurriedly married, and on 17 November, with Van Lewen's help, Pilkington was promoted to curate at St Andrew's. Through his immediate literary patron, Patrick Delany, Pilkington next came to the attention of Jonathan Swift -- probably late in 1728, when he produced the official royal birthday 'Ode' for Dublin Castle. (Swift spoofed it in his 'Directions for a Birth-Day Song' but then apparently helped Pilkington to revise it for a repeat performance in 1729.) With the backing of Swift, Delany, and another early patron, the poet Mary Barber, he next collected and published his 'Poems on Several Occasions' (Dublin, 1730; expanded edition, London, 1731). Again through Swift's sponsorship, he travelled to London in September 1732 as chaplain to the incoming lord mayor, the Jacobite printer John Barber (no relation to Mary Barber), whose opposition to the 'Excise Bill' increasingly alarmed the Walpole government. In London, Pilkington promptly alienated Barber and Swift's other friends, paid court to the prime minister's libertine son Edward Walpole, and took up with the actress Mary Heron. In the months before his appointment, seemingly with Swift's assent, he had unsuccessfully tried to broker a collected London edition of Swift's works, while palming off as Swift's his own 'Infallible Scheme to Pay the Publick Debt of this Nation in Six Months' (London, 1732, 'By D -- n S -- t'). Once in London he found publishers for some new satiric verse which Swift sent over with Mary Barber, while passing off as Swift's another of his own satires, 'A Serious and Useful Scheme to Make an Hospital for Incurables of Universal Benefit' (London, 1733, 'By a Celebrated Author in Ireland'). When the government took action against one of the new Swift poems, 'An Epistle to a Lady', both Pilkington and Mrs Barber were arrested in January 1734. The speed of his release and return to Ireland -- within three months, compared to a year and a half for Mrs Barber -- convinced contemporaries that he had turned informer. Almost certainly it was John Barber rather than Swift whom he informed on, but as his wife later remarked, 'The Notion of his having betray'd Dr. Swift incens'd the whole Kingdom of Ireland against him' (L. Pilkington, 68). Thereafter Pilkington kept a lower public profile, quietly cultivating successive pro-Walpole archbishops of Dublin, John Hoadly and Charles Cobbe. From the latter, in 1741, he received the living of Donabate, co. Dublin, adjacent to Cobbe's country seat at Newbridge House. Meanwhile the death of Pilkington's father-in-law in January 1737 -- leaving debts instead of the large fortune anticipated -- effectively ended his marriage to Laetitia. After unsuccessfully forcing her on a male friend -- or so she claimed -- he finally caught her in a sufficiently compromising position to effect a separation, in September 1737, and an ecclesiastical divorce, granted in February 1738. At the same time, by her account, he was romantically involved with the rotund but wealthy 'Widow Warren' (probably Mary Warren, widow of a Kildare MP), and was spending time with the stage-struck painter James Worsdale -- implicated that season in the formation of the Dublin Hellfire Club but protected through the influence of their mutual friend Edward Walpole, then in town as the lord lieutenant's chief secretary. For its Dublin production that January, Pilkington reportedly revamped the text of Worsdale's racy ballad opera 'A Cure for a Scold' (Dublin, 1738). 
Publication of these charges in Laetitia's first volume of 'Memoirs' (February 1748) ended any hopes that Pilkington might climb higher in the Church of Ireland. In a series of anonymous broadside retorts that year, he called her a whore and a liar, hinted that five of their six children were bastards, and threatened a counter-narrative to expose her. Nothing of the sort ever appeared. By this time, as Laetitia remarked in her third volume, Pilkington had largely given up literature for what sounds like secretarial work: 'I fancy when thy 'Pen-using' Talents perish'd, thy 'Pen-making' ones shot forth', in welcome service to 'a certain Bishop', Charles Cobbe (L. Pilkington, 300). At some point after his divorce Pilkington also took up the study of old master paintings. In Beaumont Brenan's satiric farce about Dublin art auctions, 'The Painter's Breakfast' (performed at Smock Alley, 2 April 1756), he appears as the Revd Mr Busy, a local expert and buying agent so devious that no one believes him even when he speaks truth. About the same time, as an adviser and buying agent, he began helping Cobbe's son Thomas in building up the family's notable collection of paintings at Newbridge House. Eventually, in 1770, he published his influential 'The Gentleman's and Connoisseur's Dictionary of Painters', a 723-page biographical and critical compendium which ranks as the first original treatment of the subject in English, giving special attention to the Italians (who were then at the height of fashion), to the Dutch and Flemish (who were not), and to the contemporary art market in both the British Isles and the Low Countries. Periodically expanded, revised, and retitled (as 'A Dictionary of Painters' in Henry Fuseli's 1805 and 1810 editions, 'A General Dictionary of Painters' after 1824) this held its own for nearly a century, the last edition appearing in 1857. On a moderate salary -- 'about $150' a year by 1772, according to diocesan records -- Pilkington also managed to acquire a few nice pieces for himself, including a Camphuysen landscape, a Heemskerk conversation piece, six Baptiste watercolours, and the sketch of a Tintoretto in Venice, 'reputed to be the original sketch', formerly in the ducal collection at Kilkenny (M. Pilkington, 'Dictionary', 112, 283, 36, 614). 
By the end of 1740, before his two younger surviving children escaped his custody and rejoined their mother in London, Pilkington had dropped the Widow Warren and taken up with Nancy Sandes, daughter of a minor landowner in Queen's county. He married her on 27 August 1750, less than a month after Laetitia's death. They had two children, neither of whom survived infancy. Pilkington died in Cumberland Street, Dublin on 18 July 1774, Nancy living on until 1785. 
Thanks to his penchant for anonymity and intrigue, Pilkington's full literary output has yet to be traced. When his 'Dictionary of Painters' first appeared, he told his publisher that he had on hand an extensive unpublished account, or 'Character', of the artist William Hogarth, too long and too sensitive politically to include in the dictionary. For the earlier period, his wife Laetitia indicates that he wrote at least one of the mock-heroic poems satirizing the Trinity College censor Hugh Graffan assembled in 'Graffanio-mastix, or, A Collection of Curious Poems on the Censor' (1730), as well as the libellous prose portrait of his former employer, John Barber, eventually published by Edmund Curll in 'An impartial history of the life, character, amours, travels, and transactions of Mr John Barber, City printer' (1741). 
Pilkington is a leading suspect in two celebrated literary forgeries from the 1730s: the counterfeit letter from Swift to Queen Caroline in ostensible praise of Mary Barber, of 22 June 1731, which effectively cut her off from royal patronage; and the ludicrous James Thomson pastiche in (dis)praise of a poetic rival of Pilkington's, James Dalacourt ('London Magazine', November 1734), which poor Dalacourt continued to reprint as genuine even after Thomson publicly disclaimed it. Pilkington's ability to hold a grudge is independently attested by the 'Impartial History', where he falsifies his story of meeting Swift in order to deny any credit to his original patrons, Delany and Mary Barber, whom he suspected of blocking his advancement (pp. 26-8), and by his last will, dated 14 February 1754. There the son who tried to stay neutral in his war with Laetitia ('never felt a filial affection for me') is cut off with $5. To 'those abandoned wretches' Jack and Betty Pilkington -- his two other surviving children by Laetitia, not acknowledged as such in the will -- he leaves a shilling apiece, though 'I should abhorr to mention them in any Deed of mine, if it were not to prevent all possibility of Dispute or litigation' ('N&Q', 11 ser., 6.66). 


@@@@@


doc= 22277


Redmond William Pilkington (1789-1844), also an architect, was born on 9 July 1789. Educated at Charterhouse, he then followed his father's profession as surveyor and architect, and succeeded him in some of his posts, including those connected with Lord Radnor (1826), the Sun Fire Assurance office (1838), and the Charterhouse (1824). At the Charterhouse he rebuilt Preacher's and Pensioner's courts, apparently to Edward Blore's designs, though he exhibited a view of one quadrangle at the Royal Academy in 1827 under his own name. Pilkington was a magistrate for Middlesex and lived in Hyde Park Gate, Kensington Gore. He married, on 7 July 1827, Frances ('fl'. 'c'.1810- 'c'.1875), daughter of Thomas Adams of Belgrave Place, London, with whom he had one son, Lionel Scott ['see below']. He supported his brother's family, and purchased an estate, Ash Hill, near his father's property at Doncaster, where he resided occasionally; he died there on 22 May 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 22278


Pilkington, Richard (d. 1631), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was a member of the family long established at Rivington, Lancashire, and was perhaps nephew to James Pilkington, bishop of Durham from 1561 to 1576. He attended the grammar school at Rivington, appearing in its first extant register of 1575-6, and was admitted as a scholar of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in May 1585, graduating BA in 1590 and proceeding MA in 1593. In 1595 he was ordained deacon (30 November) and priest (8 December) in the diocese of Carlisle, but on 27 May 1596 he was presented by a Lancashire neighbour, Thomas, Lord Scrope of Bolton, to the rectory of Hambleden, Buckinghamshire. 
It appears, however, that Pilkington was not resident in Buckinghamshire, for in 1597 he was instituted to the rectory of Salkeld, Cumberland, and on 8 June the same year he was collated as archdeacon of Carlisle, probably at the behest of Bishop John May of Carlisle, whose daughter Anne he married about this time. Their son Abraham (who matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, on 1 June 1621 aged twenty) was born in 1600 or 1601; they also had a daughter who later married Thomas Hickman, Pilkington's curate. Pilkington had already resigned Salkeld in late 1599, vacating his archdeaconry before the collation of his successor on 6 February 1600. On 30 October 1599, as a member of Queen's College, he supplicated for incorporation in the degree of MA at Oxford; there he proceeded BD on 27 June 1600, and DD on 8 July, 1607. For more than thirty years until his death, Pilkington continued to hold the rectory of Hambledon; on 13 December 1609 he was licensed to hold it alongside that of a second benefice, unknown. 
Pilkington became known for his controversy with Anthony Champney, a graduate of the Sorbonne, who had issued a controversial work in 1616. In his response, 'Parallela', Pilkington did not hesitate to assume the mantle of tradition, urging his readers to separate 'the dross from the gold, the popish novelties from ancient verities'. He addressed his work to Archbishop George Abbot, 'who first encouraged me to this battle, and can best of all men judge (as the most experienced general in this sacred warfare) on which side the truth propendeth'. Champney replied in 1620 with 'Mr Pilkinton his Parallela Disparalled', complaining that its author had met his short 'manual of controversies' with 'a fowle great book of fifty sheets' (preface); 'Parallela' had indeed run to more than 400 pages. In the year of Champney's reply Pilkington was presented to the rectory of Little Kimble, Buckinghamshire, by Edward Sergeant, lord of the manor and estate of that name. Pilkington was collated as treasurer of the diocese of Lichfield on 2 June 1625 but resigned in 1628; he had already been admitted to high office in the diocese of Lincoln, having been collated as archdeacon of Leicester on 1 August 1625, and installed by proxy on 16th of the same month. 
Pilkington continued as archdeacon until his death; he died in September 1631 and was buried at Hambledon on 19 September. According to Anthony Wood, the ceremony was held during: 'the most dreadful storm of wind, thunder and lightning, as ever was known in those parts. It occasioned so great a darkness, that the neighbours were forced to convey the corpse to the grave by lights at four of the clock in the afternoon.' It was reported that the violent wind 'moved and broke some of the stones that were to cover the grave and that it forced the shovel out of the clerks hand'. These events occasioned 'certain odd reports' of him to be made by the Catholics whom Pilkington had so strongly opposed during his lifetime (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.513). 


@@@@@


doc= 22279


Pilkington, Robert (1765-1834), army officer, the son of Robert Pilkington and his wife, Grace, was born at Chelsfield, Kent, on 7 November 1765. After attending the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, he was commissioned second lieutenant, Royal Artillery, on 27 August 1787. He was transferred to the Royal Engineers on 5 June 1789, embarked for Canada in July 1790, and was stationed at Quebec. He was promoted first lieutenant on 16 January 1793, captain-lieutenant on 3 June 1797, and captain on 18 April 1801. He was active at Newark (Niagara on the Lake) and York (Toronto), and in 1794 he established a fortified post on the River Miamis. His engineering expertise was much in demand, and in addition to his military work, he became involved in various civil projects, and made maps. 
Pilkington acquired a large landholding in Upper Canada, so though he left in autumn 1802 and never returned, he maintained an interest in the county. As an absentee landlord he enticed gullible emigrants from Northamptonshire and Warwickshire to his Pilkington township, then undeveloped: 'most died cursing Pilkington for the impossible position in which he had placed them' ('DCB'). 
Back in England in 1803 Pilkington was again stationed in the southern district; and in May he was transferred for special service to the government gunpowder factory at Waltham Abbey, Essex. Pilkington was promoted regimental lieutenant-colonel on 24 June 1809. Two months later he accompanied the disastrous Walcheren expedition as commanding engineer in one of the divisions under the earl of Chatham. He participated in the siege and capture of Flushing, where he was wounded, and in the operations under lieutenant-generals Sir Eyre Coote and Sir George Don. Before the evacuation of the army in November and December 1809 he was entrusted with the destruction of the basin, arsenal, and sea defences of Flushing; Captain Moore and 600 men of the Royal Navy were employed under his orders. In his dispatch Sir George Don gave great credit to Pilkington for the skill with which the operations were carried out. 
Pilkington returned to England in January 1810, and was stationed first at Woolwich and later at Weedon, where he superintended the erection of the large ordnance stores, gunpowder magazines, and barracks. On 15 October, at Devizes, Wiltshire, he married Hannah, daughter of John Tylie; they had four daughters and one surviving son. In May 1815 Pilkington was appointed commanding royal engineer (CRE) of the north-western district; and on 1 December 1815 he was promoted regimental colonel. 
In October 1818 Pilkington was appointed CRE at Gibraltar, where he remained for twelve years, and where he was promoted major-general on 27 May 1825. He was appointed a colonel commandant of the Royal Engineers on 28 March 1830, after his return to England; and he succeeded General Sir A. Bryce as inspector-general of fortifications on 24 October 1832. Pilkington died at Craven Hill, Bayswater, London, on 6 July 1834. 


@@@@@


doc= 22280


Pilkington, Sir Thomas (1628-1691), merchant and politician, was born on 30 March 1628, the eldest son and heir of Thomas Pilkington (died 1637), landowner of Northampton, and his second wife, Anne, the daughter of Edward Mercer, also of Northampton. Pilkington's father successfully established the family's gentry status but after his death Pilkington was apprenticed, in 1645, to a prominent London Levant merchant, Thomas Barnardiston. Barnardiston provided him with access to the City's leading commercial circles and to its leading presbyterian families. Pilkington married Hannah Bromwich of Gracechurch Street at St Peter Cornhill on 13 June 1654. They had four sons and one daughter. 
Pilkington was first elected an assistant of the Levant Company in 1657, and he held that office almost continuously for the next quarter century. His trade was largely with Smyrna, where he employed as many as eleven different factors over his career. Pilkington served on the London common council for Dowgate in 1667-77 and was elected bridgemaster in 1675 and 1680. Chosen deputy governor of the society that superintended the corporation's Irish interests on three occasions in the 1670s, he was also master of the Skinners' Company in 1677-8 and again in 1681-2. By 1677 he was living in Scotch Yard, Bush Lane, in the parish of All Hallows-the-Great and, in time, he acquired a country home at Eltham, Kent. 
Pilkington's election to the common council coincided with the beginnings of nonconformist political assertiveness in Restoration London. In 1673-4, as opposition activities in the corporation escalated, he was chosen for committees that drafted a petition to the crown alleging a decline in London's trade and that considered a motion for more frequent common council meetings. Identified by one critic with a 1675 civic cabal who 'hate Prerogative', Pilkington also acquired a reputation for militant anti-Catholicism (BL, Add. MS 34362, fol. 13). That reputation secured his election as London MP to the three parliaments of the exclusion crisis in 1679-81. In the 1679 parliament he served on committees to enhance security against popery and to promote the export of cloth to Turkey. A defender of the credibility of the informer Titus Oates, Pilkington established himself as one of the most outspoken Commons' advocates of the exclusion of James, duke of York, from the throne. In May 1679 he demanded York's return to England so 'that we may impeach him of High Treason' (Grey, 7.238), and he also sought specifically to incorporate exclusion into a popular London petition demanding parliamentary action on behalf of protestantism. 
Triumphing against loyalist efforts to replace him and Sir Thomas Player as City MPs, Pilkington was chosen for a London seat again in October 1679. He was one of the promoters of the London petition of December 1679-January 1680 which attempted to pressure the king into calling a parliamentary session. As prorogation followed prorogation Pilkington assisted in the election of fellow nonconformists Slingsby Bethel and Henry Cornish as sheriffs of London and Middlesex for 1680-81. When the parliament of 1680-81 finally met Pilkington was a member of the committee that drafted a second exclusion bill in November; and he was among the promoters of another London petition against York. Also a member of a committee that inquired into judicial behaviour Pilkington presented a London address critical of corporation recorder Sir George Jeffreys, who had worked against some civic petitions, and whom Pilkington condemned as 'a common enemy of mankind' (Grey, 7.464). He supported the impeachments of Lord Stafford and Edward Seymour, and he favoured efforts to end the coercion of nonconformists in order to facilitate protestant union. Having served as deputy alderman for Dowgate in 1677-80 Pilkington was returned for two aldermanic vacancies in 1680 and joined the court of aldermen in December 1680 for the ward of Farringdon Without. 
After the third Exclusion Parliament of March 1681 Pilkington assisted in drafting a city petition for another parliament and was elected sheriff of London and Middlesex with Samuel Shute. Charles II declined to knight them, as would have been customary. The new sheriffs worked hand-in-glove for the next year with country and civic whig leaders to turn the corporation of London into a political forum to take the place of parliament. Charles was equally determined to crush the whigs in London, just as he had out-manoeuvred them in parliament, but in Pilkington he found an opponent determined to fight him at every turn. When Charles tried to destroy the earl of Shaftesbury through a treason accusation Pilkington and Shute empanelled a London jury of dissenters and whigs for Shaftesbury's trial. When the jury threw out the indictment against the earl in November 1681 Pilkington ignored court orders to disperse whig crowds and feasted Shaftesbury, who had recently become a member of the Skinners' Company, at Skinners' Hall. 
When Charles retaliated with his 'quo warranto' against the corporation's charter Pilkington received the writ, as sheriff, with one of the verbal barrages for which he was becoming noted. 'His tongue speaks naked swords', sneered one loyalist poet (Lord, 3.195), while Bishop Gilbert Burnet remembered him as 'an indiscreet man, that gave himself great liberties in discourse' ('Burnet's History', 2.348). When the duke of York returned to London in April 1682 Pilkington told his fellow aldermen that he would 'rather go live in a hermit's cell' than agree to an address welcoming the heir to the throne. Indeed tory aldermen claimed that Pilkington said James 'had twice burnt this City and was now come to cut the inhabitants' throats' (London Newsletters, 8.34, 25 March 1682; 'CSP dom.', '1682', 194). At the time Pilkington was deeply involved with Shaftesbury and the duke of Monmouth in organizing a banqueting campaign to maintain opposition enthusiasm in London and elsewhere. York promptly initiated a 'scandalum magnatum' suit against Pilkington, but the sheriff's friends claimed that the allegation and the suit were really political contrivances intended to silence him and to disrupt whig activities. 
Despite his legal vulnerability Pilkington played a critical role in the London shrieval election of 1682, an unprecedented three-month affair that gave Charles control of the City, drove some whigs to conspiracy, and influenced the arguments for resistance being developed by Algernon Sidney and John Locke. Pilkington was unswerving in his insistence that the London electors, as the 'supreme authority' in the corporation, had a right to choose both sheriffs, despite the crown's claim that the loyalist lord mayor, Sir John Moore, had a customary right to name one of them ('CSP dom.', '1682', 417). Standoffs between the lord mayor and the sheriffs in common hall elections and disorderly polls in June, July, and September snapped tempers and left many citizens fearing either popular violence or, in Pilkington's words, 'military government' (Luttrell, 1.225). An infuriated king threw Pilkington and Shute into the Tower at one point for encouraging 'tumultuary meetings' on behalf of the whig shrieval candidates, Thomas Papillon and John Dubois (London Newsletters, 8.76, 29 June 1682). Pilkington, Shute, and other whig activists were also charged with riot after the first common hall. When the court accepted the lord mayor's ultimate declaration of the election for loyalists Dudley North and Peter Rich, despite an obvious electoral majority for the whigs, Pilkington took the lead in refusing to recognize the legitimacy of the election. Indeed, according to one source, he confronted the king-in-council with a declaration of the people's right to 'fortifie' themselves against such an encroachment upon their liberties (ibid., 8.116, 21 Sept 1682). 
The crown's capture of the shrievalty left it in charge of judicial processes in London and led to what Pilkington remembered as the 'Egyptian bondage' ('House of Lords MSS', 3.49). He was one of the chief sufferers in the court sponsored loyalist reaction of 1682-5. Already fined $800 by a Surrey jury in a libel action brought by the king's perfumer and argued by Jeffreys, Pilkington was found guilty of the 'scandalum magnatum' in November 1682 by a Hertfordshire jury that awarded the future James II $100,000 in damages. Pilkington relinquished his aldermanic place and accepted imprisonment after taking measures to protect his estate. In 1683 he and the other city 'rioters' were found guilty and fined, and the crown secured a king's bench judgment against the City charter. Despite Pilkington's reputation among loyalists as 'a disturber of mankind', James pardoned him in June 1686 and remitted his staggering fine (Singer, 1.481). Pilkington returned to his trade, which his friend Henry Ashurst had looked after during his imprisonment. 
A supporter of the prince of Orange in 1688-9 Pilkington was returned to the Convention Parliament from the City, was elected alderman for Vintry, and was chosen lord mayor upon the death of his predecessor. Knighted by William III, he was also appointed a London lieutenancy commissioner, a JP for Kent, an assessment commissioner for London and Northampton, and a commissioner for preventing the export of wool. The legal judgment against Pilkington and the other whig 'rioters' of 1682 was reversed in 1689, but the Commons rejected their petition to secure repayment of their fines from Sir John Moore and the tory sheriffs of 1682-3 rather than from the government. 
Leaving parliamentary leadership to the other London whig MPs, Pilkington focused on the corporation. Imprisonment had not tamed his political temper. He continued to relive the traumas of the exclusion era, and he refused to accept William's turn to the tories in 1690. When he was re-elected lord mayor in September 1689 his mayoral show celebrated the rescue of London's liberties from an arbitrary government, but in the parliamentary election of March 1690 the London liverymen replaced him and his fellow whig City MPs with four churchmen. As lord mayor Pilkington promoted a measure brought to the new parliament by the London whigs and intended to broaden electoral rights as well as to release common council and common hall from magisterial restraint. The church tory parliamentary majority not only rejected this measure but, in the 'Corporation of London Act' (1690), imposed new elections for the mayoralty, the shrievalty, and common council. Pilkington was then continued as lord mayor by his whig aldermanic colleagues, despite a slight common hall majority for a church tory candidate. 
During William's absence in Ireland and the French invasion scare of July 1690 Pilkington blocked the efforts of Secretary Nottingham to regulate contested common council elections. He also gave the queen-in-council a 'short, pertinent and quick Speech' about the need to remove disaffected tories from the government and from the London lieutenancy commission (Morrice, ent'ring book R. 171). These episodes left some privy councillors ready to return Pilkington to the Tower, and the tory common councilmen unsuccessfully petitioned the Commons in hopes of dislodging him and his whig aldermanic colleagues. Pilkington finished his mayoralty in October 1691, having served for an unusual two and a half years, and he died intestate on 16 November. His fortune seems to have suffered from his fines, imprisonment, and political preoccupations. The aldermen granted a small civic pension to his daughter. William Pilkington, his son and sometime Smyrna factor, followed him in trade and became consul at Aleppo. 


@@@@@


doc= 22281


Pilkington, William (1758-1848), surveyor and architect, was born on 7 September 1758 at Hatfield, near Doncaster, Yorkshire, the elder son of William Pilkington ('fl'. 'c'.1720- 'c'.1765), jockey, of Hatfield, and his second wife, Elizabeth ('fl'. 'c'.1730- 'c'.1760), daughter of William Barker of Tadcaster. Educated at Charterhouse, about 1777 he joined Sir Robert Taylor, the architect, as a pupil, remaining as his assistant until Taylor's death. He succeeded him as surveyor to the duke of Grafton's London estate, building a house in Half Moon Street in 1798. Pilkington was also surveyor to the board of customs from 1781 to 1810 (building custom houses at Portsmouth, 1785, dem., and Liverpool, enlargement 1786, dem. 1828); district surveyor to the parishes of St Margaret and St John in Westminster from 1784; and surveyor to the Sun Fire Assurance office from 1792, and the Charterhouse from 1792, where he rebuilt Big School in 1803 (dem. 'c'.1872). For the earl of Radnor he built the council house at Salisbury (1788-97) from Taylor's designs, and the gaol at Folkestone. 
Pilkington's most important works, however, were the transport office in Cannon Row, Westminster (1816), later the India Board of Control, and the monumental Naval Hospital at Great Yarmouth ('c'.1798-1811), which consisted of four brick blocks with Roman Doric porticos (converted into flats, 1996-7). He occasionally exhibited designs at the Royal Academy, from 1780 to 1790. In 1819 he sought employment from the new church building commission. Pilkington retired about 1842 to his property at Hatfield, where he resided as a landed gentleman, claiming direct male descent from a companion of William the Conqueror. He died there on 18 August 1848. He had married, on 16 June 1785, at St George's, Hanover Square, Sarah ('fl'. 'c'.1765- 'c'.1827), daughter and coheir of John Andrews of Knaresborough, Yorkshire, with whom he had two sons. One was Henry Pilkington of Park Lane House, near Doncaster, a barrister and an assistant poor-law and tithe commissioner. 
Pilkington's second son, 




@@@@@


doc= 22282


Pillans, James (1778-1864), classicist and educational reformer, was born in April 1778 in Riddle's Close, Edinburgh. At the time of his birth his father had recently started his own printing business, which was to remain in the Pillans family into the twentieth century. Pillans's father, James Pillans (1745-1831), was a man of decided and radical political beliefs, and an elder in the Anti-Burgher Secession church of Adam Gib, taking a great interest in the events of the French Revolution until he became disillusioned with the excesses of the terror and with the movement's atheism. All that is known of Pillans's mother is that she persuaded her husband to cease his membership of a reform society in Edinburgh, fearing for the safety and livelihood of her family (Richardson, 5-6). Although the younger James Pillans did not stay in the Secession church, he was to remain a lifelong whig and friend of prominent whigs such as Jeffrey, Cockburn, and Brougham. Pillans's whig affiliations, and his friendships, were unpopular in tory Edinburgh and lay at the root of the few failures in an otherwise uneventfully successful academic career. 
Pillans was sent first to elementary school in Old Town, Edinburgh, and then to the Edinburgh high school where the rector, Alexander Adam, became his mentor and friend. He showed a great aptitude for classical studies and came second in his class on the final examination (his good friend Francis Horner came first). His father expected him to enter the printing trade and proposed to apprentice him to a paper stainer, but he showed no inclination for a business career and in due course the family business passed to Pillans's brothers Hugh and John. Around 1792 he entered Edinburgh University, where he was a pupil of Alexander Dalzel (professor of Greek), studied mathematics under Playfair, and was influenced by Professor Dugald Stewart. He received his MA on 30 January 1801, and may have considered a career in the church. Between 1801 and 1809 he was employed as a private tutor: first to Thomas Francis Kennedy in Ayrshire, next to a family in Northumberland, where he learned to speak French from the family's governess, and finally as a private tutor at Eton College. In later life he wrote that the life of a private tutor was unsuited to anyone who held 'decided opinions upon every trifle', and that the tutor's freedom lay in self-control, for 'what can be truer independence than constant self-possession?' (J. Pillans, 'Educational Papers', 1862, 51). These character traits were to prove essential to him in later life. He enjoyed a very happy interval as a private tutor at Eton, where he had leisure for his own studies, made many friends, and had the opportunity of observing methods of teaching and discipline at a great English public school. 
In 1804 Pillans's friend Francis Horner recommended him to Francis Jeffrey, the editor of the 'Edinburgh Review', as a potential contributor. At least three articles by him were published, including a review (1808) of the translation of Juvenal by Byron's friend Francis Hodgson. In what was probably a jibe at the whig contributors to the 'Edinburgh Review', Byron included Pillans in his satirical poem 'English bards and Scotch reviewers' (1809): 'And paltry Pillans shall traduce a friend'. The cruel taunt was acknowledged to be without foundation, but it hurt Pillans deeply and caused him lifelong embarrassment. He is said to have complained to Byron, who apologized but never retracted the line ('A Printing House', 76-7). 
When Alexander Adam died in December 1809 he named Pillans as his possible successor as rector of the Edinburgh high school. At first he seemed an improbable candidate, as his politics offended the tory town council and he himself was unsure whether he wanted a career as a public school teacher. The school's boys were recruited to the tory campaign and chants of 'No Fraser, No Pillans' were heard (Luke Fraser was interim head after Adam's death and Pillans's own rival for the post of rector). But his candidacy was backed by Robert Blair, the lord president of the court of session, and he was duly elected in January 1810. The new rector encountered serious disciplinary problems when he first faced his class of 144 boys, predisposed to defiance by their role in opposing his election. In his first year he frequently resorted to corporal punishment as a means of keeping order. A pupil in this period remembered an occasion when Pillans beat one of the biggest boys 'in spite of his most piteous deprecations', employing a strong janitor to hold him down (Steven, 180). Perhaps because of such experiences, Pillans came to reject corporal punishment as degrading to the boy who suffered it and the master who inflicted it alike, and to consider its use evidence of the master's failure to employ effective discipline. After his first year he was able to discontinue the practice altogether, an innovation both by Scottish standards and by those of his preceptors at Eton. In December 1810 he wrote to Francis Horner that he had begun to feel pleasure and enthusiasm in his work. John Brown Patterson, one of his best pupils, found him inspiring, patient, kind, and, perhaps most significantly, never ill-tempered. 
For corporal punishment Pillans learned to substitute extra work and verbal setting to rights. His most original contribution to both the education and control of the enormous classes under his care, however, was his application of a version of Bell's and Lancaster's monitorial system to his class at the high school. In his classes the twenty or twenty-five most able boys were chosen as monitors with responsibility for ten boys apiece. Any boy could offer a correction to a monitor's Latin and all disputes were referred to the rector, who kept an eye on the group as a whole. The quicker pupils were encouraged to study quietly while the slower boys received the teacher's full attention. Although he was not the first to employ a variant of the monitorial system for teaching the classics, his use of it in the well-known high school excited great interest in educational circles. Visitors from as far away as America studied and emulated it. 
Pillans extended the classical curriculum of the high school, improving the teaching of classical geography, extending the Greek course, and, following his experience at Eton, introducing Latin verse composition, which was not taught in Scottish schools and universities. In 1812 he edited a little volume of these student verses, most of them by boys of fourteen or fifteen, inexperienced in the medium. He was well aware that the work was unpolished compared with that of boys at the English public schools, for whom Latin verse composition was a familiar exercise, and he was later to admit that the work should not have been published at that stage. A favourable notice in the 'Edinburgh Review' (November 1812) was followed by a hostile review in the rival 'Quarterly Review' (December 1812) sometimes attributed to the poet laureate, Robert Southey, though other evidence points to Walter Scott as the reviewer. Pillans accepted this criticism with courage and humility, and in future the verse produced by his pupils improved. The 'Quarterly Review's' criticism did no harm to the high school, which flourished under Pillans, attracting boys from many countries and from all social groups: 'I used to sit between a youth of ducal family and the son of a poor cobbler', as one former pupil put it (Richardson, 17). 
On the basis of his success as rector of the high school Pillans was appointed professor of humanity and laws (Latin) at Edinburgh University in 1820, the electors comprising the lords of session, the Edinburgh town council, and the Society of Writers to the Signet. He held the chair for forty-three years. At some time in the early part of this period he married Helen Thomson, second daughter of the Revd Thomas Thomson, minister of Dailly, Ayrshire. She died over twenty years before her husband and they had no children. Pillans was on close terms with his brothers-in-law, the antiquary Thomas Thomson and the landscape painter John Thomson, and their families. 
Pillans found the transition from rector of the high school somewhat difficult. Accustomed to a purely classical curriculum, he was now teaching students whose attention was divided between classics, mathematics, and metaphysics; the older students proved more difficult than schoolboys to mould, and sessions were too short for him to get to know them well. He instituted a version of his monitorial system, using the term 'inspectors' for the monitors. He discovered that students were often poorly prepared in Latin and Greek; indeed the standard was often lower than that of his rector's class at the high school. Characteristically, he taught elementary Latin without complaint, reserving his deepest disapproval for those who needed help and refused to ask for it. He opposed the institution by J. S. Blackie of an entrance examination in Greek (1855). 
Pillans's scholarship favoured precision and elegance over breadth of knowledge, and he retained a schoolmasterly concern with the classics as an instrument of mental and moral training. An example of this attitude was his distaste for Caesar's 'Gallic Wars' as a school text; Pillans felt it was lacking in moral lessons and apt to encourage excessive admiration for military skills (Richardson, 50). He wrote a number of textbooks, including 'First Steps in the Physical and Classical Geography of the Ancient World' (1853; 13th edn, 1882). His favourite Latin author was Horace; his achievement was to inspire his pupils with an appreciation of Latin literature. 
In his lifetime Pillans was immensely respected not only as a professor of classics whose recommendation carried great weight for teaching appointments but also as an authority on education at all levels. He spent his holidays touring parish schools, where he was welcomed by the more confident and fearfully barred from entry by those who knew their work to be sub-standard (Richardson, 33). On longer holidays he visited France, Switzerland, Prussia, and Ireland, where he made careful observations of the educational systems. In 1834 he gave evidence before the Commons select committee on the state of national education in Britain, chaired by Lord John Russell. Although Pillans believed that a classical education offered a unique training in logic, mental flexibility, hard work, and self-discipline for the governing classes, he believed that it was inappropriate for those destined to follow a trade. He did believe in universal compulsory education (as in Prussia) and was a moderate supporter of secular education programmes, believing they encouraged tolerance and arguing that early religious training properly took place in the home. In 1854 he was president of the Watt Institution, which promoted technical education. His educational addresses, dedicated to Lord John Russell, were published in 1856 as 'Contributions to the Cause of Education', and include his claim to have been a pioneer in the use of a blackboard and chalk as a teaching aid. 
Pillans was small in physical stature, with an impressive head and an eccentric taste in dress. He wore a white beaver hat and put on a blue coat with brass buttons for important occasions. He was attired in a tartan dressing gown for a photograph taken in 1860, which contemporaries considered a good likeness of him in old age. Refusing to wear spectacles when his sight declined, he used an enormous magnifying glass to read his lectures. His memory for both facts and individuals was excellent, and he always took a helpful interest in the careers of his former pupils. He had a wide circle of friends, including Brougham, Gladstone, and Sir Walter Scott. By nature a friendly, gregarious man, his standards for perfect self-control placed him under an intolerable strain and he endured two episodes of serious mental illness, probably depression. As he grew older he became increasingly fearful of the lonely life that awaited him on relinquishing his chair, despite calls for his retirement. He finally resigned his chair in April 1863, at the age of eighty-five, and received the degree of LLD in the same month. Pillans died at his home, 43 Inverleith Row, Edinburgh, on 27 March 1864, believing he was teaching a class. He was buried on 1 April in the graveyard of St Cuthbert's Church, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 22283


Pillement, Jean Baptiste (1728-1808), painter and designer, was born in Lyon, France, on 24 May 1728. He came from a long line of painters, and after early training in his native Lyon he worked briefly at the Gobelins factory in Paris, before going to Madrid in 1745. In a three-year stay in the Iberian peninsula, the young painter established an enduring reputation. His rococo singerie and chinoiserie designs for the home of the Dutch consul at Seteais, near Sintra in Portugal, are the best-known achievement of this period. He was then offered the appointment of painter to the king of Portugal but, typically, he avoided such a commitment and travelled to London. 
In the absence of modern scholarship, knowledge of Pillement's long, ten-year stay in England is incomplete, although he stayed longer in England than in any other country. However, there is no doubt of the success and the ongoing influence of his London period, and subsequent contacts with England. Through a link-up with English and French engravers and print dealers in London and Paris, his gifts for draughtsmanship and inventive design became widely known and, as intended, his prints were used as pattern books for fabrics, wallpaper, ceramics, and a variety of decorative schemes. Nothing is more indicative of the charm and originality of his invention than his book of engraved floral designs entitled 'Fleurs de fantaisie'. He readily understood the English penchant for landscape and developed his original interpretation of the genre, derived from Nicolaes Berchem, Claude-Joseph Vernet, Francois Boucher, and a merging of observed nature and rococo fantasy. 
Once the success of this formula had been established, Pillement maintained the same style, unaffected by changes in taste. Thus, among his exhibits at the Society of Artists (1760, 1761, 1762) and the Free Society of Artists (1763, 1773, 1779), landscapes with cattle, travellers, and coast scenes predominated. The same applies to the hundreds of works dispersed through auction in March 1761 from the collection of the French print dealer and publisher Charles Leviez, before Pillement left London. Among a number of English patrons, the actor David Garrick was the most notable. In 1772 the artist painted eleven pictures for Garrick's villa near Hampton Court, and their surviving correspondence reflects the excellent relations that Pillement enjoyed with his English patrons. By chance the best-known works by Pillement in England were acquired, after the artist's death, by the duke of Wellington during the Peninsular War in 1814 and remain at the family seat, Stratfield Saye, in Hampshire. 
After London, Pillement made a brief visit to Italy before working in Vienna at the Hofburg in 1763-4, and for the prince of Liechtenstein; he then moved on to further decorative interiors for the king of Poland (1766) at the royal castle in Warsaw, and at the Ujazdow Palace. He was invited to work at St Petersburg but went with his family to Avignon (1768). His unconventional career denied him recognition in his native country, but he exhibited at the Paris Salon in 1776, and executed a suite of three paintings for Marie-Antoinette at the Petit Trianon, Versailles. By 1780 he was again in Portugal where he decorated a celebrated small dining-room, again near Sintra, later recorded by the enchanted William Beckford. His five large canvases of elegant company in the gardens at Benfica, Lisbon (Musee des Arts Decoratifs, Paris), are unique achievements, and further emphasize the versatility of the artist. During a stay in Porto, he established a teaching studio and taught a number of Portuguese painters, among whom Joaquim Marques (1755-1822) is the most notable. The tradition of Portuguese interest in Pillement has continued in modern times with a recent loan exhibition of his work from Portuguese collections, with a substantial catalogue with French and English editions published in 1996. From his Portuguese experience come his views of shipping and fishermen in the Tagus estuary, often including a 'free' impression of the Belem tower, which are, today, among his most admired works. His marine views included shipwrecks and salvaging scenes, experienced at first hand by the artist on one occasion. The influence of Vernet is, of course, apparent in both categories. Pillement died in Lyon on 26 April 1808. His son, Victor Pillement, was an able draughtsman and engraver. 
Pillement was a prolific and versatile artist who worked throughout Europe in a long career of ceaseless activity and travel. He worked in most media with a huge and variable output and it is important to distinguish between his two roles: that of designer and decorator, filling pages with, for example, chinoiserie scenes, imaginary flowers, and occupations for the four seasons; and his status as an important French rococo landscape painter, and arguably the finest exponent of the medium of pastel in eighteenth-century landscape and marine painting. 


@@@@@


doc= 22284


Pilon, Frederick (1750-1788), playwright and actor, was born in Cork. After receiving a fairly good education in his native city, he was sent to Edinburgh University to study medicine, but he took to the stage instead. He first appeared at the Edinburgh Theatre as Oroonoko, but with small success, and consequently joined an inferior strolling company, with which he remained for some years. He finally drifted to London, where William Griffin the bookseller employed him on the 'Morning Post'. After Griffin's death had deprived him of this position, he seems to have worked as an obscure literary hack until he began to write for the stage. 
Pilon was soon employed with some regularity at Covent Garden Theatre. There, on 4 November 1778, 'The Invasion, or, A Trip to Brighthelmstone' -- 'a moderate farce', according to John Genest -- was performed, with Lee Lewis in the chief part, Cameleon (Genest, 6.352). It was repeated twenty-four times during the season, and was several times revived. 'Illumination, or, The Glazier's Conspiracy', a prelude, suggested by the illuminations on Admiral Keppel's acquittal, was acted on 12 April 1779 for Lee Lewis's benefit. Pilon wrote many plays for Covent Garden, including: 'The Device, or, The Deaf Doctor', which, when first produced on 27 September 1779, met with great opposition, but was successfully revived with alteration as 'The Deaf Lover' on 2 February 1780; 'The Siege of Gibraltar', a musical farce (25 April 1780), celebrating Rodney's victory; and 'Aerostation, or, The Templar's Stratagem' (29 October 1784), which dealt with the rage of the day for balloons. Meanwhile Pilon moved on to Drury Lane, where he on 18 May 1782 produced 'The Fair American', a comic opera, which was not very skilfully plagiarized from Samuel Tuke's 'Adventures of Five Hours' (1663). Pilon's last piece, a comedy, 'He would be a Soldier', after being rejected by George Colman, was performed at Covent Garden on 18 November 1786, and achieved considerable success. In addition to his plays, all of which he published, Pilon issued 'The Drama', an anonymous poem, in 1775, and 'An Essay on the Character of Hamlet as Performed by Mr Henderson' (1771). An edition of George Alexander Stevens's 'Lecture on Heads' appeared in 1785, with additions by Pilon. 
In 1787 Pilon married a Miss Drury of Kingston, Surrey; he died at Lambeth on 17 January 1788. At least one critic, William Gifford, lamented Pilon's brand of drama, ranking him among the 'blockheads of the kingdom' by whom the lower orders are 'so brutified and besotted... that they have lost all relish for simplicity and genuine humour' (Gifford, xiii-xiv). 


@@@@@


doc= 22285


Pim, Bedford Clapperton Trevelyan (1826-1886), naval officer and barrister, was born on 12 June 1826 at Bideford, Devon, son of Lieutenant Edward Bedford Pim. His father died of yellow fever off the coast of Africa in 1830, when he was engaged in the suppression of the slave trade, in command of the 'Black Joke', tender to the 'Dryad'. His mother was Sophia Soltau, eldest daughter of John Fairweather Harrison. Pim was educated at the Royal Naval School, New Cross, and entered the navy in 1842. He served under Captain Henry Kellett on the 'Herald' from 1845 to 1849. In that year he was lent for duty on the brig 'Plover'; having wintered in Kotzebue Sound, Alaska, he made a journey in March and April 1850 to Mikhailovsky in search of Sir John Franklin. Pim returned to England on 6 June 1851, having been promoted lieutenant on 20 October 1850. 
At this period Pim proposed an expedition in search of Franklin to the north coast of Asia, and offered to survey the coast. After receiving a grant of $500 from Lord John Russell, unlimited leave from the Admiralty, and recommendations to the authorities in St Petersburg, he went to Russia in November 1851, but the Russian government refused to permit his project. On 21 April 1852 he left England on board the 'Resolute', and served under Sir Edward Belcher in the western division of his Arctic search expedition. In the following October, when the 'Resolute' was in winter quarters off Melville Island, a travelling party discovered in a cairn on the island the information (placed there by McClure the previous April) that McClure's ship, the 'Investigator', was ice-bound in Mercy Harbour, Banks Land, 160 miles off. It was too late in the season to attempt a communication, but on 10 March 1853 Pim was sent as a volunteer in charge of a sledge to Banks Land. The journey was accomplished in twenty-eight days: on 6 April Pim safely reached the vessel, only just in time to relieve the sick and enfeebled crew. 
In January 1855 Pim was appointed to the command of the gunboat 'Magpie', and did good service in the Baltic. He was wounded at the bombardment of Sveaborg on 10 August 1855. In April 1857 he was appointed to the command of the 'Banterer' in the war with China, and was severely wounded at Sai Lau, Canton River, on 14 December 1857. On 19 April 1858 he was promoted commander and in June was invalided home. In June 1859 he was appointed to the 'Gorgon', for service in Central America. While stationed off Grey Town he originated and surveyed the Nicaraguan route for an isthmian canal through Mosquito and Nicaragua. While on the station he purchased a bay on the Atlantic shore, for which he was censured by the lords of the Admiralty in May 1860. He returned to England in June, and, retaining the command of the 'Gorgon', took her to the Cape of Good Hope in January 1861. On his way home he exchanged into the 'Fury'. The following June Pim retired from active service; his name, however, remained on the navy list, and he was promoted captain on 16 April 1868 (he was raised to the rank of rear-admiral on the retired list in 1885). 
On 3 October 1861 Pim married Susanna, daughter of Henry Locock of Blackheath, London; they had two sons. Pim made three journeys to Nicaragua, in March 1863, October 1863, and November 1864, to pursue his transit scheme. After he had obtained additional concessions, in November 1866 a company, called the Nicaraguan Railway Company, Limited, was registered; but the necessary capital was not forthcoming, and the company was dissolved in July 1868. 
Pim now turned his attention to the law. In 1870 he entered as student of the Inner Temple (20 April) and of Gray's Inn (28 November), and was called to the bar on 27 January 1873. He was admitted a barrister of Gray's Inn 'ad eundem' the following month. His practice was almost exclusively confined to Admiralty cases, and he went on the western circuit. At Bristol his name became a household word among seamen. He represented Gravesend as a Conservative from 1874 to 1880, but lost the seat at the following general election. He was elected FRGS in November 1851, and on 9 April 1861 an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers. On 28 January 1862 he laid before the institution his mode of fastening armour-plates on vessels by double dovetail rivets. He was on the first council of the Anthropological Institute (1871-4) and remained a member of the institute until his death. His varied publications included propaganda for his canal proposal. 
Pim died at Deal on 30 September 1886, in his sixty-first year; his wife survived him. A brass tablet and window were placed in his memory at the west end of the church of the Seamen's Institute, Bristol, by the pilots of the British empire and the United States of America in 1888. Pim was a highly intelligent, determined, and resourceful man of wide-ranging interests. His courage in the Arctic and under fire earned him promotion to captain, but his lack of interest forced him to consider another career. In the law he was as successful as he had been in the navy. 


@@@@@


doc= 22286


Pinchbeck family (per. c.1720-1783), clockmakers and mechanics, came to prominence through the invention of 'pinchbeck', a copper and zinc alloy having the appearance of gold, by Christopher Pinchbeck (1669/70-1732). His parentage and date of birth are obscure; though no records have been found, it seems that he was first apprenticed to a fisherman and later to a pastry cook. Nor is it known where he learned the skills which enabled him to set up as a maker of clocks and automata, trading from St George's Court, Clerkenwell. In 1721 he moved to Fleet Street, where, under the sign of the Astronomico-Musical Clock, 'he maketh and selleth watches of all sorts, and clocks' ('Applebee's Weekly Journal'). Mention is also made of musical automata, in imitation of singing birds, and of barrel organs for churches. Apparently he also leased the pastry shop next door which he ran with his wife, Rossomon. Their date of marriage is unknown. She predeceased him but their two eldest sons, Christopher and Edward ['see below'], and three other children, John, George, and Rosamond, were living at the time of his death. 
Pinchbeck exhibited his astronomical clocks at Bartholomew fair in association with a juggler named Isaac Fawkes under the style of the 'Temple of the Muses', 'Grand Theatre of the Muses', or 'Multum in Parvo'. The 'Daily Journal' of 27 August 1729 announced that the prince and princess of Wales went to the fair to see these marvels. A large broadside relating to the exhibits, with the place and date left blank, implies that they were toured, as does a print showing a fair with 'Pinchbeck' over one of the booths. His clocks are referred to in George Vertue's 'Diary' for 1732 and he is known to have made and sold trinkets of pinchbeck. 
Christopher Pinchbeck died on 18 November 1732 aged sixty-two and was buried on 21 November in St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street. In his will, written the previous week, he appointed Edward Pinchbeck as his sole executor, Christopher being at this time in France. The estate was to be equally divided among his five children. 

Edward Pinchbeck (1713?-1766?) took over the running of his father's business, his sign now that of the Musical Clock. His wife, Alice, was already expecting Christopher, the first of their two sons. Edward immediately began to advertise the alloy, stating, in the 'Daily Post' of 27 November 1732, that 'the toys made of the late ingenious Mr Pinchbeck's curious metal... are now sold only by his son and sole executor, Mr Edward Pinchbeck'. He also declared that he could reduce watches 'to a fashionable Size, by a new Method, without altering the Works'. His failure to comply with the instructions in the will to divide the estate equally caused a family confrontation. He claimed that there were insufficient assets for any inheritance to be met and that his 'new and improved alloy', and not that of his father, was the only asset in the business. His brother Christopher took the matter to the law courts. No contemporary records detailing the composition of either metal have been found. Zinc was rare at the time, being imported from the Far East, but various alloys of copper and zinc, often adulterated with other trace metals, were available in Germany. 
Edward Pinchbeck's trade card, published after his successful lawsuit, advertised that he made and repaired astronomical, musical, and repeating clocks, watches, 'Musical-machines and Machinery of any kind whatsoever'. In 1733 he exhibited under title the 'Grand Theatre of the Muses' at Bartholomew fair. In 1745 he took premises in Edinburgh, advertising in the 'Caledonian Mercury' of 14 January 1745 'anything in his metal that is made either in Gold or Silver'. By May he returned home, possibly owing to his wife's illness which led to her death later that year. The insurance value of his goods, utensils, and stock-in-trade was $300 in 1755. He continued to trade in Fleet Street until 1758 but his whereabouts thereafter is uncertain and a date of death of 1766, suggested by some writers, has not been documented. 

Christopher Pinchbeck (1709/10-1783), Edward's older brother, took premises a few doors from those of their late father. Under the sign of Pinchbeck's Head he sold trinkets in pinchbeck metal, and clocks and watches. His trade card for 1747 indicated that he had moved to Cockspur Street, Westminster, with additional premises at Tunbridge Wells. He chose not to frequent the London fairs with his 'mechanical wonders' but in 1766 opened a 'repository' above his shop where he showed among twenty other marvels a triangular musical machine called the panopticon. He was held in considerable esteem by George III, and Wilkes included him in a 'list of the party who call themselves the King's Friends' and also as a member of the 'Buckingham House Cabinet' (Wilkes, 'London Museum', 2.33). He took out two patents in 1768, one for a 'nocturnal remembrancer', or writing tablet which could be used in the dark, another for a candlestick incorporating a device to keep the candle upright, and in 1776 one for a design for candle-snuffers that continued in use into the twentieth century. This inspired an 'Ode to Mr Pinchbeck, upon his newly-invented candle snuffers' by 'Malcolm MacGregor', the pseudonym of William Mason, a leading satirist of the day and an ardent whig who took the opportunity to indulge in political mockery. Pinchbeck was appointed king's clockmaker and was made an honorary freeman of the Clockmakers' Company in 1781. It seems probable that he did not make clock movements himself but employed others to work to his designs. He undoubtedly possessed great mechanical ingenuity. It is probably he, rather than his father, who is mentioned in 1731 as acting as technical expert to the London Lead Company on two occasions, regarding the feasibility of using 'fire engines' for draining two lead mines in Flintshire. He was elected to the Smeatonian Society in 1774 and held office as president for the year 1781-2. He was a member of the Society of Arts from its inception in 1757. In 1762 he devised a self-acting pneumatic brake for preventing accidents to the men employed on walking cranes, for which the society awarded him a gold medal. In 1774 he presented a model of a plough for mending roads to the society. 
Christopher Pinchbeck purchased land near Tunbridge Wells on which lay Adam's Well, which on analysis was shown to lack any of the beneficial minerals associated with the town's famous spa waters. Seeking to turn this deficit to his advantage, he proclaimed its purity and invested a considerable sum in digging baths and constructing buildings and an approach road. He sold bottles of the water there, in the assembly room he leased in the town, and in London. The project was, however, a costly disaster which he wryly referred to as 'Pinchbeck's folly'. 
Details of Christopher's wife, Martha, are unknown; she presumably predeceased him, for his will, dated 1779, mentions his married daughters Martha and Rosamond and his son William, for whom 'I do desire and direct that one guinea per week be paid to my undutifull and afflicting son Will Pinchbeck (whom I am unhappy to say has never done one single thing to oblige me since his infancy)'. The will further discloses that Christopher was at the time litigating for William and his family in regard to a freehold estate. Christopher died on 17 March 1783, aged seventy-three, and was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields. His son-in-law William Hebb, tobacconist and snuffman, whose premises were next door to Christopher's in Cockspur Street, continued his business until February 1788 when, intending to move his own premises, he put the remaining stock up for disposal at John Christie's auction rooms in King Street. The sale lasted two days, the 211 lots fetching in the region of $75. 


@@@@@


doc= 22287


Pinchbeck family (per. c.1720-1783), clockmakers and mechanics, came to prominence through the invention of 'pinchbeck', a copper and zinc alloy having the appearance of gold, by Christopher Pinchbeck (1669/70-1732). His parentage and date of birth are obscure; though no records have been found, it seems that he was first apprenticed to a fisherman and later to a pastry cook. Nor is it known where he learned the skills which enabled him to set up as a maker of clocks and automata, trading from St George's Court, Clerkenwell. In 1721 he moved to Fleet Street, where, under the sign of the Astronomico-Musical Clock, 'he maketh and selleth watches of all sorts, and clocks' ('Applebee's Weekly Journal'). Mention is also made of musical automata, in imitation of singing birds, and of barrel organs for churches. Apparently he also leased the pastry shop next door which he ran with his wife, Rossomon. Their date of marriage is unknown. She predeceased him but their two eldest sons, Christopher and Edward ['see below'], and three other children, John, George, and Rosamond, were living at the time of his death. 
Pinchbeck exhibited his astronomical clocks at Bartholomew fair in association with a juggler named Isaac Fawkes under the style of the 'Temple of the Muses', 'Grand Theatre of the Muses', or 'Multum in Parvo'. The 'Daily Journal' of 27 August 1729 announced that the prince and princess of Wales went to the fair to see these marvels. A large broadside relating to the exhibits, with the place and date left blank, implies that they were toured, as does a print showing a fair with 'Pinchbeck' over one of the booths. His clocks are referred to in George Vertue's 'Diary' for 1732 and he is known to have made and sold trinkets of pinchbeck. 
Christopher Pinchbeck died on 18 November 1732 aged sixty-two and was buried on 21 November in St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street. In his will, written the previous week, he appointed Edward Pinchbeck as his sole executor, Christopher being at this time in France. The estate was to be equally divided among his five children. 

Edward Pinchbeck (1713?-1766?) took over the running of his father's business, his sign now that of the Musical Clock. His wife, Alice, was already expecting Christopher, the first of their two sons. Edward immediately began to advertise the alloy, stating, in the 'Daily Post' of 27 November 1732, that 'the toys made of the late ingenious Mr Pinchbeck's curious metal... are now sold only by his son and sole executor, Mr Edward Pinchbeck'. He also declared that he could reduce watches 'to a fashionable Size, by a new Method, without altering the Works'. His failure to comply with the instructions in the will to divide the estate equally caused a family confrontation. He claimed that there were insufficient assets for any inheritance to be met and that his 'new and improved alloy', and not that of his father, was the only asset in the business. His brother Christopher took the matter to the law courts. No contemporary records detailing the composition of either metal have been found. Zinc was rare at the time, being imported from the Far East, but various alloys of copper and zinc, often adulterated with other trace metals, were available in Germany. 
Edward Pinchbeck's trade card, published after his successful lawsuit, advertised that he made and repaired astronomical, musical, and repeating clocks, watches, 'Musical-machines and Machinery of any kind whatsoever'. In 1733 he exhibited under title the 'Grand Theatre of the Muses' at Bartholomew fair. In 1745 he took premises in Edinburgh, advertising in the 'Caledonian Mercury' of 14 January 1745 'anything in his metal that is made either in Gold or Silver'. By May he returned home, possibly owing to his wife's illness which led to her death later that year. The insurance value of his goods, utensils, and stock-in-trade was $300 in 1755. He continued to trade in Fleet Street until 1758 but his whereabouts thereafter is uncertain and a date of death of 1766, suggested by some writers, has not been documented. 

Christopher Pinchbeck (1709/10-1783), Edward's older brother, took premises a few doors from those of their late father. Under the sign of Pinchbeck's Head he sold trinkets in pinchbeck metal, and clocks and watches. His trade card for 1747 indicated that he had moved to Cockspur Street, Westminster, with additional premises at Tunbridge Wells. He chose not to frequent the London fairs with his 'mechanical wonders' but in 1766 opened a 'repository' above his shop where he showed among twenty other marvels a triangular musical machine called the panopticon. He was held in considerable esteem by George III, and Wilkes included him in a 'list of the party who call themselves the King's Friends' and also as a member of the 'Buckingham House Cabinet' (Wilkes, 'London Museum', 2.33). He took out two patents in 1768, one for a 'nocturnal remembrancer', or writing tablet which could be used in the dark, another for a candlestick incorporating a device to keep the candle upright, and in 1776 one for a design for candle-snuffers that continued in use into the twentieth century. This inspired an 'Ode to Mr Pinchbeck, upon his newly-invented candle snuffers' by 'Malcolm MacGregor', the pseudonym of William Mason, a leading satirist of the day and an ardent whig who took the opportunity to indulge in political mockery. Pinchbeck was appointed king's clockmaker and was made an honorary freeman of the Clockmakers' Company in 1781. It seems probable that he did not make clock movements himself but employed others to work to his designs. He undoubtedly possessed great mechanical ingenuity. It is probably he, rather than his father, who is mentioned in 1731 as acting as technical expert to the London Lead Company on two occasions, regarding the feasibility of using 'fire engines' for draining two lead mines in Flintshire. He was elected to the Smeatonian Society in 1774 and held office as president for the year 1781-2. He was a member of the Society of Arts from its inception in 1757. In 1762 he devised a self-acting pneumatic brake for preventing accidents to the men employed on walking cranes, for which the society awarded him a gold medal. In 1774 he presented a model of a plough for mending roads to the society. 
Christopher Pinchbeck purchased land near Tunbridge Wells on which lay Adam's Well, which on analysis was shown to lack any of the beneficial minerals associated with the town's famous spa waters. Seeking to turn this deficit to his advantage, he proclaimed its purity and invested a considerable sum in digging baths and constructing buildings and an approach road. He sold bottles of the water there, in the assembly room he leased in the town, and in London. The project was, however, a costly disaster which he wryly referred to as 'Pinchbeck's folly'. 
Details of Christopher's wife, Martha, are unknown; she presumably predeceased him, for his will, dated 1779, mentions his married daughters Martha and Rosamond and his son William, for whom 'I do desire and direct that one guinea per week be paid to my undutifull and afflicting son Will Pinchbeck (whom I am unhappy to say has never done one single thing to oblige me since his infancy)'. The will further discloses that Christopher was at the time litigating for William and his family in regard to a freehold estate. Christopher died on 17 March 1783, aged seventy-three, and was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields. His son-in-law William Hebb, tobacconist and snuffman, whose premises were next door to Christopher's in Cockspur Street, continued his business until February 1788 when, intending to move his own premises, he put the remaining stock up for disposal at John Christie's auction rooms in King Street. The sale lasted two days, the 211 lots fetching in the region of $75. 


@@@@@


doc= 22288


Pinchbeck family (per. c.1720-1783), clockmakers and mechanics, came to prominence through the invention of 'pinchbeck', a copper and zinc alloy having the appearance of gold, by Christopher Pinchbeck (1669/70-1732). His parentage and date of birth are obscure; though no records have been found, it seems that he was first apprenticed to a fisherman and later to a pastry cook. Nor is it known where he learned the skills which enabled him to set up as a maker of clocks and automata, trading from St George's Court, Clerkenwell. In 1721 he moved to Fleet Street, where, under the sign of the Astronomico-Musical Clock, 'he maketh and selleth watches of all sorts, and clocks' ('Applebee's Weekly Journal'). Mention is also made of musical automata, in imitation of singing birds, and of barrel organs for churches. Apparently he also leased the pastry shop next door which he ran with his wife, Rossomon. Their date of marriage is unknown. She predeceased him but their two eldest sons, Christopher and Edward ['see below'], and three other children, John, George, and Rosamond, were living at the time of his death. 
Pinchbeck exhibited his astronomical clocks at Bartholomew fair in association with a juggler named Isaac Fawkes under the style of the 'Temple of the Muses', 'Grand Theatre of the Muses', or 'Multum in Parvo'. The 'Daily Journal' of 27 August 1729 announced that the prince and princess of Wales went to the fair to see these marvels. A large broadside relating to the exhibits, with the place and date left blank, implies that they were toured, as does a print showing a fair with 'Pinchbeck' over one of the booths. His clocks are referred to in George Vertue's 'Diary' for 1732 and he is known to have made and sold trinkets of pinchbeck. 
Christopher Pinchbeck died on 18 November 1732 aged sixty-two and was buried on 21 November in St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street. In his will, written the previous week, he appointed Edward Pinchbeck as his sole executor, Christopher being at this time in France. The estate was to be equally divided among his five children. 

Edward Pinchbeck (1713?-1766?) took over the running of his father's business, his sign now that of the Musical Clock. His wife, Alice, was already expecting Christopher, the first of their two sons. Edward immediately began to advertise the alloy, stating, in the 'Daily Post' of 27 November 1732, that 'the toys made of the late ingenious Mr Pinchbeck's curious metal... are now sold only by his son and sole executor, Mr Edward Pinchbeck'. He also declared that he could reduce watches 'to a fashionable Size, by a new Method, without altering the Works'. His failure to comply with the instructions in the will to divide the estate equally caused a family confrontation. He claimed that there were insufficient assets for any inheritance to be met and that his 'new and improved alloy', and not that of his father, was the only asset in the business. His brother Christopher took the matter to the law courts. No contemporary records detailing the composition of either metal have been found. Zinc was rare at the time, being imported from the Far East, but various alloys of copper and zinc, often adulterated with other trace metals, were available in Germany. 
Edward Pinchbeck's trade card, published after his successful lawsuit, advertised that he made and repaired astronomical, musical, and repeating clocks, watches, 'Musical-machines and Machinery of any kind whatsoever'. In 1733 he exhibited under title the 'Grand Theatre of the Muses' at Bartholomew fair. In 1745 he took premises in Edinburgh, advertising in the 'Caledonian Mercury' of 14 January 1745 'anything in his metal that is made either in Gold or Silver'. By May he returned home, possibly owing to his wife's illness which led to her death later that year. The insurance value of his goods, utensils, and stock-in-trade was $300 in 1755. He continued to trade in Fleet Street until 1758 but his whereabouts thereafter is uncertain and a date of death of 1766, suggested by some writers, has not been documented. 

Christopher Pinchbeck (1709/10-1783), Edward's older brother, took premises a few doors from those of their late father. Under the sign of Pinchbeck's Head he sold trinkets in pinchbeck metal, and clocks and watches. His trade card for 1747 indicated that he had moved to Cockspur Street, Westminster, with additional premises at Tunbridge Wells. He chose not to frequent the London fairs with his 'mechanical wonders' but in 1766 opened a 'repository' above his shop where he showed among twenty other marvels a triangular musical machine called the panopticon. He was held in considerable esteem by George III, and Wilkes included him in a 'list of the party who call themselves the King's Friends' and also as a member of the 'Buckingham House Cabinet' (Wilkes, 'London Museum', 2.33). He took out two patents in 1768, one for a 'nocturnal remembrancer', or writing tablet which could be used in the dark, another for a candlestick incorporating a device to keep the candle upright, and in 1776 one for a design for candle-snuffers that continued in use into the twentieth century. This inspired an 'Ode to Mr Pinchbeck, upon his newly-invented candle snuffers' by 'Malcolm MacGregor', the pseudonym of William Mason, a leading satirist of the day and an ardent whig who took the opportunity to indulge in political mockery. Pinchbeck was appointed king's clockmaker and was made an honorary freeman of the Clockmakers' Company in 1781. It seems probable that he did not make clock movements himself but employed others to work to his designs. He undoubtedly possessed great mechanical ingenuity. It is probably he, rather than his father, who is mentioned in 1731 as acting as technical expert to the London Lead Company on two occasions, regarding the feasibility of using 'fire engines' for draining two lead mines in Flintshire. He was elected to the Smeatonian Society in 1774 and held office as president for the year 1781-2. He was a member of the Society of Arts from its inception in 1757. In 1762 he devised a self-acting pneumatic brake for preventing accidents to the men employed on walking cranes, for which the society awarded him a gold medal. In 1774 he presented a model of a plough for mending roads to the society. 
Christopher Pinchbeck purchased land near Tunbridge Wells on which lay Adam's Well, which on analysis was shown to lack any of the beneficial minerals associated with the town's famous spa waters. Seeking to turn this deficit to his advantage, he proclaimed its purity and invested a considerable sum in digging baths and constructing buildings and an approach road. He sold bottles of the water there, in the assembly room he leased in the town, and in London. The project was, however, a costly disaster which he wryly referred to as 'Pinchbeck's folly'. 
Details of Christopher's wife, Martha, are unknown; she presumably predeceased him, for his will, dated 1779, mentions his married daughters Martha and Rosamond and his son William, for whom 'I do desire and direct that one guinea per week be paid to my undutifull and afflicting son Will Pinchbeck (whom I am unhappy to say has never done one single thing to oblige me since his infancy)'. The will further discloses that Christopher was at the time litigating for William and his family in regard to a freehold estate. Christopher died on 17 March 1783, aged seventy-three, and was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields. His son-in-law William Hebb, tobacconist and snuffman, whose premises were next door to Christopher's in Cockspur Street, continued his business until February 1788 when, intending to move his own premises, he put the remaining stock up for disposal at John Christie's auction rooms in King Street. The sale lasted two days, the 211 lots fetching in the region of $75. 


@@@@@


doc= 22289


Pinck, Robert (bap. 1573, d. 1647), college head, was probably born at Kempshott in the parish of Winslade, Hampshire, and was baptized in Dummer Chapel there on 1 March 1573, the eldest son of Henry Pincke (died 1611) of Kempshott, and of his second wife, Elizabeth (1544/5-1625), daughter of John Page of Sevington, Hampshire. In 1588 he entered Winchester College and on 26 May 1594 was admitted to New College, Oxford, matriculating soon after on 14 June. Elected fellow in 1596, he graduated BA on 27 April 1598 and proceeded MA on 21 January 1602. In 1610 he was elected senior proctor of the university. On his father's death in 1611 he inherited Kempshott, but remained in Oxford. On 19 November 1612 he became BMed and sought a licence to practise. His ordination as deacon on 25 November 1614 suggests a clerical and theological reorientation, and perhaps that he had in sight the wardenship of New College to which, in 1617, on the resignation of Arthur Lake, he was duly elected with an anticipatory royal letter of support. In 1619 he took the degrees of BD and DD, and on 14 July 1620 New College presented him to the rectory of Stanton St John, Oxfordshire, to which benefice he added only Colerne, Wiltshire, many years later in 1645. 
In 1629 Pinck was nominated a delegate for the reform of university statutes promoted by William Laud, and was sufficiently prosperous to fund conversion of a disused chantry chapel at Winchester College into a library. By this time, however, following efforts by the warden and seniors to eradicate abuses and waste, New College's large fellowship was bitterly divided, and the visitor, Bishop Richard Neile of Winchester, failed to restore peace. In 1630 the fellows were further split by a disputed election to the wardenship of Winchester College, in which the candidate favoured by Bishop William Laud, recently chosen the university's chancellor, was strongly backed by Pinck. Malcontents, encouraged by Laud's enemies, elected another candidate. Secretary Windebanke's son, John, who spent ten years in Pinck's care, recalled the warden's retiring disposition and failure to mix either with fellows or with leading university figures. In late 1630 Laud advised Pinck to associate with other heads to strengthen his hand internally. Pinck thanked him for securing him intimacy with 'this good master of ours', presumably Bishop Neile, and with a company of friends whom he had 'ever applauded... in their freindlie conv[e]rsing one with the other' (Oxford, New College Archives, 3098). 
In 1633 Pinck was nominated a delegate for the university press. Laud chose him vice-chancellor in July 1634, and again a year later. To Anthony Wood, Pinck 'was a zealous defender of the university privileges and liberties' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.226). Alongside the keeper of the archives, Bryan Twyne, he fought the citizens of Oxford over courts leet, felons' goods, markets, alehouses, and other disputed matters. Pinck even discommoned recalcitrant tradesmen. He helped Twyne obtain in 1635 a new charter which substantially reinforced academic privilege. The most delicate issue of his mandate was Laud's claim to metropolitical visitation as archbishop. For a year before Laud achieved a favourable royal verdict in June 1636 Pinck discreetly helped Twyne prepare counter-arguments, but kept a low profile to avoid breaking with the chancellor; that same June, just before leaving his office, Pinck arranged the formalities of reception by convocation of a final revision of the new code of statutes which Laud had promoted. 
Of Pinck's political loyalties there was no doubt, and as the break between Charles I and parliament approached he showed himself a thorough royalist. Like several other heads he took the protestation in February 1642 only with major reservations. On the hasty departure of Dr John Prideaux in summer 1642 the university chose Pinck to exercise the functions of vice-chancellor for a third time. He mustered scholars and had them drilled in New College. In August he welcomed Sir John Byron's royal troopers and was denounced to Speaker Lenthall by the city's MPs. In early September he wrote to Laud's successor as chancellor, Philip Herbert, earl of Pembroke, seeking protection, and received a sharp rebuke in reply. Both letters were printed by order of parliament. He went to treat with parliamentary forces under the command of Lord Saye and Sele near Aylesbury. There he was arrested on 10 September and sent to London where on 12 September he was imprisoned. Later that month Saye searched Pinck's Oxford study for incriminating papers, but exhibited displeasure when a trooper destroyed the warden's gilt alabaster bust of the king. Pinck's release on bail was ordered on 5 January 1643. He was soon back in Oxford and, after the marquess of Hertford became chancellor, Pinck was twice more chosen vice-chancellor, on 18 November 1643 and 24 August 1644. 
Renowned for his charitable disposition -- exhibited a decade earlier in efforts to clear the debts of an imprisoned Wykehamist, Thomas Lydiat -- Pinck obtained in 1644 New College chaplaincies for Peter Gunning and Isaac Barrow, royalist refugees from Cambridge, as well as for Richard Sherlock. Another chaplaincy found for the promising Ralph Brideoake of Brasenose College was to be repaid when, as post-Restoration bishop of Chichester, the beneficiary raised a monument to Pinck in New College chapel. Pinck died on 2 November 1647 several days after a severe fall in his lodgings at New College, and was buried in the chapel on 6 November. He was a man of considerable means. By his will dated 22 May 1647 he left his manor of Kempshott and pastures nearby to his nephew Henry Pinck; the patronage of the rectory of Wootton, Oxfordshire, which he had recently purchased for $500, to New College; $110 to purchase an annuity for apprenticing young people in Stanton St John parish; and many other generous legacies. 
Pinck published in his lifetime only the many poems he contributed to commemorative academic collections between 1596 and 1641. John Lamphire published in 1680 his questions for academic exercises accompanied by his references to ancient, medieval, and near-contemporary works that discussed them, 'Quaestiones selectiores in logica, ethica, physica, & metaphysica, inter authores celebriores repertae'. This has been called 'a good cram-book for the Oxford disputants' (Madan, 3.387). A manuscript, 'Gesta vicecancellariatus sui', covering his first period as vice-chancellor and including some of his speeches, was used by Wood but has since disappeared. A pamphlet of verses by four friends or pupils, 'In honour of the Right Worshipfull Doctor Robert Pinke, doctour of divinitie, and warden of New Colledge in Oxford' (1648), praised the warden's learning, advancement of friends, and kindness to the poor. 


@@@@@


doc= 22290


Pinckard, George (1768-1835), physician, was the third son of Henry Pinckard of Handley Hall, Northamptonshire, and his second wife, Rachel, 'nee' Wilkins. After tuition by a clergyman relative and a country medical practitioner, he studied medicine first at the then united hospitals of St Thomas's and Guy's, then at Edinburgh University, and finally at Leiden, where he graduated MD on 20 June 1792. He visited hospitals in Paris and Geneva and lived briefly with his brother and sister at Copet, near Geneva, and witnessed the capture of the city by the French under General Montesquieu. On 30 September 1794 he was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, in London. 
In October 1795 Pinckard was appointed a physician to the army, and in that capacity he accompanied Sir Ralph Abercromby's expedition to the West Indies, reaching Carlisle Bay, Barbados, on 13 February 1796, after many delays. Having served in the West Indies and South America he then returned to England via the United States. In his 'Notes on the West Indies' (3 vols., 1806), which were originally written as letters to a friend, he describes at great length what he saw in the West Indies and Guiana, often dwelling upon the horrifying incidents of slavery which he witnessed. He also makes some remarks on yellow fever. The book ran to two editions. 
In 1798 Pinckard was in Ireland, and in the rebellion of that year he served on the staff of General Hulse. He was promoted to be deputy inspector-general of hospitals, and had part of the direction of the medical service in the duke of York's expedition to The Helder. After his return his residence was 99 Great Russell Street, London, and he then moved to Bloomsbury Square, where he lived until his death. He married, in Edinburgh on 27 June 1817, Lucy, 'nee' Eastwood. 
Pinckard was one of the principal founders of the Bloomsbury Dispensary for the relief of the sick poor at 62 Great Russell Street, which opened on 26 October 1801, and he was sole physician to it from 1801 to 1835. Dr Richard Pinckard was his successor, from 1835 to 1845. Another relative, George Henry Pinckard (1805-1892), nephew of George, was a benefactor to the dispensary, which in its early years relied heavily on the family. 
In 1824 Pinckard founded the Medical, Clerical and General Life Assurance Office to provide life assurance to those 'subject to such deviations from the common standard of health, as do not eventually shorten life'. Renamed Clerical, Medical and General in 1825 (and later Clerical Medical), the society was initially based at 32 Great Russell Street before a move to 4 Southampton Street (1827), and 78 Great Russell Street. During this period Pinckard served as the society's first chairman; his brother Joseph (1766-1866) was its first secretary and his nephew the first policyholder. 
Pinckard published in 1819 accounts of four cases of 'hydrophobia', in which he recommended immediate excision or cauterization of the whole wound. In 1835 he published 'Suggestions for Restoring the Moral Character and the Industrious Habits of the Poor' recommending the replacement of workhouses with farms, thereby allegedly reducing the poor rates. He had long had angina pectoris, when he died in an attack while at work in his consulting room on 15 May 1835; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 22291


Pindar, Sir Paul (1565/6-1650), merchant and diplomat, was born in Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, the second son of Thomas Pindar of that town. Originally intended for the university, he chose instead a mercantile career. Following his apprenticeship to a London merchant engaged in the Italian trade, he was sent to Venice, where he was to serve as his master's factor. While there he prospered, both acting on commission for others and trading on his own account. In 1602 he was said to be managing some of the Italian investments of Sir Robert Cecil. Such activities both reflected and furthered a detailed knowledge of Italian -- and more especially Venetian -- banking systems; this bore fruit in the later years of James I's reign in Pindar's interesting, though disregarded, proposal for the establishment of an English national bank which would benefit the crown by furnishing 'exacte knowledge of the trewe estate of everye perticular man, by meanes wherof dewties might be Imposed proportionable to the effectuall valliditie of mens trewe Estates'. While this consideration alone might account for the failure of such proposals to attract the English mercantile community -- at least before 1694 -- even more significant was Pindar's suggestion that deposits in the bank would provide a potential source of loanable funds 'uppon which his Majestie may prevayell at pleazure eyther by Consente or withoute the privitie of the Propryetaryes at all tymes' (BL, Lansdowne MS 108, art. 90). 
From 1609 Pindar became involved in commercial diplomacy as the consul of the English merchants at Aleppo and, after 1611, as English ambassador at Constantinople, an appointment virtually in the gift of the Levant or Turkey Company at this time. He was knighted in 1620 during a prolonged visit to England, but appears not to have resettled in the country permanently until 1623. During the reign of Charles I much of the great wealth which he had accumulated abroad went into the management of the great and petty customs farms, of which he became the dominant figure, as he was also in the less important farm of the tobacco subsidy from 1632. He also invested in and managed the farm of the royal alum manufacture in Yorkshire in 1628. A notable white elephant during the previous reign, the alum business prospered under the efficient management of Pindar and his partner, William Turner, with the result that the king was able to grant the reversion of the lease of the farm to Sir John Gibson in June 1630 at an annual rent of $12,500, an improvement of $1500 on that paid by Pindar and Turner. In 1640 Pindar bought up the remainder of the lease, which he held until 1647 when he was ousted by a parliamentary order in favour of the earl of Mulgrave. However, over the first decade and a half of the reign Pindar's other interests were dwarfed by his massive customs-farming concerns, in which he had not only an investor's interest but also that of an active entrepreneur and director. He employed his wealth and business acumen to acquire a directoral power amounting to little less than complete predominance, buying up shares of subsidiary partners in order to obtain a controlling interest. The farmers' heyday was reached during the 1630s with syndicated loans of increasing size and longer duration anticipating their rents years in advance as well as granting large overdrafts to the crown by honouring a far greater amount of tallies than the rent could bear. 
This golden period (for Pindar) ended in July 1637. Following the accession of Bishop William Juxon to the office of lord treasurer the security which Pindar and his fellow concessionaires had enjoyed under Lord Treasurer Portland and the succeeding treasury commission vanished almost overnight. Whether or not Juxon was, as one account maintained, the 'creature' of the courtly multi-concessionaire Lord Goring (BL, Stowe MS 326, fols. 62(b)-63), he now proposed that the existing farmers should join forces with Goring and his associates, Sir Nicholas Crisp, Sir Job Harby, and Sir John Nulls. But this proposal, and its corollary that the farmers should raise money to be lent to the king on joint security rather than on their individual credits, was acceptable to only one member of the existing syndicate of farmers of the great customs, and Pindar and the others withdrew. For a short time Pindar played dog-in-the-manger to the new farming syndicates by associating himself with John Harrison's project for the renationalization of the customs revenue. But this was a short-lived episode curtailed by a personal appeal from Charles I that Pindar should rejoin his former colleagues, to which Pindar agreed, moved to tears by the king's plea that his crown itself was in jeopardy in the desperate financial situation due to the Scottish war and the new farmers' inadequate response to his needs. Harrison yielded to a similar request and the great and petty farms were let to combinations of the new and old syndicates (led by Pindar and minus Goring) from Christmas day 1640 and Lady day 1641 respectively. Pindar had already underlined his own indispensability by his massive personal loans to the crown in 1638-9, when he advanced in all about $93,000, $8000 of which was for a large pendant diamond for the king in May 1638. 'This Sir Paul', observed Sir Edmund Rossingham, 'never fails the King when he has most need' ('CSP dom.', '1639', 3). His loans to others were also impressive; for example $36,000 was fruitlessly advanced in 1635 towards the charges of Sir William Courteen's interloping East India expedition, while in October 1637 $18,620 was reckoned to be due to Pindar for his advances to the naval treasurer, Sir William Russell, for payment of seamen's wages in anticipation of the receipts of ship money. 
The newly reconstituted syndicates of customs farmers responded spectacularly to the royal needs. It is uncertain how many of the tallies directed upon them by the crown were honoured, but certainly their advances amounted to at least $100,000, so that the sum of $253,000 reckoned to be due to them for principal and interest after the Restoration cannot be very far out. In May 1641 Pindar and the other farmers were ordered by the Long Parliament to pay a fine of $150,000 in order to compound for their delinquency in collecting customs duties which parliament had never voted. Their leases were sequestered and all prospect of their loans being repaid in the foreseeable future consequently disappeared. The same is true of Pindar's individual advances to the king which had been assigned upon different branches of the royal revenue down to Christmas 1645, since effectively that revenue was no longer the king's to dispense. In the circumstances it is hardly surprising that Pindar returned a temporizing reply to a parliamentary request for a loan of $20,000 in 1643. Far from aiding the parliament which had penalized him two years earlier, he was engaged in shipping gold to the king at Oxford. In 1650 he offered his services to the now pretender, Charles II, who proposed that he should act as treasurer of the money which was being clandestinely collected on the royal behalf. Nothing came of this since Pindar died on 22 August. He was buried on 3 September in an enormous lead coffin in St Botolph without Bishopsgate, London, a church which, along with others in his native Northamptonshire, had been a beneficiary of his largess. St Paul's Cathedral had also benefited from his generous contribution of $10,000 towards Archbishop William Laud's rebuilding fund in the 1630s. While still engaged in trade abroad, Pindar had in 1611 presented twenty Arabic, Persian, and other manuscripts to the Bodleian Library. 
Pindar never married. His magnificent and much-admired house in Bishopsgate was taken down in 1890, but its splendid oak front is preserved in the Victoria and Albert Museum. A reproduction of one of the richly ornamented ceilings of his house can be seen in the former library at Leeds Castle, Kent. By his will dated 24 June 1646 (proved 1651) he left one-third of his estate to the children of his eponymous nephew who predeceased him, and another third to his executor and kinsman, William Toomes. In 1655 the latter took his own life after failing to satisfy Pindar's debts and legacies since, of the $236,000 at which Pindar's estate had been valued in 1639, desperate debts now preponderated. Also largely irrecoverable was the final third of the estate, consisting of miscellaneous legacies to friends and relatives. 


@@@@@


doc= 22292


Pine, Sir Benjamin Chilley Campbell (1809-1891), colonial governor, the son of Benjamin Chilley Pine of Tunbridge Wells, Kent, was born in London and attended school at Brighton. He graduated from Trinity College, Cambridge (BA 1833, MA 1840), was admitted to Gray's Inn on 9 June 1831, and was called to the bar in 1841. In the same year he became queen's advocate at Sierra Leone, and made his first marriage, to Elizabeth, daughter of John Campbell, who died only six years later, in 1847. 
In 1848 Pine acted as governor of Sierra Leone, where he displayed military ability, taking part in the expedition to the Sherbro River, and helping to destroy a strong stockaded fort, from which a group of Africans had terrorized neighbouring settlements. In 1849 his vigorous policy put an end to civil war in the same district. 
This success led to Pine's appointment in 1849 as second governor of the infant colony of Natal. During the Cape Frontier War of 1850-53 in the south-west he preserved peace within his territory, and was commended by the home government. In 1855 he led a force of volunteers against the Bhaca, who were subjugated, and also dealt with Boer land claims in Natal and with the labour question. 
In 1856 Pine returned to the west coast as governor of the Gold Coast Colony, and was knighted at Windsor Castle. In May 1859, to improve his health, he went to St Kitts, West Indies, where the climate was more congenial, as lieutenant-governor. In the same year he made a second marriage, to Margaretta Anne, daughter of Colonel John Simpson of the Bengal army. 
At the time of Pine's appointment, St Kitts, like each of the Leeward Islands, was in effect governed as a separate colony in a loose confederation, with a governor-in-chief at Antigua. Pine recommended a federation, with a central authority based at Antigua. In 1866, while temporarily acting as governor of Antigua, he helped to persuade the legislature to reform the constitution. He did the same in his own island of St Kitts. The home government adopted his views, and in February 1869 he was appointed governor-in-chief of the Leeward Islands, with a mandate to introduce federation (in 1868 he had been appointed governor of Western Australia, but had not acted, because of his appointment to the Leeward Islands). On 23 June 1870, in an exhaustive address, he laid his project before the council of Antigua, and in the course of the year carried it in all the islands. He was thus the first governor under the federal constitution of the Leeward Islands. For his services he was made a KCMG in June 1871. 
In 1873, before he had finished his term as governor-in-chief at Antigua, Pine was sent back to Natal as lieutenant-governor. He was recalled in 1874, after the summary trial and banishment of Langalibalele, and retired on a pension in 1875. 
Pine was made a bencher of Gray's Inn in 1880, and acted as its treasurer in 1885. He was also a member of the Oriental Club, Hanover Square. A rhetorical speaker and writer, Pine was the author of articles on the African colonies for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. He died on 25 February 1891 at his residence at 59 Wimpole Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 22293


Pine, John (1690-1756), engraver, who may be the son of Henry and Frances Pine baptized at St Edmund, the King and Martyr, Lombard Street, London, on 29 March 1691, spent the whole of his working life from 1719 in London. Before 1719 he may have studied under, or been apprenticed to, the engraver-printseller Bernard Picart in Amsterdam. As well as engraving book illustrations, plans, and maps, he was a publisher and print- and mapseller, as well as Bluemantle pursuivant at the College of Arms and engraver to the king's signet and stamp office. He was one of the group of independent-minded artists who congregated at Old Slaughter's Coffee House in St Martin's Lane in the 1730s. With Hogarth, George Lambert, and other members of this same social set, he was a petitioner for the 'Engraving Copyright Act' of 1735, an important piece of legislation which gave the designers and engravers of prints protection of their work for a period of fourteen years from the date of publication. Pine, with Hogarth, became a governor of the Foundling Hospital in 1746 and at the end of his life was involved in the discussions that eventually led to the foundation of a royal academy of art. 
One of Pine's earliest known works is a set of engravings after designs by the French engraver and printseller Bernard Picart (1673-1733) illustrating 'Jonah: a Poem', published in London in 1720. It is thought Pine learned his trade with Picart, who practised in Amsterdam and was an important supplier of prints to the English market. Pine's enthusiasm for the work of Rembrandt might have derived from Picart, who included copies of Rembrandt prints in his volume 'Impostures Innocents' (1734). Hogarth's oil portrait of Pine (Beaverbrook Art Gallery, Fredericton, Canada) imitates the style of the self-portraits of Rembrandt, to whom Pine seems to have borne a passing physical resemblance. Hogarth also depicted him as the fat friar in his engraving 'The Gate of Calais' (1749), which earned him the nickname Friar Pine. 
Pine remained closely connected with several French artists throughout his life. In 1739 he published a series of prints of 'The Tapestry Hangings of the House of Lords', perhaps inspired by the success of Picart's publication in 1714 of Charles Le Brun's Meleager tapestries. The Lords set of ten huge hangings, designed by Hendrick Vroom (1563-1640) and depicting the defeat of the Spanish armada, hung in the house from 1650 until 1834, when they were destroyed by fire. Pine's prints were engraved after drawings by C. Lempriere and embellished with elegant borders incorporating emblematic figures by Hubert Gravelot, the French artist who had travelled to England in 1732 to assist on an English edition of Picart's 'Ceremonies et coutumes religieuses de tous les peuples du monde' (1733-7). Pine evidently regarded the armada prints as one of the major projects of his career, since he used his influence to ensure that the 'Copyright Act' of 1735 gave him the exclusive right to copy the tapestries, the insertion of a clause to this effect at the third reading of the bill in April 1735 indicating that the scheme took at least four years from inception to publication. 
One of Pine's earlier projects, a series of engravings of the ceremonies marking the installation of the knights of the Order of the Bath in 1725, was printed by Samuel Palmer and John Huggonson in 1730. Using drawings of the participants by Joseph Highmore, Pine included every knight and attendant, each identified by an engraving of his arms, this meticulous record no doubt commending him to the College of Arms and influencing his appointment as Bluemantle pursuivant in 1743. Pine's close attention to detail also enriches his 1733 octavo edition of Horace's 'Opera', the imagery being taken from classical seals, paintings, and sculpture. The subscription list printed at the beginning of the book must be one of the most illustrious of its kind, naming the great and the good from every corner of Europe, including the kings of England, Spain, and Portugal. The first volume of a follow-up publication of Virgil's 'Bucolica et Georgica' appeared in 1753, but the second was published only in 1774, after Pine's death, by his son Robert Edge Pine. 
In 1746 Pine collaborated with John Tinney to produce a plan of London on 24 imperial sheets, based on a survey of the capital by John Rocque; he also engraved plans of Bristol (1743) and Nottingham (1751). He appears to have had some link with the city of Bath, and two of his children, the miniaturist Simon Pine (died 1772) and the portrait painter Robert Edge Pine, lived in Bath for parts of their lives; a third son, Horace (1731-1770), was resident in Nacton, Suffolk. Pine also had two daughters, one of whom married the artist Alexander Cozens. His wife, Jane, who was his sole heir and executrix, was probably the sister of the printer Samuel Palmer. Pine died on 4 May 1756 in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 22294


Pine, Robert Edge (1730-1788), painter, was born in London, the son of John Pine (1690-1756), an engraver. John Pine's other children were Simon (died 1772), a miniature painter, Horace (1731-1770), Charlotte, and another daughter whose name is unknown and who married the painter Alexander Cozens. Nothing is known of Robert Edge Pine's early years, although it is presumed he would have received some instruction from his father. On 23 December 1749 he married Mary Fulford at the church of the Holy Sepulchre, Holborn, London. They had four known daughters, Elizabeth, Anne Charlotte, Rose, and a Miss J. He seems to have painted from the beginning the range of subject matter that he continued to use throughout his life: history paintings, theatrical subjects, and portraits. One of his earliest works was 'Thomas Lowe and Mrs Chambers as Captain Macheath and Polly', engraved in mezzotint by James McArdell in 1752. Pine was active in the Society of Arts and was on the committee of polite arts. In March 1759 he proposed to the society that it hire a room for exhibitions of the works of 'the present painters and sculptors' (Paulson, 2.308), one of the moves that led to the foundation of the Society of Artists in 1760. 
In 1760 Pine won the first premium for historical painting at the Society of Arts with 'The Surrender of Calais to Edward the Third' which was also exhibited at the first exhibition of the Society of Artists (1760, no. 42). He won the first premium again in 1763 with 'Canute the Great Reproving his Courtiers for their Impious Flattery' (destroyed by fire in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1803), which was exhibited at the Free Society of Artists in the same year (no. 159), and again at the special exhibition of the Society of Artists in 1768 (no. 89). Both pictures were engraved by Francois Germain Aliamet. 
Pine exhibited at the Society of Artists from 1760 to 1771, and at the Free Society of Artists from 1761 to 1763. Among his paintings exhibited in these years were 'George II' (1759; Audley End, Essex), 'The Earl of Northumberland Laying the Foundation Stone of Middlesex Hospital' (1761; Middlesex Hospital, London), and 'Mrs Yates as Medea' (1770). In 1759 John Hamilton Mortimer became his pupil. Both artists through the 1760s were actively involved with the Society of Artists and sat on various of its committees. It is likely that Pine's radical political views were encouraged through the contacts he had made in the Society of Arts, for example with the republican Thomas Hollis, and in certain sections of the Society of Artists. Pine's republican sympathies led him to paint the portraits 'John Wilkes' (1768; Palace of Westminster, London), 'Richard Oliver' (1771; Guildhall Art Gallery, London), and 'Brass Crosby' (1771; Daily Telegraph, London), the subjects of the last two being imprisoned in the Tower of London at the time for supporting the publication of parliamentary debates. 
During the 1760s Pine was one of the leading portrait painters in London. On 5 October 1771, after a quarrel with the Society of Artists and probably its president, James Paine, over an unknown 'insult' he erased his name from the society, and although the case dragged on his resignation was eventually accepted on 22 June 1772; he never exhibited there again. Pine exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1772, 1780, and 1784. In 1772 his brother Simon died and Pine moved to Bath, where he lived for eight years, for some of this time in close proximity to his nephew, the watercolour painter John Robert Cozens. Pine's address in Bath from at least 1775 to 1779 was at Cross Bath in the parish of St Peter and St Paul. 
Pine continued to paint portraits, including one of David Garrick, exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1780 (possibly the version now in the Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington, DC). His republican views led him to support the cause of American independence and he came to know a number of supporters of America such as George William Fairfax, in Bath, a friend of George Washington, and Samuel Vaughan, a London friend of Benjamin Franklin. In 1778 he painted the allegorical picture 'America', now only known from an engraving by Joseph Strutt of 1781. He also held an exhibition of his work in the great room at Spring Gardens, London, in 1782, which included a series of Shakespearian scenes, an ambitious work which anticipated John Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery. 
Following his political convictions, Pine decided to go to America and was settled in Philadelphia by August 1784. In the same year he wrote, 'I think I could pass the latter part of my life happier in a Country where the noblest Principles have been defended and establish'd than with the People who have endeavoured to subdue them' (Stewart, 20). By 27 October 1784 Pine had opened a gallery in the state house, Philadelphia, with paintings he had brought from England. 'A Descriptive Catalogue of Pictures Painted by Robert Edge Pine', produced by Francis Bailey, a local printer, in the same year, lists 'America' and about ten Shakespearian pictures, including illustrations to 'Lear', 'Hamlet', 'Macbeth', 'The Tempest', and 'As You Like It', and also a picture of Boadicea. These paintings were destroyed by fire in Daniel Bowen's Columbian Museum in Boston, in 1803, after Pine's death. 
Pine continued to paint portraits in America. With letters of introduction from the writer and composer Francis Hopkinson and the lawyer and writer Thomas McKean he stayed from 28 April to 16 May 1785 at Mount Vernon, where he painted George Washington. He sometimes travelled to the south for portraiture, painting faces on small canvases which were later incorporated into larger ones and completed in his studio. He also painted, with Edward Savage, 'Congress Voting Independence' (Historical Society of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania), and three other untraced pictures of the American War of Independence. 
According to John Hopkinson, Pine died of apoplexy on 12 November 1788 in Philadelphia. His will, which had been drawn up on 23 August 1782, was filed for probate in Philadelphia on 22 September 1789. His widow, Mary, was the sole beneficiary and executor. John Hopkinson said Pine was 'a very small man -- morbidly irritable' and added that his wife and daughters were also very small, 'indeed a family of pigmies' (Dunlap, 1.377) and, according to Farington, Rose Pine was 'insane' (Farington, 'Diary', 3.778, 25 Feb 1797). Pine's widow received some charity from the Royal Academy in the 1790s (ibid., 2.364, 10 July 1795; 3.1033, 20 July 1798). 


@@@@@


doc= 22295


Benjamin Pingo (bap. 1749, d. 1794), the fifth son of Thomas Pingo junior and his wife, Mary, was baptized on 8 July 1749 at St Andrew's, Holborn. In the late 1760s he was awarded premiums by the Society of Arts for ornamental drawings. He subsequently served as an officer of customs in 1772-4, but achieved greatest prominence as a herald at the College of Arms, where his work included the preparation of family genealogies. 
Benjamin Pingo was appointed rouge-dragon pursuivant in 1780, was granted arms in 1782, and became York herald in 1786. He officiated at the celebrations for the treaty of Paris in 1783, and his equestrian portrait appears on an engraving published for the occasion. Benjamin died with his fellow herald John Charles Brooke in a widely reported crush at the Haymarket Theatre on 3 February 1794, aged forty-five. His manuscripts were bequeathed to the College of Arms. He is thought not to have married. 


@@@@@


doc= 22296


John Pingo (bap. 1738, d. 1827) was the second son of Thomas Pingo junior and his wife, Mary; he was baptized on 11 March 1738 at St Andrew's, Holborn. John was apprenticed in the Merchant Taylors' Company to his father, whom he succeeded as engraver of punches at the assay office in 1776. John was awarded premiums by the Society of Arts for medal work, which included cutting dies and making puncheons. Among his medals -- none of which is signed -- are those celebrating naval and military actions in 1758 at Louisburg and Plassy. John also engraved seals, many of which he exhibited at the Society of Arts, in Spring Gardens, between 1770 and 1774. 
In 1780 John entered the mint as third engraver, while still retaining his position at the assay office. In 1792, two years after the death of his mother, a two-day auction of the contents of the family house in Gray's Inn Lane was held. This included machinery and tools for medal production, which represent the residue of his father's, Thomas Pingo junior's, effects. John Pingo appears to have remained a bachelor, and in 1793 went to live at the mint in one of the houses allocated for engravers. He was superannuated from the mint in 1811 and retired from the assay office in 1815. He subsequently moved to Thornton Row, Greenwich, Kent, and died there in 1827, aged eighty-nine. 



@@@@@


doc= 22297


Lewis Pingo (bap. 1743, d. 1830), the fourth son of Thomas Pingo junior and his wife, Mary, was baptized on 26 July 1743 at St Andrew's, Holborn. He received instructions as a young student at William Shipley's drawing school, where he is said to have 'manifested great promise' (Farington, III/27). 
Lewis Pingo was considered 'a worthy, promising young artist' by Thomas Hollis (Hollis, 21 Sept 1768), and he received premiums from the Society of Arts between 1756 and 1771. They were awarded for medal-making, gem-engraving, wax modelling, and drawing, examples of which were exhibited in London between 1761 and 1782. 
Lewis Pingo's greatest legacy is his medals, which are variously signed 'L. PINGO', 'L. P.', or 'L. P. F.' (F='fecit'). They number more than fifteen, and include portrait medals of David Garrick (1772) and Captain James Cook (1783), as well as prize medals for the Royal Humane Society (1776) and the Board of Admiralty (1796). Examples of his work are represented in the British Museum. 
Lewis Pingo succeeded to the position of third engraver at the mint on his father's death in 1776, and in 1780 was appointed chief engraver. He was responsible for coinage work, including the preparation of designs and wax models, the engraving of dies, and the production of tools to facilitate striking. Among the coinage with which he can be associated are patterns dated 1782, proposed as a measure against counterfeiting, the distinctive 1787 shillings and sixpences, and coinage for the Bank of England and the Bank of Ireland. 
Lewis Pingo and his brother John began to trade under their joint names around the time of their father's death in 1776, by whom they had been bequeathed medal dies, collars, puncheons, and presses. A trade label (BM) refers to 'J & L Pingo, Engravers to His Majesty' and an address at 101 Gray's Inn Lane; they continued to produce medals until the mid-1790s. 
Lewis Pingo had two wives, Sarah and Sally -- the marriage dates are not known -- with whom he had eight daughters. He retired from the mint as chief engraver in 1815, and subsequently moved to Grove Lane, Camberwell, Surrey. He died there on 26 August 1830, aged eighty-seven. 



@@@@@


doc= 22298


Thomas Pingo junior (1714-1776), the first son of Thomas Pingo senior and his wife, Mary, was born on 24 September 1714 and baptized on 10 October 1714 in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields. In 1732 he was bound apprentice to his father in the Merchant Taylors' Company, but it was as a medallist that he achieved the greatest distinction, making the transition from the soft metal-engraving of silver and copper to the cutting of steel dies. With the technical skills necessary to manage the additional demands of actually striking medals, Thomas Pingo junior is believed to have been the first medallist in Britain to establish his own manufactory for this purpose. 
Thomas Pingo junior was responsible for more than twenty-five of his own medals, struck between 1742 and the mid-1770s and usually signed 'PINGO', 'T. PINGO F.', or 'T. P. F.' (F='fecit', or engraved). These include prize medals for the Board of Admiralty (1742), the Society of Arts (1758), and the Royal Academy of Arts (1770), as well as portrait medals of William, duke of Cumberland (1745), and George III (1759-60). Examples of most of his work are in the British Museum. The designs for several Pingo medals were drafted by James 'Athenian' Stuart, the painter and architect. Thomas Hollis, the whig antiquary and diarist, was frequently called upon to advise on suitable inscriptions for the medals, examples of which he would then purchase and distribute to friends and associates. 
In 1756 Thomas Pingo junior received the appointment of engraver of punches at the assay office, Goldsmiths' Hall, cutting steel punches for the hallmarking of gold and silver plate. He also perfected machinery which gave the work greater precision. In 1771 he was appointed third engraver at the Royal Mint, and held the position until his death. Among the coinage with which he can be associated are guineas and half-guineas dated 1774-86. 
Between the 1730s and the 1760s Thomas Pingo junior's family and business were situated in Great Kirby Street, Hatton Garden. This was only a short distance from where his grandfather Zachariah Pingo and great-uncle John Pingo junior had been situated. Thereafter he moved a little north to Gray's Inn Lane, where the family stayed until the early 1790s. Throughout the 1760s and 1770s Thomas Pingo junior was a frequent exhibitor at societies in London, and among the work that he showed was a pattern thaler of Stanislaus Augustus of Poland in 1766 and a gold coinage trial for Brunswick-Luburg in 1767, as well as several of his medals. Thomas Pingo junior is frequently, but mistakenly, associated with the preparation of models for Josiah Wedgwood: a misleading attribution, arising from the simple misreading of the word 'medal' -- for model -- on one of his invoices to Wedgwood. 
In 1736 Thomas Pingo junior married Mary Goldwire (1714-1790), and among their thirteen children John, Lewis, Henry, Benjamin, and Mary were to distinguish themselves. In 1769 the marriage took place between Eleanor, another daughter, and James Kirk, who may have been a member of the Kirk medal-engraving family. Thomas Pingo junior died on 1 December 1776 aged sixty-two. He was buried at St Peter ad Vincula, in the precincts of the Tower of London, on 7 December 1776. 
Thomas Pingo junior's will, prepared in 1772, left much of the estate to his wife, Mary, including the house and the profits arising from the use of his medal dies. His sons John and Lewis Pingo ['see below'] were left his medal-making tools and equipment, and it is clear from the terms of the will that their father hoped and expected that they would succeed him at the mint and at the assay office. 
Thomas Pingo junior gained a sizeable foothold in the London medal market, which continental medallists were trying to penetrate. His medals and those of his children represent the most enduring evidence of the Pingo family and their work. They are of a consistent technical and artistic standard, but only occasionally rise to levels of real excellence. The reliance on a relatively small repertoire of designs unashamedly reflects the ideas and taste of others -- most notably James 'Athenian' Stuart and Thomas Hollis -- rather than any definite or particular style. 



@@@@@


doc= 22299


Pink, Charles Richard (1853-1889), architect, was born on 4 July 1853 at Wood End House, Soberton, Hampshire, the son of Charles Pink, a land and estate surveyor. From 1864 to 1869 he studied drawing with J. G. Hart, after which, in 1871, he was articled to Thomas Henry Watson for four years. In 1872 he was a student at the RIBA and in 1873-4 he attended Professor T. Hayter Lewis's classes of fine art and construction at University College, London, where he won a first prize in ancient and medieval art, and a second in ancient and modern construction. 
In 1875 Pink was employed in Winchester, Hampshire, designing the Chilworth and North Baddesley schools. In 1876 he became an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA). He designed a number of houses and schools, and a few churches, mostly in Hampshire. Pink was particularly knowledgeable about architectural heraldry, and a number of his heraldic sketches were reproduced after his death in a volume called 'The Pink Memorial' (1889). In addition he published 'Notes on Heraldry' in 1884, and a privately printed paper, 'Architectural Education', in 1886. 
Pink also took a keen interest in the professional education of architects. He served on the committee of the Architectural Association until 1885, when he was elected president, and in 1886 he was elected fellow of the RIBA. Pink married Florence Anna, 'nee' Browne, and their son, Richard Charles Montagu Pink, was born in November 1888. However, Charles Pink died of bronchitis at Hyde, near Winchester, on 25 February 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 22300


Pinke, William (c.1599-1629), scholar and author, born in Hampshire and probably a kinsman of Robert Pinck, entered Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1615, graduated BA in 1619, and proceeded MA in 1622. He gained a reputation both as an accomplished scholar, skilled in Hebrew, Greek, and Arabic, and as a devout and serious man, labelled a puritan by some contemporaries. He was ordained and in 1626 published 'An examination of those plausible appearances which seeme most to commend the Romish Church and to preiudice the reformed', probably a translation from the work in French by John Cameron. Appointed philosophy reader at Magdalen, Pinke also became about this time a tutor to George Digby, later second earl of Bristol. In 1628 he was appointed a fellow of the college, but a promising career was cut short by his early death in February 1629 when, according to Wood, he was '30 or thereabouts' ('History', 3.272). He was buried in Magdalen College chapel. 
In dedicating to Digby a posthumous edition of Pinke's sermons, 'The Tryall of a Christians Syncere Love unto Christ' (1631), William Lyford suggested that this represented 'but an Essay to some master peece which you might have expected, if he had lived to finish what he attempted in the Greek antiquities and observations on the Hebrew Text', yet for all the author's learning its theme was the fundamental truth of Christianity, 'which if it bee not first rooted in the heart, all other our conclusions and speculations in Divinitie will be but like the building a Castle in the ayre'. For Pinke, 'the profession of Christ is the most serious business in the world', and 'a reall inward disposition of the soule' was worth more than 'the formalyties of comming to Church, carrying a bible, hearing a sermon' (Pinke, 24); Christians observing the latter merely out of habit were 'no better than Turks or Jews'. Indeed, so crucial was an informed, personal profession of faith in God that 'there is not a pin to choose between him that beleeves in grosse, what the Church of England beleeves, and him that beleeves as that synagogue of Satan the Church of Rome beleeves'; 'blind, absurd implicite faith' led to 'Protestant Popery' (ibid., 27-8). Despite the potentially subversive nature of this work it was republished several times in Oxford in the 1630s; less surprisingly, it reappeared in 1657 and 1659. 


@@@@@


doc= 22301


Pinkerton, John (1758-1826), historian and poet, was born on 17 February 1758 in Edinburgh, the son of James Pinkerton (died 1780), hair dealer, and his wife, Mary Heron ('b'. 1717), the daughter of an Edinburgh apothecary and widow of Robert Bowie. Soon after Pinkerton's birth the family moved to a house owned by his mother, at Grangegateside. Pinkerton attended a local day school until about 1764. He was then sent to the grammar school at Lanark, where he showed an aptitude for Latin translation. He inherited 'a portion of hypocondriacism' from his father ('Public Characters', 3.21), and preferred quiet walks to rougher pastimes. At the age of twelve he returned home, where he pursued a solitary education, his father opposing his wish to attend university. 
In his teens Pinkerton was apprenticed to William Aytoun, writer to the signet in Edinburgh, but he clearly aspired to a literary rather than a legal career. In 1776 he published anonymously 'Craigmillar Castle, an Elegy', dedicated to James Beattie, whose poem 'The Minstrel' had first interested him in poetry. At about the same time he wrote two tragedies, one of which he burnt. He also began collecting Scottish ballads, and offered some of these to the London publisher James Dodsley in 1777. After their rejection he sent them to Thomas Percy, beginning a correspondence that lasted sixteen years until it ended in acrimony, as sooner or later did many of Pinkerton's friendships. In 1780 he completed his apprenticeship, and when his father died soon after, leaving him an independence of $300 per annum, he abandoned the legal profession altogether. While visiting London to buy books he formed the intention of settling there. He returned to Edinburgh to put his financial affairs in order, then moved to London in 1781, and took up residence at Knightsbridge. That year Charles Dilly published some of his poems as 'Rimes', followed by 'Two Dithyrambic Odes' and 'Tales in Verse' (1782), none of which was particularly successful. 
In 1781 Pinkerton's collection 'Scottish Tragic Ballads' was published by John Nichols, and in 1783 it was republished, with a second volume containing new material, as 'Select Scotish Ballads'. Some of the 'ancient' pieces, including a continuation of the poetic fragment 'Hardyknute', were in fact Pinkerton's own work. This forgery earned him notoriety as a literary impostor, and the enmity of Joseph Ritson, the literary critic and historian, who exposed and condemned Pinkerton's deception in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (54/2, 1784, 812-14). In 1785, under the pseudonym Robert Heron, Pinkerton published 'Letters of Literature', a collection of literary essays including one entitled 'On literary forgery'. Here, and in subsequent visits to the subject, Pinkerton argued 'Perhaps in fact nothing can be more heroic and generous in literary affairs than a writer's ascribing to antiquity his own production; and thus sacrificing his own fame to give higher satisfaction to the public' (Heron, 384). The reputation for eccentricity and arrogance that 'Letters of Literature' earned Pinkerton was due notably to this opinion, and also to the book's deprecation of respected classical and contemporary authors, and its views regarding the shortcomings of English orthography. Pinkerton later regretted the vehemence with which he had expressed himself, and wrote to David Laing, 'from a constitutional irritability of nerve, I have in my earlier productions shown much controversial asperity... were I revising my books, I should dash out all such passages, which I never see without disgust. I can only say they are the products of infirmity, and not of malice' ('Literary Correspondence', 2.355). 
In 1786 Pinkerton published 'Ancient Scotish Poems', which contained no further forgeries and confessed to his earlier deception. This collection of previously unpublished Middle Scots poems is now regarded as his most significant contribution to Scottish literary scholarship. In the same year he published 'The Treasury of Wit', a collection of aphorisms, under the pseudonym H. Bennet. 'Scotish Poems, Reprinted from Scarce Editions' came out in three volumes in 1792, and brought a new attack on Pinkerton's honour by Ritson ('GM', 1793, 32), who disputed Pinkerton's acquisition of one of the manuscripts. 
Pinkerton also pursued other fields of research, including numismatics. In 1784 Dodsley published his 'Essay on Medals', a well-respected study that was reprinted in 1789 in an enlarged two-volume format. He followed this with 'The Medallic History of England to the Revolution' (1790). The 'Essay on Medals' earned Pinkerton the attention of Horace Walpole, with whom he continued to correspond until Walpole's death, after which he sold his recollections of him to be serialized in the 'Monthly Magazine', and published as 'Walpoliana' in 1799. Pinkerton's reports of Walpole's religious infidelity met with public indignation. 
Through Walpole, Pinkerton made the acquaintance of the historian Edward Gibbon, who found in him 'a mind replete with a variety of knowledge, and inclined to every liberal pursuit' ('Public Characters', 3.29). Gibbon formed the plan of a series of works on the early English historians, to which he would give his name, and which would be edited by Pinkerton. This plan was never fulfilled. The first historical work Pinkerton did publish was controversial: 'A Dissertation on the Origin and Progress of the Scythians or Goths' (1787) was predicated upon a belief in the congenital inferiority of the Celtic people, and drew attacks from various contemporary scholars, including Ritson in the 'Historical essay on Scotish song', which prefaced his 'Scotish Songs' (1794). Pinkerton repaid this and previous favours in kind in his review of 'Scotish Songs' for the 'Critical Review' (5 Jan 1795, 49-58). His other historical works were 'An Enquiry into the History of Scotland' (1789); 'Vitae antiquae sanctorum' (1789); an annotated edition of John Barbour's 'The Bruce, or, The History of Robert I, King of Scotland' (1790); and 'The History of Scotland from the Accession of the House of Stuart to that of Mary' (1797). In that year he also published 'Iconographia Scotica', which was followed in 1799 by 'The Scotish Gallery', another book of portraits. 
By now Pinkerton had for many years been keen to obtain a position commensurate with his abilities. He made repeated appeals to Horace Walpole, who in 1788 on Pinkerton's behalf unsuccessfully solicited Sir Joseph Banks regarding an opening at the British Museum. A further application to Banks in 1795 was equally fruitless. About this time Pinkerton began working for the 'Critical Review', though the exact degree of his involvement is unclear. In 1802 he left for Paris, where he was engaged in promoting the 'Critical Review' to French booksellers. Early in 1805 bankruptcy caused the magazine to be sold, and the political situation in France encouraged Pinkerton to leave for England. On his return he published 'Recollections of Paris' (1806), which provided 'abundant evidence of the low level of his moral standard' (Constable, 1.505). 
Pinkerton's social standing and advancement were damaged by his unorthodox views on religion and morality. Friends such as Lord Hailes and Sir Walter Scott condemned his refutation of the 'Old Testament' in 'Ancient Scotish Poems', and strangers wrote indignant retorts. The 'irregularities of his conduct' ('Literary Correspondence', 1.viii) in his private life provided additional material for criticism. Throughout the 1780s he lived at Knightsbridge, then from 1789 at Mansfield Place, Kentish Town, with a woman who went by the name of Ann Pinkerton, and who he led some friends to believe was his wife. They had two daughters, one named Sophia, and in 1791 a son, Frederick. About a year later Pinkerton left this woman and his family 'on account of her bad conduct and drunkenness' (Wood, 195). 
It is probable that Pinkerton was then in the process of negotiating his forthcoming marriage to Henrietta Maria Burgess, daughter of a tradesman in Odiham, Hampshire, who may have kept a school in Kentish Town. The marriage took place in her parish on 14 August 1793, and the couple settled at Flask Walk, Hampstead. The following year Pinkerton wrote to Lord Buchan of his current state of contentment, adding 'nor has my marriage to a quiet, good wife, with some money, been without its share in contributing to my health and finances' ('Literary Correspondence', 350-51). Two daughters, one named after her mother, survived, and a third child died in 1797; in his last will, Pinkerton claimed that these daughters were his only issue. By 1802 he and Henrietta had separated reasonably amicably. He was then living in Pimlico, London, and his wife in Odiham with their two daughters, who were to inherit fortunes from their uncles. Pinkerton later stated that his brother-in-law Thomas Burgess, the future bishop of Salisbury, had induced him to marry Henrietta 'by splendid promises never performed. So much for christianity' (Wood, 195). After ten years' separation, a divorce 'was begun and completed for what I know at the expence of her brother'. There is no record of such a bill, and it seems unlikely therefore that the divorce was ever legal. Before it could have been completed, and in the knowledge that it had not been, Pinkerton married 'another bitch of the modern hot-bed race quite unfit for the society of men of sense or spirit', but possessed of a rich uncle (ibid.). The identify of this woman is unknown, though parish records for St Mary Magdalen, Old Fish Street, London, list the marriage of a John Pinkerton to Elizabeth Brown Becket on 30 April 1812. The relationship appears to have been short-lived. 
One friend remarked that Pinkerton had 'ample worldly shrewdness (in pecuniary matters at least)' (Gillies, 2.124). His financial situation became increasingly uncomfortable, however, after the breakdown of his first marriage, and in mid-1812 he sold part of his library. Shortly after this he moved back to Edinburgh. During the previous decade he had published 'Modern Geography' (1802), which was well received and translated into French and Italian, a 'New Modern Atlas' (1808-9), 'A General Collection of... Voyages and Travels' (1808-14), and 'Petralogy' (1811). On arrival in Edinburgh he directed his energies towards realizing an ambition of his youth, to see one of his plays produced. 'The Heiress of Strathern, or, The Rash Marriage' received its one and only performance at Edinburgh on 23 March 1813, and was hissed off the stage. After this Pinkerton travelled around Scotland, staying with various acquaintances. Between November 1813 and February 1814 he tried unsuccessfully to obtain a position at the register house in Edinburgh. Between August and October he attempted to resurrect Gibbon's projected history, and finally appealed publicly to the prince regent for support, but this came to nothing. He left Scotland for Paris in early 1815, by which time, according to Gillies, 'there were but three individuals in the whole community with whom he remained on speaking terms, namely, Sir Walter Scott, Mr. Thomas Thomson, and my obscure self' (ibid.). Gillies, who was obviously fond of Pinkie Winkie, remembered his 'overweening egoism and numberless eccentricities' (ibid., 124-5). 
Pinkerton spent the rest of his life in Paris, where Francis Douce visited him in 1819 and reported that he was living in 'mean lodgings' (Wood, 200). These may have been the hotel at no. 10, 26 rue de Ponthieu, Champs-Elysees, which became his last home. He supplemented his small income by dealing for London booksellers, but in a letter to Scott less than a year before his death he intimated that 'I am not only under a great bodily disease but my Mind suffers from pecuniary pressure' (ibid., 201). For the last seven years of his life he suffered from rheumatic gout, which made reading and writing arduous and must have cost him dearly in every respect. According to Beattie, writing in 1798, the drawing prefixed to 'The History of Scotland' (1797) was 'a striking likeness' of Pinkerton at that time, and he spoke 'with a strong Edinburgh accent' (W. Forbes, 'An Account of the Life and Writings of James Beattie', 2 vols., 1806, 2.321). In his latter years Pinkerton was described as 'a very little and thin old man, with a very small, sharp yellow face, thickly pitted by the small-pox, and decked with a pair of green spectacles' (Nichols, 5.673). After a long period of sickness he died in Paris on 10 March 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 22302


Pinkethman, William (c.1660x65-1725), actor and theatre manager, was probably born in London. The name Pinkethman is common in parish records of the period in London (St Clement Danes; St Andrew's, Holborn; St Bride's, Fleet Street), but nothing has been discovered of William's birth or parentage. If he was the Pinkiman Clark found in the 'Belphegor' prompt book, playing a Servant at the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin in 1677-8, it seems unlikely that he was 'the same age' ('The Tatler', no. 188, 22 June 1710) as his fellow actor William Bullock, who was probably born in 1666. After his first mention, as Stitchum in Thomas Shadwell's 'The Volunteers' in November 1692, Pinkyman or Pinkerman is recorded from time to time playing small parts at Drury Lane. When Thomas Betterton and the older members split from the United Company in 1694-5, he stayed with Christopher Rich and soon took more significant roles. He was a popular speaker of prologues and epilogues, often delivered riding a donkey. Colley Cibber and others complained that Pinkethman sometimes gagged or extended business to the detriment of the play, but his standing continued to grow: by 1700 he was one of six members whose signatures appeared on business transactions for the company. A document of 1703 shows that his earnings were surpassed only by those of Thomas Doggett and Benjamin Johnson among the comic actors. He usually played at Drury Lane but, because of the divisions and reaffiliations of the companies, sometimes worked elsewhere. 

'The Tatler' jocularly compares the comic routines of Pinkethman and Bullock: 'Mr Bullock has the more agreeable squall, and Mr Penkethman the more graceful shrug. Penkethman devours a cold chick with great applause; Bullock's talent lies chiefly in sparrow grass. Penkethman is very dextrous at conveying himself under a table; Bullock is no less active at jumping over a stick; Mr Penkethman has a great deal of money, but Mr Bullock is the taller man. ('The Tatler', no. 188, 22 June 1710)' If he made 'a great deal of money' it was perhaps mainly from drolls and farces and fair booths, and such 'diverting Entertainment' as 'the Dancing Dogs, newly arriv'd from France' (Rosenfeld, 277) which accompanied a performance of Thomas Southerne's 'Oroonoko' at Richmond. But Pinkethman was more than a knockabout comic and an astute businessman: he was a versatile and esteemed actor. He took over the part of Lory, the witty servant in John Vanbrugh's 'The Relapse', when Doggett went back to Betterton's company, and he played the boisterous and duplicitous Sergeant Kite in George Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer', as well as the rustic Appletree, the crusty Old Bellair in George Etherege's 'The Man of Mode', and handsome 'shatterbrains' Underplot in 'Three Hours after Marriage', by John Gay, Alexander Pope, and John Arbuthnot. The Dublin edition of this play records that, in the disguise scene, Pinkethman as crocodile manoeuvred his tail with such gusto that he knocked down Mrs Hunt (the maid, Sarsnet), displaying her underwear and legs to the delight of the audience. In helping her up, he became entangled with Colley Cibber in the mummy case, and the stage carpenter took half an hour to extricate them. 
In old plays and the tragedies of his own time, Pinkethman took significant parts, in particular Abel Drugger, the small-minded tobacconist in 'The Alchemist', the part Ben Jonson wrote with Robert Armin in mind and for which Garrick was later famous, and also Dapper, the lawyer's clerk. He was the good-natured poor gentleman Hearty in Richard Brome's 'A Jovial Crew' and the 'humorous old Lord' Calianax in Beaumont's and Fletcher's 'The Maid's Tragedy'. In Shakespeare and adaptations of Shakespeare he played Dr Caius in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', a Carter in 'Henry IV', the Chief Witch in 'Macbeth', the Poet in 'Timon of Athens', the Gentleman Usher in Tate's 'King Lear', and Polonius in 'Hamlet'. He was Antonio in Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd' and once played the title role in 'Oroonoko', though more commonly he took the part of Daniel. 
Pinkethman's entrepreneurial activities began in August 1698, when, with Blakes as a partner, he offered 'Jephtha's Rash Vow' at Bartholomew fair. He ran booths at the fairs until the end of his life. Less than a month before his death he produced 'Semiramis' with Henry Norris at Bartholomew fair, but did not perform. Downes wrote that Pinkethman 'has gain'd more in Theatres and Fairs in Twelve Years, than those that have Tugg'd at the Oar of Acting these fifty' (Downes, 108). Early in the eighteenth century he was hiring entertainments ranging from Italian mimes and French rope dancers to displays of horsemanship and gymnastics. A broadside published after the death of John Edwards, 'Horse Doctor and Merry Andrew' (1706), implied that 'dull sneaking Pinkethman' was too miserly to buy more than 'half a pint of ale' to lament the death of his performer. 
In February 1709, at the Duke of Marlborough's Head in Fleet Street, Pinkethman exhibited a 'moving picture' -- a large landscape upon which animals, persons, coaches, and ships moved and appeared to diminish in perspective. In May it was removed to Greenwich, to the Hospital tavern, next door to the 'new Play-house' where Pinkethman was trying a summer season while the London theatres were closed for part of each week. For the 1710 season he offered a 'subscription ticket', which for 1 guinea gave twenty-one admissions to performances, and could be used either singly or for parties. Performances were scheduled by the tides, so that watermen could bring passengers down on the ebb and take the incoming tide for the return to London. Pinkethman did not work at Greenwich after 1711. On 14 November 1714 he was a prisoner in the king's bench, presumably for debt, though whether because of the failure of one of his enterprises is not clear. He was free by 22 November, his wedding day. 
In 1718 Pinkethman started a summer theatre at Richmond, 'for the Diversion of the Nobility and Quality that attend the Court of their Royal Highnesses' the prince and princess of Wales. There he also exhibited a 'fine musical Picture' of the royal family. Some of the best actors of both companies played at his theatre on Saturdays and Mondays, while also performing two week nights in London. In 1719 Pinkethman provided his own theatre in a converted donkey stable, and gave a special 'ass prologue' for the occasion. With the beast beside him on stage he declared: '
But into Debt I'm got so very deep 

My Creditors assure me they can't sleep, 

Unless you stretch forth your kind Hands, what think ye? 

Becomes of them, this House, and Bankrupt Pinky? 

[and if they don't applaud] 

And as this Place once more will come to th'Ass 

Poor Penky'll be the Beast that's turned to Grass. 
(Rosenfeld, 279)' In the same season, shortly after Joseph Addison's death, a burlesque version of his tragedy 'Cato' was performed, with Norris as Cato and Pinkethman as Juba. Politics were no doubt involved in this presentation 'for the entertainment of their Royal Highnesses', but some were offended. The summer seasons at Richmond continued, as did Pinkethman's regular playing at Drury Lane, until 1724, the year before he died. During this period was published 'Pinkethman's Jests, or, Wit Defin'd' (1724, 2 parts), which had reached four editions by 1735. 
The little information available about Pinkethman's private life leaves unsolved problems. He married Elizabeth Hill, of St Paul's, Shadwell, at Bow church on 22 November 1714, when he is recorded as a bachelor of the parish of St Paul, Covent Garden. Elizabeth died in 1720, and was buried at Richmond on 2 August. It does not appear that she had any children, and no record of any other marriage has been found. However, Pinkethman's son -- also William -- was a member of the Lincoln's Inn Fields company in 1722 and took some of his father's roles after his death. He was, presumably, the child of an earlier union. A 'Penkethman's widow' is recorded as sharing in 'benefit nights' at Drury Lane in 1726, 1727, and 1728. 
Pinkethman was certainly successful. He had many friends, and there was little malicious gossip about him. Surviving portraits show a good-looking man, with the singing, dancing, and gymnastic skills needed by the comedian. He became 'of Richmond... Gentleman' and owned a theatre and a house on Richmond Hill, where, on the king's birthday, he gave splendid parties, with 'a Barrel of Ale' for the 'Commonalty'. It was there, on 20 September 1725, that he died; he was buried at the parish church on 24 September. His will confirms a deed of gift of his property to Anne Atkins 'of Richmond... spinster'. Was she, perhaps, 'Penkethman's widow' who later shared in benefits at Drury Lane? 


@@@@@


doc= 22303


Pinney, Charles (1793-1867), mayor of Bristol, was born on 29 April 1793, the youngest son of John Pretor Pinney (1740-1818), sugar planter and merchant, and his wife, Jane (died 1821), only daughter of Major William Burt Weekes, both of Nevis, West Indies. John Pinney was originally named John Pretor, and assumed the surname and arms of Pinney by royal licence on succeeding to the Pinney estates in 1762. Charles Pinney was born after his return to England to live in Bristol. He took over his father's business interests to become a merchant and a slave owner, in partnership with E. Case at Bristol. After having apparently been on the point of proposing marriage to a daughter of Wilberforce, the abolitionist, on 8 March 1831 he married Frances Mary (died 1860), fourth daughter of James Charles Still of East Knoyle, Wiltshire; they had two sons and a daughter. 
Pinney was a common councillor in Bristol from 1822 to 1835 and sheriff in 1823-4, one of the few whigs on a council which in the early nineteenth century had become dominated by tories, and which was despised in the city as a self-interested oligarchy enjoying power without responsibility. Pinney himself was known as a friend of reform; he was president of the whig Anchor Society in 1822, had helped to found and presided over a mechanics' institute, and in September 1830 had chaired a public meeting which declared its sympathy with the French revolution of July. 
On 16 September 1831 Pinney was sworn in as mayor of Bristol and thus had the misfortune to be in office during the riots that followed the rejection of the 'Reform Bill'. The riots began on 29 October 1831 when Sir Charles Wetherell, the city recorder, who was very unpopular because of his opposition to reform, entered the city. It fell to Pinney as mayor to receive him. Crowds gathered to meet Wetherell and stoned the carriage in which he and Pinney were riding and later the mansion house where he and Pinney had repaired. Pinney tried to quieten the crowd on two occasions but, being met with abuse and missiles, read the riot act at dusk. Incensed, the crowd broke into the mansion house and ransacked the ground floor. Wetherell made an inglorious exit over the roof and left Bristol in disguise. The crowd began to disperse, some of their own volition, others after the arrival of troops who, under their commander Thomas Brereton, used only the flats of their swords. The crowd reassembled early on 30 October while the troops were resting and at about 7 a.m. attacked the mansion house again. Pinney followed Wetherell's example and escaped over the roof while the rioters looted the house. There followed widespread destruction of public buildings as the crowd attacked the Bridewell, the New Gaol, and the Gloucester county prison, liberating the prisoners before firing the buildings. They fired the bishop's palace, dock gates, customs house, and excise office, before turning to private houses in Queen Square, an area firmly associated with Bristol's commercial elite and political establishment. They held an impromptu feast in Queen Square with food and drink looted from the corporation cellars and from other cellars in Queen Square which were used as wine vaults and as bonded warehouses for spirits. The volume of alcohol inflamed the tempers of the rioters and made the houses burn easily. Finally on the Monday the troops, now reinforced, and aided by some 4000 special constables, charged and cleared the crowd. Official figures suggest twelve were killed and ninety-four injured. More recently Harrison has suggested that between 120 and 250 were killed or injured (Harrison, 299-300). Of the 102 rioters who were taken prisoner, thirty-one were condemned to death and four in fact executed. Clemency was shown to the others after a petition on their behalf gathered 10,000 names, including those of people who had had their houses destroyed. Twenty-two were transported. 
On 25 October 1832 Pinney was put on trial in the court of king's bench charged with neglect of duty in his office as mayor during the riots. After a trial lasting seven days the jury returned a verdict of not guilty, asserting that Pinney had 'acted according to the best of his judgement with zeal and personal courage' (Pinney, 1833). Although it is impossible to establish the course of events with certainty, since it is reconstructed from sometimes conflicting testimonies of witnesses and from conjecture about closed sessions of the mayor and magistrates, Pinney's acquittal seems fair, if kind. He had indeed tried to persuade the crowd to disperse, instructed Brereton to act decisively, and sworn in special constables, but all the blame for lack of co-ordination between the civil and military authorities, which had allowed the situation to get out of hand, was laid on Brereton. 
Although triggered by a national issue, the crowd's anger is now seen as having been directed largely against the entrenched city corporation, to defend whose interests wealthier citizens were mostly unwilling to act as special constables. Given that his own views favoured reform, and that he received little support from magistrates all too aware of their own unpopularity, or from other citizens, or the military, Pinney probably acted no worse than most others would have done, faced with a crowd which began by obeying the customs of traditional protest, but, with access to unprecedented quantities of alcohol, took on a frightening aspect. 
The riot by no means blighted Pinney's commercial or political career. He continued as a merchant and became president of the powerful Merchant Venturers' Society in 1844-5. In 1835 he was chosen as one of the first aldermen of the reformed corporation and retained this office until 1853. He died at his home, Camp House, Clifton, Bristol, on 17 July 1867, leaving a substantial fortune proved at under $60,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 22304


Pinnock, William (bap. 1782, d. 1843), publisher and compiler of educational works, was born in Alton, Hampshire, and baptized there on 3 February 1782, the son of John Pinnock and his wife Sarah, 'nee' Marshall. Little is known of his early family life except that they lived in humble circumstances. After a period as a schoolmaster Pinnock became a bookseller in Alton and wrote and published his first works in 1810-11: 'The Leisure Hour: a Pleasing Pastime Consisting of Interesting and Improving Subjects', with explanatory notes, and 'The Universal Explanatory Spelling Book', with a key and exercises. Expanding reading audiences in the early nineteenth century created significant new markets for educational works. Such markets, combined with improvements in printing technology, presented opportunities for entrepreneurial writers and publishers like Pinnock to make a living from literary projects for 'popular' audiences. Pinnock moved his business to Newbury, Berkshire, in 1811 and then in 1817 to London, where in partnership with Samuel Maunder (whose sister, Ann, he had married on 1 December 1814) he bought the premises of the 'Literary Gazette' at 267 Strand and took shares in that publication. 
Pinnock and Maunder ceased to print the paper after number 146 and began to publish a series of highly successful short catechistic manuals, constructed in the form of questions and answers and sold under Pinnock's name. It is unclear how much of the literary work he did himself, and how much came through the networks of publishers, writers, and schoolteachers in the London area. The catechistic method of instruction, used to inculcate Christian truth, became secularized in Pinnock's period and was deployed as an educational device to lead the reader to memorize 'matters of fact'. Such a technique was seen by many as an appropriate way of educating the lower orders. Pinnock issued eighty-three 'catechisms' in series at 9died each, covering such eclectic topics as chess, conchology, sacred geography, history, agriculture, and algebra, of which many were translated into German, French, and Arabic. 
Pinnock produced educational texts in varied subjects but he also designed texts to appeal to specific audiences based on age, gender, and social position. He produced new works but also marketed 'improved and updated' established educational 'trade' works such as Joyce's 'Scientific Dialogues' (1800) and Mangnall's 'Historical and Miscellaneous Questions' (1800). He had considerable success with several literary projects, and his abridgements of Goldsmith's histories of England, Greece, and Rome, which went through many editions, were highly profitable. The quality of the history they contained, however, is questionable, as the historical facts selected as important -- such as the large cost of George IV's robes -- tend towards the sensationalist and novel. His series of county histories, which were compiled largely from the work of other writers, were collected into the 'History and Topography of England and Wales' (1825) and were also successful. 
Despite such success, Pinnock was in perpetual financial distress owing to the costs and failings of his speculations in the businesses of wood veneering and manufacturing pianos, and he was eventually forced to sell most of his copyrights to various other publishers. He died at his home, Broadley Terrace, Blandford Square, London, on 21 October 1843. 
Pinnock's son 


@@@@@


doc= 22305


William Henry Pinnock (1813-1885) was a Church of England clergyman and writer. Educated at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, he was ordained in 1843, and graduated LLB in 1850 and LLD in 1855. He followed his father in compiling elementary textbooks and engaging in revising and improving previously established works -- notably his father's abridgement of Goldsmith's 'History of England' (46th edition, 1858). His considerable literary output was largely devoted to ecclesiastical laws and usages. He died at his vicarage at Pinner, Middlesex, on 30 November 1885, and was survived by his daughter Agnes Alicia Pinnock. 


@@@@@


doc= 22306


Pinto, George Frederick (1785-1806), composer, violinist, and pianist, born in Lambeth, London, on 25 September 1785, was the son of Samuel Saunders (or Sanders) and his wife, Julia, a singer, who was the daughter of the violinist and composer Thomas Pinto. Throughout his brief career as a musician George Frederick always used his mother's maiden name as his surname. He showed very early promise as a violinist and about 1794 was sent to study with Johann Peter Salomon. At the age of ten he made his first public appearance as a violinist, playing a concerto at Signora Salvini's benefit concert on 4 May 1796. For the next few years he appeared regularly in concerts in London and in other British towns and cities, and he seems to have made two excursions to Paris. At Salomon's benefit concert on 10 March 1800 he played the violin in a sonata for piano and violin with John Field. Pinto's op. 1, a set of three divertimenti for piano, was advertised in the 'Morning Post' on 5 November 1801, but no copies of this publication are currently known to exist. His op. 2, 'Three Favourite Airs with Variations', also for piano, probably appeared in 1802. 
It is not known with whom Pinto learned piano, but the composer and writer Alexander Campbell referred in 1802 to his musical activities in Edinburgh, where his grandfather Thomas Pinto was a leading resident musician. Campbell stated: 'Young Pinto is not only an admirable violin player, but also a first-rate performer on the grand piano forte; to excell on two instruments so widely different from each other, is a proof of genius and unwearied application very seldom to be met with. (Campbell, 189)' In fact the piano seems to have become Pinto's favoured instrument at about this time, as his early publications of piano music suggest. The airs with variations were followed in 1803 by two grand sonatas in E[flat] minor and A major, op. 3, and a grand sonata in C minor, published without opus number. Three sonatas, in G major, B[flat] major, and C major, op. 4, were issued in 1804 or 1805. Other posthumously published works may also date from this period, including a fantasia and sonata for piano in C minor (left in an unfinished state by Pinto but completed by Samuel Wesley and Joseph Woelfl), and a sonata for piano with violin accompaniment in A major, edited by Woelfl. At Domenico Corri's Edinburgh concerts in January 1803, when Corri was prevented by an accident from appearing, the seventeen-year-old Pinto 'presided at the pianoforte' ('New Grove'). 
In 1804 Pinto began to suffer serious ill health, but it seems he still carried on composing. Three duets for two violins were published as op. 5 in 1805, and another three appeared soon afterwards, probably in the same year. At about the same time he also published 'Cory Owen, a Favourite Irish Air, Arranged as a Rondo' for piano. The last works to be seen into print by Pinto himself were three sonatas for piano with violin accompaniment, which appeared in 1806; the title is somewhat misleading, for, in contrast with the majority of such sonatas in that period, the violin in all Pinto's sonatas was not subordinate to the piano, both instruments playing a full part in the presentation and elaboration of the musical material. Towards the end of his short life Pinto also published a number of songs, to which he or the publisher gave the fashionable title 'canzonets', and others were published soon after his death. These show his remarkable command of the expressive techniques of the day; Nicholas Temperley has remarked, 'Only Schubert himself wrote more striking songs before the age of 20' ('New Grove'). By November 1805, when he was engaged for a series of concerts in Oxford, Pinto's condition had deteriorated to such an extent that he was able to take part only in one of them. This was his last public performance. He died in Chelsea on 22 March 1806. The cause of death is not known, though his biographer in Grove's 'Dictionary of Music and Musicians' asserted that his health had been 'undermined by excesses'. He was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 22307


Pinto, Thomas (bap. 1728, d. 1783), violinist and composer, was baptized at St Giles Cripplegate, London, on 2 February 1728, the son of Guglielmo Pinto, an Italian gentleman of Portuguese ancestry, who for political reasons fled from his high-ranking position in Naples to England, where he married and had three sons. Only his mother's first name, Mary, is known, but the 'Memoir of George Frederick Pinto' (1828) indicates that there was friction in the marriage for religious reasons, and the couple eventually separated. Thomas Pinto showed musical ability from an early age, becoming adept enough as a violinist to lead the band at St Cecilia's Hall, Edinburgh, in his early years. In the 1750s he was performing in London as a leader and soloist. He succeeded the violinist Felice Giardini as leader at the King's Theatre in 1757, and in 1762 played concertos at oratorio performances organized by Thomas Arne at Drury Lane, becoming leader of the opera orchestra there in 1763. 
In 1769 Pinto undertook an unsuccessful speculation in Marylebone Gardens in partnership with a Mr Troughton (not Samuel Arnold, as mentioned in many sources, though Arnold's music was performed). A wet summer ruined the project and Pinto evidently lost $2000. He fled to Scotland, where he remained until 1773. He then led at the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin, for six years. He appears to have retired to Edinburgh, where he died in 1783. 
Burney described Pinto as an exceptionally gifted violinist whose superior sightreading abilities allowed him to get away without much practice, until the arrival of Giardini about 1750, whose professionalism forced him to take more care. In Dublin, John O'Keeffe found his manner 'perfectly respectable, proper and very grave' (O'Keeffe). Pinto published a set of six sonatas for violin about 1770. 
On 16 October 1766 Pinto married his second wife, the singer Charlotte Brent (1734-1802); they had seven children. His first wife, a German singer named Sybilla Gronemann, whom he had married in 1745, was mother to several children including a daughter, Julia, a singer who married Samuel Sanders (or Saunders) and was the mother of George Frederick Pinto (1785-1806). 


@@@@@


doc= 22308


Pinwell, George John (1842-1875), painter and illustrator, was born on 26 December 1842 at 12 Great Mays Buildings, London, the son of John Pinwell, a carpenter thought to have been involved in building the original station at Surbiton, and his wife, Mary Ann Baker. In 1854 Pinwell's father died and Pinwell, though only twelve years old, was forced to work as a butterman's boy, calling out prices in the street. In 1861 his mother remarried and Pinwell, no longer forced to contribute to the financial support of the family, left home that year to study art. Supporting himself through work as an apprentice draftsman for a company that manufactured embroidery designs, Pinwell attended evening art classes at St Martin's School of Art. In 1862 Pinwell left St Martin's to study at Heatherley's academy. While attending the academy he left the embroidery firm, where he had met his future wife, Isabella Mercy Stevens, whom he married on 25 April 1865 at St Marylebone parish church in London, to create designs for Elkington, the London electroplate manufacturer. 
It was in 1862 that Pinwell received his first commission for a wood-engraving illustration for the periodical 'Once a Week'; 'Saturnalia', the title of his first illustration, appeared in the 31 January 1863 edition of the magazine. From 1863 until his untimely death in 1875 Pinwell was employed by the leading engraving firms of the day including Joseph Swain, J. W. Whymper, and the Dalziel Brothers, and produced more than 500 illustrations for books and periodicals. The periodicals included: 'Good Words', 'Once a Week', 'The Graphic', 'London Society', the 'Churchman's Family Magazine', the 'Cornhill Magazine', 'Sunday at Home', and 'The Quiver'. Pinwell's book commissions included: 'Dalziel's Illustrated Goldsmith' (1865), 'Dalziel's Illustrated 'Arabian Nights' Entertainments' (1865), 'The Adventures of Gil Blas', 'Ballad Stories of the Affections', and 'A Round of Days' (all 1866), 'Poems' by Jean Ingelow, 'Golden Thoughts from Golden Foundations', 'Touches of Nature', and 'Wayside Posies' (all 1867), 'North Coast and other Poems' and 'The Uncommercial Traveller' (1868), and 'Picture Posies' (1874). Books published after Pinwell's death continued to reprint the illustrations he had designed for earlier publications. 
Pinwell exhibited his first watercolour painting, 'An Incident in the Life of Oliver Goldsmith' (priv. coll.), in 1865 at the Dudley Gallery, London. The painting was developed from the theme and imagery he used in his illustrations for 'Dalziel's Illustrated Goldsmith' of the same year; he often used his illustrations as the root subject matter for his watercolour paintings. In 1869 Pinwell was elected as an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours and in 1870 he became a full member. He contributed regularly to the society's exhibitions; his more important works included: two subjects from Browning's poem 'The Pied Piper of Hamelin' (priv. coll., study in Tate collection) and 'A Seat in St. James's Park' (priv. coll., studies in V&A) in 1869; 'The Elixir of Love' in 1871; 'Gilbert a Becket's Troth -- the Saracen Maiden Entering London at Sundown' (Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight) in 1872; and 'The Great Lady' (priv. coll.) in 1873. He was also elected an honorary member of the Belgian Society of Painters in Watercolours. Pinwell also painted in oils, again often returning to the subject initially captured in illustrations. At his death in 1875 Pinwell left unfinished a large-scale oil painting entitled 'Vanity Fair' (priv. coll.) that he had begun in 1873. It is believed that with this painting he was going to seek admission to the Royal Academy. 
Pinwell was one of the group of artists referred to as the Idyllists by the art historian Gleeson White in his 1897 treatise on English illustration of the 1860s. Others comprising this group, as further defined by the critic Forest Reid in 1928, were Pinwell's peers Frederick Walker and John William North. In their paintings of figures in domestic or landscape settings the Idyllists blended the Pre-Raphaelite theories of realism with the demands of narrative expression, interjecting sentiment as needed. But, as Christopher Newall observed, 'Walker and North favored the thematic treatment of scenes from contemporary life. Pinwell retained the practice of giving imaginative form to historical or literary texts' (Newall, 83). Pinwell's art is often compared to that of Walker's yet he was in fact a closer friend to North and the two often shared commissions for illustrations. 
Pinwell fell ill with a respiratory ailment and sought relief from his symptoms in the dry climate of Tangier. However, these attempts proved futile and on 8 September 1875 at his residence in Warwick House, 86 Adelaide Road, Haverstock Hill, London, Pinwell died. He was buried in Highgate cemetery. His wife survived him. A posthumous exhibition of his work was held in Deschamps's Gallery in New Bond Street in February 1876 and his remaining drawings, paintings, and sketches were sold by auction by Christie, Manson, and Woods on 16 March 1876. The Victoria and Albert Museum and British Museum, London, and the Boston Museum of Fine Arts hold collections of his works. 


@@@@@


doc= 22309


Piozzi, Hester Lynch (1741-1821), writer, was born on 16 January 1741 at Bodfel Hall, near Pwllheli, Caernarvonshire, the only child of Hester Maria, 'nee' Cotton (1707-1773), and John Salusbury (1707-1762) of Bachegraig, Flintshire. Her parents (who were cousins) were both descended from Catrin of Berain, 'Mam Cymru' ('Mother of Wales'), and were thus connected with many of the leading families of north Wales, an ancestry of which Hester was remarkably proud. Much of the Salusbury property was mortgaged and money was a constant problem, but Hester became the focus of her parents' love and intellectual aspiration: ''I' was their Joynt Play Thyng, & although Education was a Word then unknown, as applied to Females; They had taught me to read, & speak, & think, & translate from the French, till I was half a Prodigy' ('Autobiography', 2.10). 
Hester early learned the arts of pleasing and performing as her parents' genteel poverty encouraged them to use their daughter's precocious charms to gain an inheritance. They briefly lived with Hester's childless maternal uncle, Sir Robert Cotton, at Lleweni Hall, Denbighshire, and subsequently at his London house, but he died intestate in 1748. In the following year the restless John Salusbury set out to repair the family fortunes as part of Lord Halifax's expedition to Nova Scotia, while Hester's mother turned her attention to Sir Thomas Salusbury, Hester's childless paternal uncle. Eventually established at Offley Park, Hertfordshire, Hester, at seventeen, outgrew even the considerable educational resources of her mother and aunt (Lady Salusbury encouraged her to translate 'Spectator' articles into Italian), receiving tuition in philosophy, rhetoric, and Latin from Dr Arthur Collier, and in French literature from Dr William Parker. Collier's taste for the speculative and the combative exercised a formative influence upon the growth of his pupil's mind, and his circle of friends, including Sarah Fielding, to whom he had taught Greek, and James 'Hermes' Harris, encouraged her literary endeavours, which were frequently sent to the London newspapers. Her early poems, like her translations from the Romance languages, demonstrate an intriguing blend of imitation and individuality; her 'free Translation' of Racine's 'Epitres sur l'homme' (1747), which she entitled 'Essay on man', displays growing confidence as she combines the French poet's earlier criticism and the Twickenham poet's own words to critique her beloved Pope. She later recalled the impact of her reading of the first part of Joseph Warton's 'Essay on the Genius and Writings of Pope' (1756): 'this -- shall I call it unlucky Volume... made a Writer & Critic of H:L:P'. 
No early portraits exist, but Hester claimed to have been the teenage model for Hogarth's painting 'The Lady's Last Stake'. She was slight in stature, only 4 feet 11 inches, with chestnut brown hair, sensitive grey eyes, and rather angular features; a later portrait by Reynolds and a miniature by Cosway reveal, as she herself was aware, a rather deceptive serenity ('Thraliana', 1.471-2). Her attractive vivacity and intellectual accomplishments, added to the fact that she was regarded as the acknowledged heir of Sir Thomas, enticed local admirers such as the talented poet James Marriott, who was frightened off by the disapproval of her father, now returned unsuccessful from Nova Scotia, a virtual dependant on his brother. The death of Lady Salusbury and Sir Thomas's subsequent remarriage were to blight Hester's prospects of independence. A suitor, eulogized as 'a Model of Perfection', was introduced by her uncle and approved by her mother; her father's determination that his daughter should not be 'exchanged for a barrel of Porter' ('Autobiography', 2.20) counted for little, and his sudden death in December 1762 removed the impediment. The visions of romance were over, and her final poem as an unmarried woman, 'Imagination's Search after Happiness', published in the 'St James's Chronicle' of 10 September 1763, vainly recommended the consolation of piety. Details of dowry and jointure were settled, and a month later, on 11 October, in St Anne's Soho, at the age of twenty-two, she was 'bartered' to the handsome but bourgeois Henry Thrale (1728-1781), a wealthy London brewer. 
It was a loveless match which deeply embittered Hester. She also resented the endless pregnancies, thirteen between 1764 and 1778, producing twelve children, only four of whom survived to maturity. When not actively seeking a male heir, Thrale was distant, somewhat severe, and prone to womanizing if his wife was not available; a man about town, he valued his wife primarily as a woman who did not object to his town house in Deadman's Place, Southwark, and ultimately as a vivacious and ornamental hostess at his Streatham Park estate. Revealing a certain social insecurity, the sportsman Thrale forbade as too masculine her favourite outdoor activity of riding, restricted her participation in London social life, and even denied her management of household and culinary affairs. Shut away from the world, she lived, as Johnson later remarked, like Thrale's kept mistress. Her study was a solace and a retreat from the nursery, and her writing supplied both an intellectual and an emotional outlet. 
Thrale, though stolidly unmoved by his wife's poetic attempts to win his affection, numbered a popular dramatist among his friends, and Hester was delighted to make the acquaintance of Arthur Murphy. The playwright was also a friend of Samuel Johnson, and on 9 January 1765 the Great Cham himself came to enliven dinner at Deadman's Place. Mr and Mrs Thrale soon became intimate with Johnson, who became a regular dinner guest. Thrale was no great talker, finding, as Frances Burney later recalled, 'a singular amusement in hearing, instigating, and provoking a war of words, alternating triumph and overthrow, between clever and ambitious colloquial combatants' ('Memoirs of Dr. Burney', 2.104-5). Mrs Thrale revelled in such combative conversation, and her effervescent volubility encouraged, and provided a perfect foil for, Johnson's erudite pronouncements. Johnson more than filled the place of Hester's former mentor Collier; she was flattered by the attentions of this literary lion who took her sufficiently seriously as a poet not only to praise and criticize her efforts, but also to suggest collaboration. With Johnson she was soon translating Boethius's 'Consolations of Philosophy', and for another of Johnson's projects, the 'Miscellanies in Verse and Prose' of his lodger, the blind Welsh poet Anna Williams, Hester contributed a translation from Boileau, 'Epistle to his Gardener', and wrote her best-known poem, 'The Three Warnings' (1766). Subsequently she assisted him in the preparation of his 'Journey to the Western Islands', and Johnson acknowledged that several of the lives in his 'Lives of the Poets', completed at Southwark and at Streatham, owed as much to her conversation as to her skills as amanuensis. 
In the autumn of 1765 Thrale stood for parliament to represent Southwark, and his wife, though heavily pregnant, took part in canvassing the electors, and collaborated with Johnson in the writing and proof-correction of election addresses. Thrale gained the seat, but Hester lost the child, under two weeks old, to infantile diarrhoea. In the following year Johnson's emotional breakdown led the Thrales to make over to his use rooms at both Southwark and Streatham, and for the next sixteen years his life was transformed by the affection, care, stability, and comfort of a couple to whom he referred as his 'Master' and 'Mistress'. There was little danger of emotional or intellectual stagnation for Hester, because the magnet of Johnson attracted Turk's Head members and other distinguished figures to her dining-table and tea-urn. Johnson presided with Hester Thrale over this new Streatham salon, which she saw as 'a sort of Receptacle for Wits & Writers', and Thrale's library was subsequently adorned with portraits he commissioned Sir Joshua Reynolds to paint of their eminent guests: Oliver Goldsmith, Garrick, Burke, the philosopher and poet James Beattie, the Italian scholar Joseph Baretti, Sir Robert Chambers, Vinerian professor of law at Oxford, Reynolds himself. Membership of the Thrale coterie betokened social and cultural arrival; having made his reputation as a historian of music, Charles Burney was delighted at his invitation, and so was his daughter Frances when critical acclaim of her 'Evelina, or, A Young Lady's Entrance into the World' (1778) secured her entree into what had earlier been an almost exclusively male preserve. Hester became acquainted with the influential Elizabeth Montagu as her coterie rivalled that of the lively 'queen of the blues' in celebrity. 
Despite the glamour, the wit, and the repartee, however, Johnson was an exhausting house guest, demanding, beyond attention to his various physical ailments, a mother love to compensate for his own rather austere upbringing. Behind the public face of her performance as brilliant hostess, Hester's nurturing powers were drained not only by her own children, but by the overgrown child Johnson, who required psychological fostering of his creative powers. Her various journals record the many and various demands upon her: the 'Children's book' (1766-78) charts her children's growth and intellectual attainments, but also their ailments and deaths. Working with only French models, Hester's 'Thraliana' effectively constitutes the first English collection of anecdotes of friends, the famous, and the obscure, poems, treasures of wit culled from books or conversation, random thoughts on a multitude of topics, fragments of lived experience: in short, the juxtaposition of the ordinary and the extraordinary. The six leather-bound volumes, the gift of Thrale, represented more than a safe and secure repository; they became a confidante as she recorded the history and development of her family. 
Hester was drawn into taking an active managerial role in the family business by Thrale's increasingly reckless speculation. In 1772 his eagerness to vanquish rival London brewers such as Calvert and Whitbread involved him in the ruinous schemes of an incompetent chemist to brew beer without malt or hops, and to produce a wood preservative for ships' bottoms. Johnson rallied round in the counting-house, and Hester, again expecting another child, tirelessly set about averting the threatened bankruptcy by raising money from family friends and from her mother, placating regular customers, and regaining the loyalty of a demoralized workforce at the brewery who 'declared they would not live 'with' 'Mr Thrale', but they would do 'anything' for 'me'' ('Thraliana', 1.313). As she continues: 'Women have a manifest Advantage over Men in the doing Business; every thing smooths down before them'; her spirit and common sense had saved the brewery, but her eighth child lived only ten hours. 
Meanwhile Hester's mother was dying of cancer at Streatham and her husband's womanizing in the Borough was featuring in the 'Westminster Magazine'; it was beyond Hester's powers to 'smooth down' such scandal, which spread to indecent insinuation concerning her own relationship with Johnson. While Hester was tending Mrs Salusbury and consulting physicians, the appallingly self-centred Johnson reprimanded her for neglecting him; with characteristic patience and tact she recommended him to take his long-planned trip to the Hebrides: 'I believe Mr. Boswell will be at last your best Physician'. 
In the summer of 1774, her domestic tragedies temporarily put behind her, Hester set out on a tour of Wales in the company of her husband, her ten-year-old eldest daughter, and Johnson. Her ardent hopes of impressing the men in her life with the beauties of her homeland seemed doomed to failure; Wales, it would seem, could not measure up to the western islands. Memories of emotional security contrasted all too strongly with present feelings of being unloved. She attempts to reconcile these personal difficulties in her journal of the tour, in which conventional travel narrative is overshadowed by self-analysis. Her motherland focuses her sadness at the recent loss of her mother and the death of her favourite daughter, the four-year-old Lucy, her maternal concern for her eldest daughter's health, her lack of female companionship, and her isolation and vulnerability. Johnson and Thrale, she wrote, 'have too much philosophy for me. One cannot disburthen one's mind to people who are watchful to cavil, or acute to contradict before the sentence is finished' ('Journal of a tour to Wales', Broadley, 193-4). 
'Notwithstanding the Disgust my last Journey gave me', Hester soon had the preparations in hand for another; this time to the continent with the addition of Baretti as a knowledgeable guide, and a maidservant to help care for her daughter. The party set out in September 1775 and the 'French journal', in its increasingly confident balance of the subjective and the objective, the personal and the documentary, represents a further experiment in the genre of travel writing. Plans for a third tour -- to Italy -- where Hester might further indulge her passion for the Italian masters were abandoned on account of a further domestic emergency, the illness of the Thrales' only son and male heir. The sudden death, on 23 March 1776, of the nine-year-old Harry subjected the mother to a distracted grief which intensified her concerns for the health of her remaining children, subject, as she came to see it, to some inherited taint of the Thrale blood. Thrale was submerged in a black melancholy, recurrent bouts of which were exacerbated by venereal disease, and only alleviated by hunting parties, extravagance, a suicidal over-indulgence at the table, and flirtation with the beautiful scholar of Greek, Miss Sophia Streatfeild. The demise of the 'Southwark Macaroni', at the age of fifty-two and after a series of strokes, came as little surprise; the simple statement 'Mr Thrale died on the 4th April 1781' was written on an otherwise blank page of 'Thraliana'. 
Hester's grief was augmented by the revival of gossip concerning the wealthy widow's future plans; the day after the funeral was not too soon for Boswell to pen an 'Ode by Samuel Johnson to Mrs Thrale upon their supposed approaching nuptials'. Partnership with 'Dictionary Johnson' was, however, limited to the sharing of managerial duties at Southwark, and, anxious to remove all unfashionable traces of 'Borough Dirt', Hester completed her liberation by concluding the sale of the brewery to David Barclay for $135,000. A gentlewoman once more, established for the London season in Harley Street, Hester's pre-eminence as a lady of fashion seemed assured. Scandal replaced celebrity, however, when in 1784, three years after the death of Thrale, she made a love match of her own. Against the advice of her forceful eldest daughter, Hester Maria ['see 'Elphinstone, Hester Maria] -- aptly nicknamed Queeney -- and the violent opposition of Johnson, whose ill health increased his self-absorption, and to the dismay of almost all her fashionable and bluestocking friends, she married the Italian musician Gabriel Mario Piozzi (1740-1809). Having 'married the first Time to please my Mother', she came close to avoiding marriage to please her daughter, but ultimately she determined to brave society's prejudice against an Italian, Roman Catholic singer husband. They were married in London by a Catholic priest on 23 July, and two days later in an Anglican service at St James's, Bath. Hester Lynch Piozzi not only secured her own happiness but also, free from the inhibiting presence of Johnson ('in Johnson's intellect mine was swallowed up and lost'), found her own feet as a writer. 
With Piozzi she travelled for three years through France, Italy, and Germany, her creativity nurtured not so much by contentment as by determination to answer the malicious reports circulating at home, and to establish 'that I was not 'lost' to the world'. She contributed some poems and the preface to the influential 'Florence Miscellany' (1785) in collaboration with the 'Della Cruscan' poets, Robert Merry, William Parsons, and Bertie Greatheed. Her preface celebrated the self-conscious sensibility of these literati in exile, placing less emphasis upon the liberal politics which united the group with Italian patriots. In many ways, however, the continent proved a personal and cultural liberation, suggesting answers to the question of how femininity is constructed when divorced from domesticity. Learning in Milan of Johnson's death, Hester was removed from the accusations of Mrs Montagu and others that she had shortened his life (she was blamed for deserting her maternal duties to her daughters and to Johnson), and provided with the necessary distance to produce a critical perspective on the great man. She completed her first book, 'Anecdotes of the Late Samuel Johnson' (1786), a candid and generically ground-breaking biography, which sold out on the first day of publication. The 'English Review' judged Mrs Piozzi's the best 'of the 'nine lives' of this giant in learning' (6, 1786, 255), and Peter Pindar (Dr Walcot) capitalized upon public fascination with the feuding biographers in his popular and pointed lampoon 'Bozzy and Piozzi, a town eclogue' (1786). Although some contemporary critics accused her of a self-justifying stress upon Johnson's foibles and failings, Hannah More's recognition that this was 'new-fashioned biography' has been endorsed by modern criticism, which sees her as anticipating Boswellian biographical innovation (his 'Life of Johnson' was published in 1791) while supplying an irreverent corrective. 
For a decade Hester had been Johnson's principal correspondent, and it was natural that she should wish to produce an edition of his letters. This project necessitated her return to England in March 1787 to retrieve those she had deposited in a bank vault and to collect others from mutual friends. 'Letters to and from the Late Samuel Johnson' (1788), representing the first publication and canonization of a large body of his correspondence (some 338 letters), also sold well, attracting some justified abuse from Boswell, who detected some manipulative editing, and less deserved rancour from the disgruntled Baretti. Arthur Murphy declared that the edition revealed the great man 'in the undress of his mind' ('Monthly Review', 78, 1778, 326), and her editorial practice has largely been vindicated by modern editors who reserve their disapproval for the self-conscious over-dressing of her own revised letters to Johnson. 
Having been satirized as a diminutive creature riding to literary acclaim on the gigantic shoulders of Johnsonian erudition, Hester herself was only too aware of the anxiety of influence. In the entertaining and important travel journal 'Observations and Reflections made in the Course of a Journey through France, Italy, and Germany' (1789), her first work not to fall under the long shadow of Johnson, she built upon previous experimentation by using an authoritative but conversational discourse, alive with present-tense immediacy, to erode the barriers between diary and travel narrative. Her delight in Piozzi and in Italy was everywhere apparent in the materials she included in this development of the genre, which subverted masculine tropes of the grand tourist as disillusioned and hard to please. Sympathetically depicting Italian life as a 'demi-naturalized' wife, she substituted involvement for prejudice, and satirized (as a Welshwoman) the English habit of ridiculing that which it finds disconcertingly unfamiliar. By the middle of July the queen was reading 'Observations and Reflections' to Frances Burney to their mutual delight. 
Hester had her Streatham house redecorated in Italianate splendour in 1790 to house a renovated coterie including continental guests such as Ippolito Pindemonte, loyal friends of former days, and newer acquaintances such as Samuel Rogers the poet, the novelist sisters Harriet and Sophia Lee, Hannah More, Mrs Garrick, and the celebrated Mrs Siddons. Despite her radical politics, Helen Maria Williams was a frequent visitor. Hester's friendship with Sarah Siddons and John Kemble, and her experience of composing dramatical prologues and epilogues, encouraged her desire to write a play. These efforts turned out to be something of a blind theatrical alley. She produced two unpublished plays: 'The Adventurer: a Comedy in Two Acts' ('c'.1790), which contained some brilliant dialogue but was burdened with a clumsy and vapid plot; and 'The Two Fountains, in the Manner of Milton's 'Comus'' (1789), an untheatrical dramatic poem, a revision of Johnson's fairy tale 'The Fountains'. Having always shunned the novel as a genre which submerged women, as authors, readers, or characters, in a sentimental dream, she came to realize that her real strength lay in non-fictional prose; her aspirations were towards history and philology. Her sustained interest in languages, etymology, word play, and punning eventually bore fruit in 'British Synonymy, or, An Attempt at Regulating the Choice of Words in Familiar Conversation' (1794). An ambitious work, recalling in its preface her own Welsh origins, it specifically addressed itself to those who, like her husband, found English taxing: 'if I can in the course of this little work dispel a doubt, or clear up a difficulty to foreigners, who can alone be supposed to know less of the matter than myself, -- I shall have an honour to boast, and like my countryman Glendower in Shakespeare's Henry the Fourth, 'have given our tongue an helpful ornament'.' Her modest disclaimers and the protestations of ignorance remind us that she was acutely aware of encroaching into a male-dominated genre. Her deprecations seem to have done the trick with the 'British Critic', whose reviewer adjudged it 'the best, if not the first, imitation of Abbe Girard's celebrated work on Synonymous Words'. Its discriminating definitions and characteristic excursions offer real insights into an eighteenth-century mind, and the kind of entertainment wholly absent from a dictionary of synonyms. Mrs Piozzi is ever anxious to vilify the French revolutionaries, and those elements such as dissenters, Paine-ites, or freethinkers whom she sees as attempting to further republicanism and foment revolution. 
London society was beginning to pall, and having been delighted to discover, on various business trips to north Wales, that her husband loved the country of her birth as much as she had his, Hester decided to return home in 1795. At Brynbella, a villa they built near her ancestral home of Bachegraig, she lived contentedly with her 'caro sposo', a would-be gentleman farmer. Nursing Piozzi through increasingly severe attacks of gout, and feuds with her rather mercenary daughters, failed to diminish a zest for life apparent in her entertaining and visiting (the scholarly Thomas Pennant and the Ladies of Llangollen, Eleanor Butler and Sarah Ponsonby, were firm friends); her poetry (some of her best verses were inspired by the grandeur of the north Welsh sublime, and the coast near Pwllheli); her political pamphleteering (her 'Address to the females of Great Britain' and 'Three Warnings to John Bull', 1798, focus upon the need for the rational and moral woman to aid national defence of mixed government); her good works with the poor (offering soup, or charity, or Hannah More's 'Village Politics' which she had translated into Welsh); and, by no means least, her journal writing, which she continued to the very last. 
Hester Piozzi's last major published work, 'Retrospection' (1801), was based upon a novel and timely conception: to publish at the opening of the nineteenth century an anecdotal abridgement of the last eighteen hundred years. Although this was a work aimed at the general reader, she was conscious that in some ways she had overreached herself 'in undertaking a Work wch. should be written in All Souls College Oxford'. Some of the reviews panned the book as 'a series of dreams by an old lady', or 'history in dimity'; obviously she had once more intruded into what was perceived as a masculine genre. Her single female predecessor as historian was Catharine Macaulay, but Piozzi's principles were diametrically opposed to the republican line of Macaulay. Denying the optimism of whig progressivism, she provides an original and revisionary response to Gibbon's 'infidel' 'History'. 'Retrospection' proved a critical and commercial failure, but it has since been seen as a feminist history, concerned to show changes in manners and mores in so far as they affected women; it has also been judged to anticipate Marxian history in its keen apprehension of reification: 'machines imitated mortals to unhoped perfection, and men found out they were themselves machines'. 
Piozzi's death, of 'slow-spreading Gangrene' on 26 March 1809, occasioned the final entry in 'Thraliana': 'my second Husbands Death is the last Thing recorded in my first husband's present! Cruel Death!' The devastated Hester channelled her energies into arrangements for the naturalization and education of John Salusbury Piozzi, her husband's nephew whom they had adopted in 1798. Determined to make him her heir and continue the Salusbury line, in 1814 she generously made over Brynbella and all her Welsh property to her nephew as a wedding gift, establishing herself at Bath in somewhat reduced circumstances. The glamour of her connections and anecdotes continued to make her the centre of a circle of admirers including the writer Edward Mangin, and Sir James Fellowes, a retired naval doctor, both thirty years her junior, who became deeply attached to her. Perhaps unwisely, they encouraged her unsuccessful attempts to find a publisher for 'Lyford Redivivus, or, A grandame's garrulity', an abstruse collection of proper names with conjectural etymologies; as in 'British Synonymy' her philological scholarship was seriously flawed. The devoted attentions of a young, unsuccessful actor, William Augustus Conway, compensated her for the coolness of her alienated daughters and the jealousy of her mercenary heir. Once more an impulsive search for affection was to create scandal; her effusive letters to her 'Chevalier' Conway were the subject of deliberate and salacious misinterpretation after her death. Hester's seventy-ninth birthday (she counted it her eightieth) was lavishly celebrated in January 1820 at the assembly rooms where over 600 guests admired the undiminished vigour of her intellect and the 'astonishing elasticity' of her dancing. Such expense dictated a year's retirement in economical Penzance, and it was on her return from this self-imposed exile that she suffered a serious fall. '[A]lways a blue', she quipped, 'now a black and blue' ('Autobiography', 2.462), but complications set in, and she died at 10 Sion Row, Clifton, on 2 May 1821. Two weeks later, on 16 May, she was laid to rest, according to her expressed desire, beside her dear Piozzi in the vault of Tremeirchion church in the Vale of Clwyd. 
Modern criticism might be reluctant to underwrite Frances Burney's eulogistic comparison of Hester Piozzi with her other celebrated friend and salonniere Germaine de Stael, in terms of intellectual superiority, conversational brilliance, impulsive daring, 'sportive gaiety', and faulty morality ('Journals and Letters', 9.208-9). Nevertheless her innovative writings and genre experimentation betray a refusal to accept the restrictions on female authors in her time, and her published works, traditionally of more specialized interest to Johnsonists and cultural historians, have a new and sympathetic audience as she is reassessed by contemporary feminism. 


@@@@@


doc= 22310


Piran (supp. fl. 6th cent.), holy man, had a strong cult in medieval Cornwall and Brittany; unfortunately nothing is known about his life with any certitude. The surviving Latin life of St Piran was probably produced at Exeter in the thirteenth century and is preserved in the fourteenth-century Gotha manuscript compilation of British saints' lives and, in abbreviated form, in John Tynemouth's similar collection of the same date (rearranged in 'Nova legenda Anglie'). It is a lightly rewritten version of the life of the Irish saint Ciaran of Saigir, with whom Piran was mistakenly identified. Joseph Loth judged that the names Ciaran and Piran could not be identical, although an Irish 'c' can be equivalent to a British 'p'. Suggested identifications of Piran with the Cornish saints Kerrian (venerated at Exeter) and Keverne (patron of St Keverne, Cornwall) are equally improbable philologically. 
There is comparatively abundant evidence for Piran's cult, which reveals his long-lasting reputation as a local founder of Christianity. It was centred at Perranzabuloe (Perran in the Sands). The earliest historical reference to it is in a charter of 960 ('AS chart.', S 684) which mentions 'Carnperan' as a boundary mark. 'Domesday Book' reveals that there was a minster church dedicated to him serving a large parish and staffed by a group of canons; after the Norman conquest it was given to Exeter Cathedral and declined to the status of an ordinary parish church. However, the relics of Piran which it possessed were the object of pilgrimages, bequests, and local veneration until as late as 1558. At the end of the eighteenth century St Piran's Oratory, a small stone chapel, was discovered in the sand dunes of the nearby coast. It is unlikely to date back to the time of the saint himself but certainly predates the medieval church building which was begun about 1100. The oratory remained uncovered until the 1970s, after which it was again engulfed in sand. A Celtic stone cross, possibly still older, stands near the church. 
Two other Cornish parishes, Perranarworthal and Perranuthnoe, were dedicated to Piran; there was an altar to him in Exeter Cathedral; and Waltham Abbey claimed to possess one of his bones. According to Gerald of Wales, there was a chapel named after him in Cardiff 'c'.1172. In Brittany he was venerated about six parishes. His feast day, 5 March (borrowed, like the other details of his life, from St Ciaran), appeared in the calendars of Hereford and of Leon and Treguier in Brittany. Historians of Cornwall from the sixteenth to the eighteenth century stated that tinners still kept his feast day and told stories of him. St Piran's cross, a white cross on a black ground, was allegedly the standard of Cornwall and has been adopted by modern Cornish nationalists. 


@@@@@


doc= 22311


Pirie, Alexander (1736/7-1804), Secession church and Independent minister, had a controversial career in which he proved divisive in three ecclesiastical bodies. Of his origins, early education, and family nothing is known, but from 1756 he was schooled in philosophy and theology under Alexander Moncrieff in the Anti-Burgher branch of the Secession church in Abernethy, Perthshire. In 1760 he was appointed Moncrieff's assistant to teach philosophy, and was licensed as a probationer in September 1762 with a view to missionary service in America. In April 1763 he pleaded illness to excuse himself for not fulfilling this commission, but by then his teaching was under suspicion. On 1 and 2 September 1763 he answered charges before the Anti-Burgher synod of recommending 'several erroneous books' (the only one named was 'Essays on the Principles of Morality and Natural Religion', by Henry Home, Lord Kames), espousing a theory of necessity inconsistent with human responsibility and divine sovereignty (allegedly drawn from Kames), and subverting students. His irreverence contributed to the synod's sentence of deprivation of licence and 'lesser excommunication'. 
Supporters in the Abernethy congregation adhered to Pirie's unauthorized preaching and sought his ordination. This he obtained from the Burgher Presbytery of Perth on 17 July 1765, to serve the newly constituted Burgher congregation in Abernethy. But his 'Essay on National Covenanting' (1766) and careless expressions about the humanity of Christ resulted in his suspension by the presbytery on 27 June 1767. Although in May 1768 the synod on appeal referred the case back on procedural grounds, Pirie published his abandonment of secession principles in 'A Review of the Principles and Conduct of the Seceders' (1769) and took his leave, with his followers' continuing adherence. 
Pirie was next courted by the Relief church congregation of Blairlogie, near Stirling, but he was a marked man. The Relief Presbytery disapproved of the invitation and soon divided on congregational freedom of ministerial choice. Pirie became Blairlogie's unapproved minister on 19 August 1770. His repeated rejection by the presbytery was followed by another parting, on 14 June 1778, and Blairlogie's allegiance to the Relief was regularized. 
Pirie moved finally to Newburgh, Fife, near Abernethy, home to sundry dissenting groups. He sold medicine and ministered to a small Independent church (the Congregational Society), perhaps with Glasite connections. He died there suddenly on 23 November 1804, aged sixty-seven. 
Six volumes of his 'Miscellaneous and Posthumous Works' (1805-6) display his range and vigour. Things first ('Genesis') and last ('Revelation') were a special interest. Separately published were most of his pamphlet contributions to his own ecclesiastical trials; his 'Psalms or Hymns' (1777), of which some fourteen found wider use in the Relief's 'Sacred Songs and Hymns' (1794); and 'Dissertation on the Hebrew Roots' (1807). 


@@@@@


doc= 22312


Pirie, William Robinson (1804-1885), Church of Scotland minister and university principal, was born at the manse of Slains, Aberdeenshire, on 26 July 1804, the second son of George Pirie DD (1761-1826) and his wife, Mary Forbes (died 1835). He studied at King's College, Aberdeen, from 1817 to 1821 without graduating and, after briefly entertaining a career in law, proceeded to the study of divinity. Licensed by the presbytery of Ellon in November 1825, he was ordained to the parish of Dyce, Aberdeenshire, in April 1830. On 24 March 1842 Pirie married Margaret Chalmers (1821-1900), daughter of Dr Lewis William Forbes, minister of Boharm, Banffshire. The couple had five daughters and five sons the eldest of whom, George William, later became professor of mathematics at Aberdeen University. 
Pirie espoused the views of the moderate faction in church politics; the Disruption of 1843 opened the way for him to become professor of divinity at Marischal College, Aberdeen. He received the degree of DD from both Marischal and King's College in 1844. In September 1846 he was briefly minister of Greyfriars parish in Aberdeen, but he demitted the charge a year later due to opposition to pluralities. On the fusion of the colleges in 1860, Pirie became the professor of church history in Aberdeen University, though he was considered to teach 'with a maximum of philosophical theory and a minimum of historical fact' (Anderson, 172). In 1877 he became principal of the university, a post he retained until his death. 
Pirie achieved prominence in the Church of Scotland, as convener of the business committee of the general assembly and as moderator in 1864. He managed to keep the church from the threat of further disruption over the issue of innovations in worship and finally achieved the abolition of lay patronage in 1874, although in the short run this did nothing to improve relations with the Free Church of Scotland. He remained a dominant figure in the assembly until shortly before his death. 
In his speech Pirie exhibited his Aberdeenshire origins, and his debating skills were enhanced by a sharp sense of humour. One commentator recalled 'his short but compact figure, his erect and vigorous gait, his bold strong features surmounted by a heavy crown of tangled hair, his easy, confident manner, and his almost ostentatious carelessness of dress' (Anderson, 170). Pirie was the author of several substantial works, but it was his moderatorial address that proved to be his most influential publication. He died at Old Aberdeen on 3 November 1885 and was buried there in Nellfield cemetery on 7 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 22313


Pirrie, William (bap. 1807, d. 1882), surgeon, the son of George Pirrie, a farmer, and Jean Bruce, was born in the parish of Gartly, near Huntly, Aberdeenshire, and was baptized there on 15 July 1807. He was educated at Gartly parish school; at Marischal College, Aberdeen, where he graduated MA in 1825; at the University of Edinburgh, where in 1829 he graduated MD with a thesis entitled 'De vitiis tali', and also became a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons; and in Paris, where he studied surgery under Baron Dupuytren. 
After returning to Aberdeen in 1830 Pirrie was appointed lecturer on anatomy and physiology in the joint Aberdeen medical schools of Marischal and of King's College. On the separation of the schools in 1839 he became the first regius professor of surgery at Marischal; and when they were again united by parliamentary act in 1859 he continued to teach as professor of surgery in the University of Aberdeen. He was also for a great many years, until his retirement in 1880, surgeon to the Aberdeen Royal Infirmary. In 1875 the University of Edinburgh conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD, and in 1877 he was made surgeon in Scotland to the prince of Wales. Pirrie was married to Mary Rose Matthews, who survived him. They had four daughters and four sons. 
Holding office for fifty-two years, Pirrie was well known to three generations of Aberdeen medical students, his portly figure and somewhat assertive manner, together with his fondness for recalling his Parisian experiences under Dupuytren, winning him the sobriquet of 'the baron'. His lectures were essentially demonstrative, and he possessed a great ability to inspire enthusiasm in his audience. To him and to his colleague in the chair of anatomy, John Struthers, is due the credit of establishing the high reputation of the Aberdeen medical school, which had never been so well attended as at his death. Pirrie was also instrumental in encouraging his old schoolfellow and friend Sir Erasmus Wilson to found the chair of pathology in the university in 1882. 
An intrepid and successful surgeon, Pirrie, during the latter half of his career, was widely known as the foremost surgeon in the north of Scotland, with a practice that was so successful that he became a household name in the region. In order to do all his work he would often be in his study by four in the morning, and might begin his visits by seven. He published, in addition to numerous contributions to the medical journals, a treatise entitled 'The Principles and Practice of Surgery' (1852) which passed through several editions and which remained for many years a standard textbook; and, with William Keith, 'Acupressure, an excellent method of arresting surgical haemorrhage and of accelerating the healing of wounds' (1867). 
Pirrie resigned his chair in the summer of 1882, and died at 253 Union Street, Aberdeen, on 21 November in the same year, having worked until the preceding month. At his funeral a crowd of some 30,000 were said to have been in attendance. 


@@@@@


doc= 22314


Pistrucci, Benedetto (1783-1855), cameo cutter and medallist, was born on 24 May 1783 in Rome, the second son of the three children of Federico Pistrucci and his wife, Antonia Greco. Both parents were Roman, Antonia the daughter of a wealthy merchant and Federico a judge of the criminal court and briefly a papal administrator in Bologna. Benedetto and his elder brother, Filippo, showed precocious talents, respectively for modelling in wax and for drawing, and after false starts Benedetto was placed with the cameo cutter Nicola Morelli. At the Scuola del Nudo (school of figure drawing) at the Campidoglio in Rome, where both drawing and modelling were taught, he took the first prize for sculpture in 1800. When he realized that his work was being sold by both his masters and the dealers as antique work with his signature removed, he began to place a privy mark of the Greek letter lambda in an obscure position on his cameos. 
Declaring himself to be an independent master at the age of almost sixteen, from 1799 Pistrucci was receiving substantial commissions on his own account. His patrons included the dishonest dealer Ignazio Vescovali, and Napoleon's three sisters, Elisa Baciocchi, grand duchess of Lucca, Carolina Murat, queen of Naples, and Paolina Borghese. Pistrucci was so confident of making a career that he married Barbara Folchi, the daughter of a wealthy merchant, in 1802, when she was sixteen. They had nine children, born between 1803 and 1824. Two of them, Elena Pistrucci (1822-1886) and Maria Elisa Pistrucci (1824-1881), followed their father's profession as cameo cutters; the middle of three sons, Camillo Pistrucci (1811-1854), was sent to Rome to be a pupil of the Danish neo-classical sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen. 
The Roman dealer Bonelli persuaded Pistrucci in 1814 that his fortune lay in England, and during the journey there he found himself trapped in Paris owing to the brief return of Napoleon. Having worked for the Napoleonic courts in Italy, he was able to model Napoleon from life and to work for French patrons. Pistrucci arrived in England on 31 December 1815 armed with an introduction to Charles Dietrich Konig, from 1813 keeper of natural history at the British Museum, who became a staunch friend, resolved problems of immigration, and arranged an introduction to Sir Joseph Banks, president of the Royal Society. During a session in which Pistrucci was modelling Banks, the writer and connoisseur Richard Payne Knight called to show a new treasure in his collection, a fragmentary cameo head of Flora. Pistrucci identified the stone cut for Bonelli in 1809 for less than $5. Knight had bought the stone from Bonelli for $100 and declared it 'the finest Greek cameo in existence' (Pistrucci, 182). Fortunately it bore Pistrucci's privy mark and the controversy quickly established his reputation in London. Banks commissioned three cameo heads of George III to be shown to Wellesley Pole, newly appointed as master of the Royal Mint. A request from Countess Spencer, for a cameo of St George and the dragon, was followed in June 1816 by Pole's commission for models for coinage, and Pistrucci proposed the St George and dragon design for some of the coin reverses. 
On the death of Thomas Wyon on 22 September 1817, Pistrucci was offered the post of chief engraver at the mint at a salary of $500 p.a., and a residence. Although the offer was not confirmed because of Pistrucci's status as an alien, he performed the duties of an engraver and took up residence. He was responsible for some of the models and dies for the gold and silver recoinage of George III and the new coinage of George IV, but after 1821 he cut no further coinage dies. The first and most important medal commission of his career was made in 1816 when the prince regent proposed a medal to commemorate the final defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo. The Royal Academy chose John Flaxman to submit designs, but the prince regent preferred the wax models by Pistrucci and he was thus formally commissioned to produce the work for an eventual fee of $3500, payable as the work progressed. He had argued that the medal represented the labour of thirty normal medals and in 1843 he was still charging $105 for a portrait medal die or marble bust. The Waterloo medal was to be 5.3 inches in diameter and was to be distributed in gold. Only completed in 1844 when a final payment was made to him, the dies were never hardened and the medal was only reproduced in electrotype. (The wax models remain in the Museo Numismatico della Zecca in Rome.) Pistrucci's friend W. P. Hamilton, then a government minister, suggested a medal for the acquisition of the Elgin marbles in 1817 by the government, though the project is recorded only in the wax models in Rome and in the cameo portrait head of the prince regent in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. 
A compromise over Pistrucci's status was reached in 1828 by which William Wyon was appointed chief engraver, as he deserved to be, and Pistrucci became chief medallist. The salaries were reduced to $300 p.a. with a $50 allowance to Pistrucci for a pupil, an arrangement offensive to both artists. Pistrucci was refused permission to appoint his son Raffaele as his assistant in 1829. Until the compromise, Pistrucci had enjoyed $500 p.a. and piece-rate payment for his models and dies for coinage. For example, he had earned $1322 additionally in 1817, which included $525 for the obverse and reverse of the new crown piece and $315 for the reverse of the new gold sovereign (TNA: PRO, Royal Mint 3/20; 3/23). Such a salary enabled him to have his family with him in London; known to have been with him in 1824 and 1842, the family's movements are not properly documented. Pistrucci's temperament did not foster good relations with his colleagues at the mint; the insecurity of his position there was deepened by a spasmodic but bitter campaign conducted through the newspapers by his partisans and those of William Wyon. He returned to Rome in 1839, probably to seek an appointment at the papal mint. 
Pistrucci made fourteen medals altogether, of which five were official, including the coronation medals for George IV and Queen Victoria. His medals incorporate assured, individual effigies, among which are those of Lord Maryborough (1823) and the physician Sir Gilbert Blane (1830). His masterpiece, the Waterloo medal, shows Pistrucci's command of the types (or figures) of cameos, an understanding of the figurative language of the Roman Renaissance, and an appreciation of the antique sculptured relief -- his types, none the less, were always original. Regarding himself as principally a cameo maker, his integrity and invention enabled him to charge $950 for a work and gave him a steady patronage in Britain until his death. Eighty-one cameos are documented, of which only forty-eight have been found. The original models for his coins, medals, and cameos are preserved in Rome in a collection of 396 waxes in the Museo Numismatico della Zecca. 
Pistrucci was also a monumental sculptor and eleven signed portrait busts by him are recorded, including one of the duke of Wellington (1832), and five subject sculptures; a lost bust is documented of the greatest soprano in Europe at the time, Giuditta Pasta. In style the busts may be placed between the work of Lorenzo Bartolini in Italy and Sir Francis Chantrey in England. Benedetto Pistrucci died at his home, Flora Lodge, Englefield Green, Surrey, on 16 September 1855 and was buried on the 20th in the cemetery of Christ Church, Virginia Water, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 22315


Pitcairn, David (1749-1809), physician, born on 1 May 1749 in Fife, was the eldest son of Elizabeth Dalrymple and her husband, Major John Pitcairn (bap. 1722, d. 1775), who was killed at the battle of Bunker Hill. Robert Pitcairn (1752-1770?) ['see under 'Pitcairn, John (bap. 1722, d. 1775)], whose name was given to the island he sighted, was his brother. David attended Edinburgh high school, the University of Glasgow, and, some years later, the University of Edinburgh. In 1773 he went to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he graduated MA in 1779 and MD in 1784. In 1779 he began to practise in London, and was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 15 August 1785. He was censor five times, and in 1786 was also Goulstonian lecturer and Harveian orator. His uncle, William Pitcairn, resigned the post of physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital, and David was elected in his place on 10 February 1780. He remained in the post until 1793, when he also resigned. 
David Pitcairn rapidly built up a large private practice. John Latham mentions him in his treatise on gout and rheumatism, stating that Pitcairn was the first to discover that rheumatic fever frequently caused valvular disease of the heart; and that he announced this discovery while teaching at St Bartholomew's Hospital. On 11 April 1782 Pitcairn was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He was married to Elizabeth, daughter of William Almack, founder of the assembly rooms which bore his name, and his wife, Elizabeth, who was sister of William Cullen. 
Pitcairn had frequent attacks of quinsy, and in 1798 his failing health, accompanied by haemoptysis, forced him to give up work and spend eighteen months in Portugal. He returned to England and continued to practise, but on 13 April 1809 he had a severe sore throat, followed by acute inflammation of the larynx, causing oedema of the glottis. He died of this on 17 April 1809, at Craig's Court, Charing Cross, London. Matthew Baillie, who had been a close friend of Pitcairn's for thirty years, attended him, and described his case, along with that of Sir John Macnamara Hayes, who died of the same disease three months later. Pitcairn's body was examined by Sir Benjamin Collins Brodie the elder, in the presence of Matthew Baillie, Everard Home, and W. C. Wells. Pitcairn was buried in the family vault at the church of St Bartholomew-the-Less, outside the walls of St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. A tablet to his memory was erected in the church of Hadham Magna, Hertfordshire. Pitcairn was known as the fifth possessor of a gold-headed cane which passed from his uncle, William Pitcairn, to him, and then to Matthew Baillie. Baillie's widow gave the cane to the Royal College of Physicians. 


@@@@@


doc= 22316


Pitcairn, Robert (c.1520-1584), administrator, was the son of David Pitcairn of Airdrie, a barony belonging to the Lumsden family in Fife, and his wife, Elizabeth Durie. He married Euphemia Murray (died 1596), daughter of Sir William Murray of Tullibardine. On his mother's side Robert Pitcairn had very influential church connections, and when in 1561 he became commendator of Dunfermline it was in succession to George Durie, the last pre-Reformation abbot, who was also archdeacon of St Andrews, keeper of the privy seal, and brother to Andrew Durie, bishop of Galloway. Pitcairn himself had been educated for a career in the church, and he now found himself in the enviable position of possessing a quasi-hereditary sinecure which gave him access to the substantial resources of one of Scotland's major abbeys. All this, moreover, without having to perform any religious duties. He was obviously ambitious, however, and the commendatorship was to be the stepping stone to greater things. By 1568 he had become a privy councillor and extraordinary lord of session, and in that year he was also a member of the commission which accompanied the earl of Moray to York, and subsequently London, to attend Queen Elizabeth's enquiry into Queen Mary's conduct. This was to be the first of a number of visits which Pitcairn made to England in the following years. In September 1569, for instance, he was in London reassuring Elizabeth of Moray's opposition to schemes for the marriage of Mary and the duke of Norfolk, and in the following May he formed part of a mission seeking both English assistance against Mary's supporters and advice concerning a replacement as regent for the earl of Moray, assassinated on 23 January 1570. Elizabeth recommended the earl of Lennox, father of Darnley, and a choice totally unacceptable to the current secretary, the powerful and influential William Maitland of Lethington. It was the latter's resignation in July 1570 which enabled Pitcairn to succeed him as secretary. 
In his new office Pitcairn inevitably participated in the principal events of the 1570s and early 1580s. Thus during the year which followed November 1571 he was called upon to undertake three further diplomatic missions to England, in all of which he and his colleagues sought to justify the actions of the king's party in their struggle against the followers of Queen Mary, while also hoping to obtain English military assistance. In October 1572, shortly before the earl of Morton became regent, Pitcairn was involved in negotiations with Sir Henry Killigrew, the English ambassador, over the possibility of Mary being returned and her fate decided by the Scottish government, but the stability of Morton's regency largely meant a return to more mundane matters. Consequently the secretary's time (as his regular attendance at the privy council confirms) was largely taken up with the daily routine of administration. None the less, in February 1573 he took part in the discussions which resulted in the pacification of Perth, whereby the Hamilton and Gordon families gave their recognition to James VI's government. In August 1574 he accompanied the regent on his judicial expedition to Aberdeen, while in September 1575, acting as a border commissioner, Pitcairn was a signatory to the agreement which ended the frontier dispute with England resulting from the so-called Redeswyre incident. 
Pitcairn's last embassy to the queen of England occurred in June 1578, when Morton, who had recovered his position within Scotland, sent his secretary on a mission whose agenda, although it also included such issues as piracy, the condition of the borders, and James VI's claims to the estate of the countess of Lennox, had as its principal objective 'the ratification and confirmation of the peace and amity contracted in the first year of her reign' ('CSP Scot.', '1574-81', 300). He was given a cordial reception by Elizabeth and was later described as having 'truly, honestly and diligently performed and discharged this charge' ('Reg. PCS', 1578-85, 23), but Pitcairn was unable to persuade the English queen to consider an alliance and he returned empty-handed. 
Pitcairn's final years in office were principally concerned with domestic matters, for instance, with the negotiations with the Argyll-Atholl faction in October 1578 which finally resolved their dispute with Morton; with the vexed question of the earldom of Lennox which the king, as the thirteenth earl's paternal grandson, sought to possess and which he ultimately bestowed on his kinsman Esme Stewart; with the problem of finding a solution to the long-standing feud in north-east Scotland between the Forbeses and the Gordons. 
In his political alignments Pitcairn acted astutely for much of his career. Originally an adherent of the earl of Moray, on the latter's death in 1570 he transferred his support to the earl of Morton, Moray's obvious successor as leader of the king's party. By 1578 his allegiance to the regent was reputedly wavering, and by 1580 observers like Sir Robert Bowes, the English ambassador, were noting the secretary's backing for Morton's great rival, the earl of Lennox. But when he changed sides again in 1582 and aligned himself against Lennox with the faction known as the Ruthven raiders Pitcairn made a disastrous miscalculation which eventually cost him his job. He benefited in the short term, receiving a treasury appointment from the first earl of Gowrie in April 1583, but the latter was unable to prevent a counter-revolution in the following year which not only brought about his own downfall but also ended Pitcairn's secretaryship. Rather pathetic attempts at bribery in an effort to retain his position only resulted in temporary imprisonment in Lochleven Castle, and in May 1584 John Maitland of Thirlestane replaced him as secretary. As Pitcairn and his wife had no children, shortly before his death he transferred the abbacy of Dunfermline to his nephew, Henry Pitcairn, who ultimately inherited it. Pitcairn died on 18 October 1584 at his home, Limekilns, near Dunfermline, and was buried in the north aisle of Dunfermline church, in close proximity to his predecessor George Durie, the last abbot of Dunfermline. 
Pitcairn's epitaph commemorates him as 'the hope and pillar of his country', but this would seem to be an overestimate of his achievements. Actively involved in the nation's affairs both before and during his secretaryship, he differed from the two Maitlands who preceded and succeeded him in that office in that he contributed little to the formation of policy and the taking of important decisions. A competent and conscientious civil servant, highly regarded as such, Pitcairn was essentially a figure of secondary importance during James VI's minority. 


@@@@@


doc= 22317


Robert Pitcairn (1752-1770?), John's son, was born on 6 May 1752 in the parish of Burntisland, Fife, and baptized there on 12 May that year. He served on the 'Emerald', after which, on 8 July 1766, he was entered as a midshipman on board the 'Swallow', a sixth-rate sloop of fourteen guns then fitting out for a voyage of discovery under Captain Philip Carteret. According to the 'Swallow''s pay book he was then nineteen. This information, which would put his birth date back to 1746/1747, is now thought to be wrong. 'Swallow''s course in the Pacific Ocean was more southerly than that of any other navigator to date, but a consequence of this was that she passed scarcely any land. This made the discoveries of the voyage few in number and made provisioning difficult. Carteret was reduced to promising a prize to the sailor who should sight land. This went to Pitcairn, who sighted an island, which was the most important discovery of that part of Carteret's voyage. On Thursday 2 July 1767 ship's time (1 July civil time) the 'Swallow' sighted an island, according to their reckoning, in latitude 25 degree 02' S and longitude 133 degree 21' W. 'The 2d of July we made Pitcairn's Island, which I so called, after the name of the first person who discover'd it, Mr Pitcairn, a young gentleman and midshipman on board... [T]he next day [the sighted land] prouved to be a small high uninhabited island not above 4 or 5 miles round, is scarce better than a large rock in the Ocean. (Carteret, 149-50)' The ship was unable to land on the island, which is of volcanic origin and whose high cliffs descend precipitously into the sea so Pitcairn never set foot on the island which bears his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 22318


Pitcairn, Robert (1793-1855), antiquary, was born in Edinburgh on 14 August 1793, the second son of Robert Pitcairn, principal keeper of the register of deeds at the Register House, and his wife, Jean Kincaid. He was apprenticed to William Patrick, writer to the signet, and was admitted to the Society of Writers to HM Signet on 21 November 1815. Soon after admission he became an assistant to Thomas Thomson, deputy keeper of the records. His researches in old justiciary records commended him to Walter Scott, who in September 1826 praised him as 'a most valuable labourer in the vineyard of antiquities' ('Letters', 10.98). Proofs of his transcripts of the Mure of Auchindrane case of 1611 had stimulated Scott's late verse drama 'Auchindrane, or, An Ayrshire Tragedy' (1830), and the first of six fascicles of Pitcairn's researches occasioned Scott's last 'Quarterly Review' article (February 1831). In January 1823 Scott had sent Pitcairn early news of the formation of a 'Bibliomaniacal Society... for the prosecution of the important task of publishing dilettante editions of our National Literary Curiosities' (ibid., 7.315). This became the Bannatyne Club, which in 1833 issued the three volumes of Pitcairn's 'Trials and other Proceedings, in Matters Criminal, before the High Court of Justiciary'. 
The 'Trials', though well received, involved the editor in heavy personal financial loss, estimated at about $500. The work had been undertaken at the suggestion of Thomson, who moreover in 1834 proposed that Pitcairn should prepare an abridgement of the register of the great seal of Scotland, leading him to understand that the record commissioners would pay his salary. Pitcairn received only $200. He went to London in 1835 to complain about Thomson's mismanagement and state his case. The revelations led to a Treasury inquiry into the financial maladministration of the Register House, and Thomson was relieved of his post in 1841. By the time the matter was cleared up Pitcairn was owed over ten years' arrears of salary. In 1853 he was appointed one of the four official searchers of records for encumbrances at the Register House, Edinburgh. 
As well as work for the Bannatyne Club, Pitcairn among other antiquarian editions published 'Historical Memoirs of the Reign of Mary, Queen of Scots' for the Abbotsford Club (1836), and James Melvill's 'Autobiography and Diary' for the Wodrow Society (1842). Scott regarded this 'rummager of our records' ('Letters', 10.98) as 'painstaking and capable' (ibid., 11.70). Pitcairn married, on 4 September 1839, Hester Hine, daughter of Henry Hunt, merchant of London. He died of heart disease in Edinburgh on 11 July 1855. His widow died in 1903, aged 100. 


@@@@@


doc= 22319


Pitcairn, William (1712-1791), physician, eldest son of David Pitcairn, minister of Dysart, Fife, and Catherine Hamilton, was born at Dysart on 9 May 1712. He studied at the University of Leiden, where he entered on the physic line on 15 October 1734, and attended the lectures of Boerhaave. He took the degree of MD at Rheims. His mother belonged to the Hamilton family, and Pitcairn became private tutor to James, sixth duke of Hamilton. He stayed with him at Oxford, and travelled abroad with him in 1742. The University of Oxford awarded Pitcairn the degree of MD at the opening of the Radcliffe Library in April 1749. Soon afterwards he began to practise in London, and was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 25 June 1750. In 1752 he was Goulstonian lecturer, and in 1753, 1755, 1759, and 1762 a censor. He was elected president in 1775, and continued to be elected until he resigned in 1785. He was elected physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital on 22 February 1750, and resigned on 3 February 1780. He was also physician to Christ's Hospital. 
Pitcairn lived in Warwick Court, near the old College of Physicians in Warwick Lane, in the City of London, and had a very large practice as a physician. On 4 March 1784 he was elected treasurer of St Bartholomew's Hospital, and from then on he lived in the treasurer's house in the hospital. In 1770 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. Pitcairn had a country residence, with a botanical garden of 5 acres, in Upper Street, Islington, and was an accomplished botanist who employed collectors in the East and West Indies. He was remembered at St Bartholomew's by having a ward named after him. He had great faith in the use of opium for fevers and particularly for enteric fever; the value of this treatment was not then recognized. Pitcairn received Radcliffe's gold-headed cane from Anthony Askew and his arms are engraved on it. The cane was passed on to his nephew, David Pitcairn, who became physician at St Bartholomew's after his uncle's retirement. 
Pitcairn's portrait by Joshua Reynolds was hung in the censor's room at the College of Physicians. He died at his house in Upper Street, Islington, on 25 November 1791, and was buried in a vault in the church of St Bartholomew-the-Less, within the hospital walls, on 1 December 1791. The contents of his garden and part of his library were sold by auction in 1792. 


@@@@@


doc= 22320


Pitcairne, Archibald (1652-1713), physician, was born in Edinburgh on 25 December 1652, the son of Alexander Pitcairne, merchant and magistrate, and his wife, Janet Sydserff (died 1698). Alexander Pitcairne was registered as a burgess of Edinburgh in 1670, sponsored by Sir Archibald Sydserff, possibly his father-in-law. The Sydserffs originated in Rochlaw, while the Pitcairnes of Fife claimed descent from a single posthumous heir born after Flodden. The Pitcairnes were Episcopalians. Archibald was the eldest son and had at least one brother, David, also a physician, and a sister, Janet, who married Robert Ouchterlony, a shipmaster in Leith. 
Archibald Pitcairne attended the Dalkeith School and entered the University of Edinburgh in 1668. His regent was William Paterson, and he graduated MA on 20 March 1671. Some accounts state that Pitcairne originally intended to study divinity, which, in the light of his later reputation for irreligion, seems ironic. He soon abandoned this course for the law, which he pursued so diligently that he became ill, and was advised to travel to France for his health. Stopping in Paris he encountered a group of Scottish medical students, who persuaded him to study medicine instead. His father, however, called him home to Edinburgh after a few months. During the period between this return to Edinburgh and his return to Paris in 1675 Pitcairne began to study mathematics, in which he rapidly became proficient. He may have met the precocious young David Gregory (1659-1708), who later became his closest friend and who shared his mathematical interests, during this period. But it is equally plausible that Pitcairne met Gregory only after 1680; they had almost certainly met by March 1683, when Pitcairne issued a public challenge to the Edinburgh mathematics professor John Young. Young's failure to solve the problem Pitcairne had set him led to his dismissal and the appointment of Gregory in his place. 
Pitcairne returned to Paris in 1675 to study medicine. Little specific is known of his study there, but he attended the lectures of anatomist Joseph-Guichard Duverney and no doubt others, both inside and outside the university. He obtained his MD degree from the University of Rheims, which had minimal residence requirements, on 13 August 1680. Pitcairne returned to Edinburgh and immediately entered the circle of elite, improving physicians around Robert Sibbald. Sibbald's circle held regular meetings modelled on those of the Royal Society, in which scientific papers were read and new discoveries discussed. Pitcairne was a founder member of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, for which Sibbald obtained a charter on 29 November 1681. Pitcairne served as second secretary in 1684. On 30 September 1687 Pitcairne was registered as a burgess of Edinburgh by right of his father. About 1680 Pitcairne married Margaret Hay (died 1690), daughter of Colonel James Hay of Pitfour. They had a son and a daughter, both of whom died in infancy. Margaret Pitcairne was buried in Greyfriars churchyard on 30 April 1690. 
When Sibbald attempted to found a medical school in the University of Edinburgh in 1685 Pitcairne was appointed one of the professors in September of that year, along with Sibbald himself and James Halkett. However, the town council gave the new faculty no financial support, and it does not appear that any of the professors ever lectured. In February 1687 Pitcairne shared his lodgings with David Gregory, and entered one of the most fruitful intellectual periods of his life. 
Pitcairne and Gregory shared books and information on medicine and mathematics, draining a good many bottles of claret in the process. Both Pitcairne and Gregory worked on the method of infinite series, and their contributions were later published in the collected works of the English mathematician John Wallis. Pitcairne was present when Gregory received a copy of Newton's 'Principia' soon after its publication in July 1687, and shared in Gregory's excitement at Newton's achievement. Pitcairne had meanwhile been studying the Italian iatro-mechanists, particularly G. A. Borelli and Lorenzo Bellini, and found in Newton's work and its mathematical vision of nature another way to explain the mechanization of the organism. 
Pitcairne's first publication was a Latin pamphlet, 'Solutio problematis de historicis, seu, De inventoribus dissertatio', published in Edinburgh in 1688. This was in part a response to Andre Dacier's translation of the work of Hippocrates, in which he claimed that the ancient Greek had known of the theory of the circulation of the blood. Dacier struck a blow for the ancients in the debate between the ancients and moderns, and Pitcairne responded for the moderns by defending Harvey's claim as discoverer of the circulation. In his work Pitcairne displayed an impressive knowledge both of the classics and of Harvey's work. He claimed Harvey as the first of the iatro-mechanists. This pamphlet was originally to be published with another, more controversial work, Pitcairne's 'Epistola Archimedis ad regem Gelonem', a satire ostensibly of medical sects but in reality of presbyterianism. This work was not published until 1710, and then anonymously. 
On the basis of this rather slender published evidence, along with nominations by Bishop Gilbert Burnet and James Dalrymple, Viscount Stair, and much reputation by word of mouth, Pitcairne was offered the chair of the practice of medicine at the University of Leiden in November 1691. Meanwhile Pitcairne's Jacobitism had made him unpopular in Edinburgh. He wrote a highly praised Latin epitaph (translated into English by Dryden) for John Graham of Claverhouse, Viscount Dundee, hero of the pyrrhic Jacobite victory at Killiecrankie in 1689. This was published by Walter Scott in his edition of Dryden's works in 1808. Dated to 1692, although not published until much later, were Pitcairne's anti-presbyterian satires, the play 'The Assembly' and the poem 'Babel'; both apparently circulated in manuscript. Pitcairne's opposition to the Presbyterian kirk was tied to his Jacobitism. His criticisms of the kirk led to charges of atheism, but it is more likely that Pitcairne, like his friend Gregory, was a devoted, if not devout, Episcopalian. 
Pitcairne moved to Leiden in April 1692; along the way he stopped in Cambridge to talk with Newton, and was given a copy of Newton's essay 'De natura acidorum', which detailed his theory of matter (this essay was not published until 1710). In his inaugural lecture on 26 April, Pitcairne set the tone for his professorship. He claimed that he would liberate medicine from the thrall of philosophical sects by linking it to the true philosophy, the natural philosophy of Newton. In a series of four dissertations which followed, Pitcairne attempted to outline his new theory of medicine, based on a system of vascular hydraulics. However, the new Newtonian medicine strongly resembled the old mechanical medicine; Pitcairne soon came to realize that a medical theory relying on atomistic matter theory and short-range forces was not easily quantified or demonstrated. Pitcairne issued these lectures as pamphlets and they were reprinted with other essays as 'Dissertationes medicae' (Rotterdam, 1701). They strongly influenced a Newtonian school of iatro-mechanism whose members included Richard Mead, James Keill, John Freind, and Stephen Hales. 
In the summer of 1693 Pitcairne visited Scotland for a holiday and did not return to Leiden, resigning his position in December. His letter of resignation did not specify his reasons, but it has been generally surmised that his fiancee, Elizabeth Stevenson ('c'.1670-1734), daughter of his colleague Sir Archibald Stevenson, did not wish to leave Scotland. The Leiden authorities were displeased by his manner of resigning, and withheld some of his salary, which was paid to his widow only in 1725. 
Pitcairne married Elizabeth Stevenson on 8 August 1693. They had four surviving children: three daughters, Elizabeth (died 18 March 1718), Margaret (died August 1777), and Jane, the second daughter, who married Alexander Erskine, fifth earl of Kellie, and who died on 7 June 1776. Their only son took part in the 1715 rebellion on the Jacobite side, and was confined in the Tower for a time. Another child was buried in Greyfriars churchyard in July 1697. 
Despite his short stay in Leiden, Pitcairne's lectures and dissertations had an impact on a number of individuals. His Leiden students included William Cockburn, Richard Mead, and the surgeons John Monro and Robert Elliot. Pitcairne obviously inspired great affection in his students, many of whom acknowledged his influence. Mead later interceded for Pitcairne's son in 1715 and succeeded in obtaining his release from the Tower. Hermann Boerhaave was a student in Leiden at the time, but it is not known if he attended Pitcairne's lectures. In addition, the prestige of his Leiden professorship emboldened Pitcairne to embark on new projects in Edinburgh. He encouraged the surgeon Alexander Monteith to petition the town council for the provision of bodies for dissection, and much to the dismay of the Incorporation of Surgeons, who did not welcome competition for scarce cadavers, he succeeded. In October 1694 Monteith was granted for dissection the bodies of those who died in the Correction House, as well as infant foundlings, in exchange for free medical care for the poor. Despite this promotion of anatomy, and his claims that he would reform its study, Pitcairne's own works remained in the more theoretical vein of his dissertations, and seldom mentioned anatomical evidence. 
Ever the controversialist, Pitcairne entered the debate at the Edinburgh College of Physicians over the correct therapy for fevers. A self-proclaimed follower of Sydenham, Andrew Brown, had published in 1691 a controversial pamphlet critical of the established therapy for fevers and its emphasis on purging. Several more pamphlets followed. Pitcairne's contribution to the debate, 'Dissertatio de curatione febrium', delivered to the college as one of its monthly discourses in November 1694, provoked an uproar among the fellows. While Pitcairne supported the conventional therapy based on evacuations, he justified it in terms of his new mechanico-Newtonian theory, which most fellows found unacceptable. True to form, Pitcairne then published his lecture as a pamphlet. This controversy added fire to existing factions among the membership over politics, personalities, and the preparation of a pharmacopoeia; as a result Pitcairne and his supporters, including his father-in-law, Stevenson, a former president of the college, were ejected from the college in December 1695. A general amnesty was declared only in 1703; meanwhile, Pitcairne had allied himself with the surgeons, being elected to the Incorporation of Surgeons on 16 October 1701. His former student Robert Elliot had assumed the position of anatomy professor to the incorporation and performed a yearly public dissection, at which Pitcairne delivered the concluding lecture for several years. On 7 August 1699 Pitcairne had been awarded an honorary MD degree from King's College, Aberdeen. 
Pitcairne's brash style and forceful personality were easily satirized. Edward Eizat, a physician and classmate of Pitcairne's at the University of Edinburgh, published anonymously 'Apollo mathematicus, or, The art of curing diseases by the mathematicks, according to the principles of Dr Pitcairn' in 1695 in response to Pitcairne's essay on fevers. Another of Pitcairne's Leiden students, George Hepburn, replied in 'Tarrugo Unmasked' (1695), and the ensuing pamphlet war dragged on for several years. Among Pitcairne's champions were two more former students, James Johnston and George Cheyne. The debate came to an abrupt end in 1702 when Charles Oliphant, a former ally and Gregory's brother-in-law, accused Cheyne of drunkenness. 
Pitcairne's own fondness for the bottle was well known; Robert Wodrow claimed 'he got a vast income, but spent it upon drinking, and was twice drunk every day' (Wodrow, 255). While Wodrow was a hostile commentator, many contemporaries noted the intemperance of both Pitcairne and Gregory. On 25 July 1700 Pitcairne avoided imprisonment in the Canongate for writing a seditious letter by claiming he was in his cups when he wrote it, and Mrs Henderson's howff (tavern) was a favourite resort. Yet he was also a popular and successful medical practitioner, and gained some fame as a poet in Latin, often taking the pseudonym of Walter Dannistoun and writing on Jacobite themes. A volume of his Latin poetry, 'Selecta poemata', edited by R. Freebairn, was published posthumously in 1727, and Scott remarked that Pitcairne's Latin epitaph on Dundee was much superior to Dryden's translation. 
Pitcairne's continuing devotion to the Jacobite cause did not, apparently, go beyond writing poetry, and he was on good terms with many politicians, both whig and tory. Pitcairne endeavoured to use their patronage to fill Scottish university chairs with his selected candidates, and Gregory commented on his negotiations with the earl of Roxburghe to this end. Pitcairne's former student George Cheyne, who had moved to London at his urging in 1701, acted as an intermediary in these negotiations. 
Less is known of Pitcairne's life after 1700. He published little, and seems to have devoted himself to his extensive medical practice and to his poetry. His correspondence with his friend Robert Gray and others reveals his sharp opinions of his contemporaries, but he did not enter into further public controversy. He did instigate a reply by Thomas Bower (under the pseudonym of James Walkinshaw) to the 1709 'Letter from Sir R---t S---d, to Dr Archibald Pitcairne'. This letter was probably written by William Cockburn in response to Pitcairne's criticisms of his works. Bower's reply defended Pitcairne. 
Pitcairne's published works were collected and translated into English by John Desaguliers and George Sewell and published in 1715 (2nd edn, 1727); his Leiden lectures from 1692-3 were collected and published by the apothecary John Quincy as 'Elementa medicinae' in 1717, and translated into English in the following year. 
Pitcairne, who had apparently been in poor health for some time, died in Edinburgh on 23 October 1713. He was buried in Greyfriars churchyard on 26 October, where in 1800 a monument was erected to his memory by a committee of Edinburgh physicians. Pitcairne's will was not proved until 1 October 1720. The probate record detailed numerous debts, far outnumbering Pitcairne's assets, which amounted to his library. His book collection was well known and it sold in London for $430, destined for the court of Peter the Great in Russia. Pitcairne's widow bore responsibility for payment of his debts. His only son had died not long after his release from the Tower, while fighting as a mercenary in the Netherlands. 


@@@@@


doc= 22321


Pitcairne, Alexander (d. 1695), Church of Scotland minister and college head, was the son of Alexander Pitcairne, minister of Tannadice, Forfarshire, and Lucrece Cairncross. He matriculated at St Salvator's College, St Andrews, in February 1639 and graduated MA in 1643. On 31 March 1645 he married Janet Clark of St Andrews. They had four children: David (died 1709); Alexander, later minister of Kilmany, Fife; George (died 1744), later commissary of Dunkeld; and Lucretia. In February 1648 Pitcairne returned to take up the post of regent in his alma mater. Here he remained until December 1656. Having been called to the pastorate of Dron parish church in Perthshire in October that year, he was ordained and inducted to the charge on 24 December. 
Pitcairne's conscientious commitment to presbyterianism, which he had solemnly sworn to uphold in his ordination vows, made him a target of both the ecclesiastical and secular authorities after the Restoration and the reinstitution of Erastian episcopacy. On 11 June 1662 he was deprived of his living by an act of parliament, which injunction was reinforced by the privy council on 1 October that same year. However, the apparent support of his parishioners and the tacit connivance of Robert Leighton, the bishop of Dunblane, in whose diocese Dron was situated, ensured that repeated attempts to remove him proved fruitless. Leighton in particular appears to have admired Pitcairne for his personal and theological integrity and his scholarly erudition. His earliest and best-known work, 'The spiritual sacrifice, or, A treatise... concerning the saint's communion with God in prayer', which he dedicated to Viscountess Stormont, was first published in two volumes by Robert Brown in Edinburgh in 1664. A single-volume edition was also published in London that year. His 'Compendiaria et perfacilis physiologia idea Aristotelicae... unacum anatome Cartesianisimi', a treatise discussing the ideas of Aristotle and Descartes, which he dedicated to the renowned philosopher and scientist Robert Boyle, was published at London in 1676. Although Bishop James Ramsey of Dunblane did not share his predecessor's eirenicism and initiated synodical proceedings to censure Pitcairne in October 1678, it was only after the introduction of the 'Test Act' in August 1681 and a sustained resolve to oust him from Dron that he was finally forced out of his incumbency. In May 1682 an attempt to replace him with John Taylor as minister provoked a riot, which in turn provided a suitable pretext for sending in troops under the auspices of the marquess of Atholl to eject him forcibly. 
Before 1678 Pitcairne's wife, Janet, died and he married Mary Anderson. It is not clear whether she was living, and accompanied him, when he fled Scotland and settled in the more amenable environment of the Netherlands in the company of other notable Presbyterian exiles. While there he appears to have written his 'Harmonia evangelica apostolorum Pauli et Jacobi in doctrina de justificatione', which was published at Rotterdam in 1685 and dedicated to James Dalrymple, first Viscount Stair. His name is also inscribed on the top of the manuscript of 'The faithfull pastor his sad lamentation over, heart-renting challenge and dreadfull thunders against, sharp reproof of, and seasonable warning to his apostate-flock' (1687). This suggests that it was he who translated and prepared for publication this 'letter written by a French minister' admonishing backsliders from the faith. 
Pitcairne returned home after the passing of the 'Toleration Act' in 1687, and was eventually restored to his former charge by act of parliament on 25 April 1690 after the re-establishment of presbyterianism in the revolution of 1688. In January 1691 he successfully petitioned the privy council for restitution of financial losses incurred by his earlier removal from the parish. He was appointed provost of St Salvator's College, St Andrews, at the invitation of King William in January 1691 and elevated to the principalship of St Mary's College some two years later. Probably in the early 1690s he married his third wife, Rachel, the daughter of Colin Adams, minister of Anstruther Easter. They had five children together: Joseph, who became minister of Newburgh; Andrew (died 1737); Rachel ('b'. 1695), who married Alexander Spence of Berryhill; Jean; and Annie, who married Walter Wilson, minister of Kilconquhar. Pitcairne died at St Andrews in September 1695. 


@@@@@


doc= 22322


Pitman, Sir Isaac (1813-1897), deviser of a system of shorthand writing, was born on 4 January 1813 at 3-4 Timbrell Street, Trowbridge, Wiltshire, the third of the eleven children of Samuel Pitman (1787-1863), manager of a weaving mill, and his wife, Maria Pitman, 'nee' Davis (1784-1854). 
Pitman's father was a well-read man with a lively interest in social reform, and he helped to establish schools at Trowbridge, as well as a workers' library in the mill which he managed. Isaac Pitman duly attended one of these schools, but left at the early age of twelve after suffering several fainting fits. These were attributed to the crowded conditions and poor ventilation, but may have had a psychological cause. On leaving school Pitman was put to work in the mill office, and he transferred, after about three years, to similar work when his father started weaving on his own account. His premises, first at Trowbridge Down, Trowbridge, and then at Silver Street, Trowbridge, combined domestic accommodation and weaving rooms on a single site. 
To compensate for his meagre schooling, Pitman studied independently, and some of the books that he read at this time had a formative influence on his career. Of particular relevance was John Walker's 'Critical Pronouncing Dictionary' (1791), which achieved its aim by supplementing orthography with diacritics, and William Harding's 'Universal Stenography' (1823), which was based on Samuel Taylor's 'Essay Intended to Establish a Standard for an Universal System of Stenography' (1786). They sensitized Pitman to the vagaries and redundancies of English orthography, and to the consistency and economy offered by phonetic (or phonemic) spelling. In 1831 he was sent to London, to the Borough Road Teacher Training College, where he received five months' training as a teacher before being put in charge of a new elementary school at Barton-on-Humber, Lincolnshire, at the start of 1832. A feature of his teaching was his use of a flute to help pupils sing multiplication tables and to pipe them home through the streets at the end of each school day. He introduced his more advanced pupils to Taylor's shorthand, and he started to see the potential of simplified spelling like Taylor's as an aid to universal literacy. 
Pitman's complex and difficult personality led to troubled relationships on various fronts, however. He wrangled with the school committee about the level of his pay, and with his family about how their souls could be saved. Brought up in the Baptist and Anglican traditions, he had become, on settling in Barton-on-Humber, a zealous adherent of Wesleyanism, preaching and writing tracts in its cause (and addressing some of the latter to his family in Trowbridge). About 1834 Pitman was befriended by a well-to-do widow, Mrs Mary Holgate (died 1857), who seems to have pitied the lean and hungry look which resulted from his fasting and other self-imposed rigours. There is little sign that their marriage on 5 January 1835 tempered his fanaticism, and he continued the habit, begun in his teens, of greatly extending his working day with systematic and detailed study, the 'Bible' being his new and consuming preoccupation. 
At the start of 1836 Pitman moved to Wotton under Edge, Gloucestershire, and once again took charge of a newly founded elementary school. Having found a house in Orchard Street, he was joined by his wife and then by his brother Benjamin, who helped with the school. However, his growing and unconcealed adherence to the teachings of the New (or Swedenborgian) Church in preference to those of Wesleyanism outraged the school committee, which was dominated by Calvinists. They therefore dismissed him at the end of the year, and for the next two and a half years he ran a competing school. 
In the spring of 1837 Pitman devised an edition of Taylor's system of shorthand designed to be sold so cheaply as to make it widely affordable, but Samuel Bagster, the publisher to whom he submitted it, replied that a newly devised system would command better sales. Pitman bridled at Bagster's view, and informed him in a letter dated 16 June that the 'fundamental principles' of Taylor's system could not be improved. Even so, he and his brother Joseph exchanged several letters in which they discussed and tested systems freshly improvised by themselves. The most notable among these was Pitman's letter of 5 July, in which he told Joseph: 'I have contrived a very good alphabet... In sending you this scheme, I do not send it as a 'whim', but as a scientific work, which, I think, will stand the test of years. Most of the schemes I have sent have been conceived and at the same time written to you. Consequently they could not be good enough. (M. Abercrombie, 53)' Pitman immediately prepared an edition of this system for publication under the title 'Stenographic Sound-Hand'. Each of the 3000 copies consisted of twelve letterpress pages printed by Samuel Bagster in London, and two plates of characters and illustrations drawn by Pitman and lithographed in Bristol -- the cutting, collation, and stitching being undertaken by Pitman's pupils and two of his brothers. Bagster took half the copies for sale at his London shop, while Pitman tried to distribute the rest, the accepted date of publication being 15 November 1837. 
Pitman's system had many merits. In place of the letters of the alphabet, with their need for recursive strokes of the pen, it used a simple repertoire of dashes and curves (for the consonants) and dots and pecks (for the vowel sounds), which the writer could make with the greatest ease. Moreover, by using the symbols phonetically to match the distinctive sounds of speech, the system aimed to circumvent the obstacles presented by English orthography (though some phonological misunderstandings weakened its effectiveness). The system had patterns that reflected those of articulation. For example, it used a straight line to represent plosive consonants, the line being set at various angles to distinguish points of articulation and lightly or heavily written according to the absence or the presence of voice. In a similar way the vowel signs were positioned with respect to the consonant signs to reflect the closeness of the tongue to the palate when making the sounds. (This was known as 'the vowel scale'.) The vowel markings could be omitted at the writer's discretion, thus permitting considerable gains in speed. The system was further streamlined by the use of single signs to denote certain consonant pairs (such as the 'tr' in 'trend'). 
As suggested by the letter to Joseph quoted above, Pitman was a compulsive worker, driven by haste. A letter written to another brother, Benjamin ('Ben(n)'), a few years later, confirms the same trait: 'My plan is to answer every letter 'before' I read it. That is, I begin to answer it as I begin to read it and perhaps before I have read half a dozen lines I have written 12. Then, as I go on reading, ideas pop into my mind and as fast as they pop in I whip them... on[to] the paper. (M. Abercrombie, 87)' Fittingly the inventor of a system designed to maximize speed, Pitman once commended it with the simple claim that 'Time saved is life gained'. However, he also saw his system in a quasi-mystical light, claiming that under its 'fostering sun... friendships grow six times as fast as under the withering blighting influence of the moon of longhand' (ibid., 101). 
These feelings may be linked to Pitman's love for Martha Watts, a very young woman who lived in his household from about May 1838 to May 1839, ostensibly as Mrs Pitman's companion. After her departure she and Pitman pursued a secret relationship, with occasional meetings and copious correspondence using his system of shorthand, which Mrs Pitman could not read. However, after two or three years of increasing suspicion she took a bundle of Watts's letters from Pitman's desk and had some incriminating portions transcribed by one of his pupils. By this time (1842) the Pitmans had moved to Nelson Place, Bath, partly in the forlorn hope that a new school venture might succeed, and partly so that Pitman could be near fellow Swedenborgians. Armed with the letters, Mrs Pitman brought him before the church elders, whose warnings to Pitman failed to end either his correspondence with Martha Watts or the very rare meetings by which they kept their love alive in hope of Pitman's 'external release'. However, on Mrs Pitman's death in 1857 they did not marry, and four years later, on 21 April 1861, Pitman made an unhappy marriage to Isabella Masters, the 37-year-old daughter of a 'master housepainter'. Their two sons, Alfred and Ernest, are Pitman's only known children. 
The production of some twenty editions of his system spanned Pitman's sixty-year career. The second, entitled 'Phonography, or, Writing by Sound, being also a New and Natural System of Short-Hand', appeared on 10 January 1840, to coincide with the introduction of the penny post, which assisted the distribution both of the publication and of the copious shorthand correspondence which increasingly linked the system's users. The term 'phonography', which Pitman coined in 1839 from the Greek words 'phone' (sound or voice) and 'graphe' (writing), became his unofficial trade mark, featuring in the varying titles of later editions. (It had, in fact, been used once before, in 1701.) There was little scope to develop the basic concepts underlying Pitman's system, and the new editions entailed a constant tinkering with its details, as well as some real improvements in its presentation. The earliest changes, including an alteration to the slope of the 'b' and 'p' signs and a rearrangement of the order in which the signs appeared, were the most worthwhile and practicable. However, a rapid growth in the number of users meant that later changes were sometimes divisive, particularly when they contravened existing and well-tried practices. The clearest and most damaging instance was the reversal of the vowel scale introduced (with no real effort at justification) in the tenth edition (1857). American users, led by Pitman's brother Benn, insisted on making the ninth edition of the system their standard, and Pitman's following therefore suffered a serious schism. 
Pitman faced claims that his system was not as original as he maintained. In a speech delivered in Birmingham in 1843 he defended himself: 'so far as this, that I knew nothing of an attempt to write by sound having been made by any one else till three years after I had published... 'Stenographic sound-hand'. I then met with the work of Mr. George Edmonds, of this town, aiming at the same object. I have since seen several others. (Baker, 79)' Pitman, more than he realized, was a man of his times, responding to current circumstances by constructing a system heavily indebted to others' ideas. Thus he added vowels to consonant signs in accordance with the Hebrew practice noted by many 'Old Testament' scholars; he adopted John Walker's analysis of English phonology; and he borrowed his brother Joseph's idea of using a single sign for consonant pairs. (Only in the last of these instances did he neglect to make an acknowledgement which was clearly due.) These and many other debts by no means nullify Pitman's achievement. Having devised a coherent system he worked with almost fanatical zeal to make it known throughout Britain and other parts of the world, its phonetic basis permitting its use for languages including Malagasy and Malay. In the early years he led four of his five surviving brothers, along with other enthusiasts, in a fervent campaign of public speaking which embraced most of England and southern Scotland. Correspondence circles, often involving gratuitous teaching, enabled the movement to grow exponentially, as did Pitman's prolific output of publications. (In 1845 he set up a printing press at his home.) 
By this time Pitman had started to experiment with phonotypy (printing with phonetic type). He could not use his shorthand characters, partly because the range of forms made casting impracticable. In uneasy alliance with the phonetician Alexander John Ellis he began to experiment with founts adapted from the standard alphabet, printing works as diverse as Milton's 'Paradise Lost' and parts of the 'Bible' in the Mikmak language spoken by native people in Nova Scotia, which thus acquired a written form. By the end of 1874 Pitman had fully established himself as an editor, printer, and publisher on an industrial scale; his steam-powered operation near the centre of Bath bore many similarities to the weaving mills of his childhood and youth. In 1886 he took his sons into partnership, founding the firm known as Isaac Pitman & Sons. Its phonographic and phonotypic publications were supplemented by others in a reformed English spelling which used the standard alphabet, signalling Pitman's recognition that his radical reform might not succeed. (His descendant Sir James Pitman revived some vestige of it in his 'initial teaching alphabet'.) 
Although mellowed by age, Pitman remained abstemious in every way, fiercely committed to vegetarianism and very hostile to smoking and drinking. From his mid-twenties he was a loyal adherent of the New Church, and sometimes provoked complaints by including its literature in his mailings. A resident of Bath for fifty-eight years, he died there at his home, 17 Royal Crescent, on 22 January 1897, of heart disease and the general effects of old age. His death certificate gives his name as 'Sir Isaac Pitman' -- he had been knighted three years earlier -- and his occupation as 'Inventor of Phonography'. His funeral ceremony (at New Church, Henry Street, Bath) and cremation (at Woking, Surrey) were on 27 January 1897. 
Pitman was not a thinker, and his contribution to linguistic science consisted in the stimulus he gave to a rising generation of phoneticians. After his death, significant improvements in his shorthand system made it a useful tool of twentieth-century commerce, though its use declined with the advent of new technologies. According to Baker, Pitman admitted 'I do not study, I only work'. This sums up both his limitation and his strength. 


@@@@@


doc= 22323


Pitman, John Rogers (1782-1861), Church of England clergyman and author, was born on 25 June 1782, and educated at Christ's Hospital and Pembroke College, Cambridge. He matriculated in 1800, graduating BA in 1804 and MA in 1815. After taking holy orders he was classics master at Christ's Hospital (1816-20), and was appointed perpetual curate of Berden and vicar of Ugley, Essex, on 18 February 1817. He became well known as a preacher in London, at Berkeley and Belgrave chapels, and at the Foundling and Magdalene hospitals before 1830. In 1833 he was presented to the perpetual curacy of St Barnabas, Kensington, by the vicar, J. H. Pott. He resigned his Essex livings in 1846, and Kensington in 1848, becoming domestic chaplain to the duchess of Kent. 
Pitman was a prolific writer, compiler, and editor, producing annotated editions of the works of Jeremy Taylor (1820-22), J. Lightfoot (1822-5), and E. Reynolds (1826), of N. Hooke's 'Roman History' (1821), of W. Lowth's 'Commentaries' (1822), and of J. Bingham's 'Origines ecclesiasticae' (1840). Besides numerous sermons, he also published 'Excerpta ex variis Romanis poetis' (1808), 'The School Shakespeare' (1822), 'Sophocles Ajax' (1830), and two sets of biblical commentaries (1821 and 1852). Pitman died at 8 Green Park, Bath, on 27 August 1861, shortly after his royal patron. He was survived by his wife, Elizabeth. 


@@@@@


doc= 22324


Pitts, Arthur (1557-c.1634), Roman Catholic priest, was a younger son of Arthur Pitts and Margaret Secoll. His father was a sometime fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, registrar of the diocese of Oxford, and receiver of the impropriated tithes of Iffley, who died a man of some wealth on 10 May 1578. The younger Arthur was born at Iffley, became a chorister of All Souls, and was afterwards for a time at Brasenose College, Oxford. He did not graduate, but left for Douai, arriving there on 26 December 1575. At Douai he apparently joined his four brothers; his elder brother, Robert, who was already in deacon's orders, returned to England as a priest from June 1576 until his death before 1592. 
From Douai Arthur Pitts was sent to Rome in August 1577 as one of the founding students of the new English College. Back at Douai in 1579 and in minor orders, he took the mission oath to return to England for the help of souls; he was ordained to the priesthood in Rome some time before his departure for England. He set out for England from Douai on 22 March 1581 with one Standishe, the two forming part of a detachment of forty-seven priests sent from Douai during the year. On 6 February 1582 George Haydock and Pitts were seized in an inn while Pitts was eating dinner. After questioning by Sir John Popham, the attorney-general, he was imprisoned in the Tower. One of the priests named in the indictment with Pitts, James Fenn, was executed in 1584. While Arthur Pitts was in the Tower his brother George also came to the notice of the council. He seems to have been in Oxfordshire where he 'doth great harm for he is a wise, learned, and obstinate papist' (Anstruther, 227). In October, William Allen wrote that Pitts was expecting torture and death. However, he was banished on 21 January 1585. 
Pitts resumed his studies at Rheims and came out a doctor of both faculties -- law and divinity. He served Cardinal de Vaudemont between 1585 and 1587 and then the cardinal of Lorraine, archbishop of Rheims, who made Pitts his chancellor. He was dean of Liverdun until June 1602, when he was imprisoned for alleged disaffection to the king of France. Anstruther and the 'Dictionary of National Biography' both believed that the charge was brought against him by a Jesuit because Pitts believed in the desirability of converting England through the agency of martyrs rather than the army of a continental power. French sources indicate that Pitts and a French theologian named Saint-Germain were reported to the bishop of Toul for plotting to kill the king of France. The bishop ordered them arrested, but they were released because of a lack of evidence. 
At an unknown date Pitts returned to England for his health and lived with the Stonors of Blount's Court, near Henley in Oxfordshire. In 1623 the pope nominated William Bishop bishop of Chalcedon and vicar apostolic of England. That appointment answered the continued request of the faction of secular priests which had opposed Jesuit influence in the English mission and Jesuit governance of English seminaries in Rome and Spain. Pitts was one of the first canons and an original member of the chapter founded on 10 September 1623. He also became titular archdeacon of London, Westminster, and the suburbs. He died at Blount's Court about 1634 and was buried in the church of Rotherfield Peppard, Oxfordshire. His 'In quatuor Jesu Christi evangelia et acta apostolorum commentarius', an exegesis of the gospels and the 'Acts of the Apostles', was published posthumously at Douai in 1636. 


@@@@@


doc= 22325


Pits, John (1560-1616), Roman Catholic priest, was born at Alton, Hampshire, one of the sons of Henry Pits and Elizabeth Sanders, who was the sister of controversialist and historian Dr Nicholas Sanders. The Pits family, which had an Oxford branch as well as a Hampshire one, were staunch Catholics, many of whom became priests. John Pits was admitted to Winchester College in 1571 and went to New College, Oxford, whence he matriculated on 20 March 1579. According to Anthony Wood he was in line to become a perpetual fellow of New College. However, before he could be appointed he became one of the group of Oxford men, William Allen and William Reynolds among them, who decided for religion's sake to leave Oxford for the Catholic settlements on the continent. 
Pits went to the English College at Rheims (due to political difficulties the college had moved from Douai in 1578), where he arrived on 12 August 1581. At least five of his cousins had entered the college during the 1570s and at least one of his brothers, William, would follow him to Rheims. On 27 August 1581 he left Rheims for Rome, where he was admitted to the English College on 18 October 1581. Here he took the missionary oath and began to study for the priesthood. He was ordained subdeacon and deacon in October 1585 and priest on 5 April 1586. He left Rome on 2 March 1588 and arrived back at Rheims on 8 April 1588, where he began teaching rhetoric and Greek in September 1589. His period as a teacher did not last long, since the college records state that he left on 27 March 1590 in order to become tutor to the sons of an unnamed nobleman. In 1591 he was also awarded the degrees of BTh (23 July) and MA (5 August) by the University of Pont-a-Mousson. In 1592 he received a licentiate of divinity at Trier with the publication of 'De legibus assertiones ex theologia deprompta' (Trier, 1592), a list of 137 theses on natural, divine, and human law. He completed his DTh degree at Ingolstadt on 13 June 1595 -- his 'Disputatio theologica de beatitudine' (Ingolstadt, 1595) announced the forthcoming defence of his dissertation. He returned to Lorraine and was made incumbent of the Chapelle de Notre-Dame de Bons-Secours in the neighbourhood of Nancy, by Charles de Guise III, cardinal of Lorraine. Two years later Pits became confessor to Antoinette, daughter of the duke of Lorraine and wife of Johan Wilhelm, duke of Cleves. 
During this period Pits wrote five books, three of which remained in manuscript. 'De peregrinatione libri septem' (Dusseldorf, 1604) was dedicated to his patron, Antoinette. His main work was his 'Relationum historicarum de rebus Anglicis' (Paris, 1619), commonly referred to by its running title, 'De illustribus Angliae scriptoribus', which, according to a note by the author, he completed in September 1613 and which was edited after his death by William Bishop. Anthony Wood was very critical of Pits's bio-bibliographical dictionary, pointing out many mistakes and inaccuracies and, moreover, claiming that Pits copied his data from John Bale's 'Illustrium majoris Britanniae scriptorum summarium' (1548), which, in the preface of 'Relationum', is reviled for its virulently anti-Catholic attitude. This accusation of plagiarism has subsequently been taken over by other writers. However, an examination of the book makes clear that Pits, while obviously depending on previous authorities, was independent. This conclusion was also reached by Thomas Hearne, who defended Pits against Wood's charges and made out a convincing case for Pits's original research. 
Bishop's account of Pits, appended to 'Relationum', makes mention of the fact that Pits co-operated with the House of Writers at Arras College in Paris and with his cousin, Arthur Pits. Together with his cousin, Pits played a role in the acquisition of a monastery at Dieulouard for the English Benedictines; after its establishment he used its library, mainly collected by William Gifford. His work is in any case still valuable as a source of information about many contemporary Roman Catholic authors. After the death of his patron in 1610 he was appointed dean of the collegiate church of St Euchaire at Liverdun by his former pupil Charles Poncelet de Maillane, the very energetic cardinal of Nancy, whose intention with the appointment of learned foreign Roman Catholic priests was to combat German protestantism and to root out corruption in his diocese. Pits died on 17 October 1616 at St Euchaire, Liverdun, and was buried there. In Wood's time three other manuscripts by Pits (on English kings, bishops, and 'Apostolic men') were preserved at the church in Liverdun. According to Wood one of them (on the bishops) was later used by Edward Maihew for his history of the English Benedictine congregation, 'Congregationis Angliae ordinis... S. Benedicti trophoea' (1619). 


@@@@@


doc= 22326


Pitt, Ann (c.1720-1799), actress, was born in London. Her career on the London stage spanned over fifty years, most of it spent playing comic roles and spinsters with the company at Covent Garden. Her father, John Pitt, was a fishmonger and a warden of old London Bridge, and her mother was probably called Elizabeth; they were possibly but not certainly the John Pitts and Elizabeth Baird who married at St Katharine by the Tower on 21 February 1716. While there are no church documents which refer to Ann Pitt's birth or baptism, there is a record of her brother Cecil's being baptized in the church of St Magnus the Martyr in London. In his autobiography Thomas Dibdin refers to this Cecil Pitt, who boasted that he had 'never paid to see a play in his life' (Dibdin, 1.24) and who became a wealthy dry-goods merchant in London. Ann Pitt also had two stepbrothers, James and John Pitt. 
Ann Pitt's virtuosity lay in comedy and song; once established on the London stage, she was hardly ever cast in tragedy. She first appears in the playbills of Drury Lane in 1745, where, on 30 March of that year, she enacted the part of the Nurse in Owen Swiny's 'The Quacks, or, Love's the Physician'. She acted in Dublin's Smock Alley Theatre and also in Richmond, Surrey (playing in 'The Beggars' Opera'), in 1747-8. In 1748 she returned to London and Drury Lane, where she played the Nurse in John Vanbrugh's 'The Relapse', Lady Loverule in 'The Devil to Pay', by Charles Coffey, and Dame Pliant in Jonson's 'The Alchemist' (opposite Garrick's Abel Drugger). She joined the acting company at Covent Garden in 1752 and appeared as Jacinta in Vanbrugh's 'The False Friend' on 28 January. Among her famous roles, during the thirty-nine winters she spent at Covent Garden, were Mistress Quickly in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', Deborah Woodcock in 'Love in a Village', by Isaac Bickerstaff, Widow Loveit in Samuel Foote's 'The Commissary', Dorcas in Frances Brooke's 'Rosina', and the Nurse in 'Romeo and Juliet'. In Hugh Kelly's 'Thespis' her talents are commemorated in verse: '
PITT in those fond, intolerable wives, 

Who quite through love embitter all our lives, 

With too much softness poison every breath, 

Through care still murder, and caress to death; 

There PITT, O matchless SYCAMORE! has shined 

Severely soft, and turbulently kind. 
(Kelly, 392-3)' Anthony Pasquin offered a more flippant view of the actress's career, writing in 1786: '
Her Quickly, her Dorcas, old spinsters, and nurse 

Are parts, when she dies, should be laid in her hearse. 
('DNB')' Thomas Dibdin quotes an obituarist from a London morning paper, who wrote in 1799 that Ann Pitt's acting 'bore the stamp of genuine merit and originality' (Dibdin, 1.265). 
Ann Pitt was the mother of at least two illegitimate children. When the prompter at Drury Lane, Richard Cross, wrote in his diary, 'Miss Pitt went to play in 'Beg: Opera' for Mr Usher at Richmond & was deliver'd of a fine Girl -- N.B.: She was a Virgin' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 12.14), he was likely referring to the birth of Harriet Pitt ['see below']. There is little evidence to explain who the father of the infant was; the record of her baptism names a Henry Pitt, but he was in all likelihood fictitious. Ann Pitt gave birth to a second illegitimate daughter, Mary Ann, baptized on 22 October 1759 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, whose father was the scene-painter John Inigo Richards (1730/31?-1810). Richards married Elizabeth Wignell on 28 September 1769 in Orpington, Kent, but he acknowledged in his will his 'dear daughter Mary Ann Ritchards by Mrs Ann Pitt deceased' (ibid.), and left her, among other items, a snuff-box with a picture of Ann Pitt in the lid. In 'The Secret History of the Green Rooms' (1790) J. Haslewood writes uncharitably of Ann Pitt that 'no theatric dame has given greater scope to her passions, or has been more frequently concerned in amours' (Haslewood, 99). 
Ann Pitt's last appearance on the Covent Garden stage probably occurred on 2 June 1792, when she played the Spanish Lady in Frederic Pilon's 'Barataria'. Thomas Dibdin also remembers her, about 1792, singing 'I tremble at seventy-two' in Garrick's 'Cymon' at Covent Garden. She retired to the household of her daughter Harriet in Islington, London. Ann Pitt died of natural causes in London on 18 December 1799 and was buried in the family plot of Charles Isaac Mungo Dibdin at St James's Chapel in Pentonville. 
An undated oil portrait, sometimes attributed to Hogarth, of Ann Pitt is exhibited in the Garrick Club (number 229), and Walker's engraved portrait of her, in the part of Lady Wishfort, was published in Lowndes's 'New English Theatre' in 1776. While the portrait in oils emphasizes her youthful slenderness, the Walker engraving reveals her in her mid-fifties to have been an imposing, corpulent figure. 
Ann Pitt's daughter 


@@@@@


doc= 22327


Pitt, Christopher (1699-1748), translator and poet, was born at Blandford, Dorset, the second son of Christopher Pitt MD (1662-1723) and his wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1674-1743). His father, the descendant of a family dating back to the times of Henry VI, practised as a physician in Blandford; he also translated 'The Plague of Athens' (from the end of book 6) for Thomas Creech's version of Lucretius (1682), a work dedicated to a member of the Hampshire side of the Pitt family, George Pitt (died 1745) of Stratfield Saye, the father of the first Baron Rivers ('c'.1722-1803). Robert Pitt FRS (1653-1713) was the poet's uncle; Thomas 'Diamond' Pitt (1653-1726), governor of Madras, was his second cousin -- and it was to the latter's daughter, Lady Stanhope, that Pitt dedicated his first published poem. The poet's elder brother, Robert (1693-1730), of Wadham College, Oxford (BA 1716, MA 1718, fellow 1719), translated into Latin five books of Milton's 'Paradise Lost'. 
Pitt was admitted at Winchester College in 1713 and matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, on 3 April 1718, but shortly afterwards moved to New College, where he was elected scholar in March 1719 and fellow on 5 March 1721; he graduated BA on 10 October 1722 and MA in 1724. On 30 October 1722 George Pitt presented him to the rectory of Pimperne, Dorset, where he lived permanently from 1724. 
Pitt displayed remarkable translation skills as early as 1719, when he presented the examiners for election at New College with two large manuscript volumes, one of which contained miscellaneous poems, the other a complete metrical version of Lucan's 'Pharsalia'. This latter 'work of early diligence' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 2.260) was never published, as Nicholas Rowe's translation had appeared in 1718; the manuscript is lost. 
In 1721 Pitt published 'A Poem on the Death of the Late Earl Stanhope', a celebratory ode which won him the fellowship at New College. In 1725 he published a verse translation of Marcus Hieronymus Vida's 'De arte poetica', a work first published in Rome in 1527 and recently publicized in England by Thomas Tristram (1723); Pitt's 'Art of Poetry' (1725; 2nd edn, 1742) was commended by Pope as 'both a correct and a spirited translation' ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 2.383). In 1726 he sent Pope, who was at the time completing his Homer, a translation of book 23 of the 'Odyssey', which, however, the poet did not use as largely as Pitt seemed to have expected (ibid., 2.382). The following year Pitt published a miscellaneous collection entitled 'Poems and Translations' with a dedication to George Pitt. He then turned to Virgil, publishing 'Essay on Virgil's 'Aeneid', being a Translation of the First Book' (1728), which received encouraging praise from patrons and friends -- Joseph Spence, Edward Young, William Broome, William Benson, and William Duncombe among them. The translation of the whole poem into heroic couplets was finished on 2 June 1738 and appeared, with a dedication to Frederick, prince of Wales, in 1740. Joseph Warton included it in his 'Works of Virgil' (1753, vols. 2-4), acknowledging the 'fine flow of harmonious versification' and the 'faithfulness and perspicuity' in rendering the original (preface, xix). Samuel Johnson's judgement was less enthusiastic when contrasting Pitt's translation with Dryden's: 'Dryden's faults are forgotten in the hurry of delight, and Pitt's beauties are neglected in the languor of a cold and listless perusal; Pitt pleases the critics, and Dryden the people; Pitt is quoted, and Dryden read' (Johnson, 'Poets', 5.256). To nineteenth-century critics Pitt's version appeared inadequate, and rapidly faded; John Ring last reprinted part of it in 1820, only to point out its flaws. 
Pitt's original verses combined sentimentality and wit, in accordance with the author's notion of poetry as 'something between jest and earnest' (Spence, 1025); predictably Horace, whose 'Satires' and 'Epistles' Pitt explicitly imitated, was always a major influence. This production, which Johnson regarded as merely mediocre, was as long-lived as Pitt's reputation as a translator; the first collection to appear after the poet's death was significantly entitled 'Poems by the Celebrated Translator of Virgil' (1756). 
Letters between Pitt, Pope, and Spence dating from the years 1726 to 1733 are printed in the correspondence of Pope; the correspondence of John Hughes contains several letters from Pitt to Duncombe. Pitt's physical appearance was described by Pope in 1728 as 'plump' (Spence, 59), and his constitution was early undermined by a severe form of gout -- what Spence referred to as 'your old enemy' ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 2.507). He died, unmarried, at Pimperne on 13 April 1748 and was buried in Blandford Forum church, near his parents and elder brother, whom he had celebrated in a Latin epitaph. A mural inscription on his tomb records 'the candour of his mind and the primitive simplicity of manners' and states that 'he lived innocent and died beloved'. A portrait engraved by Thomas Stothard is printed in Bell's 'English Poets', volume 99 (1782). 


@@@@@


doc= 22328


Pitt, George, first Baron Rivers (1721-1803), politician and diplomatist, eldest son of George Pitt (died 1745), MP, of Stratfieldsaye, Hampshire, and his wife, Mary Louisa, daughter of John Bernier of Strasbourg, was born on 1 May 1721 in Geneva. He was educated at Winchester College and he matriculated on 26 September 1737 from Magdalen College, Oxford; he graduated MA on 13 March 1739 and DCL on 21 August 1745. From 1740 to 1742 he travelled with his tutor Edward Holdsworth in Italy, where he was a great favourite of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. At a by-election in June 1742 he was returned to the House of Commons for Shaftesbury, Dorset, and he joined the tory opposition. On 4 January 1746 he married Penelope Atkins (1724/5-1795), daughter of Sir Henry Atkins, fourth baronet, of Clapham, Surrey, and Penelope Stonehouse. They had three daughters and one son, but their marriage was very unhappy; Horace Walpole, who greatly admired Penelope Pitt, accused George Pitt of cruelty and ill-treatment. 
At the general election in 1747 Pitt was returned both for Shaftesbury and for Dorset. He elected to sit for the county and he continued to represent Dorset until the parliamentary dissolution in September 1774. He was appointed colonel of the Dorset militia on its establishment in 1757, and following George III's accession he voted with the government as an independent. From 1761 to 1768 he served as envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to Turin. On 19 February 1770 he was appointed ambassador-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to Madrid, but was succeeded in that post by Lord Grantham in January 1771. His desire for a peerage was finally granted when he was created Baron Rivers of Stratfieldsaye in the county of Southampton on 20 May 1776; he took his seat in the House of Lords on the following day. In May 1780 Pitt was appointed lord lieutenant of Hampshire, but he only held that post until 1782, when he became one of the lords of the bedchamber. In October 1793 he was appointed lord lieutenant of Dorset, and on 16 March 1802 he was created Baron Rivers of Sudeley Castle in the county of Gloucester. He published anonymously his thoughts on political and constitutional matters in 1784, and his two anonymous works on Dorset issues appeared in 1791 and 1793. Pitt died at Stratfieldsaye on 7 May 1803 and was buried in the family vault there; a mural tablet by Flaxman was erected to his memory in the church. Lady Rivers, who probably lived separately from her husband from 1771 onwards, had resided mostly in France and Italy, and she died in Milan on 1 January 1795. The title was inherited by their son, George (1751-1828), together with the estate of Stratfieldsaye, which was purchased by the nation in 1814 for the duke of Wellington. 




@@@@@


doc= 22329


Harriet Pitt (1748?-1814), actress and dancer, played secondary roles at Drury Lane and Covent Garden. She accompanied her mother on several theatrical expeditions to the provinces and began acting at an early age. On 25 August 1758, at Bristol's Jacob's Wells Theatre, she spoke an epilogue 'in the Character of one of the boys of the School at St. Augustine's-Back' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 12.17). She became a dancer at Covent Garden in 1762 and appeared as one of the three graces in 'The Arcadian Nuptials' on 20 January 1764. Her eldest child was the future musician George Cecil Pitt ('bap'. 1767, died 1820), whose father was George Anderson, not, as previously thought, the singer and theatre manager George Mattocks. She also bore two illegitimate sons, Charles Isaac Mungo Dibdin in 1768 and Thomas John Dibdin in 1771, and an illegitimate daughter, Harriet ('b'. 1770), known as Harriet Pitt, whose father was Charles Dibdin the elder (bap. 1745, d. 1814). Dibdin abandoned Pitt when their children were very young, and the family relied on the support of David Garrick, godfather to Thomas. After a brief respite from the stage, Harriet Pitt acted at Drury Lane in 1775 and between 1778 and 1780, in the latter seasons using the name Mrs Davenett. She returned to the company at Covent Garden in the early 1780s, still as Mrs Davenett, and appeared regularly there until her retirement in 1793. Having suffered from a debilitating nervous condition, Harriet Pitt died on 10 December 1814 and was buried beside her mother. 


@@@@@


doc= 22330


Pitt, John, second earl of Chatham (1756-1835), army officer, was born on 9 October 1756 at Hayes, Kent, the eldest son of the politician William Pitt the elder, first earl of Chatham (1708-1778), and his wife, Hester, 'nee' Grenville (1720-1803), the daughter of Richard Grenville of Wotton Hall, Buckinghamshire, and the sister of Richard, Earl Temple. He was the elder brother of William Pitt the younger (1759-1806). Pitt joined the army as an ensign in the 47th foot on 14 March 1774, but resigned his commission in 1776 because his father opposed the American war; he resumed his military career as a lieutenant in the 39th foot (June 1778) when France entered the war. Promoted captain in the 86th foot in September 1779, he served at the siege of Gibraltar in 1779-83. On 10 July 1783 he married Mary Elizabeth Townshend (1762-1821), the second surviving daughter of Thomas Townshend, first Viscount Sydney; they had no children. 
At the invitation of his brother, then prime minister, Chatham, who had succeeded to the earldom on the death of his father on 11 May 1778, became first lord of the Admiralty on 16 July. On 3 April 1789 he was sworn of the privy council, and on 15 December 1790 he was created KG. He retired from the Admiralty on 20 December 1794 but remained in the cabinet as lord privy seal. On 21 September 1796 he became president of the council instead. He resigned with his brother in July 1801. 
Chatham's military career continued in tandem. He was promoted colonel in 1793 and major-general in 1795, and appointed colonel of the 4th foot in 1799. In that year he commanded a brigade in the Netherlands under the duke of York. He was present at the second battle of Bergen on 2 October, coming to the aid of the hard-pressed General Coote, and was reported wounded at Beverwyk on 6 October. After returning home he became master-general of the ordnance on 27 June 1801, a post which he held until 8 February 1806, and again from 31 March 1807 to 7 March 1810. He became lieutenant-general in 1802, governor of Plymouth on 30 March 1805, and governor of Jersey on 22 September. 
Although distant in manner, Chatham was a favourite of George III. He owed many of his appointments to this friendship and indeed, because of it, George Canning was at one point in April 1809 ready to see Chatham replace the duke of Portland as prime minister. Although Chatham's military ambitions had suffered in 1808 when the command of the British army in the Peninsula was given to Sir Arthur Wellesley, in June 1809 he was compensated with the command of the Walcheren expedition. Its object was to take advantage of Napoleon's embroilment with Austria by destroying the French fleet and arsenals along the Scheldt and seizing Antwerp and Flushing. Chatham commanded nearly 40,000 troops. The naval commander, Sir Richard Strachan, had thirty-five ships of the line and many smaller vessels. On 29 July part of the army landed at Walcheren and captured Middleburg. Other detachments took fortresses at the mouth of the Scheldt. Flushing fell on 16 August, but the chance of an early capture of Antwerp was not taken. The city was heavily reinforced and fortified. Chatham suspended operations in September, left 15,000 men on Walcheren, and took the rest home. However, half the men left behind soon succumbed to 'Walcheren fever'. Thereupon orders were sent from London to destroy Flushing and abandon Walcheren. 
Chatham has been blamed for the operation's failure, but he was set an impossible task, for the medical establishment and resources were totally inadequate. Fortescue wrote of the expedition: 'It was dogged not merely by misfortune, but by cruel, and it may be said undeserved, adversity' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 7.96). Differences between the war minister, Castlereagh, and the foreign secretary, Canning, also contributed to the failure. Nevertheless, Chatham's natural laziness and mediocre military talents did not help. On his return he presented a partisan report to the king in private, instead of forwarding it to Castlereagh, the secretary of state. An inquiry into his conduct compromised his reputation, and in March 1810 he resigned as master-general of the ordnance. Relations between Chatham and Strachan had been strained during the campaign; each blamed the other for unpunctual action and delays, hence the epigram: '
Great Chatham, with his sabre drawn, 

Stood waiting for Sir Richard Strachan, 

Sir Richard, longing to be at 'em, 

Stood waiting for the Earl of Chatham. 

' Strachan's friends called him 'the late' Lord Chatham. Chatham was nevertheless promoted general on 1 January 1812. On the death of the duke of Kent in 1820 he became governor of Gibraltar, which post he held until his death. 
Physically, Chatham strongly resembled his father. Despite an aloofness and an undesirable indolence, he was an able administrator, being 'clear-headed and possessed [of] excellent judgement... At the Office of Ordnance his administration brought the British Artillery up to a pitch of excellence unknown in his day' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 7.55). He died on 24 September 1835 at 10 Charles Street, Berkeley Square, London, and was buried on 3 October in Westminster Abbey. At his death the peerage and its pensions became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 22331


Pitt, Moses (bap. 1639, d. 1697), bookseller and printer, was baptized at St Teath in Cornwall on 12 March 1639, the son of John Pitt, yeoman, and Joan ('nee' Mill). Pitt was educated locally and retained his personal links with the west of England throughout his life. His last publication describing the experiences of his nurse Ann Jefferies, who was said to have been visited by fairies and fed by them while in Bodmin gaol, contains a number of asides about his childhood on the large family farm. Pitt's younger sister Mary claimed to have seen the fairies but he did not. In 1654 he was apprenticed to the London bookseller Robert Littlebury, a freeman of the Haberdashers' Company. Pitt also took up his freedom with the Haberdashers in 1661 but unlike his first cousin, the paper merchant and publisher Adiel Mill, he never transferred to the more appropriate Stationers' Company. The first books to carry Pitt's name on the imprint were published from the White Hart in Little Britain, London, in 1667. They were characteristically learned publications, one of continental origin, and such material remained the hallmark of his business. After the great fire (1666) several of the heavy hitters of the London book trade moved into the neighbourhood and it may have been in this way that Pitt began to develop an effective network of contacts within the intellectual environment of print. His honesty and capacity for learning probably helped. According to the bookseller John Dunton, 'his wit and virtues were writ legibly in his face... and he had a great deal of sweetness in his natural temper' ('DNB'). 
On 3 July 1668 Pitt was married in London at St Luke's, Chelsea, to Mary Upman, sister of the Revd Stephen Upman, later elected a prebend of Westminster Abbey (1691). By the early 1670s Pitt was trading from the Angel in St Paul's Churchyard and was printing and publishing the work of members of the Royal Society, including Robert Boyle, and of such high flyers in the Church of England as Gilbert Burnet. Pitt was also importing books, and in 1678 became one of the first in the trade to sell books by auction. He used premises in Little Britain for the purpose. 
For Pitt 1678 was a critical year. In May, with the support of several of the leading members of the Royal Society, including Christopher Wren, he issued proposals for a huge twelve-volume 'Atlas' of the world. It was to be based on the plates cut for Janssen with a text partly attributed to Bishop William Nicholson and Richard Peers. Only four volumes were published. In September, Pitt signed a three-year lease on the Sheldonian Theatre, Oxford, with three other members of the London trade, including Thomas Guy, partly for use in printing the 'Atlas'. In the same year Pitt's relative Richard Mill died and named him as his executor, putting him in control of a valuable set of leases, notably the Blue-Boar's Head estate in Westminster. Pitt soon began to set about rationalizing his complex financial and business interests. His work as printer and publisher was increasingly focused on the 'Atlas' though he continued to undertake work for the Royal Society, appearing on the imprint of its 'Transactions' in 1683. At the same time he embarked on an extensive programme of building and improvement in Westminster. In 1685 he began to sell off his stock of books at auction and about the same time moved into one of his own houses in Duke Street, Westminster. However, in almost every area things were beginning to go wrong for Pitt. The 'Atlas' was becoming bogged down in rising costs estimated by Pitt at about $1000 per volume. Relations with his Oxford partners broke down and led to his arrest and the seizure of his property. This, the massive outlay on the Westminster estate, which he reckoned at nearly $19,000, and his belief in family values, initiated his final downfall. In June 1684 he entered into a statute staple with his cousin and creditor Adiel Mill and began to hand over all his assets in money, books, and property to Mill partly to avoid confiscation under any action of bankruptcy. Pitt's problems were compounded in the late 1680s when he became involved in a property deal with Chief Justice Jeffreys. In the middle of some intricate negotiations the removal of James II and the arrest of Jeffreys dealt a serious blow to Pitt's interests. With Mill refusing to return his assets and pursuing him for debt, Pitt was arrested in April 1689 at the suit of a bricklayer. 'Two days later', he wrote, 'I removed my self to the 'Fleet Prison'' and he remained a prisoner for debt there and subsequently in the king's bench for at least seven years. Soon after his arrest he was declared bankrupt. Pitt did not go quietly. In 1691 he published 'The Cry of the Oppressed' in which, as well as a stirring appeal on behalf of all prisoners for debt across the nation, he included a statement of his own 'Case', laying out in sometimes confusing detail the circumstances of his personal tragedy. In the mid-1690s he wrote and published two pamphlets, 'A Letter from Moses Pitt' (1695), defending Bishop Burnet, and 'An Account of one Ann Jefferies' (1696), which in December 1696 he sent to the Revd William Turner for inclusion in his work 'Remarkable Providences' (1697). Pitt died the following year. In his will (administration to his widow, 8 October 1697) he was described as printer in St Gregory's parish close to St Paul's, and he may have begun to try to reconstruct his career in these familiar surroundings. His estate was to be divided between his widow, Mary, and his son, John, who was to be given control of all his leases and property. 


@@@@@


doc= 22332


Pitt, Robert (1653-1713), physician, son of Robert Pitt, was born at Blandford Forum, Dorset. He matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, on 2 April 1669, and was elected to a scholarship there in 1670. He graduated BA in 1672, was elected a fellow of his college in 1674, and graduated MA in 1675, BM in 1678, and DM on 16 February 1682. Pitt was professor of anatomy at Oxford, and was elected FRS on 20 December 1682. He published two papers in the 'Philosophical Transactions': the first, in 1691, was based on observations made between 1651 and 1657 by George Ent on the change in body weight of the land tortoise after hibernation, and the second, in 1694, was on convulsive rheumatic lumbago. In 1684 he settled in London, and was admitted a candidate or member of the Royal College of Physicians on 22 December. He was created a fellow and admitted on 12 April 1687 by the controversial charter of James II, when some fellows were excluded and new ones admitted. He was a censor in 1687 and 1702. He lived in the parish of St Peter-le-Poer, in the City of London, from 1685 to 1703, when he moved to Hatton Garden. On the death of Francis Bernard he was, on 23 February 1698, elected physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital, and held office until 1707. 
Pitt took an active part in the controversy which followed the establishment of a dispensary by the Royal College of Physicians to provide medicines for the sick poor. He was not a signatory to the instrument establishing the dispensary, although the records show that he was present at the meeting, on 22 December 1696, when the document was approved. He later became a leading advocate of the plan and is said to have joined the dispensarian faction of the college out of a desire to reform the practice of medicine. In 1702 he published 'The Craft and Frauds of Physick Expos'd', dedicated to the president and governors of St Bartholomew's Hospital. In the third edition, published in 1703, he added a lengthy preface attacking the apothecaries whom he accused of acting as unlicensed medical practitioners, favouring expensive worthless drugs and oppressing the sick with too many medicines. In his review of contemporary therapy he favoured indigenous drugs over the 'rarer Productions of both the Indies' and condemned a number of items in the pharmacopoeia, including precious metals, precious stones, Bezoar stone, mummy, viper flesh, and some other drugs of animal origin. In 1704 he published 'The antidote, or, The preservative of life and health and the restorative of physick to its sincerity and perfection'; in 1705 'The frauds and villanies of the common practice of physick demonstrated to be curable by the college dispensary'; and in 1707 a pamphlet entitled 'The calamities of all the English in sickness'. Pitt was attacked by Joseph Browne in 1703 in a book entitled 'The modern practice of physic vindicated, and the apothecaries clear'd from the groundless imputations of Dr Pitt', and again in 1704, in an anonymous pamphlet, 'The censor-censur'd, or, The antidote examin'd where in the designs of Dr Pitt and the dispensary physicians are detected'. 
Pitt married Martha, daughter of John Nourse, of Wood Eaton, Oxfordshire, in 1686, and died at home in Hatton Garden, London on 13 January 1713. 


@@@@@


doc= 22333


Pitt, Thomas (1653-1726), merchant and politician, was born at Blandford, Dorset, on 5 July 1653, the second son of John Pitt (died 1672), the local rector, and his wife, Sarah, the daughter of John Jay of West Hemsworth, Witchampton, Dorset. His early trading career remains obscure, but in 1673 he sailed to India and jumped ship at Balasore to set himself up as an interloping merchant in defiance of the East India Company, which held a monopoly of commerce in that area. In 1675 orders were issued for him to be seized and taken back to England, but, despite promises to submit, he continued to trade independently, protected by company servants such as Matthias Vincent and Richard Edwards. He dealt in sugar and horses and made several trips to Persia; his success can be gauged by the persistence with which the company harassed him. By October 1679 he had married Jane ('c'.1661-1727), the daughter of James Innes of Reid Hall, Moray, and a relation of his patrons Vincent and Edwards; they had four sons, including the politician Thomas Pitt, and two daughters. 
When Pitt returned to England in the autumn of 1681 proceedings were initiated in chancery to keep him in the country, but to no avail, for he soon set sail again for India, obliging the company to issue further orders to apprehend the 'desperate fellow' whom they lambasted for a 'haughty, huffying, daring temper' (Dalton, 29-30). During this trip Pitt managed to obtain permission from the nawab of Bengal to establish a factory on the Hooghly, but on his return to England in 1683 he was arrested and bound over for $40,000. Four years later the company fined Pitt $1000, but the penalty was later reduced to only $400. Further reconciliation occurred in 1688, when he was made free of the company without having to pay an entry fine, and the following year he held $300 of its stock. Taking advantage of an enforced residence at home, he ploughed his profits into buying land in his native Dorset, where at a later date he indulged his passion for planting. Furthermore, these purchases facilitated his successful return as MP for Old Sarum in 1689. However, his election was declared void, and he had to fight a by-election at Salisbury the following May to regain a seat in the house. He predictably used the Commons as a platform from which to harangue the East India Company, and showed whiggish allegiance by supporting the disabling clause in the 'Corporation Bill'. In 1690 he gained another success at Salisbury, and in the early sessions of the parliament spearheaded the increasingly organized attack of the East Indian interlopers. He also proved critical of the government, testifying in November 1692 to the severe losses sustained by English merchants in the war and demanding the removal of foreigners from royal counsels. 
Pitt's parliamentary duties did not prevent him from undertaking another journey to India in 1693, which turned out to be his last interloping trip. Yet more futile attempts were made to stop him, but the company was eventually forced to bring him into the fold. He appears to have accepted their overtures readily, and acted in their interest on his return to England in 1695-6. He was still keen to pursue a parliamentary career, being returned in 1695 for Old Sarum. In the first session he signed the association in protest at the plot to assassinate the king, but opposed the ministry over the attainder of the conspirator Sir John Fenwick. However, he again deserted his Westminster post in order to accept appointment as president of the Coromandel Coast and governor of Fort St George at Madras. The failure of eighteen committee men to regain their places at the ensuing company elections highlighted his unpopularity with the stockholders, and he never won over company luminaries such as Sir Josiah Child, who regarded Pitt as 'that roughing, immoral man' (Dalton, 110). 
Pitt's early months in office were very fraught, and the creation of the New East India Company in September 1698 brought further uncertainties. Nevertheless, he proved a stubborn foe of the former interlopers, and was even prepared to obstruct his own cousin John Pitt, the new company's representative in his jurisdiction. Only the union of the two companies in 1702 would bring about reconciliation, and, although he later expressed grave reservations about the wisdom of such a move, Pitt was prepared to work with his former rivals. Such an accommodation was clearly advanced by the old company's recent struggle with the nawab of the Carnatic, who had blockaded Fort St George for three months. Showing great resourcefulness and an inbred ability for bold diplomacy, Pitt was able not only to raise the siege but also to obtain damages from the nawab. The following year his original term of office was extended in recognition of his achievements as president, which included the introduction of new exports, improved fortifications at Madras, and a continuing rise in the factory's revenues. However, lingering tensions between the companies continued to undermine his position, and concern for the management of his estate back home caused him endless worries. His anxieties led to a rift with his wife, and as early as September 1704 he was planning a return home. Gossipmongers in Madras and London took full advantage of his difficulties, most notably in 1705-6, when controversy raged over the bills of exchange he demanded to cover debts incurred by the new company's operations in Masulipatam. Having vindicated himself on this account, he then clashed with a member of the ruling council at Madras, William Fraser, whom he suspected of fomenting a dispute between local castes. He eventually decided to suspend Fraser, but when the matter was referred to the company in England the ruling court decided to dismiss Pitt and reinstate Fraser, news of which reached Madras in September 1709. This coup was made possible only by the incapacitating illness suffered by Pitt's great ally Sir Thomas Cooke, which deprived him of support at home. Pitt accepted his fate and made speedy preparations to leave India, but remained characteristically defiant to the end, challenging any 'to charge me with any one act of injustice during my government' ('Fortescue MSS', 1.43-4). 
A most significant factor in Pitt's decision to return home was his concern for the 'Regent' diamond, 'the unparalleled jewel of the world' which he had bought from a native merchant about March 1702 ('Fortescue MSS', 1.32). In its uncut form the diamond weighed 410 carats, and after much haggling Pitt had bought it for $20,400, only just over a quarter of the original asking price. The diamond was sent in 1702 to England, where at a cost of $5000 it was reduced to 140.5 carats, the dust and cleavage worth some $5000 to $7000 on its own. The tortuous process of finding a purchaser often drove Pitt to distraction, but war in Europe effectively closed the market for such a fabulous item, and it was still unsold when he left India in October 1709. Instead of returning straight home, he diverted his journey to Bergen in Norway, where he resided for nearly a year. During his stay he wrote a memorial defending his ownership of the diamond, motivated by reports that he had obtained it illegally. His funeral sermon would return to this theme, but still the rumours persisted, with Pope questioning the governor's honesty in his 'Epistle to Bathurst'. After many anxious years the diamond was finally sold in 1717 to the regent of France for $125,000, thanks to the agency of the financier John Law. It was incorporated in the French crown and later worn by Marie Antoinette, but in 1791 was auctioned by the revolutionary government for six times its purchase price. Although stolen before it could be sold, it was soon recovered, and was later transferred to the sword of Napoleon I. It has since remained in the possession of the state, and is normally displayed at the Louvre, Paris. 
Pitt returned to England in 1710 and resumed his parliamentary career, having secured election for Old Sarum that year. The new ministry had been forewarned to enlist his services as a politician who 'will have a powerful purse in England and be a thorn in the side of some great men now at the head of the Bank and India Company' ('Portland MSS', 4.594), and in the session of 1710-11 Pitt duly backed the tory administration in the Commons and the City. He stood unsuccessfully at the East India Company elections of 1711, but was appointed to the commission to build fifty new churches in London and its environs. However, by late 1711 he had reverted to whig ranks, and in June 1713 he voted against the government in the key division on the French commerce treaty. At the ensuing general election he was defeated when contesting Wiltshire, but was again returned for the pocket borough of Old Sarum. He remained a whig and warmly welcomed the Hanoverian succession, having in April 1714 broadcast his fears of French aggrandizement in the wake of the treaty of Utrecht. 
Pitt gained another victory at Old Sarum in 1715, and, expressing abhorrence of the Jacobite rebellion, helped to mobilize armed resistance in Dorset. The following year he somewhat surprisingly undertook the governorship of Jamaica, for which he forfeited his seat in the house. However, owing to disputes over his conditions of service, and perhaps in anticipation of a difficult posting, he never took up his appointment, and was able to return to Westminster via a by-election at Thirsk. He now proved an enemy of the ministry led by his son-in-law James Stanhope, opposing several government measures in 1719-20 and leading the campaign to punish those responsible for the South Sea Bubble, which he later claimed to have caused him 'very great losses' (Dalton, 557). At the next general election he resumed his seat at Old Sarum, which, despite declining vigour, he held until his death, 'from a mixture of apoplexy and palsy' ('Fortescue MSS', 1.76), at Swallowfield, Berkshire, on 28 April 1726. 
Pitt left a vast fortune, including properties in Westminster, Dorset, Cornwall, Wiltshire, Hampshire, and Berkshire. Most of his lands devolved to his eldest son, Robert, 'the bane of my family', whom he had mercilessly castigated for many years for personal failings and the mismanagement of the Pitt estate ('Fortescue MSS', 1.59). Relations between them had improved, but Pitt remained estranged from his wife, having never completely forgiven her for 'the hellish confusion' into which his family had fallen during his absence in India (ibid., 1.21-2). However, the governor could take pride at the success of his other offspring, his second son, Thomas, having been created Lord Londonderry, his third son, John, having gained military honours, and his daughter Lucy having married James Stanhope, a war hero and leading minister under George I. However, it was his grandson William Pitt (1708-1778), described by his doting grandfather as 'a hopeful lad', who added greatest lustre to the family name by becoming prime minister and Lord Chatham (ibid., 1.73). 
Pitt often cut a controversial figure, in large part as a result of his uncompromising way of doing business, and historians have also labelled him greedy and miserly. There is no doubting his toughness as a businessman, and his family could amply testify to his hardness as a taskmaster. On the other hand, his patriotism and commitment to public service cannot be questioned, and he was far from being a creature of the parties which dominated Westminster at that time. His advice to his son concerning conduct in the Commons is particularly illuminating: 'show yourself on all occasions a good Englishman and a faithful servant to your country. Avoid faction and never enter the House prepossessed, but attend diligently to the debate and vote according to your conscience, and not for any sinister end whatever. (Dalton, 70)' He could be most charitable to relations and friends, and proved himself an active local patron, restoring several churches, including that of his native parish of Blandford St Mary, where his body was laid to rest on 21 May 1726. Plain-speaking, resourceful, loyal, and determined, he was at his best when forging a niche for English traders in India, where his activities earned him fame as 'Diamond' or Governor Pitt, but these qualities were not fashioned to win him popularity among contemporaries or the approval of later generations. 


@@@@@


doc= 22334


Pitt, Thomas, first earl of Londonderry (c.1688-1729), politician, was the second of the six children of Thomas Pitt (1653-1726), governor of Madras, and his wife, Jane Innes ('c'.1661-1727). He was educated first privately, then from 1704 at Mr Meure's academy, near Soho Square, London, and, in 1707, at Mr Coulson's, Goodman's Fields, where he learned navigation. He became captain of a regiment of dragoons in 1709, served against the rebels in Lancashire in 1715, and was colonel of a cavalry regiment between 1715 and 1726. He represented Wilton in the Commons from August 1713 to July 1727, and was mayor of Wilton in 1716-17. 
Pitt married, on 10 March 1717, Lady Frances Ridgeway (died 1772), the younger daughter and coheir of Robert, fourth and last earl of Londonderry (created 1623), with whom he had three children, two sons and a daughter. 
On 3 January 1719 he was created baron of Londonderry in the kingdom of Ireland, and he took his seat in the Irish House of Lords on 8 July 1720. On 8 October 1726 he was further advanced to the dignities of Viscount Gallen-Ridgeway of Queen's county and earl of Londonderry, but he never sat in the Irish House of Lords as an earl. At the general election in August 1727 he was returned to the British House of Commons for Old Sarum, but he vacated his seat on his appointment to the post of governor-general of the Leeward Islands in May 1728, commissioned on 7 June 1727. There is no record of any speech made by him either in the Irish House of Lords or the British House of Commons. He died at St Kitts on 12 September 1729, aged forty-one, and was buried in the family vault in the church of Blandford St Mary, Dorset. 
Pitt's great-nephew, Lord Camelford, remembered him as 'a man of no character and of parts that were calculated only for the knavery of business, in which he over-reached others, & at last himself' (Lord Camelford, 'Family Characters and Anecdotes', 1781). Camelford's opinion was no doubt shaped by the bitter family legal battles over the settlement of Governor Pitt's estate. Pitt's widow, who inherited the Cudworth estate in Yorkshire, married, in December 1732, Robert Graham, of South Warnborough, Hampshire, and died on 18 May 1772. Pitt's elder son, Thomas (1717-1734), who succeeded as second earl, died from a fall from his horse on 24 August 1734, aged seventeen; his daughter Lucy (1722-1802?) became the wife of Pierce Meyrick, the youngest son of Owen Meyrick of Bodorgan, Anglesey, with whom she had a son, Ridgeway-Owen, and a daughter, Anne; and his younger son, Ridgeway (1722-1765), who succeeded as third earl, died unmarried on 8 January 1765, aged forty-three, when all the honours became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 22335


Pitt, Thomas, first Baron Camelford (1737-1793), politician and dilettante, was born and baptized at Boconnoc, Cornwall, on 3 March 1737, the only surviving son in the family of two sons and two daughters of Thomas Pitt ('c'.1705-1761), MP and lord warden of the stannaries, and his wife, Christian ('c'.1710-1750), the daughter of Sir Thomas Lyttelton, fourth baronet, of Hagley, Worcestershire. 
Following a rift between his parents, Pitt was schooled at Marylebone, Middlesex, from 1744. From 1751 he fell under the aegis of his father's as yet childless brother William Pitt, later earl of Chatham, whose admonitory letters to him on his studies and behaviour were published in 1804. His uncle encouraged him to part from his tyrannical father, who wished him to accompany him, with his sisters, into a debtor's exile on the continent. Pitt refused and, financed by William Pitt and his maternal uncle Sir Richard Lyttelton, who sent him to Brighton to improve his faltering health, he matriculated from Clare College, Cambridge, in 1754. He resided in college until 1758, and took his MA 'per literas regias' in 1759, when his father returned from abroad. After dramatic scenes with his irate and desperate father, he agreed to pay the latter's debts and settle $5000 each on his sisters by cutting the entail on his prospective inheritance, a settlement that incurred his uncle Pitt's disapproval. Seeking to mend his health and shattered nerves in a warmer climate, Pitt set off in the train of Lord Kinnoull, appointed ambassador to Portugal, in February 1760. His companions were Lord Strathmore and Philip Francis. They were at Lisbon from March to May, and proceeded through Spain to Italy. Pitt described his travels to the poet Thomas Gray and wrote a detailed journal of them, which is extant in the British Library. He stayed with his uncle Sir Richard Lyttelton and with Sir Horace Mann, who escorted him to the Uffizi in Florence, and he also visited Venice and Rome. News of his father's death on 17 July 1761, only three weeks after his marriage to his second wife, Maria Murray, reached him in August at San Casciano. Reluctantly he proceeded home, after a long delay caused by his failure to secure a French passport in wartime; while he waited he visited Naples. He returned to England via Germany in December 1761 and duly cut off the entail. His memoir of 'Family characters and anecdotes', written for his son in 1781, reveals his abiding dislike for his father's pugnacious temper and unforgivable mistreatment of his mother. 
As part of his inheritance Pitt became parliamentary patron of Old Sarum and, to a large extent, of Okehampton. He sat as MP first for Old Sarum from December 1761 to 1768, and then for Okehampton from 1774 to 1784. When the duke of Newcastle reminded him that his father had promised to surrender to him the seat he first occupied in parliament, he retorted that he was not bound by this, and that his payment of his father's debts was conditional on his obtaining the seat. As it was, he had sacrificed his father's interest in Bodmin and Lostwithiel boroughs and failed in an application to succeed him as lord warden of the stannaries. At first he supported Lord Bute, but soon wavered. He joined the faction led by his first cousin once removed, George Grenville, who, on becoming prime minister, placed him at the Admiralty board in April 1763. His attachment to Grenville further estranged him from his uncle Pitt and alienated his neighbour Horace Walpole, who was outraged at his and Grenville's attempt to secure the allegiance of Walpole's beloved cousin General Henry Seymour Conway. This was followed by a storm in a teacup in March 1764 over the election for high steward of Cambridge University, when Pitt withheld his anticipated vote for Lord Sandwich, who was narrowly defeated. Nevertheless, he began to make his mark in debate, seconding the address ably in January 1765. 
Pitt resigned his place with Grenville in August 1765, though the new premier, Rockingham, in deference to his uncle Pitt, would have allowed him to stay put, and his name was at first inserted in the new commission. His stance became clear when he spoke and voted against the repeal of Grenville's 'Stamp Act'. In 1766 he refused office, even though his uncle Pitt, now earl of Chatham, was the mainstay of the duke of Grafton's administration: instead he visited France. His adherence was still to Grenville, whom he reconciled to his Pitt relatives in 1768. Although he disliked the populist tendencies of the radical John Wilkes, and voted against him on 2 February 1769, he joined Grenville the next day in speaking and voting against Wilkes's expulsion, and on 17 March he contradicted the house's right to declare Wilkes ineligible to sit in the Commons. He joined the Thatched House tavern celebration of the Westminster electors' freedom on 9 May, but was reproached in the press for his sale of the two seats for Old Sarum, one to a government supporter. 
Grenville's death in November 1770 left Pitt leaderless, and he became politically less attentive (he visited France again in 1771) and more independent, although as late as 25 February 1774 he sought to make Grenville's 'Election Act' permanent. He supported the Feathers tavern petitioners in their attempt to end the requirement for university students at Oxford and Cambridge to subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' in order to graduate or become ordinands. In March 1772 he opposed both government and opposition on the 'Royal Marriages Bill', which he ridiculed. He himself had married, on 29 July 1771, Anne (1738-1803), the daughter and coheir of Pinckney Wilkinson, a London merchant, of Burnham, Norfolk. She brought a dowry of $30,000 and as much again in expectation, and Pitt returned Wilkinson, as well as himself, to parliament as members for Old Sarum in 1774. The marriage produced a daughter, Anne (1772-1864), the future wife of the politician William Wyndham Grenville (1759-1834), and a son, Thomas Pitt, later second Baron Camelford (1775-1804). 
Having in 1774 reconciled his kinsmen lords Chatham and Temple, who had long been estranged, Pitt did not attend parliament until 17 February 1778, when, after referring pointedly to his absence, he declared himself favourable to peace with America; a month later he supported the removal of Lord North's ministry. He did not join the opposition, however, but acted as an intermediary in a failed bid to recruit Chatham for the ministry in March 1778. Chatham's death dismayed him and, crippled suddenly with arthritis, he took his family to Italy in September, staying at Florence and Naples. 
On his return to England early in 1780 Pitt seemed prepared to take on Chatham's mantle. He reappeared in the Commons in April to support Dunning's motion deploring the baleful influence of the crown and bitterly assailed Lord North as a harbinger of national decline, a theme to which he returned repeatedly. He supported motions against the war in America and unsuccessfully called for a halt to supply on 30 November 1781. When North's ministry fell he became more active in debate and moved for a statement of government finance since 1776. The reformist schemes of his young cousin William Pitt perplexed him, however. Though he supported the disenfranchisement of revenue officers on 16 April 1782, he opposed William Pitt's attack on pocket boroughs on 7 May, regarding them as the best shield, in the hands of propertied magnates (such as himself), against the influence of the crown. He preferred Chatham's notion of increasing the number of county seats. When, on 7 May 1783, Pitt proposed adding 100 of these, he thought the figure excessive, especially as there was a concomitant reduction of borough seats; he was willing to sacrifice Old Sarum, regarded as the 'ne plus ultra' of pocket boroughs, as it had no resident voters. It was at this point that Sir Nathaniel Wraxall described him as 'a very plausible speaker... [who] had a seductive species of querulous eloquence' ('Historical and Posthumous Memoirs', 3.67). Pitt was less sympathetic to Charles James Fox's reformist schemes, and, though he seconded Fox's motion to secure the independence of the Irish parliament on 17 May 1782, he distanced himself from Fox's argument; furthermore, on 18 December he obviated a motion of Fox's without consulting the ministry. On 17 February 1783 he moved the address on Shelburne's peace bid and denounced Fox's coalition with Lord North to obtain power. 
When Shelburne's ministry fell, Pitt was suddenly the man of the moment, and unfit for it. The king, rather than acquiesce in the Fox-North coalition, cast about for an alternative, and offered him, through Lord Gower, the Home Office and the lead in the Commons. Pitt declined, and advised the king to approach Fox and North, but without concealing his aversion to their coalition. The king failed to persuade him to reconsider high office at the end of March, and could see that his health was not up to it. Pitt steadfastly opposed the coalition, attacking their 'East India Bill' on 20 November 1783 and their objection to royal interference on 17 December. When Pitt's cousin William became premier, he at once was offered, as head of the family, a peerage; after obtaining an alteration to the title first proposed, he was created Baron Camelford on 5 January 1784. He encouraged his cousin not to take his early setbacks in the Commons to heart, and in the Lords gave him his support, other than on two occasions: on the ministry's bid, in August 1784, to extract a statement of their profits from nabobs returning from India, and in 1785 on the proposed parliamentary reform. Fox and Edmund Burke made fun of him in the Commons, and he was mocked in the opposition satire 'Rolliad'. His last speeches in the Lords, in 1786, were critical of the proposals of his kinsman Lord Stanhope to reduce the national debt. In 1789 he was prepared, though his offer was refused, to provide financial support for the premier, whose widowed mother he had already helped out. Instead he invested unwisely in an attempt, through a local agent, to restore his family's parliamentary interest in the borough of Bodmin. 
Throughout his life Camelford took a deep and informed interest in the arts. In March 1762 he embellished a small house in Twickenham, wittily dubbing it the Palazzo Pitti. He thus became a neighbour, by choice or persuasion, and surely not by chance, of Horace Walpole, who had described him in February 1760 as 'not only a most ingenious young man, but also a most amiable one' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 21.364). He impressed Walpole as a kindred spirit, both of them being finical if not effeminate, with the bonus of a keen interest in gothick architecture. He provided Walpole with designs for interior features at Strawberry Hill, and on 1 May 1763 joined the Dilettanti Society. In that year he probably designed a gothick cottage, bridge of rocks, and conservatory for Henry Seymour Conway at Park Place near Henley. Following his political quarrel with Walpole, whom he tried hard to conciliate, he left Twickenham in 1764. He designed the wainscoting for cathedral stalls at Carlisle, where his uncle Charles Lyttelton was then bishop; the Palladian bridge at Hagley, Worcestershire, for another uncle, George, first Baron Lyttelton; and the Corinthian arch for his kinsman Earl Temple at Stowe. At Boconnoc, where his father's financial ruin had left him only books and china, wasted gardens, and no timber, he restocked the domicile and designed and built a second wing as a family portrait gallery. In 1771 he erected an obelisk in the restored grounds to the memory of his uncle Sir Richard Lyttelton. His London home, Camelford House at the top of Park Lane, its front at 16 Oxford Street, was built that year, probably to his design. In 1778 Horace Walpole magnanimously recommended him to Earl Harcourt to design the gothick portion of a monument to his late father. That year he had secured family permission for a death mask of Lord Chatham to be taken by the sculptor Joseph Wilton. 
In 1779 Pitt purchased the lease of Petersham Lodge, the grounds of which were eventually, following the lodge's demolition, to be included in Richmond Park, Surrey. He bought it in fee simple from the crown by an act of 1784. In 1790 he sold the lodge to the duke of Clarence. In 1785 he failed to persuade the Society of Dilettanti to complete the building, which he had begun, of two adjoining houses in Hertford Street, for a public museum. White clay on his Cornish estate furnished material for the Plymouth porcelain factory of Richard Champion, which he patronized, although its fierce competitor, the Wedgwood pottery factory at Etruria, made Pitt's portrait medallion. He also befriended Thomas Mudge in his attempts to improve nautical chronometers, and the artists John Soane, whom he met in Rome, and Angelica Kauffmann. While in Rome in 1788 he took up the cause of British artists there who despaired of sending their works home because of high import duties. He monitored and presented to his cousin William Pitt their petition concocted by the medallist Nathaniel Marchant, which procured some exemption for them. 
Camelford was more tentative in literary matters, and was not ambitious of publication, though he may have been the author of sundry anonymous ephemera, a habit of his which Horace Walpole attributed to George Grenville's example. Sir John Sinclair ascribed to him a 'Letter to the Author' of his 'Lucubrations' of 1782, in which the writer maintained that open parliamentary boroughs were far more corrupt than pocket ones. Burke adjudged him the author in January 1784 of a pamphlet on the constitutional right of the Commons to advise the sovereign, and mockingly accredited him with another of the year before in which he had decried parliamentary reform; possibly this was the reply to Sinclair. He was reputedly the author of a tract about the American War of Independence and denied publishing a pamphlet on the French Revolution in 1789. What is undoubtedly his is a sad reflection of his family vicissitudes: in 1785 he published 'Narrative and Proofs' of the misconduct of his brother-in-law Captain John Smith, who had married Mary Wilkinson in 1760. After she had been disowned by his father, Camelford had generously sustained Mary and her family during the collapse of her marriage, which he had tried to repair in 1772. Smith nevertheless obtained an annuity of $200 from him in a lawsuit. 
Camelford's declining years were spent chiefly abroad, in Italy, and, after a month's sojourn at home in 1791, in Brussels, where he frequented counter-revolutionary circles and befriended the widow of Charles James Stuart, the countess of Albany. However, he fled Brussels in November 1792 and returned to Italy. He died in Florence on 19 January 1793 and was buried at Boconnoc on 2 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 22336


Pitt, Thomas, second Baron Camelford (1775-1804), naval officer and rake, was born on 19 February 1775 at Boconnoc House, Cornwall, the younger of two children of Thomas Pitt, first Baron Camelford (1737-1793), landowner and politician, and Anne (1738-1803), daughter of Pinckney Wilkinson, London merchant and MP. Pitt passed his childhood predominantly at Boconnoc, where he was educated by tutors. His parents took him in 1786 to a school kept by Mr Meuron in Neuchatel in Switzerland and then sent him in July 1789 to Charterhouse School in London, a place he hated so much that he left after only nine days, never to return. During the course of this erratic education he was enrolled on 25 September 1781 as a captain's servant on board HMS 'Tobago', but he did not actually see naval service until 9 September 1789, when he boarded the 'Guardian', a partly armed sloop destined for New South Wales. After striking a field of ice near the Cape of Good Hope the ship was deserted by a great part of the crew, but together with the commander Pitt succeeded in bringing the wreck into Table Bay in February 1790. 
Praised for his actions, Pitt joined the 'Discovery' on 12 March 1791, under the command of Captain George Vancouver. During the voyage around the Pacific coast of North America he was flogged several times and placed in irons for acts of insubordination, losing his rank of master's mate and finally being discharged by Vancouver while in Hawaii. Placed on a supply ship headed for England on 7 February 1794, Pitt was enraged by what he considered unjust treatment. During the voyage he learnt of his father's death on 19 January 1793, which made him the second Baron Camelford and a young nobleman of some considerable wealth. After leaving the supply ship and making his way to Malacca in the Dutch East Indies he boarded the 'Resistance', where he was soon promoted to acting lieutenant. Such was his friendship with the captain that when he left the frigate in November 1795 he did so as third lieutenant, having served with courage and distinction in the seizure of Malacca from the Dutch. He returned to England in September 1796 when the long-held dispute with Vancouver came to a head in a notorious manner. 
Incensed still by the injustices served against him, Camelford invited Vancouver twice to duel, but Vancouver preferred to submit the matter for naval adjudication. On 21 September 1796 Vancouver was walking up Conduit Street in London when Camelford, on seeing him, dashed across the road and proceeded to rain blows upon him with his cane. The violent episode caused much gossip in the newspapers and prompted a caricature from the satirical pen of James Gillray. The lord chancellor intervened and Camelford agreed to keep the peace in the future or forfeit the sum of $10,000. 
In April 1797 Camelford was promoted to the rank of lieutenant. Later that year Rear-Admiral Harvey, commander-in-chief of the fleet in the Leeward Islands, appointed him as acting commander of the 'Favourite' owing to the sickness of the captain. Charles Peterson, the first lieutenant of the ship and senior to Camelford, was indignant at his supersession and managed to transfer to the 'Perdrix', another sloop in the English harbour in Antigua. This was soon followed by the departure both of the captain of the 'Perdrix' and then of the ship 'Babet', whose captain, Jemmett Mainwaring, had been the senior officer in port. A question now arose as to who was officially in charge. Mainwaring had assumed Camelford was senior, being acting commander, and so deposited the port orders with him. Peterson, however, believed he was, on account of being senior on the lieutenants list and acting representative for his captain on leave. A threat of action resulted in Camelford's issuing orders to Peterson to prepare his men for possible attack. This Peterson refused, and by return ordered the young peer to do likewise. Camelford, annoyed at being undermined, sent an acting lieutenant, Milward, and a party of marines to arrest Peterson. Met with resistance, Milward withdrew to the quayside and was soon joined by both Camelford and the gathering armed marines from both ships. Camelford, armed with a pistol, walked towards the men of the 'Perdrix', twice demanding to know the whereabouts of Peterson and whether he still refused to obey his orders. Peterson replied that he did and Camelford fired, killing the lieutenant instantly. 
On 20 January 1798, Camelford was tried before a court martial at Martinique. After five days the court concluded that he be 'unanimously and honourably acquitted' (TNA: PRO, Adm 1/5343), it being understood that he had been the senior officer and that Peterson, by his actions, was the mutineer. Despite his acquittal, he suffered much public vilification and consequently left the West Indies as commander of the 'Terror', reaching England by July 1798. 
Later in 1798 Camelford resolved to travel to France, incognito. On the coach to Dover he met Captain Maistral, a French prisoner of war returning home under the terms of an exchange agreement. Maistrel gave to Camelford a letter of introduction to Citizen Barras, one of the directors of the republic, describing his willingness to serve France. The boatmen became suspicious of Camelford and handed him over to the collector of customs, who searched him, found the letter, and sent him as a prisoner to London. After a special session of the privy council, he was pardoned and freed, despite it being a capital offence by law for anyone to attempt to travel to France. It was agreed that he was not guilty of any treasonable activity, but his motives remained unclear. The newspapers thought him 'deranged' ('London Chronicle') and the Admiralty refused him the command of a ship thereafter. Angrily, he resigned his commission, thereby ending his naval career. 
In autumn 1799 Camelford took lodgings at 64 Baker Street and while settling into civilian life seems to have formed an affection for his cousin Lady Hester Stanhope. He was 'just under six feet two inches in height, with curly brown hair, bold blue eyes, and a lithe muscular figure' (Tolstoy, 90), yet Lady Hester also admired his 'reckless disregard for the opinions of others, his love of adventure, and his contempt for humbug and hypocrisy' (ibid., 93). Apart from their strong mutual admiration no evidence can confirm any deeper relationship. Camelford was concerned with his overall appearance and his dress became extremely fashionable and innovative, as is evident from contemporary illustrations. Lady Hester's accounts of his life also suggest that he possessed a compassionate and generous side which as a close confidante she was privy to. He regularly gave money to the poor and was keen to correct an injustice served against those less fortunate than himself. 
Camelford was never far from the public eye and continued to attract notoriety. He was fined in court for having quarrelled with and assaulted a man at the theatre in May 1799. In February 1800 his friend and lodger at Baker Street, Peter Abbott, annoyed the peer with an utterance at dinner, whereon Camelford tried to force a duel; a struggle and assault ensued. Abbott eventually withdrew the intended legal proceedings. In October 1801, at the time of the celebrations of peace with France, all houses were illuminated in the West End. Camelford however gave orders that his house be left in darkness. The celebratory mob attacked the house, prompting him to rush out and bludgeon his assailants, an action that resulted in personal injury and more newspaper column space. He was not obviously politically active, but his erratic loyalties gave considerable concern to his family. He twice voted against Pitt's government on the issue of peace negotiations with France. He later wrote to his brother-in-law, Lord Grenville, explaining it was a complete misunderstanding on his part. A year later his antics became just as bizarre when he befriended the old whig and libertarian Revd John Horne Tooke and backed him as MP for the rotten borough of Old Sarum. Duly elected, Horne Tooke entered Westminster in February 1801. Efforts were made by Lord Temple to oust this radical and friend of France on the grounds that as a clergyman he should not be allowed to sit in parliament. This motion failed in the Commons, but a few years later Addington, the new prime minister, introduced a law excluding clergymen from holding parliamentary seats. The whole matter greatly angered Camelford, who sold Old Sarum soon afterwards for nearly $40,000. Gillray and other caricaturists continually depicted Camelford in the company of opposition politicians such as Richard Brinsley Sheridan and Charles James Fox and their great supporter the prince of Wales. 
Camelford's eccentric political activities are further illustrated by a trip to France in the winter of 1801. Disguised and armed with a specially designed repeating pistol, he dodged both the English and French coastal authorities and reached Paris. His intentions are not known for sure but it has been suggested that he planned to assassinate Napoleon Bonaparte, for he was friendly with many French royalists and knowledgeable of their plots to rid their homeland of the first consul. The French authorities eventually caught him, and sent him back to England only after he had convinced them of his innocence and his support of republican France by citing his collaboration with the radicals in Westminster. Remarkably, he attempted another foray to France only a year later. This time the authorities, taking no chances, almost immediately incarcerated him in the Temple, the state prison in Paris, and returned him home after the intervention of the British ambassador. Deeply distressed by the death of his mother on 5 May 1803, he let Camelford House, in Oxford Street, London, and continued to live at 148 New Bond Street with Robert Barrie, an old navy colleague who seems to have been his closest lifelong friend. His life at this time alternated between serious scientific and literary studies and a riotous social life, typified by his enthusiastic promotion of pugilism. 
In March 1804 Camelford was involved in a duel with his old friend and fine shot Thomas Best. A woman known to both men claimed that she and Camelford had been insulted by Best; Camelford demanded satisfaction, even though he may have known the allegation was false. On 7 March 1804 Camelford met Best in the early hours of the morning in the meadows surrounding Holland House, Kensington. Camelford fired first but missed; Best's shot hit Camelford, who fell mortally wounded. He died in Kensington on 10 March 1804, aged twenty-nine. His body was placed in the north vault of St Anne's Church in Dean Street, Soho, London, after an early morning funeral service on 17 March. In his will he stated that he wished to be buried on the island of St Pierre in the Lake of Bienne in Switzerland 'where the surrounding scenery will smile upon me', an unusual request that Lord Nelson alluded to in a letter from 'Victory' on 14 May 1804. His wish was never fulfilled and his coffin lies in the old crypt beneath the tidied remains of the bombed Soho church. 


@@@@@


doc= 22337


Pitt, William, first earl of Chatham (1708-1778), prime minister, was born on 15 November 1708 at Golden Square, Westminster, the fourth child and second son of Robert Pitt (1680?-1727), politician, of Boconnoc, Cornwall, and his wife, Harriet Villiers (died 1736), younger daughter of General the Honourable Edward Villiers of Dromana, co. Waterford, and his wife, Katharine Fitzgerald, Viscountess Grandison. 
Pitt's mother came from notable Irish aristocratic families; his father's family were of lesser English gentry origin until his grandfather Thomas 'Diamond' Pitt (1653-1726), merchant, MP, and East India Company governor of Madras, made the family fortunes. As a young boy William had some contact with his paternal uncle James Stanhope, Earl Stanhope, an experienced soldier and leading whig, and in his schooldays his formidable paternal grandfather saw enough of him to recognize him as 'a hopefull lad' ('Fortescue MSS', 1.73). The letters of his young manhood suggest he was more familiar with his mother's side of the family. With his paternal inheritance came 'the Governor's' feuding family relations and something of his tempestuous character -- evident occasionally even in the young man's correspondence. 
William was educated at Eton College from 1719 to 1726; he went up to Trinity College, Oxford, in 1727, and on to Utrecht from some time early in 1728. Although his tutor at Eton recognized 'good abilities' and a good disposition in him, apparently neither Eton nor Oxford favourably impressed him (Dropmore MSS, series 2, BL, Add. MS 69288, no. 2). Much later he was to comment that 'he had scarce observed a boy who was not cowed for life at Eton', and his own sons were sent to neither institution ('Life of William, Earl of Shelburne', 1.72). Perhaps at school began the warping of his warm, affectionate disposition. Certainly he had already begun to suffer from the variety of ailments in different parts of the body -- limbs, stomach, bowels, head -- which were to afflict him all his life and which contemporaries loosely referred to as gout. These were to be associated, possibly from his thirties, certainly in later life, with nervous or psychological disorders which he and his doctor called 'lowness' and which we might call clinical depression or even manic depressive insanity or bipolar disorder. 
Of necessity, as an impecunious younger son, Pitt had to look for a career. Only at the end of eight unsettled years from 1726 to 1734 did the young man look to politics. Any thought on his father's part that Pitt might take up one of the family's ecclesiastical livings had been given up by the time he left Eton. There was no obvious vocational purpose behind his studies at Oxford, which were cut short, it seems most likely, by his father's sudden death, or at Utrecht, where he had some financial support from his brother, Thomas. How long he remained at Utrecht is unclear, but by the beginning of 1730 he was back in England, kicking his heels on various family country estates. Then early in 1731 another career was opened for him with the help of a friend from Eton days, George Lyttelton, whose sister Christian his elder brother, Thomas, married about this time. Lyttelton introduced William to his wealthy and influential soldier uncle, Richard Temple, Viscount Cobham, in whose regiment of horse William was granted a cornet's commission. The $1000 cost was very probably met by Sir Robert Walpole in an attempt to secure Thomas Pitt's considerable electoral influence, built up by his grandfather. William spent parts of the next two years in camp but in 1733-4 he was off to the continent once more, probably again with his brother's help, for the grand tour which would complete the education of a young man of social standing. Pitt's mini-tour befitted his limited means: seven months in France and Switzerland, but no time in Italy. 
The general election of 1734, the first after Pitt's coming of age, opened another avenue to explore. However, not until his brother had secured his own and his sister's husband's return, and had decided to reject an offer to buy out William's claim on a seat at the family pocket borough of Old Sarum, was William returned to represent its electors -- all five of them -- in February 1735. Even then his political career was hardly determined. His correspondence at the time suggests more the normal pastimes of a not particularly serious young man than political ambition. Furthermore, Thomas Pitt had been a government supporter for some time, and William had expressed surprise that the proposed accommodation at his expense over the seat for Old Sarum was to have been with one 'declared in opposition' rather than someone 'more agreeable to Sir Robert' (Dropmore MSS, series 2, BL, Add. MS 69289, nos. 17-18) -- surprise which suggests that he was not thinking of taking a similar stance. Within two months of his return to parliament, however, he had indeed declared his opposition to Walpole in what Lord Perceval called a 'distinguished' maiden speech in support of a bill to remove placemen from parliament ('Egmont Diary', 2.171). 
Although apparently not premeditated, such a move was hardly surprising. Pitt's one patron, Lord Cobham, was now in open opposition, having recently been relieved of his regimental command for his behaviour in the excise crisis of 1733. Pitt's brother had also been secretly moving in the same direction. In any case a young man of William Pitt's ability might well forgo the lure of office for the heady excitement of an opposition which had in the recent crisis so nearly toppled the great Walpole and had won the propaganda battle by its vigorously argued 'patriot' programme. By the summer of 1735 Pitt was enjoying the distinguished company at Cobham's magnificent country seat at Stowe. Cobham's young nephews, Richard Grenville (his heir) and George Lyttelton, also recently returned to parliament, readily adopted Pitt as one of 'Cobham's Cubs' -- the spearhead of Cobham's now implacable opposition. 
Soon the cubs, with their patron, began to move into even more distinguished circles. Frederick, prince of Wales, whose relations with his parents were deteriorating in a pattern becoming typical of Hanoverian monarchs, seemed likely to become the potent figurehead of opposition. In April 1736 the whig opposition leader, William Pulteney, provocatively moved an address to George II on the occasion of the prince's marriage, a marriage well known to be displeasing to the king. On this occasion all three cubs made 'very remarkable speeches', aptly summed up by Lord Hervey as insinuating, 'not in very covert terms' (Hervey, 2.553), that the nation owed the match and the dynastic stability it promised much less to the king than to the request of the prince and the voice of the people. Later in the year Hervey told the queen that Pitt was 'perpetually with the Prince, and at present in the first rank of his favour' (ibid., 2.613). In February 1737 all three cubs spoke again on the even more provocative Pulteney motion, only narrowly defeated, asking the king to grant the prince an establishment of $100,000 a year. Meanwhile, Pitt's notoriety had been enhanced when his opposition secured his dismissal from his cornetcy in May 1736. Compensatory reward came after the prince broke openly with his parents in July 1737, when Pitt became groom of the bedchamber to the prince, a position bringing him a welcome $400 a year. 
Pitt had begun to discover the power to command attention by his oratory but, in carelessly giving offence to the king, had displayed a recklessness that was to become characteristic. However, for some time, seemingly governed by the prince's fluctuating interests, he played only a sporadic role in opposition. With his young friends he supported the patriot cause in debates on moves in 1737 and 1738 to reduce the size of the army but was silent on other major issues. He was drawn in somewhat more as opposition grew to Walpole's handling of disputes with Spain over trade in the Caribbean. In March 1739, in debates on the convention of the Pardo with Spain -- soon after the prince had committed himself to open opposition -- Pitt was said to have spoken 'very well, but very abusively' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 3.519) of the 'national ignominy' of yet another negotiated settlement 'odious throughout the kingdom' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 10, 1737-9, 1283, 1280). His sentiments echoed those of other major speakers. His vehemence, however, brought Walpole supporters to their feet in reply, while Walpole himself made notes on the speech. However, no speeches from Pitt are reported from the next parliamentary session. In 1740-41 he was more active (with Lyttelton), most notably on the famous motion of 13 February 1741 for an address to the king to dismiss Walpole. Then Pitt cited precedents for the removal of ministers on political grounds and, in what William Coxe reported as 'his emphatic language', criticized Walpole's administration for financial improvidence at home, while concentrating on the way in which, abroad (as Walpole himself summarized the argument), 'the system of Europe was totally subverted' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 1.653). This time the cubs distinguished themselves from other supporters of the prince who, with many tories, left without voting. Yet in the next session -- following the 1741 general election, in which Pitt was again returned for Old Sarum -- he took part in only the final crucial policy debate in the proceedings which brought Walpole to resignation in February 1742. 
It is hardly surprising that such an erratic record did not win Pitt a place in the limited ministerial reconstruction which followed. However, he soon reinforced his claim as a rising young politician by two wide-ranging speeches supporting moves to set up a parliamentary inquiry into Walpole's years in power. His outspokenness won him one of the last places on the eventually ineffective secret committee of inquiry. 
Very soon Pitt won new notice as a speaker of first rank. As the limited war with Spain of 1739 merged into general European conflict over the Austrian succession from 1740, opposition to the interventionist foreign policy of Lord Carteret became focused, late in 1742, on Britain's recent agreement to take 16,000 Hanoverian troops into British pay. Always latent, anti-Hanoverian sentiment rose sharply, expressing widespread popular disillusionment with post-Walpolean politics. To this anti-Hanoverianism Pitt gave parliamentary voice without thought for the consequences. In November he spoke against payment of the troops, in Richard Grenville's words 'like ten thousand angels' (Smith, 1.19). A little later he argued that their hiring was but another instance of the way in which 'this great, this powerful, this formidable kingdom, is considered only as a province to a despicable electorate' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 12, 1741-3, 1035) -- words which compounded his offence to the king while extending it to the prince of Wales, from whom he was already alienated by the prince's reconciliation with the king. In the following session Pitt probed divisions among ministers with a new political sharpness by repeatedly attacking Carteret as 'an execrable, a sole minister', 'a Hanover troop minister', who was establishing 'a Prerogative Administration' (ibid., 13, 1743-7, 136n., 465n., 678n.). At the same time Pitt was developing an alternative policy of limited European commitment. As the war situation worsened early in 1744 he sustained his parliamentary campaign but with a new moderation. Now, independent of Cobham as well as the prince in his views, he was indeed a credible contender for office. 
Yet when, in November, the king was forced by the Pelhams to abandon Carteret, now Earl Granville, Pitt was the only leading whig left out of the reconstructed ministry. As these manoeuvres unfolded over the summer he had been isolated in Bath by the first major attack of his complex 'gout'. Much more significantly the king adamantly refused to tolerate him in the office of secretary at war for which he chose to press. Pitt had to accept his exclusion, softened by promises from the Pelhams. Indeed, his only two recorded contributions to the next parliamentary session showed conclusively that he had cast his lot with them. Making the first of his many dramatic appearances 'with the mien and apparatus of an invalid' (Philip Yorke's journal, Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 13, 1743-7, 1054n.), he delivered what Horace Walpole considered a 'very strong and much admired speech' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 19.4) -- indeed a striking overview of recent policy -- defending an increased number of troops for Flanders. Later he warmly supported the obvious ruse of increased aid to Austria so that at least half the Hanoverian troops that Britain was no longer to employ could be re-engaged. And in March, Pitt at last finalized his breach with the prince of Wales by resigning his household post. 
However, as the war situation worsened further in 1745 and Jacobite rebellion seemed near success Pitt grew impatient. When parliament resumed, by supporting a number of embarrassing motions while judiciously advertising his loyalty he brought the Pelhams to negotiate directly with him for the first time. He took a tough stance, imposing three patriot conditions. Negotiations broke down over his demand for a redirection of war policy towards maritime conflict with the Bourbons. Now Pitt publicized these new views by moving for an address to the king to augment the navy. In a striking speech notable for its abuse of Pelham, he claimed 'We are designed by [nature] for a maritime power. Experience sufficiently confirms... when we endeavour to exert our strength by sea we become the dread of the world when by land the contempt of it' (BL, Stowe MS 354, fol. 248). However, in the crisis of rebellion by land Pitt's motion received little support. There was even less for his later spoiling motions. 
Thus isolated, Pitt had to take the initiative in renewing contacts with the ministry. This time he put negotiations into Cobham's hands without conditions and had to withdraw his demand to be secretary at war. Only when the issue of his preferment became part of the full-scale showdown in February 1746 between the king and the ministers he scarcely seemed to tolerate, and the king had to submit to the Pelhams, did Pitt at last gain office. At first it was only the sinecure joint vice-treasurership for Ireland. When the chance arose in May he became paymaster-general -- an office which required no attendance on the king. 
His second-rank office gave Pitt some experience of eighteenth-century administration. He took his office seriously; like Pelham before him, he renounced the customary financial perquisites from which others made fortunes. He tackled his duties energetically, not leaving them largely to deputies, and winning the respect of subordinates. In 1754 he successfully promoted a measure of reform connected with his office, an act providing for payment in advance rather than arrears to Chelsea pensioners, thus relieving them from the grip of moneylenders. 
Pitt had won office by his parliamentary skills. Yet over the next eight years relatively few speeches are recorded, and most are on foreign affairs; only for 1751 are there records of speeches on a range of issues. There is, however, clear evidence beyond the sparse records of parliamentary debates for his claims that he wielded the 'oar of parliamentary drudgery' ('Memoirs and Correspondence of... Lyttelton', 2.467) on routine business and gave his 'most zealous endeavours in parliament, on the points that laboured the most' (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32734, fol. 323), notably the annual mutiny bills which the opposition targeted and, above all, foreign policy. 
On foreign policy Pitt's muting of his earlier patriot stance in remarkable acquiescence to the ministry's views is most obvious. Very early, in April 1746, to the duke of Newcastle's delight, Pitt defended the year's vote to employ Hanoverian troops as warmly as he had previously attacked it. He did so on political grounds: he 'was now with a set of men with whom he should ever think it an honour to act, and that he should not act with them falsely, hollowly, or coldly' (Ilchester, 'Fox, Family and Relations', 1.134). When, in February 1750, he defended the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748) and was taxed with his formerly more aggressive attitude, he adopted a different defence. Openly admitting his changed views, he acknowledged 'that I have upon some former occasions, by the heat of youth and the warmth of a debate, been hurried into expressions, which upon cool reflection, I have heartily regretted' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 14, 1747-53, 721). Since taking office he had been, it seems, consistently in favour of an early peace. Similarly, the next year, in defending the treaty of Madrid with Spain, which abandoned virtually all the claims that the opposition to Walpole had advanced, Pitt 'frankly acknowledged' the 'error' of his earlier opinions while deploying some substantial arguments (Coxe, 'Pelham', 2.139-40). 
The most fully attested and striking aspect of Pitt's foreign policy views during these years in office is his warm support for Newcastle's increasingly grandiose and eventually abortive scheme to settle German imperial elections. In correspondence over the summer of 1750 Pitt complimented Newcastle on the progress of his plans. In the house in January and February 1751 Pitt publicly 'made a great panegyric on the Duke of Newcastle's German negotiations' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 2.5), giving them cogent justification. He 'applauded the care of his Majesty for the preservation of tranquillity; expatiated on the danger, which must arise from a new vacancy in the imperial throne; and argued that the Bavarian [subsidy] treaty was justifiable, on every principle of sound policy. (Coxe, 'Pelham', 2.140)' Subsidy arrangements were justifiable, even in peacetime, Pitt argued, on grounds of preservation of the balance of power against France's attempts at subversion. Although more cautious in private about the treaty with Saxony of 1752, in September 1753 Pitt was happy enough with a projected subsidy treaty with Russia if savings could be made elsewhere. 
Furthermore, Pitt did not continue the emphasis on maritime and colonial war which he had adopted in late 1745. Despite historians' claims to the contrary, there is no evidence that he played any part in the plan for an expedition into French Canada in 1746 or was particularly assertive over escalating friction with the French in North America in the early 1750s. Rather, in August 1753, he was concerned about 'clouds' over 'the calm of Europe' (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32732, fol. 461). 
There were powerful political considerations behind Pitt's attitude. Newcastle was now his patron, having secured his return for Seaford in the 1747 election. In 1750 Pitt was invited to correspond with Newcastle when he went with the king to Hanover and even to mediate in disputes with his brother. However, Pitt had also developed strong arguments for his changed views. He had, it seems clear, become something of a continentalist by conviction. 
Defence of its foreign policy made Pitt at times a significant spokesman for an administration not short of parliamentary talent. But, despite Pelham's recognition of him as 'the most able and useful man we have amongst us' (Coxe, 'Pelham', 2.370), Pitt did not win advancement. 
In 1750-51, with the other Cobhamites, Pitt renewed contacts with the prince of Wales, which were cut short by the prince's death in March. These contacts were probably more signs of his concern over the rising influence of the king's younger son, the duke of Cumberland, than of any discontent with Pelham. Certainly, as Pitt flexed his political muscles in the Commons in 1751, such concern came out in sustained public jousting with Henry Fox, Cumberland's lieutenant -- which further displayed Pitt's impetuosity and capacity to offend not only the king but the administration's 'old corps' whig supporters. For example, in debates on the 'Regency Act' made necessary by the prince's death Pitt not only extravagantly bewailed 'the loss of the most 'patriot' prince that ever lived' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 1.91) but also played offensively on growing prejudice about Cumberland's supposed ambition. Well might Fox exclaim, 'He is a better speaker than I am, but thank God! I have more judgment' (ibid., 1.43). 
Pitt's now mature oratory indeed brought him wide recognition as 'beyond comparison' (except for the solicitor-general, William Murray) the best speaker in the Commons ('Letters of... Chesterfield', 4.1678). But this reputation -- buttressed by neither strength of connection nor amelioration of the king's dislike -- was, from mid-1751, gravely weakened by more than three years of virtual silence, enforced by serious illness. So Pitt was hardly in a position to exploit the turmoil into which the political world was thrown in March 1754 by the unexpected death of Henry Pelham. Indeed, Pitt was entirely passed over as the ministry was reconstructed under Newcastle. 
Although still beholden to Newcastle's electoral patronage (now as MP for Newcastle's seat at Aldborough, Yorkshire), Pitt was no longer ready patiently to endure royal displeasure while serving under Newcastle's lieutenants in the Commons as he had served under Pelham -- especially when that lieutenant was a parliamentary lightweight, Sir Thomas Robinson. Pitt's letters now made his demands quite clear -- a place in the cabinet and 'real participation' (Smith, 1.110) in policy-making. In November he began to implement half-formed hints of alternative strategies. At first in uneasy alliance with Fox he returned to his old brilliant form in the house, probing Robinson's inadequacies, embarrassing Murray, and even gibing at Newcastle as 'one too powerful a subject' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 2.25). When Fox was bought off Pitt went on alone. By April 1755 he had decisively quarrelled with Fox and was making tentative contacts with the alternative court at Leicester House, while further unsatisfactory overtures from Newcastle brought his impatience to breaking point. 
As he began these manoeuvres, Pitt's confidence was reinforced by a dramatic change in his personal life. In September 1754, while on his usual summer sojourns with his friends, Pitt had fallen in love with Lady Hester Grenville (1720-1803), youngest child and only daughter of Richard Grenville (1678-1727), landowner, of Wotton Hall, Buckinghamshire, and Hester Temple, Countess Temple ('bap'. 1684, died 1752). Pitt had known Lady Hester from her girlhood as sister to his fellow cubs Richard Grenville (now Earl Temple) and George and James, who had entered parliament in 1742 and were also political allies. In October, Pitt and Lady Hester were engaged; the wedding took place on 16 November 1754, 'the day from which I shall date all the real honour and happiness of poor life' (Smith, 1.128). It was an unusual match: he, at forty-six, was twelve years her senior, and both of them were old by the standards of the time. However, their correspondence over many years amply testifies to their intense mutual devotion and delight in the happy family life brought by the five children born over the next seven years: Hester (1755), John Pitt, later second earl of Chatham (1756), Harriot (1758), William Pitt the younger (1759), and James Charles (1761). 
Pitt had very good reason to be grateful to Hester for joining 'part of her best days to a very shattered part of mine' (Dropmore MSS, series 2, BL, Add. MS 69289, no. 39). The marriage must have contributed to the surge of energy which, after years of illness, was to drive Pitt over the next seven years of high achievement. It was, moreover, a political alliance. Greeted ecstatically by all the brothers, it initially strengthened Pitt's ties with them, making him part of the 'cousinhood' of Grenvilles and Lytteltons and bringing generous financial support from Earl Temple when Pitt lost office a year later. 
Outwardly the marriage conformed to the conventional pattern which Elizabeth Montagu had foreseen at the time of the engagement: 'there is an authority in the character of Mr P[itt] that will secure him the deference and obedience of his wife; proud of him abroad she will be humble to him at home' (Hunt. L., Montagu MSS, MO6720). 'To be your second self is all my ambition', Hester wrote in the early years (Chatham MSS, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/7, 76). Yet she had grown up in a highly political family, amid constant talk of politics, and in some senses over the years she became her husband's partner in politics. Only very occasionally do hints of her own views surface in correspondence with her husband. But not merely did she copy documents or keep her ear to the ground for political gossip; in later years, at least, she often managed his correspondence and received reports from allies. And certainly, without Hester's unstinting devotion and skills of family management, Pitt's chronic ill health, financial irresponsibility, and personal arrogance might well have wrecked, rather than merely hampered, his later career. 
In the late summer of 1755 Pitt's growing impatience with Newcastle for the first time fastened on an issue of policy. Worsening Franco-British friction in North America led Newcastle to arrange subsidy treaties with Hesse-Cassel and Russia to protect Hanover in the event of the open war which grew increasingly likely. At the same time he sought to strengthen support in the Commons for such divisive measures by negotiations with Pitt. But Hardwicke and Newcastle found that Pitt, while coming 'roundly into' the 'maritime and American war', was hesitant about any 'general plan for the Continent' or 'subsidiary system'. He also now made his demands for office quite clear. He wanted not merely a call to the cabinet, but ''an office of advice' as well as of 'execution'' -- obviously a secretaryship (Yorke, 2.231, 240, 238). There seems little doubt that he would have fallen into line over policy had his demands for office been met. Instead, Newcastle closed with Fox as leader in the Commons. 
By this time Pitt had an openly acknowledged connection with Leicester House. He now began to marshal support for a parliamentary opposition. In the great night-long address-in-reply debate in November, his 'eloquence', in Walpole's words, 'like a torrent long obstructed, burst forth'. Pitt magnificently revived the patriot argument on foreign policy, attacking the subsidies, and the peace he had hitherto defended, and calling for a war undertaken for the 'long forgotten people of America', a British war to be fought by 'our proper force', the navy (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 2.69-71). The speech was embroidered with the famous mocking comparison of the union of Fox and Newcastle to the confluence of the Rhone and Saone. Pitt reaped his reward in summary dismissal from office. 
Pitt maintained his patriot arguments throughout the session, notably in support of George Townshend's 'Militia Bill', together with attacks on the ministry which was, he said, 'an unaccording assemblage of separate and distinct powers with no system', 'driving a go-cart on a precipice' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 2.142, 145). But his vehemence aroused suspicion, Fox could readily show up Pitt's hypocrisy, and Pitt won very little support. Over the summer of 1756, however, the humiliating loss of Minorca to the French swelled an intense public clamour. In mid-October, Fox resigned. Pitt, blaming Newcastle for ill success abroad and claiming he could expect no share in the king's favour while Newcastle engrossed it, refused point blank to serve with him. When Newcastle also resigned Pitt refused to serve with Fox. By mid-November the king had been forced to agree to a ministry with the independent whig peer the duke of Devonshire at the Treasury and Pitt as secretary of state. 
A now enthusiastic public had high hopes of Pitt's patriot promises. But it is hard to see what Pitt expected to achieve with the odds so stacked against him. Serious illness again confined him, the ministry had been forced on the king, it had no reliable majority in parliament, and it faced a deteriorating situation in the war openly declared in May and now merging into general European war. 
The foreign situation was skilfully handled. Pitt brought new vigour, with plans for ambitious reinforcements for America and some ships to aid the East India Company. But he did not alter policy. While the king's speech promised the 'succour and preservation of America' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 15, 1753-65, 772) the need for help to the continent was also acknowledged. When Pitt next appeared in parliament, in mid-February 1757, he asked for extraordinary supplies to fulfil obligations to Prussia under the treaty of Westminster of January 1756. Supplies were granted, despite Fox's gibes at Pitt's earlier declaration that he 'would not have signed [the treaty] for the five great places of those who had signed it' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 2.145). 
Domestic policy was much more problematic. Pitt's illness perhaps conveniently kept him away as another militia bill made its chequered progress to eventual success, and the promised inquiries into losses abroad proceeded lethargically. The ministry's novel and supposedly popular financial measures were miserable failures. Worst of all were problems about the fate of Admiral Byng, the commander sent to relieve Minorca and court-martialled and sentenced to death for his defeat. Not wanting blame entirely diverted to Byng, Pitt, with Temple, the first lord of the Admiralty, pleaded for mercy. But the tide of opinion demanded vengeance and Byng was executed on 14 March 1757. 
This apparent confirmation of weakness, together with Cumberland's unwillingness, without a change of ministers, to take command of the mercenary army being put together in Germany, brought the king to dismiss Pitt and Temple early in April. Then followed virtually three months with only a caretaker ministry in the midst of unsuccessful war. The king's action and powerful Foxite attacks in the press saved Pitt from the ignominy of failed patriotism by making him appear the victim of the 'old junto'. Expressions of support came in the press and with the freedoms of thirteen cities, often manoeuvred by Pittites. Pitt could thus make himself appear essential in containing divisive opposition, while carefully not antagonizing potential allies. His restored relations with Leicester House promised reconciliation in the royal family. This brought Newcastle quickly to determine on alliance with Pitt rather than Fox; Pitt's fears of Newcastle's 'engrossing chicanery' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 2.256) did most to prolong negotiations. At last, on 29 June 1757, the Newcastle-Pitt coalition kissed hands, with Pitt again secretary of state. 
The new ministry was a very broad coalition. However, Pitt's position in it was initially weak. True, Newcastle was no longer his patron; in 1756 Pitt had been returned by family connections for both Okehampton and Buckingham, choosing to sit for the former; now he was elected by the thirty-member corporation of Bath. Furthermore, Pitt had successfully defended his revived patriot reputation and turned the force of wider opinion for the first time to work for, rather than against, a major politician. But that reputation was vulnerable, especially as he now joined the 'old junto' and faced the chances of war. The king was only grudgingly reconciled; Pitt could well be swamped by the numbers of Newcastle's old corps. The vagaries of his career had made his growing ambition for power much more obvious than any clear perception of Britain's interests abroad. And now novel issues were posed for policy and strategy by a war originating beyond Europe -- and to remain focused there -- yet including an essential European theatre. 
In Germany the early months of the coalition saw Britain's ally, Frederick the Great of Prussia, under severe pressure from all sides, while in the west, in September, Cumberland's army of observation was forced virtually to abandon Hanover to the French in the convention of Klosterseven. Within a year the coalition had responded by shaping a policy that remained in force until 1762. Britain took control of, and paid, the army in the west, and contributed British troops to it. In April 1758 a second treaty of Westminster was signed with Prussia, whereby Britain promised an annual subsidy of $670,000 and both sides agreed not to make a separate peace. 
Pitt was as forward as any minister in shaping this dual continental commitment -- despite his patriot promises, and although his office as secretary of state for the southern department gave him no formal role in German policy-making. Already he had accepted alliance with Prussia. In July he suggested increased grants to the continent. He was foremost in urging the king to disavow Klosterseven and firmly supported taking over the army of observation, although continental expenditure was thus increased sixfold and was certain to escalate further. In June 1758 -- after the prorogation of parliament -- Pitt himself proposed sending British troops to Germany, despite having declared in December that 'he would not now send a drop of our blood to the Elbe, to be lost in that ocean of gore' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 3.3). 
Pitt was more cautious about Prussia. He was ready from the beginning to grant money, and seized enthusiastically on, and made his own, Frederick's suggestions of coastal expeditions against France. But when others might have compromised Pitt was steadfast, indeed truculent, in resisting Frederick's preference for more tangible commitment -- a Baltic squadron and British troops in Germany. Seemingly Pitt feared what he called the 'lurking, diffusive poison' of Hanoverian interests and Cumberland's influence (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32877, fol. 257). Only when, after months of stalemate, Frederick reduced his demands could the treaty be concluded. 
Pitt's identification with this dual German policy was crucial to its ready acceptance in parliament. It could be said to have subordinated the German theatre to British interests; certainly, far fewer British troops and a much smaller proportion of total costs were to be devoted to the continent than in previous wars. Equally certainly, in the course of its evolution Pitt had won respect, both in the coalition and among foreign representatives, far beyond his office. By mid-1758, even Frederick the Great acknowledged his dominance. 
Meanwhile operations were gathering momentum in much less controversial spheres beyond Europe which were unquestionably within Pitt's domain of responsibility. Here the great British victories were to be won: in 1758 Louisburg, commanding the mouth of the St Lawrence, and Senegal and Goree on the west African coast; Quebec and Guadeloupe in 1759; Montreal in 1760; Martinique in 1762. The later successes were greatly facilitated when naval victories in European waters in 1759 not only helped to thwart the threat of French invasion of Britain but also established naval supremacy. In India the East India Company won dominance in Bengal and repelled the French challenge in the Carnatic, for the first time decisively getting the upper hand. 
The distinctive contribution which Pitt made to the campaigns which won these victories was first illustrated in planning for the North American campaign of 1758, after initial reinforcements agreed on in mid-1757 had failed to reverse setbacks. Pitt's instructions envisaged an ambitious two-pronged attack on Canada and operations in the Ohio. No commander-in-chief replaced the recalled earl of Loudoun; instead, commanders were to communicate directly with Pitt. Their instructions, notable for precise detail, allowed them little discretion. Most novel were the more co-operative relations envisaged with colonial governors, the systematization of the requisition of colonial troops, and the prior promise of recompense of colonial expenses. 
These characteristics were maintained, although some discretion was gradually conceded to commanders, as operations evolved in 1759-60 into the eventually successful three-pronged attack on Canada. Meanwhile, Pitt had taken the lead in moving to offensive operations on the African coast and, despite objections about sending so many ships beyond Europe, in the West Indies, where he applied the techniques of the American campaigns. India, seen by all as a subordinate theatre, was a different matter, one of responding to company requests for help. Pitt continued the generous response already recently established. However, although lavishing praise on Robert Clive as 'that heaven-born general' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 3.4), he did not succumb to Clive's attempts to lure the government into direct involvement in territorial aggrandizement. 
'Our bells are quite worn threadbare with ringing for victories', Horace Walpole wrote late in 1759. 'Indeed one is forced to ask every morning, what victory there is? for fear of missing one' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.251; 21.355). Given this remarkable reversal of British fortunes, it is little wonder that Thomas Perceval ascribed the 'glorious success of this year... so[l]ely, and under God, to Mr Pitt' ('Kenyon MSS', 496). This opinion, however, although widely shared, was never uncontested. Modern scholarship certainly requires a more sober appreciation. 
Pitt did not establish the primacy of the American theatre. By 1756 that was already generally accepted and his later attempts to deny this were rightly 'contradicted flatly' by Lord Barrington (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32932, fol. 81), although, as the responsible secretary, Pitt certainly kept attention focused there. Nor was his gradually evolved strategy for attack on Canada particularly innovative, and his early expectations of it were wildly over-optimistic. Commanders on the spot had to solve the novel problems of fighting over vast, difficult, and largely uninhabited terrains. Certainly, recipients of dispatches were inspired by Pitt's vigour and urgency, while his conciliatory attitude to the colonies helped the immediate mobilization of resources -- while aggravating long-term imperial problems. The extension of the war beyond America was likewise a piecemeal process. The nature of eighteenth-century communications and Britain's cumbersome administrative apparatus -- which Pitt pushed vigorously but did not attempt to reform -- scarcely allowed any worldwide strategy, even had Pitt conceived one. 
In balancing the demands of the American against the European theatre, Pitt was later to claim to have had a 'plan' (Liverpool MSS, BL, Add. MS 38334, fol. 34) whereby 'America had been conquered in Germany' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 1.76). But others had also recognized the connection: Frederick the Great first made the point in this war. Moreover, the particular balance of theatres was achieved not out of strategic vision but by 'ad hoc' adjustment to the war's unique circumstances, in a process frankly admitted by Pitt in 1759, when he declared that 'he had unlearned his juvenile errors, and thought no longer that England could do all by herself' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 3.78). Furthermore, the 'plan', in its dependence on Frederick the Great's desperately overstretched resources and chequered fortunes, made Britain's victories very vulnerable to his possible collapse. Pitt's most distinctive contribution to strategy were the two coastal raids on France in 1757-8. They failed in their strategic objective of diverting French resources from Germany -- although success against Belle Ile in very different circumstances in 1760-61 gave Britain a valuable bargaining counter in peace negotiations. 
Other ministers made essential contributions to the war effort: Lord Anson at the Admiralty; Earl Ligonier in military matters; probably Granville, still lord president, in policy; and, above all, Newcastle, in raising, often in critical circumstances, ever-increasing financial resources -- a matter about which Pitt was plainly irresponsible. He 'drew magnificent plans, and left others to find the magnificent means' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 3.52). Impersonal circumstances also were important: Britain's population, now beginning to rise significantly, her superior fiscal system, the greater resources of her American colonies, the neutrality of Spain in these vital years, European circumstances which did not demand closer involvement. 
Yet such qualifications must not detract from the qualities Pitt contributed. His energy and drive were remarkably sustained in face of ever-debilitating illness. After his resignation Newcastle was to exclaim with good reason, 'With all his faults, we shall want Mr Pitt;... I know nobody, who can plan, or push the execution of any plan agreed upon, in the manner Mr Pitt did' (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32931, fol. 46). His greater clarity about British interests was demonstrated in the determined shaping of the Prussian alliance. His spirit -- perhaps most evident in the 1759 invasion crisis -- sustained others, inspiring John Forbes, for example, to rename the fallen Fort Duquesne Pittsburgh in 1758. Pitt it was who insisted on pressing France to the limits when others might have compromised. To this extent he left his imprint on the war. He gave leadership when Newcastle and Fox had abdicated; with colleagues he often enforced that leadership by hectoring high-handedness and threatening rage; but he did not direct and shape the war single-handedly. 
Certainly for many contemporaries by 1759-60 Pitt seemed indeed to be the directing minister, in Temple's words the 'Minister of measures' (Smith, 1.405). To foreign envoys in London he was 'the effective minister' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 1.44), while Frederick the Great put his faith in Pitt's 'true Roman character' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 2.77). 
Pitt's dominance was never as great as it seemed. He could never simply dictate or terrorize; he still had to win co-operation for ventures like the Belle Ile expedition; without Newcastle he would not have had a parliamentary majority. Nevertheless, his rise to ascendancy had been meteoric. And it was secured by more than dramatic success in war or force of personality and ability. Credit for victories accrued almost solely to Pitt in large part because of the political skill with which he protected his nascent patriot reputation and that independence of Newcastle and the old corps he continued to assert as he had done since Pelham's death. 
In 1757-8 Pitt carefully prepared his personal supporters, including the tories he had wooed since 1755, for acceptance of his European moves. Enthusiasm for coastal expeditions helped; he also espoused, or did not oppose, a number of other patriot measures concerning the militia, the better payment of seamen, more frequent parliaments, and, most contentiously, the writ of habeas corpus. The greatest shock, the sending of British troops to Germany, was more difficult to overcome; some supporters were permanently alienated. But Pitt gained further credit from the successful embodiment of the militia during the 1759 invasion crisis and from continued courting of tories over militia issues and the property qualification of MPs in 1760. 
At the same time Pitt deliberately distanced himself from his colleagues in other ways, by subverting plans for the year's supply in 1759, for example, in order to support his City ally, William Beckford, in opposing a sugar tax. Time and again he publicly dissociated himself from responsibility for the cost of the war, while blaming the Treasury. Horace Walpole noted the art with which, in some major wartime speeches, Pitt seemed 'to avoid all ostentation of power, while he assumed everything to himself but the disposition of the money' or dwelt on success 'in a manner which excluded all others from a share in it' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 3.37, 78). Such distancing was reinforced by incidents like his vehement insistence in 1759 on the grant of a vacant garter to his ally Temple -- a grant which also recognized his own status. Amply evident in these incidents was the bullying manner, part product of personality and illness, but also part of these tactics. Although by 1760 relations eased and even the old king was mollified in his last months, such tactics meant the coalition never melded into a genuine alliance. 
Furthermore, to Newcastle's often intense annoyance Pitt never acted as a conventional leader of the Commons. Yet Pitt's public presentation of the war was enormously valuable to the administration. He carefully shaped perceptions of the German war and alliance with the 'protestant hero', Frederick the Great. He dramatized the struggle in both Germany and America, for which, he said, 'heaps of millions must be raised', 'as if he meant... that his administration should decide which alone should exist as a nation, Britain or France'. So 'he taught the nation to speak again as England used to speak to foreign powers' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 3.37, 52, 1). In 1759 he allowed no respite. 'He thought the stone almost rolled up to the top of the hill, but it might roll back with dreadful repercussion' (ibid., 3.78). The 'least omission in any part might be fatal to the whole' (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32898, fol. 223). Such parliamentary service ensured the remarkable unity behind the war and the remarkable ease with which ever-increasing sums were voted. This service was the solid basis of Pitt's dominance, and his reputation. 
At the same time Pitt came to enjoy wider and more favourable notice outside parliament than any other contemporary leading politician. This support began from late 1756 among tory populists represented on the City's common council. Its solid core was to remain the City's middling citizens and participants in the American trades. This support was marshalled and protected by Alderman William Beckford, notably through his weekly essay paper, 'The Monitor'. But, although Beckford came to enjoy a remarkable intimacy with Pitt, there is no evidence to suggest that Pitt initiated or directed his efforts. With victories came broader support from mercantile opinion, recognizing the unusual commercial prosperity accompanying this war. An increasingly enthusiastic metropolitan and provincial press amplified unsolicited praise to an audience throughout the country. Thus Pitt's unique reputation, though never uncontested, was enormously enhanced. He became what hitherto had been a contradiction in terms, a 'patriot minister'. 
The death of George II on 25 October 1760, however, changed political circumstances markedly to Pitt's disadvantage. The young king, George III, and the mentor on whom he had come to rely, the earl of Bute, were Pitt's former allies at Leicester House. But Pitt had unwisely allowed the strains of war to breach relations. Now he was to George III 'the most ungrateful... most dishonorable of men', 'a true snake in the grass' ('Letters... to Lord Bute', 45, 47), while he had rejected Bute's conciliatory overtures on the grounds that 'he must act as an independent minister or not at all' (Elliot, 365). Policy differences added to the threat to Pitt's dominance. The hostility of the king and Bute to the German war was well known, and only with difficulty did Pitt persuade the king to alter an early public reference to the war from 'bloody and expensive' to 'expensive but just and necessary' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 1.8). Then, in March 1761, despite Pitt's reiterated declaration that 'he would never have anything to do with Lord Bute as a minister' ('Cavendish's Debates', 81), Bute became his fellow secretary. As reported by Count Viry, the Sardinian envoy, Bute would 'leave Mr. Pitt master of foreign affairs' -- unless 'he goes too far' (ibid., 90). 
In these difficult circumstances the first substantial negotiations for peace with France began in May 1761. Hitherto, Pitt had envisaged a peace in which 'we must give up considerably, but we must retain a great deal at the same time' (Yorke, 3.314). Now his attitude hardened, influenced probably by both further successes abroad and frustrations at home. However, while firmer in emphasis, Pitt was not out of line with his colleagues in substance. All agreed on the central importance of security in North America. Once the French had readily conceded all Canada, negotiations came to turn on the European terms and the extent of French exclusion from the American fisheries. British ministers were unanimous in support of Prussia and Pitt had much support for firmness on the fisheries, notably from Bute, until the last stages. Then it was Pitt who allowed some concession, albeit very reluctantly. 
Pitt accepted that the substance of negotiations must be collectively decided. He insisted, however, that the execution of decisions was his responsibility. Devonshire described his undoubtedly peremptory manner. He 'flew into a great passion' as he insisted that he 'would not suffer an 'iota'' of a draft to be altered by his colleagues ('Cavendish's Debates', 111); his abruptness also offended his French counterpart, the duc de Choiseul. Without Pitt, concessions might have been made earlier and more tactfully. But the negotiations failed not because of Pitt, but chiefly because Choiseul turned his attention from peace to hopes of alliance with Spain in a renewed family compact. 
The course of negotiations had revealed an incipient division between Pitt's increasing determination to deliver a crushing blow to France, by renewed war if necessary, and his colleagues' reluctance to continue the war. Deteriorating relations with Spain sharpened this division. It became open in September, when news of the new family compact made the long-recognized threat of a juncture between France and Spain a reality. Pitt, certain that Britain was better prepared than Spain -- and further irked, no doubt, by recent attempts to rein him in -- came out for a swift pre-emptive blow against the annual Spanish treasure fleet from America. When, this time, he could neither cajole nor browbeat his colleagues into such a drastic extension of the war, he, with his sole supporter, Temple, took the highly unusual but unavailing step of presenting a written dissenting opinion to the king. Pitt's colleagues were now prepared to contemplate his often threatened resignation. On 5 October it became a reality. It was confirmed publicly on 9 October, together with the announcement that the king had granted Pitt an annual pension of $3000 and conferred a barony on his wife. The great war minister was gone. 
Pitt's passionate departing declaration to his colleagues reaffirmed the image he had constructed. He had never, he claimed, 'asked any one single employment'; he was called to office 'by his sovereign and... in some degree by the voice of the people'; he had been obstructed in virtually all his plans; nevertheless the war and its success were imputed solely to him. He 'would not continue without having the direction' and 'would be responsible for nothing but what he directed' (Yorke, 3.279-80). Granville's check to such claims to 'infalibility' and rebuke for Pitt's 'withdrawing himself from the service of his country at this crisis' brought Pitt to acknowledge his obligations to 'every one of the 'Old Ministry'' ('Cavendish's Debates', 139). The public image remained, however. The tribute of the 'Annual Register' supported Pitt's claim to be the 'voice of the people' ('Annual Register', 4, 1761, 47) and acknowledged the splendour and success of the war energetically waged under him. 
Such claims, questioned even during the war, were soon vehemently contested in the three months of public exchanges which followed Pitt's resignation. Debate in the press traversed the validity of his patriot reputation, the merits of his wartime policies, and (less prominently) the constitutional propriety of his role as 'prime minister'. Pitt's public support was thereby 'weakened, divided, and ineffective' ('Annual Register', 4, 1761, 45); Beckford triumphantly held London's common council but only eight other cities formally thanked Pitt for years of victories. 
Meanwhile, in the first session of the newly elected parliament, Pitt had declared he 'hoped never to be a public man again' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 1.75). But any intention of retiring from politics was countered by much intensified questioning of war policy, which drew Pitt to justify himself in a series of cogent speeches. Many heard in these defences 'great dignity and temper' (Harris, 'Parliamentary memorials', 9M73/G708, 6), which 'set a seal upon his character' ('Annual Register', 4, 1761, 48). Others heard theatrical self-justification. Certainly there was an underlying political purpose. 
The same mixture was to be seen the next session in the debate on the peace negotiated in 1762. Pitt was again seriously ill. He came into the house accompanied by the acclamations of the crowd outside, dramatically borne in the arms of his servants, an invalid with his crutch, clothed in black, swathed in flannel. He spoke for three hours twenty-five minutes, his longest speech yet. By all accounts his speech was 'very tedious, unconvincing, heavy, and immethodical' ('Correspondence of Edmund Burke', 1.160). He criticized the peace terms as inadequate to victories won, dishonourable and dangerous in deserting Prussia, and above all insecure because they 'restored the enemy to her former greatness' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 15, 1753-65, 1270). But with these consistent, if not always well-founded, criticisms went disingenuous claims to have stood firm alone in 'his' negotiations and a new projection of himself as protector of 'this lovely Constitution' and of 'revolution principles' of opposition to France (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 1.179, 181). 
Pitt's political intentions were unclear. Parliamentary divisions made obvious a loss of support within as well as out of doors. In the City the court of aldermen and many in the merchant community supported the peace. Pitt's personal party was weakened, especially by a now open breach with George Grenville, who had remained in office when Pitt and Temple resigned, even becoming leader of the Commons in Pitt's place. Pitt's attitude towards Newcastle, who had resigned in May 1762, was unpredictable but generally aloof. And he rejected approaches from Bute, first lord of the Treasury until his own resignation in April 1763 and replacement by George Grenville. Then suddenly, in late August 1763, in brief abortive negotiations sponsored by Bute for a return to office, Pitt acted as high-handed party leader of those he reportedly called 'the great Whig families' (Yorke, 3.526). Pitt's seeming waywardness added to the new instability in ministerial politics. 
During 1763 Pitt was offered a major new issue, arousing unprecedented public excitement, on which to renew his reputation. Having failed in the courts, the new administration's case against John Wilkes -- whose 'North Briton' had spearheaded virulent press attacks on Bute -- was to come before parliament. The immediate issue was whether Wilkes's immunity as MP extended to a charge of seditious libel, but discussion of the questionable general warrant on which he had initially been arrested could hardly be avoided. 
Wilkes was a warm personal supporter of Pitt. Yet Wilkes's unsavoury personal reputation meant that too close an association with his rising popularity would be offensive to many. So in the debates Pitt seized on broad issues of principle while (with no little hypocrisy) dissociating himself from Wilkes's person -- 'the blasphemer of his God, and the libeller of his King' -- and his publications: 'illiberal, unmanly, and detestable' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 15, 1753-65, 1364). Libels, Pitt said, should be judged by the courts, not condemned by the House of Commons. He also 'vehemently reprobated the facility with which parliament was surrendering its own privileges' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 2.269n.) and was putting itself at 'the mercy of the crown' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 15, 1753-65, 1363). 'General warrants are always wrong', he declared (despite his own wartime use of them) and, he asked, 'What will our constituents say if we do not ascertain their liberties?' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 1.294, 301-2). 
These ringing stands on principle accorded well with earlier opposition to the cider tax on the grounds of personal liberty from intrusive excise officers. They gave some ideological content to Pitt's redefinition of himself as a whig on revolution principles as party labels were revived in controversy. His 'own first wish', he said, 'had been to crush foreign enemies; now it was to crush domestic' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 1.286). But still he stood aloof from others in opposition, resolved to attend parliament only 'upon any national or constitutional points' (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32947, fol. 21) or matters 'of the first magnitude' (ibid., Add. MS 32951, fol. 430) and to 'oppose, or to promote... independent of the sentiments of others' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 2.297). 'Measures, and not men, were his point', the Prussian envoy, Louis Michell, commented to Newcastle, in what was to become a famous phrase (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32961, fol. 187). In marked contrast to Pitt's earlier behaviour he was now convinced that 'all opposition was to no purpose'; he 'never would force himself upon the king' (ibid., Add. MS 32960, fol. 17). And for nearly two years from February 1764 illness was to keep him from parliament. 
Illness, however, did not debar Pitt from further ministerial negotiations, as George Grenville's administration tottered and fell under the weight of royal displeasure. In May 1765 Pitt declined to co-operate when Cumberland sought his help on the king's behalf in forming a ministry with Newcastle. In June two interviews with the king himself promised better, until Temple declined to serve, as Pitt wished, as first lord of the Treasury. The Newcastle whigs came in without Pitt, under the youthful marquess of Rockingham. Initially they saw themselves as a mere stopgap for Pitt. But he persistently brushed aside approaches continuing into early 1766. 
Pitt's behaviour was less enigmatic than it seemed, and certainly did not point to retirement. He had learned in 1763 -- when, despite his imperious approach, he seems to have negotiated in good faith -- that acting as party leader was not the way to regain the confidence of the king. Nor, even when his policy stipulations were accepted, as in May 1765, would he relinquish control of negotiations to an intermediary. Shelburne believed that, in June, Pitt was set to accept office until Temple's unexpected refusal made him suddenly aware of 'the difficulties that threatened from different quarters' ('Life of William, Earl of Shelburne', 1.331) -- in closet, cabinet, and parliament. He feared, as always, for his independence, his ability to dominate an administration. Ill health probably heightened his fears; certainly it contributed to the obscurantism, what Burke called the 'Fustian' ('Correspondence of Edmund Burke', 1.194), of his pronouncements. And behind his persistent coolness towards the Rockingham administration ran a shrill crescendo of venom against Newcastle in which deep resentment at not being supported in the post-war years in his 'principles, and system of measures' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 2.343) mixed with memories of pre-war wounds. 
In these years Pitt showed little prescience over the solutions proposed for colonial problems highlighted by the Seven Years' War. Indeed, in March 1763 his preoccupation with the supposedly inadequate peace led him apparently to accept the ministers' declared intention to make the colonists pay for a peacetime army in America. By March 1764, when Grenville's programme of colonial legislation was unfolding, Pitt was reported by Charles Townshend to be 'against 'all' taxation' of America (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32957, fol. 239). However, only in January 1766, when the 'Stamp Act' had produced a crisis, was Pitt drawn out of his two years' absence from parliament. Then James Harris heard his 'torrent of eloquence' flow 'like a spring-tide' (Harris, 'Parliamentary memorials', 9M73/G716, 8) and his views made a considerable impact. 
There was little surprise that he called unequivocally for repeal of the 'Stamp Act', but all were startled by his grounds for doing so: not expediency, but the clearest declaration yet made by any leading politician that 'the House of Commons did not represent North America'; it therefore had 'no right to lay an internal tax upon America'. Britain, he said, had broken 'the original compact' by taxing the colonies. Accused by Sir Fletcher Norton of sounding 'the trumpet to rebellion' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 2.185-6, 192-3), Pitt retreated somewhat, but he still sought unsuccessfully to amend the clause asserting authority 'in all cases whatsoever' in the 'Declaratory Act' which the ministry proposed to accompany repeal. 
The impact of Pitt's views undoubtedly came, as Walpole saw, from 'the novelty and boldness of his doctrines, the offence he gave by them at home, and the delirium which they excited in America' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 2.185). However, from the beginning Pitt's pronouncements had much more acceptably emphasized the 'high rights and privileges' (ibid., 2.186) of parliament over the colonies, especially in regulating their trade and market for manufactures. These, he was convinced, were crucial to Britain's prosperity and military power. Pitt's sympathy with the colonists and instinct for conciliation were patent: 'will you sheathe your swords in the bowels of your brothers, the Americans?' he asked (ibid., 2.187). But he never satisfactorily resolved the conflict between emphasis on American rights and British authority. His injunction, 'Give up [internal] taxing, but control her absolutely in her manufactures, and her commerce' (Harris, 'Parliamentary memorials', 9M73/G716, 26) by external duties, suggested a distinction too abstruse to carry weight against the concept of parliamentary sovereignty. Moreover, compelling as his exposition of mercantilist precepts of the value of colonies was, it remained conventional. He never developed his hints that the regulations governing imperial trade might be modified to lessen frictions and, indeed, opposed Rockinghamite attempts to do so. 
More immediately important than the intricacies of Pitt's idiosyncratic views was the message they sent of renewed energy and ambition for office on his own terms. He advertised repeatedly that he stood ''unconcerted' and unconnected' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 2.185); he detached himself from hostility to Bute simply as a Scot; he expressed his desire 'that there might be a ministry fixed, such as the King should appoint, and the public approve' ('Correspondence of John, Fourth Duke of Bedford', 3.333). In April 1766 he 'suddenly turned his artillery' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 22.413) in the house to bring the Rockingham administration to its knees. 
Indirect contacts confirmed these coded messages to the king and eventually on 7 July his call went to Pitt. This time Temple's second refusal to serve did not disrupt the formation of an administration with a Rockinghamite core and with the young duke of Grafton at the Treasury. Pitt's ill health shaped his decision to go to the Lords as earl of Chatham and lord privy seal. By the end of the month the great war minister was back, his reputation refurbished by the inadequacies of others. 
Acceptance of a peerage provoked another public outburst against false patriotism which was the most severe blow yet to Chatham's popular reputation, shaking even the City. His absence from the Commons, the forum where his strength was proven, was a more substantial disadvantage; to his formidable French antagonist, Choiseul, Chatham was now like Samson with his hair cut off ('Life of William, Earl of Shelburne', 1.412). But this disadvantage was more than offset by the now absolute and unchallenged confidence of the king. Even when, by the end of the year, Chatham's crusade against 'faction' had aborted negotiations with the Bedford group and precipitated Rockinghamite defections, the ministry had sufficient talent to function effectively -- provided its leader gave it cohesion. That, however, was not easily given when Chatham's ill health took him to Bath for most of October. 
Chatham's priority was not political management but policy -- first and foremost, foreign policy. All negotiations for office had made apparent his concern, particularly about Britain's isolation in Europe. He had a grand vision of fixing the 'great cloud of power' ('Correspondence of John, Fourth Duke of Bedford', 3.349) he saw in northern Europe into a 'firm and solid system' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 3.30) around renewed alliance with Russia and Prussia. 
Arrangements to send a special ambassador to revive stalled negotiations with Russia began even before the administration was sworn in. Only reluctantly did Chatham accept advice to test Frederick the Great's attitude first. When Frederick showed himself decidedly averse to 'new and stricter connections with England' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 3.68), Chatham's peremptory voice was clear in instructions to Britain's ambassador to renew the approach. England was not 'asking a boon'; no concessions could be offered until Frederick showed readiness to treat; a 'continuance of hesitation' would be 'looked on as a refusal' which he would 'probably repent, ere long' (ibid., 3.83-4n.). 
When such extraordinary language achieved nothing, Chatham's scheme lapsed. He took no further initiatives in foreign policy. He was undoubtedly involved in discussions of disputes with Spain and fears about possible French designs on Corsica, but he apparently had no sustained interest in the details. 
Foreign policy had long been Chatham's chief concern. But, while his brilliance of mind might impress a new cabinet colleague, Charles Townshend, listening to his survey of 'the actual situation and interests of the various powers in Europe' ('Autobiography... of Grafton', 105), in fact he showed no appreciation of the altered circumstances and changing interests of those powers. His views were backward-looking, narrow, and rigid. Within six months of his taking office British diplomacy had, if anything, been weakened. 
Very early, Chatham had declared another matter -- the affairs of the East India Company -- to him, 'the greatest of all objects' ('Autobiography... of Grafton', 102). In the prospect of huge profits from the company's greatly expanded territorial influence in India, Chatham saw the possibility of 'a kind of gift from heaven' (ibid., 110) to the Treasury which would relieve the burden of war debt. He insisted that the issue be dealt with by parliamentary inquiry rather than negotiation with the company. He envisaged a decision that territorial rights in India belonged to the crown rather than the company, followed by an agreement allowing the company to administer the rights in return for a contribution to the Treasury. However, he 'never did open' (ibid.) his ideas to his colleagues fully and so never mobilized support against those -- including the brilliant but mercurial Charles Townshend, chancellor of the exchequer -- who favoured immediate negotiation with the company. Furthermore, Chatham strangely chose his City friend, William Beckford, rather than a minister, to introduce the issue in parliament. 
In early December 1766 Chatham again withdrew to Bath, having spoken only twice in the Lords (autocratically refuting pungent criticism of the administration's embargo on the export of corn). When he was unable to return after Christmas, Beckford's East India inquiry floundered, while the company's offer of direct negotiations was accepted, despite Chatham's opposition. As both inquiry and negotiations went on in uneasy tandem Chatham still refused to give advice on substantive issues, still 'referring the whole determination to the wisdom of' parliament (ibid., 117). He did, however, provide guidance on the procedure of the inquiry. It went on to expose the company's affairs to public scrutiny for the first time, while giving rise to some legislation. Thus Chatham can be given credit for establishing the principle of parliamentary intervention. However, although negotiations resulted in a company contribution to the national coffers, the issue of right was not settled. 
Reportedly Chatham had also seen America, with India, as one of the 'two great objects' for parliament (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32977, fol. 41), but there is little indication of what he intended. In early negotiations he promised to secure 'the proper subordination of America', although disavowing 'any violent measures... unless absolutely necessary' ('Correspondence of John, Fourth Duke of Bedford', 3.349-51). The cabinet quickly decided to demand full compliance with Grenville's 'Mutiny Act' from recalcitrant New York. But, although Grafton and Townshend, and the earl of Shelburne, as secretary of state, set to work on fundamental colonial issues -- including ways of raising revenue other than by internal taxation -- nothing was formally approved before the Christmas recess and no comment from Chatham survives. 
Then, in late January 1767, the still unfinalized ideas became public when Townshend was provoked in the Commons into a promise to raise revenue from America. At the same time he contemptuously referred to the distinction between internal taxation and external duties -- associated with Chatham -- as 'perfect nonsense' (Hardwicke MSS, BL, Add. MS 35608, fol. 1). Although fully informed Chatham did not check him. Chatham's comments on American matters were restricted to more specific matters: the continuing defiance of imperial regulation by New York and New Jersey. He bewailed their 'spirit of infatuation' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 3.188) and, on New York, eventually came down firmly for the strong line on which the cabinet had already agreed. This further evidence of authoritarianism suggests that he might well not have opposed Townshend's fateful scheme to impose external duties on America as it evolved in 1767. 
Consistently with his approach to Indian affairs Chatham also advised the cabinet to lay these specific matters fully before parliament. This insistence sprang, it seems, from profound belief in parliament's collective wisdom. But no more in imperial than in foreign affairs did Chatham move beyond immediate issues to facilitate constructive solutions to fundamental problems. 
Chatham's inability to return to London after Christmas 1766 was a turning point in the administration's fortunes. The Commons ran out of control. Criticism of Chatham went unanswered; Townshend was openly defiant on Indian as well as American matters. On 27 February 1767 the Commons delivered the administration the humiliating blow of defeating its land tax proposals. Early in March, Chatham, having at last returned to London, made an effort to reimpose his will by offering Townshend's post to Lord North. North declined. With this, Chatham's role in his administration was virtually over. He remained immured in isolation. On 12 March he saw the king for the last time as prime minister. 
It was now clear that something more than physical illness ailed him. Walpole reported that a 'word of business' brought 'tears and trembling' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 2.320). In June, Grafton found 'his great mind bowed down', 'his nerves and spirits... affected to a dreadful degree' ('Autobiography... of Grafton', 137). Soon Whateley heard he had sunk to 'the lowest dejection and debility that mind or body can be in' (Lyttelton papers, 6.260). For long the king hoped for Chatham's return. When at last, in October 1768, stung by slights to supporters, Chatham wished to resign, the king insisted he should stay to continue the fight against 'the torrents of factions' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 3.343). Chatham was adamant. 'His' administration became officially Grafton's. 
The rapid collapse of the high hopes with which Chatham's administration began was the strangest and most damaging episode in his career. The king, having so fully supported him, was so disillusioned that never again would he contemplate office for Chatham. Many politicians shared this disillusionment. The City and the press fell silent about the great patriot. 
Chatham's chronic illness was the precipitating trigger of collapse. However, the roots of failure were deeper. His conviction of superiority, shaped by wartime experience, was now so ingrained that he believed he could achieve 'his great point... to destroy faction' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 3.138n.) -- and command away obstacles abroad -- merely with the king's support and the power of his name. He now despised the arts of management. Even before illness overwhelmed him his anonymously reported conversation suggested a concern only 'to shew, that he had the absolute sole power' (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32977, fol. 42). He would not mollify colleagues or even explain his policies to them, or take measures to minimize risks of opposition in the Commons. Grafton sadly commented, 'Lord Chatham, with his superior talents, did not possess that of conciliating mankind' ('Autobiography... of Grafton', 103). Mounting difficulties compounded his illness and Chatham collapsed. 
On 7 July 1769, just nine months after his resignation, Chatham suddenly reappeared at court, apparently fully recovered. His forthright criticism of recent measures in private conversation with the king made recall to office most unlikely. Soon Chatham was courting the Rockinghamites, whom he reportedly called the 'knot of 'spotless' friends, such as ought to govern this kingdom' (Albemarle, 2.142). When parliament opened in January he launched with them the most remarkable opposition of his career. It quickly helped to bring down Grafton's tottering administration. But when the king found in Lord North a lasting replacement, the united opposition was maintained into the following parliamentary session. 
Opposition was directed primarily against the handling of the issue which, in Chatham's absence, had changed the face of politics: Wilkes's repeated election as MP for Middlesex and the petitioning movement which had protested against his unseating by the Commons. This affair gave to the Pitt patriot rhetoric a new populist dimension. Chatham's first two speeches proclaimed the 'internal disorder of the constitution' to be 'the grand capital mischief'. He urged the Lords, whose own privileges, he said, rested 'upon the broad bottom of the people', to defend the 'liberties of our fellow-subjects', regardless of the privileges of the Commons ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 3.404n., 401n., 373n.). Reckless of offence to the king, Chatham recurred repeatedly to the Rockingham nostrum of 'secret influence' at court, undermining ministers and, he claimed, occasioning 'all the present unhappiness and disturbances in the nation' (ibid., 3.421n.). He continued to seek 'to give the people a strong and thorough sense' of the 'great violation' of the constitution (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 16, 1765-71, 924), and in both sessions, regardless of the royal prerogative, he moved for a dissolution of the parliament which had, he claimed, forfeited the people's confidence. 
Meanwhile, Chatham, with the indispensable help of a new aide, John Calcraft, had taken the initiative in fostering links with the City far more deliberately than ever before. He approved a grand dinner planned by his friend William Beckford, once again lord mayor, to seal union with the parliamentary opposition and worked to keep Rockinghamite and metropolitan opinion in line. Most provocatively, he vigorously defended in the Lords the City's outspoken remonstrance to the king over the failure to respond to grievances outlined in the City's 1769 petition. However, although he had recently suggested the need to restore 'a permanent relation between the constituent and representative body of the people' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 3.406n.) by allowing an additional MP for each county, he refused to be drawn into supporting the City's more far-reaching demand for triennial parliaments. 
The summer of 1770 provided an issue ripe for exploitation by Chatham: the long expected Spanish expulsion of British settlers from the Falkland Islands. When parliament reassembled, he waxed eloquent on the need 'to save an injured, insulted, undone country' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 16, 1765-71, 1092). But when a settlement was reached over the Christmas recess the bubble burst. Chatham's castigation of 'an ignominious compromise' (ibid., 16, 1765-71, 1339) won few votes. 
By this time rifts were appearing in the opposition both within and outside parliament. In the City radicals were taking over. Their resistance to impressment for the navy when war threatened enraged Chatham. Then, in an attempt at reconciliation, he initiated action to secure the right of juries, denied in recent instances, to decide both facts and law in seditious libel cases. However, he wanted a declaration of what he maintained the law had always been; the Rockinghams proposed a bill to clarify the law. In disgust at open disagreement in February 1771 Chatham fell silent for more than two months. 
In that time opposition became further divided as City and Commons became embroiled in the famous printers' case over the Commons' prohibition of published accounts of debates. Only at the end of the session did Chatham come out in full support of 'the liberty of the press' against 'bare-faced tyranny' -- and, declaring that 'our whole constitution' was now 'giving way', he announced himself 'a convert to triennial parliaments' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 17, 1771-4, 221-3), too belatedly to appease the radicals. 
With that, the united opposition was over. Chatham's uncharacteristically sustained co-operation with the Rockinghamites was broken less by issues than by his instinctive fear of 'connection' -- now in the new form of the confident party solidarity preached by Burke. The support in City and press which had sustained his independence now finally escaped him. Tumultuous Wilkites were changing extra-parliamentary politics in directions that even his new populism could not comfortably follow. 
Chatham's wholehearted opposition had displayed his 'old brilliant style' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 23.180) of oratory in a new forum. He had gone further than any other leading politician in envisaging an enlarged constitutional role for the people. But his extremism, offending king and moderate parliamentarians alike, was predictably ineffective in its unacknowledged but obvious objective: return to office. At the end of a decade that, with a coherent strategy, Chatham could have easily dominated, he was left more disillusioned than ever by the very political weakness of which he was part cause. 
By January 1772 Chatham had decided that not 'the smallest good' could come from his attending the ensuing session of parliament ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 4.187). For more than two years he remained secluded at Burton Pynsent in Somerset, absorbed in the large-scale estate development and family pleasures to which he always turned in private moments. These were probably the Chathams' happiest family years. They saw William, the precocious second son, practising oratory under his father's eye before going up to Cambridge. Soon, his elder brother left to join the army in Canada. In 1774 the family rejoiced at Hester's marriage to Charles Stanhope, Lord Mahon, son of Chatham's cousin. 
This time Chatham's retirement was not enforced by ill health and he was kept informed about politics by Shelburne, now his closest associate. Chatham was persuaded into one speech in these years, in 1772, supporting in the Lords, with 'as much oratory and fire, as, perhaps, he had ever done', the newspapers reported ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 4.219n.), an unsuccessful bill for relief of dissenters from subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. The 'new-fangled and impudent' 'Royal Marriages Act' of 1772 drew a scathing letter criticizing the 'wanton and tyrannical' powers it gave the monarch (ibid., 4.203). In 1773-4 Shelburne was persuaded against joining the Rockinghams in opposing the right of the Irish parliament to impose a tax on absentee landholders. 
Shelburne's most frequent reports were on the still contentious affairs of the East India Company, to which, in the 1770-71 opposition, Chatham had made only passing reference. When the threat of company bankruptcy brought its affairs before parliament in 1772-3, eventuating in the passage of North's 'Regulating Act', Chatham may have helped to shape the response of Shelburne and his Commons lieutenant, Isaac Barre. Certainly Chatham's letters retrospectively endorsed their stand. He defended the policy of 1767 while clarifying it in new terms of a 'mixed right to the territorial revenues between the state and the Company, as joint captors' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 4.264). He reasserted parliament's right to intervene, especially to reform abuses of power in India, but expressed fears of intervention at home, particularly if it were to increase the 'secret influence' of the crown with the riches of India. 
In 1770-71 Chatham had paid little more attention to American than to Indian affairs. Appreciating no more than others how quickly American opinion was moving, he merely reiterated his 1766 views. Not until May 1774, when the legislative response to the Boston Tea Party was almost complete, did the crisis seem serious enough to bring him to the Lords. Even then, his 'long feeble harangue' merely 'talked high for the sovereignty of this country, but condemned the taxes' (Walpole, 'Journal', 1.369), and was so confused as to allow contradictory interpretations. Three weeks later, his vehement thunder against the 'Popery and arbitrary power' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 17, 1771-4, 1403) he saw as condoned by the 'Quebec Act' was no more constructive about imperial problems. 
Over the summer, however, Chatham energetically sought information from Americans resident in London. News they filtered to him from the first American continental congress simply confirmed his set views. Seizing the initiative in parliament, on 20 January he unsuccessfully moved a conciliatory motion for the withdrawal of British troops from Boston. On 1 February he proposed his 'Provisional Act for Settling the Troubles in America' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 18, 1774-6, 198). 
At first Chatham seemed wholeheartedly to affirm the right of Americans not to be taxed without consent as given by 'God, and nature' as well as 'the constitution' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 18, 1774-6, 165). But his proposal made clear that concessions (no longer called rights) depended on prior acknowledgement of subordination 'of right' to the British crown and parliament (ibid., 18, 1774-6, 198-9). The proposal was a constructive attempt to reconcile Chatham's two contradictory long-term aims: 'to secure to the colonies property and liberty, and to insure to the mother-country... subordination' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 4.407). He never moved beyond it. However, the elements of concession were as unacceptable to most parliamentarians as those of assertion now were to most Americans. No more than North and Burke at this time could Chatham bridge this widening transatlantic gap. His concessions were more generous but his distinctive preoccupation with imperial power was manifest. 
Soon illness took hold again and, as America moved towards independence and outright war, Chatham slipped into another two years of often complete incapacitation. Not until May 1777, and again in November, did he re-emerge, to 'thunder and lighten', in Philip Yorke's description (Hardwicke MSS, BL, Add. MS 35613, fol. 315), as French help to the Americans was threatened. In five speeches his effort to prevent an irrevocable breach with the colonies came to its climax. They were, he said, 'the great source of all our wealth and power' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 19, 1777-8, 319). Insistently he called for generous measures of conciliation while he reiterated the impossibility of subduing them by force -- 'I might as well talk of driving them before me with this crutch' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 4.433n.) -- and its uselessness. 'If you conquer them, what then?' he asked. 'You cannot make them wear your cloth' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 19, 1777-8, 317). In the war's 'impending danger' he saw 'a cloud... ready to burst and overwhelm us in ruin' (ibid., 19, 1777-8, 597). After the startling news in December of defeat at Saratoga, Chatham, in enthusiastic co-operation with the Rockinghams, took the lead in furious criticism of the 'disgraces' of the war -- so contrasted with 'the fame and renown' of the last war (ibid., 19, 1777-8, 488-9) -- and pointedly returned to the pervasive evil of secret influence. 
Chatham's crusade was obviously driven by searing despair about the imperial crisis. Old and ill, he pushed himself to courageous efforts against the tide of parliamentary opinion. At the same time his overweening self-confidence rose again. From 1774 onwards there were hints of hopes that (in Burke's words) 'the closet door stands a jarr' ('Correspondence of Edmund Burke', 3.89). The intense activity of late 1777 seemed fuelled by Chatham's belief that 'the vengeance of a much injured and afflicted people' might at last 'fall heavily on the authors of their ruin' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 19, 1777-8, 602). 
Hopes of office were thwarted, however, by the king's conviction that Chatham was now simply 'the trumpet of Sedition', 'the merit of his former conduct' 'totally undone' ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 3.242). Even when, after the announcement of a Franco-American treaty in March 1778, North's faltering nerve forced the king to allow an indirect approach, negotiations broke down over the unbridgeable gap between the king's determination against 'that perfidious man' (ibid., 4.59) and Chatham's demand to dominate. 
Meanwhile, Chatham had suddenly terminated his co-operation with the Rockinghams over their increasing readiness to acknowledge the independence of America. 'I will as soon 'subscribe to transubstantiation' as to 'sovereignty, by right', in the Colonies', Chatham declared (Bowood muniments, boxes S13, 122). On 7 April, clearly ill, he came to the Lords to defend this view. 
Chatham's speech -- incoherent to most listeners -- was a defiant cry against 'the dismemberment of this ancient and most noble monarchy' and 'ignominious surrender' to an 'ancient inveterate enemy' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 19, 1777-8, 1023). When he struggled to rise again he fell in 'a sudden fit'. Camden described the 'hurry and confusion' (CKS, Pratt MSS, U840, C173/30) as Chatham was carried out senseless. The Lords adjourned in respect. 
By evening, after vomiting, Chatham seemed recovered. It seemed the fit was no worse than a similar one of the previous summer. Burke and Walpole -- not the closest observers -- called it an 'apoplectick fit' ('Correspondence of Edmund Burke', 3.427), 'with strong convulsions and slabbering at the mouth' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 28.379). But by the end of April, Camden reported Chatham 'past all hope of recovery, dying rather of weakness than distemper' (CKS, Pratt MSS, U840, C173/31). He died at Hayes on 11 May 1778 -- 'of weakness, spasms and nervous convulsions', his nephew later wrote (Dropmore MSS, series 2, BL, Add. MS 69333, no. 26). The Commons unanimously agreed to a funeral in Westminster Abbey at public expense, while the City vied unsuccessfully for the honour of burying him at St Paul's. The Lords, however, narrowly voted not to attend the funeral. It took place on 9 June, preceded by two days' lying-in-state at Westminster which drew great crowds. It was undoubtedly magnificent. But only a handful of peers attended. The public attention accorded to this long-drawn-out demise was intense, but brief. Chatham had indeed been already 'politically dead', as Walpole put it (Walpole, 'Corr.', 28.379). Only the truly desperate could have expected miracles from him again. 
The mixed responses to Chatham's death mirror the ambiguities of his lifetime reputation. Unquestionably most contemporaries accorded him great stature. It began with that power of the spoken word, enforced by all the arts of voice, gesture, flashing eye, facial expression, and felicitous language, which, in Walpole's view, made him 'the most admired orator of the age' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 4.23). These arts were enforced by the authoritative physical presence of his 'perfectly erect' tall spare figure described by Shelburne -- 'with the eye of a hawk, a little head, thin face, long aquiline nose' ('Life of William, Earl of Shelburne', 1.77), often caricatured in political prints. Pitt's rhetorical power gave him command of the Commons. It turned the sarcastic title Great Commoner ('The Test', 1 January, 9 April 1757) into a generally recognized honorific -- although his oratory was less effective in the more intimate forum of the Lords. 
Oratory helped Pitt build his patriot appeal -- which won early recognition in 1744 with a bequest of $10,000 from the redoubtable dowager duchess of Marlborough. Hardly significant then, Pitt's reputation was decisively shaped, by chance more than skill, in the crisis of 1755-7, when he seemed to offer renewal of tired Pelhamite politics. That reputation was broadened and entrenched by the astounding victories of war which appeared (if with only partial justification) to be the fruits of his spirit and determination. To many his ambition to be, in Walpole's words, 'the most illustrious man of the first country in Europe' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 3.2) seemed achieved. Pitt and patriotism seemed synonymous. He became, at least in retrospect, as Elizabeth Montagu considered him in 1778, 'a minister raised by popular favour' (Hunt. L., Montagu MSS, MO4036). And to many, as to Admiral Sir George Rodney, he never ceased to be 'an illustrious example, how one great man, by his superior abilities, raised his drooping country, from the brink of despair, to the pinnacle of glory, and made her... dreaded by the whole universe' (Chatham MSS, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/54, 236). To this vision of national greatness which he inspired -- not least by the projection of a dramatic struggle against the Bourbons which was, from first to last, the most consistent theme of his oratory -- Pitt owed his grip on contemporary minds. His heroic image is perpetuated in two famous monuments. In Westminster Abbey he stands in peer's robes, above Britannia flanked by representations of earth and ocean; in the City's guildhall he appears as a Roman senator, while commerce pours the riches of the world into Britannia's lap. 
This heroic image, however, ignores Pitt's dismal later record. The shortcomings of his successors might burnish memories of his past glories; but never again was he able to exploit either to full advantage. Moreover, throughout his career there was an undercurrent of criticism, sometimes rising to a flood. Most frequently levelled were charges of inconsistency, which reckless rhetoric invited. They were often unfair. Where not prompted by a learning process forced on everyone by the rapidly changing international situation, they frequently sprang from unrealistic expectations of patriots. The pension and his wife's title in 1761 were richly deserved; chronic ill health made removal from the Commons hurly-burly in 1766 understandable. More pertinent was the criticism that Pitt's patriot stands were too often patently instrumental to his rampant ambition, the passion for power Lord Hillsborough recognized, which was articulated most famously in his reported words of 1756, 'I am sure I can save this country, and nobody else can' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 3.1). This readiness to wield power was an attribute of leadership too often lacking among Pitt's contemporaries. But in opposition he was never free from suspicions of 'raising a storm' for his own benefit. 'He depended', as Shelburne put it, 'on taking quick turns, which was his forte: example Wilkes' ('Life of William, Earl of Shelburne', 1.76). As Burke saw, 'to the End of his Life', the 'least peep into' the king's closet was to intoxicate him ('Correspondence of Edmund Burke', 3.89). 
Pitt's was an 'unfinished', almost 'an artificial greatness', said Horace Walpole, 'considering how much of it depended on his words' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 3.2). Contemporaries had no doubt of what Hugh Boyd called the 'persuasive gracefulness', 'the resistless power' of those words (Almon, 3.355), a power seldom dimmed by either age or illness but so difficult to recreate from imperfect written records. But nor was there doubt about the 'bitter satire' Walpole saw as 'his forte' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', 1.64), the 'terrible' invectives Chesterfield recognized as intimidating even the most able opponent (Almon, 3.374). An unsympathetic Elizabeth Montagu called him in 1762 'as great a bruiser as any orator whatever' (Hunt. L., Montagu MSS, MO4547), to be subdued only by ridicule. Artifice, too, was a recognized part of his armoury. 'Garrick never acted better', Lord George Sackville said of a speech of 1761 ('Stopford-Sackville MSS', 1.86). Sometimes, famously and not always successfully, as in December 1762, the badges of his illness, his bandages and crutch, were so exploited as to make some wonder how much was reality and how much illusion. More significantly, from the beginning, many noticed his weakness in substance and reasoning. In 1763 James Harris could record only 'glowing scraps, or splendid morsels', wanting 'a plan or order' (Harris, 'Parliamentary memorials', 9M73/G712, 6). Pitt's nephew, Lord Camelford, later wrote 'his matter was never ranged, it had no method' (Dropmore MSS, series 2, BL, Add. MS 69333, no. 28). The earl of Sandwich, answering Chatham in his last year, justly remarked, 'Oratory is one thing, my Lords, and truth, reason and conviction another' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 19, 1777-8, 375). 
A keen political sense was strangely combined with ineptitude in political practice. In an able outsider, fearful of condescending patrons, Pitt's fierce independence was natural enough. But his close associates -- the Cobham cubs of his youth, Grafton, Shelburne, Pitt's legal friend, Charles Pratt, Baron Camden -- were used, attacked, and picked up again, consulted or ignored, as he pleased. The Rockinghams were alternately shunned or wooed, complementary talents like those of Shelburne constrained rather than enabled. Shelburne's experience convinced him that Pitt 'did not cultivate men because he felt it an incumbrance' ('Life of William, Earl of Shelburne', 1.76). But the alternative of 'measures not men', while it might tap widespread disillusionment with mid-century politics, was essentially a mask for claims to sole power. Combined with an autocratic politics of command and extreme tactical swings, it made for political impotence. Even more debilitating were Pitt's relations with kings, which combined reckless insouciance and utter misunderstanding with the exaggerated obsequiousness which led him, so MP Chase Price said, 'to bow so low, you could see the tip of his hooked nose between his legs' (Albemarle, 2.83). 
Pitt seemed at his most disingenuous in exploiting party labels. He could assert exclusive whiggism, court the tories, or win praise in wartime for a patriot union of all parties. Nevertheless, behind the opportunism there were consistent ideals according with the 'revolution principles' he avowed in the 1760s. His campaigns identified genuine questions of liberty over general warrants and the rights of electors and juries. The admiration for him of both American and Irish patriots was confirmed by his defence of their right to determine their own taxation. His tolerant religious principles were apparent over measures in the 1750s and 1770s -- although never extended to Catholics -- while the 'detached sentences' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 4.538-43) found in his papers witness to a genuine if conventional faith. In all there was a reverence for the constitution, especially for the role of parliament, most distinctively shown in commitment to the efficacy of parliamentary inquiry in deciding matters of policy. Concern for parliamentary authority over the empire in the end overrode sympathy for American rights. Here the manifest concern was imperial power. Indeed, in the last resort, Pitt's vision of national grandeur, with its 'pride of conquest' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 18, 1774-6, 445), was deeply imperialist rather than libertarian. 
Despite Pitt's considerable intellectual power, his often persuasively expounded ideals were very imperfectly implemented. Many contemporaries noted his lack of grasp of practical reality. Burke bitterly remembered the difference between 'the 'real'' and 'the ostensible public man' in 'that grand artificer of fraud', but also acknowledged 'his great, splendid side' (Albemarle, 2.195). 'His views were great and noble, worthy of a patriot; but they were too visionary' wrote Grafton ('Autobiography... of Grafton', 91). 'If struck with some great idea, he neither knew how nor had patience to conduct it', Horace Walpole declared (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 2.259). In Elizabeth Montagu's opinion his 'sublimity' did not encompass the qualities of 'a great civil minister' (Hunt. L., Montagu MSS, MO4036), namely the ability to respond constructively to new circumstances and problems. 
The key to this flawed greatness must lie in the recesses of a scarred personality. Growing ambition and the increasing frustration of illness turned the affectionate, sociable young man into one who kept a deliberate protective distance in public dealings. Adulation in the war years fed arrogance and egotism, while a pronounced tendency to histrionics and what Shelburne called 'high pompous unmeaning language' ('Life of William, Earl of Shelburne', 1.77) began to border on self-delusion. Illness increasingly imposed on the difficult personality thus fatally moulded an alternation between intense activity and disillusioned withdrawal. The earldom heightened a conviction of superiority, which began to show itself in the 'wild wantonness and prodigality' Walpole saw (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... King George III', 2.320), 'a pomp of equipage and retinue quite unequalled in this age' which repelled Elizabeth Montagu (Hunt. L., Montagu MSS, MO4036). Matching the constructed reputation, the artifice of Chatham's public front -- as Shelburne described him, 'always acting, always made up, and never natural,... constantly upon the watch, and never unbent' ('Life of William, Earl of Shelburne', 1.77) -- was now complete. 
Behind the mask, however, capacity for warmth remained. David Garrick and Thomas Hollis were friends in later life. The solace and respite from public affairs that Pitt's wife and children brought are reflected in many letters to Lady Hester: from the paymaster's house in Whitehall in the early days, from 10 St James's Square, which Pitt rented during the war years, to the family's home at Hayes, near Bromley in Kent, bought in 1756 and becoming to Lady Hester 'so loved a place' (Chatham MSS, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/9, 12). It was sold in 1766 after Pitt had inherited Burton Pynsent from an eccentric admirer unknown to him, only to be urgently repurchased at Pitt's whim in his illness in 1767. Letters to and from Burton Pynsent in the early 1770s -- for example, when Lady Chatham took the daughters up to lodgings in Harley Street -- provide vivid vignettes of family life with 'an old doting daddy', as Chatham called himself ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 4.206). 
When ill, however, Pitt could not bear the children near him. Family life showed other strains. With none of the wider family except his youngest sister, Mary, were relationships untroubled. Political quarrels with his brothers-in-law forced painful rifts on his wife. Worst of all were the constant burdens placed on her in later years by his financial irresponsibility. A lifelong passion for estate development and landscape gardening at all his properties from the first -- South Lodge, Enfield, Middlesex (1747-53) -- aggravated the problem. It required the sale on 11 July 1763 of the house he had built in 1754 at 7 The Circus, Bath, and an attempt to sell Hayes again (sale of deeds, 7 The Circus, Bonhams, 27 Nov 2007). Only a parliamentary vote after his death removed the burden of debt. 
Pitt's affection for his wife and children was warmly reciprocated. But their uncritical, admiring devotion, enhancing his egotism and accentuating the seclusion enforced by illness, hardly encouraged a realistic assessment of the outside world. They helped to keep Chatham, on his landed estates, with his self-professed 'old-fashioned Whig principles' ('Correspondence', ed. Taylor and Pringle, 4.321) and lofty detachment, a man more of the past than of the world of City and press which had so lionized him. 
New perils ensured that Chatham's memory was not immediately celebrated after his death. However, his reputation with his contemporaries was reflected by early biographers, William Godwin (1783), John Almon (1790s), and especially Francis Thackeray (1827). Although Macaulay's essays of 1834 and 1844 cut loose from this adulation, the mainly whig early Victorian historians generally accepted Pitt as a great patriot and war leader, while discovering in him other virtues as orator, defender of liberty, and spokesman of the people. 'Laissez-faire' high Victorians were more inclined to honour his son. 
The heroic image of Pitt was reconstructed in the early twentieth century, when challenges at home and abroad encouraged a newly self-conscious imperialism. This trend aptly coincided with the bicentenary of Pitt's birth and the development of professional history to make of him a great imperial statesman, with a clear vision of Britain's worldwide destiny, transcending mercantilism and presaging a liberal empire. While the first substantial biographies, those of Albert von Ruville (1907) and Basil Williams (1913), did not capitulate entirely to this heroic image, it was enhanced and entrenched by most later biographies, through even to Stanley Ayling's deliberately post-imperial study (1976). It is still often reflected in general works. 
The image of Pitt the hero, however, is challenged by that of the disruptive politician rediscovered in the more rigorous study of eighteenth-century politics over the last sixty years. The exploration of popular politics has given both light and shade to Pitt's reputation. Only in the 1990s did biographies begin to explain his career in this much richer context. Among lay people, even those in former colonies where scattered places preserve his name, it is doubtful whether William Pitt, earl of Chatham, was ever a twentieth-century household name, or even one known to 'every schoolboy'. 
While Pitt's outstanding reputation with his contemporaries must still be allowed, no longer can G. F. R. Barker's view that he was 'pre-eminently the most striking figure on the English political stage during the eighteenth century' ('DNB') be maintained without question. Sir Robert Walpole surpasses him as a shrewd and constructive statesman. Figures of lesser renown, like Shelburne and notably Edmund Burke, arguably rival Pitt in insight and even stature. 
Above all, comparison with his precocious son is telling. Having some of his father's volatility and much of the self-confidence bordering on arrogance, the younger Pitt inherited superb and carefully nurtured oratorical gifts. These gave him, like his father, unsurpassed command of the Commons and power to embody the national will in wartime. There were, however, significant differences. The younger Pitt's eloquence, unlike his father's, included the force of sustained reasoned exposition. This was perhaps in part expression of his thoroughly professional approach to politics, so unlike his father's, but possibly deriving something from Shelburne. The younger Pitt was continuously engaged in depth with major issues of his day. He regularly and energetically sought the best information. He was genuinely progressive, as his father was not, on parliamentary reform, Catholic emancipation, commercial policy, and administrative reform. His constructive capacity in his chief responsibility, financial policy and administration, far surpassed his father's record, if it was less impressive and perhaps more equally matched in foreign and imperial policy and strategy. With good reason, his long career in high office was the mirror image of his father's short tenure. 
In contrast, only briefly was Chatham able to rise to the challenge of his age. By his last decade time had passed him by. 


@@@@@


doc= 22338


Pitt, William (1759-1806), prime minister, the fourth child and second son of William Pitt, later first earl of Chatham (1708-1778), prime minister, and his wife, Hester (1720-1803), the daughter of Richard Grenville and Hester, Countess Temple, was born at the family home, Hayes Place, Kent, on 28 May 1759. A lively and cheerful but delicate child, he was educated at home, where his precocious intelligence engaged his father's interest. According to the Revd Edward Wilson, the family tutor, he seemed 'never... to learn, but merely to recollect' (Pretyman, 1.3-4). He was trained as a debater, his powers of elocution developed by declamation from Shakespeare and Milton, his ready choice of words by translation from the Greek and Latin classics, his oratory by being set to address an imagined parliamentary audience. 
Although he was intended for the bar, Pitt's destiny was clearly a political life. In April 1773, at the young age of fourteen, he entered Pembroke College, Cambridge, and took up residence in October; his college tutor was George Pretyman (from 1803 Pretyman Tomline), who became a lifelong friend. Because of poor health Pitt resided only intermittently until 1776, thereafter keeping regular terms until the end of 1779. The prominence given at Cambridge to mathematical studies and history and political philosophy suited Pitt's cast of mind and contributed to his mature outlook. He read extensively in the classics and English literature, became interested in chemistry and fascinated by Newton's 'Principia', and was a competent mathematician. While European literature and the study of philosophy received due attention, concern for theology was less marked. His later time in college was sociable, and some of his friends -- among them John Pratt, later second Earl Camden, the marquess of Granby, later fourth duke of Rutland, the tenth earl of Westmorland, and Charles Long, later Lord Farnborough -- became political associates. Before leaving Cambridge, Pitt settled the affairs of his father, who died in May 1778. He inherited an annual income of $600 -- half being a grant from his elder brother John Pitt, second earl of Chatham -- with the expectation of a future capital payment, which amounted to only some $4000, raised through the sale of Hayes Place in 1785. From the outset, therefore, Pitt had little money. After leaving Cambridge he borrowed from the family's banker, Thomas Coutts, to complete the purchase of rooms at Lincoln's Inn while preparing for the bar, and mortgaged them a year later to a moneylender at a high rate. He had entered on a tangle of personal financial expedients that continued for the rest of his life. 
From Lincoln's Inn Pitt witnessed the anti-Catholic Gordon riots in June 1780, and that summer practised as a barrister on the western circuit. In September, on the dissolution of parliament by Lord North, he canvassed a university seat at Cambridge, but ended at the bottom of the poll. Through the influence of the duke of Rutland he was offered the Westmorland borough of Appleby by the boroughmonger Sir James Lowther, who -- with uncharacteristic generosity -- allowed him freedom of conduct, requiring only that he should agree to resign 'if ever our Lines of Conduct should become opposite' (Pitt to Hester, countess of Chatham, endorsed November 1780, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/12). Unable to afford the expense of a contested election, Pitt accepted the invitation and, aged twenty-one, was elected in his absence, in time for the assembly of the new parliament in January 1781. There Pitt attached himself to the followers of the second earl of Shelburne, who had been his father's disciple, as part of the combined opposition under the second marquess of Rockingham to the ministry of Lord North. His maiden speech on 26 February 1781, during the second reading of Edmund Burke's motion to reintroduce his bill for economic reform, was an unusual debut, for he spoke unprepared, following calls from the opposition benches. The confidence and quality of his response deeply impressed the house. 'His voice', it was recorded, 'is rich and striking, full of melody and force; his manner easy and elegant; his language beautiful and luxuriant. He gave in this first essay, a specimen of eloquence, not unworthy the son of his immortal parent' (Debrett, 2.17). In its maturity of argument, its logic, balance, and control, Pitt's oratory was indeed from the first as it endured to the end. Burke, Charles James Fox, and North himself commended his performance. 
Pitt spoke seldom during his first session and indeed is recorded as speaking on only twenty occasions over the next fifteen months. His substantial contributions covered three key topics. He attacked the ministerial incompetence that he believed had provoked and perpetuated the American War of Independence. He supported economic reform, an endeavour to reduce the expense of government and curtail the political influence of the crown by paring its patronage, though his emphasis, like Shelburne's, differed from that of the Rockinghamites; for -- while suspicious of George III in person -- he was guided less by hostility to the royal prerogative and more by a sense of the value of administrative improvement. And he espoused parliamentary reform, his sympathy -- like Shelburne's -- inclining rather to the proposals of the Yorkshire Association under Christopher Wyvill than the more radical metropolitan movement linked with Fox. 
In Pitt's second session, on 20 March 1782, North resigned following opposition criticism over the British defeat by the Americans at Yorktown, and Rockingham formed a ministry with Shelburne and Fox as principal secretaries of state. Despite his rising prominence, Pitt was not included in the arrangements. He had compromised his hopes of a cabinet post by declaring in the Commons on 8 March that he would accept no other and then, while having apparently been tempted, rejected the offer of a more junior place as a vice-treasurer of Ireland -- Chatham's first appointment -- worth $5000 a year. Having thus underlined his independence, he turned to parliamentary reform. In April he met Wyvill in the London home of Charles Lennox, third duke of Richmond, and was requested to present a motion; on 7 May, in a carefully phrased speech, he proposed the appointment of a select committee 'to take into consideration the present state of the representation of the House' (Debrett, 7.105). Careful to encourage the different strands of possible support, he linked parliamentary with economic reform by an argument -- 'the people were loud for a more equal representation, as one of the most likely means to protect the country from danger, and themselves from oppressive taxes' (Ehrman, 1.71) -- already employed by the Yorkshire Association. He asked for 'a moderate and substantial reform' (Debrett, 7.126), and denounced the rotten boroughs. The motion was defeated by 161 to 141 votes, a respectable minority. Pitt attended the reformers' Thatched House Tavern meeting on 18 May, and spoke in June for an unsuccessful bill to regulate the conduct of elections from his brother-in-law Lord Mahon, later third Earl Stanhope. He was proceeding, as he had intended, as far as possible by his own route: he was never, for instance, as has sometimes been said, a member of the Society for Constitutional Information. 
Rockingham died on 1 July 1782 and Shelburne accepted the leadership of the ministry, upon which Fox and Lord John Cavendish, the chancellor of the exchequer, resigned; on 10 July Pitt was appointed, at the tender age of twenty-three, in Cavendish's place. His first experience of office was in association with a man whose political views much resembled his own and who in some ways influenced his development. They broadly agreed over economic and parliamentary reform and wanted to introduce a liberal system of trade between Britain and Ireland; Shelburne also had firm views on the management of the national debt, an issue that Pitt later made his own. Yet there were temperamental differences between them, as well as differences in their methods of business, and they failed to warm to one another. A reform in Treasury office procedures was introduced, and Pitt brought in bills to reform office-holding and fees in the customs and for the wider regulation of departmental fees and the sale of offices (the 'Public Offices Regulation Bill'). The first was defeated in the Commons and the second in the Lords. Pitt was not consulted closely in Shelburne's peace negotiations with America and its allies but participated fully in cabinet discussions, attending all meetings of which records survive, and both there and in the Commons -- where he had to answer for foreign affairs -- supported Shelburne loyally. He approved of Shelburne's broad aims, if not always their detail, but his own interest was focused more on domestic than on foreign issues. 
When the preliminary treaties of peace with the United States, France, and Spain were presented to parliament on 27 January 1783, Shelburne failed to prevent Fox and North from uniting against them. A meeting on 10 or 11 February, in which Pitt sounded out the possibility of an accommodation with Fox, was fruitless and brief; and Shelburne resigned on the 24th. On the same day -- on Shelburne's recommendation, and with the eager concurrence of Henry Dundas, who hoped for an arrangement which would free North from dependence on Fox -- George III sent for Pitt. On 27 February, after nearly being persuaded to accept, Pitt declined the offer, explaining to Dundas: 'I see that the main and almost only ground of reliance would be this, -- that Lord North and his friends would not continue in a combination to oppose. In point of prudence... such a reliance is too precarious to act on. But above all, in point of honour to my own feelings, I cannot form an administration trusting to the hope that it will be supported, or even will not be opposed, by Lord North. (Stanhope, 'Life', 1.107)' Despite having been asked by the king on 20 March to reconsider, Pitt resigned on the 30th, and on 1 April a coalition of Fox and North took power, with the duke of Portland as first lord of the Treasury. Pitt's conduct made a great impression, and was a precocious example of good political judgement. Without forfeiting the king's goodwill he preserved his independence from both party and court and showed that, notwithstanding his declared ambition for power, he would not 'coalesce with those whose principles he knew to be diametrically opposed to his own' (Debrett, 9.349). 
Out of office, Pitt turned again to parliamentary reform, and on 7 May 1783 he introduced another motion, declaring that his objective was not to 'innovate, but rather to renew and invigorate the spirit of the constitution, without deviating materially from its present form' (Debrett, 9.689). He called for a measure to prevent electoral bribery, for the disfranchisement of boroughs known to be corrupt, and for an increase in representation for the shires and larger metropolitan boroughs, but made no general attack on rotten boroughs. The proposals were easily defeated, by 293 to 149, though with enough support to justify another effort later. In the summer recess, in September, Pitt travelled with his friends Edward Eliot (now his brother-in-law) and William Wilberforce to France, staying in Rheims and visiting Paris and Fontainebleau, where they met Louis XVI and Marie-Antoinette. He was back in London on 22 October for the new parliamentary session in November, and never crossed the channel again. 
On 18 November Fox introduced his 'East India Bill' and sparked off a political storm, which swept Pitt to the forefront of affairs. Its opponents saw the bill as an attack on both the rights of the crown and the East India Company's charter. As disquiet grew, a group of politicians, including Henry Dundas and the parliamentary expert John Robinson (formerly secretary of the Treasury), saw the issue as an opportunity to remove a ministry detested by the king. If George III were to dismiss the ministry, however, he would need someone to lead a new one in the Commons which would come under intense pressure from the deposed Fox-North coalition until a general election could be called with the prospect of ministerial victory. On 9 December Pitt's views were sought in great confidence by the king through an intermediary; and on the 11th, once assured of the authenticity of the overture, Pitt advised him not to dissolve parliament immediately, but to await events in the House of Lords, which might be influenced if the king made his own sentiments plain. George III acted immediately, authorizing Lord Temple to say that he would regard as an enemy anyone voting for the bill. On the 17th the peers threw out the measure by a majority of nineteen, on the 18th Portland, North, and Fox were dismissed, and the next day Pitt took office as first lord of the Treasury and chancellor of the exchequer. His cabinet, formed after a series of refusals, was notably weak, with every member but himself in the Lords, so that in parliament as well as in government much depended on his own performance. When the Commons reassembled in January 1784, moreover, the confident ferocity of Fox's attack was discouraging; on the opening day, 12 January, Pitt was defeated twice, by majorities of thirty-nine and fifty-four, the second on a motion that the king's name had been used unconstitutionally, and another five opposition motions were carried without division. On the 16th a motion that the ministry was unconstitutional had a majority of twenty-one. Pitt ignored these humiliations, however, and the situation began intermittently to ease. On 23 January he introduced an 'East India Bill', which was defeated by only eight votes, and addresses to the throne from corporations friendly to government mounted. On 2 February some independent MPs carried a unanimous motion that 'a firm, efficient, extended, united Administration' was needed (Debrett, 13.27), but the talks with opposition that followed foundered on Fox's insistence that Pitt must resign. The struggle continued fiercely, with Fox gaining a majority of twelve on 18 February for postponing consideration of the financial supplies for the Ordnance. While returning from receiving the freedom of the City of London on the 28th, Pitt was attacked in his carriage in St James's Street by a Foxite crowd, and on 5 March Fox had a majority of nine for postponement of discussion of the annual mutiny bill; but he had already declared -- a significant concession -- that he would not stop the financial supplies, and these all passed in the following weeks. Another call on the 8th for Pitt's dismissal passed by a single vote, and on the 16th he declared 'our present position a triumph, at least compared with what it was' (Stanhope, 'Life', 1.199). On the 24th, with all the grants for the year secured, parliament was dissolved. 
The general election of early 1784 broadly endorsed Pitt's struggle to survive over the previous three months, and produced a majority in a full house of about 120. There had been, clearly if irregularly, a surge of opinion in Pitt's favour among the larger and more open constituencies. The quality of the victory, as well as the swing in numbers, impressed both contemporaries and Pitt himself. Throughout the bitter parliamentary conflict, when he could so easily have been charged with an opportunist servility to George III, he had been concerned to proclaim his independence and maintain a distinctive position, free from the 'old politics of the Court' (letter to Temple, 20 July 1783, Stanhope, 'Miscellanies', 23-6) -- a claim of abiding and central importance, politically and personally. Now he could appeal to a favourable national verdict, and a rejection of Fox's politics. Having stood again for Cambridge University -- as well as for Appleby -- he emerged at the top of the university poll; since he was no longer associated with Lowther, his victory strengthened his independence. 
Pitt's immediate unavoidable task was settling the affairs of the East India Company. His act, passed in August 1784, proved the basis of Indian affairs for more than seventy years; it created a new Board of Control, made Indian authorities more responsible to London in their conduct of foreign affairs, and placed British subjects in India more directly within the jurisdiction of British courts. Unlike Fox's bill, it stipulated that the commissioners of the board -- who were always to include the chancellor of the exchequer and a secretary of state -- were to be crown rather than parliamentary appointments and have no powers of appointment to Indian offices. From 1784 to 1787 Pitt attended only sixteen of the 116 meetings of the Board of Control, leaving most of the business to Henry Dundas, the ministerial expert on Indian affairs. Friction between ministry and company continued over civil and military appointments in India, and in April 1786 Pitt strengthened the executive and military powers of the governor-general of Bengal in order to persuade Earl Cornwallis to accept the office. In 1787, on seeking to increase the crown forces in India, Pitt found the company unwilling to meet the attendant costs, and accordingly, in February 1788, introduced a bill to give the Board of Control power to order payment of any expenses incurred in securing British possessions in India. Apparently unwell, possibly from a bout of drinking with Dundas, he made one of the worst speeches of his career, displaying the impatience with the company he had often revealed in private. 'What', he asked, 'had been his avowed objects in framing the Act of 1784? The principal one was, to take from the Company the entire management of the territorial possessions, and the political government of the country' (Debrett, 8.301). The fate of the bill became doubtful, and it took a more conciliatory speech and a series of amendments against the extension of ministerial patronage to save it. Pitt concerned himself with Indian commercial and financial issues; the company's debts posed complex problems, and, when Cornwallis made proposals for a settlement of the Bengal revenues, he reportedly shut himself up with Dundas for ten days to study them. He contributed to discussions on the renewal of the company's charter, which passed through the Commons in June 1793, and introduced the office of president of the Board of Control, to which Dundas was appointed. 
Pitt distanced himself from attempts in 1786 to impeach the former governor-general of Bengal, Warren Hastings. He declared himself neither friend nor foe of Hastings, was unwilling to take an official stance, and treated each accusation on its merits, but his conduct naturally attracted attention. On the first charge against Hastings he spoke and voted for the defendant, but on the second, debated in the Commons on 13 June 1786, he astonished colleagues and the political world by condemning Hastings's conduct and voting with the opposition against him. On two later charges he likewise gave his verdict for Hastings to stand trial. He regarded the issues as entirely ones of conscience, but was reluctant to discuss his decisions, and was sensitive to criticism that they were inappropriate from the leader of the ministry, even if the case was not conventionally speaking one of ministerial responsibility. He moved firmly in 1787 to prevent the impeachment of Hastings's chief justice, Sir Elijah Impey, and was absent when the trial of Hastings opened in February 1788. 
In the summer of 1784, after a poor harvest in Ireland followed by an outbreak of economic distress and public disorder, the government in Dublin suggested palliative measures -- a revision of the 'Navigation Act', the regulation of certain duties, and the definition of Ireland's position in treaties with foreign states. Pitt, who was already interested in Irish commercial problems, seized this opportunity to try to introduce more radical 'fixed principles' and a 'permanent and tranquil system' that would enable the British and Irish parliaments to 'exercise the rights of legislation, without clashing with each other on the one hand, or, on the other, being encumbered by the necessity of actual and positive concert on every point of common concern' (Gibson, 85-6). He contemplated 'a prudent and temperate reform' of the Irish parliament, which might 'unite the Protestant interest in excluding the Catholics from any share in the representation or the government of the country' ('Correspondence between... Pitt and... Rutland', 43-4). He hoped most of all to increase the aggregate wealth of the two countries through trade, and was inclined: 'to give Ireland an almost unlimited communication of commercial advantages, if we can receive in return some security that her strength and riches will be our benefit, and that she will contribute from time to time in their increasing proportions to the common exigencies of the empire. (ibid., 65-6)' In exchange for the expected commercial rewards, coming in part from overseas trade, Pitt proposed that Ireland contribute to British naval strength through the income of the Irish hereditary revenue, a fund made up mainly of customs and excise duties that might be regarded as a self-regulating index of national prosperity. The contribution in any year would be the annual surplus of the fund over the yield produced on average in the preceding five years; if trade increased or decreased, so also would the contribution. The design was of a kind that always appealed to him, using an ingenious device for the wider end of ensuring that 'for the future the two countries will be to the most essential purposes united' (ibid.). He pressed it on the cabinet, and on 7 February 1785 resolutions were placed before the Dublin parliament. There difficulties arose, for the Irish Commons demanded that any increase in revenue should be devoted to the ordinary peacetime expenditure of Ireland. The administration compromised by proposing that contributions be required only after its budget had been balanced each year and, with this concession secured, the remaining commercial measures were approved. Pitt, however, unwilling to drop his principle of annual contributions, set to work to have it accepted, but miscalculated by forcing the pace in London during March, thereby arousing a campaign of hostile petitions and pamphlets from British manufacturers. Thereafter his policy was ensnared in a ceaseless round of discussions and amendments. A modified scheme passed the British Commons at the end of May and the Lords in July, but the revisions excited further suspicion in Ireland, the method of annual contributions remained unresolved, and the Irish government failed to rally adequate support. When the amended measure was placed before the Irish Commons on 13 August 1785, it was accepted, after a damaging debate, by a majority of only nineteen, and the bill was dropped two days later. 
The defeat was Pitt's worst failure during his first eight years in office and a severe personal blow. Having been sure of success, he convinced himself that an opportunity had been lost for a comprehensive settlement on enduring principles. Yet he had been in too much of a hurry, and failed to consult widely enough to discover, as he had wished, 'the actual temper... of men's minds' ('Correspondence between... Pitt and... Rutland', 44). It needed patient explanation and careful management to persuade the Irish parliament to accept his ideas, and he had not allowed enough time. Having invested much emotional capital in the scheme, his disappointment ran deep. Now his attention turned elsewhere, and when Irish affairs were next thrust upon him his approach was on very different lines. 
Pitt suffered a reverse over the parliamentary scrutiny of the Westminster election of 1784, in which Fox had beaten the ministerial candidate Sir Cecil Wray into third place. Convinced that Wray had polled more votes, he allowed the call for an inquiry to drag on into 1785, enabling the opposition to exploit a mounting sense of the unfairness and apparent vindictiveness of the process. His earlier majorities declined and, following a defeat early in March, the attempt was abandoned: his determination to succeed -- fuelled by rivalry with Fox -- had closed his mind to the changing mood in the Commons. 
Remaining concerned with parliamentary reform, in April 1785 Pitt introduced a modest bill for piecemeal and voluntary purchase of voters' rights in thirty-six small boroughs and the redistribution of the seats among the counties and London. This was defeated by a majority of seventy-four in a division of 422, and its opponents included two ministers. Although more successful than in 1783, Pitt had been far too optimistic about the prospects, and he never returned to the subject again. Another failure was the loss in February 1786 of a ministerial bill to implement the plans of the duke of Richmond, the master-general of the ordnance, to spend $760,000 on improving dockyard defences at Plymouth and Portsmouth. Despite Pitt's advocacy, back-benchers objected to the scale of the expenditure, and the measure was defeated in the Commons on the casting vote of the speaker. Pitt's rash attempt to reintroduce it in May prompted an outcry and its ignominious withdrawal. He had failed both to secure ministerial unity -- Lord Howe at the Admiralty was particularly hostile to the bill -- and to anticipate the mood and the likely prejudices of the Commons. 
Pitt's first financial initiative was directed against the evasion of customs duties, particularly by tea smuggling, which sapped the revenues of the East India Company and the exchequer alike. His 'Commutation Act' of 1784 lowered the levy from an average of 119 per cent to a uniform rate of 25, the loss of revenue being compensated by a sharp increase of the window tax in his June budget. Then, with the co-operation of the East India Company and the tea merchants, and the support of an advance from the Bank of England, he secretly attempted to slash the profits of the contraband by forcing down the market price of tea. A significant fall was achieved in 1784-5 and maintained in subsequent years. Encouraged by this success, Pitt lowered duties on other goods (principally wines, spirits, and tobacco) between 1785 and 1789; rights of search and seizure and other powers of the revenue officers were strengthened, for instance by the 'Manifest Act' of 1786. These measures markedly increased annual yields, discernibly reduced smuggling, and by 1792 had produced an overall increase in revenue of $1.5 to $2 million a year. 
Fiscal policy during the peacetime years of Pitt's first ministry was mainly cautious and conservative. He had no marked preference for any particular class of tax, introduced new imposts on some items of conspicuous expenditure, and increased rates on some established levies. The emphasis fell on luxuries and customary forms of assessment, and no new principle was involved, but his fiscal measures did not escape opposition. Proposals for more effective collection of levies on hops and coals and a duty on linens and calicoes were defeated in 1784; a tax on female servants in 1785 was quickly withdrawn. Pitt kept his shop tax of 1785 despite strong opposition in the Commons, riots in London -- Downing Street was briefly besieged -- and continued resentment, but dropped it in 1789, when the improved state of the finances allowed. The yield of this miscellany of taxes proved adequate, as only about $1 million a year was needed to cover the annual peacetime surplus of expenditure over ordinary revenue. Pitt's budget speech of February 1792 reviewed with satisfaction a period of successful management, stable finances, and buoyancy and growth in British trade, which he felt justified an immediate cut in taxation of about $0.25 million. 
Within this fiscal framework -- traditional, sensitive, but not unduly demanding -- Pitt earned great acclaim for his financial reforms. His 'Consolidation Act' of 1787 replaced an enormous range of customs and excise duties -- and some stamps -- with new rates linked to a greatly reduced list of exchequer accounts formed into one consolidated fund, and established the priorities of expenditure claims upon the fund. He thus tackled a system acknowledged to be rigid, inefficient, and complex -- the bill needed 2537 distinct resolutions -- in which negligence and fraud were rife from the administrative burdens involved and no clear view could be gained of the state of a large part of the nation's revenue. Treasury account books soon slimmed from between sixty and seventy folios to about a dozen, and exchequer tallies were reduced from 1700 to some 200 a year. The idea had been in the air since the 1750s and recommended in 1782 -- but it took a bold young chancellor to implement it. While the measure did not cover all aspects of government finance, being limited to receipts and issues of the exchequer, it was a vast and beneficial simplification, and anticipated the eventual reform of the accounts as a whole in 1857. 
Benefiting from reduced post-war expenditure needs, Pitt took steps to reduce the national debt. In 1784 funded national debt was about $243 million, and of $24 million annual expenditure some $8.5 million was devoted to the annual interest incurred. While Pitt's aim when increasing revenue modestly beyond outgoings was to have the means of reducing the debt he nevertheless had to borrow to meet the interest charges, though this was possible on better terms than during the war. In 1784 he encouraged two syndicates to compete for the governmental loan, a useful precedent, though less immediately effective than he had hoped, and in 1785 he negotiated directly with the Bank of England. Thereafter in peacetime he raised money through short-term bills and debentures -- except for the employment, with disappointing results, in 1789-90 of a tontine (a variety of life annuity). During 1784-5 he redeemed all he could of the higher interest-bearing unfunded wartime loans (those not secured against specified government revenues), such as navy bills and ordnance debentures. 
In 1786 Pitt implemented a plan to reduce the funded national debt (the total of loans for which payment of interest -- and sometimes repayment of capital -- had been assigned to designated funds of government revenue) by establishing a sinking fund accumulating through compound interest, as had been advocated in the eleventh report of the parliamentary commissioners for examining the public accounts in December 1783. The policy excited Pitt, who was influenced in his expectations by the views of the actuarial authority Dr Richard Price, and described himself on 30 September 1785 as being 'half mad with a project which will give our supplies the effect almost of magic in the reduction of debt' ('Correspondence of William Wilberforce', 1.9). The sinking fund bore the stamp of Pitt's imagination and experience and was a crucial part of his policy for the national debt, which was reduced by 1792 to $170 million. In that year he allocated $400,000 to a distinct account for the redemption of new debt, and in the following decade he added further annual sums of $200,000. Although there remained no adequate check on the creation of unfunded debt, which increased in the late 1780s, Pitt had nevertheless settled the structure of the fund as it endured until the 1820s. 
Pitt's peacetime financial measures were judged a notable success. A favourable economic context, interrupted by only one short period of mild recession, permitted him to reduce the national debt, simplify public accounts, reform duties, and restore confidence. While his policies undoubtedly owed something to others, finance was an aspect of government in which Pitt moved with confidence, and he made a great impression, particularly from 1786. Pragmatic and knowledgeable, and ready to take objections into account, he possessed an unusual degree of professionalism and was heard with respect on a subject that became his favourite occupation. 
Pitt's pragmatic handling of public administration was founded upon a command of detail. His efforts were restricted mainly to departments over which he presided as first lord of the Treasury and chancellor of the exchequer; while showing his disfavour in cases of corruption or negligence across the whole range of government, he was unwilling to press for wide-ranging structural reforms. His concern not to excite opposition by challenging rights of patronage or seeming to extend the crown's influence meant a cautious approach. Steps were taken in 1785 to overhaul the collection of assessed taxes by increasing the number of inspectors, improving training, and extending the supervision exercised by an enlarged taxes office, changes which proved the basis for managing the later income tax. He improved efficiency in the customs by administrative pressure, appointing able men to the commission between 1784 and 1792 and quietly suppressing twenty-eight sinecures as opportunity arose. Efforts to curb abuses by further regulation of fees resulted in an abortive bill of 1789 and an office report in 1790-91 which concluded that wholesale introduction of salaries would be impracticable. Certain responsibilities were transferred from the customs to the more efficient Excise Office without controversy, notwithstanding the unpopularity of the excise's powers. One authority suggests there was a net reduction of 441 revenue places between 1783 and 1793. 
Following criticisms by the commissioners for examining the public accounts, Pitt appointed in 1785 a commission for the audit of public accounts and abolished two ineffectual exchequer posts, the auditors of the imprests, but made little impression on the financial procedures of the navy and the army, both very largely immune still from Treasury supervision. In 1786-7, when George III asked parliament for assistance with his debts, Pitt enquired into crown revenues and obtained details of the civil list, bringing it under the scope of the 'Consolidation Act'. Without overtly challenging the crown's prerogative, he placed an important facet of public expenditure under effective parliamentary control and Treasury supervision, but did not insist on retrenchment by the crown. Pitt approved of justifiable expansion and expense, as seen in the creation of the Board of Control for India and the privy council's committee of trade and plantations (both in 1784), his outlay on naval shipbuilding ($2,400,000 in 1784) and raising the naval establishment (by 3000 men in 1784 and a further 2000 in 1788), and the founding of the Stationery Office (1786). The underlying aim was improved control of expenditure rather than major reductions of it. 
Pitt's role in matters of trade, empire, and diplomacy was less personal and sustained than his role in politics, finance, and administration. He left much business to such colleagues as Dundas, Grenville, and Charles Jenkinson, Baron Hawkesbury, later first earl of Liverpool. His approach to trade was pragmatic. He favoured the establishment of several limited free ports in the West Indies from 1787 and measures in 1785 and 1786 to encourage the Newfoundland fisheries and Atlantic whaling trades, a principal aim in each case being the exclusion of competition from the United States. Through the Nootka Sound dispute with Spain in 1789-90 he secured British whaling interests in the Pacific Ocean and opportunities also for trade with Asia. He was concerned about commerce with India, south-east Asia, and China, particularly in view of Britain's adverse bullion balance with the region arising from the country's fast growing tea imports, and consequently applied the principle of free freight to China in company ships for British and Indian goods, thereby promoting export growth and reduced demand for bullion in the 1790s. He liaised with Dundas over the latter's proposal for a commercial embassy to China, which culminated in the largely fruitless mission of the first Earl Macartney between 1792 and 1794. 
Pitt was keen to find new and growing markets, for instance in South America, but had no great commitment to securing them by territorial acquisition. British interests worldwide were firmly defended, as in the negotiation of the Indian commercial convention with France in 1787, which was closely supervised by him, and by which France conceded Britain's 'de facto' supremacy in India. He wished to prevent French encroachment upon the Dutch spice trade and possessions in the East Indies (in Ceylon, Malaya, and elsewhere), and was prepared to guarantee Dutch trade in return for the cession of bases and depots. Repeated overtures to The Hague before 1792 failed, and ministers had to be content with the annexation of the Andaman Islands in the Indian Ocean during 1789 as a contribution to the security of British India and its Far Eastern concerns. 
Trade encouraged Pitt's first sustained contacts with foreign powers. Between 1785 and 1792 Britain negotiated for commercial alliances with eight European states -- those with France and Spain deriving from provisions in the peace treaties of 1783 -- but concluded only one treaty, with France in 1786. By then Pitt was ready to attend to them enthusiastically, and their conduct depended heavily upon him. In 1786, for instance, he wrote or amended dispatches and papers for France, Spain, Portugal, and Russia and carefully supervised progress with the first in particular, while in 1791 he made commercial overtures to Poland and Prussia. The treaty with France was exceptional, a highly successful affair confidently handled by Pitt and his expert William Eden, first Baron Auckland. Having learned the lesson of his Irish propositions and consulted British manufacturing and merchant interests, Pitt obtained a growing French market for British and Irish exporters through reciprocal duties on manufactures -- excluding French silks -- in exchange for reduced duties on French wines. He was, however, in no hurry to settle border disputes with the United States, on the grounds that America had not honoured debts owed to British merchants and loyalists (an issue which strained Anglo-American relations until 1794), but appreciated Canada's value for naval stores and the economic potential of its hinterland, where he wished to establish freer trade and encourage agriculture and forestry. From 1789 Grenville handled Canadian affairs, working closely with Pitt to implement policies to which both fully subscribed, including a scheme of constitutional government. Pitt introduced his colleague's bill in 1791, vigorously announcing a policy of 'colonial assimilation' and proclaiming faith in a British constitution 'deservedly the glory and happiness of those who lived under it', which 'should be extended to all our dependencies as... circumstances... would admit' (Debrett, 29.76-7). The 'Canada Act' -- though not an especially successful measure, particularly in respect of French Quebec -- formed the basis of Canadian administration until 1840. 
In challenging the well-established and lucrative slaving and sugar interests Pitt revealed a sensibility at one with the humanitarian impulses widely evident in the 1780s, and his efforts gained their driving force from moral conviction: 'This was a question which called forth all the sensibilities of his heart' (Pretyman, 3.543). He suggested the subject of abolition of the trade to Wilberforce for investigation in 1787, and over the next five years gave him strenuous support; he used ministerial facilities to assist the abolitionists -- supplying information from the customs, ordering a report by the committee of trade, and seeking co-operation from foreign powers such as France. 
Pitt's colleagues were not united on the issue, and a private bill (which eventually became law) to restrict the trade, introduced by Sir William Dolben in 1788, encountered opposition in the Lords from ministers -- including Lord Hawkesbury and Lord Chancellor Thurlow -- despite Pitt's hints that opposition was inconsistent with cabinet office. On the eve of the great parliamentary debate on the question in May 1789 he stated that there was 'no part of our cause that is not made out upon the strongest ground' (letter to Wilberforce, 20 April, 'Private Papers of William Wilberforce', 35), and he helped draft the resolutions that Wilberforce presented to the Commons. The resolutions were nevertheless lost, for Pitt had underestimated the unease of the house over immediate abolition. Wilberforce tried again in April 1792, having earlier that year rejected Pitt's suggestion that he should introduce a less radical motion with greater likelihood of passing. Pitt supported Wilberforce's uncompromising version of April 1792 in one of his finest and most celebrated orations: 'I hope we shall hear no more of the moral impossibility of civilising the Africans' but rather make 'an atonement for our long and cruel injustices' (Ehrman, 1.401). Yet his stirring reconciliation of a noble ideal with detailed arguments to satisfy practical men did not prevail, and the motion was lost by 230 to 85, though an amendment from Dundas advocating gradual, regulated abolition by 1800 (later revised to 1796) did pass the Commons by 193 to 125, only to be lost from sight in the House of Lords after the outbreak of the war with France. Had Pitt insisted on making the measure, which was not conventionally of a ministerial nature, into one demanding collective cabinet responsibility, it might have been enacted, since his judgement in commercial matters was respected and his moral conviction was evident, but there would have been great difficulties. He could not credibly claim that interests of state demanded abolition, and he was generally disposed to allow associates considerable freedom of conscience; the king, moreover, did not approve of the measure. Pitt continued during the 1790s to support Wilberforce's parliamentary efforts; but successive discouragements moderated his enthusiasm for what he increasingly saw as a marginal issue in a demanding war. 
When he took office, Pitt's experience of -- and taste for -- diplomatic affairs was slight, and his principal objective was to avoid commitments that might hinder the revival of British trade and prosperity. A series of diplomatic crises, however, tested his resolution in defending British interests, and he showed a marked willingness to take the control of policy into his own hands -- notably so until 1791, when Lord Carmarthen was replaced at the Foreign Office by the more capable Grenville. 
One crisis derived from a traditional concern to restrain French influence in the Netherlands, which had heightened in 1785 through France's defensive alliance with the government of the United Provinces, then dominated by the Francophile patriot party rather than pro-British supporters of the house of Orange. Britain's envoy at The Hague, Sir James Harris, later first earl of Malmesbury, acted as a focus of Orangist and anti-French feeling, making use of secret-service funds sent after 1785, and as an agent of Anglo-Prussian co-operation. When in 1787 Frederick William III of Prussia received an appeal for protection from the princess of Orange, his sister, it seemed much would depend on Prussia. In August Pitt proposed joint mediation by France, Prussia, and Britain to settle the affairs of the United Provinces. He kept up diplomatic pressure on France, offered an accord on naval armaments (which was signed on 30 August), and, ordering naval preparations, warned that Britain would respond if France intervened in the Netherlands. The French, he wrote, must 'give up in effect their predominant influence in the Republic, or they must determine to fight for it' (letter to Eden, 14 September, Eden, 1.195). France did not in fact mobilize when Prussia occupied the United Provinces in September, and acquiesced as Britain and Prussia, in accordance with a secret convention of 2 October, dictated a settlement of the Netherlands favourable to the house of Orange. This was a triumph for Pitt, who had skilfully united cabinet and king behind his policy, personally drafted dispatches to Harris, and been responsible for crucial instructions to representatives in France and the United Provinces. A model of military and diplomatic co-ordination, his policy disconcerted France by its firmness and facilitated Prussian strategy. Britain's emergence from post-war diplomatic isolation was consolidated in 1788 by the formation of the triple alliance, through separate, mutual, treaties between Britain, Prussia, and the United Provinces, a system which Pitt intended to guarantee the European 'status quo', and which played a prominent diplomatic role from 1788 to 1791. 
The triple alliance was well received by parliament, but its consequences tested Pitt's diplomatic skill. When the Austrian Netherlands revolted against Austrian rule in July 1789 and sought the allies' protection, Prussia urged recognition, but Pitt judged that British interests were better served by the preservation of a semi-autonomous province ruled by Vienna than by the creation of a weak Belgian state potentially under French sway. He persuaded Prussia in January 1790 that the allies should not recognize the independence of the Austrian Netherlands, refused to assist Prussia in its disputes with Austria in central Europe, and persuaded the two powers to accept the convention of Reichenbach in July 1790. That the terms of the convention were those proposed by Britain demonstrated Pitt's considerable influence on the settlement. 
A dispute with Spain was handled with similar confidence and success. In 1789 Spanish officials closed a British depot at Nootka Sound (Vancouver) engaged in the north Pacific fur and fishery trades, claiming navigation and settlement of the entire Pacific coast of America as the exclusive preserve of Spain. When news of the incident reached London in January 1790, Pitt grasped that it raised major issues of freedom of trade. He took control of policy, informing the Spanish government that no discussion of its sovereign claims was possible until the British subjects arrested at Nootka Sound were released and fully compensated. The arrival of more details in April and May aroused traditional hostility towards Spain within parliament and among the public, and circumstances were ripe for Pitt to take a firm stand. He obtained cabinet and parliamentary approval for naval mobilization and assurances of assistance from Britain's triple alliance partners while diplomatic efforts isolated Spain in Europe and, through rapprochement with the United States, in the Americas. On 16 May he demanded the withdrawal of Madrid's claims over unoccupied American territory, restoration of the Nootka Sound depot, free settlement of the north-west coast, free trade between Spanish and British settlements, and British participation in the southern Pacific whale fishery; and on 5 July he offered to accept immediate settlement of British grievances as a preliminary to exploration of the wider issues. Madrid undertook to grant full compensation, without making any immediate concessions of principle. As mobilization continued Pitt kept up the pressure, issuing an ultimatum on 2 October in the form of alternative draft treaties of agreement. On the basis of these the British ambassador in Madrid negotiated a convention, signed on 28 October, by which Spain conceded free settlement north of California and British participation in the southern whale fishery. 
During the autumn of 1790 Pitt, under the influence of Joseph Ewart, the British envoy in Berlin, planned a 'grand design' to curb Russian expansion in south-east Europe by imposing peace on the warring Russians and Turks and compelling Russia to restore the recently captured Black Sea port of Ochakov, at the mouth of the River Dniester. He hoped to prevent Russian access to the Mediterranean and to use Ochakov as an entrepot for naval stores from the Baltic and British exports to markets in eastern and central Europe, but the policy, launched in January 1791, received a lukewarm response from the European powers. Undeterred, Pitt -- calculating that Russia would not fight -- ordered preparations for Baltic naval operations, and at length Prussia offered support. At the end of March, after several meetings of a divided cabinet, a joint Anglo-Prussian ultimatum was issued threatening war if Russia did not cede Ochakov and make peace on the terms of the convention of Reichenbach. Pitt's policy, however, caused an outcry in parliament, the press, and the country at large against mobilization for a war in which neither the balance of power nor any immediate British interest seemed threatened. Although his majorities were maintained, the hostile temper of the Commons alarmed ministers and left Pitt visibly shaken. It was, he reportedly told Ewart, 'the greatest mortification he had ever experienced' (Ewart to Jackson, 14 April, Ewart MSS, priv. coll.). By 15 April he had determined to abandon the policy, and he drafted an explanation for Berlin. This was a humiliating defeat for Pitt's foreign policy, resulting in renewed British isolation. Overconfident and incautious after a run of diplomatic successes, he had seriously overreached himself and misjudged the mood of parliament and public. The experience contributed to his reluctance to make an early commitment against revolutionary France. 
Despite his triumph in 1784, Pitt's political judgement and tactics were sometimes uncertain, particularly at first, while the intermittent effects of inexperience were not offset by widespread popularity among members of parliament. With his conception of personal independence went personal remoteness, in part adopted defensively to guard his exposed youthful situation, but more fundamentally that of a man never on outgoing terms with his world, and he seemed chilly, aloof, and severe in public life. Aspects of his personality appeared markedly in his political character -- pride, rectitude, shrewdness, and vacillation. Quick to recognize talent in the handling of business, he had little time for the mass of back-benchers: 'From the instant that Pitt entered the doorway... he advanced up the floor with a quick and firm step, his head erect and thrown back, looking neither to the right nor to the left, nor favouring with a nod or a glance any of the individuals seated on either side, among whom many who possessed five thousand pounds a year would have been gratified even by so slight a mark of attention. ('Memoirs of... Wraxall', 3.217)' Nor did he entertain on a scale considered appropriate for a first lord of the Treasury. Wilberforce remarked, 'Pitt does not make friends' (Wilberforce and Wilberforce, 1.78). His style of leadership too was unusual at first, granting his political intimates an exceptional freedom of conscience. 
Yet Pitt was in a strong position -- his opponents were out of favour, the king supported him, his talents were conspicuous and admired -- and by the end of the decade he demonstrated growing political mastery. His oratory, debating skills, and widely perceived competence earned the respect of the Commons. His usual reluctance to adopt overtly controversial measures was approved. Evidently standing -- unlike Fox -- for stable, pragmatic government dedicated to national revival after the American war, he was backed in the Lords and the Commons by the party of the crown, the office-holders, and dependants who supported government in all but very exceptional circumstances. He soon revealed a facility for working with parliamentary committees that contributed significantly to his management of the Commons in the 1790s. Except in relation to foreign policy and the king's own business, he made little special use of the cabinet. An exception occurred during the unusual circumstances of the regency crisis, when he took care to lay emphasis on collective responsibility for ministerial decisions. For leadership in the Lords before 1790 he relied on Thurlow and, increasingly from 1786, Hawkesbury; thereafter Grenville was prominent, as a counterweight to Thurlow, whose conduct over several years annoyed Pitt. Although there were forty-five peerage creations or promotions between December 1783 and the summer of 1790, Pitt had no deliberate policy of packing the Lords; the rapid growth, which eventually produced an unmanageably large assembly, was the result more of failure to resist pressing applications from ambitious men than a clear desire to use them for political ends. 
Pitt and George III, on whose support the ministry's survival ultimately depended, were never on friendly terms. Their relations always correct rather than cordial, they treated one another cautiously; yet, despite occasional disagreements over policy, they co-operated well in the 1780s. Pitt advanced his powers in areas of business -- financial and administrative -- not directly threatening to royal prerogatives and powers of patronage, and each welcomed post-war renewal and the exclusion of Fox. Pitt called a general election in the summer of 1790, a year earlier than necessary, with confidence, and the result strengthened his ministry, with one estimate suggesting a bloc of 340 members in support and only 183 in opposition when parliament reassembled. He again headed the Cambridge University poll. A mark of continuing royal approval was the grant of the wardenship of the Cinque Ports in August 1792. 
The regency crisis of 1788-9, following the king's mental collapse in November 1788, threatened Pitt's career, since the prince of Wales, whom it was assumed would be regent, favoured the Foxite opposition. Pitt's response was correct, methodical, and diplomatic; advised by the lunacy specialist Dr Willis that the king would recover, he played for time, and was careful to consult the cabinet regularly and seek parliamentary endorsement of his policy. Aware that Thurlow was privately negotiating with Fox, he took legal and constitutional advice from Lord Chief Justice Kenyon, and throughout retained control, encouraged by public support in the form of addresses from the City and urban corporations sympathetic to king and ministers. In December he established committees to examine medical reports and constitutional precedents and secured agreement in both houses that parliament should provide for the regency. On 16 January 1789 he introduced a scheme for highly restricted regency powers that was likewise accepted. Early in February parliament agreed to place the great seal in commission to enable royal assent to be given to Pitt's 'Regency Bill', which -- having been approved by the Commons on 12 February -- entered the Lords four days later. The next day -- 17 February -- came news of the king's recovery, and on 19 February further discussion of the bill was postponed. The outcome vindicated Pitt's handling of the crisis. He had enlisted the support of the House of Commons whereas Fox had antagonized it, and he had exploited the unpopularity of the prince to delay -- and curb the powers of -- a regency administration. 
Pitt's attitude towards the campaign of the protestant dissenters for repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts', which officially barred them from public office unless subscription was made to a sacramental test, surprised many. When the subject was raised in parliament in March 1787, May 1789, and March 1790, he showed himself firmly opposed to repeal. In a decisive speech in March 1787 he deemed the issue one of expediency rather than principle, arguing that toleration in practice existed -- especially through the practice of granting annual indemnities to office-holding dissenters -- and that repeal would constitute a needless weakening of the constitution. His opposition was perhaps encouraged by Fox's advocacy; more important, having consulted the bishops in 1787 and found them strongly against repeal, he knew the measure would be fiercely resisted in the House of Lords and by the king. At a deeper level, he took the Erastian view that, as church and state were necessary defences of each other and the established social order, political wisdom lay in safeguarding the privileges and patronage of the church hierarchy, particularly as dissenting views were readily associated with subversive political doctrines. It was a conviction which he espoused the more firmly as the threat from revolutionary political and social ideas -- both at home and abroad -- escalated during the 1790s. 
From the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789 until 1792 Pitt was unperturbed about events in France: 'unquestionably there never was a time in the history of this country, when, from the situation of Europe, we might reasonably expect fifteen years of peace, than we might at the present moment', he declared in his budget speech of 17 February 1792 (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 29, 1817, 826). Although Britain's ambassador was recalled on Louis XVI's deposition in August 1792, Pitt determined not to interfere in French affairs. Austria's defeat at Jemappes (6 November) and subsequent French edicts proclaiming free navigation of the River Scheldt (16 November) and assistance for foreign revolutionaries (the 'fraternal decree' of 19 November) alarmed him, however, not least because the former decree challenged the restricted navigational rights guaranteed by the Anglo-Dutch treaty of 1788. On 13 November Pitt instructed Lord Auckland at The Hague to assure the Dutch of British help in the event of French aggression. At an unofficial meeting on 2 December with H. B. Maret of the French foreign ministry, Pitt called this edict 'a proof of an intention to proceed to a rupture with Holland' which 'must also lead to an immediate rupture with this country' and the fraternal decree 'an act of hostility to neutral nations' (Ehrman, 2.233-4). His public pronouncements grew increasingly condemnatory in December 1792 and January 1793, and, though keener than many colleagues to avoid war, he became convinced that fundamental British interests were at stake. In a note of 31 December he told the French envoy Chauvelin that Britain could never 'consent that France shall arrogate the power of annulling at her pleasure, and under the pretence of a natural right... the political system of Europe, established by solemn treaties, and guaranteed by the consent of all the powers.' Rather, France must 'renounce her views of aggression... and confine herself within her own territory' (ibid., 2.239). Chauvelin's expulsion from Britain, agreed on 24 January 1793 following news of Louis XVI's execution, prompted France to declare war on Britain and the Dutch. Replying to the king's message of 11 February on the outbreak of war, Pitt condemned revolutionary 'principles... which, if not opposed, threaten the most fatal consequences to the tranquility of this country, the security of its allies, the good order of every European Government, and the happiness of the whole of the human race!' (Debrett, 34.459). 
During 1792 relations with Thurlow were further aggravated by the lord chancellor's attack on a ministerial bill, and on 16 May Pitt's ultimatum to George III finally secured his dismissal. Pitt consulted opposition leaders that month over the drafting of a royal proclamation against seditious writings and made overtures to the Northite Lord Loughborough (Alexander Wedderburn) and the Portland whigs, aiming to replace Thurlow with Loughborough and possibly strengthen the ministry further, though without immediate result. Only when the situation seemed more threatening in the winter of 1792-3, with a poor harvest, a sudden economic downturn, and a worsening international situation, did Pitt consider further repressive measures, such as the suspension of habeas corpus. In November and December he acted to strengthen the army and embody sections of the militia, while an 'Aliens Bill' was quickly passed in January 1793. He had widespread support for these measures in the country and in parliament, not least from members of the whig opposition, such as Portland, Fitzwilliam, Burke, Malmesbury, and William Windham, who were dismayed by Fox's sympathy for the revolution. When Fox demanded recognition of the French republic in December 1792 his party split. Malmesbury declared his support for Pitt on 16 January 1793 and Loughborough accepted the lord chancellorship on 28 January, while shortly after the outbreak of war a grouping of whig MPs -- led by Burke and Windham -- offered their co-operation. 
The main body of the parliamentary opposition united in support of the war, and showed little enthusiasm in May 1793 for a renewed call by Charles Grey, later second Earl Grey, for parliamentary reform, a proposal which Pitt described as 'capable of producing much mischief, and likely to be attended with no good' (Debrett, 35.470). In the same month, Pitt responded to a temporary credit crisis, involving a run on the country banks and the withdrawal of specie from the Bank of England, by extending the money supply through an issue of banknotes -- the $5 note made its first appearance -- and using exchequer bills to advance credit to the mercantile community. The conclusion of the crisis by the late summer was widely seen as a personal triumph. His offers during the summer of ministerial posts to William Windham and the second Earl Spencer were rejected, though closer links were established with the whig groups associated with Windham and the duke of Portland; Sylvester Douglas, later Baron Glenbervie, accepted the position of Irish secretary in December, while Portland renounced 'systematic opposition' in January 1794. In the spring of 1794 Pitt, now increasingly concerned about alleged Jacobin conspiracies in Britain, cultivated the opposition whig leaders, offering Portland the lord lieutenancy of Middlesex -- which was declined -- and keeping them informed about war policy. On 24 May, and subsequently on 2 and 18 June, he met Portland to seek a union of the duke's political connection with the ministry. On 3 July, after a month of talks, he presented his plans to the king. 
By the beginning of July Pitt had promised the Home Office (currently held by Dundas, who, unlike Grenville, was intimately involved in the negotiations) to Portland and the lord lieutenancy of Ireland to Earl Fitzwilliam. To keep oversight of the war in friendly hands, he proposed a new cabinet position of secretary for war and the colonies -- including India -- for Dundas, while offering Windham a new subordinate -- but cabinet-level -- place as secretary at war, and was horrified by Dundas's refusal on 9 July to accept the arrangement. Replying the same day that his friend's resignation would leave him 'really completely heart broken', he made a 'personal request in the strongest manner' that Dundas should accept (NA Scot., GD 51/1/204); on his refusal, Pitt went at once to George III to ask him to write also, which the king did immediately. Dundas acquiesced, and the new arrangements went ahead on the 11th. The cabinet now numbered thirteen rather than ten, of whom five (or six if Loughborough is counted) had joined from the parliamentary opposition. Despite some grumbling among his friends, Pitt exuded confidence and was certain of his capacity to maintain his ascendancy. He valued the coalition for the additional authority it brought government within and outside parliament and also for its further isolation of Fox. 
Pitt shared much political ground with the newcomers to his cabinet, but this did not yet extend to Irish affairs, and in promising the lord lieutenancy to Fitzwilliam (promoted lord president for the time being) he had given a hostage to fortune; not appreciating the importance attached to it, he characteristically delayed making the appointment. Matters came to a head early in October, when Portland reminded him of it and Fitzwilliam threatened resignation. By the 12th the cabinet was in grave danger of a rupture. Pitt now asserted himself, making clear to whig ministers that the current Irish administration must be fairly treated, and a respite was earned when Fitzwilliam decided to consult Lord Spencer, then in Vienna. In mid-November, on Spencer's return, Pitt discussed Fitzwilliam's Irish policy with his whig colleagues. Although what was agreed is uncertain, he told Windham on the 16th that: 'the very Idea of a new System (as far as I understand what is meant by that Term) and especially one formed without previous Communication or Concert with the rest of the King's Servants here, or with the Friends of Government in Ireland, is in itself what I feel it utterly impossible to accede to. (BL, Add. MS 37844)' The issue of consultation and agreement was uppermost in his mind, for on the subject of parliamentary representation of the Roman Catholics in Ireland -- to which Fitzwilliam was especially committed -- he was inclined to be accommodating if pressed, having already conceded the franchise on the same qualifications as protestants and access to civil and military posts other than the higher offices of state by an 'Emancipatory Act' of February 1793. 
Pitt was slow to intervene when news reached London of the controversial appointments and policies undertaken by Fitzwilliam on his arrival in Dublin in January 1795. A warning on 6 February from George III had greater impact. He complained that Fitzwilliam's plan to introduce parliamentary representation for Roman Catholics was 'a total change in the principles of government' and indeed 'beyond the decision of any Cabinet of Ministers' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/103). Ministers met the next day. On the 8th Fitzwilliam was instructed to defer the measure and not encourage its supporters. After further cabinet discussion on the 20th and 21st, Fitzwilliam was recalled, Pitt sending as replacement his friend Camden, with the whig Thomas Pelham as chief secretary, and calm was restored among the Irish politicians. While Fitzwilliam had precipitated the crisis in Dublin, Pitt had not grasped the strength of his political views; his failure to act quickly to prevent trouble and to consider the likely reaction of the king had compounded the error. Possibly he had given a misleading impression of personal support for Fitzwilliam, but he had not been alone in misjudging him, and was genuinely angry at what he considered a breach of the understanding reached in November 1794. He described Fitzwilliam's conduct as 'the strongest instance of the breach of political Faith, which had ever occurred to him' (BL, Add. MS 45107, ch. 18, pp. 52-3), and the episode created lasting ill feeling. 
With the Fitzwilliam affair ('the unlucky Subject of Ireland', as Pitt described it in January 1795; BL, Add. MS 37844) concluded, the ministry united to deal with the growing threats facing the country, of which one was political subversion. A government bill on traitorous correspondence had clarified the treason laws in the spring of 1793, and a number of prosecutions, usually successful, were then brought under the sedition laws. In response to large public meetings and agitation by the radical societies, the government acted decisively in May 1794, arresting Thomas Hardy, secretary of the London Corresponding Society, and other prominent radicals, establishing a special Commons committee, and suspending the 'Habeas Corpus Act' for eight months. Pitt encouraged and approved of these measures, and was personally involved in the examination of the arrested men. In the Commons on 16 May he called the societies' aims a 'pretext of reform' and a 'mask of attachment to the state and country' disguising a conspiracy for insurrection in the manufacturing towns: he was convinced there existed an immediate danger demanding urgent precautions, and his fears were shared by ministers and a majority of the Commons. His measures temporarily restrained the radicals, notwithstanding the collapse of the celebrated treason trials of the autumn of 1794. Politically disappointing, these were also personally embarrassing for Pitt, who was subpoenaed as a witness for the defence of John Horne Tooke, questioned about his own earlier campaigns for parliamentary reform, and taxed with having professed doctrines very similar to those of the accused himself. 
Pitt brushed off calls by Wilberforce (in December 1794 and again in May 1795) and Charles Grey (in January 1795) for peace negotiations. He renewed the suspension of habeas corpus in February 1795, though it expired in June. The winter of 1794-5, following a poor harvest, was severe and 1795 a disastrous year for agriculture; corn prices rose dramatically during 1795-6, and a fierce wave of unrest, worrying for Pitt, was evident by the summer of 1795. During the spring of that year he had started buying corn overseas on the government's account -- an innovative policy; but when prices were debated in November a committee of the house condemned the purchases. Faced by these traditional criticisms, Pitt immediately stopped the purchases and introduced -- as the committee had recommended -- bounties on certain imported grains. The arrival of government shipments with those of private merchants in the spring of 1796 helped to moderate prices the next summer. Pitt was unwilling to interfere legislatively with the market for grain or the level of agricultural wages but focused instead on measures of poor relief that were traditionally the responsibility of local authorities. The Speenhamland system of May 1795 -- which related allowances for the poor to the prevalent price of bread and the number of dependants in a family but eschewed increases in wages -- was endorsed the following autumn in an act sanctioning outdoor relief and the removal of the workhouse test of destitution. Pitt did little to support the board of agriculture set up in 1793 or a bill from Sir John Sinclair to facilitate agrarian enclosures in 1796, though he did encourage measures to reduce grain consumption in such industries as distilling and starching. 
The second half of 1795 saw the most serious occurrences of combined political and economic protest yet witnessed by Pitt's ministry. When a new session of parliament opened on 29 October, Pitt was surrounded by a cursing mob, and the king encountered a crowd shouting 'No Pitt, no war, bread, bread, peace, peace', his carriage being hit by a missile. Pitt responded swiftly; habeas corpus was again suspended and a bill for seditious meetings and assemblies and another for the definition of treasonable practices were quickly introduced. They passed by overwhelming majorities into law on 18 December 1795, Pitt carefully presenting them as necessary measures that preserved legal rights such as petitioning. Anxious about unrest, he ordered military reinforcements to London, and remarked to Wilberforce early in November: 'My head would be off in six months, were I to resign' (Wilberforce and Wilberforce, 1.114). 
In 1793 Pitt could not envisage the nature of the war ahead, and he approached it at first with characteristic optimism. He believed Britain would easily find allies and the small British army cope with a wide range of tasks -- including operations on the Atlantic and Mediterranean coasts of France, and in Mauritius and the West Indies -- but was baselessly optimistic about the quality of the army and its logistical and administrative support. He never remedied his lack of profound strategic understanding and ignorance of logistical detail; he favoured raids on the French coast but was rarely prepared to concentrate effort at one point and too often allowed diplomatic considerations to outweigh military practicalities in strategic planning. He expected a short, successful war: 'every circumstance concurs to favour the hope of our being able completely to accomplish every object of the war', he told the Commons on 17 June 1793 (Debrett, 35.675). 
The basis for the first coalition against France was quickly laid in 1793, as conventions assuring co-operation and mutual security were signed with Russia in March, Sardinia in April, Spain in May, Prussia and the Two Sicilies in July, and Austria in August. Pitt was disappointed by the failure of a British expedition to Dunkirk in August and early September, which he had intended to strengthen Austria's possessions in the Netherlands, but grasped that future success would require closer co-operation with the military power of Austria and Prussia. In November 1793 the prospect of aiding a French royalist revolt in La Vendee tempted him, but by the time an expedition reached Cherbourg on 2 December the rising had been suppressed, and it had to withdraw. News of the occupation -- at the city's request -- of the Mediterranean port of Toulon by a small British and Spanish force supported by the fleet under Lord Hood elated Pitt. Orders were given for British reinforcements to be sent and efforts made to secure assistance from Vienna and Naples, but Hood was obliged to withdraw in December. The episode raised acutely the issue of Britain's war aims and attitude towards the varying strands of French royalism. Pitt wished to avoid prescribing a form of government for France or alienating enemies of the revolution who opposed restoration of an absolute Bourbon monarchy, but thought it tactically necessary to woo active royalists. A British proclamation of 29 October invited the French 'to join the Standard of an hereditary Monarchy' (5 October 1793, 'Fortescue MSS', 2.438-9). He urged, in the course of drafting it, a 'pointed recommendation of monarchical government with proper limitations' as most 'likely to unite considerable numbers in one vigorous effort', though this, he wrote, 'by no means precludes us from treating with any other government, if, in the end, any other should be solidly established; but it holds out monarchy as the only force from which we expect any good, and in favour of which we are disposed to enter into concert' (ibid.). Pitt's pragmatic approach was not easy in practice to define or apply, and contemporary critics -- among the parliamentary opposition and more widely -- saw, as have some later historians, the Toulon episode as the moment when he committed Britain to an ideological struggle for monarchy in France. 
In 1794 Pitt sought victory through a continental coalition and deployed some 20,000 British troops in Flanders. Following set-backs to the Austrian and British forces in Flanders, he sent a special mission to Austria in July for a full alliance. When Vienna demanded a large loan underwritten by Britain, he instructed -- on 14 September -- the envoys (Lord Spencer and Thomas Grenville) to request a force of 80,000 to 100,000 Austrian troops, but they left Vienna on 7 October without any prospect of agreement in sight; the same month he abruptly terminated payments to Prussia ($1 million having been uselessly expended) and recalled Malmesbury, who had been sent to reach an agreement. He termed the mounting military crisis in the Netherlands in September a 'calamity' and, braving the king's displeasure, removed the duke of York from command there; he wrote a dutiful but firm letter to George III on 23 November and softened the blow by appointing York commander-in-chief, but keeping him out of the field. 
Pitt attached great importance in 1794 to the West Indies, where a British expedition achieved successes in the spring and summer, taking Martinique, St Lucia, Guadeloupe, The Saints, and Port-au-Prince in St Domingue. The arrival of French reinforcements and the decimation of British troops by disease meant West Indian opportunities were not fully exploited later in the year, and Guadeloupe was abandoned in December. The conclusion of Jay's treaty with the United States in November 1794, however, resolved many outstanding differences between the two powers and strengthened Britain's diplomatic position. Pitt advised and fully supported Grenville during his conduct of the negotiations. 
Although the set-backs of 1794 shook public confidence in the ministry and Wilberforce's call for peace talks in December unsettled him, Pitt saw no immediate reason for a change of strategy. Active himself in the London capital market for government loans, he was confident that money could be found for Austria as 'a public measure of necessity' (Ehrman, 2.377). On 18 December 1794 he offered a loan of $6 million guaranteed by parliament in return for 200,000 troops in 1795, of which 80,000 were to defend the Netherlands if the Dutch continued to fight. He remained keen for Prussian assistance too. In the spring of 1795 this caused a dispute lasting some six weeks with Grenville, who despaired of effective help from Berlin; the cabinet was almost equally divided on 1 March and Grenville privately offered his resignation, though Pitt -- unwilling to lose his colleague -- dissuaded him. On 8 April Pitt drafted instructions for Berlin; owing to the refusal of Grenville -- who minuted his dissent -- Dundas signed them. The foreign secretary opted -- as possibly Pitt had judged he would -- to stay in office, and was shortly vindicated by news of Prussia's peace treaty with France; the Dutch, moreover, allied with France and surrendered their fleet by a treaty of 16 May. 
Pitt's continental strategy was salvaged by Austria's agreement of a loan convention on 4 May and a treaty of defensive alliance on the 20th, though neither brought results in 1795, while Spain's peace with France in July further isolated Britain. His cabinet's decision to appropriate Dutch possessions at the Cape and in Ceylon and the Far East ensured territorial and commercial gains, but the West Indies drained military reserves, and operations on the coast of north-west France in support of the French royalists -- which attracted his enthusiastic support -- achieved nothing. By the end of 1795 Pitt had concluded that the continental war could be fought only by Austria at British expense, while Britain sought advantages at sea and in the colonies, especially the West Indies. Domestic and strategic pressures, however, were leading him to envisage a negotiated peace with France's republican government quite soon. A cabinet of 19-20 September agreed with him that -- although every effort was needed to keep Austria in the war -- it was appropriate with Vienna's knowledge to determine what terms France might accept. This shift of emphasis in his policy alarmed some ministerial colleagues but was accepted by the newly reassembled House of Commons, and by late December Pitt was contemplating making in the spring an overt declaration of British willingness to negotiate. 
In the first three years of war Pitt did not alter radically the military and financial constraints on British policy. He tried to increase recruitment to the regular army and (by the 'Quota Acts' of 1795) to the navy, and in 1794 introduced bills to regulate the volunteers and militia. During October 1796 further bills passed to increase recruitment to the regular infantry and the militia and to raise a provisional force of cavalry. They caused brief, fierce riots across the country, Pitt being burnt in effigy at Norwich. On 8 November orders were issued for the withdrawal of the fleet from the Mediterranean, after a century of continuous presence. Although war expenditure had risen rapidly ($8,137,000 in 1793, $16,837,000 in 1794, and $26,273,000 -- an unprecedented height -- in 1795), no new tax was introduced; Pitt increased government borrowing -- largely through the issue of 3 per cent stock -- against a background of buoyant foreign trade, and maintained public confidence by supporting the sinking fund. The loans produced substantial sums -- $6.7 million, $17.4 million, $22.8 million, and $32.5 million respectively in the years 1793-6 -- but his approach presupposed a short war. Resounding success in the general election of May 1796, which improved the ministry's position -- now strengthened by the accession of the Portland whigs -- markedly over that of 1790, showed there was, in public perception, no alternative to him. 
The national debt -- $241.6 million in 1793 and $310.4 million in 1796 -- grew at an alarming rate in wartime. The Bank of England, with which Pitt was not on good terms, was anxious that liabilities incurred would dangerously outrun reserves, particularly from the summer of 1795. In July 1796 the bank warned him that no further advances to government could be expected that year. A contraction of the general supply of money and rising interest rates restricted his capacity to borrow. While Pitt retained his earlier financial mastery -- managing in two large operations of May and November 1796 to reduce unfunded debt and improve borrowing terms -- he perceived that the strain on public finances was threatening Britain's ability to continue the war. Having considered a forced loan in late November, he opted for a voluntary one -- the loyalty loan -- and announced the details on 1 December; subscribers were to receive $122 10's'. of 5 per cent stock for a contribution of $100. The target of $18 million was reached in four days, a heartening display of public spirit encouraged by the threat of French invasion. In the longer term the measure was unsatisfactory because the falling value of stock meant lenders made a pronounced loss, a result that perturbed Pitt. 
Invasion scares during February 1797 put pressure on the Bank of England and the country banks. When on the 25th news was received of a French landing in Pembrokeshire -- on a small scale and easily subdued -- the general alarm made Pitt take decisive steps to prevent a run on the bank, which had only $1,200,000 bullion in reserve. The cabinet met immediately, the king was requested to travel to town to confer, and an order in council suspending cash payments by the bank was issued on the 26th. This revived commercial confidence immediately in London and, more slowly, in the provinces. At the beginning of March Pitt passed an act enabling the bank to issue notes of small value until 1 May, to offset the general shortage of specie, and on the 10th the country banks were permitted to do likewise. The terminal date was extended regularly thereafter, the low-denomination note having come to stay. An act of 5 May confirmed the order in council of 26 February until 24 June, but converted suspension into restriction, specifying the purposes to which bank notes might be applied. Again the time limit was periodically extended, and the 'restriction period' indeed continued until 1821. Pitt made such changes -- which laid the basis of a new and enduring monetary system -- on pragmatic grounds, with no intention of permanency and acknowledging his uncertainty about their possible effects. Previously wary of a sharp rise in the volume of paper currency, he was reluctant to act until the need was clear, though he did so then with a sure touch. He chose continuation as the safest option during new crises in the spring and summer, and persisted when he saw the country's credit and commerce benefit from an amelioration of the disruptive effects of specie shortage. In March too he promised a new low-denomination copper coinage; over 1000 tons of farthing, halfpenny, penny, and twopenny pieces were produced during the next two years. 
On 16 April mutiny erupted in the Channel Fleet at Spithead, a blow without warning and shocking after the victory of Jervis's Mediterranean Fleet over the Spaniards at Cape St Vincent on 14 February. Pitt was immediately prepared to grant the pay rises demanded, but mutiny flared again and was not ended until 15 May. By this time an outbreak had occurred among the North Sea Fleet at the Nore, hindering the blockade of the Texel, where an invasion armada was gathering. On the 27th Pitt was 'convinced that things [were] 'in extremis'' (Wilberforce and Wilberforce, 2.220). He pushed through acts against incitement to mutiny and communication with mutineers on 6 June and, assured of public support, resolved to wait for the mutiny to collapse, as it did on the 16th. Towards the end of the crisis he was calm and confident, but his response had appeared at times inattentive and indecisive, for he was preoccupied by the war against France, which had reached a critical stage. 
The set-backs from February to June 1797 damaged Pitt's reputation, stimulating a pervasive sense of anxiety and transient doubts in parliament and the country about his competence to lead. Opposition revived, and in March there was a short-lived back-bench move, focused on Sir John Sinclair, to topple the ministry. In May a greater challenge appeared in the person of Lord Moira. Perhaps the most overt signs of discontent from the Commons in the course of his first administration, they strengthened Pitt's determination to restore public confidence through peace. 
By early 1796 Pitt regarded the conclusion of a secure peace as a pressing objective. He allowed inquiries to be made to France through William Wickham at Bern in March, but the reply on the 26th ruled out any prospect of talks -- France demanded renunciation of British colonial gains and recognition of her own 'natural' frontiers. Bonaparte's Italian campaign worsened Pitt's hand: Sardinia sued for peace on 28 April, the Two Sicilies a month later, and on 19 August Spain made an offensive alliance with France. 'Pitt's gold' shored up Austrian resistance and delayed an Austrian separate peace. 
By midsummer 1796 the strategic position seemed bleak to Pitt. He vigorously supported a proposal -- deemed 'indispensably necessary' -- by Grenville to involve Prussia in a 'plan of pacification', and at the end of July had overcome the king's opposition. Prussia was to be offered the Austrian Netherlands in return for proposing to France the allies' terms of peace, and if terms were refused Berlin would act militarily with Austria and Britain. George Hammond from the Foreign Office was sent to Berlin, but no support was forthcoming, Prussia indeed having signed a secret treaty of neutrality with France. A minute of 2 September recording ministerial aims for a negotiation evinced 'something very like panic' (Ehrman, 2.628-9); vague about the Austrian Netherlands, it anticipated the relinquishment of British gains except for Ceylon, Cochin in India, and the Cape, but conceded France's conquests at the expense of all Britain's former allies except Austria. Contrary to the spirit of past exchanges with Vienna, the proposals were not to be sent in advance to Austria, and there was no suggestion of a joint initiative. Pitt -- in low spirits and desperate for peace talks -- was the driving force behind this plan, but Grenville, Portland, and Loughborough agreed, Dundas, previously critical, did not object, and -- after seeing Pitt -- the king consented. The overture was accepted, and Britain's plenipotentiary Lord Malmesbury reached Paris on 22 October. 
By then there had been a revival of optimism in London. Pitt's mercurial spirits were improved during September by news of Austrian successes in Germany. His cabinet -- undismayed by a Spanish declaration of war on 5 October -- had approved plans to seize Spain's overseas possessions and send a small British force -- at Lisbon's request -- to Portugal. Malmesbury's instructions were consequently firmer than the ideas of 2 September, stipulating joint negotiation with Austria and her consent as a 'sine qua non' of any settlement. When Austria proved unwilling to participate in talks, British demands were sent to Paris -- on 10 December -- for restitution of the Austrian Netherlands and imperial possessions in Germany and British retention of Ceylon, Cochin, and the Cape. Pitt kept in close touch with the negotiations, carrying on -- as was his habit -- a direct correspondence with Malmesbury and receiving reports confidentially from George Canning in the Foreign Office. On 17 December -- the day after a French expedition had sailed from Brest for Bantry Bay, where it was dispersed by storms -- the British demands were rejected and the negotiations terminated by France. 
Soon after this blow -- in January or February 1797 -- Pitt seriously, if briefly, considered withdrawing in favour of the speaker, Henry Addington, reasoning that peace with France might be more attainable if he did so. His plan to direct affairs at one remove and return once the attempt had been made was overtaken by the bank crisis. In March came news of Prussia's treaty with France, and by early April Austrian military resistance was clearly faltering. On 8 April Pitt told the king that an Austrian separate peace would be 'the greatest aggravation' of British difficulties ('Later Correspondence of George III', 2, no. 1526). His view commanded unanimous cabinet support, and, despite the king's antipathy, George Hammond was sent on a fruitless mission to Vienna to propose Russian mediation for peace. In late May, when he decided again to attempt peace negotiations, Pitt was unaware that Austria had agreed secret preliminaries of peace with France at Leoben on 18 April. An overture, approved by the cabinet on 31 May, was sent to Paris on 1 June. News on the 14th that France was willing to treat for a separate peace triggered a cabinet crisis and a severe test of Pitt's leadership. In a stormy cabinet meeting of the 15th Grenville argued strongly against negotiations, and only a slender majority of ministers supported Pitt; a minute was made of the foreign secretary's dissent. The official note of acceptance insisted that Britain would not abandon the interests of Portugal and demanded that France represent those of the Netherlands and Spain. The British representative, Malmesbury, arrived in Lille on 4 July and, as before, Pitt kept in close touch with him. He was instructed officially to retain as a 'sine qua non' both Ceylon and the Cape and to seek retention of Cochin and at least one West Indian acquisition in return for recognition of French sovereignty over the Austrian Netherlands, Nice, and Savoy, but was told privately by Pitt -- without the cabinet's knowledge -- that either the Cape or Ceylon might also be surrendered to obtain peace. Pitt knew that this concession -- if made -- would cause the resignation of Grenville and strain relations with Dundas: 'on this particular point', he told Malmesbury, as the latter recorded, 'he, or Lord Grenville, 'must' have gone out; and he added, 'it would have been' 'Lord Grenville'' (Harris, 4.128). Pitt rejected a French demand for the restoration of all British conquests, and talks were soon terminated by France after the coup of 18 Fructidor (4 September). Although actively pursued by Pitt, hopes of reviving the negotiation or securing peace through indirect channels quickly faded. 
Failure at Lille and the death of his brother-in-law Edward Eliot in September 1797 left Pitt ill and depressed, but he soon revived, comforted by victory over the Dutch fleet at Camperdown on 11 October and his new ideas about public finance. His memorandum of 11 October anticipated reduced expenditure in 1798-9 -- as a result of a decrease in subsidies and loans to allies -- and explored ways of meeting the expected public deficit of $21 to $22 million without undue dependence on borrowing. His speech of 24 November acknowledged the necessity of greater taxation, not to meet the whole deficit but to make possible 'some expedient by which we may... render within equitable limits the accommodation of the funding system, and lay the foundation of that quick redemption which will prevent the dangerous consequences of an overgrown accumulation of our public debt' (Debrett, 3rd ser., 4.272). He envisaged a single 'general tax' -- known as the triple assessment -- that would triple the rates of existing assessed taxes but -- not being a new form of assessment -- would incur no additional administrative expenditure. He rejected heavy increases in taxes and duties overall as too unpopular for the likely yield and ruled out both a general property tax and an income tax as introducing 'a degree of inquisition which would be generally invidious' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/273); he nevertheless introduced exemptions and graduated scales designed to place the burden on the wealthy, propounding in effect the principle of a graduated income tax. He hoped to find about $7 million net, which would meet two-thirds of the charge for servicing and redeeming the loan for the year. Although the triple assessment displayed Pitt's strengths of pragmatism, coherence, and comprehensiveness, the bill was attacked in the Commons and much revised before an act was passed on 12 January 1798; expectations of likely yield were reduced to about $4.5 million. Pitt adopted a suggestion made by Henry Addington for an additional voluntary contribution -- of one-fifth of income -- by the most wealthy and included it in the act, eventually producing over $2 million additional revenue. Increased estimates for the armed forces and the bank's willingness to advance only $3 million -- rather than the $4 million Pitt had wanted -- meant that by April 1798 a bigger loan was needed than forecast. More revenue raising measures were introduced: the commutation of the land tax, increased rates on salt and teas, and two new taxes -- on convoys and on armorial bearings. 
The resolve of the British public cheered Pitt. 'The general zeal and spirit of the country is everything that we can wish', he noted on 21 April 1798 ('Later Correspondence of George III', 3.49 n. 1), but anxieties remained. He supported Canning's patriotic publication 'The Anti-Jacobin' with public money at this time, making literary contributions himself. In June 1798 he carried an act to control the press and prosecute publications exciting hatred and contempt for king, constitution, and government. Proceedings were brought against radicals in Scotland in November 1797 and in England from February to May 1798. Forty-seven members of the London Corresponding Society were arrested in April and some were held for almost three years, though of five tried for high treason four were acquitted. In January an act -- unsuccessful in practice -- was passed to recruit militiamen into the regular army, while in June another permitted militia service in Ireland. In April the 'Defence Act' strengthened government's powers in the event of invasion, and in May the exemption of men employed in river and sea trades from naval service was suspended. 
The debate on this suspension provoked Pitt's duel with George Tierney. Introducing the bill on 25 May, Pitt asked that it should pass that day, whereupon Tierney accused him of making a 'precipitate' demand hostile to freedom; Pitt rejoined that Tierney wished 'to obstruct the defence of the country' (Ehrman, 3.126-9), a charge he refused to retract or explain when called upon by the speaker. He accepted Tierney's challenge and met him calmly on Putney Heath on the 27th -- Whit Sunday -- with pistols at twelve paces. Neither was injured. While the political world was dismayed by the risk taken during a national crisis, Pitt plainly shared the strong sense of personal honour of most gentlemen of his time, though his judgement was possibly impaired by the poor health that prevented his return to the Commons before parliament rose on 29 June. 
Pitt was reluctant to apply himself closely to Irish affairs until they became unavoidable. After a quiet first year, 1795, Lord Camden's administration in Dublin became increasingly worried -- against a background of renewed economic recession and a mounting threat of French invasion -- about the growth of revolutionary nationalism among the protestant community (as seen in the Society of United Irishmen) and the activities of Roman Catholic secret societies; in 1797 martial law was imposed in Ulster and reinforcements of fencible infantry and cavalry were sent from Britain. Although Dublin's forces suppressed the unco-ordinated insurrections by the Catholics of co. Wexford and co. Wicklow and the dissident Ulster protestants during May and June 1798, the events made a deep impression upon Pitt. He sent temporarily a further 8000 fencible and militia troops and accepted Camden's plea for replacement by a capable soldier. Pitt's choice, Lord Cornwallis, arrived in Ireland on 20 June, and defeated French landings in co. Sligo in August and co. Donegal in September. A third expedition, destined for Ulster, was intercepted on 16 September. 
Pitt was convinced of the need to bring Ireland permanently under closer control by Westminster. He mentioned to Camden the idea of parliamentary union in late May 1798, discussed it with Grenville early in June, and subsequently with Cornwallis; the king approved. Although not a new idea -- Pitt said in November 1792 that it had already been long in his mind -- it was dormant until it became his initiative in 1798. Characteristically brisk and hopeful to begin with, he consulted widely among colleagues at home, and more selectively in Dublin with Cornwallis, the chief secretary, Lord Castlereagh, the lord chancellor, John Fitzgibbon, first earl of Clare, and John Beresford. He studied the 'Act of Union' with Scotland of 1707 for guidance. Two problems required particularly careful handling: the status of the Roman Catholics and the reduction of 300 Irish parliamentary seats to about 100 -- giving appropriate weight to the counties and boroughs -- so as not to swamp the British representatives in a union parliament. On Cornwallis's appointment the king had informed Pitt of his decided opposition to further concessions for the Irish Catholics. Pitt was soon also aware of the strong antipathy to such measures that permeated the Irish political establishment. In October, after much consideration and with the agreement of the cabinet, he accepted that union should for the time being be on a strictly protestant basis. He postponed consideration of the difficult related issues of relief -- to which George III was also opposed -- for Irish protestant dissenters, state support for the Catholic and dissenting churches, Irish tithe commutation, and the union of the Church of England with that of Ireland. He failed, however, to impose himself directly on the process of consultation in Dublin, and a feeling of resistance to his more limited policy emerged during November and December 1798, centred on the influential speaker, John Foster. Reassured by Castlereagh's forecast of success, ministers nevertheless approved the principle of union on 21 December and finalized their plans for its implementation. 
Pitt's proposals were presented to the Irish parliament on 22 January 1799 and at Westminster the following day. In a speech on the 23rd he represented them as the key to enduring benefits: 'Ireland is subject to great and deplorable evils, which... lie in the situation of the country itself -- in the present character, manners and habits of its inhabitants -- in their want of intelligence... in the unavoidable separation between certain classes -- in the state of property -- in its religious distinctions -- in the rancour which bigotry engenders and superstition rears and cherishes. (Debrett, 34.247-8)' These 'an imperial legislature standing aloof from local party connexion' would in time cure, encouraging trade and industry and healing religious discord (ibid.). Two years before -- in a speech of 23 March 1797 -- Pitt had accepted the capacity of the Irish legislature to act for the good of the Irish people, but now his emphasis was different. He never expressed more forcefully the primacy he accorded to parliament's role and the capacity of the constitution to provide means for social and economic ends. None the less his profession of faith conflicted with protestant political sentiment in Ireland that perceived the Dublin parliament as the guarantor of a distinctive degree of national independence, whereby the country was connected with -- but not united to -- Great Britain. 
In the Irish parliament the union clause was deleted from the royal address on 23 January by 109 votes to 104. At Westminster, though, the outcome was never doubtful, and in January and February Pitt demonstrated his determination to succeed notwithstanding the set-back in Dublin. He obtained consent in April to detailed resolutions for an 'Act of Union' and encouraged every means of ensuring success in Ireland, reportedly being prepared to wait until 'people' came 'to their Senses,... with the Assistance of a little 'quiet' Coercion if it should be necessary' (Suffolk RO, Ipswich, Pretyman MS 435/44). At length the anti-union bloc broke up, assisted by judicious use of patronage; appointments, pensions, peerage creations, and promotions were deployed, with financial compensation for the proprietors of parliamentary boroughs ($1.5 million was spent on their eventual abolition). Pitt has been accused of permitting 'corrupt' means to achieve the union, but it is perhaps fairer to say that contemporary conventions of executive practice were strained to the limits rather than broken. His policy was popular in some quarters of Ireland, notably with those who feared French republicanism and with Catholics who hoped measures of relief would follow. He neither encouraged nor discouraged such hopes, and took care to prevent the kind of confusions evident in the Fitzwilliam episode. Preparations continued throughout 1799. From January to March 1800 the Dublin administration won a series of crucial majorities, and the bill for the Union, presented in May, passed both Commons and Lords there in June. Pitt meanwhile commanded substantial majorities at Westminster, and his bill received royal assent on 2 July. A triumph of determination and patience for Pitt, this achievement proved by an irony of history to play a major role in his resignation in 1801. 
The triple assessment not having met expectations, the underlying financial problem remained: government's annual bill for funded and unfunded borrowing had risen by 50 per cent in five years, and accounted for a third of total net expenditure. By the summer or early autumn of 1798 Pitt was considering the introduction of an outright income tax. He consulted colleagues, officials, and within the City, and his expectation of parliamentary backing rested on an impression that the necessity of the measure was 'strongly felt' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/341). He aimed to find at least $8 million and thought it likely that $10 million might result. His proposals were presented in an impressive budget speech -- made in spite of a bad cold -- of two and a half hours on 3 December 1798. The ensuing bill -- of 124 clauses -- replaced the triple assessment with an income tax on a graduated scale of 5 to 10 per cent for incomes between $60 and $200 a year, those below $60 being exempt and those above $200 incurring 10 per cent. Administrative details derived largely from the triple assessment and the new and important elements were a shift of assessment from expenditure to income and the obligation of the taxpayer to make a detailed return of income if required. 
Pitt took great pains to prepare the ground for his innovations in parliament, and the new measures passed through the Commons quickly, with ample majorities and apparent ease, taking effect on 5 April 1799. Yet opposition was voiced: although their necessity was generally conceded, they caused deep alarm and resentment, and the opinion that they subverted the constitution was expressed. In particular the investigative powers at the discretion of the commissioners and surveyors of the income tax caused widespread outrage. Acknowledging these anxieties, Pitt stressed the familiar aspects of his proposals, and made no attempt to introduce new administrative arrangements to implement them. He vigorously defended the income tax as necessary and equitable, but accepted that commercial commissioners be appointed to deal with mercantile incomes and a range of minor amendments. Results were nevertheless disappointing. Pitt reduced expectations of yield to $7.3 million in June 1799 and to $6.2 million in February 1800; the best calculation of the final net produce for the first year is the surprisingly low sum of $1,671,000 out of an aggregate of $6,446,000 from the land and assessed taxes. Evasion was a serious problem, yet the income tax was a historic innovation that bore fruit during the Napoleonic War. 
Underpinned by commercial buoyancy, the yield of taxation as a whole was markedly greater at the end of the 1790s than earlier in the decade, but mean annual expenditure also grew to $48.5 million for 1798-1800 from $37.75 million for 1793-7. Pitt had little scope to reduce expenditure, having already introduced tighter controls over naval and military spending in 1796-7. He continued to borrow on a large scale, though from 1798 he did so at a more favourable rate of interest than before, while in 1799 he arranged with the Bank of England for annual interest-free loans of $3 million. The hopes expressed on the introduction of the triple assessment and the income tax had proved sadly unrealistic, and Pitt was hard pushed to service loans; he had recourse in 1801 to a host of fresh levies in the old style, such as increased stamp and customs duties. Alongside funded borrowing, his short-term unfunded borrowing -- mainly through exchequer bills -- also rose sharply, from $19.3 million in 1797 to $37.9 million in 1801, and greater recourse was had to the sinking fund; the prospect of redeeming the national debt receded into the distance, though Pitt never renounced his determination that it should eventually be repaid. Pitt's handling of financial policy was, despite set-backs over his fiscal initiatives, generally very capable, and the main lines of his approach were widely endorsed. Its practical results -- the liberalization of credit, reduced real interest rates, and containment of the growth of public debt and inflation through direct and indirect taxation -- were appropriate to a commercial nation undergoing the strains of prolonged war. 
A severe subsistence crisis, caused by successive harvest failures in 1799 and 1800, darkened the last months of Pitt's first ministry. Living standards of the poorer classes were sharply reduced and the ensuing distress provoked widespread rioting. These developments alarmed Pitt. 'After all', he wrote on 8 October 1800, 'the question of peace or war is not in itself half so formidable as that of the scarcity with which it is necessarily combined, and for the evils and growing dangers of which I see no adequate remedy' (Stanhope, 'Life', 3.249). His response was characteristically pragmatic, combining steps to promote trade and industry with temporary measures to encourage imports, restrain exports, and discourage consumption of grain while promoting the use of alternatives. Refraining on this occasion from state trading in grain, he improved the system of bounties and government encouragement to traders, sometimes with impressive results. He disregarded the opposition of Grenville, who disapproved of many of his interventionist policies. In the summer of 1800 Pitt secured the passage of acts to introduce a co-operative company to manufacture flour, meal, and bread for London and to enable the lord mayor to regulate flour and bread prices. In November 1800, after a second harvest failure, he summoned parliament early and immediately brought in a number of bills to ease the crisis, including one to increase the consumption of fish and another to forbid the export of victuals. His controversial 'Brown Bread Act' -- which forbade the baking of bread solely from fine flour -- was largely ignored and repealed after two months. Another act -- which enjoyed greater success in diversifying diet and mitigating the effects of famine -- enabled (rather than compelled, as he had at first desired) parish authorities to use substitutes for wheat in their provision for the deserving poor. Pitt was unwilling to raise wage rates so as to increase the purchasing power of the poor. He discerned no practicable means of regulating the high price of wheat, professing himself unwilling to 'draw theories of regulation from clamour and alarm' or to institute 'oppressive general regulations' (Debrett, 3rd ser., 13.48, 239, 244); government, he acknowledged, lacked the information and understanding to control the complex phenomenon of price inflation. Committed neither to intervention nor to 'laissez-faire', he strove to keep his feet in the growing storm of public anxiety which followed the second harvest failure by associating parliament -- for instance, by appointing a select committee to report on the dearth -- with a moderate, pragmatic consensus approach while clinging to the correct expectation that better harvests would come, scarcity pass, and high prices abate. 
Distress and its attendant discontent and disorder reinforced Pitt's well-established anxieties about the activities of radicals and revolutionaries in Britain and Ireland. A Commons committee of secrecy, appointed in January, reported on the subject in March 1799, and on 12 July Pitt's 'Act against Societies established for Seditious and Treasonable Purposes' was passed. This suppressed the principal bodies by name and others that administered oaths unlawfully or failed to register members; previously enacted repressive measures were simultaneously tightened up. Another act that month stipulated full forfeiture of property by convicted traitors. Such provisions supplemented the continued suspension of habeas corpus for the remainder of the ministry. Early in 1801 Pitt was studying further papers on alleged subversive activities, soon to be referred to another Commons committee. His repressive policies -- sometimes known as 'Pitt's reign of terror' -- were implemented at a time of war, scarcity, disorder, and revolutionary unrest. Deeply alarmed by the autumn of 1800 at the problems confronting his ministry, Pitt regarded them as necessary for the preservation of the British state. He did not intend the 'Combination Acts' of 1799 and 1800 as part of an armoury of repression, though they have sometimes been so considered. These acts were intended to improve the existing provisions for reducing restraints on trade by both workers' and employers' combinations and for encouraging the peaceful resolution of disputes. Almost all the explicitly repressive legislation was temporary and required parliamentary approval for renewal. Pitt himself was keen to preserve legal and constitutional safeguards, such as the right of petitioning, and acknowledged that, to succeed, his policies needed the underlying consent of the political nation: 'If the mass of the people were disloyal', he said in December 1800, 'the measures of Parliament... would be ineffectual' (Debrett, 3rd ser., 13.438). A deep well of support existed upon which he could draw. His person indeed, now seen in a sterner guise, was widely if sometimes grudgingly viewed as a necessary guardian of order and of society itself. 
In the spring of 1798 Pitt, keen to re-establish British naval presence in the Mediterranean despite objections from the Admiralty, insisted that the cabinet discuss the subject on 11 and 18 April. It was agreed to send a squadron but the squadron failed to intercept Bonaparte's expedition 'en route' for Egypt. The news -- received on 26 September -- of the destruction of the French fleet at Aboukir on 1 August rendered Pitt 'in the highest possible spirits' (W. Yorks. AS, Leeds, Canning MS 30), 'confident that 'Buonaparte' 'must be destroyed'' (Suffolk RO, Ipswich, Pretyman MS 435/45); he now expected no further expeditions against Ireland and had hopes of renewed continental resistance to France. The French capture of Malta in June prompted Tsar Paul to envisage a more active Russian role. On 24 July he offered Britain a treaty of alliance; 60,000 Russians would act with the Austrians on the Rhine in exchange for $1.5 million in the first year and $1.2 million thereafter. Pitt found this immediately acceptable, and, after cabinet discussions, it was decided on 22 August to offer conditional acceptance. Pitt was worried that further aid to Austria would encounter political opposition at home, but his chief preoccupation was financial; he felt unable to find more than $2 million a year for continental strategy, of which $200,000 was already committed to Portugal. The cabinet agreed to allot to Russia the $1.2 million provisionally reserved in the spring for Austria, for use as Paul had indicated, on condition that the loan convention of 1797 was ratified by Austria and Russia was properly informed of Vienna's military plans, with stress being laid upon the importance of freeing Switzerland from French domination. The disappointing response was received on 19 October that Russia would not accept a subsidy unless provision was also made for Austria. As that involved exceeding Pitt's limit of $2 million, Paul was told that Britain could not comply. 'I am not very sanguine of anything but our... continuing to fight well our own battle; and Europe must probably be left for some time longer to its fate' Pitt told Grenville on 29 October ('Fortescue MSS', 4.355). The tsar changed his mind, however; an Anglo-Russian convention was signed in St Petersburg on 29 December by which 45,000 troops were made available to operate in the Netherlands for $900,000 a year and further payments amounting to $300,000. When details arrived in early March 1799, Pitt was glad to ratify it. 
War was renewed between France and Austria on the Rhine in March 1799, though, contrary to Pitt's hopes, without any formal coalition or concerted plans having been agreed by the enemies of France. It was conducted throughout in an atmosphere of marked mistrust between London and Vienna and with little expectation of Prussian assistance. Encouraged by reports of the unpopularity of the French and the difficulties experienced by its republican government, Pitt was keen with Russian help to strike a decisive blow in the Netherlands, hopeful that a patriotic uprising might restore the house of Orange. He had hopes that a similar revolt would assist allied efforts in Switzerland. Indeed, having convinced themselves the enemy was near exhaustion, he and Grenville considered a range of options, including a raid on Brest, though Pitt -- concerned at the expense and difficulty of co-ordinating operations and inclined from previous experience to be wary -- discouraged Grenville's schemes for employing French royalist forces. 
On 7 June 1799 Pitt made public statements, in some memorable phrases, about ultimate aims that were consistent with his approach since 1793: 'Our simple object is security, just security, with a little mixture of indemnification. These are the legitimate objects of war at all times' (Debrett, 3rd ser., 8.652-73). He denied any intention of reimposing monarchy on France or extirpating republicanism. Britain, he said, was 'at war with armed opinions... We will not leave the monster to prowl the world unopposed... Whilst Republican France continues what it is, then I make war against Republican France', but if a government were established that did not threaten others, he would not oppose it (ibid., 687-99). Despite his low opinion of the Bourbons, he privately acknowledged that monarchy would be its safest form. He agreed with Grenville that coalition was needed to ensure victory within two or three years and shared his mistrust of Vienna's intentions. Both considered an attack on the Netherlands with Russian support to be Britain's most helpful military contribution and thought of Prussian assistance as desirable. In the formulation of a 'strategy of overthrow' -- as it came to be known -- Grenville was the main protagonist, but he had his colleague's full support. 
By the end of June plans had been made for a combined assault on the Netherlands at British expense by a force of Russians, their Swedish allies, and British to support the Austrians and another Russian force in south Germany and Switzerland, though details of Austria's plans remained unknown. Renewed hopes of Prussian aid were dashed by the end of July and it was learned that no Swedes would be available. On 1 August Pitt, worried by these developments, summoned Grenville to confer; declining to attend, Grenville instead wrote a 'remonstrance' on the importance of not abandoning the planned expedition. Apparently swayed by his advocacy, Pitt dropped his doubts. He was in high hopes at Walmer when the British force under Sir Ralph Abercromby sailed on 13 August, landing at The Helder on the 27th. 
In the spring and summer the Austrians and Russians had successes in Italy and Switzerland but subsequently encountered set-backs, and Austria failed to co-operate with Britain or act effectively in the Netherlands. By early September Pitt was pondering the unification of the Austrian Netherlands and the former United Provinces (at that time the Batavian Republic, a French satellite) into a new state, with Austria receiving compensation in Italy. News of the Austrian evacuation of Switzerland, received on 14 September, persuaded him that such plans were 'out of the question' (Ehrman, 3.251), though he remained hopeful, writing resiliently of possible Prussian assistance or of continuation with Russia alone, of an assault on the fleets in Brest, or, once Holland was captured, an attack on Spain from the Mediterranean by Russian and British forces. In mid-October came news both of a devastating defeat of the Russians in Switzerland and of the decision of the British commanders to withdraw from the Netherlands. Having made a decisive start with the capture of the remaining Dutch fleet of twenty-five warships, they had found the enemy in greater strength than expected but also little sign of widespread insurrection, and it had been impossible to achieve a breakout. Although the evacuation was completed by the end of November, the campaign was nevertheless a humiliation that brought starkly into focus the failure of the most extensive military and diplomatic efforts yet attempted by Pitt's ministry during the course of the war. 
After this demoralizing set-back, ministers grew increasingly divided over strategic affairs. Pitt was incapable of giving a clear lead, for the collapse of the grand design destroyed the context in which he liked to work, and with it the prospect of a strategy agreed by his two principal colleagues. He was anxious for another scheme of coalition, and in early November overtures were made to St Petersburg and Vienna for renewed campaigns in the spring, while plans were aired for British operations in north-west France and the Mediterranean. Writing buoyantly to Canning on 3 December 1799, Pitt asserted that, with the enemy seeming near to exhaustion, new allied efforts would have 'a reasonable Prospect of making a decisive Impression', though if necessary Britain would fight on indefinitely alone, for he would never make peace with 'a 'Revolutionary Jacobin Government''. The recent coup of Brumaire, which had inaugurated the consulate under Bonaparte, he considered a step towards the restoration of monarchy. Should Bonaparte offer peace on 'honourable and Advantageous terms', he could not see 'on what Grounds We could justify to ourselves a refusal to Treat, and much the less how We could expect to be supported by Public Opinion' (W. Yorks. AS, Leeds, Canning MS 30). When Bonaparte's overture of peace to George III of 31 December 1799 arrived, however, Pitt did not think the circumstances -- the unproven stability and trustworthiness of the new French regime -- warranted negotiations. The king and cabinet agreed, though the acerbic tone and strict official form of Grenville's note to Talleyrand did not please Pitt. In a long, carefully prepared speech in the Commons on 3 February he impressively defended the answer to France, which was approved by a majority of 265 to 64. On the 17th he was challenged by George Tierney to state in one sentence the object of the war. 'I know not', he responded, 'whether I can do it in one sentence; but in one word, I can tell him that it is Security... It is Security against a danger, the greatest that ever threatened the world' (Debrett, 3rd ser., 10.567-8). 
Pitt found it impossible to envisage what Britain's strategic role should now be. A cabinet decision in February 1800 to send 15,000 troops to Minorca for co-operation with Austria or the royalists in the south of France received much criticism. Confirmation of this decision by the cabinet on 26 March led Dundas to circulate an important paper critical of the government's military strategy, and an angry exchange between him and Grenville ensued; on 8 April Dundas expressed his desire to resign after the summer campaigns, but Pitt elicited a promise that he would not do so until the end of the war. An uneasy cabinet of the 19th agreed to reduce the Mediterranean force to 5000 men, making the seizure of Malta its prime objective. In May -- worried by Bonaparte's latest incursion into Italy -- Pitt obtained cabinet backing (with the exception only of Windham) for Dundas's suggestion that additional troops be sent to the Mediterranean. Orders were issued without the king being consulted, however, and it transpired that he did not approve; on the 19th a cabinet reversed the decision (though too late to prevent the departure of the troops), ordering instead a harassing raid against the French coast. As this scene of confusion unfolded, with Pitt unable to impose any coherence, news arrived of the crushing Austrian defeat on 14 June at Marengo. 
Pitt bore the blow, George Rose reported, 'with Fortitude', and resolved not to abandon Austria. Vienna was told, despite the king's displeasure, that Britain would work for a general peace if Austria had to stop fighting, and attempts were made to arrange a defensive alliance in order to prevent a unilateral peace. A convention was steered rapidly through the Commons by 18 July, granting Vienna $2 million and wide scope to make territorial arrangements in north Italy, but the cabinet had already concluded on the 16th that a Franco-Austrian armistice could hardly be opposed if Austria found it expedient. On 24 August a French offer of a naval armistice was received. Although a cabinet meeting of 4 September quickly agreed that it was unacceptable, Pitt found the issue a 'delicate one'; 'absolute refusal', he recorded, 'would produce the immediate renewal of hostilities between France and Austria, and probably drive the latter... to an immediate peace on the worst terms' (Stanhope, 'Life', 3.240). Pitt's decision to parley until the end of September was unwise; it worsened his relations with the king and exacerbated divisions within the cabinet. 
Signs of the king's dissatisfaction with Pitt's ministry were increasingly evident in 1800. On 24 July, for instance, ministers approved plans for an assault on Ferrol, Cadiz, and Tenerife, advocated by Dundas, who then received an angry letter from George III, saying that policy was being made and orders being given without consultation or regard for his legitimate sovereign interest. Pitt saw that his intervention was needed and, showing sound tactical sense, wrote direct to Windsor firmly stressing the importance of using the remainder of the summer to advantage, advising Dundas at the same time to write likewise and with care to avoid awkward constitutional issues. The king on this occasion gladly eschewed confrontation, but the incident was upsetting. When Pitt put his authority behind a plan, proposed by Dundas on 18 September, to dispatch a force to clear the French from Egypt, the king opposed this too, while several ministers, including Grenville, expressed deep reservations. Despite this Pitt pushed the decision through an evenly divided cabinet on 3 October, probably in the hope that a military success there would strengthen Britain's hand in any future peace negotiations. His continental strategy was shattered during the winter of 1800-01. After defeat at Hohenlinden on 3 December, Austria undertook separate negotiations for the peace of Luneville (9 February 1801), while Tsar Paul proclaimed the armed neutrality of Russia, Prussia, Denmark, and Sweden on 16 December to challenge Britain's exercise of rights over neutral shipping. Pitt fully supported Grenville's defence of British maritime policy and the decision to prepare a naval force for action in the Baltic. 
Pitt's management of the war reached a nadir in 1800. It was not a task in which his talents shone. Indecisive, and without much trust in his own judgement, he was pulled increasingly in conflicting directions by the disagreements of Dundas and Grenville. He had long thought the latter's continental policy the only means of definitive victory, and when it repeatedly failed he had no strategic vision of his own to put in its place; nor was he entirely convinced by Dundas. He was increasingly tired, and his energies were absorbed in attempting to find common ground to unite the cabinet and in trying to keep Dundas in office, while serious issues of domestic policy simultaneously claimed his attention. 
Pitt's resignation arose from the proposal, usually known as Catholic emancipation, to admit Irish Roman Catholics to the Westminster parliament, something he came to regard himself as under an obligation to introduce once the 'Act of Union' was successfully implemented, particularly since it was urged upon him by the administration in Dublin. In the early autumn of 1800 he was reportedly doubtful about it, perhaps opposed. An inconclusive cabinet meeting on the subject on 1 October was not followed up, but, with the 'Act of Union' coming into force on 1 January, it was necessary to prepare the king's speech for the new union parliament. Hence, during a cabinet meeting early in January, it was resolved at Pitt's instance to make a firm decision about emancipation. He evidently concluded from another meeting on 25 January that cabinet approval existed, however qualified, and undertook to ascertain the views of the lord chancellor, Loughborough, who had been absent from the meeting -- though in the event he omitted to do so. 
Pitt now lost control of events, for at a levee on the 28th the king, who had indirectly gained knowledge of these deliberations, publicly demanded an explanation from Dundas and in a state of high excitement announced that he would consider any proponent of emancipation his personal enemy. Alarmed by a report of these ominous words, Pitt immediately summoned another cabinet, at which he declared that he 'must go out' (Ehrman, 3.504) if it were not carried; but, the measure being opposed by Liverpool, Westmorland, and Loughborough, it was decided to postpone the opening of parliament while he prepared a written proposal for communication -- with cabinet approval -- to the king. On the 29th Addington brought him a message from George III about the dangers of introducing 'a subject on which I can scarcely keep my temper' (ibid., 3.505). Nevertheless on the 31st Pitt wrote to the king stating his commitment to emancipation. He assured him that, circumstances having changed a good deal in past decades, it would present no dangers for the established church or the protestant interest in either Great Britain or Ireland, would be accompanied with a strong test of loyalty by oath, and would help reconcile the Roman Catholic clergy, the 'higher orders of the Catholics', and a 'large class' of Irish subjects to the Union. If the king was not prepared to give full support, he concluded, he would 'wish to be released from a situation, which he is conscious, that, under such circumstances, he could not continue to fill but with the greatest disadvantage' (Ehrman, 3.507-8). 
Replying on 1 February, the king refused to discuss a proposal he believed would subvert a fundamental maxim of the constitution, but expressed the hope that Pitt would drop the measure and stay in office. After meeting Addington on the 3rd, Pitt wrote a letter of resignation. It was accepted two days later, on condition that he remained to introduce his budget (which passed without difficulty) on the 18th. Addington formed a ministry with Pitt's goodwill; he advised colleagues to support (or join if invited) the new administration, though five cabinet ministers (including Grenville and Dundas) and a number of junior ones resigned with him. On 14 March, following the king's recovery from a renewed attack of his illness, Pitt returned the seals of office he had received on 19 December 1783. Uneasy about the effect his resignation might have had on the king, and having received a report that he attributed his illness to it, Pitt also sent a message assuring the monarch that he would never bring forward the Catholic question again in or out of office, and furthermore that he would try to defer it should it be agitated by others during the reign. 
Various explanations of Pitt's conduct -- widely held at the time to be mysterious -- were attempted. Possibly he was seeking rest, and anxious to find an excuse, or, while thinking it dishonourable to abandon Catholic emancipation, was worried that to insist on its discussion might produce a further attack of the king's malady. Or possibly his absence from office would enable Addington (under his guidance) to negotiate a settlement with the French at a moment when hopes of victory had been shattered and peace was his own objective. All these considerations doubtless played a part, but above all, perhaps, he had felt a stand needed to be made against non-ministerial or court influences on the king and the manner in which George III had spoken out prematurely against emancipation in public at a levee. Writing to Chatham on 5 February, Pitt underlined the importance of this, saying that the monarch's language had been 'so strong and unqualified... as to show... that his mind was made up to go to any extremity rather than consent to the measure in question' (Gibson, 310). 
Undoubtedly Pitt made characteristic errors of judgement, revealing his tendency to postpone attention to the practicalities of policy and then rely on his unusual powers of assimilation to master them quickly. He took by surprise colleagues who had neither been adequately consulted nor -- in many instances -- saw Catholic emancipation as a pressing issue or one meriting resignation. He failed to prepare the ground properly with king and cabinet in the autumn of 1800 and was unduly swayed by pro-emancipation arguments from Dublin and the convictions of Dundas and Grenville, which led him to adopt hastily in 1801 an issue of which he had previously taken a more remote view. His inattention to the king was the more serious because both he and George III were well aware of it and because it occurred as the king from the late 1790s was growing dissatisfied with ministers' dissensions and unsuccessful military strategies. As Pitt admitted: 'other Business and want of Health often made him postpone both written and personal communication with the King' (Ehrman, 3.522). In the midst of the other demands of a crisis whose prospects looked very grim, the 'unlucky business' of Ireland -- brought to a head by the sudden clash of the king's and his own deep instinctive responses -- drew to an untimely end the labours of seventeen years. 
By late 1800 Pitt suffered poor health, which contributed to the errors that led to his resignation. His debility owed much to the pressures of public life. As an adult he was free of serious illness before 1789; apart from short attacks of gout in July 1789 and October 1791 his general health appeared unchanged until 1793. The war brought greater strain, which recreation and exercise at his country residence did not entirely dispel. By the middle of the decade, he had an established gouty tendency, possibly exacerbated by steady drinking with Dundas, though his surviving cellar-books give no indication of increased consumption of alcohol in this period. He was seriously unwell in the winter of 1796-7. During September 1797, after the failure of the Lille negotiation and the death of his brother-in-law Edward Eliot, he had tormenting headaches; he was ill in June 1798, indisposed and depressed in April 1799. In July and October 1800 he suffered severe digestive difficulties; a nervous breakdown left him badly shaken at the end of that year. A physically and emotionally resilient man, he succumbed at length to the strains of unremitting attention to ministerial business in a protracted war without victory. Yet retirement from office did not bring full recovery. There were signs of debility when he resigned, two bouts of illness in 1802, and the digestive complaints that tended particularly to plague him at times of great tension persisted. His condition was neither entirely psychosomatic nor primarily the result of excessive consumption of alcohol but involved an underlying physical problem, possibly bowel cancer or more likely a combination of irregular gout producing hyperuricaemia and a recurring gastro-intestinal lesion. 
Never a widely sociable man, Pitt became more reclusive after the outbreak of war in 1793, and was increasingly withdrawn from social life after 1795. Having no inclination to be a patron of the arts or sciences, he never moved much in society or among artists and writers. Socially he saw nothing of political opponents and little of the mass of his own supporters, counting only a small group as friends. He confined attendance at court and cabinet dinners to what was necessary. Evenings were usually devoted to business, which, despite his celebrated capacity to prepare papers and speeches quickly, became ever more burdensome; he was notoriously unmethodical in maintaining his correspondence, even with the little secretarial help he received. A shy man, he could seem disconcertingly haughty and often chilly in public. In private life, however, among a small circle of close acquaintances, he showed markedly greater warmth: he was kindly, good humoured, playful and even boisterous, amiable, and fond of children. Undoubtedly mercurial -- 'either in a garret or a cellar', as was remarked by Dundas, to whom he was very close until 1801 -- his temper was buoyant and for long capable of throwing off troubles without help from religious conviction, for which he had no noticeable capacity, or interest in theological reflection. Occasionally he showed deep emotion, being overwhelmed with grief on the death in September 1786 of his sister Harriot, with whom he lived at Downing Street in 1785-6, and again eleven years later on that of Edward Eliot -- his favourite companion in early life. He was friendly with Jane, duchess of Gordon, in the late 1780s, though they drifted apart after 1791. Only once did he consider marriage, to Eleanor Eden, the eldest daughter of Lord Auckland, of whom he saw a good deal in late 1796. He expressed marked affection for her in a letter of 20 January 1797 to her father, in which, however, he explained that his circumstances -- not elaborated upon -- meant they could not marry; another letter assured Auckland he had not 'lightly or easily sacrificed my best hopes and earnest wishes to my conviction and judgement' (BL, Add. MS 59704). The episode was closed with much embarrassment on Pitt's part. He may not have wished to be drawn too close to the ambitious Auckland. Deeper-seated explanations are concern that his debts, indifferent health, and political preoccupations would make him an unsuitable husband, and perhaps reluctance to make a great change in his way of life by embarking upon a close, sexual, relationship for which he possibly felt unfitted. Friendship, affection, and (particularly as he grew older) admiration were important to Pitt, though he was poor at keeping relationships in good repair. Responding easily to sentiment, he lacked possessive passions. He enjoyed the company of younger men of political promise, most notably Canning, in whose career he took an interest, and although these relationships were sometimes close they seem rather paternal in nature and not overtly homosexual. Pitt's innocence and purity of character were often noted by acquaintances. A bachelor, wedded to politics and public life, in which he found fulfilment, he was content to spend his brief moments of leisure either convivially with friends or alone at his houses in Kent. The last three years of his life were brightened by the presence of his niece Hester Lucy Stanhope, who lived with him from 1803. 
Pitt lived as a country gentleman when time allowed. In November 1785 he bought a house at Holwood, close to Hayes Place where he had been born; he added adjacent property the following January, enlarged the estate by purchases from 1788 to 1793, and extended the house in 1797. He planted, improved the grounds, and farmed sheep in a small way; indifferent to antiquarian interests or Romantic taste, he ruined an Iron Age fort there. In these pursuits he employed Sir John Soane, with whom he was friendly, and Humphry Repton. He liked shooting, but gave up field sports as time went by. Holwood was a place of solace and recreation that he sold with regret in 1802. He had another Kent home, Walmer Castle, following his appointment as warden of the Cinque Ports in 1792. Before 1802 he usually spent some time there annually in the late summer; thereafter he was frequently present from the spring until the autumn, finding it a welcome diversion after his resignation. He rented adjoining land on which he planted trees, laid out walks, and farmed, to some profit. At Walmer, as lord warden, constable of Dover Castle, and admiral of the Cinque Ports, he had official duties he relished; he raised a corps of Cinque Ports Volunteers and was colonel of a battalion raised by Trinity House (of which he was master). Out of office he approached the military life with gusto and seriousness, encouraging the construction of Martello towers and the Royal Military Canal in Romney Marsh. 
Pitt's income between 1784 and 1792 was about $6900 a year and from 1792 until 1801 about $10,000. This should have been ample for a bachelor with rent-free accommodation at Downing Street, but, while being neither a gambler nor a speculator, he spent freely, with little regard for economy or attention to his accounts; as early as 1785 he owed about $8000, and he spent some $16-17,000 in 1785 and $11-12,000 in 1786. Servants and tradesmen cheated him on a considerable scale. He took on large loans, principally from his banker, Coutts, to whom he was paying interest on about $15,805 by 1787. Coutts arranged advances on Pitt's official income, and in 1793 Pitt was forced to assign him his salary as first lord of the Treasury. In 1796 he was paying interest of $676 on his overdraft and $940 on his bank loans. In 1797 he took out a new loan of $10,000 and a second mortgage of $7000 on Holwood. He spent over $20,200 in 1799 and needed another loan in 1800, by which time his debts were about $46,000. Fortunately his creditors were usually patient; attempts were made to settle with them in 1786 and 1793 on the strength of Coutts's loans, but debts to tradesmen nevertheless totalled about $11,000 by 1801. Servants, however, were usually paid promptly. Pitt combined financial extravagance with a markedly unassuming standard of life; restrained in his building works, he had no racing stable or great library or collection (though he did spend quite heavily on books in the late 1790s, owing $714 for them in 1801). By 1800 he had abandoned any attempt to deal with his private affairs; nearly always he contemplated them with serene disregard and was unwilling to accept private assistance in his predicament -- a detachment consonant with a concentration on public issues and devotion to public standards that made it unthinkable for him to profit privately from office. Resignation was a serious threat to his finances, and at first he seemed worried himself. He now had to rent a London house, taking first Park Place (off St James's Street) and then, from April 1802, 14 York Place (later Baker Street). He permitted his secretary Joseph Smith and his friends George Rose and George Pretyman to attempt to improve his financial position. He was unwilling to accept a sinecure and in 1801 declined an offer of money from the king, but he did accept advances from friends, whose names were made known to him, amounting to at least $11,700. In 1801 all but $500 of his debts to tradesmen were thought to have been settled; but other obligations of over $30,000 remained, many of them to his banker; despite the sale of Holwood for $15,000 in 1802 and strenuous efforts to reduce current outgoings, his habitual neglect meant considerable sums were owing once more at his death. 
Pitt expected to support Addington's ministry and act as his adviser, but he entered a period of partial political retirement lasting three years. In the autumn of 1801 he applauded the preliminaries of peace with France signed on 1 October, though regretting the cession of the Cape to the Dutch. In a speech of 3 November he said that, lacking an obvious continental ally, Britain must seek a modest but necessary peace, bargaining away as necessary her overseas acquisitions, except for Ceylon and Trinidad, which he thought too valuable to surrender; they were indeed retained in the definitive settlement. He approved the peace of Amiens of March 1802, although its terms were unfavourable to Britain, and Addington's first budget, about which he was consulted in outline. He was re-elected for Cambridge University in July 1802 in the general election that confirmed Addington in power. 
Canning arranged a public birthday dinner in Pitt's honour at Merchant Taylors' Hall on 20 May 1802, during which verses were sung on 'the pilot who weathered the storm'. Although Pitt declined to attend he was moved by reports of the occasion. His self-proclaimed pursuit of 'character' perplexed friends and former ministerial colleagues who opposed Addington. He conceived himself pledged to uphold the new minister and to refrain from taking any steps to regain office or which would disturb the king's state of mind; and he was unwilling to serve in any other capacity than chief minister, and then only with the king's express invitation and approval. The extent of his support for Addington depended upon the ministry's response to Bonaparte's territorial ambitions. In the winter of 1802-3 -- while seeming increasingly dissatisfied -- he withdrew from politics, living mainly at Walmer and Bath. In October 1802 he told Lord Grenville that, although French provocations made another war likely and the ministry lacked sufficient talent and support in the country to fight effectively, he would do nothing himself to regain office. In January 1803 he talked fruitlessly with Addington, and then absented himself from the Commons until April. When Addington made overtures in March through Dundas (now Viscount Melville), Pitt rejected a proposal that he and Addington be secretaries of state under Chatham as first lord of the Treasury, saying he would neither share power with nor serve under Addington. On 10 April Addington tried again through Charles Long, but Pitt insisted that if he returned he would expect the king's authority to reconstruct the ministry, a proposal the cabinet rejected outright. The negotiation petered out in an exchange of stiff, self-justificatory letters. 
Declaration of war with France on 18 May 1803 drew Pitt back into politics. On 23 May, frequently cheered and vociferously applauded, he gave one of his greatest orations in support of the decision to fight and was perceived to have delivered a 'negative censure' (Harris, 4.256) on the ministry's previous performance. When, however, on 3 June a motion of censure on the government was brought he tried to stop it with one of his own to proceed to the next business; he made a poor speech (which he afterwards regretted as out of touch with the mood of the Commons) and, on being overwhelmingly out-voted, made an unfavourable impression by leaving the house. Thereafter, while giving general support to the ministry, he contributed little during the session, though he did intervene critically several times on the detail of Addington's remodelling of the income tax. During the autumn session of 1803, amid growing fears of French invasion, Grenville and Fox drew closer, and on 10-12 January 1804 Pitt met Grenville, at the latter's suggestion, to see whether common ground existed. Pitt refused, however, to align himself with the Grenvillites and Foxites, arguing that systematic opposition to a weak ministry at a critical moment would be unpopular in parliament and the country, incur the hostility of the king, and be embarrassing to himself. 
Pitt attacked the measures for national defence propounded in a ministerial bill, introduced on 8 February, to regulate the volunteer forces, a subject about which he spoke regularly and in detail, using first-hand knowledge of the system in Kent. Early in March he turned to the state of the navy, whose civil administration under the earl of St Vincent as first lord of the Admiralty he condemned on the 15th in a motion defeated by 203 to 132. His scathing attacks continued during April, in closer co-operation with opposition groupings in parliament. This was a limited alliance, for he told Grenville and Fox on 18 April that he could not undertake to require the king to admit either of them to government should he be asked to lead a new ministry. His role in a co-ordinated attack on government was a severe blow for Addington, and he made a telling contribution to the debate on Fox's motion about national defence on 23 April, denouncing the 'tardiness, languor, and imbecility of ministers in every thing' (Ehrman, 3.635). By 26 April Addington was ready to resign, and on the 30th the king consulted Pitt. In a letter of 2 May Pitt proposed a 'comprehensive' ministry, including Grenville and Fox. This was not well received, as he learned by a reply on 5 May, but he requested an interview and, having consulted the royal doctors first, met the king for three hours on the 7th. The monarch was prepared to accept Grenville, with some of his associates, and possibly some Foxites. Emerging hopeful from the meeting, Pitt was shocked to learn that Grenville, the Grenvillites, and the Foxites would not enter government without Fox. Angered and bewildered at Grenville's position, he refused to ask the king to reconsider, offered his services on the 9th, and took office on 10 May 1804, with the prospect of forming a ministry without the support of the main opposition parties that had returned him to power. 
The material available for a new ministry in May 1804 was distinctly weak, and Pitt disliked making the arrangements. Of his own followers few were fitted for high office: Melville accepted the Admiralty, Camden became secretary of state for war and the colonies, and the new foreign secretary was Dudley Ryder, now Lord Harrowby, an able friend of long standing. From Addington's ministry Eldon was lord chancellor, Portland lord president of the council, Hawkesbury home secretary, and Chatham master-general of the ordnance; Castlereagh was added as head of the Indian Board of Control. Great difficulty arose filling junior posts. Canning, shocked by the exclusion of the Grenvillites, agreed only from personal loyalty to become treasurer of the navy; and others either declined office or accepted under renewed pressure. Their reactions betrayed disappointment -- which later hardened into disillusionment and resentment -- with a statesman prepared to compromise in any direction to produce a government. Although dependent, as he recognized, on the king -- an unwelcome state of affairs -- Pitt did not despair. Addington he thought unlikely to be influential out of office; the Grenville clan was unpopular, and Fox still suspect to many. 
Pitt was hard pressed to make good the charges he had levied against Addington's ministry. When he presented his own proposals for additional land forces the detailed and lengthy objections he encountered owed much of their animus to the feelings engendered by the tone of his return to power. By the autumn of 1804 he was seeking further support. The financial burden of the war was met largely by fresh issues of short-term bills and debentures, though Pitt's final budget in 1805 allowed also for a funded loan of $20 million, twice that for the previous year. This owed some of its size to a contingency sum of $5 million reserved for potential allies in an intended European coalition. One of Pitt's criticisms of Addington's ministry was its alleged failure to mount an offensive design for Europe, but he built on Addington's proposal for a Russian alliance; the two powers found common interest in south-east Europe, agreeing to work more closely in opposing the partition of the Ottoman empire. Plans were discussed to expel the French from southern Italy, and the arrival in London late in the year of a representative from the tsar with a blueprint for an alliance and a peace settlement greatly raised Pitt's spirits. While he set to work to answer these ideas for post-war Europe -- in a lengthy review that became a basis for Britain's contribution to the terms worked out ten years later -- he instructed the British envoy in St Petersburg to pursue detailed proposals for a strategic partnership. Although Russia remained the centre of attention, he discerned opportunities in Vienna and Berlin. Britain, moreover, was now at war with Spain, following a pre-emptive attack in the previous September on ships carrying bullion from South America, and the Baltic powers were being wooed. A provisional treaty was signed in the Russian capital on 12 April 1805, followed on 28 July by the ratification of a definitive treaty. In late June news reached St Petersburg that France had annexed the territory of Genoa. The tsar reacted furiously, and preparations for war were immediately begun, involving Austria, the Two Sicilies, and perhaps more surprisingly Sweden, which exacted a heavy financial price in London for a campaign in northern Germany. By September only Prussia, constantly wooed, had still to be won. The third coalition came into being without any concessions by Britain over its maritime interests. 
This did not save Pitt, as he had hoped, from domestic political problems. His ministry was ill at ease for much of 1804, and although efforts to bolster its strength from the various quarters of opposition failed in the autumn a junction with Addington was subsequently achieved. In January 1805 Addington became lord president of the council as Viscount Sidmouth, but relations between the two connections were strained. Ministers were ill-prepared for the storm that followed the publication of a report on Melville's alleged misappropriation of funds as treasurer of the navy during Pitt's first ministry, which brought Pitt's own conduct under scrutiny. The most public humiliation Pitt ever suffered, and one that deeply afflicted him, this also exposed party animosities within government. Pitt had therefore to face again the problem of parliamentary majorities, and now it seemed more intractable. When the definitive treaty with Russia was safely received late in August, to be followed within a few days by an agreement with Austria, the way looked open for him to seek the king's permission to broaden his ministry by including some Grenvillites and Foxites and if necessary Fox himself. Talks between Pitt and George III in September, however, proved a complete failure and led Pitt to conclude that nothing remained but 'to fight the best Battle We can with our own Strength' (letter to Bathurst, 27 September 1805, BL, Loan MS 57, vol. 2). 
All therefore turned on Pitt's plans for the coming campaign. He proposed to intervene in concert with the allies in the Mediterranean and northern Germany. Early in November he received the great boost to morale of Nelson's victory at Trafalgar, and was toasted as the saviour of Europe at the lord mayor's banquet at Guildhall. His reply passed into legend: 'I return you many thanks for the honour you have done me: but Europe is not to be saved by any single man. England has saved herself by her exertions and will, as I trust, save Europe by her example' (Stanhope, 'Life', 4.346). Prussia, in particular, was still holding aloof; a supreme effort was to be made to win her over. But the fate of Europe lay with Napoleon; in October he checked the Austrians at Ulm, the next month he entered Vienna, and on 2 December he decisively defeated Austrian and Russian forces at Austerlitz. Pitt's plans were shattered, and the future appeared to offer little hope. The blow found him -- in very bad health -- taking the waters at Bath. He returned to the villa on Putney Heath he had rented the previous year, where he died, utterly worn out, on the morning of 23 January 1806, aged forty-six years and almost eight months, twenty-five years to the day after he had first entered the House of Commons. Contrary to the tradition, begun by Disraeli, that Pitt died after expressing a desire to 'eat one of Bellamy's pork pies', his final words, as recorded by his nephew James Stanhope, who was at his deathbed, were 'Oh, my country! how I leave my country!' (Ehrman, 3.829). 
Pitt's death came to most people as a surprise, and even some of those close to him nursed hopes of recovery almost to the end. Its impact on the House of Commons was dramatic: 'the silence was deathlike, and several of the hardiest oppositionists said it was like an electrical shock... and that they could hardly breathe' (Thorne, 5). Fox was heard to mutter that there seemed to be 'something missing in the world -- a chasm or blank that cannot be supplied' ('Lord Granville Leveson Gower', 2.162-3). As in the case of the elder Pitt, the Commons voted to address the throne for a lying in state and funeral at the public expense and, unanimously, that the public should pay his debts, which was done to the extent of $40,000. On 22 February Pitt joined his parents and his favourite sister, Harriot, in Westminster Abbey. The personal grief among his circle was intense; it was shared, perhaps most tellingly, by some who had felt disappointment and umbrage in recent years -- Lord Grenville, George Rose, and Lord Sidmouth. Most poignant of all was Melville's affliction, as he contemplated a life in which there seemed 'to be not an hour... for these twenty-four years past, that does not at this moment and for ever continue to bring his image to my Mind' (Ehrman, 3.831-2). Pitt's executors, his brother Chatham and Bishop Pretyman Tomline, took sixteen years to settle his affairs, but in 1821 they closed the books with a net surplus, where none had been expected, of some $7600, from which bequests were made to Chatham and to the three surviving daughters of his two deceased sisters. 
Among the personal mementoes which passed to Pitt's friends were copies, executed by the artist, of John Hoppner's portrait of 1805, the last likeness for which Pitt had sat. An outstanding posthumous portrait by Thomas Lawrence appeared in 1808 and a posthumous bust by Joseph Nollekens, based on Hoppner's portrait, followed in 1815 by a full-length statue in Cambridge; other monuments included Richard Westmacott's in Westminster Abbey and statues by Francis Chantrey in London and Edinburgh. Prints of many of these representations and, in sculpture, casts of Nollekens's bust in particular were subsequently produced, as were medals with Pitt's head in profile, designed to be worn on a ribbon at celebratory dinners of the Pitt clubs whose membership grew steeply in the second and third decades of the nineteenth century. His 'tall, ungainly, bony figure' (H. A. Bruce, 'Life of Sir William Napier', 1, 1864, 31) was relished by graphic satirists such as James Gillray, who caricatured him as a rake-thin, rather prim figure, with an exaggeratedly long, pointed, and up-turned nose, in countless images, most famously in 'The Bottomless Pitt' (16 March 1792). 
Pitt had died facing the prospect of a parliamentary assault which might well have brought his ministry down, and the immediate response of his colleagues was to resign. Unable to find his successor among the cabinet, George III -- as some of its members advised -- turned to Grenville and Fox, so that, by the time that Pitt was interred, the former was first lord of the Treasury and the latter a secretary of state in the 'ministry of all the talents'. When the new government invited only two junior office-holders from its predecessor's ranks, outgoing ministers agreed to act under the standard of Pitt's name, and soon became known as Mr Pitt's friends, or Pittites. Just as Pitt had done, they abjured regular opposition, and conceived themselves ready to speak and where appropriate 'take the sense of Parliament' (Canning's interpretation in April 1806) on measures 'brought forward... in derogation from Mr. Pitt's system, or in discredit of his memory', or 'really objectionable and felt to be so by the country and still more by' the king (A. D. Harvey, 'Britain in the Early Nineteenth Century', 1978, 181). They were recognized as a distinctive connection for the rest of the decade. 
A wide range of appeals to Pitt's influence or example were made, and certain characteristic policies were credibly identified as Pittite: the persistent use of a continental strategy, in which British troops came to serve a distinctive role; the conception of a final peace treaty derived consciously from a design suggested by Pitt; a fiscal system centred throughout the Napoleonic War on the direct income tax; and the employment against threats of disorder of stern repressive legislation which yet respected a core of constitutional liberties. Certain appeals, however, were historically less respectable and brought much distortion, even caricature. The 'expedient' statesman emotionally unmoved by religious sentiment was portrayed as spiritually devout, and hailed as a convinced opponent of Catholic emancipation. The whig upholder of the balanced constitution, whose attitude to the royal prerogative was watchful and reductive, the politician who had been suspect to the elder Jenkinson and Thurlow and Eldon, acquired in memory a party label as a tory which he himself would not have recognized. 
The transmission of 'Mr Pitt's system' was arguably clearer and of greater impact in the major areas of governmental business than in the politically controversial subjects which had demanded so much of his attention, particularly in his later years. For Pitt's view of politics was affected, to an exceptional degree, by his treatment of the system as a vehicle for business. He had the traditional disdain of party and, with whatever inconsistencies and lapses, he undertook improvements for their own sake: this was a perceptible shift from the earlier movement of economic reform, and one that over time made a significant contribution to a far-reaching development by applying a more dispassionate assessment to problems of administration which could still be brought within an individual's grasp but increasingly called for a systematic approach in an era of accelerating change. The unaccustomed weight he placed on 'subjects of a low and vulgarising quality' ('Private Papers of William Wilberforce', 79) -- such as budgetary and commercial details -- proved equally lasting. His emphasis and tone over a long span in office suited current needs, drawing a ready response from his officials and an admission from his colleagues of his dominance. As men came increasingly to look back across a watershed to the different world of the eighteenth century, Pitt was seen as a great agent and symbol of change. 
The enduring sense of Pitt's personal probity and dedication was a potent legacy too. This was particularly well expressed by Wilberforce, who had known him well: 'Mr. Pitt had foibles, and of course they were not diminished by... continuance in office; but for a clear and comprehensive view of the most complicated subject in all its relations; for that fairness of mind which disposes a man to follow out, and when overtaken to recognise the truth; for magnanimity, which made him ready to change his measures, when he thought the good of the country required it, though he knew he should be charged with inconsistency on account of the change; for willingness to give a fair hearing to all that could be urged against his own opinions, and to listen to the suggestions of men whose understanding he knew to be inferior to his own; for personal purity, disinterestedness, integrity, and love of his country, I have never known his equal. (Wilberforce and Wilberforce, 3.249-50)' Pitt had his own political vision, which he was ready to advance and where necessary defend with vigour, and it was not the less strong for -- indeed it turned on -- its practicability. Great Britain, he believed, had the good fortune to enjoy a constitution which was a model of its kind. Revolution was thus the enemy of true advance, 'improvement' the true end, and parliamentary majorities were the instruments for the purpose. He was, as he knew, well qualified to put in hand and expound the task. He was, moreover, a hard-headed, if volatile, practitioner, skilled in contrivance and resource. His eloquence suited, might even elevate, the matter-of-fact tastes of the Commons, and for all his lofty neglect of the mass of back-benchers he was usually distinctly sensitive to the moods of the house. He encouraged and was anxious to recruit talent, at levels lower than that of the cabinet, and greatly preferred persuasion and manoeuvre to an outright fight. His expectations, of his position and himself, were perhaps extravagant, as was evident at the outset of his career and particularly later during his pursuit of 'character' in 1801-4. These could give hostages to fortune, but the effect in the round was undeniable. Pitt died at the nadir of his fortunes; but he took his place at once in the pantheon of exceptionally renowned prime ministers, those few outstanding figures whose names have endured. 


@@@@@


doc= 22339


Pitt, William (1749-1823), writer on agriculture, was born at Tettenhall, near Wolverhampton, Staffordshire. He lived in Pendeford, near Wolverhampton, moving later to Edgbaston, Birmingham. Pitt was one of those employed by the board of agriculture to prepare reports on the state of agriculture in each county, and he wrote reports on four counties, starting with 'A General View of the Agriculture of the County of Stafford, with Observations on the Means of its Improvement' (1794). This was followed by similar reports on the agriculture of Northamptonshire (1809), Worcestershire (1813), and Leicestershire (1819); all but the last contain lists of plants. Pitt's other publications included 'On Agricultural Political Arithmetic' (1803), 'The Bullion Debate, a Satirical Poem' (1811), 'A Comparative Statement of the Food Produced from Arable and Grass Land' (1812), and 'A Topographical History of Staffordshire' (1817). Pitt died on 18 September 1823, and was buried at Tettenhall. 


@@@@@


doc= 22340


Sir William Augustus Pitt (c.1728-1809), army officer, brother of George Pitt and fourth son of the family, was appointed cornet in the 10th dragoons on 1 February 1744, and served in the Seven Years' War. He distinguished himself in several actions, and was wounded and taken prisoner at Campen. He served as MP for Wareham, Dorset, from 1754 to 1761. Pitt became colonel in 1762 and major-general in 1770, and he was promoted to be colonel of the 12th dragoons in October 1770; five years later he was transferred to the 3rd Irish horse. He became lieutenant-general in 1777 and general in 1793, was from 1784 to 1791 commander of the forces in Ireland, and was governor of Portsmouth from 1794 until his death; he was also colonel of the 1st dragoon guards from July 1796. Pitt was created a knight of the Bath in 1792. He was married to Mary Howe, daughter of Emanuel Scroope Howe, second Viscount Howe, on 21 June 1763. He died at Highfield Park, Hampshire, on 29 December 1809, leaving no heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 22341


Rivers, Augustus Henry Lane Fox Pitt- (1827-1900), anthropologist and archaeologist, was born Augustus Henry Lane Fox on 14 April 1827 at Hope Hall, Bramham, Yorkshire, the second son of William Augustus Lane Fox (1795-1832), army officer, and Lady Caroline (died 1873), daughter of the Hon. John Douglas. He changed his name to Pitt-Rivers in 1880 on inheriting the estates of his cousin Horace Pitt, sixth Baron Rivers, which brought him considerate wealth. (Despite expenditure throughout his life on his collections and excavations, he died a very wealthy man.) 
He was educated at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and commissioned into the Grenadier Guards in 1845. In 1851 he joined the committee on the adoption of the rifle into the British army and was subsequently first instructor at the Hythe School of Musketry. Taking considerable interest in this aspect of his professional duties, he amassed a collection of historic firearms. He married on 3 February 1853 Alice Margaret (died 1910), eldest daughter of the second Baron Stanley of Alderley. They had six sons and three daughters, among them Lady (Agnes) Geraldine Grove. 
The publication of Darwin's 'On the Origin of Species' in 1859 marked a major turning point in Lane Fox's life. His collection of firearms had expanded to include other weapons, tools, and appliances. He used this ethnographic material to illustrate his theory of the evolution of culture, which he developed by analogy to Herbert Spencer's social Darwinism, and which he published in 1875. This theory embodied the idea of typology -- the realization that objects can be placed in chronological sequence on the basis of slight changes in design, a crucial concept for archaeology. His collections were later given to Oxford University where they form the core of the Pitt Rivers Museum, which opened in 1884. He was awarded a DCL degree in 1886. 
Lane Fox's interest in field archaeology seems to have begun in the 1860s during his posting in southern Ireland, where he surveyed a number of prehistoric forts. In 1864 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London and on his return to England in 1867 began his archaeological field work in earnest. He worked with the indefatigable barrow digger Canon William Greenwell in Yorkshire, surveyed and excavated hill forts and flint mines on the Sussex downs, and went flint hunting in preference to more conventional field sports. He also discovered palaeolithic implements and animal bones in the drift gravels of the Thames valley, a significant contribution to contemporary science. A notable feature of his archaeological work is the attention that he gave to settlements, rather than concentrating on the funerary sites which occupied the attention of most antiquarians. He became vice-president of the Society of Antiquaries in 1871 and was elected FRS in 1876. 
Celebrating his inheritance in 1880 with a holiday in Egypt, Pitt-Rivers (as he now became) found palaeolithic remains in the drift gravels of the Valley of the Kings, another remarkable and, at the time, controversial discovery. For the remaining twenty years of his life his archaeological work was divided between a formidable series of excavations in Dorset and Wiltshire, mainly on his own property, and his official duties as inspector of ancient monuments under the 'Ancient Monuments Act' of 1882. The excavations in Cranborne Chase, undertaken by Pitt-Rivers with a staff of assistant supervisors and draughtsmen, and labourers from the estate, included prehistoric, Romano-British, and medieval sites. The excavations were published lavishly and the finds displayed in a museum at Farnham, Dorset. The museum also contained models of the excavated sites and ethnographic objects. Pitt-Rivers laid out the Larmer Pleasure Grounds nearby with picnic bowers, an open-air theatre, and bandstand; there were dances, sporting contests, and other public events to make this remote, rural museum attractive. All this effort was directed to the end of teaching the evolution of culture theory. The teaching emphasized gradual change, and carried a strong political message: evolution, not revolution, was the road to progress. Pitt-Rivers had retired from the army in 1882 with the rank of lieutenant-general, having seen active service in the Crimea as a staff officer. He was on the active list until 1896 and was honorary colonel of the South Lancashire regiment for several years. He devoted the rest of his time to the duties of a country landowner -- road building, tree planting, and agricultural improvements. Pitt-Rivers died on 4 May 1900 at his country house, Rushmore, Tollard Royal, Cranborne Chase. He was cremated, and his ashes placed in Tollard Royal church, Wiltshire. 
After his death Pitt-Rivers's precepts were largely forgotten by archaeologists. It was not until the mid-twentieth century that a new group of professional archaeologists rediscovered his work. His fame has rested at different times on his abilities as an excavator, a builder of typologies, and a theorist. He was also a bridge-builder between anthropology and archaeology, and an educator. 
Pitt-Rivers's importance as an excavator rests on his insistence on contextual recording. He was among the first practitioners to turn antiquarianism into archaeology by recording in detail the precise position of his finds, thus rendering them useful as scientific evidence. He was one of the finest excavators of his generation; at his best, in the late 1880s and early 1890s, his care in recording information in plan and section drawings rivals modern practice. He was also in advance of his day in recording the mundane as well as the spectacular. 
The theory of the evolution of culture has not found wide acceptance. Darwin himself rejected social Darwinism and particularly its political notion that evolution can be equated with progress. Huxley rejected the gradualism of Darwin's theory, which was also a central tenet of Pitt-Rivers's theory. The theory of the evolution of culture was deeply flawed; Darwinian evolution proceeds by the selection of random genetic adaptations, while cultural change proceeds by the direct transmission of learning which takes place within, as well as across, generations. Nevertheless, if Pitt-Rivers was wrong about the mechanism by which sequences are created he was right about the sequences themselves. Archaeology in the nineteenth century was a science desperately seeking a chronology, and Pitt-Rivers probably did more than anyone in his generation to promote the establishment of a sound chronology for British archaeology. 
Archaeology and anthropology were seen largely as two aspects of the same science in the late nineteenth century. It was only later that the disciplines drifted apart. Pitt-Rivers was at the forefront of both disciplines, as a collector of ethnographic materials and an excavator of archaeological sites. The two interests are frequently linked in his published works, largely through his theoretical position; archaeology and anthropology were inseparable elements in the study of cultural evolution. Although, once again, his theory is wrong, the connection was of immense benefit to both disciplines, as has been recognized again since the 1960s. 
Public education was Pitt-Rivers's ultimate goal. He believed that existing museums confused their roles in research and education, so that most museum displays were simply tedious. His own museum, with its illustrative models, was an attempt to break this mould. Both Farnham Museum and the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford have inspired and delighted a numerous and varied public. 


@@@@@


doc= 22342


Pittis, Thomas (bap. 1636, d. 1687), Church of England clergyman, was born at Niton, Isle of Wight, and baptized there on 28 June 1636, the son of Thomas Pittis, a captain of militia on the Isle of Wight, and his wife, Mary. He matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, on 29 April 1653, and graduated BA on 5 June 1656. He proceeded MA on 29 June 1658, from Lincoln College. The year of his ordination is unrecorded but, by March 1660 he may have been preferred to the rectory of Newport, Isle of Wight by John Worsley, of Gatcombe. On 4 February 1661, at Gatcombe church, he married Elizabeth, daughter of William Stephens of Newport, and in the following year he was appointed rector of this church. In 1665 he graduated BD and the next year was appointed vicar of Holyrood, or St Cross, Southampton. His strong commitment to the crown brought him into conflict with the mayor and corporation of Southampton, which led him to publish the pamphlet 'A private conference between a rich alderman and a poor country vicar made publick. Wherein is discoursed the obligation of oaths which have been imposed on the subjects of England. With other matters relating to the present state of affairs' (1670). 
Such was his steadfastness to crown and church that Pittis was created DD at Oxford, in 1670, and was made a royal chaplain, and the lecturer at Christ Church, Newgate Street, about the same time. He was incorporated MA at Cambridge in 1676. In 1678 he was rector of Lutterworth, Leicestershire, and was then given the far more important appointment of rector of St Botolph without Bishopsgate in 1678. This was one of the London churches still standing after the great fire, although its fabric was deteriorating (it was rebuilt early in the eighteenth century). In this appointment he carried some responsibilities under his lectureship for the spiritual sustenance of the parish of Christ Church, Newgate Street, as well as for the parish of St Leonard, Foster Lane, which had been conjoined under the 1670 'act for the Better Settlement of the Maintenance of the parsons, vicars, and curates in the Parishes of the City of London, burnt by the late dreadful fire there'. Pittis was a sturdy figure in the midst of the chaos of dispossession and rebuilding that was London twelve years after the fire. His two main works (both published in 1683) are important as representing his thoughts on two challenges that loomed large at the time for the self-understanding of the established church in the wake of the Popish Plot and the exclusion crisis -- first that of protestant nonconformity, and second that of Roman Catholicism. While the parish system was in effect suspended in the capital city, the pressures upon the Church of England were enormous because without the parish system the identity of the established church was severely undermined. 
In a 'Discourse Concerning the Trial of Spirits' Pittis affirmed the integrity of the gospel message, from which sprang the church, and that the gospel had been legitimated by extraordinary dispensations of the Holy Spirit. But he could not discern anything comparable to give credibility to 'Enthusiasts'. In a 'Discourse of prayer: wherein this great duty is stated, so as to oppose some principles and practices of papists and fanaticks; as they are contrary to the publick forms of the Church of England, established by her ecclesiastical canons, and confirmed by acts of parliament', Pittis conveyed his conviction that the worship offered to God had to be 'proportionate to his being' (p. 47), and that this could not be achieved by extempore prayer. Essentially he propounded that services without a settled text could not honour God in his revelation, but could only reflect the inevitable limitations of perception of any individual who was attempting to lead worship without a text that had previously been considered and agreed. Pittis also warned against worshipping 'a notional Idol' (p. 63) -- a body of ideas held to represent God which could become a substitute for God. This, he felt, was the effect of Roman Catholic doctrine, especially in the tenets of transubstantiation, while such idolatry was concealed by the use of Latin. Both these books proved to be ephemeral and neither was reprinted. 
Pittis died intestate on 28 December 1687 and was buried at Niton; administration of his estate was granted to his widow, Elizabeth. He left two sons -- Thomas ('b'. 1669), who became vicar of Warnham, Sussex, and William Pittis -- and two daughters -- Elizabeth, who married Zacheus Isham, Pittis's successor at St Botolph's, and Catherine. 


@@@@@


doc= 22343


Pittis, William (1673/4-1724), political writer, was the second son of Thomas Pittis (bap. 1636, d. 1687) of Niton, Isle of Wight, rector of St Botolph without Bishopsgate, and Elizabeth, daughter of William Stephens of Newport, Isle of Wight. His elder brother, Thomas, later became vicar of Warnham in Sussex. From 1687 Pittis was educated at Winchester College, and aged sixteen he matriculated at New College, Oxford, on 14 August 1690; he graduated BA four years later and was a full fellow of the college between 1692 and 1695. In 1708 he published a verse essay, 'Aesop's Oxford', which satirized many of the prevailing modes of the day and was reissued a year later as 'Bickerstaff's Aesop'. On leaving the university he became a member of the Inner Temple, London. 
Pittis is better known for his political writings sympathetic to the tory and high-church cause. In 1702 he published 'The Patriots, in Vindication of Several Members of the Late Parliament', in which he praised its dedicatee, Robert Harley, then speaker of the Commons, along with Simon Harcourt and Anthony Hammond as true defenders of the national interest. The failure of a third bill to prohibit occasional conformity later prompted Pittis to publish 'The Memorial to the Church of England' (1704) with Henry Foley, MP for Ipswich, and the physician and tory pamphleteer James Drake (1667-1707). The treatise, which drew attention to the dangers faced by Anglicanism -- 'there is a 'Hectick fever' lurking in the very 'Bowels' of it' (p. 3) -- was regarded as an attack on Queen Anne's rule over the church and prompted its burning by the common hangman. On 27 April 1706 Pittis himself was fined $100 and ordered by the court of queen's bench to stand in the pillory three times for his part in the publication. In December 1714 he was again in trouble, for having published his 'Reasons for a War with France'; this time he was arrested and later bailed, apparently without charge. His other political works included parliamentary histories for the period 1702-4, which paid close attention to the resistance to occasional conformity, and for sessions during 1710 and 1711. 
Pittis's other publications included an edition of the 'Canterbury Tales' 'rendered into familiar verse' (1701), a 'Hymn to Neptune' (1705), following Admiral Rooke's victory at the battle of Velez-Malaga, an unpublished elegy for Sir Cloudesley Shovell following the death of that admiral in 1707, and a life of the Oxford physician John Radcliffe (1715, 4th edition 1724). He died at the Inner Temple in November 1724. 


@@@@@


doc= 22344


Pittman, Josiah (1816-1886), composer, was born in London on 3 September 1816, the son of a musician. He studied the organ under Goodman and S. S. Wesley. Subsequently he took lessons on the piano from Moscheles and in composition from Schnyder von Wartensee at Frankfurt. In 1831 he was appointed organist at the parish church of Sydenham, and in 1833 he obtained a similar office at Tooting; he was then organist from 1835 to 1847 at Spitalfields, and from 1852 to 1864 at Lincoln's Inn. He composed many services and much sacred music, some of which he published in 1859. He also published a couple of serious, well-researched pamphlets entitled 'The People in Church' (1858) and 'The People in the Cathedral' (1859), the latter being mainly a historical treatise. 
In 1865 Pittman became accompanist at Her Majesty's Opera, and from 1868 until his death he had the same position at Covent Garden, composing music for operas, while his literary abilities qualified him to assist also in the translation of librettos. The series of operas in piano score published as the 'Royal Edition', ranging from Auber through the alphabet to Weber, were edited by Pittman, who also, in co-operation with Arthur Sullivan, compiled selections of operatic songs for the popular 'Royal Edition' albums. He also edited a volume of Bach's fugues, and the musical portions of theoretical works by Cherubini, Marx, Callcott, and others. 'Songs of Scotland', compiled by Pittman and Colin Brown, was published in 1873. Pittman died suddenly, in his seventieth year, at Regent Street, London, on Good Friday, 23 April 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 22345


Pitts, Joseph (1663?-1739?), travel writer, was born in Exeter, one of several children of John Pitts, a nonconformist and signatory to a petition from a church in Exeter to Charles II. He received a good education but was keen to be a sailor and see the world. He sailed after Easter 1678 with five companions on the fishing boat 'Speedwell' of Lympstone, bound for Newfoundland. On their return, they were captured by an Algerine pirate off Spain, their boat scuttled, and her crew thrown in chains into the hold with other captives. 
At Algiers Pitts was bought by Mustafa, a shopkeeper, who beat him as a Christian, before selling him on to Ibrahim, a Turk of good family and captain of a troop of horse. On his annual trip to the mountains to collect tribute from the Berbers, Ibrahim met his brother, who persuaded him to convert Pitts as atonement for earlier misdeeds. Strung up by his feet, Pitts endured a prolonged bastinado and eventually yielded. However, at this time he received a letter from his father saying that he would rather hear of his son's death than of his apostasy. Pitts then told Ibrahim that he was still a Christian at heart, but on hearing that the penalty for renegades was to be burnt, he decided to conform to the practices of his new religion. 
Pitts worked his way up in Ibrahim's household, being accepted as a useful and honest servant, until Ibrahim was killed in the turbulent period following the assassination of the ruler Baba Hassan. He was then sold a third time to the kind and elderly Eumer, who took him on the pilgrimage to Mecca in 1684. The long coastal voyage to Alexandria took a month; they then tarried another month at Cairo before joining the caravan which embarked at Suez for Jiddah. After four months at Mecca Pitts and Eumer followed the pilgrim custom of proceeding to Medina to visit Muhammad's tomb before returning overland with the caravan. At Alexandria Pitts saw an English boat. He was delighted to find that it was from Lympstone and carried an acquaintance of his youth, who agreed to carry back a letter and presents for his parents. 
On their return from the pilgrimage, Eumer gave Pitts the customary freedom and bought a Dutch slave to take over Pitts's duties. They continued to live together amicably; Eumer treated Pitts as his son, offering him a wife and prospects of inheritance, but Pitts was now eager to return to Exeter. He enlisted in the Turkish army, taking part in attacks on the Spanish fort at Ceuta and against the emperor of Morocco. In 1693 he became acquainted with an English merchant named Butler, and by exchange with another soldier was able to sail with the Turkish fleet to Smyrna, where he hoped to find an English ship. Eventually a Cornishman paid for his passage on a French ship bound for Leghorn. Pitts went on board, 'Apparel'd as an English Man with my beard shaven, a Campaign Perrywigg [travelling wig] & a Cane in my Hand'. 
On emerging from detention in quarantine at Leghorn, Pitts met with a party of redeemed Dutch slaves who knew him, and joined them to walk across Europe to the Netherlands. Suffering from a bad leg, Pitts fell behind; he continued alone, and was robbed and beaten in Germany before being befriended by a picket of soldiers outside Frankfurt. They helped him to obtain a passport and passage down the Rhine. He crossed from Helvoetsluis to Harwich, where he was immediately pressed for the navy, despite his protestations. He was imprisoned at Colchester, and in despair wrote to Sir William Falkener, a Turkey merchant whom he had met in the East but who was now resident in London. He was then sent to the 'Dreadnought', but before she sailed Falkener's letter arrived for him enclosing a 'protection' from the Admiralty. Pitts was released and hastened home to Exeter, finding that his mother had died the previous year. 
The remainder of Pitts's life was passed in obscurity. He may have obtained a clerkship, and certainly travelled to London on more than one occasion, where he declined the offer of a post, probably because he had a wife and children in Exeter. Ten years after his return he published at Exeter 'A faithfull account of the religion and manners of the Mahometans, in which is a particular relation of their pilgrimage to Mecca' (1704). He explained in the preface: 'One thing I will desire of the 'Learned Reader', which is that if the 'Arabick' words in any place be not rightly written, he will please to take notice, that I aimed at the vulgar Sound of the Word, and writ as near, as I could, to their way of speaking it. And moreover, I can't pretend to a Perfection in the Arabian language.' Pitts was the first Englishman to record his own experiences of the pilgrimage to Mecca, a place strictly prohibited to infidels. His book also gave a detailed account of Muslim rituals, and the family life, customs, and cookery of the Turkish Algerians among whom he resided. In 1717, to his annoyance, a slipshod second edition appeared; this may have urged him to prepare his own corrected and amplified editions of 1731 and 1738, but here the London printers substituted the conventional Arabic forms for Pitts's Turkish ones. An undated will proved in 1739 and benefiting a wife, Hannah, may be his, and he may have been buried in the free cemetery at Friernhay, Exeter, for which no records survive. 
Pitts's account was drawn on for several collections of voyages and travels. Sir Richard Burton's 'Pilgrimage to Al-Madinah and Meccah' (1855-6) referred to it in detail and printed extracts (vol. 2, appx 5). The part dealing with Pitts's pilgrimage was published, with a 'Plan of the temple at Mecca', by the Hakluyt Society (2nd ser., 100, 1949). 


@@@@@


doc= 22346


William [ii] Pitts (1789-1840) was born on 9 November 1789 and baptized on 13 January 1790 at St Anne's, Soho, Westminster. He entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1811, before completing his apprenticeship. In 1812 he won the Isis gold medal from the Royal Society of Arts for modelling. At least five children were born of his early marriage, about 1809, his wife being named Mary. The eldest, Thomas [iv] ('b'. 'c'.1810), became an artist, and William [iii] ('b'. 1811), a sculptor; a daughter, Mary, of whom nothing is known, was followed by Joseph [ii] ['see below'], who also became a sculptor, and Frederick ('b'. 'c'.1832). Between about 1815 and 1830 William [ii] led a peripatetic existence, moving from one address in Westminster to another and being described as a silver chaser, but in 1818, when he was at 24 York Row, Kennington, his insurance policy described him as a modeller and chaser, and also a dealer in china, glass, and earthenware, for which his cover was $200 for stock and goods. In 1830 he moved to 5 Watkin's Terrace, Ebury Street, Pimlico. 
A most versatile artist, William modelled numerous figures, busts and bas-reliefs for public monuments, private houses, and churches. He exhibited at the Royal Academy (1823-40) and at the British Institution (1824-34). He painted pictures and designed china, including a Davenport service ordered by William IV. He was ambidextrous, using either hand, or both together, for drawing and modelling. The sculptors Flaxman, Westmacott, and Chantrey were among his friends. William undertook a range of commissions as a jobbing chaser of metalwork, working for Rundells, the royal goldsmiths, for other firms, and on his own behalf. He worked at Rundells' Dean Street premises chasing panels on the 'shield of Achilles' designed by Flaxman for Rundells; made in silver gilt, one example was purchased by George IV for 2000 guineas and displayed prominently at his coronation banquet in July 1821. Pitts subsequently prepared a copper version of the Achilles shield but died before it was finished; this was displayed at the London exhibitions of 1851 and 1862 and much admired. The 'Journal of Art and Design' (1850) described it as 'the finest piece of modelling for metal-work which has ever been produced in England' (p. 109). Pitts also chased the greater portion of the silver-gilt shield designed by Thomas Stothard, retailed by Green, Ward, and Green, and presented by the City merchants and bankers to the duke of Wellington in 1822. He made a silver model for Lord Arlen of Hubert Le Sueur's equestrian statue of Charles I. Between 1830 and 1840 he variously designed and modelled many of the candelabra, epergnes, and plate made for presentation, including the vast masonic tribute presented to the duke of Sussex. From 1829 to 1831 he carved reliefs for several rooms at Buckingham Palace, but in September of the latter year he was obliged to plead with the Treasury for payment of $550 outstanding from the agreed sum of $700. 
Despite his many commissions, William [ii] Pitts became overwhelmed by a series of financial and professional set-backs, and on the morning of 6 April 1840 he died at his home, 5 Watkin's Terrace, from an overdose of laudanum. The inquest disclosed that although negotiations were in hand for him to model for Mortimer and Hunt, jewellers, which would have brought him a goodly income, his design for the Nelson monument had been rejected, and he was concerned that a large commission for a gentleman in the country, which should have been completed, was still unfinished. William left a widow, his daughter Mary, and the infant Frederick totally unprovided for, his older sons Thomas [iv] and William [iii] having been employed as his assistants. Chantrey and other friends opened a fund to assist the family, and in 1842 Mrs Pitts received a charitable donation of $30 from the Royal Academy. 
The third son of William [ii] Pitts, 


@@@@@


doc= 22347


Pix, Mary (c.1666-1709), playwright and novelist, probably born in Nettlebed, Oxfordshire, was the daughter of Roger Griffith and his wife, Lucy, 'nee' Berriman. Her father may have been the Revd Roger Griffith who was vicar of Padbury and headmaster of the Royal Latin School in Buckingham, but this cannot be proved. Her mother came from Soundess in the parish of Nettlebed, Oxfordshire. Her parents were both English. Giles Jacob commented that Mary 'by her Mother's side was descended from a very considerable family, that of the 'Wallis's'' ('The Poetical Register', 1719, 1.203), but there is no other evidence of this connection. From 1684 she seems to have lived in London and on 25 July 1684 she married George Pix ('b'. 1660), a merchant tailor from Hawkhurst, Kent, at the church of St Benet Fink, London. There is record of the baptism of a son, George, on 26 June 1689 at Hawkhurst. He appears to have died the following year. There may have been at least one other child of the marriage, as there is a baptismal record of a William Pix, son of George and Mary, in 1691 at St Andrew's, Holborn, in London. 
Mary Pix was a prolific playwright. Between 1696 and 1706 seven plays bear her name, either in the dedication of the printed play text, or on the title-page. A further five anonymous texts are now generally attributed to her by critics ('Plays', lix-lxi). Her first published work, however, was a novel, 'The Inhumane Cardinal, or, Innocence Betrayed' (1696). The plot conforms to the contemporary conventions of the genre, featuring the seduction of an innocent girl by a cynical older man, aided by a treacherous older woman. Steeves describes this novel as a 'masterpiece of faulty plot construction' (ibid., xii). Pix's writing skills were more suited to drama. In the same year, she had two plays produced on the London stage: a tragedy, 'Ibrahim, the Thirteenth Emperour of the Turks', performed by Christopher Rich's patent company at Drury Lane, followed by a comedy, 'The Spanish Wives', at Dorset Gardens Theatre, also by Rich's company. 
Pix's next comedy, 'The Innocent Mistress', was staged in 1697 by the rival theatre company run by Thomas Betterton at Lincoln's Inn Fields. It is possible that this move was connected to Pix's dispute with one of Rich's leading actors, George Powell, who plagiarized her play 'The Deceiver Deceived', producing his own version entitled 'The Imposture Defeated, or, A Trick to Cheat the Devil' (1697). 'The Deceiver Deceived' was staged later in the season at Lincoln's Inn, introduced by an indignant prologue by Pix, which focused on the theft of her work. Charles Gildon, a contemporary critic, was of the opinion that Mrs Pix's version was superior: 'I think the Scene where the Blind Man's Wife make's Love before his Face, is better manag'd in Mr. 'Powel''s Play, than here, tho' in general, this is the better Play' (Gildon, 178). Pix was evidently supported by William Congreve in this controversy, as he is described in a contemporary account as leading a group of actors and friends to heckle a performance of Powell's play: 'they fell all together upon a full cry of Damnation, but when they found the malicious Hiss would not take, this very generous, obliging Mr. 'Congreve' was heard to say, 'We'll find out a New way for this Spark'' ('Animadversions on Mr. Congreve's Late Answer to Mr. Collier', 1698, 34). Pix was to remain loyal to Betterton's company for the rest of her writing career. 
A further five tragedies and three comedies are attributed to Pix. The last of these, a three-act comedy entitled 'The Adventures in Madrid', was produced about June 1706 at the Queen's Theatre, Haymarket. Her only other literary work, apart from a few minor pieces of poetry, was 'Violenta, or, The Rewards of Virtue: Turn'd from Boccacce into Verse' (1704). This is an interpretation in verse of the eighth book of the second day of Boccaccio's 'Decameron'. It is not clear whether Pix translated from the original Italian, or used an English edition. 
Although her plays were less popular than those by some of the other professional women playwrights of this period, notably Aphra Behn and Susanna Centlivre, Pix achieved moderate success. Two of her plays, 'Ibrahim' and 'The Spanish Wives', were revived well into the eighteenth century. Her comedies are generally ingeniously plotted, if somewhat conventional in characterization and theme. Her tragedies rely heavily on extravagant emotional rhetoric, well suited to actresses such as Elizabeth Barry, who played many leading roles for Pix. As an anonymous contemporary critic observed, Pix was sometimes unable to master the technicalities of blank verse: 'some of her Verses are worse than Prose, she knows not what Scanning means, nor did she ever use her Ear to judge of their awkard ['sic'] running' ('A Comparison between the Two Stages', 1702, 82). Gildon, however, while acknowledging that 'Ibrahim' may lack 'the Harmony of Numbers', credits the play with 'a Quality, that at least ballances that Defect, I mean the Passions' (Gildon, 111). Although her work preserves contemporary dramatic conventions of plotting and characterization, it frequently gives a stronger emphasis to the female perspective than was the norm in this period. None the less, her female characters are almost always polarized into one of two stereotypes: weak women who are easily manipulated by men, or sexually experienced viragos. She supported the general trend towards reforming the perceived immorality of the stage at the end of the seventeenth century, claiming in the prologue to 'The False Friend, or, The Fate of Disobedience' (1699) '
Amongst Reformers of this Vitious Age, 

Who think it Duty to Refine the Stage: 

A Woman, to Contribute, does Intend. 

' Her plays are not overtly political in subject matter, but she often tacitly endorses whig political theory in her tragedies by presenting a critique of the destructive nature of arbitrary tyranny. Her work frequently depicts the 'citizen' class, or bourgeoisie, in a favourable light, marking the transition towards a more sympathetic portrayal of the city in drama in the eighteenth century.Pix appears to have been generally well liked. She features in a number of contemporary accounts, usually characterized as fond of food and wine, and consequently rather rotund in build. In 1697 an anonymous play, 'The Female Wits', was staged at Drury Lane, satirizing Pix, Catharine Trotter, and Delarivier Manley, who had all recently come to prominence as playwrights. While the portraits of Trotter and Manley are malicious, that of Pix is less so. Mrs Wellfed, the Pix persona, is described in the cast list as 'a fat Female Author, a good sociable well-natur'd Companion, that will not suffer Martyrdom rather than take off three Bumpers in a Hand' ('The Female Wits', 1704). There is some evidence that she was a friend of Elizabeth Barry, as she is linked with the actress in 'The Players Turn'd Academicks' (1703). 
Mary Pix died in 1709, and was probably buried on 19 May, as there is a burial record on that date for a 'Mrs. Mary Picks' in the parish register of St Clement Danes Church, London. Advertisements appeared in the 'Post Boy' of 26-28 May and the 'Daily Courant' of 25 May 1709 for a special performance of Centlivre's play 'The Busie-Body', at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, London, for the benefit of Pix's estate. She does not appear to have left any children. 
Mary Pix's writings have not been the focus of much critical attention since her death. She is not included in John Duncombe's famous encomium to accomplished women, 'The Feminiad', (1754) nor in 'Biographium faemineum' (1766). Where she is mentioned in general histories of the stage, her work is often dismissed as mediocre, as in Charles Dibdin's evaluation: 'all her productions... were too slight to be permanent' ('A Complete History of the English Stage', 1797, 4.345). Her drama was championed, however, by John Doran in the nineteenth century, who asserted that her comedies are 'full of life' and her tragedies 'more than brimful of loyalty', adding 'later dramatists have not disdained to pick up some of Mrs. Pix's forgotten incidents' (''Their Majesties' Servants': Annals of the English Stage from Thomas Betterton to Edmund Kean', 1888, 1.242). In the late twentieth century, interest revived in early modern women writers, but the work of Mary Pix has still not received as much attention as that of some of her contemporaries. Her skill as a dramatist, especially in her comedies, has yet to be fully appreciated. 


@@@@@


doc= 22348


Place, Francis (1647-1728), printmaker and potter, was the fifth son of Rowland Place (1616-1680) of Dinsdale, co. Durham, and his wife, Catherine (died 1670), daughter and coheiress of Charles Wise of Copgrove, Yorkshire. Place was persuaded to enter the law as his father had done, and was articled to an attorney at Gray's Inn until the outbreak of the plague forced him to leave both the profession and London in 1665. By this time, Place had already discovered a gift for drawing and engraving through his contact with Wenceslaus Hollar, who became a close personal friend, although not his tutor. Unlike most other amateurs, Place began to practise his art professionally. Hollar invited Place to etch seventeen plates for John Ogilby's edition of Jan Nieuhoff's 'Embassy to the Emperor of China' in 1669, his earliest essay in topography. Dutch publishers (including Hugo Allardt and Frederick de Witt, among others) also issued Place's prints, which may suggest that he travelled to the Low Countries, possibly with Hollar. Clearly he had a continental market, which was very unusual for British printmakers at this time. 
Between 1668 and 1680 Place travelled widely throughout Britain making sketches, particularly between 1677 and 1678, and again after his father's death in 1680. About 1680 Place's interests and activities widened further as he became involved with the antiquarian group the Virtuosi of York, where he eventually settled. Place became an intimate friend of many artists and antiquarians in and around York, including Ralph Thoresby and William Lodge, with whom Place went on many drawing and angling excursions; sketchbooks of these tours are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. As a result of the Popish Plot, during one trip to Wales, Place and Lodge found themselves imprisoned as suspected Jesuit spies. Although Place's works were typically wide-ranging for an amateur of his time, his landscapes were unique in the way he combined natural detail with real places and imaginary idealism. His set of etched Italian scenes for the publisher Arthur Tooker (only two now survive) reflected a continental influence unknown in any other British artist of his time. Place may also have drawn some naval shipping as a royal commission. 
In addition to topographical views of London and York (BM and V&A), Place also took an interest in three-dimensional botanical drawing (Hospitalfield collection) which was quite unlike the two-dimensional style that was typical of the period. Animals and still life also preoccupied him. He etched the plates to Godartius's 'Book of Insects' (1681) and several sets of birds and animals after Francis Barlow. For a short time about 1688 Place was involved in horse-racing with Lord Fairfax. His angling trips provided source material for his numerous studies of 'fishing fowle'. Between 1666 and 1667 the Dutch tavern scenes of Teniers and Brouwer were reproduced by Place, the latter in mezzotint, making Place one of the earliest to use the new technique after Prince Rupert, who first introduced it in 1658. Place's portrait of Richard Tompson after G. Soust is said to be his finest mezzotint (Croft-Murray, 456). Via Hollar, Place received a commission from Sir Jonas Moore to produce a series of etchings after Robert Thacker's drawings of the Royal Observatory in Greenwich to commemorate its opening in 1676. Place also produced plates for the publications of his friends, including Ralph Thoresby's 'Ducatus Leodiensis' (1715; Brotherton Library, Leeds) and Francis Drake's 'Eboracum' (1736; City Art Gallery, York). His portraits are rare (BM) and often depict his 'virtuoso' friends, notably Henry Gyles, the glass-painter, whose portrait Place designed for a tradecard (Heals 90.42. BM). This portrait was also produced in crayon, as were a number of other 'admirable drawings' (Croft-Murray, 457). 
The 'ingenious' Place's virtuosity and enthusiasm led him to experiment with oil painting from 1680, stoneware pottery glazing, and the manufacture of porcelain from 1683, which he abandoned in 1694 owing to his lack of commercial success. Only four of his marbled greyware pots are known to have survived, one of which is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. His style was not dissimilar to that of John Dwight, a professional potter with whom Place was acquainted (Hake, letter 11 in Tyler, 127.83). Place's maturer drawing style evoked that of Bartolomeus Breenburgh, Antoni Waterloo, and Francis Towne, and in his latter years, Claude, by which time Place was treated as an old master. Comparatively unfinished, Place's drawings have survived because of the value of them to their virtuoso owners. About 1680 Place married Mrs Ann Wintringham, with whom he had one daughter, Elizabeth; presumably his wife died, and he married Mrs Ann Wilkinson (1662/1663-1752) in 1693, with whom he had two daughters, Ann and Frances. Place painted himself in oil, possibly at the time of this second marriage (Arbroath collection). He died at his home, King's Manor, York, on 21 September 1728, aged eighty-one, and was buried in St Olave's Church, York. 
Place's manor house, its contents including his collection of works of art (Hollar, Barlow, Jan Van de Velde, and Manby's drawings of Roman ruins), and his natural and artificial rarities were all left to his wife, who sold many of his paintings. The remaining collection was later divided between their two daughters, Ann Parrott and Frances Wyndham, on Ann Wilkinson's death in 1752 but was later reunited through descent by Francis Parrott, Place's grandson. In turn, Parrott willed the estate to his sister, Elizabeth Fraser, widow of Major John Fraser of Hospitalfield, Arbroath, part of which came up for sale in 1931 at Sothebys. 


@@@@@


doc= 22349


Place, Francis (1771-1854), radical and chronicler, was born on 3 November 1771, the illegitimate son of Simon Place and Mary Gray. 
Simon Place was by trade a baker who had become the keeper of a 'sponging house', or debtors' prison, in Vinegar Yard, near Drury Lane Theatre in London, where Francis was born. Such places were made illegal in 1779 and he became an innkeeper. He was a violent, erratic man of strong character. Francis had some schooling from 1775 to 1785, the last two years in a school kept by a Mr Bowis, whom he remembered for his kindness and learning. In 1785 Simon Place impulsively apprenticed his son to a breeches-maker called France, in Bell Yard, Temple Bar, a man whose three daughters lived on immoral earnings and who was himself to die in a workhouse. Place's upbringing had been rough, and much of his education had been in the streets, but he was literate and he soon showed more business acumen than the small tradesmen struggling around him. He prospered enough to marry in March 1791, at Lambeth, Elizabeth Chadd. She was sixteen, while he was only three years older. A slump in the breeches trade in 1791-2 caused them great distress, and when early in 1791 he joined and led a strike of breeches-makers which collapsed, they came close to starvation. For six months Place could get no work, until relief came from a former employer and he and his wife were able to buy back the possessions they had pawned. These years left a permanent mark on Place's outlook. From his father he had learned how great assets could be lost by impulsiveness and folly, 'keeping a blood horse and high company'. On the other side, the misfortunes of his fellow artisans showed the disastrous effects of ignorance and improvidence. He saw that his education, for all its shortcomings, had saved him from both. 
But Place too had given hostages to fortune. Elizabeth Place was to bear fifteen children; only eight reached adulthood. The second, but the first to survive, also called Elizabeth, was born in April 1794. In January 1796 a second daughter, Annie, was born, followed in June 1798 by a son, Francis. His growing family did not turn Place away from radicalism, but it helps explain the turn his radicalism took. 
In April 1794 Place read Thomas Paine's 'Age of Reason' and was so pleased by it that he decided in June to join the London Corresponding Society (LCS). He was probably too innocent of foreign politics to know how dangerous a move it was. In Paris the reign of terror was at its height and in the same month Robespierre inaugurated the cult of the supreme being. The LCS was known for its French sympathies and its meetings were watched and often infiltrated by spies. In 1794 one of its founders, Thomas Hardy, and two leaders of the more respectable Society for Constitutional Information, Horne Tooke and John Thelwall, were arrested; tried for seditious activities, they were acquitted in November. The government followed this reverse with two acts defining treason and restricting political meetings. Place was active in supporting prisoners in Newgate who were charged with treason, and he was and remained a friend of Hardy. But on the LCS he seems to have been a moderating influence. He chaired its general committee from September 1795 to February 1796 and was assistant secretary from May 1796 to early 1797. He opposed the policy of calling provocative meetings and the publication of a magazine which would only lose money. He also deprecated attacks on Christianity: not that he had any religious convictions, though he has been claimed as a professed atheist (J. M. Wheeler, 'Biographical Dictionary of Freethinkers', 1889). But he moved from the agrarian radicalism of Paine to the philosophic anarchism of William Godwin, and while remaining a republican he repudiated the revolutionary doctrines of natural rights and the social contract, and embraced the ideals of independence, absolute sincerity, and the gradual elimination of injustice through the spread of philosophic reason. He was not an abstract thinker. He adopted and professed those doctrines which confirmed his own experiences. Godwin repudiated violence and revolutionary agitation. Place saw that they did not bring work in a country at war with revolutionary France. He left the LCS in June 1797. 
In March 1799 Place entered a partnership with Richard Wild and they opened a shop at 29 Charing Cross. Wild sought to buy Place out in the following year, but Place borrowed enough money to set up on his own at 16 Charing Cross. Within a few years he had become a prosperous man. In 1815 he was making an annual profit of $2500. In 1817 he handed over a prosperous business to be managed by his son Francis. He was not alone in this prosperity. The war economy was good for the London shopkeeper, especially one so centrally situated. In 1820 Place attended a dinner to commemorate Thomas Hardy's acquittal and noted that of the company twenty were former members of the LCS and all prosperous men. For the first time in his life he had leisure to elaborate his views with reading and reflection and to apply them in everyday politics. His Jacobin connections, his friendships with men such as the Irishman Father James O'Coigley and Colonel Despard (both executed for revolutionary activities), made him a natural confidant of radical politicians of every sort. His practical experience and his ready sympathy with people in distress made many poor people seek his advice. He was also consulted by a new class of theorists, planners, and philanthropists who, in the unreformed political system, could not find the information they wanted from official sources. To all these Place, as a good Godwinian, gave shrewd practical advice with a dash of unpalatable candour. 
What gave Place's advice weight was his growing authority in the elections in Westminster. The borough's scot and lot franchise gave the vote, in effect, to ratepayers and until 1807 its elections had been heavily influenced by the owners of large London estates such as the duke of Bedford and the duke of Northumberland, who dictated the voting of their many tenants. The size of the electorate -- about 15,000 -- made standing for election expensive, but the meetings in Covent Garden attracted such crowds that Westminster elections took on the air of a national plebiscite. In times of popular unrest candidates for the two main parties could each ask for one of an elector's two votes, and in this way keep out a radical candidate. In the general election of 1806 James Paull, the radical candidate, had been defeated in this way. Another general election followed in May 1807, and Paull claimed to be standing in alliance with Sir Francis Burdett. The two men quarrelled and fought a duel, and Place and his friends decided to drop Paull and back Burdett, despite the fact that he had been wounded and could not appear at the hustings. This time they won, and their victory gave Westminster at least one radical member for the next twenty-eight years. As Place kept meticulous records of Westminster elections, he has often been credited with 'masterminding' them. In fact he was the most literate and systematic member of a committee of like-minded men, several quite as wealthy, who had hit upon a new way of marshalling the popular vote. By asking each elector to subscribe what he could to meet the expenses of the poll, they secured a core of loyal voters while increasing the expense for any competitor, and by organizing their following through committees in every parish of the borough, co-ordinated by a central committee, they were able to choose a candidate and guarantee him a substantial following before a rival could appear. They had invented the first constituency caucus. Their slogan, 'Westminster and Purity of Election', implied that they had done away with landlordism and intimidation. It did not mean that they secured obedient democrats as MPs. 
Place quarrelled with Burdett in 1812, and withdrew from Westminster elections until 1818. In the general election of that year his old friends begged him to help and he relented only when the election had already begun. His help was sorely needed: Burdett's seat was secured but he was second on the poll to the whig lawyer Sir Samuel Romilly. Romilly's suicide in November 1818 caused a by-election, and Place tried to secure the return of J. C. Hobhouse. But on the eve of the poll he rashly published a paper abusing the whigs as a 'corrupt and profligate faction' (Wallas, 134). They retaliated by starting their own candidate, George Lamb, who won the seat in an election of unusual violence. It was only after the radical outcry over the Peterloo massacre in 1819, in which Burdett and Hobhouse joined, each sealing his popularity with a short prison sentence, that both men were returned at the general election of 1820. Before long, however, Place was highly critical of their attitude to radical causes, calling them 'little if any better than mere drawling Whigs' (ibid., 153). J. C. Hobhouse went on to become a whig minister. Burdett joined the tories in 1834 but still retained his Westminster seat. 
Despite the defeat of 1819, Place's reputation as an organizer and a repository of information on social issues grew. His political influence, his practical experience of business, and his wide reading gave him a new status among the theorists. In 1808 he had met and befriended Jeremy Bentham and through him encountered James Mill, who in turn introduced him to the economist David Ricardo. In 1810 Place befriended his old mentor Godwin, now a chronically insolvent figure, who seems to have expected him to contribute regularly to his maintenance. Place had a horror of debt and the two men disagreed. Already attracted to the doctrines of Bentham and Mill, because they seemed to offer a firm theoretical foundation for popular education and a safe principle for the extension of the franchise, Place began to shed the utopian radicalism he had absorbed in the 1790s. A visit to Bentham at Ford Abbey in 1817 confirmed his membership of the utilitarian circle. Place accepted Bentham's jurisprudence, Malthus's principle of population, and Ricardo's doctrine of the wages fund, but when Godwin published a defence of his position against Malthus in 1820, he wrote a lengthy reply called 'Illustrations and Proofs of the Principle of Population' (1822). In this Place criticized Malthus for his ignorance of the conditions in which the poor lived and Godwin for giving up all hope for their improvement. If Godwin was too despondent, Malthus was too naive to suppose that working men would be persuaded to avoid hardship by marrying later in life. Place himself thought that the poor could be persuaded to avoid the burden of large families only if they were encouraged to use contraception, and his frank propaganda for this lost him many friends. 
Place tried to stay loyal to his artisan origins, and he never wavered in his dislike of aristocratic society, but his new allegiances affected, and in some ways compromised, his claim to speak for the poor. He was abused by leaders of popular radicalism: Cobbett disliked him as a utilitarian and a Malthusian. He retaliated by calling Cobbett 'an unprincipled cowardly bully' (Wallas, 117), and by using all his influence to keep him out of the representation of Westminster. He also distrusted the radical agitator Henry 'Orator' Hunt. He thought such men owed their popularity to their readiness to deceive simple people into believing in easy solutions to complex social problems. After some disillusioning experiences with the educational schemes of Joseph Lancaster, who disagreed with him over his 'infidel' opinions (Baker, 377), Place was inclined to follow the utilitarian policy of James Mill, who, by conveying the main texts of his political creed in simple, accessible treatises, sought to form a new democratic public of candid, self-reliant, and rational individuals who would teach by their example. But utilitarian theories never commanded a wide popular following. Meek converts such as Rowland Detrosier could prove ineffectual; but able and original ones such as Thomas Hodgskin might turn heretic. More effective than such proselytism was the policy of lobbying sympathetic people in power on insulated issues. Here Place's mastery of detail was more effective than his grasp of theory. His greatest success came in 1824, when he helped the radical MP Joseph Hume first to effect the repeal of the combination laws, and then to stave off the threat of their reintroduction by the government the following year. His motive was not to make trade unions a part of the social fabric; he thought they were brought into being in response to employers' combining to lower wages, and that they would wither away when the legislation against them had been repealed. Working men, once convinced that they could control their own numbers, would not need any other contrivance for raising wages. Place was not, as later historians claimed, pioneering a new form of objective parliamentary investigation. Managing committees and priming witnesses were devices his opponents could use against him, as he discovered in his efforts against the evangelically inspired select committee on drunkenness in 1834. What he most disliked were restrictions on the power of the working man to make his own choices. In union organization as in the temperance movement, he thought well-meaning interference worse than the faults it sought to cure. 
Place's commitment to free contract and self-help made him a staunch defender of capital honestly earned. What made him radical was his hatred of what he regarded as the unearned wealth of the landed classes. But when the whigs came to power in 1830 he supported all their reforms. The first 'Reform Bill' surprised him by its thoroughness, and though he deplored the fact that the $10 household franchise deprived many Westminster electors of their votes, he approved the bill as a whole. When in October 1831 the Lords rejected it, he helped form the moderate National Political Union to support ministers and to counter the more extremist National Union of the Working Classes, which met at the Rotunda in Blackfriars Bridge Road. His aim was to prevent the middle classes from deserting their poorer allies in alarm at threats to property and order. In the 'days of May' in 1832, when Grey's resignation raised the prospect of a Wellington ministry, Place claimed that his placard urging a run on the banks ('To Stop the Duke, Go for Gold') had deterred the duke and reinstated Grey. Place said that the 'Reform Act', when finally passed, was valuable as a start of the destruction of 'the old rotten system' of representation, and at first he wrote as if further reforms leading to a republic were a mere matter of time, given a strong popular demand. He supported the 'Poor Law Amendment Act' of 1834 and the reform of municipal corporations in 1835, and collaborated with Joseph Parkes over the framing of the latter. But he was not prepared for the rapid disintegration of the reforming majority in parliament, and he could not understand why his friends there became more and more reluctant to propose further radical measures or support a government which declared the 'Reform Act' a final measure. By then his own reputation as a radical was also compromised. After 1836 the popular radicalism he had wanted to revive developed ideas of which he disapproved. In 1838 he helped draft the 'Peoples' Charter' in a gathering of the London Working Men's Association. But the Chartist movement was soon captured by currency reformers, Owenite socialists, and advocates of 'physical force'. Its political aims were discredited by the violence of its meetings, and Place became disillusioned. He opposed factory reform and supported the Anti-Corn Law League without apparently realizing that these attitudes associated him with the enemies of the working man. Despairing of influencing events, he turned more to arranging his recollections and accumulating the records with which he hoped to write a social history of his time. 
Place's private life had meanwhile undergone a change which he ironically called 'my own revolution'. On 19 October 1827 Elizabeth Place had died, to his great grief. In February 1830 he married Louisa Chatterley, an actress twenty-six years his junior. Her first husband had died of drink, and her second partner had been transported. To a man of Place's antecedents these were not objections, but his son called the marriage 'a terrible falling off from his former rigidly virtuous life' ('Autobiography', 268). It is not clear if she was the cause of his financial losses which he suffered in 1833 and which led him to leave Charing Cross and settle at Brompton. By the move he ceased to enjoy the close contacts he had had with politicians and reformers in the library above his shop. He also lost status. He would have liked to be offered a post on one of the many commissions instituted by the Grey government, but was passed over. This vindicated his bitter criticisms of the system, but it meant that he had never any direct experience of the responsibilities of government, and remained a critic on the margin. 
Readers of Place's voluminous papers -- now one of the chief nineteenth-century collections in the British Library -- cannot be surprised at this. Place's doctrinaire outlook, together with the dogmatism of the autodidact, made him a difficult colleague in any public business. He tended to decide in advance what course should be followed, and to attribute all subsequent difficulties to the fact that his advice had not been taken. His papers are full of bullying interviews with humble men, brutally candid appraisals of the shortcomings of colleagues, and hectoring letters of advice to MPs and officials. James Mill once tried to cure him of his habit of 'raving' and it may be that in later life Place indulged this habit in the long drafts of letters which, if sent at all, could only have caused offence. His advice to the Chartist Henry Vincent when he announced his intention of standing as a candidate for Banbury is characteristic: 'Become a man of business for the next ten years. You may perhaps at the end of that time be in a condition to do some public service. You will be quite in time for enacting the Charter, or for doing any other great national good. (Wallas, 381)' The obverse of this dogmatism was an impulse to collect evidence, at first probably to illustrate his own rectitude, but later to document the larger movements of his time. From 1898, when Graham Wallas published the first biography, until our own day, the Place papers, including his autobiography, have provided one of the richest sources for the history of radical reforming movements in the period covered by his life, from the LCS to the Chartists. 
In 1844 Place suffered a stroke which left him partially disabled. In 1851 he separated from his second wife, and went to live with his daughter Annie in Hammersmith. He then moved to the home of his two unmarried daughters, 6 Foxley Terrace, Kensington, London, where he died at midnight on 1/2 January 1854. The editor of 'The Times', J. T. Delane, told Joseph Parkes on 4 January that he would be glad to publish his memoir of Place, 'but can't you get him into one column? A column used to be enough for a hero; it ought to suffice for a tailor -- even a Radical tailor' (Parkes MSS, UCL). 


@@@@@


doc= 22350


Plampin, Robert (1762-1834), naval officer, the son of John Plampin, of Chadacre Hall, Suffolk, entered the navy in September 1775 on the 'Renown', with Captain Francis Banks. He was actively engaged on the coast of North America during the opening years of the American War of Independence, but after the death of Banks, in January 1778 he returned to England. That July he went to join the 'Panther' at Gibraltar. In February 1780 he was taken by Sir George Rodney into the 'Sandwich', and was present in the actions of 17 April, and 15 and 19 May. On 4 July that year he was appointed by Rodney acting lieutenant of the 'Grafton', and, having returned to England in the autumn of 1781, passed his examination on 15 November and was confirmed lieutenant on 3 December. During the rest of the war he was on the Newfoundland station in the 'Leocadia', which was paid off at the peace; Plampin was placed on half pay. In 1786 he went to France to study French and in 1787 to the Netherlands to learn Dutch. 
During the armament of 1790 Plampin was second lieutenant of the 'Brunswick' with Sir Hyde Parker, at whose recommendation, based on his knowledge of the language and country, he was appointed in 1793 to a command in the squadron of gunboats equipping at Rotterdam for the defence of Willemstad, then besieged by the French under Dumouriez. When the siege was raised and the enemy retired from the country the gunboats were dismantled, and Plampin, after returning to England, joined the 'Princess Royal', on whose books he had been borne while with the Dutch gunboats. He received in 1793 from the states general a gold medal and chain. 
In the 'Princess Royal' Plampin went out to the Mediterranean, and on the occupation of Toulon was appointed interpreter to the governor, Rear-Admiral Samuel Granston Goodall, and afterwards to Lord Hood, the commander-in-chief. On the evacuation of Toulon, Hood promoted him commander, dated back to 30 August, and sent him home with dispatches. In February 1794 Plampin was appointed to the sloop 'Albion' for service in the Scheldt, and that summer was moved to the gun-vessel 'Firm', in command of a flotilla of gunboats in the Scheldt, until they were driven out by the ice. On 21 April 1795 he was posted to the frigate 'Ariadne' (26 guns), in the Mediterranean; at the beginning of July he was ordered to join the squadron under Nelson in the Gulf of Genoa. On the way he encountered the French fleet, and warned the admiral that the enemy were at sea. In September he was moved into the 'Lowestoft' (32 guns), which, on 7 February 1796, off Toulon, was struck by lightning and dismasted. After a partial refit she was sent home with convoy and paid off. 
In November 1798 Plampin again commissioned the 'Lowestoft', and went to the West Indies in charge of a large convoy. In July 1801 he was ordered to convoy the trade to England, but, going through the Windward passage, was wrecked on the night of 10 August. The next morning he ordered the convoy to proceed in charge of the 'Acasta', leaving the 'Bonetta' to assist in saving the crew of the 'Lowestoft' and two of the merchant ships lost at the same time. After three or four days' great exertion everyone was got safely on board the 'Bonetta', together with specie from the 'Lowestoft'. The merchants acknowledged the service by paying the freight for the treasure as if it had been carried to England. A court martial acquitted Plampin on the loss of the ship, and he returned to England in the 'Endymion'. 
On the renewal of the war in 1803 Plampin was appointed to the 'Antelope' (50 guns), from which, in the autumn of 1805, he was moved into the 'Powerful' (74 guns) and sailed under the orders of Sir John Thomas Duckworth, too late to take part in the battle of Trafalgar. Duckworth detached the 'Powerful' as a reinforcement to the East India squadron, and she had scarcely come on the station before, on 13 June 1806, she captured the French privateer 'Henriette' off Trincomalee. Learning from her that a very fast and successful cruiser, the 'Bellone' (34 guns), a serious threat to British trade, was also on the coast, Plampin disguised the 'Powerful' as an East Indiaman, and, with the sloop 'Rattlesnake', captured her also on 9 July. She had won such a reputation in the former war that the merchants at Lloyd's had offered a reward of $10,000 for her capture, but the offer had lapsed at the peace of Amiens and not been renewed. 
In the autumn the 'Powerful' was with Sir Edward Pellew on the coast of Java, and, after an independent cruise eastwards, returned to Trincomalee very sickly; Plampin himself was so ill that he was compelled to take sick leave. In 1809 he commanded the 'Courageux' (74 guns) in the Walcheren expedition, in 1810 the 'Gibraltar' (80 guns) as senior officer in Basque Roads, and from 1812 to 1814 the 'Ocean' (98 guns) off Toulon, under the orders of Pellew. On 4 June 1814 he was promoted rear-admiral, and in November 1816 he was appointed commander-in-chief on the Cape of Good Hope and St Helena station, where he relieved Sir Pulteney Malcolm. Some interesting reports of his conversations with Napoleon were given by Ralfe in 'The Naval Biography of Great Britain'. 
On his return to England in September 1820, Plampin applied directly (a method later forbidden) for the KCB for his services at St Helena, but was told by Lord Melville that, creditable as his conduct had been, the appointment as KCB could not be made except for services against the enemy. In March 1825 he was appointed commander-in-chief on the Irish station, a post he was specially allowed to retain for the customary term of three years, notwithstanding his promotion, on 27 May 1825, to the rank of vice-admiral. He died at Florence, Italy, on 14 February 1834 and was buried in Wanstead churchyard, Essex, in which county he had owned much land. He was married, but he and his wife had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 22351


Planche, James Robinson (1796-1880), playwright and herald, was born on 27 February 1796 at Old Burlington Street, Piccadilly, London, the son of Jacques Planche (1734-1816), a watchmaker, and his wife, Catherine Emily, 'nee' Planche (died 1804), who were first cousins and descendants of Huguenot refugees. Initially educated by his mother at home, where he spoke French, Planche attended the Revd Mr Farrer's boarding-school in Lawrence Street, Chelsea, from 1804 to 1808 and then studied geometry and perspective for two years under a landscape painter, M. De Court, a training of considerable benefit to him in later life. 
Articled to a bookseller in 1810, Planche wrote his first play, 'Amoroso, King of Little Britain', a 'Serio-Comick, Bombastick, Operatick Interlude' clearly inspired by Rhodes's 'Bombastes furioso' (1816) and intended for performance at a small private theatre where Planche often acted in amateur productions. It was seen in manuscript by the popular comedian John Pritt Harley, at whose instigation it was staged at Drury Lane on 21 April 1818, its favourable reception giving Planche an entree to the theatre's green-room, where he was encouraged by Harley, Stephen Kemble, and Robert William Elliston to take up playwriting as a career. Planche's earliest writing, however, was largely produced for London's minor theatres, and was generally unremarkable. The exception to this pattern was 'The Vampire, or, The Bride of the Isles', a 'Romantic Melodrama' skilfully adapted from a French original. It created an immediate stir at the Lyceum in August 1820, not least because of the production's use of the innovatory 'Vampire trap', and was promptly seized on by other theatre managers in the provinces and across the Atlantic. 
On 26 April 1821 Planche married Elizabeth St George (1796-1846) and after a honeymoon in Paris they set up house the following year in suburbia, at 20 Brompton Crescent (now Egerton Gardens), subsequently moving to Michael's Grove Lodge, Brompton. They had two daughters, Katherine Frances ('b'. 1823), and Matilda Anne, who, under her married name of Matilda Anne Mackarness (1825-1881), was to become a successful author of children's books. 
Soon after his marriage, Planche was briefly employed as stock author at the Adelphi before moving to a comparable post under Charles Kemble at Covent Garden, where he remained from 1822 to 1828, while occasionally providing pieces for the Lyceum, the Adelphi, and the Haymarket. During the summer seasons of 1826 and 1827 he also managed Vauxhall Gardens, arranging musical concerts and other such entertainments. These years at Covent Garden were characterized by two notable developments: first, Planche's collaboration in 1822 with Henry Bishop on his first full-scale opera, 'Maid Marian' (an adaptation of the novel by Thomas Love Peacock), and in 1826 with Weber on 'Oberon', for which he supplied the original English libretto; second, his persuasion of Kemble in 1823 to present 'King John' in historically accurate costumes designed by himself from 'indisputable authorities'. This latter achievement represented a triumphant departure from standard procedure at the time, initiated a succession of similarly mounted Shakespearian productions and historical plays or adaptations of his own ('Cortez', 1823; 'A Woman Never Vext', 1824; 'The Merchant's Wedding', 1828), and helped to bring about a revolution in nineteenth-century stage practice. Extending this principle to contemporary events, Planche attended the coronation of Charles X at Rheims in May 1825 to make drawings of the dresses and decorations for a 'pageant' of the ceremony, produced at Covent Garden on 11 July. 
The same 'antiquarian' approach was applied to the historical plays Planche wrote under contract to Stephen Price at Drury Lane between 1828 and 1830, works such as 'Charles XII' (1828), 'The Partisans, or, The War of Paris in 1649' (1829), 'The Brigand Chief' (1829), and 'Hofer, or, The Tell of the Tyrol' (1830). All of these productions were staged under his personal supervision with carefully researched period costume. After a short engagement as acting manager at the Adelphi, Planche devised (with Charles Dance) 'Olympic Revels, or, Prometheus and Pandora', a 'piece de circonstance' to inaugurate Eliza Vestris's management of the Olympic in January 1831. This proved an encounter of crucial importance, doing much to determine the subsequent fortunes of both parties. Their association was to last, with only short interruptions, for more than twenty years and spanned Mme Vestris's tenancy (later with her second husband, Charles James Mathews) of three London theatres, the Olympic, Covent Garden, and the Lyceum. It also quickened the pace of Planche's relentless creative activity, resulting in no fewer than thirty-six pieces in seven years for the Olympic, the Haymarket, the Adelphi, and the two patent houses, including two operatic librettos ('Gustavus III, or, The Masked Ball', 1833, and 'The Jewess', 1835), both adapted from Scribe, whose work he frequently remodelled to great effect. Planche was a founder member of the Garrick Club in 1831 and returned to Drury Lane twice as stock author, under Alfred Bunn for the 1835-6 season and again under Macready in 1842-3. 
However, it was for Vestris and Mathews, either on their own account or as members of Benjamin Webster's company at the Haymarket between 1843 and 1847, that Planche wrote much of his best work. He enjoyed success in the staple genres of farce ('My Great Aunt, or, Where there's a Will', 1831; 'The Printer's Devil', 1838; 'The Garrick Fever', 1839; 'Somebody Else', 1844; 'Spring Gardens', 1846), vaudeville ('The Loan of a Lover', 1834; 'The Two Figaros', 1836), comedy ('Grist to the Mill', 1844; 'A Lady in Difficulties', 1849; 'My Heart's Idol, or, A Desperate Remedy', 1850), and 'drama' ('The Captain of the Watch', 1841; 'The Jacobite', 1847; 'Not a Bad Judge', 1848; 'A Romantic Idea', 1849). He also, however, created a large number of highly novel extravaganzas, some, in the manner of 'Olympic Revels', parodying mythological themes or the forms of classical drama ('The Deep, Deep Sea, or, Perseus and Andromeda', 1833; 'The Golden Fleece, or, Jason in Colchis and Medea in Corinth', 1845; ''The Birds' of Aristophanes', 1846), others playfully reinterpreting familiar fairy tales ('Riquet with the Tuft', 1836; 'Beauty and the Beast', 1841; 'The Bee and the Orange Tree, or, The Four Wishes', 1845; 'The Island of Jewels', 1849). A further group, subtitled dramatic reviews, were aimed, Planche said, at offering 'a running commentary on recent metropolitan events', especially theatrical ('The Drama's Levee, or, A Peep at the Past', 1838; 'The Drama at Home, or, An Evening with Puff', 1844). 
So close did the partnership become that when the two actor-managers departed for an American tour Planche was left in sole command of the Olympic from October to December 1838. Moreover, when they placed him in overall charge of scenic decoration at Covent Garden between 1839 and 1842 and again at the Lyceum from 1847 to 1852, Planche played a significant part in the increasingly realistic mounting of plays favoured by the management, particularly in terms of costume and stage furnishing. His keen collaboration with the machinist Bradwell and later the scene painter and machinist William Beverley also yielded magical visual and technical effects in the performance of his extravaganzas, although he subsequently came to deplore the subordination of literary text to 'unmeaning spectacle', a trend ironically established by these very accomplishments. At the same time Planche was in demand as a consultant on historical dress to members of the royal family and the aristocracy for the 'bals costumes' held intermittently by the queen at Buckingham Palace. In 1847 he was co-opted onto a special committee for the purchase and preservation of Shakespeare's 'birthplace' at Stratford upon Avon. 
In 1852 Planche forsook the day-to-day routine of theatrical life to reside with a married daughter and her husband in rural Kent, while accepting regular commissions for plays from the Lyceum, the Haymarket, the Olympic, and the Strand. He returned to London two years later on his appointment as Rouge Croix pursuivant at the College of Arms, thereafter dividing his time between ceremonial duties, playwriting, translation, and scholarly pursuits. He accompanied Garter missions to Lisbon in 1858 to invest King Pedro V and again in 1865 to honour King Luis, and after his promotion to Somerset herald in 1866 he was a member of similar missions to Vienna in 1867 for the investiture of the emperor Franz Josef and to Rome in 1878 for that of Umberto I. His historical scholarship, appropriately recognized as early as 1829 by his election as fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and his influential role in the foundation in 1843 of the British Archaeological Association, of which he was later vice-president, came increasingly to preoccupy him in his later years. It found expression not only in published work but in his arrangement of the Meyrick collection of armour for exhibition in Manchester in 1857 and again at the South Kensington Museum in 1868, and in an invitation from the War Office in 1869 to reorganize the armoury at the Tower of London along chronological lines, a project which he had long canvassed. 
Planche also addressed himself to reorganization of the theatre itself. Greatly exercised earlier in his career by the protection of authors' (and librettists') copyright and having given evidence to a parliamentary select committee of 1832 which bore fruit the following year in legislation (3 William IV c. 15) relating to dramatic literary property, he now wrote a pamphlet entitled 'Suggestions for a National Theatre' (1879), outlining the aims and administrative policy of such an institution. He continued to write occasionally for the stage, producing his last work, the songs for Boucicault's 'spectacular opera', 'Babil and Bijou', at Covent Garden in 1872, and even appeared on stage in a benefit performance of Bulwer Lytton's 'Money' at the Haymarket in April 1879. 
Amid growing public renown Planche had been no stranger to private grief. His wife, who also became a dramatic author and had a number of plays produced at the Olympic and the Haymarket ('Literary Gazette', 3 Oct 1846, 859), died at the age of fifty, and his younger daughter was widowed in 1868, returning thereafter with her young family to live with her father. There followed a period of straitened circumstances for him, somewhat alleviated by the award in 1871 of a civil-list pension of $100 'in recognition of his literary services', and he remained busy with numerous enterprises until the last twelve months of his life. He died at his home in Chelsea, 10 St Leonard's Terrace, on 30 May 1880 and was buried at Brompton cemetery on 4 June. 
In all, Planche was the author of some 180 pieces for the theatre, running the entire gamut of dramaturgic taxonomy from burletta and masque to high drama and grand opera. Many were derived from French sources but most had been creatively re-imagined to appeal to English audiences and inventively recast to suit the individual talents of a whole succession of leading English performers. In this respect the most original were his numerous extravaganzas, mostly written for the delectation of holiday crowds at Easter and Christmas and redolent of wit, delicacy of touch, and a rare quality of enchantment; that they were collected together by two friends and republished on a subscription basis in a five-volume testimonial edition the year before his death is a measure of the affection in which they were held. His other publications included several books of verse, translations of German and French fairy tales, an account of travels, a critique of contemporary theatre ('Extravaganza and spectacle', in 'Temple Bar', 3, 1861), two volumes of memoirs ('Recollections and Reflections', 1872), and a whole range of studies of historical costume, armour, antiquities, and heraldry, most notably 'The Pursuivant of Arms, or, Heraldry Founded upon Facts' (1852), 'The Conqueror and his Companions' (2 vols., 1874), and 'A Cyclopaedia of Costume, or, Dictionary of Dress' (2 vols., 1876-9). He also annotated new editions of Joseph Strutt's 'A Complete View of the Dress and Habits of the People of England' (1842) and 'The Regal and Ecclesiastical Antiquities of England' (1842), and prepared a revised version of Hugh Clark's 'An Introduction to Heraldry' (1866). 
Planche's reputation as a playwright, already in decline before his death, was completely submerged in the twentieth century. Apart from periodic adaptations of a handful of his extravaganzas as Christmas entertainments at the Players' Theatre in London, there has been no resurgence of interest in his oeuvre and certainly no full-scale professional revival. But his record of achievement in the course of a long and varied working life on the London stage, his decisive contribution to the evolution of scenic presentation, and his influence on the changing form of English pantomime, not to mention the impetus he gave to burlesque (most conspicuously in the work of W. S. Gilbert), assures him a permanent place in the history of theatre practice, regardless of the fate of his plays. 


@@@@@


doc= 22352


Plant, Thomas Livesley (1819-1883), commission agent and meteorologist, was born at Low Moor, near Bradford, and baptized on 26 February 1820 at Wibsey, Yorkshire, the son of George Halewood Plant, iron merchant, and his wife, Ann Livesley. After schooling at St Cuthbert's College, Ushaw, near Durham, he moved in 1844 to Birmingham, where he married, on 21 June 1845, Jane Horne, the daughter of William Wallis Horne, a builder. In 1849 Plant set up an advertising system for W. H. Smith & Son, which, as commission agent, he supervised until 1881, and he acted as agent for various other firms. One of his two sons followed him in this business. 
Before arriving in Birmingham, Plant had developed an interest in meteorology, and from about 1837 he kept systematic records. As well as publishing 'Meteorology: its Study Important for our Good' (1862), he read two papers at meetings of the British Association and lectured on the subject in various towns. Plant was a prolific correspondent to the local press on meteorological subjects, and contributed meteorological information to 'The Times'. He also campaigned to provide Birmingham with a pure water supply, and worked to establish the post of medical officer of health for the growing town. 
When he retired Plant and his wife moved to Devon Cottage, Alcester Road, King's Heath, near Birmingham, Worcestershire, where a niece cared for the elderly couple. It was from that station, on 31 August 1883, that he boarded the train for his usual journey into Birmingham, only to suffer a heart attack from which he had died by the time the train reached New Street Station, Birmingham. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 22353


Planta, Joseph (1744-1827), librarian, was born on 21 February 1744 at Castasegna in the Grisons (Graubunden), Switzerland, where his father, the Revd Andrew Planta (1717-1773), was the pastor of the Reformed church. The Plantas were a noble family of the Grisons with a recorded history dating back to the twelfth century; Joseph's family were of the Suss (Zuoz) branch. 
After a period as professor of mathematics at Erlangen, Bavaria, Andrew Planta moved to England in 1752 with his wife and family, where he became minister of the German Reformed church in London. In 1758 he was appointed one of the assistant librarians of the recently founded British Museum, working in the department of natural and artificial productions until 1765, and then transferring to the department of printed books where he served until his death. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1770. He was buried at St George's, Bloomsbury, on 3 March 1773, where his daughter, Frederica Planta, English teacher to the young princes and princesses, was buried in February 1778. 
Joseph Planta was first educated by his father and then studied at the universities of Utrecht and 'for a short time' Gottingen in the 1760s before travelling in France and Italy. After being employed as a secretary to the British minister at Brussels, he returned to England when his father died to care for his mother and family. He succeeded his father as assistant librarian of the department of printed books in the British Museum from 1773, and in 1776 was promoted to under-librarian to take charge of the department of manuscripts. He was elected FRS in February 1774, and in June was appointed to conduct the foreign correspondence of the society. In 1776 he became one of its secretaries. 
In June 1778 Planta married Elizabeth Atwood (1744/5-1821) of the parish of St George's, Hanover Square, Westminster. A daughter, Sophia, was born in April 1779, and a son, Joseph Planta (1787-1847), who became a diplomatist, in July 1787. In addition to his duties in the British Museum, Planta was paymaster of exchequer bills for about twenty years from the early 1790s. The salary of the latter post was $283 p.a. as compared with the $100 p.a. paid to the under-librarian of manuscripts for a two-day week. 
Much of the time of the under-librarians and assistant librarians of the museum in the eighteenth century was taken up with escorting visitors round the collections. Planta also compiled a catalogue of the Cotton manuscripts (published in 1802) which, despite having many faults, was still in use at the end of the twentieth century. He arranged for repair work on some of the Cotton manuscripts which had been damaged in the fire of 1731. There was almost no money for purchases and so the manuscripts acquired while Planta was under-librarian were mainly received as gifts or bequests. 
In fact in the late eighteenth century, during the principal librarianship of the idle Charles Morton, the British Museum was very torpid. There was a great change when Planta became principal librarian in March 1799 after the death of Morton. His twenty-eight years in charge of the museum saw numerous developments, for many of which he was largely responsible. He was in favour of making the exhibition galleries much more accessible to the general public, and he enlarged the capacity of the reading rooms to accommodate the increased number of users. 
The stock of the museum grew considerably with the acquisition of such important collections as the Cracherode books, the Egyptian antiquities captured from the French (including the Rosetta stone), the Towneley sculptures, the Lansdowne manuscripts, the Greville minerals, the Von Moll books and natural history specimens, the Elgin marbles, the Burney books and manuscripts, the library of Sir Joseph Banks, and the Payne Knight antiquities. Planta's report of 1812 on the need to increase the holdings of printed works relating to Britain and its overseas possessions led to the government making special grants to fill the gaps to which he had drawn attention. 
To house the growing stock of the museum, Planta had to find more space. The Towneley gallery for antiquities was built in 1805-6, and galleries were constructed in some of the rooms of Montagu House (in which the museum was accommodated) in 1815-16 to hold books. Planta also recommended in 1816 that buildings should be constructed north of Montagu House to form a quadrangle. This extension became essential when George IV presented his father's library in 1823, but by this time Planta was too old to take much part in the planning of the new museum designed by Robert Smirke. 
Planta was involved in the introduction of increased salaries in 1801, in the first recruitment of attendants in 1802 to relieve the senior staff of the task of escorting visitors round the galleries, and in the change to the staff's conditions of work made in 1807. He pressed for the creation of the department of antiquities which was established in 1807, and he supported the improved arrangements for the natural history collections which were introduced at that time. He encouraged the production of catalogues of the Harley, Lansdowne, and Hargrave collections of manuscripts, and the new edition of the catalogue of printed books which was published between 1813 and 1819. The first edition of a 'Synopsis of the Contents of the British Museum' appeared in 1808, illustrated works on antiquities began to be published in 1810, and the publication of a facsimile of the 'Codex Alexandrinus' commenced in 1816. 
Planta's publications reflected his interest in his native country. The tongue spoken by some of the inhabitants of the Grisons was the subject of his 'An Account of the Romansh Language' (1776), which was originally printed in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (66, 1776, 129-59). His 'History of the Helvetic Confederacy' (1800) was inspired by the Napoleonic invasion of Switzerland. After the defeat of Napoleon he wrote a short sequel -- 'A View of the Restoration of the Helvetic Confederacy' (1821). 
Planta was an urbane man who administered the museum with great ability. His good knowledge of German, French, and Italian enabled him to converse easily with foreign visitors. Having begun life as a member of the Swiss Reformed church, he became a devoted adherent of the Church of England, and a regular attender at St George's, Bloomsbury, where he was buried on 9 December 1827, having died at the museum on 3 December. A memorial tablet to him was erected in St George's. 


@@@@@


doc= 22354


Planta, Joseph (1787-1847), diplomatist and politician, was born on 2 July 1787 at the British Museum, where his father, Joseph Planta (1744-1827), was librarian. His mother was Elizabeth Atwood (1744/5-1821). He was educated by his father, and at Eton College, and in 1802, when only fifteen, was appointed a supernumerary clerk in the Foreign Office, by Lord Hawkesbury; he was a clerk from 1803 to 1817. In 1807 George Canning added to his duties the post of precis writer. Planta was a close friend of Stratford Canning, and made a tour of the English Lakes with him in 1813. He was principal assistant to Lord Castlereagh in the same year, during the mission to the allied sovereigns, which ended with the treaty of Paris in 1814. He attended Castlereagh at the congress of Vienna in 1815, and brought to London the treaty of peace signed at Paris in November 1815. He was also with Castlereagh at the congress of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818. He was an indefatigable secretary and served Castlereagh well in several very stressful periods of negotiation. 
In July 1817 Planta became an undersecretary at the Foreign Office (an unprecedented promotion, but one generally welcomed): he served until April 1827. From May 1827 until November 1830 he was one of the joint secretaries of the Treasury, and in 1834 he was sworn of the privy council. He was elected MP for Hastings as a tory in 1827, held the seat until he was defeated in 1835, regained it in 1837, and held it until he retired in 1844 through ill health. He died in London on 5 April 1847. By his will Planta left his entire property to his wife, and recommended the destruction of his papers (a request apparently honoured). He lived in London for many years, at 10 Chandos Street, Cavendish Square, and about 1832 resided at Fairlight House, near Hastings in Sussex. Lord Stratford described Planta as 'an amiable, kind-hearted friend, and an excellent man of business'. He was 'an efficient civil servant of good manners, very popular with both foreigners and his own countrymen, but with no desire to initiate or influence policy' (Webster, 1.45). 


@@@@@


doc= 22355


Plantagenet, Arthur, Viscount Lisle (b. before 1472, d. 1542), soldier, diplomat, and administrator, was the illegitimate son of Edward IV (1442-1483). 
The identity of Arthur's mother and his date of birth have given rise to much speculation. The editor of his correspondence, Muriel St Clare Byrne, agrees with most authorities in identifying his mother as Elizabeth Lucy, an obscure lady who was probably the daughter of Thomas Waite of Hampshire. Stories that Arthur's mother was Elizabeth (Jane) Shore or Lady Eleanor Butler can be discounted. Byrne suggests a date of birth between 1462 and 1464, but this seems unlikely for two reasons. First, it presupposes that Edward IV did not beget, or at any rate acknowledge, any illegitimate children after his marriage to Elizabeth Woodville in 1465. Second, a fifty-year-old uncle seems an unlikely jousting companion for the young Henry VIII in the early 1510s. The first possible reference to Arthur occurs in 1472 when 'my Lord the Bastard' is mentioned in the accounts of the royal household. This scrap suggests that Arthur may have been brought up in the royal nursery alongside Edward IV's legitimate children, who were born between 1466 and 1480. 
Although Byrne contends that Arthur probably spent much of his childhood with his mother's family in Hampshire, it is likely that this proximity to the royal family continued into Henry VII's reign. His early life is obscured, however, by the lack of contemporary references to him. In 1501 he was probably 'the Bastard of King Edward's' whom Henry VII recommended to his mother. By the following year, if not before, he had entered the household of his half-sister, Queen Elizabeth of York, and was listed among her household servants at her funeral in 1503. As such he was probably known to the young Prince Henry, the future Henry VIII, who was brought up in the royal nursery at Eltham Palace under the guidance of the queen's household staff. After the queen's death he was transferred to the king's household, serving as an esquire for the body. In April 1509 he made the transition to Henry VIII's household. 
It is evident that in the first years of Henry VIII's reign Arthur Plantagenet was a close companion of the young king. In May and June 1510, along with such intimates of the king as Charles Brandon, Edmund Howard, and Thomas Knyvet, he took part in feats of arms at court. He took part in the campaigns of 1513, initially at sea, when he nearly lost his life in the shipwreck of the 'Nicholas of Hampton' in February, and later in the king's invasion of France during the summer; he was dubbed a knight outside Tournai on 14 October 1513 (although he had been styled 'miles' a year earlier). 
After the French campaign, if not before, Arthur's attendance at court became more intermittent as he served the king in a variety of local and national offices. He served on the commission for the peace for Hampshire and Sussex between 1512 and 1532 and was pricked as sheriff for Hampshire in November 1513. He attended on the king at the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520, probably as a member of the privy chamber (he was a gentleman of the privy chamber from 1526, a position he retained until 1533). In 1522 he was with Henry when he met the emperor Charles V at Canterbury, and in April 1523 he was elected a knight of the Garter. He served as a subsidy commissioner for Hampshire in 1523-4. In 1525 he was named vice-admiral of England, serving as deputy to Henry VIII's own illegitimate son, the duke of Richmond, and in the same year was made constable of Portchester Castle. In October 1527 he was among the embassy that went to present the Garter to Francois I; the same year Sir John Daunce described him as one of the king's councillors. In October 1532 he accompanied the king to Calais to meet with Francois I. This 'cursus honorum' suggests that Viscount Lisle, as he became in 1523, was a competent and trusted soldier, diplomat, and administrator, certainly not the ineffectual bungler as which he has sometimes been represented. 
It was against this background of a distinguished career in royal service that on 21 March 1533 Lisle was appointed deputy of Calais, following the death of John Bourchier, second Lord Berners. He had arrived in Calais by June. R. B. Merriman describes him as completely lacking the qualities necessary for the government of England's continental outpost, but this seems unfair. Lisle had close links with Thomas Cromwell by 1533 but his appointment to office in Calais was due to the king's personal knowledge of and confidence in his abilities. Lisle was considered to be a suitable 'locum tenens' of the king in Calais by both Henry and Cromwell and as such cultivated good working relationships with neighbouring French and imperial commanders, such as Anthoine Brusset, captain of Gravelines, and Oudart du Bies, steward of Boulogne. 
Lisle's time at Calais was, however, beset by difficulties. The defence and good government of the town and marches had been neglected under Henry VIII, a situation that had worsened after Wolsey's fall in 1529 and was not remedied until the reforms of the 'Calais Act' of 1536 were implemented under Lord Maltravers, deputy from 1540. Nevertheless Lisle continued to fulfil the military duties of the deputy's office to the best of his ability, organizing the spy network that operated throughout Picardy, Artois, and the Low Countries (for which he received $100 yearly as 'spyall money'), and overseeing the implementation of proposals for the modernization of the Calais defences, which had first been mooted by the king in 1532. Although Lisle's letters to Cromwell on the latter issue do not necessarily imply any great personal interest or ability where the art of fortification was concerned -- he was probably passing on information received from William Lelegrave, the surveyor of the works at Calais -- they do illustrate his diligence in attending to his responsibilities. Lisle's administration was also hampered by bad relations with several of the leading townsmen and members of the garrison, notably Sir Robert Wingfield, a former deputy, and Sir Richard Whetehill. 
Religion, too, was a major difficulty for Lisle's government of Calais. He and his wife were religious conservatives, and as such were hostile to the efforts made by Cromwell and Archbishop Cranmer (of whose diocese Calais formed part) to introduce reforming preachers and ministers to the Calais pale. The enclave had already felt the influence of evangelical reform from both France and the Low Countries in the form of printed books bought by members of the merchant community; in 1528, for instance, the chaplain of the staple was investigated by the then deputy, Lord Berners, for keeping suspicious books. In Lent 1534 these tensions were heightened when the evangelical John Butler was appointed as the archbishop's commissary, and in that year and in those that followed Lisle was to clash several times with Cranmer and Cromwell over the appointment of preachers. Religious discord erupted most violently in 1538 when Adam Damplip, an evangelical preacher whom Lisle had licensed, clashed publicly with John Dove, prior of the Calais Carmelites and one of Lisle's agents in London. The affair was referred back to England, and ended in Cromwell administering a severe rebuke to Lisle, greatly to Cranmer's satisfaction. 
It was, however, the question of patronage, rather than religion, that dominated Lisle's time as deputy and ultimately led to his downfall. Deputies of Calais were supposed to have the nomination of soldiers in the garrison and expected to wield influence over matters of patronage in the pale. In reality, from Henry VII's reign onwards, the influence of the deputy in patronage matters had decreased as the influence of the court grew. Battles of patronage were a commonplace during Lisle's time as deputy: for example, between 1533 and 1536 when, with Cromwell's help, he prevented Sir Richard Whetehill from obtaining a place in the garrison for his son. From 1538 differences over patronage soured the relationship between Lisle and Cromwell. The latter's clients in Calais persistently undermined the deputy and council of Calais in matters of patronage and religion. Moreover, Lisle's indebtedness and Cromwell's refusal to intercede on his behalf for a licence to return to England worsened the rift between the two men. By 1538 Lisle was in frequent communication with Cromwell's aristocratic enemies at court, including Sir Anthony Browne, Sir Thomas Cheyney, and, most importantly, the duke of Norfolk. 
Byrne believed that Lisle was 'not a political figure' (Byrne, 1.137). It seems likely, however, that by 1540 he was a key member of the aristocratic group ranged against Cromwell. Lisle shared a common aristocratic and martial heritage with Cromwell's enemies and probably resented Cromwell's dominance of policy and patronage in Calais, just as Norfolk and his allies resented Cromwell's dominance of the king's counsels at Westminster. That Lisle was a key figure in the opposition to Cromwell is shown by his arrest on 19 May 1540, accused of having treasonable communications, through his chaplain Gregory Botolph, with Cardinal Reginald Pole. That Lisle's arrest was part of a move against his enemies by Cromwell is shown by the fact that Richard Sampson, the conservative bishop of Chichester, and Dr Nicholas Wilson, a staunch ally of Bishop Gardiner, had followed Lisle to the Tower by the end of the month. On 10 June Cromwell himself was arrested, his treasonable dealings with heretics in Calais forming the main charge against him, and was executed on 28 July. Lisle, however, was clearly innocent of the charges brought against him. His arrest was part of a struggle for power and influence at the Henrician court, and did not form part of Henry VIII's attack on the remaining members of the house of York. Lisle remained a prisoner in the Tower until 1542 when Henry restored him to favour. In January the Garter was returned to him but when news of his release was brought to him by Thomas Wriothesley on 3 March, according to John Foxe, the excitement caused him to die of a heart attack. 
Lord Lisle's heraldic achievements on his elevation to the Order of the Garter testify to his status and lineage. His badges were the falcon and fetterlock, on his coat he bore the leopards of England and the lilies of France, and on his standard was the lion of March. In his arms he quartered the arms of Mortimer and de Burgh and included a baton sinister, showing that although he had an unbroken male descent from Edward III he had no claim to the throne. These arms, clearly approved by Henry VIII, and Lisle's career show that he was an example of the rewards and favour open to loyal servants of the Tudor dynasty. Lisle's career also shows that the Tudors' reconciliation with the Yorkist polity did not stop at the dynastic marriage Henry VII entered into in January 1486. 
Lisle married twice. His first wife was Elizabeth (1482x4-1525/6), daughter of Edward Grey, first Viscount Lisle, and later Baroness Lisle in her own right, and widow of Edmund Dudley. The marriage, which took place about 13 November 1511, was clearly arranged by the king and was marked by the grant to Arthur Plantagenet of forfeited Dudley lands in Lancashire, Sussex, and Dorset. They had three daughters: Frances, born 'c'.1512-20; Elizabeth, born 'c'.1520-22; and Bridget, whose birth in 1525 or 1526 probably caused the death of her mother. In 1519 Elizabeth Grey became the sole heir of the barony of Lisle, following the death of her niece Elizabeth, the fifth holder of the title, and on 12 May she and Arthur were granted the Lisle lands in Berkshire, Cornwall, Devon, Gloucestershire, Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, Somerset, Staffordshire, Warwickshire, Wiltshire, and Worcestershire. It was in his wife's right that on 25 April 1523 Arthur Plantagenet was created Viscount Lisle. 


When her husband became deputy of Calais, Lady Lisle accompanied him to the town and played an important part in the social and diplomatic engagements that were the responsibility of the deputy's wife. For Merriman, Lisle's actions were 'too much influenced by the whims of a foolish wife' (Merriman, 1.164), and Foxe denounces her as the 'utter enemy to God's honour, and in idolatry, hypocrisy, and pride, incomparably evil' ('Acts and Monuments', 5.505). In reality, although undeniably conservative in her religious views, Honor played the role of a loyal and supportive wife to her capable husband, to whom her letters show that she was devoted. She was active in maintaining Lisle's links with the court, but her priorities, in common with those of most other aristocratic women of the time, appear to have been the running of her household and provision for the education and marriage of her children. She survived her husband's death, though it left her 'distraught of mind' (ibid.), and died at Trehidy, Cornwall, in 1566. 


@@@@@


doc= 22356


Edward, second duke of York (c.1373-1415), magnate, the eldest son of Edmund (1341-1402), the fifth son of Edward III, and Isabella of Castile (died 1393), second daughter of Pedro the Cruel ('r'. 1350-69) and his mistress Maria de Padilla, was probably born, like his father, at Langley, Hertfordshire. The Monk of Evesham styles him Edward of Langley. The appellation Edward of Norwich ('de norwik') is probably a misreading of 'd'everwick' (of York), the appellation regularly used during his father's lifetime. His father's inquisition post mortem suggests that Edward was born 'c'.1375, but as this would make him only two years old when he was knighted at the coronation of his cousin, Richard II, in 1377, most authorities have preferred to date his birth to 1373, the year after his parents' marriage. 
Edward's closeness to the king was apparent by 1390. Numerous royal grants were made at his instance, and on 25 February he was made earl of Rutland. In 1392 he was a member of the royal council. He accompanied Richard on the Irish campaign of 1394-5, and led a number of successful forays. During the campaign he is called earl of Cork, a title he had probably been granted before the army left England and which he continued to use for the rest of his life. In the next few years Rutland emerged as the leading member of the circle of intimates that the king was creating around himself. He was involved in the king's diplomacy in France and the empire. After the death of Queen Anne in 1394 he was one of the three feoffees of her estates (the others being the archbishop of York and the bishop of Salisbury) -- a role which allowed him control of a significant amount of patronage. His other gains from royal favour were extensive, including the office of admiral of England, the reversion of the constableship of the Tower of London (which he finally received in October 1397), and the offices of constable of Dover and warden of the Cinque Ports (11 September 1396). His wealth and his status as the king's intended brother-in-law (see below) were reflected in his plans to build a new house outside Temple Bar in 1397, although apparently nothing came of the scheme. 
In 1397 Rutland played a leading role in the arrest and trial of the duke of Gloucester and the earls of Warwick and Arundel. In Henry IV's first parliament he was also to be accused of urging Gloucester's subsequent murder, a claim that evidently commanded contemporary belief, although he vehemently denied it. He was given a major share of the forfeitures that followed, including Arundel's lordship of Clun, Shropshire, and Gloucester's lordship of Burstwick in Holderness, Yorkshire. In September 1397 he was made duke of Aumale and succeeded Gloucester as constable of England. As constable he presided over Richard's extension of the jurisdiction of the court of chivalry to include treason and other offences touching the king's dignity. On 10 February 1398, as part of Richard's policy of extending his power in the north of England, Aumale was appointed warden of the west march towards Scotland. 
Jean Creton considered that there was no man alive whom Richard loved better. For him (and French opinion in general) Aumale was the Judas who deliberately betrayed his king in 1399. Edward may well have been made uneasy by the exile of his cousin Henry Bolingbroke in 1398, and by the seizure of the Lancastrian inheritance following the death of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. He later claimed that he had not drawn any of the revenues from the great block of duchy of Lancaster lands which had been put in his custody. But there is no evidence that he was conspiring with Bolingbroke, or that there was a treacherous motive behind his advice, when news of Bolingbroke's invasion reached Richard II during his expedition to Ireland of 1399, that John Montagu, earl of Salisbury, be sent immediately to north Wales, while Richard gathered the rest of his forces. Indeed, the advice was arguably sound, since Montagu was able to raise 4000 men, although he was then unable to hold them together long enough for the king to join him. Richard landed in south Wales, and there, inexplicably, left Aumale and most of his men and pressed northwards. Aumale's subsequent movements are unknown, although he was reputedly attacked as he made his way through Wales. He is next reported, by Creton, in the delegation sent by Bolingbroke to Richard at Flint, wearing Henry's livery. During the meeting Aumale 'said nothing to the king, but kept at as great a distance as he could from him' (Webb, 158). 
The first parliament of Henry IV saw a spectacular expression of animosity against Richard's former allies, particularly against Aumale, who, according to Thomas Walsingham, came close to being lynched. Henry resisted demands for the death penalty and restricted their punishment to the resumption of the titles and rewards granted to them since 1397. The process of confiscation had in fact already begun: Aumale had lost the constableship by the time Creton saw him at Flint; he had surrendered the constableship of the Tower of London on 31 August, and Burstwick had been granted to the earl of Northumberland on 12 September. 
These losses were substantial, but Rutland (as he now became again), with several of Richard's other allies, did receive marks of favour from Henry after parliament rose. In Rutland's case these included confirmation of his custody of the Channel Islands and of his possession of the Isle of Wight, and the strategic significance of these grants suggests that Henry was confident of his cousin's loyalty. That confidence was probably not misplaced. By the end of the year a group of Richard's former favourites were planning to seize and murder the king and his sons under colour of a tournament to be held at Windsor on twelfth night. According to the 'Chronicque de la traison et mort de Richart Deux, roy Dengleterre', Rutland was among the conspirators, but betrayed it to the king, and this version has been generally accepted, although the author of the 'Eulogium historiarum sive temporis' (ed. F. S. Haydon, Rolls Series, 9, 1858) describes the rising and its betrayal with no reference to the earl at all. The 'Traison' leaves open whether Rutland's betrayal was deliberate, but the evident confidence subsequently placed in his cousin by Henry seems incompatible with any genuine commitment to the conspiracy. Certainly Rutland collaborated in the process of repressing the rebellion, and was rewarded with the restoration of the lordship of Oakham, Rutland, in tail male. 
In October 1400 Henry IV made Rutland keeper of north Wales with the supervision of all the castles there during pleasure, a significant mark of confidence in him given the unrest in the region. On 5 July in the following year the earl was made Henry's lieutenant in Aquitaine in response to a petition from the archbishop of Bordeaux, who described the earl as the man closest to the king after the king's sons. He remained based in Bordeaux throughout the following year, but had yielded the office by May 1403. He had by then succeeded to the duchy of York, following the death of his father on 1 August 1402. 
On his return to England Edward became involved in the Welsh campaign of autumn 1403 and on 15 October was appointed lieutenant of south Wales. Initially the appointment was for one year, but on 12 November York indented to serve for three years from 29 November. The appointment was not a happy one for the duke. The king's inability to meet the cost of the war left York in desperate financial straits. He was still owed substantial sums for his service in Guyenne, although $8000 of the debt had been cancelled in return for the grant, in May 1403, of the wardship and marriage of his nephew Richard Despenser. By June 1404 he had already sold or pledged his plate and faced the prospect of mortgaging his land to pay his troops. 
In this situation York's loyalty may have wavered. In February 1405 his sister Constance, Lady Despenser, accused him of involvement in a plot against the crown. After an initial denial York conceded that he had known of the conspiracy and was imprisoned at Pevensey. After seventeen weeks he petitioned for release on the grounds of his 'trouble and heaviness' but it was not until October that there were signs of his return to favour. His land was restored on 8 December, and its issues nine days later. By November 1406 he was sufficiently trusted to be made constable of the Tower -- an office he had not held since Richard II's deposition. He also remained active in Wales. In December 1407 the prince of Wales went out of his way to praise the duke's efforts to parliament. York, he said 'had served and laboured in such a way as to support and embolden all the other members of the company, as if he had been the poorest gentleman in the realm wishing to serve him in order to win honour and renown. ('RotP', 3.611-12)' In spite of his military links with the prince, York apparently sided with Henry IV in the dispute over foreign policy that opened up between father and son late in the reign. In 1412 he accompanied Henry IV's second son, Thomas, on the campaign to aid the Armagnacs against the Burgundians. He may have returned to England briefly after the death of Henry IV on 20 March 1413, but in June 1413 he was preparing to go to the defence of Aquitaine. In August he was in Paris, discussing the possibility of a marriage between Henry V and Catherine of Valois. He returned to England late in October, but remained involved in the English end of the diplomacy which filled the months before Henry's invasion of France in 1415. 
The army's departure, early in August, was overshadowed by the discovery of a conspiracy headed by Edward's brother Richard, earl of Cambridge, but there is no suggestion that York himself was involved. The duke was present at the siege of Harfleur, where he made his will on 17 August, describing himself as 'of all sinners the most wretched and guilty' ('Register of Henry Chichele', 2.64). He commanded the van on the march through northern France, and was killed on 25 October at Agincourt, where he commanded the right wing of the English army. Accounts of his death differ, one tradition ascribing it to a head wound, another (later followed by John Leland) blaming it on 'much heat and pressing'. His bones were brought back to England and interred, as he had wished, under the step to the choir in the church of Fotheringhay, Northamptonshire, where he had established a college of priests. The present monument was erected on the orders of Queen Elizabeth, after the choir had fallen derelict. 
For most later writers Edward's career is tainted by suggestions of treachery, and the numerous occasions in the reign of Henry IV when his loyalty was publicly stressed suggest that contemporaries, too, felt that he had a reputation to live down. But he was evidently a man of considerable ability. Richard II reputedly considered resigning the crown to him, as 'the most able, wise and powerful man that he could think of' (Given-Wilson, 211), and the chronicler of Godstowe regarded him as a 'second Solomon' (Hearne, 242). He carried heavy responsibilities under three kings, apparently with success. On two occasions he took on major office when the previous holder had felt unable to continue, replacing Somerset in south Wales in 1403 and Bedford as warden of the east march in September 1414. He also gave serious attention to his office of master of the king's game. He was an authority on hunting, and particularly, it seems, on hunting-dogs. His 'Master of Game', dedicated to the prince of Wales, translated the 'Livre du chasse' of Gaston Phebus, count of Foix, with the addition of several extra chapters of his own. 
Edward did not marry until late in Richard's reign. He had been betrothed to Beatriz of Portugal on 29 August 1381, as part of an Anglo-Portuguese alliance against Castile; but in the following year Portugal and Castile came to terms, and Beatriz was betrothed instead to a son of Juan I of Castile. As Edward rose in Richard's favour, the king seems to have taken over the job of finding him a suitable bride. During the first Irish campaign Richard suggested a marriage between Rutland and a sister-in-law of Giangaleazzo Visconti of Milan ('r'. 1378-1402). At the same time he was exploring the possibility of marrying him to one of the three kinswomen of Charles VI of France who had been proposed as suitable wives for Richard himself. The most serious proposal, however, was that Rutland should marry Jeanne, the younger sister of Isabelle de Valois, for whose hand Richard was negotiating from July 1395, in spite of Jeanne's earlier betrothal to Pierre de Montfort. On the strength of the proposed match Edward was referred to in English sources as the king's brother -- a title used as late as April 1399, although by then the plan had fallen through and Edward had married (by October 1398) Philippa Mohun, the third (not, as is usually claimed, the second) daughter of John Mohun of Dunster (died 1375) and Joan Burghersh (died 1404). It was a surprising marriage for someone who must have been the most eligible aristocratic bachelor of his day. Philippa would bring him none of the Mohun land, her mother having sold the reversion to Elizabeth Lutterell. Philippa's date of birth is unknown, but she is likely to have been some twenty years older than Edward. She had had children by neither of her previous husbands (Walter Fitzwalter and John Golafre), and although York apparently had hopes of an heir in 1401, this marriage too was childless and York's heir was his nephew, Richard. Philippa outlived York, apparently spending her widowhood in Carisbrooke Castle. She died on 17 July 1431, and was buried in the chapel of St Nicholas in Westminster Abbey, where her monument survives. 
According to William Worcester, Edward also had a mistress, who subsequently married the Charlton killed at Verneuil in 1424. This seems to have been Walter Charlton of Wiltshire. His first wife, Elizabeth, had died in 1414, and by his death he had remarried. His new wife's name was Joan; she outlived him and is presumably the woman Worcester had in mind; but she cannot be identified further. 


@@@@@


doc= 22357


Plat, Sir Hugh (bap. 1552, d. 1608), writer on agriculture and inventor, was baptized on 3 May 1552 at St James Garlickhythe, London, third son of the three sons and a daughter of Richard Plat (died 1600), to whom a grant of arms had been made, and his wife, Alice, daughter of John Birtles of Birtles, Cheshire. Richard Plat was a brewer in London and owned property in St Pancras, a substantial part of which he bequeathed for the foundation and endowment of a free school and almshouses at Aldenham, Hertfordshire, his family seat. Hugh Plat matriculated as a pensioner of St John's College, Cambridge, on 12 November 1568 and on graduating BA in the academic year 1571-2 was admitted to Lincoln's Inn, where he later became steward and master of the revels. 
Amply provided for by his father, Plat's youthful pursuit of literature led him to publish light moralistic and poetical works: the first, 'The Floures of Philosophie' (1572), dedicated to Anne Dudley, countess of Warwick, comprised sentences from Seneca and miscellaneous poems; the second, 'Manuale sententias aliquot divinas et morales complectens' (1584 and 1594), extracts from Petrarch. Soon, however, he developed an interest in natural science in its broadest sense, embracing mechanical inventions, physic and alchemy, chemistry and metallurgy, cultivation in garden, orchard, and field, and domestic economy. 
Plat lived from 1594 at Bishop's Hall, Bethnal Green, east of London, subsequently moving to the neighbouring Kirby Castle. In London he had rooms at Lincoln's Inn and kept a garden in St Martin's Lane. He was also a frequent visitor to Sir Thomas Heneage's estate at Copt Hall, Essex, and had an estate near St Albans, so that his horticultural experiments were made on a variety of soils and aspects. Most of his later life was devoted to agriculture, and his investigations into the effects of various manures, especially salt and marl, yielded valuable results. Plat corresponded with all lovers of agriculture and gardening throughout England, naming his informants when repeating their hints and findings. He read widely, again duly attributing his gleanings from other men's literature, one of his favourite sources being the Neapolitan Giovan-Battista Della Porta, especially the 'Magiae naturalis' of 1558. His mechanical inventions were first exhibited in 1592 to some privy councillors and the chief citizens of London, and set out on a broadsheet the following year as 'A Brief Apologie of Certen New Inventions Completed by H. Plat'. 
Thereafter Plat published a dozen titles, some of the text being repetitive or nearly so, which went through several editions with material subtracted or added. Written in English, his advice was aimed at the intelligent layman and woman, freely disclosed for the common good. His most significant book, though not the most popular, was 'The jewell house of arte and nature, conteining divers rare and profitable inventions, together with sundry new experiments in the art of husbandry, distillation, and moulding, faithfully and familiarly set downe, according to the authors owne experience' (1594). The first part lists 103 experiments, ranging from the practical to the fantastic. These include recipes for preserving fruit, flowers, meat, and water, and for a tooth-cleaner; a cheap way to erect a small bridge without the need to place supports in the water; a chafing dish to keep food warm without coals; how to keep garments free from moths; how to dispose of wasps and rats; a cement for mending glasses; and how to know what cards your opponent is holding. The second part deals with soils and manures, the third with distillations, the fourth with moulding and casting metals, and the fifth, entitled 'An offer of certain new inventions which the author proposes to disclose upon reasonable considerations', covers a diversity of topics such as the brewing of beer without hops, the preservation of food in hot weather and at sea, mnemonics, and fishing. In consideration of his services as an inventor, Plat was knighted by James I at Greenwich on 22 May 1605. 
Plat's 'Delights for Ladies' (1602) enjoyed the longest run -- its last reprint was in 1948. It is a guide to the housewifely arts of preserving fruits, distilling, and the blending of perfumes, hair dyes, and other aids to beauty, many of these useful recipes having been given in his earlier works. His chief work on gardening, 'Floraes Paradise Beautified' (1608), with recipes and conceits for gardens and orchards, covers every necessary activity, from the preparation of the soil, through all the techniques of cultivation, month by month. In addition, Plat included 'A remedy in violent feavers and intermittent agues', and an appendix of 'new, rare and profitable inventions' in which he describes again the manufacture of his fuel brickettes, and goes on to detail his experiments in making wine from grapes grown at Bethnal Green. He relates that this wine had been commended two years previously by the French ambassador, and promises a future volume on wine making, to be called 'Secreta dei pampinei', which, however, did not materialize. 
Plat was twice married, first, on 10 February 1574, to Margaret Younge, with whom he had at least three sons who survived him. His second wife was Judith, daughter of William Albany, merchant tailor of London; two sons and three daughters of that union survived him, as did Judith, who was buried in Highgate Chapel on 28 January 1636. Plat died in late October or early November 1608. At probate his affairs were somewhat involved, with property at St James Garlickhythe, St Pancras, and St Albans, and on 12 February 1610 his widow entered a suit concerning the administration of his estate. All Plat's surviving children married, apart from his son Robert, who was wedded to gaming. William, the fourth son of his second marriage, married Marie, daughter of Sir John Hungerford, and was buried in Highgate Chapel on 11 November 1637. He left land to St John's College, Cambridge, where he had been educated as a fellow-commoner, for the maintenance of as many fellows at $30 a year, and scholars at $10, as the rents allowed. In 1858 the estate was merged in the general property of the college, and the three Platt fellowships, which then represented the endowment, became ordinary foundation fellowships. 
W. Harte, in his 'Essays on Husbandry' (1764), categorized Plat as the most ingenious husbandman of his age. He was effectively a virtuoso -- before that term came into use -- a man of leisure able to pursue his artistic and antiquarian interests, besides those of a more practical nature. His 'Floraes Paradise' was reissued in 1653 as 'The Garden of Eden, or, An Accurate Description of all Flowers and Fruits now Growing in England', with some omissions and rearrangements, by Charles Bellingham, who claimed relationship with Plat. Further editions followed, to 1685. 'The Jewell House' was likewise reissued with alterations; the revised edition of 1653 was prepared by Arnold de Boate. 


@@@@@


doc= 22358


Platt, Sir Thomas Joshua (1788x90-1862), judge, was the son of Thomas Platt (1760-1842) of London and his wife, Catherine (1777-1843). His father was a solicitor who was successively principal clerk to three chief justices, lords Mansfield, Kenyon, and Ellenborough, over a period of thirty years. Platt was educated at Harrow School before going to Cambridge, initially entering St John's College, but matriculating in 1806 at Trinity College, where he graduated BA in 1810 and MA in 1814. He was admitted as a student to the Inner Temple on 24 January 1806 and was called to the bar on 9 February 1816. As an advocate on the home circuit he was praised both for his energy and for the clarity and simplicity of his language. He invariably convinced common juries of his views, but was much less successful with special juries. He took silk on 27 December 1834 and succeeded Baron Gurney as baron of the court of exchequer on 28 January 1845, sitting until 2 November 1856. He was knighted at St James's Palace on 23 April 1845. A popular judge with a common touch, he died at his home, 59 Portland Place, London, on 10 February 1862, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. He was survived by his wife, Augusta, with whom he had several children, including three sons. She died at 61 Queen's Gardens, Hyde Park, London, on 16 February 1885 in her eighty-ninth year. 


@@@@@


doc= 22359


Platt, Thomas Pell (1798-1852), biblical translator, was born in London, the son of Thomas Platt. After school in Little Dunham, Norfolk, he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, as pensioner, on 25 November 1816. He was elected scholar on 3 April 1818, Davies scholar in 1819 (the same year in which he was president of the union), and Tyrwhitt Hebrew scholar in 1821. He graduated BA in 1820, became a fellow in 1820, and proceeded MA in 1823. 
While at Cambridge Platt became involved with the British and Foreign Bible Society, and was for several years its librarian. In 1823 he published a catalogue of Ethiopic biblical manuscripts held in the Royal Library of Paris and in the British and Foreign Bible Society library. Afterwards he also collated and edited the Ethiopic versions of the 'New Testament' for the society. The publication did not aim to offer new interpretations but 'simply to give the Abyssinians the Scriptures in as good a form of their ancient version as could be conveniently done'. Platt did, however, make a few interpretative notes on the readings in the gospels which particularly struck him, and was prepared to defend his methods when the publications of the British and Foreign Bible Society were attacked in an article in a 'Quarterly Review' of 1827. In 1829 he prepared an edition of the Syriac gospels, and in 1844 edited an Amharic version of the 'Bible', using the translation of Abba Rukh for the 'Old Testament', and that of Abu Rumi Habessinus for the 'New'. Platt was one of the earliest members of the Royal Asiatic Society (founded in 1823), and for many years served on its oriental translation committee. He was also a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. 
Platt came under the influence of the Tractarian movement and described his conversion from evangelicalism in a 'Letter to Dr. Pusey' of 1840. Even after his change of heart, however, he resisted 'mystical and spiritual interpretations to the prophecies of the 'Old Testament'' in vogue among some Tractarians. Platt lived for many years at Child's Hill, Hampstead, but died at Dulwich Hill, Surrey, on 31 October 1852, leaving an only son, Francis Thomas Platt. 


@@@@@


doc= 22360


Plattes, Gabriel (c.1600-1644), writer, who claimed in his first publication of 1638 to have had twenty-four years' experience of observing husbandry, was probably born about 1600. Nothing is known of his origins beyond his own statement that his 'predecessors... lived well upon a small Farme; and by their industry maintained and educated their children, in manner not much inferior to the sons of the best Knights and Gentlemen of the countrey' (Fussell, 78). Plattes's writings indicate that he had travelled widely throughout Britain, and was familiar with the southern and western regions of England. He undoubtedly possessed a knowledge of contemporary agricultural and mining practices. It is possible that he had been employed with his friend William Englebert, a military and drainage engineer. During his brief years in London, he met those inventors, chemists, and improvers of husbandry who were active in and around the metropolis. 
The first two books, 'Treatise of Husbandry' (1638) and 'A Discovery of Subterraneall Treasure' (1639), delivered in straightforward style elementary advice: in the first on enclosure, fertilization, and the planting of seeds (for which he proposed, though probably never constructed, a drilling machine) and trees, and in the second on prospecting, metal working, and assaying. His desire to benefit mankind, especially the poor people of the commonwealth, was fulfilled; both works became extremely popular and were reprinted throughout the century, under slightly different titles, and were favourably received overseas. The 'Subterraneall Treasure' was the first useful text in English dealing with metallurgy. While his view of the world was of its period, Plattes proposed that analyses of the streams issuing from mountains would indicate valuable hidden minerals. 
When he became part of the circle surrounding the reformer Samuel Hartlib, Plattes produced one of the group's best-known manifestos, 'Description of the Famous Kingdome of Macaria' (1641). It was published as an anonymous fifteen-page tract, possibly intended for distribution to members of the Long Parliament at their second session in October that year. Lost to view for many years, it was reproduced in the first volume of the 'Harleian Miscellany' in 1744 and was for a long time ascribed to Hartlib. Subsequent study of the Hartlib papers and other contemporary sources has confirmed Plattes as the author. Macaria is a puritan utopia, described in a dialogue between a scholar and a traveller, who meet at the Royal Exchange and adjourn to Moorfields to discuss the trading of 'intelligence' as a commodity. 
Parliament did not respond to Plattes's petitions and in his later years he was reliant on Hartlib for financial support. In 'The profitable intelligencer, communicating his knowledge for the generall good of the commonwealth & all posterity' (1644) Plattes advertised his forthcoming work, 'The treasure house of nature unlocked'. He died, impoverished, in London in December 1644. Hartlib subsequently acquired his manuscripts, in the vain hope that Plattes had left something ready for publication. 


@@@@@


doc= 22361


Platts, John (1775-1837), Unitarian minister and compiler of reference works, was born at Boston, Lincolnshire. For seven or eight years he officiated as a Calvinist minister there, but then became a Unitarian. Ordained by Charles Wellbeloved and Robert Aspland, he ministered at Spain Lane Chapel at Boston from 1804 to 1817, when he moved to Hall Gate Chapel in Doncaster. Platts supplemented his stipend -- diminished from its small base by the loss grants from Lady Hewley's Charity and an annual subvention from William Smith MP -- by teaching and compiling educational works. He was also an enthusiastic Liberal activist and a humorous speaker. 
In 1825 Platts began publication of 'A New Universal Biography'. He claimed in the preface that he would offer not only hundreds more names than other publications but a superior arrangement. In place of 'a mere petty accommodation' of alphabetical organization, sacrificing all chronology and classification, he organized the work into four periods: from the creation to Christ, from the birth of Christ to the Reformation, from the beginning of the sixteenth century to the close of the seventeenth, and from the eighteenth century to the time of its writing, with further division into thematic groupings under each head, to facilitate continuous reading and learning. He acknowledged a wide range of sources but relied chiefly on the 'General Biography' of John Aikin and the successive versions of a biographical dictionary by Alexander Chalmers. Only five volumes appeared. The rest, caught in the economic downturn of that year, remained in manuscript, and the promise of a substantial income vanished. 'A New Self-Interpreting Testament' (4 vols., 1827; with a new edition in 1830) provided brief introductions to each of the books with footnotes giving variant readings from other translations and parallel passages from other books of the 'Bible'. 
Platts published several Unitarian tracts, of which the most important is probably 'Reflections on materialism, immaterialism, the sleep of the soul... and the resurrection of the body' (1813), to prove that resurrection takes place immediately upon death. His educational works include 'The Literary and Scientific Class Book' (1821); 'The Female Mentor, or, Ladies' Class Book' (1823), a selection of 365 reading lessons; and 'A Dictionary of English Synonymes' (1825). 'The Book of Curiosities... with an Appendix of Entertaining and Amusing Experiments and Recreations' (1825) and 'The Manners and Customs of All Nations' (1827) appealed to the apparently insatiable appetite of the time for miscellaneous information; these works were extensively reprinted (and no doubt pirated) in American editions for at least fifty years. 
Platts died at Doncaster, after a long and painful illness, presumably cancer, on 19 June 1837. His widow, about whom nothing further is known, died in 1851, leaving five daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 22362


Plaw, John (1744/5-1820), architect, was apprenticed at the age of thirteen to a member of the Tylers' and Bricklayers' Company in London. In 1763, when he was awarded a prize by the Society of Artists for a drawing of the Banqueting House in Whitehall, he was described as an 'architect and master builder in Westminster' (Society of Arts, 'Register of Premiums', 1763, 39). He joined the Incorporated Society of Artists a year after its foundation in 1766 and was president at the time of its dissolution in 1791. In 1774-5 he designed his most important surviving house, Belle Isle, Westmorland, for Thomas English who, according to William Wordsworth, was the first man to settle in the Lake District 'for the sake of the beauty of the country' (W. J. B. Owen and J. B. Smyser, 'Prose Works of William Wordsworth', 3, 1974, 342). Picturesquely situated on the largest island in Lake Windermere, Belle Isle is a domed, circular villa with an Ionic portico and plain interiors, anticipating both in its form and in its neo-classical character the later and better-known Ickworth in Suffolk. A drawing of the house was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1775, when Plaw was living in Lambeth, near Westminster Bridge; by 1778 he had moved to King's Road, Parsons Green, Fulham, and he subsequently occupied premises in Charles Street, Westminster, and at Lothbury in the City of London before settling in Tottenham Court Road, where he was living about 1785-8. By 1788 he had moved again, this time to Paddington. 
Plaw's practice during the 1780s and 1790s was largely taken up with the design of villas and cottages, most of them near London or in the home counties; he also designed a house in South Third Street, Philadelphia, in 1786, and he prepared designs for several houses in Scotland, only one of which (Seacliff, East Lothian, 'c'.1795) is known to have been built. Many of his executed and unexecuted designs were illustrated in the three publications on which his fame largely rests: 'Rural Architecture' (1785), 'Ferme ornee, or, Rural Improvements' (1795), and 'Sketches for Country Houses, Villas and Rural Dwellings' (1800); he also contributed an article on architecture to the first volume of 'The New Encyclopedia' (1788). Aimed largely, as the title page of the 'Sketches' puts it, at 'persons of moderate income', his books, with their attractive aquatint illustrations -- an innovation in English architectural publishing -- were among the first to exploit the growing taste for the picturesque, demonstrated in his frequent use of Gothic detailing. He also favoured the use of vernacular building materials such as thatch, tree trunks, and 'pise' or rammed earth; the latter was publicized for the first time in England in 'Ferme ornee'. The influence of his publications can be seen not only in the minuscule number of surviving houses that can be securely attributed to him, such as the veranda-ed New York Cottage near Faversham, Kent -- perhaps the first building in England to be directly inspired by a North American model -- but also in numerous farm buildings and in villas and 'cottages ornes' such as Houghton Lodge, Hampshire, which was in existence by 1799, and the Round House at Havering atte Bower, Essex (1793-4). Plaw, unlike some of his more adventurous contemporaries, eschewed irregular planning in favour of what he called 'symmetry and correspondence of parts' ('Sketches', 3), and his talent for neo-classical design is well demonstrated in his most prominent surviving building, the church of St Mary, Paddington, built under an act of parliament in 1788-91 to serve the inhabitants of what was then one of London's most rapidly growing suburbs, and planned in the form of a Greek cross. 
Plaw moved from London to Southampton about 1795, taking up residence in a house called Spring Place in the hamlet of Hill, to the north-west of the town. He prepared designs for fashionable residential developments, including Albion Place, a group of houses to the north of the town wall which was never completed; he also designed a cavalry barracks (later incorporated into the headquarters of the Ordnance Survey) in 1806. In or about 1809, 'discouraged and disappointed in his art... which he loved and laboured to promote' ('Repository of Arts', new ser., 14, 1822, 250-51), he emigrated to Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, allegedly taking the charter of the Society of Artists with him. Here he built up a new practice, and it was here that he died, at the age of seventy-five, on 24 May 1820; his burial-place in Charlottetown was marked by a tombstone illustrated in the 'Architectural Review' of 1919. Of his known children one son, John, served as his apprentice and was admitted to the Tylers' and Bricklayers' Company in 1787, and a daughter exhibited architectural drawings at the Society of Artists in 1791. His pupils included George Byfield and John Buonarotti Papworth. 


@@@@@


doc= 22363


Player, Sir Thomas (d. 1672), local politician, was apparently born in Canterbury, Kent. Authorities differ about his parentage. He was probably the son of Thomas Player, linen draper, of Canterbury, who was bound apprentice to a member of the London Haberdashers' Company in April 1611. An Oxford graduate of 1630, of the same name and also of Canterbury, may have been a close kinsman, as was John Player, the puritan divine who became a leading Independent of Canterbury in the 1640s. 
Eventually a freeman of the Haberdashers' Company, Player was a hosier by trade and in 1638 a resident of the London parish of St Leonard Eastcheap. He first acquired prominence in the City as a signer of parliamentary puritan petitions in 1641-2. He became a member of common council for Bridge Within ward, serving from 1642 until 1649. Appointed a captain in the trained bands in 1642, he was sent with his regiment to relieve parliamentary forces at Gloucester and eventually became a militia colonel. In July 1642 he was one of sixty-six common councilmen who petitioned the House of Lords against Lord Mayor Sir Richard Gurney, who was impeached and replaced by Isaac Penington. Player served on important city committees between 1643 and 1646. Among these was the Salters' Hall subcommittee of the militia committee, which recruited volunteers for the war against Charles I. Player also became an army provisioner and was identified as a leading civic Independent in 1646, when presbyterians gained control of civic affairs. 
Player's religious and political views may, however, have been somewhat cross-grained. In October 1646 he was elected elder for a London presbyterian classis, but he apparently chose not to serve, despite the encouragement of his neighbour Nehemiah Wallington. A few months later he was removed by the London presbyterians from the civic militia committee, together with such Independents as Penington and Robert Tichborne. When the army intervened in the corporation of London in August of that year, Player was among those restored to superintendency of the trained bands. He joined with other leading Independents in securing a contract for provisioning the army in Ireland in March 1648. After the army's London incursion, one presbyterian writer decried Player as a leading civic 'Apostate', but he and a colleague were pilloried in a May 1648 verse as men who: '
both their parts can 'play', 

on either side that beares the greatest 'sway'. 
('A paire of Spectacles for the Citie', 10; 'Mercurius Elencticus', no. 26, 203)' Indeed, during a resurgence of political presbyterianism in London in the summer of 1648 Player was appointed to a civic committee to petition parliament for a personal treaty with the king. 
Player disappeared from civic politics after the execution of Charles I and the creation of the Commonwealth, but he returned in October 1651. He was then elected chamberlain at a time of increasing sectarian influence in the city and of diminishing confidence in its financial resources. In 1653 he was appointed by the council of state to a commission to consider complaints of merchants who had sustained losses at the hands of Portuguese colonial authorities in Africa. Thereafter he became a political survivor, serving as chamberlain under the protectorate, the revived Commonwealth, and Charles II. In March 1660 the restored Long Parliament appointed him a militia commissioner for the Tower Hamlets. By the 1660s Player had acquired a residence in Mare Street, Hackney. 
During a civic entertainment on 5 July 1660 Player and his son, Thomas Player, were knighted by Charles II in gratitude for loans made to the restored monarchy through the London chamber. In the early 1660s, as he made regular payments for the government out of continuing civic loans, Player was appointed receiver for various taxes for London and several counties. In time he became a civic banker to the crown, routinely advancing money for the navy and other offices and receiving at least $4300 for his services. Samuel Pepys visited Player twice in 1666-8 about the navy's credit in the city, describing him as a man he had 'much heard of for his credit and punctuality' (Pepys, 7.72). Player's wife, Rebecca, died in 1667. Player himself died in December 1672 and was buried at St John-at-Hackney on 9 December, a few weeks after his resignation as chamberlain. He left his entire estate to his only surviving son and executor, Thomas, who also succeeded him as chamberlain. 


@@@@@


doc= 22364


Player, Sir Thomas (d. 1686), politician, was probably born in London, the only son of Sir Thomas Player (d. 1672), local politician, and his wife, Rebecca (died 1667). His father, who, in 1638, lived in the parish of St Leonard Eastcheap, London, before moving to Mare Street, Hackney, rose to prominence in the City in the 1640s as a cross-grained Independent, and he served the corporation of London as chamberlain during the Commonwealth, the protectorate, and the restored monarchy. On 20 April 1641 Player married Joyce ('bap'. 1622, died 1686), daughter of William Kendall, a leading presbyterian common councilman of Bread Street, but Player did not become free of the City, as a member of the Haberdashers' Company, until 1659. He benefited from Charles II's appreciation of his father's financial services as chamberlain at the time of the Restoration, being knighted, along with his father, in 1660. He also served as a Middlesex JP (1660-80), a Middlesex assessment commissioner (1661-80), a London lieutenancy commissioner (1662-77), and a London trained band colonel (1660, 1674-7). He was eventually chosen leader of the Honourable Artillery Company (1669-77), and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society (1673), and a common councilman for Bassishaw (1672-82), where he lived, in Basinghall Street, near the Guildhall. He succeeded his father as chamberlain in 1672, a few weeks prior to the elder Player's death. 
Player was originally a protege of Sir John Robinson, the leading Anglican loyalist in the corporation, who described him to the secretary of state, Sir Joseph Williamson, in 1670 as 'an honest, brave gentleman' who 'ought to be encouraged' ('CSP dom.', '1670', 268). By 1672-3 he had become one of Williamson's sources of intelligence in the City. In January 1674 he was intimate with such leading loyalist aldermen as Sir Robert Vyner and Sir Joseph Sheldon; and he served as the receiver for exchequer funds set aside for the rebuilding of St Paul's Cathedral. According to one report he was one of the king's drinking companions and still enjoyed occasional personal access to Charles as late as 1676. 
Player, however, was both politically ambitious and independent; and he complained, about the time of the stop of the exchequer in 1672, that Charles owed him $4000. He threw in his lot with 'the Nonconforming Men', promising, according to one critic, to weaken enforcement of the 'Conventicle Acts' in return for their support (BL, Add. MS 34362, fol. 9). Robinson blamed him for a 1673 common council petition full of grievances, claiming that he had promoted it for the sake of his own popularity; and when the aldermen stifled it Player claimed that their action 'was such a breach upon the Common Councell as hath not beene knowne' (Christie, 1.114; 2.55). By 1675 Player was a deputy alderman for his ward and had joined such other civic leaders as Sir Samuel Barnardiston, Francis Jenks, and Thomas Papillon in co-ordinating opposition to the earl of Danby's ministry in London and parliament. Player was targeted at court for retaliation in 1677 after he was compromised by the collapse of two opposition bankers, with whom he was associated, and by the arrest of the earl of Shaftesbury, with whom he also had ties. At the midsummer common hall Danby intervened in the corporation in hopes of seeing him evicted from office, only to be baffled when thousands of liverymen appeared to re-elect Player as chamberlain. But he was dropped from the London lieutenancy; and James, duke of York, engineered his elimination as leader of the artillery company, claiming 'no honest man ought to countenance him' (Raikes, 1.195). 
In January 1679, after Charles II had prorogued parliament, Player was among the civic leaders who circulated a popular petition in London calling for another session. He was then elected as a City MP to each of the three exclusion parliaments. Both his outspoken language over the next four years, which often employed military imagery, and his vigilant arousal of London citizens on behalf of a protestant succession earned him hatred at court and poetic caricature as Dryden's 'railing Rabsheka' (Lord and others, 3.294). In the 1679 parliament he sat on the secret Commons committee for the investigation of the Popish Plot, and in debate he defended the probable need to take up arms against the 'Popish Guards' of a Catholic successor, who might endanger protestant life and property (Grey, 7.151). He moved the first bill to exclude the Catholic duke of York from the succession in May 1679, while simultaneously promoting another London petition to pressure Charles into accepting it. He was also named a parliamentary commissioner for the disbandment of the army. 
In the long interval between the 1679 parliament and its repeatedly prorogued successor Player acted as the chief organizer of the London opposition. He helped orchestrate popular demands for a doubling of the guards in London in September 1679, after Charles II's serious illness prompted the duke of York to rush home from the continent for a possible succession. Even some in Player's own political camp thought this action was intended primarily 'to get fame among the people' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 475). 
In the following months Player actively promoted petitions for a parliamentary session. When the new parliament finally met in October 1680 Player served on the Commons committee that drafted the 'Second Exclusion Bill'. 'Let the Duke be removed', he challenged the house, maintaining that Londoners were 'not afraid of [civil] War', if that was a necessary consequence of exclusion (Grey, 7.406). When the Commons adopted the bill he served on a civic committee that drafted a corporation address to the throne requesting Charles 'to hearken & incline to the humble Advice' of his parliament (CLRO, common council journal, 49.157). When the bill was lost in the Lords, Player said, in the Commons, that the citizens of London would 'not give [the king] a penny for 'Tangier', nor any thing else' until the succession and protestantism had been secured (Grey, 8.10). He also recommended the removal of London recorder Sir George Jeffreys, with whom he had once been friends, for interfering with petitions. 
When Charles first prorogued and then dissolved parliament in January 1681 Player was again at the centre of opposition to the king. He was on the civic committee that drafted a petition immediately after the prorogation demanding that parliament resume on the announced date. After his re-election as City MP he sought, reportedly with the assistance of some whig officers of the trained bands, to resume his position as leader of the Honourable Artillery Company and to oust the duke of York as its captain-general. Charles prevented Player's intended coup by himself becoming leader of the company; but this incident and others confirmed loyalist fears that whig leaders were embarking upon the same military courses as their predecessors in the Long Parliament. In the short-lived third Exclusion Parliament at Oxford, Player was on the Commons committee for the impeachment of the informer Edward Fitzharris, and he moved that any judge, JP, or jury who co-operated with the king's plan to have Fitzharris tried elsewhere was guilty of betraying the constitution. After the Oxford dissolution Player was predictably among the promoters of a London petition demanding another parliament that was approved in common council in May 1681. 
Player was vulnerable to political retaliation as the loyalist reaction of 1681-3 gathered momentum. John Rouse, one of his London operatives, was taken up on charges of treason in June 1681 and rumours circulated that Player would also be charged, but the dismissal of the government's cases against Rouse and also the earl of Shaftesbury by London juries saved the chamberlain from prosecution. In January 1682 he was elected to the civic committee to defend the London charter against the crown's 'quo warranto'. He thwarted a loyalist effort to congratulate York on his return to the capital in March 1682, recommending another petition for a parliament rather than any honouring of 'the chief ground of all... our miseries & calamities' (Library of Congress, London Newsletters, 8.28). He was also among those who welcomed Monmouth, the alternative protestant successor, to London in September 1682, after Monmouth's tour of the west country had demonstrated his continuing popularity. 
Player's promotion of the London whigs' candidates for the shrievalty in 1682 earned him inclusion in the government's case against leading civic whigs for turning the shrieval election into a riot. He was also active on behalf of the whig mayoral candidates of 1682 before the poll was tweaked by the loyalist aldermen on behalf of tory Sir William Pritchard. Player consequently absented himself from Pritchard's swearing in as lord mayor (leading to stories that he had fled with the City's funds), and he seconded Sir William Williams's threat to impeach Pritchard, informing the new mayor that the citizens of London 'would spend their Estates, rather than... [be] wronged by injustice' (Library of Congress, London Newsletters, 7.297). 
Player's words proved prophetic, at least in his own case. He was already the subject of privy council harassment about his superintendence of funds for the redemption of captives in north Africa. The government's probe soon widened to include his disbursement of money for the army disbandment. The tory electors of his ward ousted him from common council in December. In May 1683 he and the other civic whigs charged with riot were found guilty in king's bench and Player was fined 500 marks. In September 1683, as the corporation's charter hung in the balance, the common hall replaced him as chamberlain. 
Blows aimed at Player in the loyalist press were equally damaging. Thomas Otway may have had Player and others in mind in his portrayal of Antonio in 'Venice Preserv'd' (1682), and John Crowne may have incorporated Player's character into the Podesta of Naples in 'City politiques' (1683). Satirists nicknamed him Sir Thomas Cresswell in allusion to his alleged intimacy with the notorious Mother Cresswell and her prostitutes. For Dryden he was: '
So full of zeal he has no need of grace; 

A saint that can both flesh and spirit use, 

Alike haunt conventicles and the stews. 
(Lord and others, 3.294-5)' Player apparently stayed clear of the plotting that some whigs engaged in during 1682-3. He was disarmed after the disclosure of the Rye House plot in June 1683 and his protege Rouse, who was arrested and charged, apparently offered to implicate Player in treasonable schemes. No evidence appears to have been found against him, however, and Rouse exonerated Player of any wrongdoing from the scaffold. In the meantime Player sought to mend his political fences with Charles II and the duke of York, but his role as one of the leading London campaigners against a Catholic successor was not forgotten. James, who succeeded in 1685 as James II, absolutely refused to forgive him. In 1685 Player's estate was seized until alleged deficiencies of $3250 in his army disbursement accounts were made up. He died, apparently without surviving children, on 14 January 1686 and on 20 January was buried at Hackney, where his wife was also buried on 8 December the same year. 


@@@@@


doc= 22365


Playfair, Sir Hugh Lyon (1786-1861), army officer and provost of St Andrews, was born at the manse, Meigle, Perthshire, on 17 November 1786, the third of four surviving sons and four daughters of Dr James Playfair (1738-1819), principal of the United College, St Andrews, and his wife, Margaret Lyon (died 1831). He was educated at the grammar school of Dundee before attending classes at St Andrews. In June 1804 he gained a commission in the artillery branch of the East India Company's Bengal army, following his two elder brothers, George Playfair (1782-1846) of the Army Medical Service, who became chief inspector-general of hospitals in Bengal, and William Davidson Playfair (1783-1852), who became a colonel in the Indian army. Hugh Lyon Playfair studied mathematics for three months in Edinburgh before gaining technical instruction at Woolwich, passing out in January 1805. He arrived in Calcutta in August 1805, having been gazetted lieutenant. 
The military records indicate that Playfair was a man of great moral and physical courage but perhaps some obstinacy, and that he was an inspirational leader. Commanding a detachment of artillery sent to the upper provinces in November 1806, he led his troops the whole distance of 800 miles to Cawnpore without having a single man invalided or sentenced to punishment. In March 1807 General Sir John Horsford appointed him to command the artillery at Bareilly, where he both improved the discipline of the force stationed there and suppressed the forces of a robber chief, Tumon Singh. In November 1807 he was appointed to the horse artillery and sent to Agra, and in January 1809 joined the army at Saharanpur, under generals St Leger and Robert Gillespie, engaging in skirmishes with the Sikhs. Regarded as the most efficient officer in his regiment, he was appointed adjutant and quartermaster to the horse artillery in November 1809, based at Meerut from 1811. In November 1814 he took part in the assault on the Gurkha fortress of Kalunga in the Himalayas; after the death of General Gillespie in the first attack, Playfair's artillery corps was brought into action and the garrison surrendered on 30 November 1814. Playfair was wounded twice during the fighting. In October 1815 he was promoted to be captain of horse artillery. 
Playfair's health suffered in India, and he obtained leave in 1817, sailing for Europe. On the way he touched at St Helena where he met Napoleon in exile. After spending three years travelling widely in Scotland, Ireland, and western Europe, he revisited St Andrews in 1820, receiving the freedom of the city. Having gone to India penniless, he now had a sufficient fortune to buy a large house, St Leonard's West, part of the old St Leonard's College, St Andrews. This was surely a remarkable achievement for a serving artillery officer, and indicated marked financial abilities, from which St Andrews, both town and university, would later benefit. On 7 March 1820 he married Jane, daughter of William Dalgleish of Scotscraig, Fife; they had six sons and five daughters. 
Playfair returned to India in the summer of 1820. At his request he was appointed superintendent of the great military road between Calcutta and Benares, a post previously held by his brother William Playfair. During over six years in charge of the road he made major improvements including a system of staging bungalows. In June 1827 he was promoted to be major, commanding the fourth battalion of artillery at Dum-Dum until July 1831. He resigned from the service in February 1834. His campaigning and managerial abilities were recognized by his senior officers. For his men he set up a library and a theatre, and instituted an informal court where minor offenders were tried (and fined) by their peers 'with the happiest results' (Louden, 12n). 
These were the abilities Playfair brought to St Andrews, where he settled permanently on his return to Scotland in 1832. Universally nicknamed 'the Major' (although actually gazetted lieutenant-colonel), he was elected provost of St Andrews in 1842, and held the office until his death. At the time of his election the city was in decay, and many of the buildings were in a state of dilapidation, while the town council was helpless, being divided into bitterly antagonistic factions. As provost, Playfair immediately instituted a programme of radical urban reform. Pavements and streets were drained and surfaced, and street frontages were straightened, controversially, by pulling down forestairs, porches, and other 'excrescences'. Several new streets were driven through, the foundation stone of Queen Street being laid in 1858. Playfair organized an appeal in 1846 to fund drainage, public baths, a town hall, and a public library. The largest work of his regime was the new town hall, which still survives. So extensive were the construction works that it was claimed during the 1840s, a period of trade depression and hunger in the rest of the country, that there were no unemployed men in St Andrews. Playfair also sought to improve facilities for leisure, including a plan to encircle the town with a network of footpaths. Opportunities were provided for tossing the caber, and a bowling green was laid out. Playfair was a keen actor and laid on amateur theatricals in the private theatre erected in the grounds of his house. 
Playfair's negotiating skills helped to ensure the success of deputations to the Treasury and Home Office on behalf of the University of St Andrews, which secured nearly $9000 in government grants enabling the present United College quadrangle to be built. It was also through his efforts that the Royal and Ancient Golf Club, of which he became captain, was put on a firm footing, and the golf links were saved from erosion. He was the prime mover in the foundation of the Union Club (1835) which later merged with the Royal and Ancient, and was responsible for building the present clubhouse. He was a ruthlessly efficient golfer, winning the first gold medal at the autumn meeting of the St Andrews club in September 1818. His proficiency was commemorated in the golfing verse ('Golfiana', 1833) of George Fullerton Carnegie. Through his friendship with Antoine Claudet he also pioneered photography in St Andrews. 
Some of Playfair's schemes ran into local opposition, and he endured much personal criticism. But he had a dry sense of humour which he used to goad people into carrying out his plans. He liked to 'shock old women of both sexes and to put cant out of countenance'. He was at ease in all levels of society. A contemporary painting ('A Grand Match of Golf', 1844) shows him playing golf with the earl of Crawford and Sir Ralph Anstruther, while he is also described as walking down South Street 'with a veritable fish-wife on each arm, sharing their somewhat noisy confidences with an admirable affectation of interest' ('GM', 335). Although himself an ultra-tory in politics (he regretted the passing of the 1832 'Reform Act'), he was able by his force of personality to reconcile individuals of strongly contending views. He had a remarkable aptitude as a fund-raiser: although he was wealthy enough to buy property at will when obdurate owners stood in the way of his plans, most of his town improvements were paid for by public subscription. His nephew Lyon Playfair (1818-1898) wrote that: 'he laboured with the will and authority of an autocrat, and forced money by subscription with the audacity of a highwayman. Naturally he constantly gave offence, but as his reforms were always justified by their good results, the Major's tyrannies were condoned.' He was knighted (KCB) on 12 March 1856, and received the degree of LLD from St Andrews in the same year. 
Playfair was a thickset man with a florid, heavy featured face, shaggy grey side-whiskers, and penetrating eyes. Deeply religious, he published 'First Catechism of the Principles of Religion' (1853). He died at his home, St Leonard's West, St Andrews, on 21 January 1861, and was buried in St Andrews Cathedral ground on 27 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 22366


Playfair, James (1738-1819), Church of Scotland minister and writer on geography, was born on 19 December 1738, the second son of George Playfair, a farmer of West Bendochy, Perthshire, and his wife, Jean Roger, both of whom were Scottish. After studying theology at the University of St Andrews, whence he matriculated in February 1755, he was licensed as a probationer on 1 November 1770 and served as pastor to a Presbyterian congregation at Newtyle, Forfarshire, north-west of Dundee. On 30 September 1773 he married Margaret Lyon (died 1831), the elder daughter of a Forfarshire clergyman. They had two daughters and four sons, who included the future Sir Hugh Lyon Playfair; their son George was the father of Lyon Playfair, first Baron Playfair of St Andrews, and Sir Robert Lambert Playfair. 
On 19 June 1777 Playfair was reassigned from Newtyle to nearby Meigle. After further study he received the degree of doctor of divinity from the University of St Andrews on 2 July 1779. It is said that he was repeatedly offered the post of moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland; if so he never accepted this prestigious office. 
On 20 August 1800, in his sixty-second year, Playfair was appointed principal of the United College, St Andrews, and minister of the church of St Leonard's in the same city. He was also historiographer to the prince of Wales for many years but few details concerning that employment have survived. In 1809 he allowed himself the uncharacteristic pleasure of publishing a pseudonymous satire on George Hill, principal of St Mary's College, St Andrews, entitled 'The last speech, confession and dying words of dominus defunctus, sometime inquisitor of the city of Juxtamare'. 
It was primarily in St Andrews that Playfair's major literary labours were undertaken. These include a two-volume 'System of Chronology' (1784); a six-volume 'System of Geography, Ancient and Modern' (1810-14); a four-volume 'General Atlas, Ancient and Modern' (1814); and a two-volume 'Geographical and Statistical Description of Scotland' (1819). Of these much-laboured compilations only the last remains of interest today. It is based almost entirely on the multi-volume 'Statistical Account of Scotland' (1791-9) by Sir John Sinclair, to which Playfair had contributed accounts of the parishes of Meigle, Essie, and Nevay. In passages original to his own book Playfair described how he had tunnelled into 'Dunsinnan hill' to discover remains of Macbeth's fortress (demolished in 1057). He defended the authenticity of Ossian's poems and praised Burns but ignored Scott, who was not yet known as the author of the 'Waverley' novels but had written highly popular long poems on Scottish themes. Playfair also commented interestingly on changes in the dress and manners of the highlanders since 1745. He died at Dalmarnock, near Glasgow, on 26 May 1819, soon after his book had come out. His widow died at St Andrews on 4 November 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 22367


Playfair, John (1748-1819), mathematician and geologist, was born on 10 March 1748 at Benvie, near Dundee, the eldest son of James Playfair (1712-1772), minister of Liff and Benvie, and his wife, Margaret Young (1719/20-1805). Educated at home until 1762, he attended the University of St Andrews to qualify for the church. Having graduated in 1765, he completed his theological studies in 1770, when he was licensed as a minister. As a teenager he acted as deputy professor of natural philosophy at St Andrews and came third out of six candidates for the chair of mathematics at Marischal College, Aberdeen. In 1770 he moved to Edinburgh, where he became a crony of William Robertson (soon a key patron), Adam Smith, Joseph Black, and perhaps James Hutton. In 1772 he competed unsuccessfully for the chair of natural philosophy at St Andrews. On the death of his father Playfair assumed responsibility for his three sisters and four brothers, including James Playfair (1755-1794), later an architect, and William Playfair (1759-1823), who wrote on political economy. 
John applied successfully for his father's living, into which he was inducted in 1773. Next year he joined Nevil Maskelyne, astronomer royal, who with colleagues was endeavouring to measure the density of the earth by means of the gravitational attraction exerted by Schiehallion, a mountain in Perthshire, on a plumb-line. Through this contact with Maskelyne he was introduced to scientific society in London. In 1783 Playfair resigned his living and moved to Raith, near Kirkcaldy, as private tutor for five years to Robert and Ronald Ferguson, with whom he wintered in Edinburgh, where he shone in literary society. 
In 1785 Playfair became joint professor of mathematics with Adam Ferguson in the University of Edinburgh, where each session he taught three courses, two of which focused on geometry and trigonometry. In the third he sometimes taught continental analysis and from 1792 applied mathematics (astronomy, gunnery, fortification, geography, and navigation). In 1795 he published his lectures entitled 'Elements of Geometry', which went through five editions in his lifetime and, with revisions by Wallace and Kelland, reached a thirteenth edition in 1875. In 1805 he was elevated to the chair of natural philosophy at Edinburgh, which gave him less teaching, more learned leisure, and slightly greater emolument (his biggest class numbering 223 at 3 guineas per head). His published lectures show that he broadly followed his predecessor, John Robison, though he gave greater attention to hydrostatics, hydraulics, aerostatics, and pneumatics. A projected third volume on optics, magnetism, and electricity remained unexecuted. 
In addition to enjoying a high reputation as a professor of mathematics and natural philosophy, Playfair was a geologist, a builder of scientific institutions in Edinburgh, a promoter of whiggery, and a man of letters. In his 'Illustrations of the Huttonian Theory of the Earth' (1802) he analysed, modified, and defended the ideas of his close friend Hutton, whose publications suffered from prolixity and obscurity. In lucid prose Playfair supported the timelessness in Hutton's theory, argued that geologists should concern themselves with proximate and not final causes, asserted that natural and divine philosophy were separate but not incompatible activities, coined new terms such as 'geological cycle' and 'igneous origin', and reported his own work on unconformities of strata, which he regarded as 'the most striking monuments of the high antiquity and great revolutions of the globe' ('Illustrations', 212). As much of the 'Illustrations' was devoted to rebutting the attacks made on Hutton's views by Richard Kirwan, it fuelled the controversy between Hutton's defenders and attackers, loosely called the vulcanists and the neptunists respectively. 
Though Playfair was elected FRS London in 1807, he devoted himself far more to the Royal Society of Edinburgh, of which he was a founder member. He became secretary to its physical class in 1789 and from 1798 to his death was its general secretary. He not only administered the society but edited its 'Transactions', in which he published most of his own scientific papers and classic obituaries of Matthew Stewart, Robison, and Hutton. In 1811 he was the leading spirit in establishing the Astronomical Institution of Edinburgh, of which he was president until his death. This private body procured the replacement of the existing observatory, left half-built in 1792, by a new one begun in 1818 and completed in 1830 to a design by Playfair's nephew William Henry Playfair. 
Playfair and his close friend Dugald Stewart were the leading whigs among the professoriate. They encouraged free and wide discussion among undergraduates, even in the troubled 1790s. Their houses were open to affluent boarders at about $300 per annum. Lord John Russell, a future leader of the whigs and British prime minister, was only one of several lodgers who enjoyed Playfair's tuition, his zealous love of liberty, and his gracious table. In 1805 Playfair and Stewart were the university's dominant polemicists in the Leslie affair. On Playfair's resignation from the chair of mathematics some tory clergymen in Edinburgh proposed one of themselves as a candidate and began to circulate rumours about the religious orthodoxy of John Leslie, a whig who was strongly supported by Playfair and Stewart. Leslie was elected, and the general assembly cleared him from the imputation of atheism. These outcomes signalled the revival of Scottish whiggery. 
Playfair was the first British natural philosopher to make extensive contributions to that new and characteristic genre the nineteenth-century periodical. In fifteen years from 1804 he published anonymously about sixty articles on science in the whig 'Edinburgh Review', edited by his friend Francis Jeffrey. Playfair ventilated his own concerns, such as the alleged stagnation of mathematics at Cambridge, and combated British xenophobia by demonstrating an urbane catholicity and intellectual largess. Though reviewing was his forte, he contributed his important but incomplete historical 'Dissertation, Exhibiting a General View of the Progress of Mathematical and Physical Science since the Revival of Letters in Europe' to the supplement to the fourth, fifth, and sixth editions of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1824, published separately 1816). As a leading literatus in Edinburgh, Playfair moved easily and successfully in both the learned and fashionable worlds. Admired as the Scottish d'Alembert, the ageing and amiable bachelor was adored by several women not only for his well-known feminist sentiments. No wonder that Jeffrey was inspired to coin the apt phrase 'philandering at the Needles' to denote Playfair's devotedness to ladies and to rocks. 
Playfair spent seventeen months in 1816 and 1817 on a geological tour of 4000 miles in Europe, gathering materials for a comprehensive work on geology which he never began, and enjoying a flattering reception by leading Parisian savants. Thereafter his health declined, culminating on 20 July 1819 with his death from strangury in Edinburgh, where he was buried on 26 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 22368


Playfair, Lyon, first Baron Playfair (1818-1898), politician and chemist, was born on 21 May 1818 at either Meerut ('Who's Who') or Chunar in Bengal (Reid), second son of eight children of George Playfair (1782-1846), chief inspector-general of hospitals in Bengal, and his wife, Janet (died 1862), daughter of John Ross of Edinburgh. Lyon was grandson of James Playfair (1738-1819), nephew of Sir Hugh Lyon Playfair (1786-1861), and older brother to Sir Robert Lambert Playfair (1828-1899). 
Playfair was sent from India in 1820 to be raised by an aunt in St Andrews, and later by his mother, and did not see his father again until he was twenty-two. After enjoying several years at the parish school from 1824, he endured a narrow schooling in Latin at the city's old grammar school before entering the University of St Andrews in 1832. Here he was inspired by illicit attendance at chemistry lectures to attempt the extraction of sugar from beetroot in the family kitchens. In 1835 he was sent to his uncle James in Glasgow to train as a merchant, but his medical ambitions soon prevailed. Having enrolled at Anderson's University, along with such students as James Young and David Livingstone, Playfair won prizes in the chemistry classes of Thomas Graham. After Graham left in 1837 Playfair continued medical studies at Edinburgh University, befriending John Goodsir and Edward Forbes. However, he soon had to abandon his degree after contracting severe eczema in the dissection room. Following paternal advice he travelled to Calcutta, where work as a merchant's clerk had been arranged for him. However, he so impressed the local college's professor of chemistry, William O'Shaughnessy, that Lyon's father was prevailed upon to return him to scientific pursuits in Britain, for which he sailed in 1838. 
At University College, London, Lyon attended medical lectures and became a laboratory assistant -- alongside Young -- to the professor of chemistry, Thomas Graham. In 1839 Graham advised Playfair to study with Europe's most eminent organic chemist, Justus von Liebig. Playfair soon became a star pupil in the Giessen laboratories through his discoveries of a new fatty acid in the butter of nutmeg, and a new crystalline substance in cloves. Such was Liebig's faith in his outstanding disciple that he invited Playfair to produce an English translation of his great book, 'Die organische Chemie in ihre Anwendung auf Agriculture und Physiologie' (1840, several editions), and to represent his work on this subject at the Glasgow meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS) in 1840. Here Playfair's abilities were noted by the geologists William Buckland and Henry De la Beche, and also by a number of chemical manufacturers. After returning to Giessen to take his PhD in 1841, and co-operating in the founding of the Chemical Society in Britain, Playfair was appointed as chemical manager of the Primrose dye works near Clitheroe. Foreseeing the imminent demise of luxury calico printing, Playfair resigned within a year, having already helped to quell one of the labour riots that swept across Lancashire in the summer of 1842. 
Impressed by Playfair's public lectures and his plan for supplying cheap water to lower-class tenements, the Royal Institution of Manchester made him an honorary professor of chemistry; he thereupon commenced an extensive series of researches with James P. Joule on atomic volume and specific gravity. As a distinguished pupil of Liebig, the impecunious Playfair found his reputation much enhanced by the famous chemist's popular British tour in 1842, and in October Michael Faraday wrote to offer Playfair the chair in chemistry at King's College, Toronto. On arriving in London to accept the post, Playfair was surprised to be invited to an audience with Sir Robert Peel, Buckland, and De la Beche, in which the prime minister persuaded Playfair not to leave the country. One year later Peel nominated him as a member of the royal commission on sanitation, the critical results of which were published in 'The State of Large Towns in Lancashire' (1845). Playfair also received a BAAS grant to collaborate with Bunsen of Heidelberg in studying the efficiency of charcoal iron furnaces, basing his work in 1844 at Derbyshire premises owned by the father of Margaret Eliza Oakes. Continuing researches at Manchester in this period covered such topics as cow's milk and the physiology of cattle, the nature of human sleep, and an analysis of palmic acid. 
Playfair moved to London in 1845 on becoming chemist to the Geological Survey. A small teaching laboratory had been created for him there, and Edward Frankland (1825-1899) was appointed as his assistant. As a public servant, however, Playfair was soon summoned to advise on the ventilation of Buckingham Palace, his assessment of which was so alarming that the report was kept from parliament. Next he received Peel's request to investigate the devastating potato blight in Ireland, his deeply pessimistic conclusions upon which encouraged Peel to repeal the corn laws. Playfair's marriage to Margaret Eliza Oakes (died 1855) in 1846 produced a daughter, Jessie, and a son, George, later Major George Playfair of the Royal Artillery, and the second Baron Playfair; Lyon Playfair's father died in the same year. Soon afterwards Playfair arranged for Young to extract paraffin from the rare naphtha spring on his brother-in-law's Derbyshire estate, thereby aiding the launch of the petroleum industry in 1847. Playfair's researches for the Geological Survey mostly concerned coal gases, colliery explosions, and an analysis of the coal best suited to the navy's steamships. Elected as a fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1848, his reputation was reaffirmed in an outstanding study of the loss of condensation volume in hydrated minerals, and the discovery of the nitroprussides. 
In 1848-9 Playfair was not only called upon to combat a serious cholera epidemic, but was also recommended by Peel as the best person to assist and advise the prince consort on his new invention for filtering royal sewage to fertilize the Osborne estate. As a fellow German speaker who was widely respected in British industry, Playfair was next appointed, in early 1850, as a special commissioner to assist the prince with his somewhat faltering plans for an international exhibition. Playfair's privileged access to the prince consort initially caused jealousy among the existing commissioners, and a court secretary complained that Playfair was of 'low birth, ordinary appearance and uncouth manners' (Fulford, 218). Diplomatically smoothing away such animosities, Playfair visited northern manufacturers to muster their support for the exhibition, persuading the prince to adopt a display classification more congenial to these potential exhibitors. Before and during the 1851 Great Exhibition Playfair managed the prize-awarding juries and attended to the royal family, a role which rapidly brought appointment as commander of the Bath and gentleman usher to the prince consort. 
In November 1851 Playfair was appointed professor of chemistry at the new government-run School of Mines. He now attacked the complacency he saw arising from the easy predominance of British manufacturers among the Great Exhibition's prize-winners. At the prince's behest, in 1852, Playfair undertook a tour of European universities and colleges to ascertain the education in arts and sciences available in rival countries. His conclusions were unfavourable for the economic future of British manufacturing, and his well-attended School of Mines lecture, 'Industrial instruction on the continent', provoked a debate on the need for national promotion of technical education. In 1853 Playfair was appointed as secretary for science, alongside Henry Cole as secretary for art, in the newly constituted Department of Science and Art (DSA). Despite the prince consort's close involvement with the constitution of the DSA and Playfair's ready access to him at court, Playfair's years at the DSA were not productive. He tried to launch a national scheme of science schools co-ordinated through a central administration in South Kensington, but found himself 'preaching in the wilderness' to an unsympathetic population (Reid, 152). Playfair's troubles culminated in 1855 when his first wife died, leaving him in charge of two young children. 
Apart from an investigation of ferrocyanides, the bereaved Playfair accomplished little until 1857. Then marriage to the wealthy Jean Ann Millington (died 1877) enabled him to buy out half of his work for the DSA, and later brought him another daughter, Ethel Mary. Playfair also accepted the presidency of the Chemical Society for two years, during which time he took up the professorship of chemistry at Edinburgh University, in 1858. There he was active in the politics of the Senatus, but still had to pay for his extensive teaching laboratories out of his personal funds. Reluctantly resigning his position at court, Playfair none the less retained the faith of the queen and consort, who sent their sons Albert Edward, prince of Wales, and Alfred, duke of Edinburgh, to study under him; Playfair famously instructed the former to plunge his moistened hand into a vat of boiling white lead to demonstrate the harmlessness of this experiment. Much saddened by the prince consort's death in 1861, Playfair paid tribute to the prince in his work for the 1862 international exhibition, and co-ordinated plans for the Edinburgh memorial to him in 1863-4. 
Playfair later described his tenure at Edinburgh as that of a quiet academic life, yet up to 1863, and occasionally thereafter, he and his assistants -- notably Frederick Guthrie and James Dewar -- busied themselves in laboratory researches chiefly concerning the density of carbon allotropes, vapour densities of volatile liquids, and the constitution of salts. Parliamentary calls for Playfair's expert advice were unremitting, however, and in 1862-3 he chaired a royal commission which recommended the abolition of ineffective seasonal restrictions on herring fishing. More controversial was the outcome of the 1865 royal commission on the cattle plague (the rampant rinderpest), the unpopularly ruthless conclusions of which were only implemented after widespread reading of Playfair's pamphlet on the history of the disease's recurrence. In 1867 Playfair took his own long-held educational concerns to parliament in lobbying for an investigation of the outcome of the Paris Universal Exhibition. His somewhat personal interpretation as exhibition juror was that a decline in British industrial prestige was attributable to a national deficiency in technical instruction. Such was the widespread anxiety that Playfair succeeded in cultivating on this matter, that a select committee was set up to investigate under Bernhard Samuelson in 1868. 
In the same year Playfair helped to secure electoral representation for the Scottish universities, thereby creating the seat for Edinburgh and St Andrews universities for which Playfair himself stood in November 1868. Although generally an avowed 'Gladstonian' Liberal, Playfair won over this tory constituency by his reputation in public services and the 'strong bond of attachment' he enjoyed with his many former students (Reid, 210). On taking up his Westminster seat in 1869 after resigning his chair, Playfair also found himself representing the concerns of science, Sir Joseph Hooker dubbing him in 1873 as 'the only scientific man' to whom the government cared to listen on educational matters (Imperial College Playfair MSS, fol. 358). Playfair's speeches were prominent in debates on health issues, but were especially decisive in the collapse of Gladstone's 'Irish Universities Bill'. Playfair's appointment as postmaster-general in 1873 acknowledged his invention of the postcard in 1870, but also served to soften his criticisms of Gladstone's administration. 
After losing the position of postmaster-general after the general election of 1874, Playfair devoted time to managing the business affairs of the 1851 commissioners, whose ranks he had joined in 1869. Before long Disraeli asked him to preside over a commission inquiring into the administration of the civil service. Its first report of 1875 established the basis of the unjustly eponymous 'Playfair scheme' which introduced competitive examinations and two streams of appointments, thereby earning Playfair the recurrent antagonism of clerks in the lower tier. In 1875-6 he engaged in the heated parliamentary debates on vivisection, promoting a bill on behalf of physiologists that sanctioned painful experiments when performed under anaesthesia, rendering Playfair the target of highly personalized attacks from antivivisectionists. In 1877 Playfair was disappointed at the widespread indifference which greeted his efforts for the Scottish university commission of 1876, and his distress was heightened by the death of his second wife. 
In the summer of that year Playfair travelled to the USA, where he met Edith Russell, whom he married in 1878, thereby forging strong family links to the American continent. On returning to Westminster he was given the delicate task of chairing a committee to adjudicate on Manchester's plans for a scheme to draw water from Lake Thirlmere. At the general election in 1879 Playfair found his tory constituents increasingly disaffected, but narrowly retained his seat. He was appointed by Gladstone as deputy speaker and chairman of ways and means the following year. The issue of Irish home rule dominated this administration, as a result of which Playfair had to deal with many attempts by Irish MPs to obstruct the operations of the house. The press attacked Playfair's toleration of their tactics, but also criticized his reluctant (and yet well-precedented) move to suspend several offending MPs from the house in July 1882. Finding that the cabinet did not support his interpretation of the precedent, Playfair later resigned; he was made KCB in 1883 at the speaker's insistence, but this was no consolation for his lost prospect of a cabinet position. On the back benches Playfair successfully defended his 1876 'Cruelty to Animals Bill' against the vocal opposition of antivivisectionists, and spoke persuasively in favour of compulsory vaccination; he also became honorary secretary of the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851, and sought to redress the financial deficits of the prince consort's legacy. 
Playfair's reputation outside Westminster came to the fore again in 1885 when he served as president of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. After his Irish sympathies forced him to relinquish his university seat he was overwhelmed by offers of new parliamentary constituencies, and settled for the chiefly working-class district of South Leeds. In Gladstone's short ministry of 1886, Playfair was vice-president of the committee of council on education, but out of office later that year he once again promoted the causes of technical education and now also spoke out more vigorously on workers' wages, free trade, and transatlantic harmony. By the time he stood down as secretary of the 1851 commissioners in 1889, he had transformed their finances to yield an annual surplus of $5000 devoted to 1851 Exhibition scholarships for domestic and colonial students; in the same year Playfair published his principal public addresses in 'Subjects of Social Welfare'. 
Playfair was created Baron Playfair of St Andrews in 1892, whereupon he left the Commons and was made lord-in-waiting to Queen Victoria. In the following years he spoke in favour of university extension, advised on the Venezuela question, and served on a royal commission on the aged poor that proposed state pensions. On Lord Rosebery's recommendation his political eminence was rewarded by his appointment as GCB in 1895. Despite failing health, in 1897 Playfair proposed the creation of a new museum at South Kensington, proposing the title 'Victorian Museum' in honour of the queen's jubilee. He did not, however, live to see its opening as the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1899: affected 'profoundly' by Gladstone's recent death (Reid, 465), Playfair died at his home, 68 Onslow Gardens, South Kensington, on 29 May 1898, and was buried by the ruined cathedral of St Andrews on 4 June. He was survived by his third wife. 
In appearance Playfair was short with a 'fine' head of 'massive moulding' (Reid, 10), and had a countenance which so closely resembled that of his friend Charles Wheatstone that Mrs Wheatstone once mistook Playfair for her own husband. He maintained a passionate commitment to Scottish affairs and a singular sympathy for German culture throughout his life, and his considerable tact and conversational skill enabled Playfair to move with relative ease through the company of manufacturers, politicians, and the royal family alike -- although some scientists resented his haughty manner. His speeches on scientific and parliamentary subjects were 'luminous' in delivery (Roscoe), albeit often diplomatic in content, and divulged no religious convictions. Latterly, Playfair accrued substantial wealth through his successive marriages, directorships, and a period serving as chairman of the Bovril Company. Considering Playfair's contributions to health and education, and his prominence in over five decades of royal commissions and parliamentary inquiries, posterity might not share the opinion of his friend and biographer Reid that Playfair's life was 'most useful' but not a 'great' one (Reid, 5). 


@@@@@


doc= 22369


Playfair, Sir Robert Lambert (1828-1899), author and colonial administrator, born at St Andrews, Fife, on 21 March 1828, was the grandson of James Playfair, principal of the University of St Andrews, and the third son of George Playfair (1782-1846), chief inspector-general of hospitals in Bengal, and his wife, Janet (died 1862), the daughter of John Ross. Lyon Playfair, Baron Playfair, was his elder brother. After an education in St Andrews and at Addiscombe College, he entered the Royal (Madras) Artillery in 1846. In 1861 he was transferred to the Madras staff corps, and in 1863 he was given the local rank of lieutenant-colonel at Zanzibar. He retired from the army as lieutenant-colonel on 1 November 1867. In 1851 he married Agnes Ranken, the daughter of Major-General Thomas Webster, of Belgarvie, Fife; they had five sons and two daughters. 
From November 1848 to May 1850 Playfair was associated with Sir James Outram in a quasi-political mission to Syria. From March 1852 until September 1853 he served as assistant executive engineer at Aden, and in 1854, when Outram became first political resident there, the latter chose Playfair as his assistant. In this capacity, under Outram and his successors, Playfair remained at Aden until 1862. He acted as temporary political resident from 19 April 1860 to 30 October 1861, and for a short time in 1862. While assistant resident he took a share in suppressing the traffic in slaves between Arabia and Somaliland, and in the events connected with the British occupation of Perim in 1857. He had qualified as interpreter of Arabic, and used his time at Aden to research the history of that part of Arabia. His work was published at Bombay as 'History of Arabia Felix, or, Yemen from the commencement of the Christian era to the present time' (1859), including an account of the British settlement at Aden. In 1860 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. 
On 17 December 1862 Playfair was appointed political agent at Zanzibar, and in July 1863 became consul there. On 20 June 1867 he became consul-general in Algeria, where he remained for the rest of his diplomatic career. On 16 March 1885 he was made consul-general for Algeria and Tunis, and on 2 August 1889 consul-general for the territory of Algeria and the northern coast of Africa. He acquired an extensive knowledge not only of Algeria, but of the Mediterranean countries generally, visiting among other places the Balearic Islands and Tunis, where in 1876 he explored the Khomair country, previously almost unknown to Europeans. In 1874 he wrote 'A Handbook for Travellers in Algeria', published in Murray's series; a second edition including Tunis appeared in 1878, and a fifth in 1895. In 1881 he wrote for the same series 'A Handbook to the Mediterranean Cities, Coasts, and Islands', which reached a third edition in 1890. During his residence in Algeria he studied the official archives of the consulate, and in 1884 he produced 'The Scourge of Christendom', an interesting account of British relations with Algeria until the French conquest in 1830. His most valuable work in connection with the Barbary states was 'A Bibliography of Algeria from the Expedition of Charles V in 1541 to 1887' (1888). This work, which originally appeared among the 'Supplementary Papers' of the Royal Geographical Society, was completed in 1898 by a supplement carrying the bibliography from the earliest times to 1895. In 1889 he brought out 'The Bibliography of Tripoli and the Cyrenaica', from the earliest times to 1889, which was also included among the 'Supplementary Papers', and finally in 1892 he prepared, in conjunction with Dr Robert Brown, 'A Bibliography of Morocco from the Earliest Times to 1891'. These works were of the most exhaustive character. 'The Bibliography of Tunisia' (1889), which completes the series, was prepared by Henry Spencer Ashbee. 
On 29 May 1886 Playfair was nominated KCMG. At the meeting of the British Association at Leeds in 1890 he presided over the geographical section. He retired from the diplomatic service on a pension on 1 December 1896. In January 1899 he received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of St Andrews. He died at his residence, 18 Queen's Gardens, St Andrews, on 18 February 1899. 


