@@@@@


doc= 22370


Playfair, William (1759-1823), inventor of statistical graphs and writer on political economy, was born on 22 September 1759 at the manse, Liff, near Dundee, the fifth of eight children of the Revd James Playfair (1712-1772), of the parish of Liff and Benvie, and Margaret Young (1719/20-1805). Much of his early education was the responsibility of his brother John Playfair (1748-1819), who was later to become professor of mathematics and natural philosophy at Edinburgh University. William married Mary Morris, probably in 1779, and they had two sons and three daughters between 1780 and 1792. 
In 1786 and 1801, Playfair invented three fundamental forms of statistical graph -- the time-series line graph, the bar chart, and the pie chart -- and he did so without significant precursors. Hence he is the creator of all the basic styles of graph with the exception of the scatterplot, which did not appear until the end of the nineteenth century. A few examples of line graphs precede Playfair, but these are mostly representations of theoretical functions with data superimposed and are conspicuous by their isolation. His contributions to the development of statistical graphics remain his life's signal accomplishment. Although this work was received with indifference, he rightly never faltered in his conviction that he had found the best way to display empirical data. In the two centuries since, there has been no appreciable improvement on his designs. 
Playfair was uniquely prepared by education and circumstances for these innovations. He was apprenticed (1774-7) under Andrew Meikle, millwright to the Rennie family, at the Houston Mill on the Phantassie estate, near East Linton. The fourth son of the family, John Rennie, was a fellow engineer-in-training. Thereafter, Playfair was taken on by Boulton and Watt in Birmingham, spending much of his tenure (1777-81) working in James Watt's house at Harper's Hill, preparing and copying drawings of the steam engines. Playfair idolized his master and wrote of him (1819) with admiration on Watt's death. 
Playfair was acquainted with the members of the Lunar Society, including Joseph Priestley, whose chronological diagrams inspired the bar chart, and James Keir. Playfair and Keir were associates in the company formed to market Watt's copying machine, but this venture had little success. Between 1781 and 1785 Playfair applied for and obtained four patents for working metals, elaborations of the methods previously developed at the Soho manufactory of Boulton and Watt. Keir disputed the originality, believing that his own ideas had been appropriated, and there was an acrimonious breach. Towards the end of 1781 Playfair left Boulton and Watt with William Wilson, a co-worker, to set up as silversmiths and platemakers in Marylebone, Middlesex. The partnership did not prosper; large debts were run up and the enterprise foundered. An often-to-be-repeated pattern of grand purpose, conflict with others, suspicion of wrongdoing, and ultimate business failure was thus established. 
Playfair started to write about economics in the 'Regulation of the Interest of Money' (1785); he wrote both for gain and from conviction. His several subsequent books and pamphlets on economics include one of the first critical editions (1805) of Adam Smith's 'Wealth of Nations'. It contained sharp criticism of Smith's ideas together with supplementary material to bring the work up to date, but this edition was not well received. 
Although a preliminary manuscript circulated privately in the previous year, Playfair's 'Commercial and Political Atlas' of 1786 was the first publication to contain statistical charts. The 'Atlas' was devoted to an examination of English trade during the eighteenth century. Though modelled on the familiar geographical atlas, it contained no maps. It was unusual in format: the layout was landscape and the charts were mostly foldouts, two to three times larger than the volume itself. In the charts, Playfair plotted pounds sterling against time in forty-four time-series line graphs. The book also contained a solitary bar chart, an oddity made necessary because he did not have sufficient data to construct a line graph. Ironically, this was the only graph not to include time as a dimension despite the inspiration of Priestley's (1765) chronological charts. Playfair sought forgiveness for the shortcoming: 'This Chart... does not comprehend any portion of time, and it is much inferior in utility to those that do' (Playfair, 'Atlas', 101). 
The graphs in the 'Atlas' differ little from those in use today: hachure, shading, colour coding, and grids with major and minor divisions were employed. The charts were used to depict actual, missing, and hypothetical data, the various forms being differentiated by the kind of line used, solid or broken. In addition to functional variation, many charts emphasized area, indicating accumulated or total amounts. All included a descriptive title in the body of the chart and labelling of the axes. The first and second editions contained the numerical data -- inserted at James Watt's urging -- but by the third edition Playfair had sufficient confidence to discard the tables. As he certainly did in later publications, Playfair probably engraved the lines on the copper printing plates himself, drawing on his experience as an engineer. 
Despite isolated critical favour, this foray into publishing and economics earned Playfair neither riches nor reputation and he left for Paris in 1787. English industry and commerce were in the vanguard and Playfair believed that he would be well placed to profit in a France striving to industrialize. His new aim was to establish a rolling mill in the style of Boulton and Watt. Although Louis XVI himself approved the plan, nothing came of it, and Playfair abandoned engineering for the world of enterprise. 
Playfair entered into a partnership with Joel Barlow, lawyer, sometime poet, and Parisian representative of the American Scioto Land Company. The bungled efforts of the Scioto partners to make their fortunes and to establish a colony of French settlers on the Ohio River in 1789-91 is a fascinating episode in early American history, the full story of which will probably never be told. The enterprise involved distinguished figures of the American War of Independence and Playfair's participation is a quirk of history. Suspected of embezzlement in the collapse, he was subsequently involved in other legal entanglements before leaving France shortly before the terror of 1793. 
Playfair spent the years between 1793 and 1814 in London, with occasional trips to the continent. He attempted to emulate the freewheeling schemes he had seen succeed in revolutionary Paris, but without success. Playfair narrowly escaped prosecution by the Bank of England in 1797 in connection with a bank that he and Jan Caspar Hartsinck had established. He continued to write, his eventual output numbering over one hundred books and pamphlets. He co-edited a daily paper, 'The Tomahawk', that lasted but 113 issues, and also a weekly, 'Anticipation', that endured no longer. He inevitably fell back on engineering, working as a gun-carriage maker, and supplemented his income by dubious means. One swindle led to conviction at the court of king's bench in 1805. 
During this period, Playfair published several tracts that included graphs, the most notable being 'Lineal Arithmetic' (1798) and 'Decline and Fall of Powerful and Wealthy Nations' (1805). In the 'Statistical Breviary' (1801), he introduced the circle diagram and pie chart that used area to represent the relative sizes of geographical regions. In 1809-11 he published his massive 'British Family Antiquity' (9 vols.), which contained illustrations and chronological diagrams; hopes of money were clearly the driving force. 
Playfair's charts were not readily accepted, especially in Britain. This may be ascribed to a resistance to illustration in scientific writing, technical difficulties of production and publication, and concerns regarding accuracy that were not eased by Playfair's occasional carelessness and his less than reputable personal standing. He was received more kindly in Germany and France, gaining widespread approval, from the professional geographer Alexander von Humboldt to the amateur Louis XVI, in whose opinion the charts 'spoke all languages and were very clear and easily understood' (Playfair, unpublished MS, 1822-3). The charts started to catch on in Britain, by reverse diffusion, more than fifty years after their conception there. Yet, even as late as the early twentieth century, Playfair's role in the invention of statistical graphs was little known. 
Playfair returned to France after the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy but his proneness to disputation soon made him unwelcome and he moved back to London. In his remaining years, he seems to have lost enthusiasm and energy for the 'grand scheme'. Life cannot have been easy for one accustomed to seeing large sums come and go in the speculations of his middle years. In 1816 he descended to extortion when he attempted to broker the sale, to Lord Archibald Douglas, of papers alleged to relate to the Douglas cause of half a century earlier. The documents almost certainly never existed and the blackmail did not succeed. In the same year, he used a similar tactic to procure a 'loan' from his fellow former apprentice John Rennie, by this time celebrated for Waterloo Bridge and other familiar constructions. 
Playfair's final years saw a renewed interest in economics and his last publications include several charts, including some exceptional examples. His interest in agricultural matters was the stimulus for the last two works (1821, 1822) that examined the difficulties experienced by English farmers in the early nineteenth century. William Playfair died in poverty on 11 February 1823 at Covent Garden, London, probably at 43 Bedford Street. He was survived by his wife and four of his children, one of whom, Andrew William, had emigrated to Canada where he became prominent in the military and was successful in private business, founding the town of Playfairville, Ontario, not far from Ottawa. Andrew William persuaded his elder brother and sister, John and Elizabeth, to join him in Canada and their descendants have since prospered and spread throughout the dominion. 


@@@@@


doc= 22371


Playfair, William Henry (1790-1857), architect, was born in London on 7 July 1790, the younger son of the expatriate architect James Playfair (1755-1794), who died when William was four, and his wife, Jessie. That his widow sold her husband's drawings to Sir John Soane and involved the latter in completing works at Cairness House, Buchan, gives an indication of his father's milieu and standing. Ten years later Playfair was sent north to complete his education in Edinburgh, in the house of his bachelor uncle Professor John Playfair (1748-1819), a noted mathematician and natural philosopher, and one of the principal illuminati of post-Enlightenment Edinburgh, of whom he later wrote that he was 'one that I have much cause to revere and love' (Playfair, letter book 7). There he met future friends and clients likewise being educated from that house -- particularly the brothers Andrew and James Rutherfurd, who became his own virtual brothers. Indeed, when later 'suffering under the doctor and the lancet' (as he frequently was), he would stay in the country at Craigiehall, with Andrew Rutherfurd (now lord advocate) 'living on physic and slops' (Playfair, letter book 7). Andrew's wife, Sofia, came to take the responsibility for engaging Playfair's domestic staff. Whereas most of his rivals were sons of builders or self-made, Playfair, as a second-generation architect, regarded himself as a gentleman. 
Educated at Edinburgh University, Playfair returned to his family in London on graduating 'c'.1809, there attending both Robert Smirke's office (where his immediate superior was William Burn) and James Wyatt's. He returned to Edinburgh to make a 'special study' of architecture in William Stark's office until the latter's death in 1813. Nothing is known of the next three years of his life, although his student drawings in the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland collection show him painstakingly copying masters such as Stark and the brothers Adam, improving his perspective, and developing his stupendous finished drawing technique with the advice of his friend the artist Hugh 'Grecian' Williams. He also took the opportunity to accompany his uncle to Paris. At some point Playfair visited Dublin, frequently revisited London (whose architecture he excoriated as lacking the excellence derived from patient study), and in 1843 visited his doctor brother in Italy. He refused to visit Rome, however, and was suitably appalled by the excesses of Florence. Like that of Alexander 'Greek' Thomson, his classical architecture was one derived from the best sources and refined in his intellect: reality could prove disappointing. 
In 1816, however, Playfair was one of nine architects to submit designs for the completion of Edinburgh University's Old College. His plan for a single court, his attention to proportion and symmetry, and his evident homage to Robert Adam's design, led the professors to select his designs unanimously, substantially ahead of his nearest rival, William Burn. Refining his designs and building from an office on site, he spent much of his attention on the university over the following nine years. The outstanding library (now called the Playfair Library) has a coffered barrel-vaulted ceiling and rows of giant Corinthian columns with echoes of E.-L. Boullee's Temple to the Supreme Being. Playfair achieved the paradoxical distinction of producing an austere building with limited decoration whose very form was intensely rich and picturesque. 
The university was the first of six Playfair buildings which underpinned Edinburgh's claim to be the Athens of the north. In 1818 he was appointed architect of the observatory on Calton Hill, an underscaled Temple of the Winds with a portico to each direction; he was also the architect of the Royal Institution (now the Royal Scottish Academy) on the Mound (1822; extended north and flamboyantly and richly reclothed from 1832) and executant architect under C. R. Cockerell for the National Monument on Calton Hill (1824-8), of which only the western portico was completed, and also designed the proudly austere Royal College of Surgeons, Nicholson Street (1830-32), and the National Gallery on the Mound (1850-57). Their mostly indifferent sites, which contemporaries lamented, Playfair turned to advantage, lending an Attic dignity and almost mythology to each. The emphasis was on very heavy modelling to emphasize light, shade, and monumentality, sparingly used but powerful carved detail, and compositions which carried the eye upward to the skyline. Only in Dollar Academy (1818) did he undertake something comparable outside Edinburgh. 
Almost certainly Playfair had been in Stark's office when the latter entered the 1811 competition for the layout of Calton Hill with a report emphasizing the need for the architecture to complement rather than dominate the landscape. That might explain why the commissioners approached the wholly inexperienced Playfair rather than those building the second New Town, for the layout and design of Calton Hill in 1818. It was to be Playfair's first housing layout, and was awarded without competition. His emphasis was upon the 'nature of the ground' rather than neatness of plan on paper. The streets on Calton Hill and the lands north emphasized the contours, and in Royal Terrace (1821 onwards) he produced a lengthy avenue of unmatchable grandeur, punctuated by pavilions with giant-order columns, facing out over the proposed main route to London, and to the sea. At the next level down, Blenheim Place, he turned corners with masterly scenography with curved pavilions with giant colonnades, providing focus for the plainer houses between. The northern parts of the scheme toward Leith proved abortive through the bureaucratic stupidity of proprietors being charged taxes by both Edinburgh and Leith since they could not agree boundaries. 
Given Playfair's identification with the Greek revival and the Athens of the north, it comes as a surprise to see that that was not his contemporaries' perception. John Murray Graham, a friend and client, considered him equally adept in Roman and Greek classical, modern Italian, Gothic, Tudor, and Scottish baronial: in other words, eclectic. It was, rather, more a matter of appropriateness, and response to the picturesque qualities of site. Whereas Italianate classical had suited the new-built Dunphail, Moray, Dunbanagher, Ireland, and Belmont, Edinburgh (all 1828), a Scottish revivalism seemed correct for the romantic extensions in the Edinburgh hinterland he then provided between 1830 and 1845 for his friends, beginning in 1830 with Grange (Sir Thomas Dick Lauder) and Prestongrange, East Lothian (E. G. Suttie), and followed by Meadowbank (1835 for Lord Meadowbank), Craigcrook (1835 for Lord Jeffrey), Bonaly (1836 for Lord Cockburn), Barmore, Argyll (1838 for John Campbell), and Lauriston (1845 for Andrew Rutherfurd). 
Most of Playfair's over sixty commissions were restricted to the vicinity of Edinburgh, for he appears (maybe for health reasons) to have disliked travelling. From 'c'.1819 until his death he lived at 17 Great Stuart Street, Edinburgh. His letter books imply a number of smaller commissions of repair and alteration (for example, Blackhope Farmhouse, Mortonhall, and Castle Grant, Inverness-shire), which he may never have visited. Some major schemes which remained abortive include his grandly classical scheme in 1829 for a quadrangular Advocates' Library facing George IV Bridge which was abandoned; and once his client referred his 1837 portfolio of plans for the rebuilding of Buchanan, Stirlingshire, for judgment by Charles Barry in London, nothing more was heard of the project. The majority of his projects were built during his first fifteen years of practice, when the pressure must sometimes have appeared insupportable. Only three major Edinburgh institutions were constructed thereafter: Donaldson's Hospital (from 1842), the Free College (from 1846), and the National Gallery (from 1850). 
Playfair's office was meticulously run. Each project had a serially numbered set of drawings, in which virtually no latitude was allowed to builder or craftsman: steps, chimneypieces, dados, cornices, and skirtings were alike detailed with as precise measurements as the principal parts of the building. Compared with his contemporaries, Playfair appears to have produced an extraordinary number of drawings for each project: he maintained absolute control of the design through some very rough, large-scaled initial pencil sketches of, say carvings, followed by the necessary plans, elevations, and sections, very few stupendous worked-up elevations or perspectives, and countless sheets of smallish hard-edged details on stiff yellow paper. When Playfair visited a site he scrutinized the work carefully, issuing letters of dismay to the builders about bad building practice, insufficient labour on site, or deviation from specification in the workmanship of drains. They must have dreaded his visits. 
Very little contractual detail survives, other than an excellent specification for the dairy at Floors, Roxburghshire (Playfair, letter book 7, 10). The sheer quantity of drawings produced between 1817 and 1827 is sufficient to justify either a much larger office than he had (although the celebrated Dundee Harbour engineer James Leslie was his pupil over six years during this period) or his later claim that the collapse of his health -- never mind his solitary and often sad life -- was the consequence of his dedication to his art, despite the protection offered by his friends. Yet his library included, among excellent editions of Vitruvius and Palladio, many topographical works, books on Elizabethan architecture, building construction, and engravings by Grecian Williams, works by Ruskin (demonstrating that he was keeping up to date), and a good supply of novels. His work was almost his entire life -- but not quite. 
Playfair was not easy. He was fastidious, shunned what he regarded as uncouth and rude, and was quick to take offence; even friends and colleagues had to tread warily. In 1829 he had been elected as one of only seven architect members of the Royal Scottish Academy, but he later shunned professional circles and did not join the Architectural Institute of Scotland after its foundation in 1849-50. The artist David Roberts described him as a 'difficult customer', and David Octavius Hill, acting as client on behalf of the Royal Scottish Academy, had to coax him back to act for the academy in the new National Gallery after another prickly resignation. In 1845 he likewise resigned after six years as an officer of the board of the Scottish Widows, following another imagined slight. Despite his success with Edinburgh University, he latterly refused to enter competitions, perhaps in disenchantment with Donaldson's Hospital (won in competition against David Hamilton and James Gillespie Graham): 'I am resolved to adhere to my original determination to produce no plan [for the Free College] in competition' (Playfair, letter book 7). So the trustees abandoned the competition, and appointed him. Playfair responded with a cloistered Oxbridge college planned with genius so that its twin towers framed the axis between the tower of Tolbooth St John's and the pediment of the Royal Institution. Had his plan for the Mound been adopted, the National Gallery would have formed part of the composition. 
Playfair's health deteriorated after the early 1840s, when his sister Jessie came to live with him. His declining years were dominated by Donaldson's Hospital and the National Gallery. The former, an enormous quadrangle in the Elizabethan manner he had used to refashion the skyline and rebuild the offices of Floors (from 1837), displays the influence of the many books on Elizabethan architecture in his library. He desired it to be English in character, somewhere where Henry VIII might have met Anne Bullen (Boleyn). Most contemporaries regarded the hospital as his best design, although several lamented its lack of the vigorous three-dimensionality of, say, Heriot's Hospital. Like Floors, it was a paradox of a clear classical plan with a coruscating skyline. The National Gallery, back in the city, was a return to neo-classicism: two art galleries side by side within a single frame, a spine wall running down the centre. As built (lacking its original towers), the decoration is limited to Ionic columns and pilasters, pediments, and cornice. The rich red romantic interior decorated by David Ramsay Hay was encased within a shell of supreme plain elegance. If eclectic he ever had been, at the last Playfair had returned to Grecian purity. Playfair died at his home in Edinburgh on 19 March 1857 and was buried there in Dean cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 22372


Playfere, Thomas (c.1562-1609), Church of England clergyman, was the second son of William Playfere (died 1596) and his wife, Alice, of Hawkehurst, Kent, although university records indicate that he had links with London; a portrait of 1597 indicates that he was then thirty-five, or in his thirty-fifth year. He matriculated pensioner of St John's College, Cambridge, in December 1576, was admitted scholar on 5 November 1579, graduated BA in 1580, proceeded MA in 1583, and was elected fellow on 10 April 1584. His college offices included Linacre lecturer in medicine (1588), preacher (1591-2), and Hebrew praelector (1593-4). He proceeded BD in 1590 and DD in 1595, and was elected Lady Margaret professor of divinity in December 1596, having been incorporated at Oxford that year. 
Playfere credited his university education to Sir George Carey, knight marshal. He established a reputation as a brilliant orator and preacher. In 1592 Thomas Nashe (also under the patronage of Carey and a former member of St John's) called him 'mellifluous PLAYFERE', adding: 'I cannot bethinke mee of two in England in all things comparable to him for is time. Seldome have I beheld so pregnant a pleasaunt wit coupled with a memorie of such huge incomprehensible receipt, deepe reading and delight better mixt than in his Sermons. ('Works of Thomas Nashe', 1.314)' Playfere's prose makes extravagant use of rhetorical devices, thematic imagery, and allegory. It was sometimes judged excessive; in his 'Directions for Speech and Style' (1599) John Hoskins warned of the over-use of antithesis by citing how Playfere used it 'thirty times in one sermon'. Evidence of his style's popularity can be seen in the pirated publication of Playfere's sermon preached at St Mary's Hospital, London, in Easter week 1595; several authorized editions subsequently appeared as 'The Meane in Mourning' (1596, 1597). Thomas Fuller testified to his reputation as a fluent Latinist, something corroborated by Francis Bacon's choice of him to translate his 'Advancement of Learning' (1605) from English to Latin. 
Doctrinally Playfere was a Calvinist: in his 1600 commencement oration he sharply refuted John Overall's anti-Calvinism. Playfere seems to have been ambitious to a fault. He was re-elected to his professorship until his death, but by increasingly slim margins. In 1599 he unsuccessfully petitioned courtiers for support of his candidacy for the mastership of Clare College; in 1605 the fellows of Pembroke College, Cambridge, protested against Playfere's designs for election as their master; and in 1608 he sought Viscount Cranborne's assistance in securing his last re-election as Lady Margaret professor. The large number of Playfere's sermons preached before James and his court suggests that he may have been made a chaplain-in-ordinary after 1603; the prince of Wales's feathers added to his portrait suggest service to Prince Henry. He was granted the crown living of Cheam, Surrey, in 1605, allegedly through Lord Chancellor Ellesmere; in 1608 he was presented to the rectory of Shipdham, Norfolk, by Sir Henry Gawdy. 
From 1602 Playfare suffered from a recurring mental disorder. John Chamberlain gossiped in November 1602 that 'Dr. Plaifer... is lately crackt in the headpeece' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.169), and John Manningham noted in December 'that Playfare hath bin halfe frantike again, and strangely doted for one Mrs. Hammond, a gentlewoman in Kent' ('Diary of John Manningham', 155). On 13 March 1603 Playfere married Alice Grinling at Dickleburgh, Norfolk. By June 1608 his mind had failed again, and a deputy delivered his commencement address. He died intestate in Cambridge on 1 February 1609, and was buried in St Botolph's, Cambridge, on 3 February. His widow, who was granted administration of his estate, erected a monument there with Playfere's bust and a panegyric Latin epitaph. John Hacket recalled how his 'greatest well-wishers did not wish him alive again, because his rarely beautified Wits... were now more and more distermper'd'. John Williams pronounced a funeral oration in Playfere's style in St John's, after which 'it was in every Mouth, that Playferes Eloquence was not dead' (Hacket, 10). Several sermons appeared separately after his death, and reprints and collected editions continued until the civil war; the most complete is 'The Whole Sermons' (1623). 


@@@@@


doc= 22373


Henry Playford (1657-1709), music publisher, was born on 5 May 1657 and baptized at the Temple Church on 14 May, the only surviving son of John Playford (1622/3-1686/7), and his wife, Hannah ('c'.1633-1679); his godfathers were Henry Lawes and an elder Henry Playford. He issued the first three volumes of 'The Theatre of Music' (1685-6) jointly with Robert Carr; this partnership did not last, and he published the fourth volume alone in 1687. From 1696 to 1703 Henry traded in the Temple Change 'over against St Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street' but in the second edition of 'The Divine Companion' (1707) he advertised books and prints for sale from a room 'up one pair of Stairs next the Queen's-Head Tavern over against the Middle Temple Gate'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22374


Playford, John (1622/3-1686/7), music publisher, was born in Norwich, a son of John Playford (died 1639), mercer of Norwich, and his second wife. He may have been educated at the almonry, or cathedral choir school, in Norwich and on 23 March 1640 was apprenticed to the London stationer John Benson. He was granted his freedom on 5 April 1647 and leased a shop in or adjoining the porch of the Temple Church, where he traded for the rest of his working life. 
Playford's earliest publications included pamphlets revealing royalist sympathies, such as 'A perfect narrative of the whole proceedings of the high cort of justice in the tryall of the king, &c.', registered with the Stationers' Company on 22 January 1649. Such activities led to the issue of a warrant for his arrest: the precise consequences are unknown, but his career seems to have been interrupted until late 1650, when 'The English Dancing Master' was registered on 7 November. Appearing in ten editions between 1651 and 1698, it contained instructions for the dances themselves as well as their melodies. It was followed in 1651 by 'A Musicall Banquet', consisting of three sections containing music in tablature for lyra viol, dances in two parts, and a collection of catches, each developed in later, separate publications. He went on to produce many volumes of vocal and instrumental music, sometimes in partnership with other stationers, including his master Benson and his own former apprentice Zacharia Watkins. In 1653 he issued 'A catalogue of all the musick-bookes that have been printed in England, either for voyce or instruments', substantially a historic record rather than an advertisement of material currently available (BL, Harleian MS 5936, no. 421). His comprehensive musical primer, 'An Introduction to the Skill of Musick', incorporating material by Thomas Campion and Christopher Simpson, first published in 1654, was still available in 1730, the twelfth edition of 1694 having been revised by Henry Purcell. 
About the beginning of 1653 Playford married Hannah ('c'.1633-1679), schoolmistress, probably the daughter of Benjamin Allen and Hannah Allen, booksellers, of Pope's Head Alley. The Playfords' first son, Samuel, was baptized in the Temple Church on 29 December 1653, and he was followed by Thomas (born 9 April, baptized 22 April 1656), Henry, the only child to survive to adulthood ['see below'], and Margaret (born 6 October, baptized 13 October 1659). On 29 October 1653 Playford was appointed clerk of the Temple Church, and in the same year he stated that his house was 'in three Leg Alley, in Fetter Lane, next doore to the red Lyon' near St Dunstan-in-the-West ('A Catalogue of All the Musick-Bookes'). Samuel was buried at St Dunstan's on 5 January 1655, but died in the Temple, where the Playfords may have moved; they did not, however, live above the shop, which was certainly small and probably a single-storey structure. About 1656 they took possession of a house in Islington in which Hannah Playford ran a boarding-school, belatedly advertised in 'Choice Ayres' (1679), where girls might 'be instructed in all manner of curious work, as also reading, writing, musick, dancing, and the French tongue'. Four further children of John and Hannah were baptized or buried at Islington between 1664 and 1670. 
Playford was admitted to the livery of the Stationers' Company on 20 April 1661 and from the same year was permitted to exercise the company's monopoly in the publication of metrical psalm books, the change in his fortunes at the Restoration perhaps being related to his ability to help with the re-establishment of choral services in cathedrals and at the Chapel Royal. On 13 March 1661 he was paid $38 10's'. for providing material for the Chapel Royal; he supplied copies of John Barnard's 'First Book of Selected Church Musick' to Canterbury Cathedral and Westminster Abbey; and in a petition granted on 1 March 1674 he claimed that he 'did procure both the Organ and Books belonging to your majesties Chappell Royall wch had bin Embezled' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/360, no. 215; see Ashbee, 8.216 and 337). Direct intervention from the king certainly brought about Playford's election to the court of assistants of the Stationers' Company on 20 June 1681. From 1675 onwards Playford held a share in the company's English stock. 
In several publications Playford advertised ruled paper, ink, bound manuscript books, and music 'prick'd' in manuscript, the last of these enabling him to offer for sale music too elaborate or limited in appeal to justify a printed edition. Three sources have long been associated with him: BL, Add. MS 31430, containing instrumental works by William Gregory, Matthew Locke, and John Jenkins; Glasgow University Library, Euing Music Collection, MSS R.d.58-61, a set of vocal partbooks dating from about 1659 and associated with the Old Jewry Catch Club, of which Playford was a member; and Paris, Conservatoire, MS Res. 2489, a song book. Comparison of the text hand of these manuscripts with Playford's handwritten dedications in British Library copies of 'Psalms & Hymns in Solemn Musick' (K.1.i.19: 1671) and 'The Second Book of the Pleasant Musical Companion' (K.1.d.24: 1686), and with the registers of the Temple Church during the period when Playford was clerk, leaves no doubt that they were copied by him. In turn, the Glasgow partbooks in particular suggest that his publishing activities were related to musical recreations in which he himself took part. Similarly, his interest in psalm books probably stems from his office as clerk of the Temple Church. 
Playford usually employed a single printing shop in Little Britain, described in an advertisement at the end of 'The Order of Performing the Divine Service in Cathedrals and Collegiate Chappels' bound with the 1679 edition of the 'Introduction' as 'the ancient and only Printing-House in England, for Variety of Musick and Workmen that understand it' as well as 'the usual House for printing Mathematical Bookes'. It belonged in 1651 to Thomas Harper, succeeded in 1656 by William Godbid and in 1679 by Godbid's widow, Anne, and his former apprentice John Playford the younger ['see below']. Playford's publications were not technically innovative, and most were set in movable type using an old-fashioned Granjon typeface. Engraving was employed in special circumstances: for the 1663 'Musick's Hand-Maide', a keyboard book in which chords and six-line staves made ordinary music type impracticable, and for a reissue in 1650 of William Child's psalm book of 1639, for which Playford had acquired the existing plates. The title-page of Purcell's 'Sonnata's of III Parts' of 1683 suggests that Playford published the work on the composer's behalf without financial risk to himself; nevertheless, he played an active part in preparing the edition, because the engraving (by Thomas Cross) imitates John Playford's musical handwriting and was probably modelled on a manuscript exemplar in his hand. 
Playford marketed music as a commercial proposition, aiming for wide distribution in an amateur, middle-class market, and it has sometimes been suggested that his sale of popular material might have undermined and devalued an established musical tradition (Krummel, 114). The criticism overlooks both the number of serious publications issued by Playford or with his help and the varied repertory circulating in manuscript in the later seventeenth century, some of it available from Playford's shop. Arthur Bedford's complaint in 'The Great Abuse of Musick' (1711) that Playford 'had spar'd no Cost or Pains to oblige the World with Smut and Profaneness' (1.67) is an early example of a changing sensibility about obscene catches considered acceptable in male society in Playford's lifetime. In the 1670s Playford planned to print 'a large collection of Full Service and Anthems (with the organ parts) of Four Parts for Sides' (that is, divided between cantoris and decanis for cathedrals) which might have established him as a successor to Barnard: he described this project in his petition granted in 1674, and in the advertisement already mentioned in the 1679 'Introduction' he stated that he abandoned it 'not finding incouragement thereto'. 
After Hannah Playford's death in October 1679 the house in Islington was offered to let for the remaining sixteen years of Playford's lease. Playford moved to a house in Arundel Street 'near the Thames side, the lower end, over against the George', in the parish of St Clement Danes, and in the preface to the fifth book of 'Choice Ayres' (1684) announced that because of 'Age, and the Infirmities of Nature' he was handing the main responsibility for his business over to his son Henry in partnership with Robert Carr. His will, made on 5 November 1686, was neither signed nor witnessed and was not proved until August 1694, when his former apprentice John Bligh and servant Susanna Hammerton testified to its handwriting (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/422, fols. 79'v'-80'v'); he refers to 'losses crosses and sickness' since the death of his wife and warns that his estate will 'come short of the expectation of many of my friends and acquaintance'. No record of his death or burial exists, but he must have died after 24 December 1686, when his last Stationers' Company dividend was collected, and before 7 February 1687, when his share was reallocated to William Cooper. His wish to be interred in the Temple Church must have been respected, because Henry Playford asked in his own will made in 1690 to be buried there next to his father. Playford seems to have been friendly with leading musicians of his time, including John Blow and Henry Purcell, to whom he left mourning rings; in 1687 Purcell composed an elegy on his death, 'Gentle shepherds, you that know', with a text by Nahum Tate. 




Unlike his father, Henry Playford faced considerable competition from other publishers, especially those who sold cheap engraved copies of popular songs. Two sale catalogues of 1690 and 1697 show him attempting to clear old and unwanted stock, and he seems to have tried to raise the standard of published music in terms of both content and presentation, bringing out finely presented volumes, including Henry Purcell's 'Orpheus Britannicus' (book 1, 1698; book 2, 1702) and John Blow's 'Amphion Anglicus' (1700). The death of John Playford the printer in 1685, and the failure of John's sister Eleanor to gain permission to operate the Little Britain shop in her own right, meant that Henry did not have the option of continuing his father's printing arrangements. Although he issued more engraved editions than his father, most of his publications still used movable type: between 1688 and 1695 his main printer was Edward Jones, who produced the first and second books of 'Harmonia sacra' (1688 and 1693) using a Granjon typeface, but from 1695 to 1698 he placed prestigious work such as 'Orpheus Britannicus', book 1, with John Heptinstall, to be printed in his 'new tied note', a round-note typeface in which quavers and semiquavers were beamed together as they would be in manuscript or engraved music. From 1699 major works were printed by William Pearson, who owned another modern typeface, the 'new London character', in which Playford himself had invested. 
Throughout his independent career Playford published non-musical works and was involved in the sale of prints and paintings. From 1698 he adopted various original means of encouraging business: in the 'Post Boy' of 10 September 1698 he advertised a lottery of music books, later deferred because of lack of support, and in the autumn of 1700 the same newspaper gave details of musical societies to be organized in London taverns, an initiative probably related to the publication of the first book of 'Wit and Mirth, or, Pills to Purge Melancholy' in 1699. He announced a plan for music clubs in London and other cities in 'The Second Book of the Pleasant Musical Companion' (1701). Between 1699 and 1702 he issued 'Mercurius Musicus, or, The Monthly Collection of New Teaching Songs', the first English periodical devoted exclusively to music; from 1704 to early 1706 he was connected with the 'Diverting Post'. By 1703 he was in serious financial difficulty: on 4 June he wrote to one Mr Lewis, whom he addressed as 'Cosen', asking for the loan of $10 (Royal College of Music, MS 2214), and on 21 July he approached him again requesting immediate payment of $5 outstanding for a picture, claiming that a man to whom he owed $10 had 'maid a vowe if I Don't pay him this afternoon he will give me Truble to Morrow' (Royal College of Music, MS 2215). On 25 November he filed a chancery suit against Pearson (TNA: PRO, C.10 445/32); the case appears to have been amicably settled out of court, but Pearson's answer shows that Playford in fact owed him $55 9's'. 4died 
On or about 19 December 1688 Henry Playford married Ann (1673-1743), daughter of Thomas Baker, city solicitor of Oxford from 1679 until his death in 1700; a daughter, Ann, was born in 1694 and married Thomas Fitzgerald at St Margaret's, Westminster, in 1728. Identification of Henry Playford's surprisingly young bride is confirmed by a reference to her sister Rachel ('b'. 1676) in his will, and Playford refers to his apprentice John Baker of Oxford, bound to him on 2 March 1702, as his brother (Royal College of Music, MS 2215). The St Clement Danes rate books and the dividend books for the English stock suggest that Henry Playford died between May and 24 December 1709, but his will was not proved until 1721. His widow, who moved to a house in Little Dean's Yard, Westminster, died on 29 June 1743 and was buried in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey on 6 July. In her will she left over $2500. 


@@@@@


doc= 22375


John Playford (1650-1685), music printer, born on 13 March 1650, was a son of the publisher's elder brother or half-brother Matthew Playford, rector of Great Stanmore, Middlesex, and his wife, Eleanor. He was bound apprentice to William Godbid, his uncle's main printer, on 6 November 1666 and freed on 1 December 1673. After Godbid's death in 1679 he worked until 1683 with Anne Godbid, but thereafter ran the Little Britain printing house on his own. His will, proved on 29 April 1685, left his copyhold estate to his mother, then married to Randolph Nicholl, and after her death to his unmarried sister Eleanor. 'E. Playford' is named as one of the publishers of Daniel Newhouse's 'The Whole Art of Navigation' (1685), and the younger Eleanor seems for a time to have managed the printing shop herself, but as she was not a stationer's widow she was not allowed to continue and advertised the printing shop for sale in the 'London Gazette' for 3-6 May 1686. Unable to find a buyer for its specialized equipment, Eleanor unsuccessfully petitioned the king for permission to run the shop herself: she later married William Walker, and the apprentice of the same name bound to Henry Playford on 1 December 1707 was presumably their son. 


@@@@@


doc= 22376


Pleasants, Thomas (1728-1818), benefactor, was born in co. Carlow, the eldest son of William Pleasants and Grace Edwards. Little is known of Pleasants's early life as he did not rise to prominence until his wife of twenty-seven years, Mildred Daunt, died on 1 February 1814 and bequeathed the 86-year-old Pleasants $90,000. Since he had not earned the money himself, as there were no children from the marriage, and because a lawsuit concerning his wife's family over the terms of her will had caused much ill feeling between him and the Daunts, Pleasants felt he could neither spend the money himself nor leave it to any relations. 
Instead Pleasants became a generous supporter of the Royal Dublin Society. In 1809 the society had been unable to respond to a memorial from the woollen weavers of Dublin, so within two months of his inheritance Pleasants spent $14,000, four times the amount mentioned in the memorial, to purchase a plot of ground in Cork Street, where he erected a store tenter house where weavers could dry their wool during the winter. It was estimated that by these means 22,000 men, women, and children were saved from want each year. He also donated many paintings and pictures to the collection of the Royal Dublin Society as well as a sum of $100 to augment the society's library. It was also at his expense that the lodges and entrances of the botanic gardens at Glasnevin, co. Dublin, were erected at a cost of $600. On 22 July 1814 Pleasants received the freedom of the city of Dublin in return for his efforts. Additionally, he donated $6000 to the Meath Hospital, Dublin: $4000 to build an operating room, and the interest of the residue to purchase wine and other necessities for the afflicted. In 1816 he invested $160 to reprint Samuel Madden's 'Reflections and Resolutions Proper for the Gentlemen of Ireland' (1st edn, 1738). The published form, which contained Pleasants's annotations, was to be dispersed free of charge among members of any societies dedicated to the arts, manufactures, and agriculture in Ireland. 
Pleasants died at the age of ninety on 1 March 1818 at 67 Camden Street, Dublin, and was buried at St Bride's graveyard in the city. In his will, which at thirty-two pages had taken two years to write, he left large sums to several Dublin charities: $5000 to the Dublin Fever Hospital in Cork Street; $5000 for the hospital for incurables; $3000 to St Bridget's parish school; $3000 to the Dublin almshouse; $3000 to the Meath charitable loan; and $1000 each to St Luke's charity school, St James parochial school, and a school for females. Most importantly he left his home and $15,000 to establish an orphanage for protestant females, as well as various personal bequests to servants and relatives and $300 to erect a monument to his father-in-law, and the original source of his wealth, Surgeon Daunt. In recognition of his bequests Pleasants has a street in Dublin named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22377


Plechelm (fl. 8th cent.), missionary and bishop, was said to have been an Irishman. The only evidence about him is the mention of his name in a calendar issued in Utrecht and dating from the tenth century and an anonymous and fabulous life. According to this, Plechelm was born in Ireland where he became a bishop. In the company of Wiro, another Irish bishop, he was sent to Rome where the pope confirmed them in their episcopal status. Shortly after their return, they decided to sail back to the continent, taking with them a deacon, Odger. In the region of Liege, they were welcomed by 'king' Pippin -- identified as Pippin II, mayor of the Frankish royal palace -- who commissioned them to evangelize the pagans of the country. Later, Pippin bestowed on Plechelm a piece of land at Odilienberg, near Roermond, where he built the church of St Mary and abbey of St Peter. Plechelm also became Pippin's confessor. He died a very old man, probably on 15 July, his feast day. 
Biographies of Wiro and Odger are also extant. All three are based on the same legend, each author emphasizing the part of his own hero. For instance, the life of Wiro makes him Pippin's confessor, while the 'Vita Plechelmi' gives the part to Plechelm. These lives only develop common hagiographical topoi and have no historical value. They were probably written by monks of the abbey of St Peter. The life of Wiro seems to date from the ninth century; the two others are more recent and based on the former. Internal evidence shows that the life of Plechelm must have been written at the end of the tenth century at the earliest. 
Plechelm's relics are venerated at Roermond, Utrecht, and Oldenzaal (Overijssel) where a church is dedicated to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22378


Plegemund (d. 914), archbishop of Canterbury, re-established the authority of the see of Canterbury after the misfortunes of the late ninth century and saw through a programme of reform, whereby each future shire in Wessex had its own see. Plegemund was of Mercian descent, and he may have lived as a hermit on the island of Plemstell, in what is now Cheshire, before entering King Alfred's court, where he was one of four scholars who helped to translate Gregory the Great's 'Cura pastoralis' from Latin into English. The delay of one and a half years between the death of Archbishop AEthelred in 888 and the consecration of Plegemund in 890 supports later accounts that he was only offered the see of Canterbury after Grimbald, a Flemish monk and scholar, had refused it. Plegemund's indigenous background may have given him the confidence to take over this heavy responsibility, for the see of Canterbury was then at its nadir. His training as a scholar meant that he was also well equipped to master the tortuous aspects of papal politics necessary to re-establish the see's authority. 
Plegemund's most prominent achievement was in the establishment of new sees at Crediton, Ramsbury, Sherborne, and Wells between 909 and 918. Ecclesiastical factions fighting in Rome for control of the papal see meant that it was vital for him to gain the approval of the newly elected pope, Sergius III ('r'. 904-11), for this proposed reorganization of the English church. Sergius III had recently annulled all of the acts of Pope Formosus, who had granted Plegemund his pallium. This made it possible that Plegemund's actions would not be recognized by future generations. Plegemund travelled to Rome in 908, probably to obtain confirmation of his authority and also to secure the agreement of the pontiff to the proposed subdivision of the two ancient sees of Wessex into a number of smaller bishoprics. The success of his mission from the point of view of the Roman authorities can perhaps be inferred by the fact that he returned to Canterbury with the relics of St Blaise. 
The account in a document from the later tenth century that Plegemund consecrated seven new bishops on a single day is fictitious; and the dates for the establishment of the new sees can only be dated generally between his return from Rome and the appointment of Waestan as bishop of Sherborne in 918. Under this programme the regions comprising the future shires of Devon and Cornwall (diocese of Crediton), Dorset (Sherborne), Somerset (Wells), Wiltshire (Ramsbury), and Hampshire (Winchester) each received their own bishop. 
Plegemund's interests also extended to playing a role in the development of the new English state and its urban communities. He attended the formal councils which Edward the Elder held in 901, 903, 904, and 909 at Southampton, Winchester, and other unspecified centres, which both Mercian and West Saxon bishops attended. In 898 he was involved in a meeting with King Alfred and Ealdorman AEthelred which set out new river frontages in the modern day area of Queenshythe in the city of London. In 909 he dedicated the tall tower at the New Minster, Winchester. Plegemund played this full role in the renewal of urban and political landscapes without neglecting his scholarly duties. At Canterbury under his rule the Latin script written there improved notably (in contrast to the poor work produced under his two predecessors since the 850s), with the introduction of a new handsome rounded script with relatively few Kentish misspellings. 
Plegemund died on 2 August 914. He may not have been as holy and as scholarly as Alfred's first choice for the archbishopric, but he served the English church well in its renewal after the disruptions of the viking age on international, national, urban, and scholarly levels. He was the first archbishop to visit Rome in nearly a century and his reforms led the way for Oda and others to introduce ecclesiastical reorganization into the Danelaw. 


@@@@@


doc= 22379


Plessis, John de, seventh earl of Warwick (d. 1263), royal councillor, first appears in 1223 as a knight in the service of Henry III. His parentage and background are obscure, although it seems likely that he was of French birth. The chronicler Matthew Paris states that he was a native of Normandy. During his first few years in England he appears in close association with Hugh de Plessis, Drew de Barentin, and Nicholas de Bolleville, all of them knights retained in the royal household, with whom he was granted joint custody of the manor of Chalgrove in Oxfordshire from 1224 onwards. Hugh de Plessis was almost certainly a kinsman, perhaps John's father or elder brother. Drew and Nicholas may have derived their names from Barentin and Bolleville, in the Pays de Caux, north of Rouen. John de Plessis served in Wales in 1223 and 1228, on the Breton campaign of 1230, and from 1233 appears as a regular witness to royal charters, perhaps as a protege of the king's chief minister, the alien Peter des Roches. He survived des Roches's fall, however, and in 1234 was appointed constable of Devizes Castle and keeper of the forest of Chippenham, offices he was to retain for the rest of his life. 
Besides appearing as a frequent witness to charters at court, between 1238 and 1240 Plessis played a leading role in the collection of royal taxes, and in 1239 served briefly as sheriff of Oxfordshire. In 1242 he joined the king's expedition to Gascony, where in August 1242 he carried out negotiations with the count of Toulouse at Bordeaux. By this time he had already assembled a rich collection of wardships, widows, and escheats, including the manor of Stottesden in Shropshire, first granted to him in 1240 and confirmed to him in fee the following year. In 1234 he had married one of the heiresses in his custody, Christina, daughter of the Berkshire landowner Hugh of Sandford. Originally Plessis appears to have been betrothed to Christina's mother, Joan, but it was Christina that he married, suggesting that the marriage was very much an affair of convenience. Christina died before December 1242, when the king promised Plessis the marriage and lands of Margery, sister and heir of Thomas of Newburgh, earl of Warwick, and widow of the Norfolk baron John Marshal of Hingham or Hockering. 
The king's award, which was to raise John de Plessis from relative obscurity into the highest ranks of the nobility, was an extraordinary one, and it may be no coincidence that it was made at Bordeaux on Christmas day, perhaps in the aftermath of Christmas feasting. Margery, the proposed bride, was effectively pressured into marrying Plessis against her will. Indeed it is possible that she had already contracted a second marriage, before her forced betrothal to Plessis. As a result, Plessis occupied an ambiguous position for the first few years of their union. It was not until 1245 that he was granted the third penny of the county of Warwick, and only in August 1247 that he was officially recognized as earl. In the meantime he was forced to come to an arrangement with his wife's family, guaranteeing him life possession of the earldom of Warwick and of Margery's other estates, principally the Oxfordshire barony of Hook Norton, should Margery die before him. In the event, following Margery's death in 1253, Plessis retained his earldom and, with the king's assistance, was able to detach the barony of Hook Norton from the rest of Margery's inheritance, so that it could pass to the son and heir of his previous marriage. This, like the betrothal to Margery, was a highly irregular arrangement, which can have done little to endear either Plessis or the king to the English baronage. At Plessis's accession, and throughout his time as earl, his estates were seriously depleted by the assignment of dower to two previous countesses of Warwick. None the less from 1243 onwards he controlled Warwick Castle and an estate of nearly fifty knights' fees. 
From 1244 Plessis served as constable of the Tower of London, and in 1251 was appointed to hear pleas there as justice on eyre. In 1250 he was overseas, at least in part so as to make a pilgrimage to Pontigny, presumably to the shrine of St Edmund of Canterbury. In 1252 he took the cross, but did not go on crusade. He accompanied the king to Gascony during the expedition of 1253-4, and in September 1254 was preparing to return to England via his homeland in Normandy. To this end he obtained letters of safe conduct from Louis IX of France ('r'. 1226-70), but at Pons in Poitou, he and his companions, Gilbert of Seagrave and William Mauduit, Plessis's brother-in-law, were taken captive by the town's inhabitants. Seagrave died in captivity, and Plessis and Mauduit were not released until the following year. Shortly afterwards, in June 1255, Plessis was required to relinquish his custody of the Tower of London. He continued, however, as constable of Devizes, and remained high in royal favour. In November 1255 he was involved in the king's negotiations for the crown of Sicily, and in March 1258 was summoned to the king's campaign in Wales. 
During the ensuing baronial rebellion John de Plessis was nominated by both the barons and the king to serve on the reforming council of twenty-four. As a baronial sympathizer he sealed letters against the king's Lusignan half-brothers, and in June 1258 was confirmed as constable of Devizes. In 1259 he was nominated as one of the council set to govern England in the absence of the king, and participated in various of the exchanges with Louis IX and Simon de Montfort, attendant upon that year's Anglo-French treaty of Paris. Although appointed to the west-country circuit of the special eyre of 1260 there is no evidence that he sat as a justice. He was summoned to the king's parliament proposed for Easter 1260, and to the Welsh campaign in August 1260, and by 1261 was back within the royalist camp, being appointed sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire by the king, and attending the royalist parliament in October 1261. In the same year he fined 400 marks with the crown to retain the manor of Kidlington, claimed as part of his barony of Hook Norton. In September 1262 he issued a charter granting a market to his burgesses at Warwick. 
John de Plessis died on 25 February 1263, leaving his body and a small amount of land to the Augustinian canons of Missenden in Buckinghamshire. During his lifetime he had made gifts of timber to the Dominicans of Bristol, and to the hospital of the Holy Trinity at Berkeley. His son and heir of his first marriage, Hugh de Plessis (died 1292), later granted land to Osney Abbey for the sake of his father's soul, and was permitted to inherit the Oxfordshire barony of Hook Norton. This passed via Hugh's son, also Hugh (died 1301), to another Hugh de Plessis, who died childless in 1337. John was succeeded as earl of Warwick by William Mauduit, a nephew by marriage. His arms of six annulets or fauses roueles de gules are recorded on his seal, and may well be a family coat, unrelated to the arms of the earldom of Warwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 22380


Plessis, Joseph Octave (1762-1825), Roman Catholic archbishop of Quebec, the seventh of the eighteen children of Joseph-Amable Plessy, blacksmith, and his wife, Marie-Louise Mennard, was born near Montreal on 3 March 1762. After education at the College St Raphael, Montreal (1773-8), and the Petit Seminaire, Quebec (1778-80), he took minor orders and taught for three years at the College St Raphael before being appointed secretary to the bishop of Quebec, a post he held from 1783 to 1797. He was ordained priest on 11 March 1786. In 1792 he was made cure of Notre Dame, Quebec, the most important parish in the diocese, and in 1797 became grand vicar and coadjutor to Bishop Denault. The appointment was welcome to the government, with whom he had established good working relations, having proved his loyalty in the aftermath of the French Revolution. Consecrated coadjutor-bishop on 25 January 1801, he became bishop of Quebec in 1806, on the death of Denault. Faced with an acute shortage of priests, he gave immediate priority to education, diverting the younger clergy into secondary teaching in the hope of gaining vocations. In this task he had to overcome the opposition of the Sulpician order. 
While remaining independent of party Plessis sought an entente with the government, and in 1812, on the outbreak of war with the United States, he won its goodwill by his efforts to secure French-Canadian loyalty. In 1814 he was granted a salary of 1000 louis, a seat in the legislative council, and legal recognition of his office. On becoming archbishop of Quebec in 1819 he travelled to Rome in the hope of securing the elevation of his vast diocese into a metropolitan province. Though this request was not granted, vicars-general were appointed for Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, and Upper Canada. His pastoral visitations extended to the remotest areas and he was notably supportive of their isolated clergy. 
Plessis's relations with the civil authorities were less cordial under the governorship of Lord Dalhousie. In 1822 he opposed the union of Lower with Upper Canada because it included a clause making clerical appointments subject to government approval, and he was uncompromising in his insistence on a separate Catholic school system. He died at Quebec on 4 December 1825 and was buried in the cathedral of Notre-Dame on 7 December. His vigorous policy of administrative, pastoral, and educational reform left the Canadian church with a new sense of purpose and enhanced prestige. 


@@@@@


doc= 22381


Plessington, Sir Robert (d. 1393), justice, was born into a family of minor Lancashire freeholders, presumably named from Pleasington in that county. He was married in 1369, but his wife died before 6 February 1380, when he was married to Agnes (surname unknown), who survived him. From November 1376 he was a keeper of the peace in the West Riding of Yorkshire (later in the East Riding also), while during the 1370s he was also attorney of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, in the royal exchequer, until in November 1377 he was appointed chief baron of the exchequer for the duchy of Lancaster. By 19 March 1380 he was the duke's steward in Lancashire, and a justice at Lancaster. In 1374 Gaunt had leased to him the lordship of Staincliffe in the West Riding for twenty years. On 6 December 1380 he was appointed chief baron of the king's exchequer, and before 8 December 1382 he had relinquished all his Lancastrian offices. Plessington left office under something of a cloud, charged with the erasure and embezzlement of records, but on 1 May 1383 he received a ducal pardon for any offences committed in office, and in the parliament of October 1383 the king publicly ratified, at its beneficiary's request, the general pardon which he had earlier granted to Plessington. The latter had long profited from ducal service -- on 20 October 1375 he could afford to lend Hugh, Lord Dacre, 1100 marks ($733 6's'. 8died). 
By 16 November 1383 Plessington, who had been knighted by July 1382, had found a new patron, for he had become chief steward of Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham, a rising star at court who was to be among Gaunt's opponents. On 7 July 1384, at Mowbray's supplication, Plessington was granted the stewardship of Richmondshire. However, Mowbray's influence at court failed Plessington in a case where the king's chief favourite, Robert de Vere, earl of Oxford (died 1392), was concerned: the latter prevented Plessington from occupying the stewardship of Kendal, Westmorland, granted him by the crown in 1382. During the parliament of 1386, before 5 November, Plessington was dismissed from his post as chief baron of the exchequer. A schedule of charges was drawn up against him alleging misconduct in office, though the offences named were relatively trivial. Clearly he had angered the king, perhaps by siding with the critics of royal policy in the parliament of 1386. In November 1387 Plessington compounded his offences in Richard's eyes by reading publicly in the king's presence in Westminster Hall the charges against the royal favourites made by the lords appellant (who included the earl of Nottingham); moreover, he acted as their spokesman in the Merciless Parliament of 1388. 
Despite, or perhaps because of, the uniquely high profile of Plessington's services to the appellants, the latter did not procure his restoration to royal office. Instead, their leader, the king's uncle Thomas, duke of Gloucester, became his appreciative patron. He was a member of Gloucester's council on 2 November 1391, and his chief councillor on 14 February 1392; Plessington had also become a ducal steward by the time of his death, on 27 July 1393. He purchased a great deal of property, especially in his native Lancashire -- Pleasington Manor, part of Ellal and lands in Lancaster, Comberhall, Kirkham, and Penwortham. In 1381/2 he bought Healaugh Manor and an estate in Swaledale, in the West Riding of Yorkshire. The purchase of Burley, Rutland, in 1383 gave his family a landed stake in southern English society. He also acquired tenements in Holborn, Middlesex. In the parliament of 1397/8 Plessington was posthumously accused of having aided Gloucester in his treasons of ten years earlier; in March 1398 he was declared to have been a traitor, and his son and heir, Robert ('b'. 'c'.1369), was forfeited. The judgment was reversed in Henry IV's first parliament, in 1399. 


@@@@@


doc= 22382


Plimer, Andrew (1763-1837), miniature painter, was born at Wellington, Shropshire, and baptized there on 29 December 1763, the younger son of a clockmaker, Nathaniel Plimer ('b'. 1726), and his wife, probably Mary Elizabeth or Eliza. Andrew and his elder brother, Nathaniel ['see below'], were both trained as clockmakers but, according to G. C. Williamson, they ran away with a troupe of Gypsies and spent over two years travelling in Wales and the west of England before eventually settling in London. There, in 1781, both brothers entered domestic service, Andrew as a manservant to the miniaturist Richard Cosway, and Nathaniel working for the enamellist Henry Bone. Cosway nurtured the ambitions of the young Andrew Plimer, not only allowing him to act as a studio assistant and teaching him the principles of portraiture in miniature but perhaps even sponsoring Plimer's drawing lessons with the engraver John Hall of Soho. By 1785 Plimer had become sufficiently accomplished to establish his own practice as a miniaturist, working firstly from a studio at 32 Great Maddox Street and then, from 1787 until 1810, at 2 and, later, at 8 Golden Square, London. The middle years of the decade saw Plimer working in Exeter but by 1818 he was back in London, at 15 Upper York Street, near Manchester Square. Meanwhile on 21 February 1801 he had married Joanna Louisa Knight (1774-1861), the daughter of John and Frances Knight of Wicken, Northamptonshire. 
From 1786 to 1810 and again in 1819 Plimer exhibited at the Royal Academy. Although he continued in practice until 'c'.1830 he may have experienced difficulty attracting new clientele in his later years as he is known to have travelled widely in search of commissions from about 1820 onwards, visiting Devon, Cornwall, Dorset, Wales, and Scotland. This decline in his fortunes is borne out by the wording of his obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', where he was described as 'many years ago an eminent miniature painter in Exeter' ('GM'). Most critics agree that in stylistic terms, too, Plimer's work can be broadly divided into two categories: his early and most successful miniatures, which are usually signed with the initials A. P. on the obverse and dated pre-1790, and his more mannered style of the ensuing years, in which he neither signed nor dated his work. At its best Plimer's work from his first phase is pleasing and highly competent, if a little 'hesitant in attack' (Reynolds, 'English Portrait Miniatures', 152); his sitters are individualized, their features well modelled, and the fine hatching that was his hallmark is used to good effect in the backgrounds -- as, for example, in 'Unknown Officer' (1785; Kenwood House, London) or 'Unknown Lady' (1786; Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge). Though Plimer stopped signing his work during the 1790s it tends to be instantly recognizable because of the stylized treatment he adopted for his sitters in this era. Most of his subjects are depicted facing half to the left on larger ivories of about 6-7 cms in height; the eyes, generally elongated, are given a disarming dominance, and his sky backgrounds have become somewhat formulaic. However, some very fine examples of his work belong to this second phase of his career, such as 'Eliza Boscombe as a Child' ('c'.1800; Christies, 23 April 1998, lot 155) and his most important work, 'The Daughters of Lord Northwick: the Hon. Anne Rushout, the Hon. Harriet Rushout and the Hon. Elizabeth Rushout' ('The Three Graces') ('c'.1800; Huntington Library and Art Collections, San Marino, California). This miniature, one of a group executed for Lord Northwick, demonstrates Plimer's ability to tie together a group composition effectively, a skill also to be seen in 'Maria, Lady Affleck and her Daughters' ('c'.1795; Huntington Library and Art Collections, San Marino, Calfornia). None the less the overriding impression of Plimer's later work, and particularly of his female portraits, is one of deteriorating quality as Plimer strove to produce flattering likenesses of his sitters, an impression heightened perhaps by the numerous nineteenth-century copies and fakes of his work in circulation. But even his poorest portraits can usually be distinguished from fraudulent copies by the underdrawing visible in the strokes of the hair and by the neat, dark areas of cross-hatching in the lower sections of the background. Indeed some of his very last works, executed when poor eyesight had forced him to turn to large coloured drawings on paper, display the graphic skills of which he was still capable; these include 'Young Lady in White' (1829; priv. coll.; R. Walker, 'Secret Passion to Noble Fashion. The World of the Portrait Miniature', 1999, exhibition catalogue, Holburne Museum, Bath). 
His reputation fading, Plimer died on 29 January 1837 at Western Cottages, Western Road, Brighton, and was buried on 4 February at Old Hove. He was survived by his wife and four daughters: Louisa (1802-1864), later Mrs John Scott; Joanna (1803-1846); Charlotte (1804-1845); and Selina (1809-1841). A son died in infancy. His wife's younger sister, Mary Ann Knight, had been his pupil and worked in a manner very similar to Plimer's with great success. Plimer's elder brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 22383


Nathaniel Plimer (1757-1822), was born in Wellington, Shropshire, and also pursued a career as a miniature painter after working for Henry Bone and then training with his brother under Richard Cosway. He exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1787 to 1815 and at the Incorporated Society of Artists in Suffolk Street, London, in 1790-91. From 1804 to 1814 he was resident in Edinburgh where he was an inaugural member and exhibitor at the Associated Society of Artists (1808). Like his brother, Nathaniel signed only early miniatures, up to 1789, with his initials, NP, but, as he failed to develop the same artificial manner as Andrew Plimer in later years, many of his unsigned works go unrecognized. His technique made more use of stippling, lending a softer touch to his work, as in 'Miss Harlow' ('c'.1800; Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge). He is thought to have returned to London about 1815 and to have died there in 1822, leaving four children, the youngest of whom, Adela, married Andrew Geddes, the Scottish portrait painter. A portrait of Andrew Plimer by Geddes (1815) is in the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh, and a miniature self-portrait by Nathaniel Plimer (priv. coll.) is on loan to the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh. An extensive collection of Andrew Plimer's miniatures is held at the Huntington Library and Art Collections, San Marino, California; examples by both brothers can be seen at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. A large group of family miniatures by Andrew Plimer was sold at Sothebys on 27 January 1964 (lots 55-80). 


@@@@@


doc= 22384


Plimsoll, Samuel (1824-1898), politician and shipping reformer, was born on 10 February 1824 at 3 Colston's Parade, Bristol, the eighth of thirteen children born to Thomas Plimsoll (1785-1844), clerk in the Excise Office, and his wife, Priscilla (1789-1863), formerly Willing. Soon after his birth Thomas Plimsoll was promoted to supervisor at Penrith, where Samuel received the rudiments of his education until 1838, when his father was transferred to Sheffield. He was a pupil at Dr Samuel Eadon's school there for about a year, leaving aged fifteen to work as clerk for a solicitor, then for a brewery. When Robert Bayley founded the People's College, he attended the classes available before and after the normal working day. When his father died, Plimsoll was left to support his mother and five young children. 
With the development of the railway network between the south Yorkshire coalfields and London, and the involvement of his brother Thomas in the coal trade, Plimsoll's mind turned to the profits which would accrue to anyone who could deliver coal to London more cheaply than hitherto. His dream became a possibility when he received an unexpected bequest of several hundred pounds from the properties left by his grandfather. Before these plans materialized, Henry Cole, organizing secretary for the Great Exhibition to be held in London in 1851, arrived in Sheffield and recruited Plimsoll as secretary for the Sheffield Great Exhibition committee. Plimsoll declined payment, but by his energy and forceful speeches he secured a great many exhibitors, and made himself known and respected. By 1853 several south Yorkshire coal owners had promised to support his plans, and as Thomas was by then manager of the Sunderland and Hartlepool Coal Company, Plimsoll went to London that summer, hoping to make his fortune as a coal merchant. 
This naive enthusiasm rapidly led to Plimsoll's downfall. He was unaware that the manager of the Great Northern Railway, with whom he was negotiating, had a brother who was a London coal merchant, and that these two were determined to obstruct his every move in order to protect their monopoly. In February 1855 Plimsoll was declared bankrupt, and, when the news reached Sheffield, he suffered the further indignity of being suspended from his Congregational church membership until he humbly accepted their condemnation of his business methods. He began fresh negotiations, helped by a local businessman, John Chambers, and very soon was invited to meet Chambers's two stepdaughters. Romance followed, and on 1 October 1857 he married the younger, Eliza Ann Railton (1830-1882), and they set up home over Plimsoll's coal office at 32 Hatton Garden, London. Their only child, Elizabeth ('b'. 1865), died the day after she was born. The Plimsolls then adopted Nellie Plimsoll (1866-1957), daughter of Plimsoll's nephew, who had died of typhus six days after her birth. The coal transporting business began to prosper, and Plimsoll patented a 'sliding tip' which prevented much of the coal being smashed to dust as it was being shot into wagons. 
By this time Plimsoll had a well-developed concern for social justice and the problems afflicting labour in dangerous trades carried out in Yorkshire, notably coalmining and edge-tool grinding, and he decided to enter parliament. He stood for Derby in 1865 and was defeated, but was elected in 1868 and held the seat until 1880. Plimsoll was considered to be an 'advanced liberal', voting for the disestablishment of the church in Ireland, a system of arbitration to ensure workers' rights, and for the special care of orphans, outside the workhouse. His interest in the welfare of seamen was generated by James Hall, a Tyneside shipowner, who in 1867 had voiced the general abhorrence at the loss of life brought about by the overloading of sub-standard ships and a payments system for the crews which forced them onto vessels which were clearly unsafe. Provided with facts and figures by Hall, Plimsoll launched into an emotional campaign against a supposed conspiracy between the insurers and the shipowners to profit from sending what soon became known as 'coffin-ships' onto the high seas where many vanished without trace. He also condemned the Board of Trade, in the person of its president, Sir Charles Adderley, as the body responsible for the weak regulations then in force. Over the centuries laws had been in force in various countries, to prevent overloading, and the excessive stowage of deck cargo, sometimes requiring a marked load-line. But to service the growing cargo and passenger traffic, many unseaworthy vessels were kept in service and heavily overloaded. By the 1870s more than 3000 merchant seamen were lost each year, their families condemned to fatherless poverty. The Board of Trade could require load-lines to be painted and could detain unsafe ships, but this required a complaint to be laid, and when the inspectors arrived, the offending vessel had usually left the port. 
In 1873 Plimsoll published 'Our Seamen: an Appeal', a hotch-potch compilation of pictures, data, and letters from the Royal National Lifeboat Institution and other organizations. Although justifiably described as 'a work marred by inaccuracies and want of knowledge... the writer showed by his ignorance of technicalities that he was dealing with a subject that he did not know in detail and was not entitled to speak with authority' ('The Times', 4 June 1898, 10b-c), it nevertheless caught public attention. 
Meanwhile Plimsoll's motion in parliament, calling for a royal commission to examine the high incidence of loss of merchant ships between 1856 and 1872, was immediately successful. Being, however, staffed by eminent landlubbers, the commission concluded that human error and drunkenness had been principally to blame for the losses. The proposed bill to amend the 'Merchant Shipping Act' did not go far enough for Plimsoll, who moved his own 'Shipping Survey Bill'. Its defeat, by 173 to 170, forced the government to strengthen its bill, but Disraeli misjudged and under-rated Plimsoll, and his growing support from both unions and public. When Disraeli allowed the government bill to run out of time, Plimsoll could no longer contain his ire. On 22 July 1875 members witnessed an extraordinary scene where Plimsoll vehemently abused the shipping interests, including certain members of parliament, among the villains who sent sailors to their death. Asked to withdraw these statements, Plimsoll defied the speaker, threatened the prime minister, and left the house still shouting 'villains' and 'scoundrels'. Lord Shaftesbury, brought in to calm these storms, commented, 'He is proud of his own impetuosity and seems to think that no-one can be weary of it. I find him bold, earnest, rash. He will ruin himself and the cause by his violence' (Hodder, 3.326). A few days later Plimsoll returned to the house and apologized for his behaviour, while declining to withdraw any statement of facts. 
These stressful events brought Plimsoll to the edge of nervous breakdown and while parliament was in recess he and his wife set off on a long cruise which took them to the Baltic, the Mediterranean, Black Sea, and up the Danube. He returned to find the new 'Merchant Shipping Bill' still, in his view, gravely defective. Further argument and debate, supported by public agitation, led to the 'Merchant Shipping Act' of 1876, which obliged owners to mark their foreign-going vessels with a load-line in the shape of a 12 inch circle with an 18 inch horizontal bar. When Joseph Chamberlain took over as president of the Board of Trade in 1880, Plimsoll found he now had a friend in that department. Rules for establishing the mark's position were set out by Lloyd's register of shipping in 1885, and in 1890 Plimsoll's ambitions were finally realized when another act required the Board of Trade to affix the Plimsoll line. 
Plimsoll's achievement in 1876 brought him a testimonial and $1000 from the Society of Engineers, and he was elected president of the Sailors' and Firemens' Union, a post which required him only to preside at the annual congress and advise on parliamentary action. The Royal National Lifeboat Institution presented him with a silver model of a lifeboat then under construction which was launched at Lowestoft that December as the 'Samuel Plimsoll'. In May 1880 he sought and failed to obtain the Chiltern Hundreds and in 1880 he contested and was defeated in the Liverpool and in 1885 the Sheffield constituencies. He did not again stand for election. 
Plimsoll never recovered his full health. In 1879 he had an eye removed. That summer he purchased 28 Park Lane, Westminster, and adopted a spurious coat of arms, but his wife was by then gravely ill. They spent the winter in the warmer climate of Algiers, returned to London, then went to Madeira the following autumn. At Christmas they sailed round southern Africa, returned again to London, then in the summer of 1881 went to India and Ceylon. Encouraged by her apparent recovery, Plimsoll left his wife in the care of family members while he went back to deal with business in London. She went to Australia, and in 1882 settled at Brisbane with Plimsoll's married sister. A relapse prompted her to ask for him but he was unable to secure a passage before learning of her death on 17 August 1882. Plimsoll was well-known in Australia and her funeral cortege included the governor and premier of Queensland, together with many of its leading citizens. On 21 August, however, Plimsoll obtained an exhumation order, and had her remains shipped back for burial on 15 November at Highgate cemetery. 
During his many visits to Hull, Plimsoll had had business dealings with Joseph Armitage Wade, a prosperous timber merchant, and on 8 October 1885 he married Wade's daughter, Harriet Frankish (1851-1911). She identified with his public interests and accepted Nellie as a daughter, besides giving birth to a son, Samuel Richard Cobden Plimsoll (1887-1955) and two daughters, Eliza Harriet (1889-1939), and Ruth Wade (1891-1957). By 1892 Plimsoll was suffering from diabetes and decided to retire from public life. He moved to 31 Clifton Gardens, then to 35 Augusta Gardens, Folkestone, where he died on 3 June 1898. Within hours all the ships in Folkestone harbour had their flags at half mast, and on 7 June a contingent of sailors drew his hearse to St Martin's Church, Cheriton, Kent, for his funeral and burial. In August 1929 a memorial to Plimsoll, incorporating a bust by Frank Blundstone, was unveiled on the Thames Embankment, London. In 2010 a bust of Plimsoll was unveiled at Capricorn Quay, Bristol, opposite the SS 'Great Britain'. 
Besides his Plimsoll line, which is now elaborated to take account of the differences in buoyancy of fresh and salt water and the increased hazard of the north Atlantic winter, Plimsoll's name was also bestowed in 1876 on the rubber-soled canvas shoes, then being manufactured by the Liverpool Rubber Company. The company's salesman, Philip Lace, said that the shoes were water-tight as long as they were not immersed above the level of the band, which reminded him of the Plimsoll line. 


@@@@@


doc= 22385


Plot, Robert (bap. 1640, d. 1696), naturalist and antiquary, was baptized on 13 December 1640 at Sutton Barne in the parish of Borden, near Sittingbourne, Kent, the son of Robert Plot (died 1669), who was descended from an old-established Kentish family, and his wife, Rebecca, daughter of Thomas Patenden or Pedenden, also of Borden, and widow of Edward Knight of Woodnesbury. He was educated at the free school in Wye, and on 24 March 1658 entered Magdalen Hall, Oxford, whence he matriculated in the university on 2 July; he graduated BA in 1661, and proceeded MA in 1664. Thereafter he taught at Magdalen Hall (the name of one of his pupils, Matthew Bryan, is known for 1665), at the same time preparing for the degrees of BCL and DCL. Although Plot served as dean and vice-principal of Magdalen Hall, in 1676 he moved to University College to which in 1683 he gave a statue of King Alfred, legendary founder of the college. It was during these years of teaching and study that Plot must have laid the foundation of the formidable erudition that earned him the sobriquet 'learned Dr Plot', learning which is evidenced on every page of his writings. He did not, however, neglect practical studies. In 1667, in company with John Ward and John Mayow, he followed a course of chemistry given by William Wilden and at some stage he learned basic land-surveying techniques sufficiently to be able to draw his own maps. 
Endowed with practical ability and a sense of objects and machines which is displayed in the clarity of the descriptions that he gives of them, Plot was fascinated both by the new sciences, which in the company of Ward and Mayow he encountered in the activities of the group of natural philosophers in Oxford that congregated first around Robert Boyle and later around Thomas Willis, and by antiquities. During the mid-1660s he conceived a plan to travel throughout Britain collecting materials towards the writing of a descriptive survey of the country. If the intellectual stimulus behind this project may have been the tradition of geographical study at Magdalen Hall, the antiquarian interests of Plot's tutor there, Josiah Pullen, and the Baconianism of the natural philosophers in the circle of Boyle, Plot's literary stimulus was Pliny's 'Historia naturalis', Leland, Camden, and the English chorographical tradition stemming from William Lambarde. 
In 1671 Plot wrote some commendatory verses for Thomas Southouse's 'Monasticon Favershamiense' and in the same year proceeded BCL and DCL. Freed from the commitment to study, he could concentrate on his antiquarian researches and in 1672 or 1673 prepared printed and manuscript synopses of his plan to elicit patronage. Successful in this, partly through the help of such men as John Fell, bishop of Oxford, and Ralph Bathhurst, vice-chancellor of the university, with both of whom he had earlier become acquainted in Boyle's circle, Plot was able to begin travelling through Oxfordshire -- to which county he had now decided to limit his researches -- in June 1674. Two years later 'The Natural History of Oxfordshire, being an Essay toward the Natural History of England' was published by the university press. 
Plot's first book was well received and successful. Four issues of the first edition are known and it was posthumously reprinted in a revised and enlarged second edition adorned with a life of Plot by his stepson John Burman in 1705. Of more immediate consequence to Plot, however, was the fact that the favourable reception accorded the book in university circles led first to the suggestion that a special lecturership in 'philosophical natural history' should be created for him, and ultimately to his being appointed simultaneously professor of chemistry and curator of the objects in the natural and antiquarian sciences centre that the university created around Elias Ashmole's gift of his collections in 1679. For this centre an extensive building was purposely erected and there Plot lived, taught, and collected, from the time that it opened in 1683 until 1690. A second consequence of his publication seems to have been his election to the Royal Society of London on 6 December 1677; he was its second secretary from 30 November 1682 until 29 November 1684 and during the same period he edited numbers 144-78 of the 'Philosophical Transactions', thus reviving this journal from four years of desuetude. 
Part of the material of which Plot was able to dispose to fill the 'Philosophical Transactions' derived from meetings of the Philosophical Society which had been established in Oxford immediately upon the opening of the Ashmolean Museum and of which Plot, its leading spirit, was director of experiments. It was to this body that Plot first communicated the studies on the origin of springs and rivers that he published as 'De origine fontium' in a Latin translation by Christopher Wase (1684), in advance of including their English original in his 'Natural History of Staffordshire' (1686). During this period, when he was visiting Staffordshire gathering material for the volume similar to that on Oxfordshire that he had planned from perhaps as early as 1675, he also communicated a series of papers to the 'Philosophical Transactions' arising from his local natural history researches. One of these, on the best season of the year for felling timber, provoked official enquiry and experiment as being of importance to the navy. 
Plot throughout his career was a tory and an establishment man. 'The Natural History of Oxfordshire' was dedicated to Charles II, that of Staffordshire to James II. Plot's particular patron seems to have been Henry Howard, seventh duke of Norfolk, whom he presented 'with a flattering speech' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 3.108) for an honorary DCL in 1684 and to whom he dedicated the first volume of the 'Philosophical Transactions' that he edited. In 1687 Norfolk appointed Plot registrar to the court of chivalry a few days before the archbishop of Canterbury made him a notary public. The same year he was disappointed in an attempt to become warden of All Souls, and although in 1688 he succeeded John Dryden as historiographer royal he was deprived of the place under the new regime in favour of Thomas Shadwell. Plot was clearly ambitious, and a willingness even to embrace Catholicism in order to obtain advancement was imputed to him. Disappointments at Oxford (probably in 1681 he had also been spoken of for principal of Magdalen Hall) may have influenced him in deciding to marry and leave the university. On 12 November 1689 he resigned from his chair of chemistry and in the winter of 1690-91 from the keepership of the Ashmolean. On 21 August 1690 he married Rebecca (1662-1713), second daughter of Ralph Sherwood, a freeman in the London Grocers' Company, and widow of Henry Burman of Newington, Kent. With her he acquired a stepson, John Burman (died 13 April 1726), who would edit the second edition of 'Oxfordshire' (1705); she and Plot had two sons, Robert Sherwood and Ralph Sherwood. 
Plot now moved to London and Sutton Barne, Borden, to which house he added a large parlour and chamber at the north end, enclosed the front court, and laid out a new kitchen garden. Here he continued his old interests but inclined increasingly to antiquarian studies, probably seeing more prospect of obtaining patronage and advancement through them than through natural philosophy. A major project was for a history and defence of the earl marshal's office, for which he assembled numerous papers which, like all his manuscripts, were inherited by his stepson. The combination that he had formulated, however, was still potent, and in the early 1690s Plot projected both a 'Natural history of Middlesex and Kent' and one of London and Middlesex, despite the fact that he had clearly stated at the end of 'Staffordshire' that he would 'never publish any more of these 'Histories'' ('Staffordshire', 450). Proposals for both projects were published and the collecting tours which Plot undertook enabled him to supply materials to Edmund Gibson for his revision of Camden's 'Britannia'. By August 1694 Plot had received sufficiently substantial subscriptions for the London and Middlesex volume for him to publish a set of 'Enquiries to be propounded... in order to their history of nature, arts and antiquities'. As earlier when he was embarking on the Oxfordshire survey, Plot's contacts brought him support. In January 1695 the office of Mowbray herald-extraordinary was created for him and two days later he was appointed registrar of the College of Heralds. During this last period Plot was ambivalent in his attitude towards continuing work on county natural histories, perhaps because the effort of travelling and collecting wearied him into recurrent ill health. His later letters are punctuated by illness and on the 30 April 1696, after great suffering, he succumbed to the stone. He was buried in Borden church. 
Ambitious and old-fashioned, a practitioner of a pharmaceutical alchemy directed towards finding a universal solvent that Plot thought was the essential ingredient in the efficacious remedies of Paracelsus and J. B. van Helmont, perhaps time-serving but none the less fundamentally committed to utilitarian natural philosophical and antiquarian research, Plot reveals the quintessential nature of the late seventeenth-century scholar, neither humanist nor modern. For Plot philosophizing fundamentally meant providing rational accounts of things which were described in detail. This rational empiricism meant that he had no strong allegiances to a particular intellectual system, although he was convinced of the need to make experiments if he was to give a true description of things. Acquisitive, but none the less convivial, bibulous, a good companion, and jovial, Plot was in contact with most of the learned men of his day, and his worldliness was probably a major element in his ability to obtain the collaboration and patronage of county society in his efforts to record their surroundings. His success is to be measured less in his own career than in the influence that his two county histories had on succeeding writers. By eschewing universalism, except in the range of literary reference that he brought to bear on his subjects which were treated in a relentlessly rational manner, Plot created a form of history writing which, by delimiting its subject either to a defined geographical region or to a particular topic, enabled practitioners of the genre to tackle manageable subjects. At the same time, by combining civil and ecclesiastical history with natural history, he introduced an element of novelty and enabled himself to describe a region as a unified whole in which nature and human activity were but two parts of a single environment. Authors of local histories, whether civil, natural, or both, were to acknowledge Plot's influence throughout the eighteenth century. If the model is no longer followed, the quality of his descriptions none the less continues to give value to his works. 


@@@@@


doc= 22386


Plott, John (1732-1803), miniature painter, was born at Winchester. He may have been the John Plot who was baptized on 11 November 1735 at the church of St Maurice, Winchester, the son of William Plot. In early life he was employed by an attorney, and in 1756 he acted as clerk of the accounts for the maintenance of French prisoners quartered near Winchester. Later that year he turned to art, and, after receiving some instruction in landscape from Richard Wilson, he became a pupil of Nathaniel Hone, whom he assisted in his miniatures and enamels. Plott practised miniature painting with success both in London and in Winchester, exhibiting with the Incorporated Society of Artists (of which he was a director in 1774) from 1764 to 1775, and at the Royal Academy from 1772 to the end of his life. 
Plott painted miniatures on ivory and enamel and also executed larger portraits in oil. According to Foskett 'many of his miniatures are of a very high quality, and his work deserves more recognition than has hitherto been the case' (Foskett, 620). Plott's miniature of Miss Anne Locke, noted by Foskett as a fine example of his work, was exhibited in Edinburgh and is illustrated in Foskett's catalogue of the exhibition 'British Portrait Miniatures' (1963). The Victoria and Albert Museum holds a miniature portrait by Plott of his aunt 'Mrs Lydia Butt' (1776). A miniature of the Hon. Revd Shute Barrington, bishop of Llandaff, Salisbury, and Durham, attributed to Plott, was at Christies on 26 June 1980 (lot 54). 
Having a taste for natural history Plott also executed a number of beautiful watercolour drawings of that kind, including a series for a projected work on land snails, which remained unfinished at his death. He was an intimate friend of the poet George Keate, and some of their correspondence was formerly in the possession of G. B. Henderson of Bloomsbury Place, London; it appears from one of the letters that Plott was twice a candidate for a librarianship in the British Museum, where engraved portraits after Plott's miniatures may be found. Plott painted a miniature of Keate, which was engraved by J. K. Sherwin as a frontispiece to 'The Poetical Works of George Keate' (1781). 
Four years before his death Plott became a member of the corporation of Winchester. He died at his sister's house at Stoke, Winchester, on 27 October 1803, aged seventy-one. A portrait of Plott, scraped in mezzotint by himself, is mentioned by Sir William Henry Bromley in his 'Catalogue of Engraved British Portraits from Egbert the Great, to the Present Time' (1793) and in Musgrave's 'Catalogue... of a collection of English portraits... which will be sold by auction by Mr Richardson' ([1800]), but is not otherwise known. 


@@@@@


doc= 22387


Plough, John (d. 1562), religious controversialist and Church of England clergyman, was the son of Christopher Plough of Nottingham. Educated at Oxford, he had presumably graduated by 1538, since on 17 May that year he received dispensation to take all holy orders outside statutory times and two on the same day. He succeeded his uncle John Plough as rector of St Peter's, Nottingham, on 13 February 1539, resigning by June 1550. He supplicated at Oxford for the degree of bachelor of civil law early in 1544 and the same year was instituted to the tiny living of Sarratt in the liberty of St Albans, on the Buckinghamshire-Hertfordshire border, compounding for his first fruits on 3 May. On 7 October 1552 he compounded for the rectory of Bocarde in the marches of Calais, bringing as his two sureties Thomas Plough, barber, and John Hardye, tailor, both of St Albans. 
Still listed as vicar of Sarratt in November 1554, when Edmund Bonner, restored as bishop of London at the beginning of Mary's reign, visited the diocese, Plough was conspicuous by his absence. He had probably either retired to Calais or else already departed for Basel, where he is supposed to have engaged in controversy with his fellow protestants William Kethe and Robert Crowley, and certainly did so with the Catholic Miles Huggarde. 'An Apology for Protestants' (1558 or 1559) was written in reply to Huggarde's 'The Displaying of the Protestantes' (1556) but no copy is known to survive. Two other tracts ascribed to Plough, 'A Treatise Against the Mitred Men in the Popish Kingdom' and 'The Sound of the Doleful Trumpet', are likewise lost. The only official record of Plough's presence abroad, beyond his listing in John Bale's catalogue of exiles, comes from the account book of the rector of Basel, which after Mary's death records a payment of 2's'. from 'Joannis Blougk Angli' for letters testimonial, effectively a passport for his return to England. 
Plough was granted letters patent, enrolled on 28 December 1559, by Sir Nicholas Bacon, the lord keeper, for the crown living of Long Bredy, Dorset, on the recommendation of 'Mr Buggins'. This was presumably the exile John Buggins, 'merchant companion' of John Bodley in Geneva. Plough held the living until his death. He was also one of the first of the exiles to be preferred by Edmund Grindal after his consecration as bishop of London. On 18 February 1560 Grindal collated him to the vicarage of East Ham, Essex, close to the city. According to the antiquary William Cole, Plough, George Hody, and John Opynshaw presented Elizabeth with a treatise on protestant doctrine. 
Plough probably lived in East Ham rather than Dorset. In January 1561 he was bequeathed 20 shillings by one of his Essex parishioners, and was present as vicar at Grindal's primary visitation of London diocese in April 1561. His successor was collated on 18 November 1562, when the living was void by his death. No will is known and there is no evidence that he married. That he had not done so before departing for Basel is effectively confirmed by the fact that he was not deprived in early 1554, as were the vast majority of London's married clergy. 


@@@@@


doc= 22388


Plowden, Charles (1743-1821), Jesuit, was born on 1 May or 19 August 1743, the seventh son of William Ignatius Plowden of Plowden Hall, Shropshire, and his wife, Frances Dormer, daughter of Charles, fifth Baron Dormer of Wenge. Four of his brothers also became Jesuits, Charles and Robert being nicknamed Sons of Thunder (Abercrombie, 288) on account of their strong opinions. Another brother was Francis Peter Plowden, the historian. Aged ten, Charles began at the Franciscan school at Edgbaston, and between 1754 and 1759 studied humanities at the college of the English Jesuits at St Omer. He entered the Society of Jesus at Watten on 7 September 1759. He studied at Bruges during 1763-4 and 1767-9, and then left for Italy, somewhat reluctantly, to study theology in Rome (1769-70) and at Bologna (1770-71). He was ordained in Rome on 30 September 1770. 
Besides his studies, Plowden acted as a popular tutor and companion in Italy to John Biddulph and Sir Thomas Gage, staying at the English College, Rome, and the College of Nobles in Bologna. Throughout 1772 he and Gage travelled, arriving in Paris in June 1772. He returned to Bruges between 1772 and 1773. At the suppression of the Jesuits in 1773 by Clement XIV he criticized the pope so severely in 'A Candid and Impartial Sketch... of Clement XIV' (3 vols., 1785-6) that it was withdrawn. At the suppression of the society he was minister of the English Jesuit 'great college' in Bruges. Upon the violent destruction of the two Jesuit colleges there by the imperial government in 1773, which he described in a valuable account written in 1807, Plowden was detained in prison in Ghent as hostage together with the two heads of the Jesuit colleges. On regaining his liberty on 25 May 1774 he lodged at the English Jesuit academy at Liege, where he wrote his defence (1776) of Lawrence Ricci, Jesuit general at the time of the suppression, before embarking on further travels during which he acted as tutor and companion to William Constable-Maxwell (alias Middleton), with whom he visited Milan, Naples, Rome, and Venice between 1779 and 1781. 
In 1781 Plowden returned to England, where he became chaplain to the Haggerston family at Ellingham, Northumberland. In 1784 he was appointed chaplain and tutor to the family of Thomas Weld at Lulworth Castle, Dorset, and occasionally acted as chaplain to the Arundells at Wardour. He continued his defence of the former Jesuits by writing his account of their unique survival in Belorussia (White Russia) thanks to the generosity of Catherine the Great. In 1789 Plowden's close friend John Carroll, bishop of Baltimore, tried unsuccessfully to persuade him to become head of Georgetown College. While at Lulworth, he became a leading spokesman for the 'orthodox' party, which included Weld and John Milner, against the 'heterodox and schismatical' Anglo-Gallican policies of the Cisalpine Club and Catholic Committee, though he maintained cordial relations with the Cisalpine leader, Charles Butler. He prevailed upon Weld to allow the consecration of the 'orthodox' bishops William Gibson and John Douglass in the Lulworth chapel in December 1790, and he himself preached at the latter event. He attacked the Cisalpines, notably Sir John Throckmorton and the Revd Joseph Berington, in a number of works, including 'An Answer to the Second Blue Book' (1791), 'Observations on the Oath' (1791), and 'A Letter to the Catholics of England' (1792). His charges of deception against Berington led the latter to liken him to Tartuffe: 'His sanctimonious air and oily diction veil a mind of artifice; and, at a distance, may be heard the sounding brass and the tinkling cymbal' (Berington, xxxi). 
In November 1794 Plowden rejoined at Stonyhurst, Lancashire, his former Jesuit colleagues from Liege, and briefly acted as convent chaplain at York in 1796. On the first attempt to restore the English province of the Society of Jesus in 1803 he was appointed novice master at Hodder Place, near Stonyhurst, where he distinguished himself by his remarkable exhortations to preserve English Jesuit traditions and by washing the feet of all new novices, which was accompanied by a reading of 'John' 13, a practice deriving apparently from Watten but terminated in 1808 on account of fears of anti-Jesuit feeling being stirred up. At Hodder he was solemnly professed on 13 November 1805. After the bull of restoration issued by Pius VII in 1814 Plowden was declared provincial on 8 September 1817, and at the same time rector of Stonyhurst College. Here, he continued to defend Jesuit rights against episcopal pretensions at Wigan, for instance, in 1818, and set himself the task of persuading Rome to restore formally the Jesuits in England despite the resistance of the bishops. In 1820 he was summoned to Rome for the election of a new general of the society and used this opportunity to advance the cause of restoration: 'I have been trotting the streets in quest of cardinals and prelates and losing time in their ante-chambers. Oh, what a bore!' (Basset, 378). Returning home, depressed at the lack of success, he died suddenly at Jougne in France on 13 June 1821, where he was buried, with military honours, as a general, in the parish cemetery, having been mistaken for a soldier returning from the appointment of a general in Rome. He was loved by his novices and students, among the latter being Richard Lalor Sheil, who described him as 'a perfect Jesuit of the old school' ('Schoolboy recollections', 'New Monthly Magazine', Aug 1829). 


@@@@@


doc= 22389


Plowden, Edmund (c.1518-1585), law reporter, was most probably born at Blunden Hall in Bishop's Castle, Shropshire. He was the eldest son of Humphrey Plowden (died 1558), a local landowner, and his wife, Elizabeth Wollascot, daughter of John Sturry of Ross Hall, Shropshire. Virtually nothing is known about Plowden's upbringing and early education, or about the origins of the unwavering, but deeply private, adherence to the Catholic faith that was such a conspicuous feature of his life. He seems likely to have spent three years at Cambridge University without taking a degree, but Anthony Wood's assertion that he also studied medicine at Oxford is improbable. Although the dates of his admission to the Middle Temple and call to the bar are uncertain, by his own account Plowden began his legal education in 1538, tradition having it that he was so studious that he did not leave the inn once during the space of three years. He began recording cases he heard in court from at least 1550, the same year in which he gave law readings (on entails and replevins) at New Inn. 
Having acted in a legal capacity for John Winchcombe in 1548 and become steward of his estate at Greenham in 1550, Plowden may already have begun establishing himself in Berkshire and Oxfordshire, where he later resided when not in London. His public career blossomed in the reign of Queen Mary, probably owing in part to his friendship with Sir Francis Englefield, who became a privy councillor and master of the court of wards in 1553. Plowden was appointed to the council in the marches of Wales in 1553, and was also made a member of the commission of the peace for Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, Shropshire, and Worcestershire. He was returned for Wallingford to the parliament that assembled in October 1553, for Reading in November 1554, and for Wootton Bassett in 1555, the latter two being places where Englefield is known to have had influence. Plowden was one of a number of MPs against whom informations were laid for contempt for being absent without licence when the house was called in early January 1555. It has sometimes been argued that the accused MPs were protesting against the reintroduction of heresy laws, but the true cause of the incident remains obscure; in any case Plowden pleaded that he had not been absent, and the charges were eventually withdrawn. In 1557 he was raised to the bench and appointed autumn reader at the Middle Temple; his reading on dower was postponed to 1558. On the death of his father on 21 March 1558 he succeeded to the family estate at Plowden, Shropshire. In 1554 he had purchased, in conjunction with the London merchant, John White, other lands in Shropshire, including former monastic property at Lydbury North. On 27 October 1558 he received a writ calling him to the degree of serjeant-at-law in the following Easter term, but the writ abated with the death of Queen Mary, and it was not renewed by Queen Elizabeth. 
The family tradition that Elizabeth once offered Plowden the office of lord chancellor if he would renounce Catholicism is probably unfounded, but it is a fair reflection of his reputation as a lawyer, despite the disabilities caused by his faith. His defence of Edmund Bonner, the deprived Marian bishop of London who refused the oath of supremacy, was sufficiently successful in calling into question the consecration of all the Elizabethan bishops that it required an act of parliament to remedy the defect. In 1566, and possibly at the instigation of the duke of Norfolk, Plowden wrote a well-known defence of the claim of Mary of Scotland to the throne of England. This argued that the English crown descended by inheritance, and since the maxims of the common law, which applied to natural bodies, did not apply to political bodies, Mary's foreign birth did not invalidate her claim. At the same time Plowden held that the crown of Scotland was historically 'in homage' to the crown of England. Hence it was 'folly' to suggest that Mary herself (as opposed to the Scots in general) was out of allegiance to, and therefore incapable of holding, the English throne. Referring to an opinion of Henry VII that was retailed by Polydore Vergil, he predicted that a Scottish succession would not lead to the oppression of England by Scotland, because the Scottish monarch would naturally be inclined to come to England, 'the head of the island'. He made a point of praying that God would 'blesse oure Soueraigne quene Elizabeth with long lyffe and many Childerne', thereby rendering all his arguments unnecessary. He also noted that in 'silence there is saufftie but in speache there is perill and in wryting more' (BL, Harley MS 849, fols. 1'v', 31'v'), and in general he appears to have been politically circumspect. 
Plowden continued to hold office in the duchy of Lancaster, was on the Berkshire commission of the peace, and was appointed to the commission of sewers in 1567. He attended Church of England services until 1569, when, after some delay, he declared himself unable to sign a declaration that obliged justices of the peace to acknowledge their duty to observe the 'Act of Uniformity', although the real sticking point for him was a requirement that he promise to attend services according to the 'Book of Common Prayer'. He was obliged to enter into a bond for his good behaviour, but seems to have suffered no further difficulty, despite the fact that he ceased attending church, subsequently acted as counsel for known Catholics, and was regularly returned as a recusant during the government's periodic attempts to ferret out Catholics at the inns of court. Plowden was named a head burgess when Bishop's Castle, Shropshire, was granted its first charter in 1574, and he may have helped to secure the borough's parliamentary enfranchisement ten years later. He also continued to thrive as a lawyer and member of the Middle Temple. Having served as Lent reader in 1561, he was treasurer of the inn from 20 June 1561 until May 1567. In this capacity, and afterwards, he raised money and supervised the erection of a new hall, one of the windows of which contains his arms with an inscription to the effect that his great care had brought the work to completion for the benefit of all those who cultivated the laws. 
In 1571 Plowden published 'Les commentaries, ou, Les reportes... de divers cases... en les temps des raignes le Roy Ed. le size, le Roigne Mary, le Roy & Roigne Philip & Mary, & le Roigne Elizabeth', a volume of law reports that decisively broke out of the older year-book tradition, and was the first to be published by the author in his own lifetime and under his own name. The keys to Plowden's approach were two resolutions he claims to have made at the beginning of his law studies. The first was: '[to] be present at, and to give diligent attention to, the debates and questions of law, and particularly to the arguments of those who were men of the greatest note and reputation for learning. The second was, to commit to writing what I heard, and the judgment thereupon, which seemed to me to be much better than to rely on treacherous memory. ('Les commentaries', preface)' Concentrating on demurrers or special verdicts, which threw up particularly problematic points in law, he did not quote verbatim, but he did preface each report with a transcription of the pleadings from the court record, and he verified the accuracy of the arguments presented by consulting the judges and other lawyers who had made them, sometimes showing them his version for approval. Although the book contains some of his own cases, there are only one or two lengthy expositions of his own views, most notably that in connection with the application of principles of equity to the interpretation of statutes. Plowden claimed that he published in the first place because manuscript versions, some of them corrupt, were circulating widely, and he appears always to have had an eye on the needs of law students. The second edition, which included additional cases, was printed in 1578, along with an analytical index compiled by Recorder William Fleetwood. The work was subsequently reissued many times, with some later editions containing in addition Plowden's 'Queries', a collection of moot points that was published from manuscript for the first time in 1620. Highly respected in his lifetime, Plowden's name is frequently associated with well-known legal aphorisms; Camden praised him for his learning and 'integrity of life' (Camden, 270). Sir Edward Coke approvingly referred to him in his 'Institutes' as a 'sage of the law'. 
Plowden's will, dated 2 January 1582, gives his residences as Burghfield, Berkshire, and Shiplake, Oxfordshire. The latter house was leased to him in connection with his wardship of the young Francis Englefield, whose father had fled into exile at the accession of Queen Elizabeth, entrusting his estates to Plowden. Probably towards the end of the 1550s Plowden had married Katherine, daughter of William Sheldon of Beoley, Worcestershire. Their first-born son, Humphrey, seems to have died in infancy. The elder surviving son, Edmund, died in August 1587 (aged at least twenty-four); the younger, Francis, lived until 1652. One daughter, Ann, married Francis Parkins in 1581; another, Mary, became the wife of Richard White, and her son Thomas White became principal of the English College at Lisbon. Plowden died in London on 6 February 1585, leaving bequests for the poor and money to cover the unpaid tithes he owed to vicars in the parishes where he held land. He requested burial either in the Middle Temple Church, where there is a monument depicting him in his lawyer's robes, or at Burghfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 22390


Plowden, Francis Peter (1749-1829), lawyer and historian, the eighth son of William Ignatius Plowden, of Plowden, Shropshire, and Frances Dormer, daughter of Charles, Baron Dormer, was born at Plowden on 28 June 1749. His brother, Charles Plowden, later became rector of Stonyhurst College. Francis received his education in the college of the English Jesuits at St Omer, France. He entered the noviciate of the Society of Jesus at Watten, near St Omer, on 7 September 1766, and was master of the college at Bruges from 1771 to 1773. At the time of the papal bull suppressing the Society of Jesus, Plowden had not taken holy orders. He therefore found himself released from his first or simple vows of religion, and returned to a secular life in 1773. He entered the Middle Temple, and for some years practised with success as a conveyancer. On 5 July 1793 he received an honorary DCL from Oxford University in consequence of the publication of his 'Jura Anglorum: the Rights of Englishmen'. 
With the lifting of the restrictions preventing Roman Catholics from pleading, Plowden was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1796. He would have acquired considerable practice in the chancery courts had he not been held back by a misunderstanding with the lord chancellor. He became eminent, however, as a legal and political writer, and published several pamphlets against William Pitt the younger. His 'Historical Review of the State of Ireland' (1803) was apparently written under the patronage of the government, although he attacked the ministry in a preliminary preface. In 1813 a prosecution was instituted against him at the Lifford assizes by a Mr Hart, who was connected with the government, for a libel contained in his 'History of Ireland' (1811). A verdict was returned for the plaintiff, with $5000 damages. To avoid payment of this sum, Plowden fled to France and settled in Paris, where he was appointed a professor in the Scots College. 
Plowden was married to Dorothea (died 1827), daughter of Griffith Philipps of Cwmgwili (MP for Carmarthen, 1751-61, 1768-74). Dorothea was the author of 'Virginia' (1800), a comic opera which was performed at Drury Lane, and condemned the first night. Of their children, a son, Captain Plowden, aide-de-camp to General Churchill, was killed in a duel in Jamaica, and Anna Maria (died 1822) was the third wife of Archibald Cochrane, ninth earl of Dundonald. Plowden was a man of acknowledged talent, and a staunch whig in politics, but in his worldly affairs he was somewhat improvident. In addition to his histories of Ireland he was the author of numerous other works on British history and constitutional law. He died at his residence in the rue Vaugirard on 4 January 1829. 


@@@@@


doc= 22391


Plowden, Walter Chichele (1820-1860), diplomatist, was born in England on 3 August 1820, the youngest son of Trevor Chichele Plowden of the Bengal civil service. He was educated at Dr Evan's school, Hampstead, and, at the age of nineteen entered the office of Messrs Carr, Tagore & Co., in Calcutta. He resigned this post four years later, in 1843, and embarked for England. At Suez he met J. T. Bell, and joined him in an expedition to Abyssinia to discover the sources of the White Nile. He remained in Abyssinia until 1847, when he returned to England, and was shipwrecked 'en route', in the Red Sea. 
In 1848 Plowden was appointed first British consul in Abyssinia, with a mission to Ras Ali. He remained in the interior until February 1860, when he took leave of King Tewodros. Near Gondar, on the Kaka River, Plowden was attacked by a rebel chieftain, and was wounded and taken prisoner. He was ransomed by the authorities of Gondar on 4 March, and carried into the town, where he died of his injuries on 11 March 1860. His death was afterwards avenged by Tewodros. 
Plowden's manuscripts were forwarded to his brother Trevor Chichele Plowden, who edited and published them as 'Travels in Abyssinia and the Galla Country' (1868); he also left a considerable sum of money -- nearly $4000 -- at his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 22392


Plugenet, Alan (II) de, first Lord Plugenet (d. 1298), baron and royal councillor, was the son of Alan (I) de Plugenet (died after 1230) and Alice, his wife, daughter of Thomas of Rochford and Isabella de Berkeley. The Plugenets were almost certainly of Breton descent, perhaps native to Plancoet near Dinan, and had first risen to prominence in the mid-twelfth century when Hugh de Plugenet (died 1200) received the manor of Headington by grant of the Empress Matilda. Hugh married Sibilla, daughter of Josce de Dinan and sister-in-law of the notorious outlaw Fulk (III) Fitzwarine (died 1258). By 1242 his lands at Lambourn in Berkshire and Westbury in Wiltshire had passed via his sons Alan (died 'c'.1202) and Josce (died 1229/30) to William de Plugenet (died 1257), son of Josce. Through Josce de Dinan and the Fitzwarines the family also enjoyed associations with the Welsh marches and the county of Hereford. Alan (II) de Plugenet's father, Alan (I), was probably a younger son of Josce de Plugenet (died 1229/30) and held a minor estate at Lambourn. Robert de Plugenet, probably another of Josce's sons, served as deputy sheriff of Wiltshire in 1235-6, and as a leading member of the household of William (II) Longespee (died 1250), claimant to the earldom of Salisbury. 
Alan (II) de Plugenet first appears in 1256, when he was promised an heiress at the behest of his kinsman Robert Walerand (died 1273), the son of Plugenet's grandmother Isabella de Berkeley by her second marriage. In 1260 he was knighted by the king at Westminster, and in the following year received an annual fee of 20 marks to retain him in royal service. He served throughout the baronial rebellion of the 1260s as a staunch adherent of the king and his son, the Lord Edward. Following the royalist victory at Evesham in 1265 he seized temporary possession of a large number of rebel estates and was appointed constable of Dunster Castle. Through royal favour he was also confirmed in possession of the rebel manor of Haselbury Plucknett in Somerset and granted life custody of the Hampshire forest of Woolmer. In 1269 he received possession of the lands of his kinsman Robert Walerand, centred upon the castle and barony of Kilpeck in the Welsh marches. Following a complicated exchange between Plugenet, Walerand, and Eleanor of Castile, wife of the Lord Edward, Walerand was allowed to draw an annuity from these lands until his death in 1273, after which Plugenet obtained Kilpeck, part of Walerand's estate in southern England, and the royal manors of Piddington in Oxfordshire and Pitney and Wearn in Somerset. As a follower of the Lord Edward, in 1267 Plugenet was appointed keeper of the Isle of Wight and of the royal manor of Gillingham. In 1270 he acted as Edward's deputy sheriff for Somerset and Dorset and as constable of Corfe. 
From 1276 onwards Plugenet participated in Edward's Welsh wars, and by 1287 had been appointed one of the king's seneschals for west Wales. As seneschal, he is said to have goaded Rhys ap Maredudd (died 1292) into rebellion by demanding suit of court from Rhys's men. Following the capture of Rhys's castle of Dryslwyn, Alan was appointed constable, and was engaged over the next two years in the castle's rebuilding and defence. He was summoned to parliament as a baron in 1295, to the king's proposed expedition to Gascony in 1294, and to the wars in Scotland from 1294 until 1298. During the king's expedition to Flanders in 1297, he served as one of the counsellors of Prince Edward, the king's son, and played a conspicuous part in negotiations with the baronial opposition. He died shortly before 25 December 1298, having earlier made gifts to the nuns of Aconbury in Herefordshire. With his wife, Joan (died 1315), daughter of Andrew Wake of Dowlish in Somerset, he had two children: a son Alan ['see below'], and a daughter Joan, married first to Thomas Corbet (died before 1295) and second to Henry de Bohun (died 1314), son and heir of John de Bohun of Haresfield in Gloucestershire, and grandson of Humphrey (IV) de Bohun, earl of Hereford (died 1275). 
Plugenet's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 22393


Alan (III) de Plugenet, second Lord Plugenet (d. 1325), baron, succeeded to his father's lands in 1299 and was knighted in 1306. Between 1300 and his death he was summoned regularly to the king's wars in Scotland and Gascony, and as a baron to parliament. At the death of his mother, Joan, in 1315 he was instructed by John of Droxford, bishop of Bath and Wells, to comply with Joan's wish that she be buried at Sherborne. Sir Alan is said to have made the bishop's messenger eat the letter and wax. He later denied the charge, but admitted that he had commanded the messenger to be so soundly beaten that, in his terror, he ate the letter. Alan (III) de Plugenet died in 1325 and was buried at Abbey Dore in Herefordshire. He and his wife, Sybil, had no children, so that his barony passed to his sister Joan. Joan, who died in 1327 and was buried in the lady chapel of Hereford Cathedral, granted a life interest at Kilpeck to her kinswoman by marriage, Eleanor de Bohun. Most of the Plugenet estate passed thereafter to Richard de la Bere, who claimed descent from Alice, mother of Alan (II) de Plugenet, who had remarried after the death of Alan (I). 


@@@@@


doc= 22394


Plukenet, Leonard (bap. 1642, d. 1706), botanist, was baptized on 4 January 1642, one of several children of Robert Plucknett and his wife, Elizabeth. The family, apparently well-to-do, lived in the parish of St Margaret's, Westminster, in which he in turn was to live for most of his life. After Westminster School, where his contemporaries included William Courten and Robert Uvedale, he matriculated at Hart Hall, Oxford, in November 1662, but no record of a degree there (or anywhere else) has been traced. Though styled 'doctor in physick', his name is not on the roll of the College of Physicians nor in the records of the Society of Apothecaries, so if he subsequently practised medicine in London, as traditionally assumed, this must have been on some less official basis. A farm in the Chilterns and twenty houses in Westminster which he owned at the time of his will could be evidence of his having prospered in that occupation, though inherited wealth is equally possible. On 6 November 1669 he married Letitia, daughter of George Manley; they had seven children. 
The earliest dated reference to Plukenet as a botanist is not until his middle age, in a letter from Ray to Sloane in 1684. The extent of his knowledge by then suggests it had been acquired over a considerable period, perhaps initially through field botanizing, for records entered in his copy of Ray's 'Catalogus plantarum Angliae' (1670) reveal a good acquaintance with the wild flora of the London area. (Others from further afield are noticeably numerous from Lincolnshire, doubtless made on visits to a cousin, Captain Anthony Irby, of Boston.) Plukenet's main concern, though, was to amass a herbarium as representative as possible of the plants of the known world, on similar lines to those of Sloane and Petiver; he emerges in contemporary correspondence as a principal competitor and critic of the two men. Though he had a small botanical garden at his home in St Margaret's Lane, near Old Palace Yard in Westminster, and had access to the living collections of fellow botanists, most of his acquisitions came from correspondents in often distant countries overseas. The eventual 8000 specimens and more (incorporated in the Sloane Herbarium in the Natural History Museum) include some of special interest from St Helena, the earliest examples of that island's endemic plants, some of them now long extinct. In striking contrast to Petiver's, Plukenet's collection is a model of neatness, but unfortunately the source of specimens is rarely indicated, though, as many of the figures in his works were copied from those, the missing data can to some extent be reconstructed. 
Again in contrast to Petiver, Plukenet refrained from publishing interim, partial catalogues of his collection and instead chose to embody it in a sequence of four magisterial volumes (the first three brought out at his own expense) which together amounted to a single work. These were the four-part 'Phytographia' (1691-6), the 'Almagestum botanicum' (1696), the 'Almagesti botanici mantissa' (1700), and the 'Amaltheum botanicum' along with an index to the whole (1705). The last two were effectively supplements. So highly valued was this corpus that a six-volume collected edition, made up out of surplus copies, was called for in 1720 and itself earned a reprint in 1769. This value lay in the fact that, in Pulteney's words, 'no work before published by one man ever exhibited so great a number of new plants' (Pulteney, 2.27). The 'Phytographia', the principal volume, consisted wholly of plates, 250 in all, each made up of a number of small figures, with the names and synonyms of the plants depicted printed underneath. Several British plants made their first appearance in these. The 'Almagestum' followed, with descriptions of several thousand species arranged alphabetically under the generic names of earlier authors. Though Ray found much to fault in the Latin, contemporary and later botanists made much use of both for identifying plants. Linnaeus in particular relied on the 'Phytographia' extensively, lauding it as ''opus incomparabile''. An 'Index Linnaeanus', collating Plukenet's figures with the latter's species, was subsequently compiled by P. D. Giseke and published in Hamburg in 1779. 
Plukenet felt that his labours were under-appreciated and a certain testiness seems to have been the result. Sloane describes him in letters as 'reserved, jealous of his reputation, and none of the best nature' ('Correspondence of John Ray', 306-7) as well as 'a little conceited and opinionated... incapable of advice' (ibid., 299-300). If his equals in botany disappointed him, however, royal patronage in some degree made up for that: soon after the accession of William and Mary in 1689 he was appointed superintendent of the royal gardens at Hampton Court, that horticultural king's pre-eminent concern, and with it took the title of 'queen's botanist' or 'royal professor of botany' -- no doubt in emulation of the Jardin du Roi in Paris. This he may have owed to the influence of his Irby cousins. 
In his final years Plukenet seems to have developed an interest in insects. A collection of some 1700 specimens, by no means all butterflies and moths, pressed flat and mounted like dried plants in a book, with names in English and roughly arranged by 'orders', was subsequently acquired by Sloane and is now in the Natural History Museum in London. A notebook in Plukenet's hand apparently relates to this and suggests most were taken in the neighbourhood of the city. If so, this has a claim to be the oldest collection of British insects in existence. 
Plukenet died at Westminster on 6 July 1706 and was buried on 12 July in the chancel of St Margaret's, Westminster, the church in which he had been baptized. His wife, Letitia, is probably the woman of that name buried there only a few months later. To her he bequeathed his vast collection and all his botanical books. Most of the former was eventually purchased by Sloane, the rest by Philip Carteret Webb. 'Plukenetia', a genus of mainly tropical members of the spurge family, was named in his honour by Plumier and perpetuated by Linnaeus. 


@@@@@


doc= 22395


Plume, Thomas (bap. 1630, d. 1704), Church of England clergyman and educational benefactor, was baptized on 18 August 1630 at All Saints', Maldon, Essex, the second son of Thomas Plume, alderman of Maldon, coal merchant and landowner, and his third wife, Helen. Educated at Chelmsford grammar school, Plume was admitted to Christ's College, Cambridge, on 24 February 1646, matriculating on 11 July of that year. He graduated BA in 1650. 
The details of Plume's life are unclear in the decade following his graduation. He did not follow his father's presbyterian leanings, but instead received clandestine episcopal ordination during the 1650s. He may have been living near Cheam in Surrey, where the staunch Anglican John Hacket had been allowed to retain the rectory when deprived of his other livings; it was certainly during this period that Hacket became Plume's friend and mentor. Hacket's influence may have secured Plume the vicarage of Greenwich, to which he was instituted by Richard Cromwell on 22 September 1658. Hacket also helped secure Plume's admission as BD at Cambridge, 'per literas regis', in 1661. Hacket was instituted as bishop of Lichfield the same year, and employed Plume as his agent in London, particularly in purchasing books. On 16 March 1667 Hacket noted that he had promised Plume 'the next prebend that shall be void' at Lichfield, but died three years later before honouring this promise (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 54, fol. 108). He left Plume two volumes of manuscript sermons, which Plume published as 'A Century of Sermons upon Several Remarkable Subjects' (1675), with 'An Account of the Life and Death of J. Hacket'. 
During the 1660s Plume accumulated other benefices, including the sinecures of the deserted parish of Merston, Kent, in 1662, and Little Easton, Essex, in 1665. On 10 June 1679 Plume was instituted as archdeacon and prebendary of Rochester, and lived at Longfield Court, the archdeacon's residence, until his death there on 20 November 1704. He was buried at Longfield four days later. 
Plume used his prosperity to create a purpose-built library in his native town. Before his death he purchased approximately 7400 books and pamphlets. W. J. Petchey argued that these were bought deliberately to create a public library, and not merely as Plume's personal collections. Most were English publications, mainly pre-1649, but there were also works published in Aberdeen, Waterford, Amsterdam, Antwerp, Paris, Lyons, Cologne, Leipzig, and Geneva, and from Poland, Sweden, and Denmark. They included texts in Hebrew, Persian, Syriac, Coptic, and Greek as well as Latin and English, and included protestant and Catholic sermons and other works of religious controversy and theology, editions of medieval chronicles, legal treatises, and classical texts, and editions, biographies, and books on astronomy, political theory, and education. They also included titles previously owned by Francis Bacon, Cardinal Richelieu, the duke of Pomerania, and the elector of Brandenburg. The library also contained 1530 pamphlets, mostly in English on English subjects. By his death Plume had assembled the books and converted the rooms above his endowed school in Maldon to house them. The library, significantly, contained no space for expansion, and only $1 per annum was provided for the acquisition of new books. Plume appears to have intended his bequest as a definitive repository of knowledge which could be drawn upon by neighbouring clergy and gentry. The pre-1649 bias in the library's contents may have indicated Plume's desire to return to pre-civil war learning, and to advance the physical and intellectual restoration of the church. 
In his will Plume restored dissolved chantry lands near Maldon to spiritual purposes by endowing a weekly lectureship in the town, and funding six poor boys at his school. He also paid $200 to establish a workhouse to employ the poor of Maldon. Plume's other charitable bequests were intended to strengthen the church and relieve poverty in Kent. He donated four houses, 'the Archdeacon's Almshouses', to the parish of Deptford, and gave $100 to Bromley College. He also established a charitable fund to enable the marriage of ten young women under the age of twenty-four (five from Chatham, five from Rochester). His will stated that despite being a bachelor this bequest was to show that he 'had no ill opinion of marriage' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/481, fol. 103'v'). He gave $1000 to augment parish livings in the diocese of Rochester and to fund a weekly lecture at Dartford or Gravesend. 
Plume's other bequest was $1902 12's'. 2died to erect an astronomical observatory and create a professorship of astronomy and experimental philosophy at Cambridge. The intentions behind this bequest are obscure. There is nothing to support the eighteenth-century view that Plume made the bequest after reading Huygens's 'Cosmotheros' on John Flamsteed's recommendation. This work was published at the end of Plume's life (1698), and was 'an imaginative exercise akin to science fiction' (Petchey, 'Intention', 3-4). Although Plume's vicarage at Greenwich was adjacent to the new Royal Observatory, Plume had no demonstrable links to the Royal Society, and his library shows no bias towards cosmology. His will envisages the professor dispensing applied knowledge 'of Astronomy, the Globes, Navigation, natural Philosophy, dialling and other practicall parts of the Mathematicks', rather than engaging in pure research (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/481, fol. 106'r'). The professor was to have few other formal duties. 
Plume left the exact provisions of the post to the discretion of the trustees, Francis Thompson DD of Gonville and Caius College, Dr Covell, master of Christ's College, Richard Bentley, master of Trinity College, and William Whiston, Lucasian professor of mathematics, with the advice of Isaac Newton and Sir John Ellis, master of Caius. The chair was established by letters patent on 11 June 1707, and funded by lands purchased at Balsham, Cambridgeshire. 
Under Bentley's auspices an observatory was constructed over the great gate at Trinity. In 1737 it contained 'divers large Telliscops', other 'Mathematicall Instruments', and 'a double barrelled Pneumatick Machine' with a cupola containing 'two Telliscopes' (CUL, Add. MS 3466). Thereafter the observatory and professorship were neglected, and the observatory was removed in 1797. 


@@@@@


doc= 22396


Plumer, Sir Thomas (1753-1824), judge and politician, was born on 10 October 1753, the eldest son of Thomas Plumer (1711-1781) of Lilling Hall in the parish of Sheriff Hutton in the North Riding of Yorkshire, formerly a wine merchant in London, and his wife, Anne (died 1795), daughter of Henry Thompson of Kirby Hall, Yorkshire. He was at Eton College from 1763 to 1771, then went to University College, Oxford. Reputed 'one of the best scholars among the undergraduates' (Maurice, 25), he graduated BA in 1775, MA in 1778, and BCL in 1783. In 1777 he was elected Vinerian scholar and in June 1780 became a fellow of his college. 
Plumer had entered Lincoln's Inn on 6 April 1769 and while pursuing his legal studies attended Sir James Eyre on his circuits, frequently assisting him by taking down the evidence at the trials over which he presided. Called to the bar on 7 February 1778, he joined the Oxford and south Wales circuit. After eight years he felt he was 'in the way of gaining both reputation and connexion' (Jerdan, 3.3) and he later became one of the leaders. He was also a commissioner of bankrupts from 1781 to 1793 and king's serjeant of the duchy of Lancaster from 1785 to 1813. He practised with particular success in the court of exchequer, where he was greatly in demand in tithe cases, and became renowned for his expertise in parliamentary election disputes. 
Plumer became known to a wider public from his appearance in a succession of notable state trials. The ability he showed when employed in the defence of Sir Thomas Rumbold at the bar of the House of Commons in 1783 led to his being retained, along with Edward Law (afterwards Lord Chief Justice Ellenborough) and Robert Dallas (later chief justice of the common pleas), to defend Warren Hastings. During those interminable proceedings he was made a king's counsel on 7 February 1793 and was elected a bencher of his inn in the Easter term following. His skilful performance in the Hastings trial led to his being retained in 1796 for John Reeves, charged with publishing a seditious libel, and in 1798 for James O'Coigley, Arthur O'Connor, and others charged with high treason. He subsequently appeared for the crown in the prosecutions of Joseph Wall, governor of Goree, for murder (1802) and Edward Marcus Despard for high treason (1803), and in 1806 he deployed his notable skill in cross-examination on behalf of Henry Dundas, first Viscount Melville, in his impeachment by the House of Commons, securing an acquittal on all the charges after a fifteen-day trial. In the same year he assisted John Scott, Baron Eldon, and Spencer Perceval in challenging the findings of the so-called 'delicate investigation' into the conduct of Caroline, princess of Wales, through their letter to the king of 2 October 1806. 
On 27 August 1794 Plumer married Marianne (1775-1857), eldest daughter of John Turton of Sugnall, near Eccleshall, Staffordshire; they had five sons and two daughters. In 1811 Plumer purchased an estate at Canons, Stanmore, Middlesex. 
Plumer had been appointed second justice on the north Wales circuit on 25 March 1805, a post he held until 1812, and, when William Cavendish-Bentinck, third duke of Portland, formed his administration in spring 1807, he was made solicitor-general (11 April) and knighted (15 April). At a by-election in May he was returned for Jacob Pleydell Bouverie, second earl of Radnor's borough of Downton, taking up a standing offer made after Plumer's legal efforts had ensured that Radnor's influence would prevail there, but which he had hitherto declined. Coming to the Commons rather late in life, Plumer did not shine as a debater, but he was a regular and dependable defender of the Portland administration and that of his friend Perceval which followed. He showed himself opposed to reform proposals of almost every kind, whether for ending the slave trade (1807), abolishing sinecures (1810), extending the parliamentary franchise (1810), or removing Roman Catholic disabilities (1811). This conservatism extended to law reform. In a debate on the criminal law in 1810 Plumer declared himself attached to the existing system of law and 'extremely jealous in his views of any new theories' and in 1813 he opposed two of Romilly's measures for the reduction of capital offences, insisting that severity was necessary for the security of the state. 
On 26 April 1812 Plumer succeeded Sir Vicary Gibbs as attorney-general. He was regarded as indolent in some quarters but this may have been due to chronic ill health. After Perceval's death he had no desire to remain in politics and when an act was passed in April 1813 to alleviate delays in chancery by creating a vice-chancellor he pressed his claims so insistently that Eldon felt obliged to appoint him despite having practically promised the post to Richard Richards. He took office on 14 April and was sworn of the privy council on 20 May. 
Plumer's appointment was strongly criticized, particularly by Romilly, who claimed that 'a worse appointment... could hardly have been made' (S. Romilly, 'Memoirs of the Life of Sir Samuel Romilly', 3 vols., 1840, 3.102). Romilly exaggerated Plumer's ignorance of equity and he learned quickly enough for his promotion to master of the rolls in succession to Sir William Grant on 6 January 1818 to attract no hostile comment. 
The creation of a vice-chancellor did little to ease the plight of chancery litigants and Plumer's judgments were frequently and successfully taken to appeal, probably more because of the ready availability of appeals and rehearings than his shortcomings. Until he secured a Treasury grant to provide a new courtroom in Lincoln's Inn the vice-chancellor's hearings were conducted in conditions which 'lessen[ed] the public reverence for a judge' (Bell, 9), and, though he was praised for urbanity and politeness, inexperience made him very slow and encouraged litigants to file interlocutory motions purely for delay. His reputation also suffered from the prolixity of his judgments, which sometimes led his court to be deserted by all but the reporter and gave rise to the rhyme which circulated at the chancery bar: 'To cause delay in Lincoln's Inn two diff'rent methods tend; his Lordship's [Eldon's] judgments ne'er begin, his Honour's [Plumer's] never end'. 
Nevertheless, Campbell wrote in 1857 that Plumer's judgments had acquired a respectable reputation. The best-known, 'Dearle v. Hall' (1823), on the priorities between competing equitable interests in pure personality, was later embodied in statute. 
Plumer had extensively renovated the Rolls House and its chapel in Chancery Lane at his own expense and after struggling against illness for some months he died there on 24 March 1824, aged seventy, and was buried in the chapel on 1 April. He was a devout Anglican and firm sabbatarian, who gave generously to charity. A captain of the Bloomsbury and Inns of Court Volunteers in 1798, he served as treasurer of Lincoln's Inn in 1800, and was a trustee of the British Museum and a fellow of the Royal Society and the Society of Antiquaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 22397


Sir Robert Plumpton (1453-1525), landowner, son of Sir William and his second wife, Joan Wintringham of Knaresborough, certainly soon developed a strong connection with the fourth earl of Northumberland, both as retainer and member of his comital council, and this ensured his role in resisting the mounting Scottish threat during Edward IV's last years: most notably, in 1482, he campaigned north of the border in a massive force commanded by Richard of Gloucester and Northumberland, probably receiving his knighthood in the process. His sympathies during Richard III's reign can only be guessed at: in all probability he followed the line of his patron, Henry Percy, and may even have been in the earl's non-participating force at Bosworth on 22 August 1485. During the early years of Henry VII's reign Sir Robert seems to have enjoyed Northumberland's patronage to the full, regaining his father's former offices in both the royal honour of Knaresborough and the Percy lordship of Spofforth. When the king paid his first visit to Yorkshire in April 1486 he rode with the earl and a company of fellow Percy feedmen to greet him; he may have fought for Henry VII at the battle of Stoke in June 1487 and was certainly involved in the mopping-up operations following Lambert Simnel's defeat there; later in the year he travelled to London for the coronation of Queen Elizabeth. When the spring of 1489 brought a rebellion of considerable proportions in Yorkshire, he responded to an urgent summons to attend the earl of Northumberland at Thirsk and, following Percy's murder at the hands of the rebels on 28 April, played a sufficiently prominent role in suppressing the insurrection to receive a personal letter of thanks from the king, as he did again in 1492 for his part in putting down a further obscure rising in the western part of the county. Thereafter he ceased to play any significant political or military role in the north, partly because Northumberland's death removed his prime benefactor and the new earl was only a child, and partly because much of the rest of his life was dominated by a gargantuan effort to defend his inheritance. 


@@@@@


doc= 22398


Plumpton, Sir William (1404-1480), landowner and administrator, was the eldest son, and heir, of Sir Robert Plumpton (1383-1421) ['see under 'Plumpton family] of Plumpton near Knaresborough in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and Alice, daughter of Sir Godfrey Foljambe of Hassop in Derbyshire. Born on 7 October 1404 he was still a minor at the time of his father's death in 1421: not surprisingly, since both his father and grandfather had been Percy retainers, he became a ward of Henry Percy, second earl of Northumberland, and, after he attained his majority in 1425, his prime loyalty to the Percys wavered significantly only when they were eclipsed by the Nevilles in the 1460s. Like many young gentlemen of the day he saw service as a soldier in the war against France: in 1427-8, when he probably received his knighthood, and again, in 1435, as a captain in the retinue of John, duke of Bedford. From the late 1430s, however, his main interests centred on Yorkshire. In 1439 he became steward and master forester of the royal honour of Knaresborough and constable of Knaresborough Castle, and remained closely connected with the honour's administration for the rest of Henry VI's reign. Then, in 1442, the earl of Northumberland appointed him steward of his lordship of Spofforth and other estates in Yorkshire for life, with an annual fee of $10. To this was added in 1447, for his good service, a further $10. From November 1439, moreover, Plumpton's name appeared on the commission of the peace for the West Riding and he served as sheriff of Yorkshire (1447-8), and Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire (1452-3). 
During the 1450s, as a retainer of the earl of Northumberland, Sir William Plumpton became increasingly identified with the Lancastrian regime. Shortly before the first battle of St Albans in May 1455 he was summoned to attend a Lancastrian great council as a representative of the West Riding, and he may have fought in the battle (where his patron was killed). In 1456 he probably took part in a raid over the Scottish border led by the new earl of Northumberland, and it was no doubt as Northumberland's man that he appeared on royal commissions in the later 1450s. Perhaps present in the Lancastrian force at Ludford Bridge on 12 October 1459 he was certainly a commissioner of array to counter Yorkist rebels in the West Riding in December 1459. Significantly, following the Yorkist victory at Northampton on 10 July 1460, he ceased to be a justice of the peace and in all probability he actively supported the earl of Northumberland and the Lancastrians in the autumn of 1460 and was present at the battle of Wakefield on 30 December. On 12 March 1461, a few days after the Yorkist Edward IV had been proclaimed king in London, orders were issued by the Lancastrian leadership requiring Plumpton and two other knights 'to summon all liegemen of the forest or demesne of Knaresborough to set out with them to meet the enemy', while the following day a letter purporting to come from Henry VI himself at York begged that he present himself 'in all hast possible' to 'resist the malicious entent and purpose' of Edward IV (Kirby, 26). Plumpton almost certainly answered the call and fought for the Lancastrians at Towton on 29 March 1461; his son and heir, another William, probably lost his life in the fighting; and since his patron, the third earl of Northumberland, perished there, it is hardly surprising that the next few years proved traumatic for him. 
Initially, following Towton, Plumpton fled to Cumberland, only to be captured at Cockermouth, and on 1 May 1461 he was brought before Edward IV at Newcastle. However, he managed to avoid the attainder for treason that might easily have been his fate, and even secured the protection of the king against his enemies providing he agreed to bind himself in the sum of $2000 as a guarantee of his future good conduct. He apparently failed to raise the money and, when the time allowed expired on 12 July 1461, he surrendered himself as a prisoner at the Tower of London: he probably remained imprisoned there until he obtained a general pardon on 5 February 1462. Even then his troubles were far from over, since in late 1463 he had to face further charges of treason when he was accused of receiving 'false, damnable, deffamatory and slaunderous writing' against the king and secretly aiding 'divers persons coming out of Scotland fro the king's adversaries' (Stapleton, lxix). These were very serious charges but he was acquitted on all counts and from early 1464 appears to have enjoyed complete liberty. Even so his position remained difficult: hence his attempts to find favour with John Neville, who became earl of Northumberland in 1464, and his brother Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, as a result of which he regained his office as steward of Spofforth and became Warwick's deputy as steward, constable, and master forester of Knaresborough. Perhaps this explains why, when Henry Percy was restored to his father's earldom in 1470, his early relations with Plumpton were rather frosty: for instance, he deprived him of his offices in the honour of Knaresborough in 1471. Plumpton's appointment as steward of Spofforth was nevertheless renewed by Northumberland in 1472 and he managed to win a measure of royal favour as well: he served as justice of the peace in the West Riding for most of the 1470s, figured on several government commissions, and even received permission to fortify his manor house at Plumpton. He died on 15 October 1480. 


The central theme of much of the 'Plumpton Correspondence' -- and, indeed, the main reason why the family's letters and papers were preserved -- is the protracted struggle from the 1470s onwards to prove rightful title to and, ultimately, obtain possession of the family estates. For this, moreover, Sir William Plumpton must bear prime responsibility. With his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of his near neighbour Sir Brian Stapleton of Carlton, he had several daughters and two sons, Robert and William. Robert died in 1450, soon after becoming betrothed to Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas, Lord Clifford, of Skipton in Craven. Elizabeth then married Sir William's second son, William, in 1453, and by the time of her husband's death in 1461 she had given birth to two daughters. In the meantime Sir William Plumpton himself had taken a second wife, Joan Wintringham of Knaresborough, with whom he had a son, Robert. For reasons that cannot be fully explained he chose to keep this marriage a secret. Only when taken to task by the ecclesiastical authorities many years later for his apparent immorality in living with Joan did he at last acknowledge her as his wife in 1468. Eventually, in 1472, the marriage was declared valid and Robert Plumpton recognized as his legitimate son. By 1472, moreover, he was the only legitimate son of Sir William. In the early 1460s, however, Sir William's granddaughters had been married: the elder, Margaret, to John Rocliffe of Cowthorpe near Wetherby and the younger, Elizabeth, to another local gentleman, John Suthill. Both these marriages had been arranged before Sir William Plumpton made public his own second marriage and in the clear expectation that the two girls would be coheirs to the family estates. Thus when in the 1470s Sir William made it increasingly clear that he favoured his son, Robert, and, indeed, in 1478 married him to Agnes, daughter of Sir William Gascoigne, as his heir presumptive, conflict with the Rocliffes and Suthills was inevitable. 
Even before Sir William Plumpton's death in the autumn of 1480, arbitration machinery had been set in motion: now battle was joined with a vengeance until, in September 1483, a compromise was reluctantly agreed. There matters rested for over a decade until in 1497 Henry VII's notorious financial agent Sir Richard Empson chose to give his formidable backing to Sir William Plumpton's granddaughters in a new challenge to the settlement of 1483. Thus by the end of 1502 Sir Robert Plumpton found himself deprived of the legal right to lands he had occupied for over twenty years. Not that he had any intention of giving up the struggle. Indeed, a few days after the verdict on his Yorkshire estates went against him at the York assizes in the autumn of 1502, he ordered his wife to 'see that the manor and place of Plumpton be surely and stedfastly kept' and for months thereafter attempts by the victors to occupy the family lands were parried, with both Sir Robert's wife, Agnes, and his son William playing prominent roles (Kirby, 152). Sir Robert meanwhile journeyed to London to press his claims personally, even appealing to Henry VII for protection. In February 1503 he became a knight of the body. Eventually, on 16 July 1503, his efforts were partially rewarded when the king issued an injunction that 'William Plompton, son and heir of Sir Robert Plompton, peacably enjoy the Lordships of Plumpton and Idle' (Stapleton, cxii-cxiii). But his troubles were not over, as a letter from his second wife, Isabel, daughter of Ralph, Lord Neville, whom he married in 1503 after the death of Agnes, makes clear: 'Sir, for God's sake take an end', she concluded, 'for we are brought to beggar staffe' (Kirby, 181). Both Sir Robert and his son William may have served a period of imprisonment in the Fleet towards the end of Henry VII's reign, as he and his wife certainly did in the Counter in 1510. Moreover, although a fresh arbitration in March 1515 did at least give Sir Robert firm possession of the manor of Plumpton, William Plumpton (1485-1547) ['see under 'Plumpton family] clearly received a much depleted inheritance at his father's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 22399


Plumptre, Anne (1760-1818), writer and translator, was born in Norwich, and baptized on 22 February 1760 at the Cathedral Church, Norwich, the second daughter of Robert Plumptre (1723-1788), prebendary of Norwich and president of Queens' College, Cambridge, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Newcome. She and her sister 
Anne Plumptre wrote the circle's second novel, 'Antoinette' (1796), published anonymously and derived from 'Celestina' by Charlotte Smith. Reviewed in the 'Monthly Magazine', it was praised for its interesting story, liberal sentiments, and 'instructive lessons to the female world'. The 'Monthly Review' found her second novel, 'The Rector's Son' (1798), improbably plotted and romantic in a pejorative sense. But it is ambitious and energetic, and strikes out to explore a range of different settings and temperaments, notably in India. She produced two more novels: 'Something New, or, Adventures of Campbell House' (1801) and 'The History of Myself and a Friend' (1817). Bell Plumptre's novel 'Montgomery, or, Scenes in Wales' was published the same year as Anne's 'Antoinette'. In 1798 the Minerva Press brought out Bell's novel 'The Mountain Cottage, or, Wonder upon Wonder, a Tale from the German', which was a translation of Christian Heinrich Spiess's 'Mausefallen und Heckelkramer'. 
Anne's translations of Kotzebue, the German playwright then in fashion in London, and Bell's of W. A. Iffland's 'The Foresters', both published in 1799, belong to the aesthetics of sensibility associated with the Gothic vogue that exploited the extremes of feeling, especially fear and the 'frisson' of illicit sensuality. Sheridan borrowed Anne's accurate translation before publication in order to produce his own very successful version of Kotzebue's 'Pizarro, or, The Spaniards in Peru: a Tragedy'. Anne also translated a 'Life and Literary Career of Kotzebue' (1801). 
The sisters' writing careers and political sympathies began to diverge. Amelia Opie contrasted the two sisters: 'Bell is laudably attentive to her studies, and stays at home, while Anne, 'a little in love', as usual, is more at Ham... than in Caroline Street' (unpublished letter, Huntingdon MS, OP60, 12 Dec 1800). This was the pattern from now on: Bell was a teacher for a time, and some of her tales from the German, such as 'Domestic Stories' (1800), were intended for use in that didactic context. She continued to write fiction such as 'The Western Mail', professing to be letters stolen from a postbag, and 'Stories for Children' (1804). Her 'Domestic Management, or, The Healthful Cookery Book' was published in the same year. Anne ranged more widely, both in her life and her work. 
Anne Plumptre was considerably more than a translator or novelist in a popular vein. Her own writings outnumber her translations, and display independence of mind and personal intrepidity. Her translation of the poet Friedrich Matthisson's popular letters and travels in 1799 was accompanied by her introduction, which shows her critical intervention in an important literary instance. The poet Thomas Gray's correspondence had been bowdlerized by his first editor, Mason, and she translated three letters which clearly showed his homosexual attachment to the young Victor von Bonstetten, a close friend of Matthisson. The letters, and the importance of this attachment, were acknowledged by later editors and biographers of Gray. 
In 1802 Anne set off for France in the company of Amelia Opie, who had married the painter John Opie in 1798; both women were friends of the poet Helen Maria Williams, whose 'Journals from France' were well known. Anne's 'A Narrative of a Three Years' Residence in France... 1802-5' (1810) is a substantial work and a serious political enquiry, from the point of view of a first-hand witness, into Napoleon's reign and the attitudes of the French people towards it. It examines the rumours and assumptions circulating in England during the war with France, and attempts to put them right by personal observation and cool assessment of the facts. She deliberately went to the provinces, as offering a truer picture than most recent travellers' experiences, often limited to Paris. She examines specific allegations about Napoleon's 'atrocities' and finds them unproven. She also scrutinizes the attitudes of the people towards his government, and finds 'speech everywhere in France as free as in England'. She draws a firm political conclusion: the emperor is not such a monster as he is painted, his people by and large support him, and he should be accepted by the British and the rest of Europe as a legitimate ruler. She advocated an initiative of making peace with Napoleon. Her views did not find favour in Britain, but this book is a serious and neglected contribution to the absorbing and variegated literature on Napoleon by writers across Europe. 
During her stay in France, Anne uncovered an unusual unpublished manuscript, an account of the plague at Marseilles in 1720, written by an eyewitness and participant, a local doctor, M. Bertrand. Her substantial introduction gives a lively defence of its relevance to the present, relating the vivid description of the plague both to recent outbreaks of disease, especially 'last summer's epidemic' of 'the yellow fever' in a number of Mediterranean ports, and to the more recent calamities or infections of war and of revolution. She also paints a sympathetic portrait of the brave doctor, with his penchant for literature. She draws attention to the literary quality of his account, giving us a glimpse of her own aesthetic criteria: 'It is a picture which unites in an eminent degree the qualities most calculated to engage the attention of all readers -- the horrible and the pathetic, the interesting, and the instructive: -- and the interest here excited is so much stronger than in the most finely wrought work of imagination, inasmuch as we know that it is not over imaginary woe that we now drop the sympathetic tear, but over woes, alas, too real... (p. xiii)' She sought and found further documents in Marseilles and London, and the whole was published in 1805. 
Anne also translated travel literature including, between 1803 and 1806, 'Travels in Southern Africa', from the German of H. Lichtenstein. This, like her further translations of accounts of travels -- 'Travels through the Morea, Albania, and other Parts of the Ottoman Empire' (1813), from the original by F. C. Pouqueville, and 'Voyages and Travels to Brazil, the South Sea, Camscatka, and Japan' (1813-14), from the German of Langsdorf -- again shows Anne's interest in current politics, in Britain's overseas commitments, in medical matters, and in being imaginatively at the centre of the action. Anne travelled to Ireland in 1814-15, and her 'Narrative of a Residence in Ireland' (1817) also has political concerns, though more circumspectly veiled by description of daily incident. It was ridiculed in the 'Quarterly' (vol. 16) by Croker, notorious for his vitriolic conservatism. 
Anne and Bell collaborated once more in 1818 in their translation of 'Tales of Wonder', taken from a variety of different sources, again finding the vein of contemporary interest in German, just moving into a new phase. Neither ever married; but both, especially Anne, had productive and for the most part successful literary careers. Anne died in Norwich on 20 October 1818. Bell lived on until 1838, dying in Rennes on 18 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 22400


Annabella Plumptre (1769-1838), the third daughter of the family and also born in Norwich, were both well educated, particularly in languages. They began their writing careers as part of the Enfield circle in the early 1790s. This lively group in an important provincial centre was active in writing drama, poetry, and fiction. Both sisters acted in 1791 in a private theatre in 'Adelaide', a play by their friend Amelia Alderson (later Opie), for which their brother James Plumptre (1771-1832) wrote the prologue. The group also came under the influence of William Taylor of Norwich, a major intermediary between German and English culture, and the two sisters began to translate the stimulating new literature, including tales and plays (especially the popular plays of August von Kotzebue). Both women divided their time in the 1790s between Norwich and London, and Anne in particular was part of the radical dissenting culture that sympathized with the French Revolution. In 1794 she met Thomas Holcroft, playwright and radical, George Dyer, and John Thelwall, whose political campaign in Norwich she actively promoted. 


@@@@@


doc= 22401


Plumptre, Charles John (1818-1887), barrister and writer on elocution, was born on 28 March 1818, the eldest son of Edward Hallows Plumptre (1785-1851), a London solicitor. He was the brother of Edward Hayes Plumptre (1821-1891), dean of Wells. After receiving an education at private schools and King's College, London, Plumptre was entered at Gray's Inn in May 1838, and was called to the bar on 5 June 1844. Shortly before this, on 14 March 1844, he had married Caroline Colmer ('b'. 1819/20), the younger daughter and coheir of her father, Robert Colmer. In conjunction with George Harris, Plumptre edited the ninth and eleventh volumes of 'The County Courts' Chronicle' (1860-61), and, in conjunction with Mr Serjeant Edward William Cox, between 1850 and 1860 he established the Public Reading Society, providing the first penny readings for the public. 
Plumptre's fine presence and his expressive, sweet, and powerful voice led him to devote himself to the study and practice of elocution. He gradually withdrew from practice at the bar and concentrated on lecturing on his favourite art, especially at the universities and at the various theological colleges, where his teaching was highly valued. He held official appointments as lecturer on elocution both at Oxford and at King's College. In 1861 he published a course of lectures delivered at Oxford in 1860; these subsequently formed the basis of a large work, 'The Principles and Practice of Elocution' (1861), which was dedicated to the prince of Wales, and went through five editions. After the death of his first wife he married Adelaide, 'nee' Denton, the widow of Robert Becher, on 24 January 1866; she was to predecease him. He went on to publish 'The Culture of Voice and Speech' (1874) and 'The Right Mode of Respiration' (1886). He died on 15 June 1887 at his home, 36 Hamilton Terrace, St John's Wood, London, survived by two sons, also lawyers. 


@@@@@


doc= 22402


Plumptre, Edward Hayes (1821-1891), dean of Wells, came from a family originally of Nottingham ['see 'Plumptre, Henry]; the branch to which Edward belonged subsequently moved to Fredville in Kent. He was born on 6 August 1821, the son of Edward Hallows Plumptre (1785-1851), a London solicitor. Charles John Plumptre was his brother. He was educated at home, and (after a brief stay at King's College, London) entered Oxford as a scholar of University College, of which his uncle Frederick Charles Plumptre (1796-1870) was master from 1836 until his death. In 1844 he took a double first class in classics and mathematics (the only one of his year); he was elected to a fellowship at Brasenose, which he resigned three years afterwards, on his marriage with Harriet Theodosia, daughter of Michael Maurice and sister of Frederick Denison Maurice. For some years the influence of his brother-in-law was apparent in his religious views. Ordained in 1846 by Bishop Wilberforce, he proceeded MA in 1847, and joined the staff of King's College, London. There his work mainly lay for twenty-one years, and he enlarged the scope of the institution by introducing evening classes. From 1847 to 1868 he was chaplain there, from 1853 to 1863 professor of pastoral theology, and from 1864 to 1881 professor of exegesis. He proved a most sympathetic teacher, and took a genuine interest in the future welfare of his pupils. He also took a leading part in promoting the higher education of women as a professor of Queen's College, Harley Street, where he was principal during the last two years of his work there (1875-7). 
Throughout this period Plumptre was also occupied in clerical work. From 1851 to 1858 he was assistant preacher at Lincoln's Inn, and in 1863 prebendary of St Paul's. He was rector of Pluckley from 1869 and of Bickley from 1873. He was Boyle lecturer in 1866, the lectures being published as 'Christ and Christendom'. From 1869 to 1874 he was a member of the 'Old Testament' revision committee, and from 1872 to 1874 Grinfield lecturer and examiner at Oxford. 
In 1881 he resigned his work in London on becoming dean of Wells. He was an ideal dean, possessing a genuine talent for business, and being always ready to consider the suggestions of others. Not only the cathedral and the theological college, but the city of Wells, its hospital, its almshouse, and its workhouse, commanded his service. 
Meanwhile his pen was never idle. He wrote much on the interpretation of scripture, endeavouring to combine and popularize, in no superficial fashion, the results attained by labourers in special sections of the subject. He contributed to the commentaries known respectively as the Cambridge 'Bible', the 'Speaker's Commentary', and the 'Bible Educator'. His other works included 'Biblical Studies' (1870; 3rd edn, 1885), 'St Paul in Asia' (1877), 'Movements in Religious Thought: Romanism, Protestantism, Agnosticism' (1879), and 'Theology and Life' (1884). His most remarkable theological work was 'The Spirits in Prison, and other Studies on Life after Death' (1884-5), a review of previous teaching on the subject of eschatology. His characteristic sympathy with 'the larger hope' is moderated throughout by a characteristic caution. He had passed beyond the influence of Maurice, and, though his loyal admiration for his earlier teacher remained unchanged, he had rejected his conclusions. 
In 1888 he issued a little work on 'Wells Cathedral and its Deans', and in the same year appeared his 'Life of Bishop Ken'. Though diffuse, the book has something of the charm of Isaak Walton's 'Lives', and breathes the still air of a cathedral. 
Plumptre published several volumes of verse. He had a keen perception of literary excellence, unappeasable ambition, and unwearied industry; but his gifts were hardly sufficient to ensure him a place among the poets. 'Lazarus' and other poems appeared in 1864 (3rd edn, 1868), 'Master and Scholar' in 1866, and 'Things New and Old' in 1884. All his pieces are refined and earnest; few are really forcible. Three of his hymns were included in 'Hymns Ancient and Modern'. Plumptre translated the plays of Sophocles (1865) and of Aeschylus (1868). For twenty years he studied Dante, and his English version of Dante's work appeared as 'The 'Divina Commedia' and 'Canzoniere' of Dante Alighieri: with Biographical Introduction, Notes and Essays' (2 vols., 1886-7). 
Plumptre died on 1 February 1891 at the deanery of Wells, and was buried in the cathedral cemetery beside his wife, who had predeceased him on 3 April 1889. The marriage was childless. 


@@@@@


doc= 22403


Plumptre, Henry (bap. 1680, d. 1746), physician, born in Nottingham, was baptized at St Peter's, Nottingham, on 21 February 1680, the second son of Henry Plumptre (1644?-1693), of Nottingham, and his second wife, Joyce (died 1708), daughter of Henry Sacheverell of Barton, probably sister of William Sacheverell (1638-1691), and widow of John Milward of Snitterton, Derbyshire. Plumptre's grandfather Huntingdon Plumptre was 'accounted the best physician at Nottingham', while Robert Plumptre (1723-1788) was his nephew. 
Plumptre was admitted a pensioner of Queens' College, Cambridge, on 19 January 1698, and graduated BA in 1702, MA in 1705, and MD 'per literas regias' in 1706. In that year he was among those appointed by the university to carry a complimentary letter to the University of Frankfurt am Main on the occasion of its jubilee. On 15 February 1703 he was elected fellow of his college, but vacated the office by not taking orders on 4 July 1707. 
Plumptre was admitted a candidate of the Royal College of Physicians on 22 December 1707, and a fellow on 23 December 1708. He delivered the Goulstonian lectures in 1711 and the Harveian oration in 1722, and on 19 March 1733 was appointed Lumleian lecturer. He served as censor in 1717, 1722, 1723, and 1726, and as registrar from 1718 to 1722; he was appointed treasurer on 13 July 1725, and was consiliarius in 1735, 1738, and 1739. He was named an elect on 5 May 1727, and served as president for six years from 1740 to 1745. He was also physician at St Thomas's Hospital, London, a post he resigned in 1736. He died on 26 November 1746 of an ulcer in his bladder. 
Plumptre was author of 'Dissertatio medico-physica de Carolinis thermis' (1695), and of 'Oratio anniversaria Harvaeana' (1722). He is also said to have written a pamphlet entitled 'A Serious Conference between Scaramouch and Harlequin', with reference to the controversy then raging between John Woodward and John Freind. He devoted much time and energy to the fifth 'Pharmacopoeia Londinensis', which appeared in 1746. 
Henry Plumptre's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 22404


Plumptre, James (1771-1832), playwright and Church of England clergyman, was born at the president's lodge, Queens' College, Cambridge, on 2 October 1771, the third son of Robert Plumptre (1723-1788), president of Queens' College, and his wife, Anne Newcome. He was educated at Dr Henry Newcome's school at Hackney, where he took part in amateur theatricals and developed a strong interest in drama; in 1788 he entered Queens' College, Cambridge, but in 1790 he migrated to Clare College, from which he graduated BA in 1792, MA in 1795, and BD in 1808. He was elected a fellow of Clare College in 1794, and was ordained in the same year. 
Like his elder sisters Anne Plumptre and Annabella (Bell) Plumptre ['see under 'Plumptre, Anne], James began his writing life in the Enfield circle and the theatre group in Norwich, where he acted in and wrote the prologue to Amelia Alderson's play 'Adelaide' (1791). His comedy 'The Coventry Act' (1793), 'replete with sentiment and pleasantry', was, according to the 'Norwich Mercury' (19 January 1793), 'received with uncommon eclat, by a numerous and fashionable audience'. The cast of characters included three sisters, to be acted by his own sisters. A second play, 'Osway: a Tragedy' (1795), was published but not performed. Based on the classical model for male friends, Cicero's Damon and Pythias, it transports the scene to Saxon Britain, with echoes of 'Cymbeline' and 'Macbeth', and depicts the taming of a tyrant through peaceful revolution. Plumptre's main dramatic work was 'The Lakers: a Comic Opera' (1798). An amusing send-up of contemporary types, such as the enthusiastic botanizing lady, the tourists with carriages embracing the vogue for 'wild nature', and the solitary walker (who is the hero of the piece), it is interspersed with mildly pleasing songs. It is periodically revived, usually in its Lake District setting. 
Plumptre was not as politically engaged as his two literary sisters, and he was concerned for drama as a moral educator who wished to improve its tone, as in 'Four Discourses Relating to the Stage' (1809) and 'The English Drama Purified' (3 vols., 1812), a selection of expurgated plays. He also published some religious works. He was curate in charge of Hinxton, Essex, from 1797 to 1805, when he returned to Cambridge. In 1812 he came into the college living of Great Gransden, Huntingdonshire, which he held until his death there on 23 January 1832. On 6 June 1815 he married Elizabeth Robinson (1770-1836), who was buried beside him at Great Gransden. Selections from the travel journals he kept during his tours in England, Scotland, and Wales between 1790 and 1800 were published in 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 22405


Plumptre, John (1754-1825), Church of England clergyman, was born at Mansfield, Nottinghamshire, on 11 March 1754, the eldest son of Septimus Plumptre (1717/18-1782), vicar of Mansfield, and his wife, Catherine Young. He was the grandson of John Plumptre, MP for Nottingham, and nephew of the Cambridge scholar Robert Plumptre. He entered Eton College in 1770 and King's College, Cambridge, on 20 January 1773; there he graduated BA in 1777, as eleventh in the list of junior optimes (where he was erroneously described as of Queen's College), and MA in 1780. He was elected fellow of King's in 1776; in 1778 he was presented to the vicarage of Stone, Worcestershire, a living in the gift of the crown, and resigned his fellowship. However, in the same year he was described at the visitation as resident at Eton College as a tutor, and a curate discharged the duty of the living. On 7 April 1781, at St Botolph's, Cambridge, he married his first cousin Diana (died 1825), daughter of Robert Plumptre. 
Plumptre was still at Eton in 1782, at the time of his eldest son's baptism, but by 1786 he was at Stone, where he was to hold the living until his death. It was a quiet village of no more than sixty families. In December 1787 he was nominated to the third prebend of Worcester, and in May 1788 he was nominated by the dean and chapter of Worcester to the vicarage of Stoke Prior, probably as a temporary measure to fill the living until his successor was qualified to enter it. In 1790 he surrendered Stoke Prior and was appointed to the rectory of Wichenford, near Worcester, a peculiar also in the gift of the dean and chapter of Worcester, which he held until his death. Like Stone, Wichenford was a small village, containing about forty families, and Plumptre appointed curates to serve the parish in his absence. In both Stone and Wichenford parishes Plumptre ensured that morning and evening prayers were said each Sunday and that catechizing was undertaken regularly. He also maintained his parsonages in good repair. 
Plumptre published three works of theology and a sermon, but most importantly he was a good classical scholar with an easy facility for languages. He published a Greek translation of Alexander Pope in 1795, which ran to a second edition within a year; in 1797 he also translated some of Milton's works into Greek. In 1807 he published a translation of the elegies of the first-century author Pedo Albinovanus into English verse. 
In April 1808 Plumptre was appointed dean of Gloucester through the influence of his former pupil Henry, third Earl Bathurst, and in the same year he was granted a Lambeth doctorate in divinity. While dean of Gloucester he was described as 'a very respectable divine' (Witts, 47). He was also a correspondent of his fellow Etonian William Wyndham Grenville, Baron Grenville, the prime minister; his manuscript letter complimenting Grenville on his Latin and Greek compositions in 'Nugae metricae' (1824) is bound with Grenville's own annotated copy of the book in the British Library. After many years' suffering with the stone Plumptre died in Gloucester on 26 November 1825, his wife having died a few months earlier, on 18 June. He was survived by two daughters and three sons, one of whom, John Francis (1782-1864), was so extreme in his protestantism as to suggest that Catholic emancipation was the wickedest thing since the crucifixion. 


@@@@@


doc= 22406


Plumptre, Robert (1723-1788), Church of England clergyman and college head, was born in Middlesex, the youngest of ten children of John Plumptre (1679-1751), MP for Nottingham, and his wife, Annabella, daughter of Sir Francis Molyneux, fourth baronet, of Teversall, Nottinghamshire, and Diana Howe. He was educated at Henry Newcome's public school in Hackney. Admitted as a pensioner at Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1740, he obtained his BA in 1744, was elected a fellow of the college the following year, and was ordained in 1748. 
The Plumptre family was patronized by Philip Yorke, first earl of Hardwicke, who presented Plumptre with the Cambridgeshire livings of Wimpole and Whaddon in 1752. These had been held since 1745 by Plumptre's elder brother Charles (1712-1779). On 7 September 1756 Plumptre married Anne Newcome, the daughter of his old schoolmaster. Immediately afterwards he received from Hardwicke a prebend at Norwich (again following Charles), apparently as a wedding gift, and thereafter maintained residences in Cambridge and Norwich. In October 1760 he proceeded DD and the following month was elected president of Queens' College. He served as vice-chancellor of Cambridge University in 1760-61, and again in 1777-8. In 1769 he obtained the Knightbridge professorship in moral theology. His scheming to secure this appointment, which he considered 'small in value' but with 'the recommendations of having nothing to do for it' (BL, Add. MS 35628, fol. 90), is well documented and reflects the family ethos that Thomas Gray slyly satirized when he translated the Plumptre motto, 'Non magna loquimur, sed vivimus', as 'We don't say much, but we hold good livings' (Gray, 2.646). In 1777 Charles Plumptre, now archdeacon of Ely, made Plumptre his assistant, another sinecure place. Plumptre also served as a justice of the peace for Cambridgeshire. 
Plumptre presided over Queens' in its whig heyday, when the college was 'distinguished for its attachment to Civil and Religious liberty' (Gunning, 1.262). He was reform-minded, an active campaigner for such liberal causes as the abolition of religious tests in the university and the introduction of annual examinations. His only publication, apart from a few congratulatory poems in Latin, was 'Hints Respecting some of the University Officers' (1782), which argued that university officers should be properly paid. The American War of Independence led Plumptre to adopt a more moderate stance in university politics. In 1775 he supported the university's controversial address to the king, condemning the Americans, and was branded 'a tory' by David Hughes, a fellow of Queens'. In 1780, having read William Cole's characterization of him as a ''warm Whig'', Plumptre noted that he was 'thought of late (by some of that Party still 'warmer') to incline towards Toryism, because he abhors the American Rebellion' (BL, Add. MS 5849, fol. 142). Plumptre's 'inclination' was symptomatic of wider trends; after his death a mood of reaction set in at Queens'. He interested himself in the history of his college and left a valuable 'Historical account of the foundation, benefactors, presidents & fellows, &c.' (BL, Add. MS 5849, fols. 118-48). 
Plumptre had ten children. He was an enlightened parent who gave his several daughters 'an education very different from what generally falls to the lot of even well instructed females' (Watkins and Shoberl, 277); two of them, Anne and Annabella, became known for their writings ['see 'Plumptre, Anne]. The liberal ideals he fostered led his wife and eldest daughters to leave the Church of England. Plumptre died at Norwich on 29 October 1788 and was buried in Norwich Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 22407


Russell Plumptre (1709-1793), physician, born on 4 January 1709, was admitted pensioner of Queens' College, Cambridge, on 12 June 1728, and proceeded MB in 1733, and MD in 1738. He was admitted a candidate of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1738, and fellow on 1 October 1739. He became a fellow of Queens' College, Cambridge, and in 1741 he was appointed regius professor of physic at Cambridge. He died in Cambridge on 15 October 1793. 


@@@@@


doc= 22408


Plumridge, Sir James Hanway (1787-1863), naval officer, the son of James Plumridge of Littleworth, Berkshire, an architect in London, and his wife, the daughter of Mr Hanway, of Hertford Street, Mayfair, was born in Hertford Street, and educated at the naval academy, Chelsea. He entered the navy in September 1799 on board the sloop 'Osprey' on the home station. He afterwards served in the 'Leda' in the expedition to Egypt, with Captain George Hope, whom he followed to the 'Defence'; in her he was present at the battle of Trafalgar. He was then for a few months in the 'Melpomene' with Captain Peter Parker, and again with Hope in the 'Theseus'. On 20 August 1806 he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and served throughout the war in various ships, including the 'Melpomene' in 1809, the 'Menelaus' in 1810 (again with Parker), and the 'Caledonia', as flag-lieutenant to Sir Edward Pellew. On 23 May 1809 the 'Melpomene', then becalmed in the Danish Strait, was attacked by twenty Danish gunboats. After an action lasting seven days the gunboats were driven off, but the ship was so severely damaged that she had to be sold out of the service. This incident left a lasting impression on Plumridge. On 7 June 1814 he was promoted to the command of the sloop 'Crocus', and in July he was appointed to the 'Philomel', in which he went to the East Indies. In 1817 he returned to England as acting captain of the 'Amphitrite'. The promotion was not confirmed, and from 1818 to 1821 he commanded the brig 'Sappho' at St Helena, and afterwards on the Irish station. In 1821 he married a daughter of Rear-Admiral Hart; she died on 31 July 1827. 
Plumridge was advanced to post rank on 9 October 1822. From 1831 to 1835 he commanded the frigate 'Magicienne' in the East Indies. In 1835 he married Harriet Agnes, daughter of the Rt Hon. H. Elliot, and they had children. She died on 17 April 1845. From 1837 to 1841 he was superintendent of the Falmouth packets, and from 1842 to 1847 was storekeeper of the ordnance. From 1841 to 1847 he was Liberal MP for Falmouth. In 1846-7 he was seriously considered for a seat on the Board of Admiralty, but was not deemed sufficiently reliable politically. In 1847 he was appointed to the frigate 'Cambrian', for service in the East Indies, and on 13 October was ordered to wear a broad pennant as second in command on the station. In 1849 he married a daughter of Colonel Skinner of the Royal Artillery. 
Plumridge returned to England towards the end of 1850, and on 7 October 1852 was promoted to be rear-admiral. In 1854, with his flag in the 'Leopard', he commanded the flying squadron in the Baltic, and especially in the Gulf of Bothnia. His predatory operations against Finnish towns along the Bothnian coast resulted in the destruction of large quantities of shipbuilding material, only part of which was owned by the Russian government, and even less of which was in process of being worked up into the gunboats he was seeking. On 10 June 1854 his forces received a severe repulse at Gamla Carleby, where they attempted to land out of sight of the ships. These operations provoked a storm of anti-British protest in Scandinavia and north Germany, and were little better received by the fleet: their notoriety, and the fact that Plumridge outranked the new commander-in-chief, Rear-Admiral Sir Richard Dundas, meant that he could not return to the Baltic in 1855. 
In February 1855 Plumridge was appointed superintendent of the Devonport Dockyard, and on 5 July was nominated a KCB. In November 1857 he was promoted to be vice-admiral, and left the dockyard. He had no further service, and died at his home, Hopton Hall, near Lowestoft, Suffolk, on 29 November 1863. 
Having earned his promotions through professional excellence alone, Plumridge was fortunate to obtain a sea-going command in wartime, but his misplaced zeal and lack of political weight brought his term to a premature end. In consequence, he returned to the administrative posts where he had spent most of his post-1815 service. 


@@@@@


doc= 22409


Plunket, Christopher, second earl of Fingall (d. 1649), politician and soldier, was the eldest son of Lucas Plunket (Lucas Mor), first earl of Fingall (1589-1637), and his second wife, Susanna (died 1623), fifth daughter of Edward, first Baron Brabazon, whom he married in 1611. Christopher's mother, a protestant, died in 1623 and his father raised his four sons and four daughters as Catholics. Shortly prior to his father's death in 1637 Christopher married Mabel (died 'c'.1700), daughter of Nicholas Barnewall, first Viscount Barnewall of Kingsland. As the head of one of the most important Old English families of the pale, the second earl enjoyed particularly close links with the earls of Westmeath, Roscommon, Kildare, Tyrconnell, and Meath, and lords Dunsany, Slane, and Kingsland. Despite Fingall's mortgaging of portions of his estate in co. Meath (in part to acquire acres in co. Cavan), a later commentator noted his industry and found his lands 'very well husbanded'. 
Fingall took his seat in the Irish parliament of 1640, served as a member of the committee for privileges, and actively supported the removal of Lord Deputy Wentworth. Like his fellow peers he reacted to the October 1641 rising by securing his own estates and trying to find a political solution. Ultimately the bungling and hyperbole of the lords justices, Sir Charles Coote's military excesses, and the deteriorating political climate in England effectively undermined any negotiated settlement to the crisis and forced Fingall to ally with the insurgents. On 17 November he was proclaimed an outlaw and early in December he attended a meeting at Knockcrofty, near Drogheda, which resulted in a formal alliance between the Old English and Ulster insurgents. At a later gathering at the Hill of Tara, Fingall was appointed general of the horse for Meath with the power to nominate 'so many captains as [he] though fitt out of the baronies' (1641 depositions, TCD, MS 840, fol. 13). The earl also raised provisions for the Irish forces and commanded a troop of horse at the siege of Drogheda (November 1641 - March 1642). He regularly attended the confederate general assemblies but, unlike his illustrious uncle Sir Nicholas Plunkett, speaker of the general assembly, he appears to have maintained a low profile throughout the 1640s. However, he fought at Dungan's Hill (8 August 1647), where the confederate forces were routed, and was wounded and taken prisoner at the battle of Rathmines on 2 August 1649. He died of his wounds in confinement in Dublin Castle later that month and was buried in St Catherine's Church on 18 August. He left at least two young sons: Luke (1639- 'c'.1685), his heir, and Nicholas, who later married Anne Taaffe, daughter of the first earl of Carlingford. 
The third earl was indicted for high treason and the state confiscated Fingall's estates by the 'Act for the Settling of Ireland' (August 1652). Despite being named in Charles II's 'gracious declaration' (30 November 1660) and being judged innocent by the court of claims (25 February 1662), the third earl of Fingall had to struggle throughout the 1660s to recover his estates. By 1670 he had been reduced to penury and could not provide a jointure for his wife or portions for his younger children, or pay his debts. Finally in March 1672 letters patent confirmed Fingall's possession in free and common socage of most of his ancestral lands in counties Cavan and Meath together with Fingal House in Dublin. His restoration can in part be attributed to the influence his great-uncle Sir Nicholas Plunkett enjoyed with the duke of Ormond, and to his timely marriage in 1665 to Margaret, the first earl of Clancarty's daughter and Ormond's niece. While the union initially proved to be an unhappy one, with Lady Margaret complaining how unreasonable and unpleasant her husband was, the couple had at least three children. By Fingall's death about 1685 the family fortunes had recovered, only to be squandered by his son and heir, Peter. The earl provided his two daughters with generous portions and his wife, who became a lady-in-waiting to Catherine of Braganza, with a jointure of $600, and left an extensive library, richly stocked with historical and political works, including the important Jacobite manuscript known as 'A light to the blind'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22410


Plunket, John (1668-1738), Jacobite conspirator, was born in Dublin between January and July 1668, although further details of his parentage and early years are unknown. He was educated at the Jesuits' College in Vienna, where he received a doctorate of civil law. It is unclear how Plunket became involved in work for the Jacobite cause, for which, using the alias Rogers, he served as an excessively imaginative, yet often unofficial, agent from approximately 1710 until 1722. His role was the communication of information between the exiled Jacobite court and contacts in London. However, his tendency to exaggerate his intimate acquaintance with foreign statesmen and prominent Jacobites in Britain and abroad, typically to magnify his own importance, rendered his behaviour highly suspicious and often downright ludicrous. 
Described by a fellow agent as 'an ill figure of a man and as ill in utterance' (Macpherson, 2.425), Plunket should be included among several minor Jacobite agents whose reports have been characterized as 'wildly varying in optimism and accuracy' (Szechi, 7). In 1715 the duke of Berwick complained to his half-brother James, the Stuart Pretender, that Plunket pretended to possess secret letters of great importance, expressing disquiet at the agent's penchant for 'inventing this strange stuff' ('Stuart Papers', 3.355). Whatever his reputation for falsehood, Plunket's historical significance derives from his involvement in two very different, largely abortive, conspiracies (the first in 1712, the second 1722) against the British monarchy, though his role and the implications of these events remain open to debate. 
In spring 1712 Plunket sent to the lord treasurer, Robert Harley, earl of Oxford, several forged letters supposedly written by the allied commander Prince Eugene of Savoy and addressed to Count Zinzendorf, Austrian ambassador at The Hague, for dispatch to Vienna. The letters identified that the murder of ministerial leaders such as Oxford and Viscount Bolingbroke, the setting fire to the Tower, and the incitement of public unrest in London were salient features of a planned coup -- led by Eugene, the duke of Marlborough, the Hanoverian minister Baron Bothmar, and the principal whigs -- to remove Queen Anne and to derail the peace with France. Unbowed by initial scepticism, Plunket presented the correspondence to some of Oxford's more gullible colleagues, who insisted that he explain their provenance, which, before the privy council in April, Plunket revealed to be one of Zinzendorf's clerks in The Hague. None the less many still remained unconvinced; contemporary reports announced the arrival in Utrecht of 'an Irish papist here, who pretends... great correspondence in England' ('Portland MSS', 9.349). Later eighteenth-century assessments from writers sympathetic to Marlborough confirmed the spuriousness of Plunket's claim, identifying the agent as a 'miscreant Jesuit' and one of Oxford's 'obscure and mercenary spies' (Coxe, 3.289, 291). In the twentieth century both G. M. Trevelyan and Winston Churchill dismissed the 1712 plot as 'rubbish' (Churchill, 2.924). More recently, however, research by Edward Gregg has suggested the credibility of a whig conspiracy on the basis of evidence that Marlborough did discuss the import of Dutch and Hanoverian troops to maintain the succession. It would appear that Plunket, while presenting forged correspondence, accidentally discovered 'compromising Marlborough-Junto correspondence' (Szechi, 16-17) setting out plans to repeat the events of 1688 and to prevent a separate Anglo-French peace. 
From 1713 until early in 1718 Plunket resided mainly in Paris, visiting Jacobite haunts such as the Scots College. It is unknown what role, if any, he played in the rising of 1715. On his return to London he was rumoured to have communicated with Spanish agents in London, to have intercepted letters from George I's mistresses, and to have continued to send unsolicited letters to the Stuart court. In 1721 he took the all-important step of accompanying the Jacobite conspirator and lawyer Christopher Layer to Italy on legal business, thus setting in motion his involvement in a second conspiracy, now better known as the Atterbury plot. In Rome, Plunket and Layer held interviews with the Old Pretender, where they informed him of a proposed rising initially intended to coincide with the general election of 1722. Back in England by September, Layer now began to help recruit forces during which period Plunket is known to have accompanied Layer to at least one meeting of Jacobite minions in the London house of the third earl of Burlington. In September 1722 the plot was revealed and Layer arrested. His interrogation quickly implicated Plunket, who was apprehended in early October after a vigorous manhunt. 
As with the events of 1712, the nature of Plunket's involvement in the Atterbury plot was variously interpreted. Certain accounts linked him with the prominent Anglo-Irish Jacobite sympathizer Charles, fourth earl of Orrery, and even elevated Plunket to the role of Orrery's agent. Others chose to treat Plunket and Layer as minor, foolish Jacobite pawns who, while implicated in the Atterbury plot, engaged in a conspiracy more imaginary than real. Certainly it appears that Plunket and other minor Jacobites persisted in preparations for their own modified plan for domestic military dissent -- 'the Scheme' -- after similar efforts had been abandoned by the Jacobite hierarchy. There is also evidence to suggest that, whatever the nature of their relationship, Plunket overestimated the extent of Orrery's involvement in the Atterbury affair. None the less, in a charged political climate Plunket was identified by a Commons report of 1723 as among several minor figures who transacted 'Treasons with Lord Orrery's clerk' and 'sent frequent Accounts to the Pretender's Agents abroad' (Lambert, 3.13.40; 'Historical Register', 7.165). In the face of comprehensive government evidence Plunket feebly claimed no knowledge of any conspiracy, and denied that he had understood the purpose of Layer's visit to Rome or that he had met with the Pretender. However, Plunket's own correspondence contradicted these assertions and demonstrated communication with James prior to his visit to Rome, and how for many years he had been in contact with, among others, the Jacobite financier Sir William Ellis. 
Undoubtedly many of Plunket's statements were further evidence of his tendency for exaggeration. Yet to his prosecutors such connections, coupled with his Roman Catholicism, were sufficient to single him out as a 'principal instrument in the said horrid and detestable Conspiracy' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 8.196; 'Historical Register', 7.150). Remarkable evidence demonstrating the true distance between Plunket and the core of the Jacobite movement is provided by the Pretender, who intimated that he had neither trusted nor employed Plunket, whom he believed had no 'particular business at all, & I believe [he] came chiefly out of curiosity' (Stuart papers, 63/68). 
Plunket spent the remainder of his life imprisoned in the Tower. His survival was aided by a state subsidy continued after George II's accession when rumours of a pardon proved false. By the mid-1730s he suffered acutely from gallstones, and he was taken from the prison on 23 July 1738 to be operated on by William Cheselden. However, he died, apparently unmarried, on the 24th at Cheselden's residence on James Street, Westminster; he was buried in St Pancras churchyard. His small quantity of books and personal effects was turned over to his nephew, Thomas Plunket. A drawing of him by a thirteen-year-old boy from 1727 remains untraced. 


@@@@@


doc= 22411


Plunket, Nicholas (c.1629-1718), historian, was born in the north of co. Dublin, the son of James Plunket (died 'c'.1631) and his wife, Elizabeth Roper. Nothing is known of his education. In 1641 he succeeded to the family seat at Dunsoghly, co. Dublin, on the death of his grandfather who had mortgaged the property to Sir Henry Tichborne, and became Tichborne's ward. At an unknown date he married a daughter of Sir Thomas Esmonde; the couple had four children. Plunket appears to have seen military service in England and Ireland in the later 1640s. During the 1650s he served abroad, mostly in Flanders. He returned to Ireland after the restoration of the monarchy in 1660. By that time his first wife was dead, and he later married Elizabeth Fisher, with whom he had three children. Plunket had some difficulty in recovering his estate and, when he did, seems to have lived at Harristown rather than in Dunsoghly Castle. He left Ireland in the later 1680s, living for a while in London and, thanks to his connections through his mother's family, mixing in recusancy circles attached to the court of Catherine of Braganza, the queen dowager. He was in France in 1689 but back in London by 1691; he remained there for the rest of his long life, for a time living in Somerset House in the apartment of the dowager countess of Fingall, a lady-in-waiting to Queen Catherine. 
Nicholas Plunket of Dunsoghly is generally accepted as the compiler, and in part the author, of 'An account of the war and rebellion in Ireland since 1641', though for a time it was attributed to Sir Nicholas Plunkett (1602-1680), the leading Catholic confederate. Thomas Carte, who described it as 'a collection of a vast number of relations of passages that happened in the Irish wars, made by a society of gentlemen who lived in that time, and were eye-witnesses of many of those passages', drew on it for his biography of the first duke of Ormond ('DNB'). Almost two-thirds of the original manuscript has been lost; the remainder forms what is known as the Plunkett-Dunne manuscript in the National Library of Ireland. In compiling the 'Account' Plunket may have seen the surviving papers assembled by Sir Nicholas Plunkett, Catholic spokesman at Whitehall in 1661-2, to demonstrate the loyalty of the dispossessed proprietors in the 1640s. He would also have had access to the extensive library at Somerset House. The whole tenor of the 'Account', which was not completed until the early eighteenth century, is strongly biased in favour of the Ormondist party in the confederacy, anti-clerical, and dismissive of Giovanni Rinuccini, 'this Bedlam of a nuncio' (Kelly, 439 n. 37). All of this fits with the high regard for both dukes of Ormond which Plunket is known to have had. Plans to publish the 'Account' in the mid-eighteenth century came to nothing. 
Recent scholarship has discredited the view that Nicholas Plunket of Dunsoghly was the author of 'A light to the blind', an early eighteenth-century Jacobite tract, published in part by J. T. Gilbert as 'A Jacobite Narrative of the War in Ireland 1688-1691' (Dublin, 1892; reprinted Shannon, 1971). This is now thought to have been the work of Colonel Nicholas Talbot of Drogheda ('fl'. 1690). Despite spending the later decades of his life in England, Plunket does not appear to have forfeited his estate in Ireland and was able to leave money in his will to support an almshouse in Dublin for Catholic widows. He died in London in 1718. 


@@@@@


doc= 22412


Plunket, Oliver (1625-1681), Roman Catholic archbishop of Armagh, said to have been a younger son of John Plunket of Loughcrew, co. Meath, and his wife, Thomassina, daughter of Henry Dillon, was born, according to a contemporary horoscope, on 1 November 1625. Through his father, a younger son of James Plunket, seventh Lord Killeen, he was cousin to Luke, first earl of Fingall. His mother's grandfather was Sir Lucas Dillon, and she was therefore cousin to the second earl of Roscommon. 
Although he was descended from an Old English dynasty, it has been surmised, on the grounds of his familiarity with Gaelic culture, that Plunket was fostered in the home of the Irish O'Farrells of Longford. Schooled at Killeen by his cousin Patrick Plunket, brother of the first earl of Fingall and later Roman Catholic bishop of Ardagh, in 1647 Plunket departed from Ireland in the company of the former papal envoy Pierfrancesco Scarampi and headed for the Irish College in Rome, where he received a formal ecclesiastical education and seminary training. A subdiaconate was conferred on him in December 1653. He was ordained a few days later, on 1 January 1654. In June that year Plunket requested and was granted suspension of his formal undertaking to return to Ireland as a priest. Rather than take his chances with the new regime in Ireland, he remained at Rome, residing with the Oratorians at the church of San Gerolamo della Carita. He devoted himself to further study in law at the University of Rome. In September 1657 Plunket was appointed professor of theology at the Urban College, where he had been ordained. The college was missionary seminary of the congregation of propaganda, responsible for the preservation of the Catholic faith wherever it languished in adversity. During Plunket's stay in Rome he was frequently consulted on Irish affairs by members of the congregation. 
With the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, hopes rose for the revival of Catholic fortunes in Ireland, and Plunket was one of many who eventually returned to minister there. Edmund O'Reilly, archbishop of Armagh, died in 1669, and Plunket sought and obtained promotion to the vacant see in July that year. His appointment appears to have had the support of Pope Clement IX, who, as Cardinal Rospigliosi, had been attached to the Congregation de Propaganda Fide. It was claimed by Cardinal Moran in his memoir of Plunket that the pope had personally circumvented the discussion of alternative candidates for the Irish primatial see. Plunket himself overcame local opposition by emphasizing his family's fidelity to Rome and good standing with the crown, citing in particular the example of his kinsman the second earl of Fingall, executed by the parliamentarian regime at Dublin Castle. 
Plunket was consecrated at Ghent by the local bishop, acting with the assistance of Nicholas French, bishop of Ferns, on 1 December 1669. He then set out for Ireland, travelling via London, where he had an audience with Queen Catherine of Braganza and enjoyed the hospitality of her chief almoner, Father Philip Thomas Howard, future vicar apostolic in England, to whom Plunket's severed head would one day be entrusted. 
After a difficult journey to Holyhead, Plunket arrived in Ireland on the feast of St Patrick 1670. Having stayed briefly in Dublin with his kinsman the papal knight Sir Nicholas Plunket, he entered his diocese and conducted a visitation by the middle of April. He confirmed Patrick O'Daly as vicar-general, received promises of respectable financial support from the clergy and laity, and resolved to remain within his diocese rather than return to the hospitality of his family. In his letters to Rome he marvelled at the devotion of the people and their constancy in the faith in the face of opposition and suffering, and claimed to have confirmed 10,000 by the beginning of May. He organized a provincial synod of the representatives of all the northern dioceses, held in two sessions in order to avoid attracting attention at a time when caution was necessary. 
During the first few months of his residence Plunket adopted disguise as Captain Browne, a soldier, 'with my sword, my wig and my pistols' ('Letters', 301). Early in May, however, the atmosphere in Ireland was altered with the replacement of John Robartes, Lord Robartes, as viceroy by John Berkeley, Lord Berkeley. There ensued a period of relative freedom. By August 1670, evidently with the permission of the protestant primate, Archbishop James Margetson, Plunket had set up a school for scions of the Ulster Catholic gentry at Drogheda, staffed by two Jesuits. During Berkeley's brief tenure at Dublin Castle, not only was Plunket able to put off his disguises and move about his diocese quite freely, he was even invited occasionally to consult with the lord lieutenant, and acted co-operatively with protestant authorities in a temporarily successful attempt to pacify the native Irish raparees and tories whose activities were reducing parts of Ulster to a state of lawlessness. 
On the whole Plunket's major concerns during the 1670s derived from the jealousies and rivalries of his fellow Catholics. He attempted to resolve a number of disputes which had arisen both from the absence of clear leadership during the 1650s and in consequence of the growing conflict surrounding the reorientation of the Catholic faith in Ireland which came to a head over the remonstrance in the 1660s. But he did not escape damaging entanglement in some of these disputes, many of which revolved around the long-standing antagonisms between Gaelic and Old English, papal and Irish interests, in all of which, by virtue of his background, education, and subsequent career, Plunket was himself already deeply mired. The manner of his appointment had created substantial hostility even within his own province, and such feelings were exacerbated by episodes such as the pacification of the tories, which some chose to interpret as a deliberate betrayal of honest Catholics impoverished by dispossession in the interests of the protestant colonial oppressors. Some felt Plunket appeared far too concerned to demonstrate loyalty to the treacherous English crown. 
On top of these simmering tensions there was no love lost between the primate and his fellow archbishop, Peter Talbot of Dublin. In June 1670 Plunket had called a meeting of the resident archbishops and bishops, who met in Dublin in an attempt to adopt a united front on various matters of internal organization and discipline. This became the occasion for the renewal of an age-old conflict between the two archbishoprics over precedence, a subject on which both men discoursed publicly in print. Plunket and Talbot's mutual antagonism only deepened when Plunket took a decision in favour of the Dominicans, to the prejudice of the Franciscan order, in a controversy over territorial rights to seek alms. In 1671 Rome was informed, apparently quite maliciously, that the new archbishop was suspect in regard to his observance of the vow of celibacy, that he was a spy, even that he would shortly convert to protestantism. Archbishop Talbot was not the author of the various accusations levelled against his brother prelate, but was less than discreet about them, and after an investigation he was obliged temporarily to leave the country in 1673, remaining in exile in England and France until 1678, and returning only in time to be arrested and imprisoned in Dublin Castle, whence he never emerged. 
With the renewal of religious persecution in 1673 Plunket's school was shut down, and in 1674 he spent six months on the run in the uplands of southern Ulster under threat of punishment and deportation imposed by the new viceroy, the earl of Essex, on all Catholic clergy. On 27 January 1674, using the pseudonym Thomas Cox, Plunket wrote to the internuncio at Brussels describing his flight: 'my companion [John Brenan, Roman Catholic bishop of Waterford and Lismore] and I on the 18th of this month [old style]... were obliged to take to the road. Snow mixed with big hard hailstones was falling, a cutting wind was blowing into our faces, and the snow and hail blew so fiercely into our eyes, and affected them so much that we are hardly able to use them even yet. Finally, after frequent danger of being suffocated by the snow in the valleys we arrived at the house of a poor gentleman who had nothing to lose' and who sheltered them for over a week ('Letters', 398). This was a fraught time of cold and hunger for the archbishop, who wrote a number of other letters from various hiding places deploring the persecution visited on Ireland, which he likened to the Roman persecution of Christianity. On at least one occasion he came close to being apprehended in his vestments as he prepared for mass. 
In August 1678 Plunket held his second and last provincial synod. All the northern dioceses were represented, and of twelve present five bore the surname Plunket. Twenty-six statutes were enacted, dealing with the life and ministry of priests in regard to specific topics, such as the raparees, the rights of Rome in relation to the appointment of bishops, fosterage by priests, the use of alcohol and the visiting of taverns, provision of altar-ware, remuneration of priests, controversies over boundaries, the requirement of the presence of a priest and two witnesses for the validity of marriage, and a severe penalty for those who should marry without dispensation within the forbidden degrees of kindred. A subcommittee to deal with seven contentious issues was set up, and it was decreed that the archbishop should visit every diocese in the province as soon as convenient. Without delay Plunket began his visitation in Meath and Clonmacnoise. But the storm clouds were now gathering. 
In the autumn it was decreed once again that all Catholic bishops, vicar-generals, and members of religious orders depart Ireland, heavy fines being threatened to any lay person who sheltered them. Plunket went back into hiding as the sensational disclosure in England of a conspiracy to kill the king and place his Catholic brother on the throne, the so-called Popish Plot, initiated a new round of persecution, more deadly than before. Some time after the first revelations an Irish dimension to the plot was 'discovered', and although in 1674 there had been some question as to whether much effort had been made to apprehend Catholic clergy, this time firm action was finally taken. 
On 6 December 1679 a well-laid plan was put in execution with the arrest of Plunket at Naul, co. Dublin, where he had been hiding in disguise. He was taken to Dublin Castle, and there endured solitary confinement until 16 January 1680, when he received visitors, no evidence of plotting having emerged from his letters and papers. However, several individuals whom Plunket had aggrieved one way or another then conspired against him. Edmund Murphy, former parish priest of Killeavy in south Armagh, had been suspended from priestly duties by the archbishop for colluding with the raparees. He and one William Hetherington concocted the original accusation that Plunket was involved in the Popish Plot, which they laid before the earl of Shaftesbury in London. 
Meanwhile, Plunket's enemies among the Franciscans and those northern Irish who had always resented the appointment to the province of Armagh of someone they perceived as an outsider now availed themselves of an opportunity to avenge themselves on the archbishop. One of them, Anthony Daly, another who had fallen foul of the archbishop's disciplinary hold over his diocese, continued to pursue his long-standing campaign against Plunket by forwarding to Rome a range of accusations similar to those first made in 1671 in an attempt to undermine his credit with the Holy See. Several others, including John MacMoyer, provided the 'evidence' for Plunket's supposed engagement in the Popish Plot. But at his trial, held at Dundalk on 23 and 24 July 1680, no witnesses against him were forthcoming, Murphy, MacMoyer, and their co-accusers fearing to show their faces in a town where both they and the accused were so well known. Despite the exclusion of Catholics from the jury, it was not possible to find the bill of indictment, in which Plunket was accused of treasonably plotting to raise 70,000 Catholics for the murderous extirpation of protestantism in Ireland, further to the establishment of Catholicism there with armed French assistance. Consequently the proceedings were transferred to London, where Plunket arrived in late October, entering the prison at Newgate on the 29th. 
Even in London it proved difficult to obtain a guilty verdict. The first grand jury refused to find a bill because the witnesses contradicted each other. The duke of Ormond, the viceroy responsible for Plunket's detention in 1679, on being informed of the sources of information against the archbishop, had remarked that 'if rogues they must be that discover roguery, these must be the best discoverers because they are the greatest rogues... no schoolboy would trust them with a design for the robbing of an orchard' (Walker, 329). Eventually, however, Plunket was arraigned in the king's bench at Westminster Hall on 3 May 1681. He objected to the jurisdiction on the ground of his previous arraignment in Ireland, but this was overruled, and the trial at his request was fixed for 8 June, to enable him to bring over evidence. But the Irish courts refused to compromise their independence by forwarding records without direct orders from the crown, and the English judges refused to receive evidence as to the previous convictions of the witnesses against Plunket. 
The archbishop was roughly treated at the hands of both the prosecuting counsel, led by Sir Robert Sawyer, and the judges sitting in his case. Lord Chief Justice Sir Francis Pemberton openly declared that the very foundation of the archbishop's treason was not so much any action of his against the crown, as his setting up and holding forth an inherently blasphemous and superstitious religion. The evidence that he had plotted to land a massive French army at Carlingford was barely credible, but the jury took only fifteen minutes to return a guilty verdict. The archbishop may not have helped himself by his own ready admission that he had done everything in his power to organize and regulate the Roman Catholic hierarchy and laity in Ireland, and by his ingenuous acceptance that there might be matter for a 'praemunire'. 
Ultimately, it was the violent background of partisan politics in the English capital amid the near hysteria of anti-popery associated with the exclusion crisis that sealed Plunket's fate. Onlookers as great and influential as the earl of Essex readily conceded that Plunket was innocent. He and others intimately involved in Irish affairs well knew that Plunket had always remained loyal to the crown, even to the extent of leading the Catholic hierarchy as far as it was possible to go in repudiation of the doctrine of the papal deposing power. But private hand-wringing could not save Plunket from the traitor's death which he suffered on 1 July 1681, when the industry of others on his behalf, such as the queen, and the Spanish and French ambassadors, finally failed. From the scaffold at Tyburn, Plunket made a speech asserting his innocence and challenging the evidence against him. Its wide circulation probably reflected the fact that the tide which had swept Plunket away was now turning rapidly the other way. The very day after that on which the archbishop was hanged, drawn, and quartered, Shaftesbury, the orchestrator of the demands for exclusion and a leader of the anti-Catholic pack, was himself imprisoned. 
A collection of nine letters and short notes written by Plunket during his final days is preserved at Downside Benedictine abbey, near Bath, where the archbishop's tomb has been situated since 1883. The letters were addressed to a fellow prisoner, Maurus Corker, a native of Yorkshire and a Benedictine priest, a former chaplain to Catherine of Braganza in custody in Newgate for his priesthood. Corker was eventually released and sent into exile. It was to him that Plunket entrusted everything in his last days. Through him and his friends, as well as through his own friends and his servant, James McKenna, the archbishop was able to communicate and even have mass discreetly in his cell. In several of the letters Plunket wrote with regret of his many sins and shortcomings, the many stains on the archiepiscopal pallium, the head which had soiled the mitre. But he maintained a deep confidence in divine mercy, and was convinced that his death would be that of a martyr. 'Happy are we who have a second baptism, nay a third; water we received, the sacrament of penance we got. And now we have... the baptism of blood.' He did not fear the butchery which awaited him, and thought of Christ, who suffered 'the most paineful death of the cross which... compared to that of Tyburne, as I hear ye description of it is but a fleabyting' ('Letters', 579). 
Plunket's executioner was bribed, so that, having been subjected to punishment, the archbishop's dismembered body was saved from the execution fire. Buried first at St Giles-in-the-Fields, in London, two years later the body was exhumed by Corker when he went to Germany. The skull he then presented to Plunket's one-time host, Thomas Howard, by this time Cardinal Norfolk. About 1721 a successor to Plunket's see arranged the transfer of the skull to the Dominican nuns at Drogheda, where it is now displayed in St Peter's Church. The rest of the remains made numerous peregrinations. One of the archbishop's ribs is borne in procession around Drogheda annually. 
On 17 March 1918 Plunket was declared a martyr to the Catholic faith, and he was beatified on 23 May 1920. In 1974 the formal acceptance of claims for a miraculous intercession by the martyr opened the way to Plunket's canonization by Pope Paul VI on 12 October 1975. 


@@@@@


doc= 22413


Plunket, Patrick, ninth Baron Dunsany (1594/5-1668x70), politician, was the only son and heir of Christopher Plunket, eighth Baron Dunsany (died 1603), and his wife Mary 
(Maud; died 1610)
, daughter of Henry Babington of Dethick, Derbyshire. His father died in 1603 while he was still a minor and seven years later, when he was fifteen, his mother was murdered, allegedly by Honora 'Ny Caffery' 'nurse to one of her children' (after she was burnt, a man owned up to the crime) (NL Ire., GO 66, p. 21). Patrick later married Jane, daughter of Sir Thomas Heneage of Lincolnshire. In 1618 he received a warrant for his estates in counties Meath and Dublin and, in spite of his Catholicism, enjoyed a prominent position in local affairs. He took his seat in the House of Lords in 1634, becoming involved in a bitter quarrel with Baron Trimleston over precedence, and again in 1640. 
With the outbreak of the 1641 rising Dunsany, like the other Catholic lords of the pale, condemned it and served as a member of a delegation appointed to confer with the insurgents. In March 1642 he reiterated his loyalty in a letter to Ormond, adding 'I am an Englishman born, my mother an Englishwoman, and my wife an Englishwoman' ('DNB'). He later claimed that his house at Castlecore had served as a refuge for English refugees but after the insurgents ambushed him, destroyed much of his estate, plundered his house of furniture and goods worth $4000, and 'for his loyalty, had his own daughter and his son's wife, being both great with child, stripped and sent home naked', he fled to Dublin ('Journals of the Irish House of Lords', 1.200). He arrived late in 1642 only to be charged with high treason and imprisoned for eighteen months before being bound over to appear for trial in the court of king's bench. It is not clear where he spent the 1640s but he does not appear to have played any role in the confederate war effort, which perhaps explains why in 1653 the Commonwealth gave him permission to hold part of his lands (at Dunsany). 
Despite being named in Charles II's 'gracious declaration' (30 November 1660) and restored by the 'Act of Settlement and Explanation' (1665) to his castle and to a third of the estates he had held in 1641, Dunsany encountered considerable problems in recovering possession. In 1668 he wrote to Sir Edward Dering, one of the commissioners of the court of claims, begging for his help and outlining his plight: 'the god of heaven and earth knowes my sadd and deplorable condition; my weake and aged bedd-ride condition together with that unspeakable want few knowes but myselfe' (BL, Stowe MS 745, fol. 3). He died some time between 1668 and 1670, outliving his eldest son, Edward, who had married Lady Catherine MacDonnell, fourth daughter of the first earl of Antrim; his title passed to his grandson Christopher. 


@@@@@


doc= 22414


Plunket, Thomas, Baron Plunket in the nobility of the Holy Roman empire (1716-1779), army officer in the Austrian service, a kinsman of Lord Dunsany, was born in Ireland. After entering the Austrian army he fought in Turkey and in the War of the Spanish Succession. In 1746, as a colonel and adjutant-general of the army in Italy, he much distinguished himself, and in the following year he was sent to Genoa as bearer of the imperial pardon to that republic. He served throughout the Seven Years' War. In 1757, by capturing the obstinately defended village of Krzeszow, he greatly contributed to the victory of Kollin. The cross of the order of Maria Theresa, which conferred the title of baron, was consequently awarded him on 4 December 1758. In the following year he was in command of eight Austrian regiments in Saxony. In 1763 he was nominated general. On St Patrick's day 1766 Plunket attended the dinner given at Vienna to men of Irish extraction by Count Demetrius O'Mahony, the Spanish ambassador. In 1770 he was appointed governor of Antwerp, which post he held until his death on 20 January 1779. 
Plunket married Mary D'Alton, probably a sister of Richard and Edward D'Alton, Austrian generals, and had a son, an Austrian officer, killed at the siege of Belgrade in 1789, and a daughter, Mary Bridget Charlotte Josephine. Born at Louvain in 1759, she was educated at the English Austin nunnery in Paris, and married in 1787 the marquis de Chastellux, who died on 26 October 1788; she was later lady-in-waiting to the duchess of Orleans. Gouverneur Morris (1752-1816), the American minister to France from 1792 to 1794, knew her late husband and attended her salon in Paris, where he was introduced to the duchess of Orleans and other members of the court. In November 1793 Madame de Chastellux was imprisoned in the Austin nunnery, her old school, along with a group of British subjects. According to Alger, her detention was on account of her aristocratic marriage and likely involvement in the flight of several members of the king's family. She escaped the guillotine and was released in November 1794; she remained in Paris, where she died on 18 December 1815. Her son Alfred ('b'. 1789) became an equerry to Princess Adelaide, the sister of Louis-Philippe, was a deputy (1832-42), and was created a peer of France in 1845. 


@@@@@


doc= 22415


Plunket, William Conyngham, first Baron Plunket (1764-1854), lord chancellor of Ireland, born at Enniskillen, co. Fermanagh, on 1 July 1764, was the fourth and youngest son of Thomas Plunket, a Presbyterian minister of Enniskillen, whose father also was a zealous minister of the same denomination. His mother, Mary, was the daughter of David Conyngham of Letterkenny, Donegal. The father, who was educated at Glasgow, was transferred from Enniskillen to Dublin, where in 1768 he was appointed the colleague of the Revd Dr Moody in the ministry of the Strand Street Chapel. In 1778 he died, leaving his widow ill-provided for; and it was only by the support of the Strand Street congregation that she was able to bring up and educate her children. 
William Plunket attended the school of the Revd Lewis Kerr, and became familiar with Barry Yelverton (later Lord Avonmore) through a friendship with his son. In 1779 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, twice took the class prize, obtained a scholarship in his third year, and joined the historical society, where, with his friends young Yelverton and Thomas Addis Emmet, he was a frequent speaker. Fired by the example of its members Bushe, Magee, Parsons, and Wolfe Tone -- inspired, too, by the enthusiasm of the patriotic successes of 1782 -- he became a leading debater, was vice-president in 1783, took the medals for oratory, history, and for composition in turn, and produced an essay in defence of the age, which the society decided to print and rewarded with a special prize. In 1784 he graduated BA, and having kept his terms at the King's Inns while at the university, he entered Lincoln's Inn and began to study law, depending for money on his mother's narrow means and on the help of friends. He returned to Dublin in May 1786, was called to the bar in 1787, and acquired a modest practice before the year was out. He practised indiscriminately in common law, equity, and criminal courts, and went the north-western circuit, which included Enniskillen. He was soon one of the leading advocates of his day. On 20 October 1790 he married Katharine, daughter of John McCausland of Strabane, then MP for Donegal, and Elizabeth Span. They had six sons and five daughters. 
In 1797 Plunket was made a king's counsel by Lord Clare, but until 1798 he kept aloof from politics. Nor was he professionally brought into political prominence except when, on 4 July 1798, he appeared with Curran to defend Henry Sheares on trial for high treason. Early in 1798 James Caulfeild, first earl of Charlemont, offered Plunket the seat for the borough of Charlemont, once held by Grattan. At first the offer was refused, Plunket being for, and Charlemont against, the Roman Catholic claims; but it was renewed without any pledge being attached to it, and on these terms was accepted. Plunket was elected, and devoted himself to an uncompromising opposition to the projected 'Act of Union'. He took his seat on 6 February 1798, and during the remainder of the existence of the Irish parliament frequently spoke in debate. He was also a contributor of witty articles to 'The Anti-Union' newspaper, begun on 27 December 1798 and abandoned in March 1799. The extinction in 1800 of the Irish parliament, and with it the disfranchisement of the Charlemont borough, for a time put an end to Plunket's political ambitions, and he devoted himself to his practice and to the accumulation of a fortune. He did attempt to secure the Dublin University parliamentary seat in 1802, but was unsuccessful. He appeared for the prosecution on the trial of Robert Emmet in September 1803 for his rebellion, and was charged with having pressed with undue severity the charges and evidence against his former friend, in order to win the favour of the government. Plunket was embarrassed by rumours of his former radicalism, and by Emmet's accusation that he had inculcated popular resistance by his speeches in parliament and at the bar. By the attorney-general's special request Plunket made a speech in reply. Emmet was convicted of treason and executed. Shortly afterwards, at the end of 1803, Plunket became solicitor-general for Ireland, and was at once denounced as a renegade by Juverna in Cobbett's 'Weekly Register'. In 1804 he recovered $500 damages against Cobbett in an action for libel. Some years afterwards he took proceedings against the publishers of 'Sketches of History, Politics, and Manners in Dublin in 1810', for repetition of the charge. 
In October 1805 Pitt made Plunket attorney-general, and Plunket retained that office in the 'ministry of all the talents'. Hitherto, with official approval, he had treated the post as professional and non-political. Now it became a party and parliamentary one. He was distrusted by the Foxite whigs, but was urged by Lord Grenville to enter the House of Commons. He was accordingly, though with reluctance, elected for Midhurst early in 1807. He then became an adherent of Lord Grenville, and, though he sat only for two months before the dissolution, made his mark in debate, particularly in his advocacy of Catholic relief. Having identified himself with the whigs, he declined the request of the new tory administration that he retain the attorney-generalship. 
Upon the dissolution Plunket was not re-elected to parliament, and for the next five years he remained in Ireland, earning both reputation and an income probably unequalled at the Irish bar. In cross-examination he excelled; he addressed juries with marked success; but it was to chancery cases that he devoted most of his time, and in them he felt most at home. Despite the offer of two successive seats in the interval, it was not until 1812 that he re-entered parliament, as member for Dublin University. The government favoured a tory candidate, but his friends Burrowes and Magee secured his unopposed return. He held the seat until he retired from parliament. He was now rich, partly from his own exertions, partly from his brother Dr Plunket's bequest to him of $60,000. In parliament he generally supported Lord Grenville, but sought to model himself on the independent oppositionism of Henry Grattan, whom he greatly admired. He chiefly directed his parliamentary efforts to furthering the cause of Catholic emancipation. On 25 February 1813 he made a great speech in support of Grattan's motion for a committee on the laws affecting Roman Catholics, of which even Castlereagh declared that 'it would never be forgotten'. His moderation and support for the royal veto over episcopal appointments did not, however, endear him to Irish Catholic activists. His next great effort was, on 22 April 1814, in favour of Lord Morpeth's motion for a vote of censure on the speaker for expressions hostile to the Roman Catholic claims. The cause of emancipation, however, which had seemed hopeful in 1813, grew more and more hopeless until 1821, and Plunket, though he spoke not infrequently, won no more oratorical victories. 
Following the lead of Lord Grenville, Plunket supported the tory government in renewing the war against Napoleon in 1815, and in rejecting Burdett's parliamentary reform motion in 1817. He went on to denounce 'radical revolutionaries', and to oppose an inquiry into the Peterloo massacre in 1819, on the grounds that its proposers intended it 'for the degradation of public functionaries'. On the introduction of the 'Seditious Meetings Bill' in December 1819, he delivered a speech which satisfied Grenville and the government and offended the whigs. Brougham upbraided him for his vote, and Lord Grey was reported to have called him an 'apostate'. He was rewarded by an assurance of security in his Dublin University seat. 
Time, however, healed this breach with the whigs. When Grattan died in 1820, Plunket succeeded to his position as foremost parliamentary champion of Catholic emancipation. On 28 February 1821 he reintroduced the subject in a speech of which Peel said, twenty years later, 'it stands nearly the highest in point of ability of any ever heard in this house'. He saw his emancipation bill safe through its second reading on 16 March by 254 to 243 votes, and then left its conduct to Sir John Newport; it failed to become law. His wife's death on 14 March 1821 recalled him to Ireland, and so paralysed his energies that he withdrew for some time from public and professional life. 
In January 1822 Plunket was appointed by Lord Liverpool attorney-general for Ireland under the new lord lieutenant, Marquess Wellesley, and was sworn of the privy council. Hopes were held out to him and to the other Grenvillites who now joined Liverpool's government that something would now be done for the Roman Catholics. He believed that their cause would progress more surely with friends in the administration than if its supporters remained permanently in opposition. His situation was difficult. The Irish part of the administration had been expressly constructed on the principle of a combination of opposites; Henry Goulburn, the chief secretary, and William Gregory, the under-secretary, were evangelical anti-Catholics, O'Connell and his party were impatient for reform, and the protestant party, enraged by the replacement of the Orangeman William Saurin by Plunket, endeavoured to thwart such efforts as could be made. On the whole, Plunket discharged his duties with courage and fairness. When the grand jury of Dublin threw out the bills against the ringleaders of the 'bottle riot' -- a violent protest against Wellesley's banning of Orange demonstrations in November 1822 -- Plunket proceeded with 'ex officio' informations against them, but failed to obtain convictions. Saurin then accused him of having resorted to an unconstitutional procedure, and instigated a vote of censure upon him in the House of Commons. In a house predisposed against him, he made a powerful speech refuting the charge. His difficulties in Ireland were incessant, and made worse by the informal restriction of his powers imposed by the anti-Catholic home secretary, Robert Peel. Plunket's failure to secure convictions against Catholic leaders, most notoriously in the abortive prosecution of O'Connell in 1824 for his 'Bolivar' speech, further antagonized protestant opinion. The rise of the Catholic Association led to the introduction of a bill for its suppression in February 1825, which he supported, once assured that it would also apply to the Orange order. Though his speech in support of Burdett's 'Catholic Relief Bill' on 28 February was one of his finest, still the bill was defeated in the House of Lords. 
On Lord Liverpool's resignation in March 1827 and Canning's assumption of office, Plunket expected to become Irish lord chancellor. The king's dislike of advocates of Catholic claims denied him the office, as George IV refused to accept Lord Manners's resignation of the Irish chancellorship. Canning then offered Plunket the English mastership of the rolls, just vacated by Copley, which Plunket accepted, held for a few days, and then resigned, owing to the professional feeling of the English bar against the appointment of an Irish barrister to an English judicial post. Lord Norbury was thereupon induced to resign as chief justice of the Irish common pleas, and Plunket succeeded him, and was raised to the peerage of the United Kingdom as Baron Plunket of Newton, co. Cork. His first speech in the House of Lords was made on 9 June 1827, on the 'Catholic Relief Bill', the approaching success of which was now almost assured; and when it passed, in 1829, it was felt that no protestant had done more for it than he. 
Politically, Plunket's work was now almost done, though in later years he voted and not infrequently spoke on Irish questions. On 23 December 1830 he was appointed by Lord Grey lord chancellor of Ireland. The change was not popular with the bar, as his reputation in the common pleas was that of a hasty and imprudent judge. Politically his influence was still great, and his advice was highly esteemed by successive lord lieutenants; and in 1839 he made a powerful defence of Mulgrave's administration in the House of Lords. As a judge he proved himself patient, bold, and acute; and whatever may be said of his deficiency in learning -- and his decisions certainly were frequently reversed on appeal -- his practical efficiency could not be denied. The numerous legal appointments he from time to time bestowed on his relatives excited comment, and even scandal. Early in 1839 a report was put about that he was to be replaced by Sir John Campbell, and overtures were made to him to co-operate. He refused. Lord Melbourne sounded him again in June 1841, without result. The lord lieutenant then asked for his concurrence as a personal favour to himself, and on 17 June Plunket yielded and resigned. 
Plunket retired altogether from politics, travelled in Italy, and lived a peaceful country life at his seat, Old Connaught, Bray, co. Wicklow. At last his mental faculties failed; he died at Old Connaught on 4 January 1854, and was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. He was succeeded in the title by his eldest son, Thomas Spen Plunket (died 1866), bishop of Tuam, Killala, and Achonry. 
Plunket was physically very strong and a keen sportsman, but indolent: he rose late, hated to put pen to paper, and left to the last moment the preparation of his cases. A deep-read lawyer he was not, but he had a tenacious grasp of principle. Conviction rather than passion, close and comprehensive reasoning rather than appeals to sentiment, were the leading characteristics of his public speaking. As a statesman, his fame rests on his service to Catholic emancipation. 


@@@@@


doc= 22416


Plunket, William Conyngham, fourth Baron Plunket (1828-1897), Church of Ireland archbishop of Dublin, was born at 30 Upper Fitzwilliam Street, Dublin, on 26 August 1828, the eldest son of John Plunket QC (1793-1871), afterwards third Baron Plunket, and Charlotte (died 1886), third daughter of Charles Kendal Bushe, lord chief justice of Ireland. His other grandfather was William Conyngham Plunket, first Baron Plunket. 
Plunket was taught first at a day school in Dublin and afterwards at Seaforth rectory, near Liverpool, under the Revd William Rawson, who had taught W. E. Gladstone. In 1842 he was sent to Cheltenham College and rose to be head of the school. But at the age of eighteen his health broke down through overwork and he had to abandon plans to proceed to Cambridge. When, on 18 May 1847, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, he was not considered physically fit enough to follow an honours course. He graduated BA in 1853 and received the degrees of BD and DD in 1876. (He also received the honorary degree of LLD of Cambridge in 1888.) By 1857 he had recovered sufficiently to seek ordination. He became chaplain and private secretary to his uncle Thomas, second Baron Plunket, then bishop of Tuam, and in the following year was appointed rector of the united parishes of Kilmoylan and Cummer in that diocese, a virtual sinecure that enabled him to spend much time in Dublin and in other parts of the west. 
The early years of Plunket's ministry brought him into close contact with the protestant evangelizing movement in Connemara and Mayo, and fostered a sympathy with minority protestant communities which was to be strongly evinced during his episcopal career in his relations with reformers in Spain, Portugal, and Italy. He became an active member of the Irish Church Missions Society to Roman Catholics (founded 1849), travelling through every district of west Connaught in aid of its work, and frequently visiting England to solicit financial support for the movement. 
On 11 June 1863 Plunket married Annie Guinness (died 1889), daughter of Sir Benjamin Lee Guinness, the wealthy brewer, who had funded the major restoration of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin (1864). Annie was largely responsible in her own right for the scheme of district nursing for the Dublin poor which became St Patrick's Nurses Home. Plunket was appointed treasurer of St Patrick's Cathedral in 1864 and precentor in 1869, his direct connection with the cathedral lasting until his election to the bishopric of Meath in 1876. His energy, earnestness, and administrative ability combined with his social position to give him a leading place in the evangelical party in the Church of Ireland, then facing disestablishment, which he strenuously opposed. During the debate on prayer book revision that immediately followed disestablishment, Plunket (who was a member of the revision committee) was looked on as the leader of those who sought to secure a radical revision in an evangelical direction. Even his friendly biographer found some of his proposed amendments surprising (How, 106), a harsher verdict being that they were defeated 'by the good sense of the assembly which included churchmen far more learned than he was' (Leslie). 
In 1871, on the death of his father, Plunket succeeded to the peerage. Five years later he was elected bishop of Meath and was consecrated at Armagh on 10 December 1876. His tenure of the see of County Meath, remarkable for having at the time no cathedral, and for conducting much of its administration from nearby Dublin, lasted for eight years, and during this period he spent much time in the capital. 
In 1884, on the resignation of Archbishop Richard Chenevix Trench, Plunket was elected archbishop of the united dioceses of Dublin, Glendalough, and Kildare. It was as archbishop that he most displayed his qualities of forbearance and sensitivity towards schools of thought different from his own, and came to be respected as a fair and unprejudiced father in God. He had already revealed these attributes in 1871, when he supported the appointment to St Bartholomew's, Dublin, of Richard Travers Smith, a Tractarian holding views on liturgical revision very different from his own. Later, as Smith's archbishop, Plunket not only showed himself tolerant of an attitude to church ornaments which was the opposite of his own, but sought to accommodate both points of view. He also became a somewhat controversial figure, both in his own church and in the Church of England, through his championship of the cause of the protestant reformers in Spain. Especially in England this was viewed by many as an intrusion upon the episcopal domain of the Spanish Roman Catholic bishops, and was deprecated by most of the Church of England bishops. Plunket, however, regarded what was happening as reform from within, not proselytizing from without (How, 259). His exertions in the cause of the conversion of Spain to protestantism extended over eighteen years; he undertook three separate journeys to Spain to satisfy himself of the progress of the reformation, and gave money without stint in its support. In 1894 he determined that the time for episcopal consecration of Senor Cabrera, the leader of the movement in Spain, had arrived, and on communicating his resolution to the Irish bishops to visit Spain in company with two of their number, the majority of his brother prelates declined to oppose his action. He hoped to receive a wider and more positive endorsement of his action (the fruits of which were to endure) at the next Lambeth conference, but his death intervened. Plunket left Ireland in the autumn of 1894, accompanied by the bishops of Clogher and Down, and on 23 September the ceremony of consecration was performed. 
Almost as keen as Plunket's interest in the Spanish reformers was his sympathy with the reformed church in Italy. In 1886 he became president and chairman of the Italian Reform Association, and was active in his support of Count Campello and the leaders of that body. In his efforts on their behalf he acted in co-operation with the English bishops, and thus his work in Italy did not arouse the same degree of controversy as his intervention in Spain had excited. Both as bishop of Meath and particularly as archbishop of Dublin, he took a close interest in educational matters. He was convinced that it was vitally important that the church's primary schools should be within the national school system, and the transformation of the former Kildare Place teachers' institution into the state-recognized Church of Ireland Training College in 1884 owed much to his diplomatic skill. 
Plunket died at the palace, St Stephen's Green, Dublin, on 1 April 1897, Lady Plunket having predeceased him in 1889. He was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin, on 6 April, after a public funeral in St Patrick's Cathedral; a bronze statue by (William) Hamo Thornycroft RA was unveiled in Kildare Place, Dublin, on 16 April 1901 by the viceroy, Earl Cadogan. Plunket was succeeded as fifth Baron Plunket by his eldest son, William Lee Plunket (1864-1920). 
Plunket was essentially a man of affairs though a prolific pamphleteer on behalf of the causes he espoused. He enjoyed versifying, and some of his lines show that, although he abhorred the prospect of home rule, he had a strong sense of place as an Irishman. He wrote with feeling of the sufferings of the Irish rural poor, and saw no inconsistency between his admiration of their qualities and his strong support for an evangelical movement that sought to wean them from a church to which, quite clearly, they had strong ties of loyalty and affection. He was an extremely popular figure, particularly with the free churches. He regularly attended meetings with their leading clergy in the Evangelical Alliance, and looked forward to unity with other protestants as a strong possibility. 


@@@@@


doc= 22417


Plunkett, John Hubert (1802-1869), lawyer and politician in Australia, was the younger of twin sons born to George Plunkett, farmer, of Roscommon, co. Galway, and Eileen O'Kelly of Tycooly, co. Galway, in June 1802 in Roscommon. He took his BA at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1824 and was called to the Irish bar in 1826. Successful on the Connaught circuit, his vigorous political advocacy was credited by Daniel O'Connell for the success of local candidates at the elections of 1830. With Catholic emancipation in 1829, and a whig government in office in Britain, Plunkett was appointed solicitor-general to Sir Richard Bourke, new governor of New South Wales, in 1831, at a salary of $800 per annum. He arrived in Sydney in June 1832. 
In the colony Plunkett also had the work of deaf Attorney-General Kinchela, prosecuting in ninety-one cases, securing convictions in sixty-four, and adding the attorney-generalship to his own office when Kinchela retired in 1836. His 'Magistrates Act' abolished summary punishments and court hearings in private houses, and restrained the excessive use of the lash. After the Myall Creek massacre of an Aboriginal community he secured the death sentence for seven white men. His most important achievement, he believed, was the 'Church Act' of 1836, which disestablished the Church of England and secured equality for Catholics and Presbyterians, and later Methodists; he himself was willing to include Jews and Independents. Plunkett became first president of the board set up to administer the act in 1839. 
As a Roman Catholic, Plunkett was inescapably involved in the sectarian politics of New South Wales. In 1844 he supported the Lowe committee, which recommended the introduction of the Irish national system to provide combined secular education but separate religious instruction. On its introduction in 1849 he became first president of the national schools board. This involved continuing controversy with the Catholic hierarchy, headed by Archbishop Polding and Archdeacon McEncroe, although Plunkett considered secular education to include the truths of natural religion, God, the afterlife, and the ten commandments. 
Plunkett was a member of the executive council from 1843. In 1856 he resigned his offices, entering politics relying on Irish sentiment, under the constitution he had helped to draft. Despite supporting W. C. Wentworth's much mocked hereditary upper house proposal, he was elected to the 1856 legislative assembly for Argyle county, where he held land. In 1857 he became president of the legislative council, resigning in 1858 when Premier Cowper dismissed him from the national schools board. He was then elected to the legislative assembly for Sydney. Austere and saturnine, and lacking flexibility and speed of decision, he was not a good politician: he alienated the anti-squatter vote over land title and the squatter vote over convict labour supply. Appointed to the legislative council by Governor Young, he held ministerial office from 1863 to 1865; his resignation as attorney-general brought down the Cowper government. 
A founder member of Sydney University in 1849, and Catholic St John's College in 1858, Plunkett was vice-chancellor from 1865 to 1867. Deteriorating health led him to Melbourne, where he died on 9 May 1869. He was accorded a state funeral in Sydney. His name was borne in 1861 by a son of his liberal co-religionist, landed neighbour, and political colleague, Terence Aubrey Murray. Plunkett had no children with his wife, Maria Charlotte McDonougha (1813-1895), whom he had married in 1832, and who died in Sydney in August 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 22418


Pocahontas (c.1596-1617), Algonquian Indian princess, was the daughter of Chief Powhatan (or Wahunsonacock) (d. 1618) of the Virginia Algonquian nation. Probably named Matoaka at birth, she was a prepubescent youngster and her father's favourite daughter and known as Pocahontas -- translated by William Strachey as 'little-wanton' (Strachey, 113) or in modern terms 'playful one' -- when she, according to Captain John Smith, saved his life after the Powhatans captured him in December 1607. Anthropological evidence suggests that she more likely performed a symbolic role in a Powhatan adoption ceremony or a peripheral role in an alliance that Powhatan attempted to form with Smith, who misunderstood the message. Thereafter she frequently visited James Fort, where she turned naked cartwheels, cavorted with the English boys, and began to learn English. According to Smith, she also provided the Jamestown colonists with essential food and, at risk of her life, crucial information about her father's intended attacks on the colony. Many years later Smith attested to Queen Anne that 'during the time of two or three yeeres, she next under God, was... the instrument to preserve this Colonie from death, famine and utter confusion' ('Complete Works', 2.259). 
Pocahontas's contact with the outpost temporarily ended with Smith's return to England in the autumn of 1609 and the resumption of Anglo-Indian warfare. Between 1609 and 1612, according to Strachey, Pocahontas was married for two or more years to an American Indian captain named Kocoum; if so, the fate of her marriage and of her husband remain mysterious. Presumably she was unmarried in April 1613, when Captain Samuel Argall bribed the Patawomeck natives with whom she was then living to entice her aboard his ship. Argall detained Pocahontas as a hostage to end Powhatan's attacks on the colonists and to force his return of English prisoners and weapons. Powhatan soon capitulated, inaugurating nearly a decade of peace between the principal antagonists in coastal Virginia. 
While in captivity at Jamestown, Pocahontas succumbed to the proselytizing of Reverend Alexander Whitaker and the romantic entreaties of John Rolfe (1585-1622), a survivor of the famous shipwreck on Bermuda in 1609 and a recent widower. In early April 1614, Whitaker reported, she 'openly renounced her countrey Idolatry, confessed the faith of Jesus Christ, and was baptised' (Hamor, 59-60) and renamed Rebecca. At about the same time Rolfe asked the governor's permission to marry 'one whose education hath bin rude, her manners barbarous, her generation accursed, and... discrepant in all nurtriture from my selfe' (Hamor, 64). John Rolfe and Rebecca were married at Jamestown in April 1614. The following year she gave birth to a son, Thomas. 
The Virginia Company of London recognized in the Rolfes a unique opportunity to offset some of the colony's discouraging reputation. Investors and trustworthy migrants shunned an outpost that had a harsh climate and few amenities, little promise of prosperity (Rolfe's experiments with West Indian tobacco had just begun), and a frightful mortality rate from disease and American Indian hostility. Pocahontas was living proof that Indians not only could be friendly neighbours but, with proper encouragement, could become almost indistinguishable from English men and women. And in contrast to earlier Powhatan visitors to England, Pocahontas claimed nobility: her father was variously described as a prince, king, or emperor. She was also a practising Christian, wore fashionable clothing, spoke fluent English, and carried herself with the grace and dignity befitting a 'lady'. She was married to an English gentleman and was raising their son in accordance with English customs. The company directed Sir Thomas Dale to bring Pocahontas to England. 
In June 1616 the Rolfes and perhaps a dozen Powhatans arrived in London, where Pocahontas was lodged in the Bell Savage on Ludgate Hill, an old hostelry and former theatre named for the Savage family which had originally owned it. The Indian princess was suddenly the talk of the town and much in demand at quasi-public functions. The queen received her at Whitehall; the bishop of London hosted a dinner in her honour at Lambeth Palace; King James treated her 'graciously' at a masque by Ben Jonson; and the Dutch artist Simon de Passe engraved her portrait. By the autumn of 1616 the Rolfes had moved from London's noxious air to a house in the suburban village of Brentford, where she had a poignant visit from John Smith. She had been told after his departure from Virginia that he was dead: 'your Countriemen... lie much', she lamented. But now that Pocahontas was in England and knew that he was alive, she wanted to call him 'father' and him to call her 'childe, and so I will bee for ever and ever your Countrieman' ('Complete Works', 2.261). 
It was to be a short 'for ever'. Pocahontas's health deteriorated rapidly in the winter of 1616-17. In mid-March 1617 the Rolfes boarded ship for Virginia, but Pocahontas, suffering probably from tuberculosis or pneumonia, was too weak to travel. She was put ashore at Gravesend, Kent, where 'she came... to her end and grave' (Purchas, 19.118). Her body was interred on 21 March 1617 in the chancel of St George's Church. Pocahontas had played a key role in early Indian-English contact in Virginia and contributed significantly to the survival of the first permanent English colony in America. In the final year of her life she was the leading exemplar of English efforts to Anglicize the Native Americans. 
John Rolfe, fearing that his son could not survive the ocean voyage, left him in the care of Sir Lewis Stukeley in Plymouth and subsequently of Henry Rolfe, John's youngest brother, in London. In the 1630s, many years after his father's and maternal grandfather's deaths, Thomas, then about twenty years old, migrated to Virginia, where he spent the remainder of his life. He prospered by growing the variety of tobacco his father had introduced on lands that had originally belonged to his mother's kin. In Virginia, Thomas married Jane Poythress and left numerous descendants who cherished their lineage from the Indian princess. 
Pocahontas's eventful life soon entered American legend. Drawing especially on the accounts of the Indian princess in Captain John Smith's 'Generall Historie' (1624), historians, dramatists, poets, and novelists since the eighteenth century have fashioned disparate versions of her life. Early Virginia narratives often featured her prominently in the colony's founding and eventual success because of her conversion to Christianity, her marriage to an Englishman, and their union's brief promise of an amalgamated Indian-English society. Nineteenth-century authors emphasized -- and argued the authenticity of -- her rescue of Smith, with northern writers generally sceptical, southern writers generally supportive. Numerous painters, printmakers, and sculptors were also inspired by her short but dramatic life, as epitomized in two prominently displayed works in the United States Capitol: a bas relief (1825) of her rescue of Smith, and a painting (1840) of her baptism. Recent biographies and novels, by contrast, have stressed her cultural marginality. Perhaps the most widely disseminated but least accurate representations are two animated feature films by Walt Disney studios: 'Pocahontas' (1995), on her life in Virginia and romance with John Smith, and 'Pocahontas II' (1998) on her visit to England, in which, healthy and happy, she returns to Virginia. 


@@@@@


doc= 22419


Pocklington, John (d. 1642), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, matriculated as a sizar from St John's College, Cambridge, about 1595. In October 1598 he migrated to Sidney Sussex College, of which he was a scholar and from where he graduated BA early in 1599 and proceeded MA in 1603. He was ordained deacon and priest at Peterborough on 22 December 1605, but seems to have remained at Sidney Sussex as a fellow. He proceeded BD in 1610, and although presented that year to the vicarage of Babergh, Suffolk, and in 1611 to the vicarage of Brabraham, Cambridgeshire, he received a dispensation to retain his fellowship, thanks to the intervention of Lord Harrington, the bishop of Bath and Wells, and the earl of Kent. 
In 1613 Pocklington became a fellow of Pembroke College. Here he served as chaplain to the master, Samuel Harsnett, who, as bishop of Chichester, left much college business to his chaplain and to Thomas Muriell while he attended to the affairs of his diocese. Harsnett's absenteeism and delegation to junior fellows caused much resentment within Pembroke, and as early as 1614 there were complaints to Richard Neile, the new bishop of Lincoln, that Pocklington had offended against college practice by seating himself above his seniors in chapel. Two years later, in the course of a campaign by disgruntled fellows which resulted in Harsnett's forced resignation from the mastership, Matthew Wren (not usually noted for his anti-popery) informed on a disputation in the chapel in which Pocklington was alleged to have defended the doctrine of real presence and argued for Rome as a true visible church, denouncing by implication the views of such notable clergy as Archbishop George Abbot. According to Harsnett, by some time in 1617 Pocklington cleared himself in the consistory court of the charges of popery to the satisfaction of the university and the king. However, in 1618 he resigned his fellowship. 
In 1615 Pocklington had acquired the rectory of Waresley, Hertfordshire, and when in 1618 he was additionally presented to the rectory of Yelden, Bedfordshire, he seems to have made the latter his home. Within a few years he married Anne (died 1655?), whose other name is unknown. Four children -- Margaret, Oliver, John, and Elizabeth -- were baptized at Yelden between 30 August 1623 and 2 December 1627. Further preferment came to Pocklington in the form of prebends at Peterborough, where he was collated on 31 October 1623, and Lincoln, where he was installed by proxy on 9 March 1627. He is also said to have become chaplain to the bishop of Lincoln, John Williams. Williams was still acting as his patron as late as 1631, when he wrote on Pocklington's behalf to Bishop William Laud, recommending him for a royal chaplaincy. Soon afterwards, however, they appear to have fallen out, according to John Hacket because Pocklington 'was a tell-Tale, and made needless Complaints against his Brethren' (Hacket, 2.110), although Williams's declining influence as a patron may have provided some incentive. 
His early brushes with Neile and Wren notwithstanding, in the 1630s Pocklington was an ardent, if idiosyncratic, advocate of the new Laudian orthodoxy. In a letter of 8 December 1634 to one of the archbishop's staff at Lambeth he protested that 'to do his Majesty and the Church true service in the University' was the 'unfeigned desire of his heart'; he would be 'industrious, faithful, and in any church employment truly zealous' ('CSP dom.', '1634-5', 346). His sermon preached before Williams on 17 August 1635 during an episcopal visitation, published as 'Sunday No Sabbath' (1636), justified royal policy as set out in the 'Book of Sports'. Dismissing sabbatarianism as a puritan doctrine and 'a mysterie of iniquitie, intended against the Church' (Milton, 119), Pocklington denied the relevance of the fourth commandment to Sunday observance. On the other hand, he deplored puritan 'irreverence' in church, which he saw as tending to keep away from services those whom he considered as the 'godly'. In his 'Altare Christianum, or, The Dead Vicars Plea' (1637) he reiterated his emphasis of twenty years earlier on a holy visible church and revealed his pronounced sacerdotalism. He stressed the apostolic continuity of the hierarchy and the sacramental role of the priesthood; the railed-in altar was a 'holy of holies', set apart by 'the presence of our saviour, whose chair of state it is upon earth' (Fielding, 104), and only ordained clergy could enter and take communion there. It was therefore consistent that, in addition to praising contemporary Catholics such as Cardinal Borromeo, Pocklington should base his arguments on sources popular with Roman polemicists, align himself with the medieval church against the forerunners of protestantism, and celebrate surviving medieval church adornment. It is significant that it was in June 1637 that he was sworn a chaplain-in-ordinary to the king. 
It is also not surprising that Pocklington should share his thoughts frankly with Williams's erstwhile enemy Sir John Lambe, dean of the court of arches and the leading proponent in the Lincoln and Peterborough dioceses of Laud's altar policies. Writing to Lambe on 4 March 1639, Pocklington, whose negative view of puritans had been compounded by his involvement in lengthy legal disputes over church restoration and by events surrounding the bishops' wars in Scotland, thought that loyal English clergy might teach Scottish ministers and the laity of both countries a lesson in duty and obedience: 'how they would make the pulpits ring with invectives against Puritan rebels and traitors', for 'when treason and rebellion is with like zeal detested and declaimed against in Puritans, as in Papists, I still believe there is some religion and pity in that generation'. He again emphasized his readiness to serve church and king, 'though I am not ignorant that any devotion that way has done me no good amongst some no mean ones'; he sought withdrawal from 'that corner where my strong stirring for the Church rights makes me less acceptable with some great hands' and proximity to friends such as Edward Martin, president of Queens' College, Cambridge, and dean of Ely ('CSP dom.', '1638-9', 535). Rewarded this time with a canonry at Windsor, Pocklington was one of the chaplains who accompanied Charles I on his journey north later that year. 
With the advent of the Short Parliament in spring 1640, Pocklington served as procurator for the Peterborough chapter in the lower house of convocation. A letter to Lambe from York dated 14 September found him again with the king, reporting optimistically on the level of support for the royal cause and dismissively of the weak state of the Scottish army. Pocklington did not serve again as procurator in the November-February session of convocation. Prosecuted on account of his two books, he was also accused of turning the communion table at Yelden altarwise and bowing towards it, and of using 'corporal' cloths and a sacring bell during the communion. 'The Petition and Articles or Severall Charge Exhibited in Parliament Against John Pocklington' (1641) attacked him as 'a chiefe author and ringleader in all those Innovations which have of late flowed into the Church of England'. Having been found guilty, on 12 February 1641 he was deprived by the House of Lords of all his benefices and disabled from ever holding any place in the church; his books were ordered to be burnt publicly in London and in the universities. He seems to have retired to Peterborough, where on 16 September 1642 he made his will, leaving to his two sons and two daughters property in Northamptonshire and at Brington and elsewhere in Huntingdonshire. Pocklington died on 14 November and was buried on 16 November in the monks' churchyard, Peterborough Cathedral; his wife and executrix survived him. His son Oliver (died 1681), who obtained an Oxford MD in 1656 and probably practised as a physician during the Commonwealth, was rector of Brington from 1663 until his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 22420


Poekrich, Richard (1696/7-1759), inventor of musical glasses and social and economic reformer, was born in Aghnamallagh, near the town of Monaghan, Ireland, and was descended from a Cromwellian planter family which had been granted land in co. Monaghan in the seventeenth century. His father, a landed gentleman also named Richard, was briefly a member of the Irish House of Commons. His mother's maiden name was probably Newburgh. A brother and a sister are mentioned in his father's will. On the death of his father, probably in 1722, Richard, as the eldest son, succeeded at the age of twenty-five to the entire family estate. 
Poekrich went to Dublin as a young man about 1720. Although he has been accused of squandering his wealth on a variety of ill-advised projects, it has to be said that many of his proposals in the public domain were quite down-to-earth and realistic, such as providing an incentive for the reclamation of bogs through granting long leases in respect of land so reclaimed and the provision of better funding for the Dublin workhouse through tolls. In his address to the electors of Dublin in 1749, when he stood, unsuccessfully, as a candidate in the by-election of that year, he argued for the production of Irish malt liquors to replace imports from Britain and made proposals for getting the beggars off the streets and putting the able-bodied to work. Poekrich's attempt to enter parliament as an MP for co. Monaghan in 1745 had likewise been unsuccessful. It was probably on that occasion that he wrote the ballad 'A Lamentation', a powerful dirge about rack-renting landlords and the peasants' folly in voting such people into parliament. On 23 April 1745 he married Margaret Winter (died 1758), a widow with an income of $200 per annum, but owing, it is suggested, to Poekrich's impotence, the marriage did not last. 
Poekrich is remembered as the inventor of musical glasses, by which music was produced by striking harmonically arranged goblets of glass. The invention was developed in the harmonica. Poekrich also invented a new form of dulcimer. In later life he gave concerts in various parts of England, at which practical exhibitions of his musical glasses were given. 
In 1755 Poekrich published a volume entitled 'Miscellaneous Works', comprising poems and songs. Thomas Newburgh, a Dublin barrister, described his eccentricities and schemes in a poem entitled 'The Projector'. 'A tall, middle-aged gentleman', usually wearing a bag-wig and sword, he perished on 10 November 1759 in a fire at Hamlin's Coffee House, Sweeting's Alley, near the Royal Exchange, London. Poekrich's wife seems to have formed a liaison with Theophilus Cibber, and was drowned with that author in a shipwreck in the Irish sea in 1758. 
Although Poekrich was the butt of much hilarity in his time because of his then way-out ideas about blood transfusion and the manufacture of tin boats, and his prophecy that there would come a time when it would be as common for men to call for their wings as to call for their boots, Newburgh nevertheless conceded that Poekrich seldom disclosed any marks of an unsound mind and was a pleasant, jocular, and agreeable companion. Patently, Richard Poekrich was a man before his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 22421


Pocock, Sir George (1706-1792), naval officer, was born on 6 March 1706 at Thames Ditton, Surrey, the son of Thomas Pocock (1672-1745), chaplain in the Royal Navy and of the Royal Hospital, Greenwich, and his wife, Joyce (died 1745), daughter of James Master of East Langdon, Kent, and sister of Margaret, wife of Admiral George Byng, first Viscount Torrington. In 1718 he entered the navy with his cousin John Byng (bap. 1704, d. 1757) on board Admiral Byng's flagship, the 'Superb', commanded by his uncle, Captain Streynsham Master, and was present at the battle of Cape Passaro off Sicily. 
Promotion and appointments followed as a consequence of his ability, his uncle's influence, and his readiness to serve in unhealthy climates and in small ships; such willingness, in time of war, offered the best chance of earning prize money. After three years in the hospital ship 'Looe' and two years in the ships of the line 'Prince Frederick' and 'Argyle', he passed the examination for lieutenant on 19 April 1725. With this rank he served in ships of the line, the 'Burford' and 'Romney', and returned to the Mediterranean in the 'Canterbury' before moving to Admiral Sir Charles Wager's flagship, 'Namur'. 
Pocock was given his first command, the fireship 'Bridgewater', on 26 February 1733, and after a spell in the frigate 'Aldborough' took command of the 'Woolwich' (40 guns). With the outbreak of the War of the Austrian Succession he was appointed to the 'Shrewsbury' (80 guns) in January 1743; he was then moved to the 'Sutherland' (50 guns) and sent to cruise off the coast of Spain, escort a convoy from St Helena to England, and return with another squadron before crossing to the Caribbean. 
On the Leeward Islands station Pocock served under commodores Fitzroy Henry Lee and Edward Legge; Legge died on 18 September 1747, and Pocock took command. Soon afterwards Rear-Admiral Sir Edward Hawke ordered him to search for a convoy which had escaped after Hawke had fought and defeated its escort in the Atlantic. This he did, capturing about thirty ships himself; the remaining ten were taken by privateers. In May 1748 he was relieved by Rear-Admiral Henry Osborn, with whom he had served in the 'Superb' and who had married his cousin Sarah Byng. 
Pocock lived in St James's Street, London, from 1749 to 1754, and in July 1754 he was given command of the 'Cumberland' (56 guns) on the home station; six months later he commissioned the 'Eagle' (60 guns) to join a squadron to be commanded by Vice-Admiral Charles Watson in Indian waters. Before departing, his ship was badly damaged in a storm so that Pocock returned to the 'Cumberland' to hoist his flag on his promotion to rear-admiral on 4 February 1755; on 10 November the squadron reached Bombay. 
After a successful operation against the pirate Tugalee Angria in his base at Gheria, north of Goa, the squadron arrived at Madras early in 1756 and there, in August, it was learned that Calcutta had been captured by Suraj ud-Daula, the nawab of Bengal. The squadron, with troops embarked, sailed for the Hooghly River but Pocock's ship ran into difficulties off Palmyras Point, became separated from the others and, running short of food and water, had to run south for Vizagapatam. When the 'Cumberland' eventually reached the Hooghly, Pocock found that Calcutta had been recaptured and that Watson and Colonel Robert Clive's troops had left to attack the French trading settlement of Chandernagore. 
Unable to follow without pilots, Pocock was rowed upriver; he arrived the day before the attack and hoisted his flag in the 'Tyger'. The bombardment of the Chandernagore defences on 23 March 1757 was prolonged and bloody, Pocock himself being 'scratched most shockingly' by flying splinters and 'covered with blood from head to foot' (Hill, 2.27-8). The settlement surrendered, and three months later Clive won his crushing victory over Suraj ud-Daula at Plassey and installed Mir Jaffir as nawab of Bengal. 
On 15 August that year Admiral Watson died suddenly of fever at Calcutta, and Pocock, who had been promoted vice-admiral on 8 December 1756, succeeded to the command. This, however, coincided with news from London that his cousin John Byng had been executed after being tried and found guilty of 'failing to do his utmost' against the French off Minorca in the previous year. 
Early in 1758 the comte de Lally, the governor-designate of French settlements in India, arrived in the Indian Ocean with strong reinforcements for Pondicherry, escorted by a squadron commanded by the comte d'Ache. On 29 April Pocock's seven small ships of the line intercepted d'Ache's nine off Cuddalore, although Lally himself was able to escape into Pondicherry. Action was at point-blank range but three of Pocock's captains failed to get into the action; all three were subsequently found guilty by court martial. As was usual the British fired into the enemy's hulls, and since the ships were crowded with soldiers the French suffered heavy casualties: 162 killed and 360 wounded. The heaviest losses were in d'Ache's flagship, the 'Zodiaque', which Pocock had engaged with his own flagship, the 'Yarmouth', 'as with the spirit of a duel' (Orme, 2.300). 
Pocock again brought d'Ache to action off Negapatam on 3 August and the outcome was similar. The French suffered heavy losses but, as a result of the French custom of aiming at the rigging, the British were so damaged aloft that they were unable to exploit their initial success. A year later, on 10 September 1759, the two admirals fought another action; on this occasion reinforcements brought Pocock's strength to nine sail of the line and the French to eleven, most of them more heavily gunned. Again Pocock worsted d'Ache, who was himself among the 1500 French casualties; wounded, he finally lost heart and, abandoning Pondicherry, made for Mauritius; the British were thus left in command of the sea and the East India Company achieved secure communications. 
On Pocock's return to London later that year the East India Company, assuming financial reward unnecessary, suggested his portrait be painted, or sculpted. 'He made choice of the marble' (Beatson, 2.219), and the full-length figure in Roman military dress stood beside one of Clive in East India House. In January 1760 he was elected MP for Plymouth; he sat for two parliaments, voting with the government though against Rockingham's attempted repeal of the 'Stamp Act' in February 1766. He was made knight of the Bath in 1761. 
In January 1762, when the government decided to act against Spain, Pocock was chosen for high command in the co-ordinated attacks on the keystones of Spanish global power: Havana and Manila. While the operation against the latter was to be mounted from India, the force destined for Havana was drawn from England, several Caribbean islands, and North America. The collecting, escorting, landing, and support of this force was to be Pocock's responsibility. The core of the expedition -- five sail of the line and sixty-seven transports with some 4000 troops embarked -- sailed from Spithead on 5 March 1762. Arriving at Martinique on 26 April, Pocock was shocked by the absence of the ten sail of the line and the transports which Rear-Admiral George Rodney had been ordered to contribute to his force. It emerged that Rodney had sent the extra ships to defend Jamaica against a reported French threat. Refused a meeting with Rodney, Pocock took his flagship under his own command, embarked the troops, who had recently taken the island from the French, and set sail. 
After collecting Rodney's missing ships Pocock decided to take twenty ships of the line, and 200 transports with some 12,000 troops embarked, by the most direct but most difficult route, the Old Bahama Passage along the north coast of Cuba. He had no pilots and so sent boats ahead to take soundings and light fires on rocks and islands, and the passage lasted nearly a week. But when the fleet arrived off Havana on 6 June the Spaniards were taken by surprise, and next morning the army began to land. 
Military operations were the responsibility of the inexperienced earl of Albemarle, who decided that instead of directly attacking the city he would first take the powerful fortress of El Morro which commanded the harbour mouth. Pocock supplied the land forces, guarded against interference from Spanish or French forces, and searched for the troop convoy due to arrive from New York. On 30 July he sent four ships of the line to bombard El Morro but their guns could not be elevated sufficiently to damage the massive walls. 
Finally, on 30 July, a mine was sprung under a seaward bastion of El Morro, the breach was stormed and the fortress taken. Havana itself was now bombarded and, after the arrival of American reinforcements, was completely surrounded. The city surrendered on 13 August. Under the previously agreed division of booty Pocock and Albemarle shared a third of the total, which amounted to $123,000 each. This aroused criticism in England, and Pocock and Albemarle were later lampooned in Charles Johnstone's 'Chrysal, or, The Adventures of a Guinea' (1764). Dissatisfied with his share, Albemarle tried to extract more from the bishop of Cuba, who appealed to Pocock. Unwilling to sour his relations with the earl, Pocock was happy to sail for England. The return was delayed by Atlantic storms, in which two ships of the line and twelve transports were lost. The survivors, in sight of the Scillies, made no headway for a month, the 'Namur' finally reaching Spithead on 13 January 1763. 
On his return to London, Pocock settled down to enjoy his rewards, with a house in Mayfair and another (later named Orleans House) at Twickenham. During 1763 he married Sophia Pitt Dent (died 1767), daughter of George Francis Drake, granddaughter of Sir Francis Drake, bt, and widow of his friend, Commodore Digby Dent; they had one son, George (1765-1840), who was created a baronet at the coronation of George IV, and one daughter, Sophia (died 1811), who married John, fourth Earl Powlett. A popular and modest officer who, 'unlike most... was never known to swear, even on board his ship' (Charnock, 305), Pocock saw no further service. On 11 September 1766 he formally sought the king's permission to remove his name from the list of flag officers available for duty. This was said to have been prompted by his annoyance that a more junior officer, Admiral Sir Charles Saunders, had been appointed first lord of the Admiralty, although Pocock congratulated him. It would appear that at about this time he also stopped attending the Commons; he lost his seat in 1768. 
Pocock resigned from the Royal Navy in 1782, allegedly because of his anger at the appointment of the controversial Vice-Admiral Sir Hugh Palliser as governor of the Royal Hospital, Greenwich. He maintained his maritime interests by becoming master of Trinity House (1786-90) and vice-president of the charitable Marine Society, which encouraged boys to serve in the Royal Navy. Pocock died at Curzon Street, London, on 3 April 1792, and was buried in St Mary's Church, Twickenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 22422


Pocock, Isaac Innes (1782-1835), playwright and painter, was born at Bristol on 2 March 1782. He was the second and eldest surviving son of the sea captain turned marine painter Nicholas Pocock (1740-1821) and his wife, Ann Evans (1752-1827), and, after the family moved to London in 1789, was educated by Joseph Hambledon at Hemel Hempstead. He then trained as a painter, first under George Romney from September 1797 to between February 1799 and Romney's return to the north later that year, after which he worked for a while under Sir William Beechey RA. He exhibited historical compositions and portraits at the Royal Academy (1803-18), the British Institution (1806-17), and the Liverpool Academy (1810-14). In 1807 he won the first 100 guinea premium awarded by the British Institution, for his painting 'The Insolent Visit of Thomas a Becket to Henry II', and was a candidate for associate of the Royal Academy in 1806 and 1811. Pocock married Louisa Hime, a 'Jewish proselyte' (W. I. Pocock's phrase), at St Nicholas's parish church, Liverpool, on 29 August 1812, and they had three daughters and a son: Anne ('b'. 13 July 1813), Louisa ('b'. 28 May 1815), Isaac John Innes Pocock (1819-1886), and Frances Elizabeth ('b'. 29 June 1824). 
Pocock's last known painting was an altarpiece for the former chapel of St Andrew and St Mary Magdalene at Maidenhead, Berkshire, a gift from him in 1825, complementing the organ presented by his widowed aunt Anne, Lady Pocock, in 1817. On her death in 1818 he ceased exhibiting and inherited Ray Lodge, the Maidenhead property of his uncle Sir Isaac Pocock (1751-1810), who, like his elder brother Nicholas, had been a Bristol sea captain and was knighted as high sheriff of Northampton in 1786. 
Isaac Pocock shortly afterwards became an active local magistrate and, in 1831, a deputy lieutenant of Berkshire, devoting his time to local affairs and the playwriting on which his memory largely rests. His first dramatic piece, the musical farce 'Yes and No', was produced at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket, in 1808; having some musical ability, he easily collaborated in many similar works for the three London theatres royal, though the most successful were published and more widely performed. In 1813 his 'Miller and his Men', an archetype of spectacular melodrama and the most popular staple of the nineteenth-century toy theatre, with villainous miller, brigand crew, innocent heroine, and explosive finale, was first performed at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden. The music was by Henry Bishop, their next well-known collaboration being 'Home Sweet Home, or, The ranz des vaches', of which the Bishop-Pocock master is in the British Library. Pocock's first adaptation from the works of Sir Walter Scott, the operatic drama 'Rob Roy Macgregor, or, Auld Lang Syne', was performed at Covent Garden in March 1818 -- 'a well-made little patchwork with plenty of highland songs and thoroughly pasteboard characters' (Downer, 56). It was none the less Macready's first important role as hero and when performed at Edinburgh was honoured by the presence of Scott himself. Several other such adaptations followed, but none so successful, and Pocock not only wrote but on occasion also supplied watercolour drawings of his ideas for scenery and costume. Setting sketches for his Christmas equestrian spectacle 'King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table', adapted from Scott's poem 'The Bridal of Triermain' and performed at Drury Lane in December 1834, and costume drawings for his posthumously produced 'Cavaliers and Roundheads', adapted from Scott's 'Old Mortality' and performed at Drury Lane in October 1835, are in the Theatre Museum, London. A single setting sketch for the latter is in the British Museum among designs by the Grieve family, who actually executed the scenery. 
Pocock's merit as a playwright, in common with similar contemporaries', was his ability to turn out a stream of stageworthy and commercial, but otherwise ephemeral, pieces for a popular audience. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' lists thirty-one which were performed, but there were others: Nicoll's tally of forty-eight comprises twenty-six melodramas or musical dramas, nine farces, four operatic farces, and nine other works (four classed an interlude, a ballet, a comic opera, and an entertainment, and five unspecified). Pocock was addressed in verse as 'Ingenious son of an ingenious Sire' by William Hayley, whose son Thomas Alphonso was a fellow pupil of Romney, who made a sketch of them together in February 1799 while all were at the Hayleys at Eartham, Sussex. As master of Ray Lodge, Pocock was noted for his kindness and generosity; a few surviving letters (transcripts in the Theatre Museum) show tory attitudes and sociable habits, and throw a little light on theatre in Berkshire at the time of his death. He died from a sudden collapse brought on by gallstones at his home on 25 August 1835, and he was buried in the vault of Holy Trinity, Cookham, where his is one of several family memorials (his uncle Sir Isaac's being by John Flaxman). 
Pocock's portrait of George Bartley as Hamlet is in the Garrick Club, London, and one of C. E. Horn as Seraskier in James Cobb's and Stephen Storace's comic opera 'The Siege of Belgrade' (exh. RA, 1817) is in the collection of the Royal Society of Musicians, London. One of his father (exh. RA, 1811), which was engraved by Edward Scriven (impression and plate, NMM), is in the possession of a distant relative, together with one of his brother William Innes Pocock (1783-1836), a naval lieutenant who was also an accomplished marine watercolourist, which is also possibly by Isaac Pocock. Some engravings from his other portraits are in the British Museum, while his composition 'Britannia Recommending to the Historic Muse the Victors of the Present War' is the frontispiece to the July 1799 issue of the 'Naval Chronicle', a journal for which his father did much work. According to his brother William, while still living in London Pocock was elected to serve as lieutenant, captain, and major in the light company of the Westminster voluntary (the Royal Westminster volunteers, according to Isaac's obituary, 'GM', 2nd ser., 4, 1835, 657-8), and there is an oil portrait by Beechey in the Indianapolis Museum of Art which may show Pocock as a young man in militia uniform, though this identification remains tentative. The National Portrait Gallery archives hold a record of a now unlocated head-and-shoulders version of this portrait. 


@@@@@


doc= 22423


Pocock, Isaac John Innes (1819-1886), barrister, was born at Maidenhead, Berkshire, on 28 July 1819, the only son of Isaac Pocock (1782-1835), playwright and painter, and his wife, Louisa Hime. After schooling at Eton College he studied at Merton College, Oxford, where he held a postmastership (scholarship), took second-class honours in classics in 1841, and graduated BA in 1842. Admitted to the Inner Temple in January 1842, he was called to the bar in November 1847 and was subsequently a JP for Berkshire. On 4 April 1850 he married Anna Louisa ('b'. 1824), daughter of Benjamin Currey of Eltham Park, Kent. In 1872 he printed privately 'Franklin, and Other Poems'. He died at his home, Curtisfield, Maidenhead, Berkshire, on 28 May 1886; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 22424


Pocock, Lewis (1808-1882), art patron, was born in London on 17 January 1808, the third and youngest son of John Thomas Pocock (1776-1832), the proprietor of St Bride's Wharf, Fleet Street, and his wife, Margaret (1782-1811), daughter of John Kennedy (1759-1842), the co-owner of the Vineyard nursery, Hammersmith. The Pocock family had come to London from Berkshire about 1750 and prospered as speculative builders. Connections with France made by Kennedy when working for the Empress Josephine on the gardens of Malmaison led to Lewis being educated at Tours. When young, he lived at St Bride's Wharf and at his father's suburban house, at 6 Greville Place, Kilburn, and, later, at 4 Albion Place, Southwark. On his father's death, his inheritance supported his patronage of the arts and new artistic technology. 
The writer Fanny Riviere (Mrs C. H. Smith) recalled that in 1834 Pocock was 'a handsome young man of good means', who patronized art and attended most of the literary and scientific institutions. He was often accompanied by his friend the architect George Godwin, with whom, in 1836, he founded the Art Union of London, a subscription society to encourage young artists and the appreciation of art; the two men became honorary joint secretaries. The union was one manifestation of a growing enthusiasm for the arts among the rapidly expanding middle classes; encouraged by the patronage of the prince consort as well as the publicity of the union, the emergence of this new public for art was to culminate in the Great Exhibition of 1851 and the founding of museums and galleries throughout the country. 
The Art Union published a monthly journal, books, prints, and Parian reproductions of sculpture; it also organized artistic competitions, awarded prizes, and pressed for the subsidization of public art galleries. Pocock himself wrote the introduction to an edition of 'The Pilgrim's Progress', illustrated by H. C. Selous and published by the Art Union in 1844, and to a poem inspired by the Lord's prayer by Dean Henry Alford of Canterbury, illustrated by Frederick Pickersgill. He commissioned a large painting in oils, 'The Proscribed Royalist', from the young John Everett Millais in 1852; his own collection also included paintings by J. M. W. Turner. Samuel Johnson having lived near his house, he made a notable collection of Johnsoniana which was sold by Sothebys in 1875. 
Pocock advised the guiding committees of the Great Exhibition of 1851 and supported the establishment of the South Kensington (later the Victoria and Albert) Museum; he was also a fellow of the Society of Arts. Pocock's interests spread beyond art: the scientist Michael Faraday was a friend and, in 1852, Pocock himself patented a scheme for 'electric lighting combined with the production of colour and power' ('Art Union of London Annual Report', 1883) and another for purifying sea water. Pocock was also involved in the early development of photography, and served as treasurer for the Graphic Society. As a director of the Argus Life Assurance office, he published 'A Familiar Explanation of the Nature of Assurances upon Lives' (1842). 
On 6 September 1838 Pocock married Eliza (1816-1894), the daughter of George Bassett (1773-1846), architect and land surveyor; they had twelve children. They lived in London, first in Gloucester Road, Regent's Park, and then in Bloomsbury, at 29 Montague Street. Later, they moved to 28 Gordon Square. Subsequently, they moved to 20 Upper Gower Street and, in 1869, to 70 Gower Street, where Pocock died on 17 October 1882; he and his wife were both buried in Highgate cemetery. His obituary in 'The Graphic' of 23 December 1882 noted that: 'he believed in the refining influence of all things beautiful to the eye and he zealously devoted himself to the diffusion of works of art among the people, in order that the pleasures of what he held to be the highest sense might be enjoyed by the many instead of the chosen few.' 



@@@@@


doc= 22425


Pocock, Nicholas (1740-1821), marine painter, was born in Bristol on 2 May 1740, the eldest of six children. He was baptized on 28 May 1742 at St Stephen's Church, Prince Street, Bristol, the son of Nicholas Pocock ('c'.1709-1759), a Bristol seaman, and Mary Innes (1715-1780), who came from an ancient Scottish family. When he was seventeen he was apprenticed as a mariner to his father and when his father died in 1759 he entered the employment of the Champion family, who were prominent Bristol merchants. By 1766 he was in command of Richard Champion's ship 'Lloyd' and he subsequently made six voyages in her to Charles Town, South Carolina. In 1770 he sailed to the Mediterranean as captain of the ship 'Betsey', and between 1771 and 1776 he made six voyages in the 'Minerva' to the West Indian islands of Dominica, Nevis, and St Kitts. Six of his logbooks have survived, each illustrated with charming pen and wash drawings of his ships, coastal profiles, and harbours. Four of these are in the collections of the National Maritime Museum, London; one is in the Bristol Record Office; and one is in the Mariners' Museum, Newport News, Virginia, USA. 
About 1778 Pocock left the employment of Richard Champion and set up on his own as an artist. For the next twelve years or so he worked from his home in Prince Street, Bristol, painting marine subjects and views in and around the city. He worked initially in watercolours, and a number of his Bristol views were engraved and published. In 1780 he sent an oil painting to the Royal Academy. It arrived too late for the exhibition but prompted an encouraging letter from Sir Joshua Reynolds, who considered it 'much beyond what I expected from a first essay in oil colours' (Northcote, 2.90-91). Reynolds advised him to unite landscape painting to ship painting, and 'to carry his palette and pencils to the waterside' (ibid.). 
On 10 February 1780 Pocock married Ann Evans (1752-1827) at St Augustine's Church, Bristol. They had nine children including Isaac Pocock, who became a painter and dramatist, and William Innes Pocock, who joined the Royal Navy. In 1789 Pocock and his family moved to London and took up residence in a fine house at 12 Great George Street, Westminster. He was much in demand by admirals and senior naval officers for paintings of the naval actions of the period. His patrons included Admiral Lord Hood and his naval brother, Lord Bridport; Lord Gambier; Sir Richard Strachan; and Lord Barham, the first lord of the Admiralty. He was also commissioned by the Navy Board to paint panoramic views of the royal dockyards at Plymouth and Woolwich. In 1794 he was present on board the frigate 'Pegasus' during the battle of the Glorious First of June. His illustrated notebook of the four-day action is in the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich. His most prestigious naval commission was to produce six paintings which were engraved as illustrations for the official 'Life of Admiral Lord Nelson' (1809) by J. S. Clarke and J. McArthur. His commemorative painting of Nelson's ships gathered at Spithead is one of his finest works. 
In 1804 Pocock became one of the founder members of the Society of Painters in Water Colours and he exhibited no fewer than 182 works at the annual exhibitions of the society. He also exhibited 113 pictures at the Royal Academy and 25 at the British Institution. Like many of the other marine artists of his day, Pocock earned additional income from the publication of engravings after his pictures. Apart from the numerous engravings of his sea battles, he was also commissioned to illustrate the 1804 and 1811 editions of William Falconer's epic poem 'The Shipwreck', and he contributed more than sixty illustrations for the 'Naval Chronicle' between 1799 and 1813. 
Failing health prompted Pocock to leave London in 1817. He stayed briefly in Bath and then he and his wife moved to Ray Lodge, Maidenhead, which was the home of his eldest son, Isaac. There he died on 9 March 1821, and was buried at Cookham parish church. There were a few brief notices on his passing, but it was only in later years that his contribution to marine painting was fully appreciated. His experience as a seaman and the pains he took to obtain information from naval officers ensured that his pictures of naval actions were extremely accurate records in terms of ships, flags, and weather conditions. The National Maritime Museum, London, has the largest collection of his paintings and some 300 watercolours and drawings. Other major collections of his watercolours are to be found in the City Museum and Art Gallery in Bristol, the British Museum, the National Library of Wales at Aberystwyth, and the National Museum and Gallery of Wales at Cardiff. Other examples of his works are to be found in the Royal Collection, the Huntington Art Gallery, California, and in regional museums, including Norwich, Belfast, and Manchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 22426


Pocock, Nicholas (1814-1897), historian, born at Falmouth in January 1814, was the eldest son of Nicholas Pocock of Falmouth and the grandson of Nicholas Pocock (1740-1821), the marine painter. Isaac Pocock and William Innes Pocock were his uncles. He was educated at a private school in Devon by the Revd John Manly, and on 3 February 1831 matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, as Michel exhibitioner; in 1834 he was elected scholar. He graduated BA in that year with a first class in the final mathematical school, and a second class in 'literae humaniores'. In 1835 he won the Johnson mathematical scholarship and the senior mathematical scholarship in 1836. In 1837 he proceeded MA, and in 1838 he became Michel fellow of Queen's, where he was afterwards mathematical lecturer. He had the reputation of being the best mathematical tutor of his time, and among his pupils was Bartholomew Price; he was public examiner in mathematics in 1839, 1844, and 1848, and in 'literae humaniores' in 1842 and 1852. He was ordained deacon in 1838 and priest in 1855, but never held any ecclesiastical preferment. He married in 1852 Edith, daughter of James Cowles Prichard and his wife, Anne Maria, 'nee' Estlin, and retired to Clifton, Bristol, where he spent the remainder of his life with the exception of a year when he was in charge of Codrington College, Barbados. He died at home at 5 Worcester Terrace, Clifton, on 4 March 1897, and was survived by his widow and several sons and daughters. 
Pocock edited in 1847 the third edition of Hammond's 'Miscellaneous Theological Works', and in 1852 published 'The First Two Books of Euclid... with Additional Figures'. Afterwards he devoted himself almost exclusively to the history of the Reformation in England. His great work was his monumental edition of Gilbert Burnet's 'History of the Reformation', published in seven volumes by the Clarendon Press in 1864-5; the seventh volume consists entirely of Pocock's dissertations on Burnet's authorities, sources, and errors, and the whole work embodies the results of much careful and laborious research. He made an extensive collection of original records, two volumes of which were issued by the Clarendon Press in 1871 as 'Records of the Reformation'; poor sales stopped the series at 1535. Pocock's collections remained for the most part in manuscript with the exception of those published in 'Troubles Connected with the Prayer Book of 1549' (published by the Camden Society in 1884). Pocock also edited for the Camden Society Harpsfield's 'Treatise of the Pretended Divorce of Catherine of Aragon' (1878) and contributed numerous articles on Reformation history to the 'Saturday Review', 'Union Review', 'Quarterly Review', 'Church Quarterly Review', and 'English Historical Review', and to 'The Athenaeum' and 'The Academy'. He was one of the early contributors to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Pocock did much to discredit the traditional protestant view of the Reformation, but he maintained quite a strong Anglican perspective on it. His documents were quite soundly edited and remain of value. 
Pocock's other works include 'The Ritual Commission' (1872), 'The Abolition of the Thirty-Nine Articles' (3 parts, 1874), 'The Principles of the Reformation' (1875), and 'The Recovery from the Principles of the Reformation' (1877). 


@@@@@


doc= 22427


Pocock, Robert (1760-1830), printer and antiquary, born at Gravesend, Kent, on 21 February 1760, was the third and youngest son of John Pocock ('c'.1719-1772), shopkeeper, who had married firstly Jane Channell (1717-1749) at Gravesend in 1745, and secondly Martha Williams ('c'.1719-1776) of East Greenwich, Kent, in 1750. Robert was the only son of this second marriage. He was educated at the free school in Gravesend and then was apprenticed to his mother as a shopkeeper, on 18 February 1774, his father having died in 1772. In January 1776 Martha Pocock died, leaving to Robert her stock-in-trade as well as the High Street property held by her in trust for both him and his half-brother John. Robert married, probably in 1778, Ann, daughter of Edward Stillard of London. They had five children. Ann died in March 1791; in the following year on 19 March Robert married Frances ('bap'. 1766, died 1818), daughter of John Hinde of Milton Regis, Kent. This marriage produced seven children. 
In 1786 Pocock founded the first circulating library and printing office in Gravesend, and his first literary productions were some children's books. He wrote a chronology and a history of Gravesend in 1790 and 1797 respectively, and made other contributions to the topographical and family history of Kent. He also wrote a history of Dartford as well as some other works, which were never printed. In addition Pocock was by 1802 dealing, as his trade card states, in 'natural and other curiosities, collected from different parts of the world', and was in 1812 the first chairman of the Kent Natural History Society. 
Pocock was a man of great versatility, as shown by his published diaries, which cover the years 1811-12, 1815, and 1822-3, but even so he ran into financial difficulties. In 1811 Thomas Cadell from Rochester set up a rival press in Gravesend, which did not help matters, and Pocock was obliged in December 1811 to transfer his properties to his wife's relations, and to borrow money from them. He eventually moved to Dartford, Kent, some time between 1823 and 1827, living with his son George Admiral Pocock, who had set up his press there in 1823. His latter years were passed in comparative poverty. Robert Pocock died of heart disease at Dartford on 26 October 1830, and was buried at Wilmington, Kent, on 2 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 22428


Pocock, William Fuller (1779-1849), architect, was born in the City of London, possibly at Fetter Lane, on 26 September 1779, the eldest son of William Pocock (1750-1835), a carpenter and joiner, and his wife, Hannah (died 1830), daughter of Major Fuller of High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. Both of his parents were Methodists. The Pococks moved in the mid-1780s to Leyton, in Essex, where William Pocock the elder traded as a builder, before branching out into the letting of furnished properties and furniture making; stacking tables (then a new concept) were a speciality. Intended for his father's trade, William Fuller Pocock was so impressed by watching the supervision of house building in Moorfields that he resolved to be an architect. He was accordingly articled to Samuel Beazley, and in 1799, while still under his care, sent his first drawing of a mausoleum to the Royal Academy. Pocock was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools in 1801, shortly before he became assistant to Thomas Hardwick. About 1803 he set up in practice as an independent architect and surveyor, and ran his office from 26 Southampton Street, off the Strand. 
A freeman of the City of London, Pocock quickly established himself in the world of London property and building. Most of his exhibited early works tended towards the commemorative and sepulchral, including in 1803 a design for an obelisk at Hafod, Wales, in memory of the fifth duke of Bedford, and a design for a Temple of Fame, shown in 1806. His executed work was more prosaic. Pocock designed a number of suburban villas and rural structures: his first book, published in 1807 by John Taylor, was 'Architectural designs for rustic cottages, picturesque dwellings, villas, etc. with appropriate scenery'. This contained advice on the causes of dry rot alongside aesthetic musings, besides the thirty-three plates of rural designs for villas and 'cabannes ornees', mainly in the 'antient English character', some of which had already been built. Pocock had bought land at Camberwell, Surrey, upon which to build his own cottage in 1805: here he lived with his wife, Fanny Willmer, whom he married on 10 February 1809. They subsequently moved to Virginia Water, Surrey, where Pocock built a cottage named Glenridge, on Callow Hill, commenced in 1825. 
Pocock was surveyor to a number of estates, including those of the Brewers' Company and of Viscount Dungannon, the ground landlord of the Trevor estate in Knightsbridge. In 1811 Pocock began to build a number of houses on the latter estate, on the site of Powis House: one of these, 10 Trevor Place, was to be his principal London residence. A speculative developer in his own right, he also oversaw the construction on lands across greater London on behalf of a number of institutions. His strong commercial connections led not only to factory commissions but also to designs for the suburban retreats of these industrialists. Pocock balanced his busy professional life with much building activity on behalf of the Methodist church. He designed a wide range of public buildings as well as housing, and in this he was representative of the increasingly complex nature of early nineteenth-century architecture. These included chapels such as the Ranelagh Chapel, George Street, Chelsea, of 1818 (dem.) and the Kensington Wesleyan chapel of 1836, and the Wesleyan centenary hall in Bishopsgate Street (1840; dem.); schools, such as that at Aldenham, Hertfordshire, for the Brewers' Company of 1825, or the Western Grammar School, Kensington, of 1835; a new livery hall for the Leathersellers' Company, off Bishopsgate, in 1820 (dem.); almshouses, such as the Carpenters' Company almshouse at Twickenham of 1841; factories, including Messrs Smith and Baber's floorcloth manufactory in Knightsbridge of 1824 (dem.); and militia depots: Pocock, a zealous volunteer, designed the Bunhill Row headquarters of the London militia in 1828. He also designed a ballroom for a hotel in Montreal, Canada (1817), and a chapel in Antigua (1837). These were executed in a mixture of styles: Pocock was happiest as a classicist, but was adept at designing in a restrained Tudorbethan idiom also. His 'Designs for Churches and Chapels' of 1819 (3rd edn, 1835) enjoyed wide circulation in its day, but was much criticized by later Gothicists for its lack of authenticity and meanness of detail. His other publications consisted of 'Modern Finishings for Rooms: a Series of Designs for Vestibules, Staircases, Libraries, etc.' (1811; repr. 1823, 1837) and 'Observations on Bond in Brickwork' (1839). 
Pocock was master of the Carpenters' Company in 1840 and an early member of the Institute of British Architects. His wife died in 1833 and was buried in a tomb designed by Pocock in Egham churchyard in Surrey. A cautious, thorough, and devout man, Pocock himself died, at his home, 10 Trevor Place, Knightsbridge, on 29 October 1849, aged seventy; his last audible words were 'Glory, glory, Halleluyah, Halleluyah, Halleluyah' (Pocock, 58). He was also buried at Egham. His professional practice was continued by his son William Willmer Pocock (1813-1899), who wrote an affectionate account of his father, printed in 1883. An album containing prints and drawings by William Pocock is in the collection of the Royal Institute of British Architects. 


@@@@@


doc= 22429


Pocock, William Innes (1783-1836), naval officer and artist, second surviving son of Nicholas Pocock (1740-1821), marine painter, and his wife, Ann, who died on 27 December 1827, aged seventy-five, daughter of John Evans of Bristol, younger brother of Isaac Pocock, artist and dramatist, was born at Bristol in June 1783. He entered the navy in 1795, served in the East and West Indies, and from 1807 to 1810 made three voyages to the Cape of Good Hope, St Helena, and China, in the 'St Albans'. In the last of these the convoy was much damaged in a storm off the Cape of Good Hope, and stayed at St Helena to refit. Pocock made several sketches of the island, which, with an account of its history, he published as 'Five Views of the Island of St Helena' in 1815, Napoleon's residence on the island having made it famous. On 1 August 1811 Pocock was promoted lieutenant of the 'Eagle' (74 guns), with Captain Rowley, and saw much boat-service in the Adriatic, serving with distinction and gaining significant prize-money. She was paid off in 1814, and Pocock had no further employment afloat. 
Pocock apparently read, wrote, and painted; he was a good linguist, and reportedly published in 1815 'Naval records: consisting of a series of engravings from original designs by Nicholas Pocock, illustrative of the principal engagements at sea since the commencement of the war in 1793, with an account of each action' and also pamphlets on naval subjects. In his last year, despite ill health, he worked on a plan for using steam vessels in war, for which he had a model steam tug constructed. 
Pocock was twice married. His first wife was Anne, only daughter of Thomas Wilson, of Ives Place, near Maidenhead: they had three daughters. His second wife was Elizabeth Anne, only daughter of Dr Richard Pearson (1765-1836), the eminent physician: they had one son and three daughters, and she survived him. He died at Reading on 13 March 1836, and was interred at Bray church, Berkshire. He has been confused with William Fuller Pocock, architect and artist. 


@@@@@


doc= 22430


Pococke, Edward (1604-1691), oriental scholar, was born on 8 November 1604 at Oxford, the eldest child of Edward Pococke (died 1636), a clergyman originally from Hampshire, and his wife, Hester Shepard, and baptized the same day at St Peter-in-the-East. He spent his infancy at Chieveley, Berkshire, where his father, a former fellow of Magdalen College, had recently been appointed vicar. At an early age he was sent to the free school at Thame, where he received a good grounding under the master Richard Boucher. 
On 4 June 1619 Pococke matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, where one of his contemporaries was Edward Leigh, with whom he maintained an acquaintance. Admitted scholar of Corpus Christi College on 11 December 1620, under his tutor there, Gamaliel Chase, he learned Hebrew as well as Greek, graduating BA on 28 November 1622 and proceeding MA on 28 March 1626. Later that year he attended Matthias Pasor's lectures on Arabic, which introduced him to what was to be the central interest of his life. Finding Pasor's instruction insufficient, he then applied to the foremost English Arabist of the time, William Bedwell, and was privately taught by him at his vicarage at Tottenham High Cross. It was probably there that Pococke first met John Selden, who was later to be his patron and protector. 
Pococke was admitted probationer fellow of his college on 24 July 1628. By this time he had learned enough Syriac (perhaps from Pasor's lectures) to prepare an edition and translation of a manuscript of the epistles '2 Peter', 2 and 3 'John', and 'Jude', which he had discovered in the Bodleian Library, but which had been omitted from Widmanstetter's edition of the Syriac 'New Testament'. In November 1629 the great Dutch scholar G. J. Vossius, who was visiting England to accept the grant of a canonry at Canterbury, noticed this manuscript while being shown round the Bodleian, was informed of Pococke's edition, and insisted on meeting the author. Their long talk ended with Vossius offering to have the edition published at Leiden, which had the printing facilities lacking in England at that date. Pococke agreed, and in 1630 the book was published, under the supervision of Louis de Dieu. In the meantime Pococke had been ordained by Richard Corbet, bishop of Oxford. He had also applied for the post of chaplain to the Levant Company at Aleppo. His purpose in so doing was to learn Arabic language and literature at the source, and it seems probable that the inspiration had come from his talk with Vossius, whose friend Jacobus Golius (professor of Arabic at Leiden) had recently returned from a long stay with the Dutch merchants at Aleppo, bringing back a magnificent collection of oriental manuscripts. 
Pococke was appointed chaplain at the Levant Company's general court in London on 31 March 1630. It is possible that among his patrons were his father's Berkshire neighbours, the Fettiplaces: Charles Fettiplace was treasurer of the company at Aleppo while Pococke was there. Having left England with the company's ships in summer 1630, Pococke arrived at Aleppo on 17 October, bringing a recommendation from John Selden to the consul, John Wandesford, in whose house he lived for the five and a half years he spent in Syria. All the time that he could spare from his ministerial duties he devoted to studying the oriental languages (principally Arabic, both written and spoken, but also Hebrew, Syriac, and Ethiopic) and to collecting manuscripts. His friendships at Aleppo encompassed both Muslims and Christians of various persuasions. His Muslim teacher ('shaykh'), Fathallah, praised his pupil's skill and character long after. Pococke also employed the dervish Ahmad to teach him and to copy and buy manuscripts (services which he had previously performed for Golius). Letters written later by the dervish to Pococke at Oxford are extant. According to Edward Leigh, Pococke was so respected by the local inhabitants that they chose him as an umpire to settle their disputes. Christian friends included Michael Thaljah, a professional scribe, brother of the local Greek Orthodox bishop, and Golius's brother Petrus, a Catholic missionary known as Celestinus de Sancta Liduina. 
In October 1631 the chancellor of Oxford, William Laud, who was already collecting manuscripts with a view to enriching the Bodleian Library, wrote to Pococke asking him to buy Greek coins and Greek and oriental manuscripts on his behalf. Pococke later supervised the dispatch of manuscripts from Aleppo in accordance with a royal ordinance procured by Laud (now archbishop of Canterbury) which required every returning ship of the Levant Company to deliver one Arabic or Persian manuscript to him. Laud had not as yet met Pococke, but obviously had good reports of him, for after he had determined to establish a professorship of Arabic at Oxford he wrote to Pococke ordering him to return home soon in order to be the first to hold the chair. 
Pococke accordingly left Aleppo (before April 1636), and arrived in Oxford in time to take his BD on 8 July. He was then formally appointed professor of Arabic, and delivered his inaugural lecture on 10 August. It is regrettable that only a small part of this is preserved (printed at the end of his 'Carmen Tograi', 1661), for it already displays Pococke's independence from the trite themes of contemporary Arabists: it deals with the love of the ancient Arabs for poetry. Laud's statute required the professor to lecture on Arabic grammar and literature every Wednesday in Lent and during vacations, and imposed attendance on all bachelors and all students in medicine, but it seems that this last requirement was a dead letter, and during the more than fifty years that Pococke lectured at Oxford he had only a few dedicated pupils. 
Pococke had brought back from Aleppo, together with numerous manuscripts, an edition he had prepared of the proverbs of al-Maydani. This remained unpublished during his lifetime, for he had recently acquired a manuscript of a work which interested him far more. This was the 'History of the dynasties' of Abu'l-Faraj (Bar Hebraeus), an account of Islamic history, which, although by a Christian author of late date, was far superior to anything available in print in Europe at that time. However, Pococke felt dissatisfied with his ability to produce an adequate translation, for lack of the requisite works on Islamic geography and history. The remedy was found by the brother of Thomas Greaves (his chamber fellow at Corpus), John Greaves, a fellow of Merton, who was anxious to travel to the east for his own astronomical researches, and proposed that the two should go together to Constantinople, where Pococke might find the resources he needed. Through the agency of Peter Turner, Laud's right-hand man at Oxford, Greaves obtained from the chancellor leave of absence for Pococke to travel to Constantinople, retaining his professorial salary. Pococke also had to spend more than $500 of his own, which the recent death of his father had made possible. Laud appointed Thomas Greaves, whom Pococke had instructed in oriental languages, as deputy professor of Arabic during Pococke's absence. In return Greaves and Pococke promised to procure manuscripts for Laud. 
The two friends embarked on a ship for Constantinople in early July 1637, but Greaves left the ship at Leghorn to pursue his own researches in Italy. Pococke continued alone to Constantinople, where he stayed for the next three years, living in the house at Galata of the English ambassador, first Sir Peter Wyche (for whom he acted as chaplain), later Sir Sackville Crowe. There he was joined before the end of the year by Greaves, who however left for further exploration in Rhodes and Egypt in August 1638. But in July 1639 Pococke encountered another oriental scholar, Christianus Ravius, a German (known in England as Christian Ravis) whose eastern travels were supported by Archbishop Ussher. He arrived with a letter of recommendation from Vossius to Pococke, who arranged for him too to live in the ambassador's household. Pococke was occupied in perfecting his knowledge of the languages and collecting manuscripts, with the help of old friends at Aleppo and new friends at Constantinople. These included several learned Jews, notably Jacob Roman, who introduced Pococke to the study of Judaeo-Arabic, and procured important Hebrew manuscripts for him. He also received help from Cyril Lucaris, patriarch of Constantinople, but this ceased with Cyril's execution by the Turks in June 1638. Pococke sent Laud a long account of this event, and later repeated it orally to Thomas Smith, who subsequently published it in his 'Account of the Greek Church' (1680). He also made an Arabic translation of Hugo Grotius's famous eirenic treatise 'De veritate religionis Christianae', with the principal intention of healing the divisions which he had witnessed between the various Eastern Christian sects. 
In August 1640, responding to the concerns of Charles Fettiplace and Laud about the worsening political situation in England, Pococke embarked on his return journey. He took a detour through Paris in order to visit Grotius and ask his permission to make changes in his translation of the part of his book dealing with Islam, by excising some puerile fables about Muhammad falsely attributed to the Muslims. Grotius agreed, and gave Pococke a message for Laud, who by this time had been impeached and was in custody. On his arrival in England (March 1641) Pococke visited Laud in the Tower and reported Grotius's advice, to use any means of escape abroad. Laud refused to give his accusers this satisfaction. He had in the meantime settled the Arabic professorship with a permanent endowment. Pococke returned to Oxford, where at the end of the year he was visited by Ravis, accompanied by his Arabophone amanuensis Nicolaus Petri, whose Arabic letters to Pococke reveal an admiration for his learning and a liking for him in strong contrast to his contempt and hatred for his master, Ravis. 
In 1642 Pococke was presented by his college to the rectory of Childrey in Berkshire, which was to be his residence for the next eighteen years except for the short stays in Oxford required for his lectures. Early in 1646 he married Mary, daughter of Thomas Burdet of West Worldham, Hampshire. Their eldest child, Edward Pococke (bap. 1648, d. 1726), was baptized in October 1648. Between then and January 1661 five more sons and three daughters were born to them: all except one lived to adulthood. Pococke was a conscientious pastor, but in the troubled years during and immediately after the civil war had trouble with parishioners disgruntled about tithes and his adherence to the prayer book. He was also harassed by quartering of soldiers from the victorious parliamentary army, until John Greaves procured him a protection signed in December 1647 by the commander Sir Thomas Fairfax. 
After Laud's execution in 1645 parliament sequestered the estate designated to support the Arabic professorship, and for three years Pococke lost the income from that source, until it was restored by the efforts of Selden in London, and Gerard Langbaine, provost of Queen's College, in Oxford. When the visitors appointed by parliament in 1647 to reform Oxford began their activities, Pococke submitted to their authority (unlike Greaves and others, who were in due course expelled), but avoided taking the covenant and the 'negative oath' abjuring all connection with the king, by the expedient of staying away from Oxford and the visitors. However, attention was drawn to him when, after the death on 27 March 1648 of the professor of Hebrew, John Morris, the king, then a prisoner on the Isle of Wight, nominated Pococke as successor. This post carried with it the considerable advantage of a canonry at Christ Church. Selden, who was a member of the parliamentary committee for regulating the universities, got that committee to confirm the appointment (12 April), but Pococke seems not to have occupied the canon's lodgings assigned to him. In the following year he refused to take the engagement promising loyalty to the republican regime, and was accordingly, despite the efforts of Greaves and Selden, deprived of his canonry, which was given to Peter French (Cromwell's son-in-law), on 24 October 1650. It seemed likely that Pococke would also lose the Hebrew and Arabic professorships, and the committee had actually so ordered, but were persuaded by a petition signed by leading members of the university in December 1650 to postpone implementing this order until a suitable replacement had been found. No replacement was forthcoming (Ravis, who had earlier coveted Pococke's Arabic post, had already departed for Sweden), and Pococke was not further disturbed at Oxford, where he stayed at Balliol College when performing his required lectures. 
At Childrey, however, some malcontent parishioners cited Pococke before the commissioners appointed by Cromwell for ejecting 'ignorant, scandalous, insufficient and negligent ministers'. In these proceedings, which dragged on for months in 1655, Pococke defended himself vigorously, and was supported by local notables, including the Fettiplaces. An appearance by a delegation from Oxford, headed by the then vice-chancellor, John Owen, who warned the commissioners of 'the infinite contempt' which they would incur if 'they had turned out a man for insufficiency, whom all the learned, not of England only, but of all Europe, so justly admired for his vast knowledge, and extraordinary accomplishments' (Twells, 174), finally persuaded them to dismiss the charges. 
Pococke by this time had indeed earned a reputation for learning throughout Europe, by the publication of 'Specimen historiae Arabum' (1650). In 1648 Langbaine persuaded him to commit the outcome of his twelve years' study of Abu'l-Faraj's history to print. The resulting book consisted of a small excerpt from the history, in Arabic and Latin, accompanied by a lengthy commentary (printed first in 1648) illuminating Islamic history, geography, mythology, religion, and literature from a wealth of sources, mostly unpublished and previously unknown in Europe. It represents a revolution in Arabic studies, being Pococke's attempt to show that far from being a mere ancillary to biblical exegesis, Arabic literature (in the widest sense) was worthy of study in its own right in the same way that the classical cultures were. It is his greatest work, and of permanent scholarly value. It was also the first Oxford book printed with the Arabic types which Laud had acquired for the university. 
Pococke was also responsible for the earliest work to be printed with Laud's Hebrew types. This too was a pioneering work, for it was in Judaeo-Arabic, hitherto virtually unknown to Christian scholars, except for Saadya Gaon's translation of the 'Pentateuch' published at Constantinople in 1546. The book, called 'Porta Mosis', consisted of six prefatory sections of Maimonides' commentary on the 'Mishna', with translation and Pococke's extensive commentary, in which he emphasized the importance of the medieval Jewish works written in Arabic, then the lingua franca. Although Pococke embarked on this publication in 1652, it did not appear until 1655, because in the meantime he had received a request from Selden to produce an edition and translation of the 'Annals' of Eutychius, a Christian Arabic writer for whom Selden bore an affection (he had himself published a controversial extract in 1642, for which Pococke had assisted him, but not enough to eliminate all Selden's blunders). The proposed edition was to be printed at Oxford at Selden's expense, and supervised by Pococke and Gerard Langbaine. Pococke, knowing that Eutychius was an unreliable historian, was reluctant to undertake the assignment, but felt that he owed Selden so much that he could not refuse. Selden died on 30 November 1654 before the work was completely printed, but he bequeathed the edition and the costs of finishing it to the two supervisors. Pococke completed it for publication in 1656, although he made clear in his preface his dissatisfaction with many aspects of the book. 
Pococke was also concerned, between 1652 and 1657, with the publication of the polyglot 'Bible'. His printed contributions to this are small, but he loaned several important manuscripts, and performed the valuable service of reading the proof-sheets as they were issued and sending his suggestions to the supervisor, Brian Walton. His only other publication of this decade was a tiny pamphlet entitled 'The Nature of the Drink Kauhi, or Coffe', an extract in Arabic and English from a work of al-Antaki. This was a joke on Pococke's part; he had become addicted to coffee-drinking (then a novelty in England) while in the east, and a later palsy in his hand was ascribed to this. Among the pupils attracted to Pococke's Arabic lectures about this time were Edward Bernard, Robert Huntington, Narcissus Marsh, and Thomas Smith. 
At the Restoration, Pococke's canonry was restored (20 June 1660), and after settling a dispute about the assignment of the proper lodgings, he moved with his family on 27 July into the canon's quarters at Christ Church which he was to occupy for the rest of his life. As some compensation for his sufferings as a royalist he was advanced to the degree of DD by royal command on 20 September 1660. At Christ Church he participated fully in the duties associated with the cathedral and the college, and from 1662 was a delegate of Oxford University Press, where his influence may be seen in the choice for publication of such books as William Beveridge's edition of the Greek canons (1672), which included the Arabic version. 
Immediately after returning to Oxford, Pococke had begun to prepare an edition and translation of the complete Abu'l-Faraj, and this, which remained the standard edition until the twentieth century, was published in 1663. Meanwhile he had produced a textbook for students of Arabic, an edition of the poem 'Lamiyyat al- 'Ajam' of al-Tughra'i ('Carmen Tograi', Oxford, 1661), with a literal facing translation and extensive notes on elementary grammar and lexicography. It included a treatise by Pococke's favourite pupil, Samuel Clarke, on the metrics of Arabic poetry. The book represents the substance of one of Pococke's lecture courses, and is of interest for the introductory section giving a justification for learning Arabic greatly different from those common at the time. His Arabic translation of Grotius's 'De veritate', done long before, had also finally appeared in print (1660), thanks to financial support from Robert Boyle, who had become a friend and admirer of Pococke during his residence at Oxford in the previous decade. Copies of the book containing only the Arabic text, specially prepared for the lands of Islam, were distributed later by Robert Huntington, chaplain at Aleppo from 1670 onwards. Pococke's concern for the spiritual welfare of the Eastern Christians was also demonstrated by his publication, at his own expense, of his Arabic translation of the Anglican catechism (1671). He also produced an abbreviated Arabic version of the 'Book of Common Prayer', published by the university press in 1674. 
Pococke's most widely influential book, however, was a translation of the 'philosophical fable' ('Hayy ibn Yaqzan') of ibn Tufayl, published with the Arabic text under the title 'Philosophus autodidactus' (1671). Although nominally the work of his eldest son, Edward, whom he was grooming to be his successor as Arabic professor, it was conceived, supervised, and partly written by the father. He had long before prepared an English translation, of which fragments survive among his notes, and was apparently about to publish it in 1660. However, that earlier project came to nothing, perhaps because of fears that the work might appear too controversial, since it can be read as exalting the power of human reason to attain knowledge of the divine without the aid of revealed religion (it has been condemned as such by both Muslims and Christians). The book engendered lively interest, particularly among deists and Quakers, and versions in English and the vernaculars of Europe were soon made from the younger Pococke's Latin. 
Despite this success, the increasing scorn for Arabic studies in post-Restoration England and Oxford frustrated Pococke's further attempts to get Arabic texts published. These included his edition of al-Maydani's proverbs, the original version of Maimonides, 'Guide of the Perplexed', and a most interesting account of the wonders of Egypt by 'Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi. Part of an edition of the latter with a translation by the younger Pococke was actually printed about 1685, but then the edition was abandoned for obscure reasons. The elder Pococke therefore turned to the more acceptable medium of biblical commentary. He produced a series of commentaries on the minor prophets, beginning with 'Micah' and 'Malachi' in 1677, and ending with 'Joel' in 1691, the year of his death. The commentaries were in English, but contain much oriental learning, with quotations in the original languages. 
Pococke was the finest European Arabist of his time (only Golius could compare with him), and among the greatest of all time. He possessed not only a breadth and depth of learning astonishing in an age when most Arabic literature still had to be read in manuscript, but also a sympathy and understanding for Islamic culture almost unique in an intellectual climate in which suspicion and hatred for other sects and religions were the norm. His published work was long influential, and is still instructive. He was also an accomplished Hebraist, well read in rabbinical writings. 
As a teacher Pococke was less successful, and he failed to found a flourishing tradition of the study of Arabic. Of his most promising pupils Samuel Clarke and William Guise died young, Huntington failed to write anything, Marsh was distracted by his ecclesiastical career, Thomas Smith became disgusted with Muslims by his experiences at Constantinople, and Bernard frittered away his talents in one unfinished project after another. Pococke's son Edward was obviously unfitted for the academic career into which his father tried to push him. In the event his successor as Arabic professor was no pupil of his own, but Thomas Hyde, who was more interested in Persian than Arabic. 
Pococke was greatly admired by his contemporaries in the republic of letters, and seems to have been almost universally liked by those with whom he came in contact. His amiability is confirmed by the otherwise unilluminating account of his character supplied, long after his death, by John Locke to his first biographer, Humfry Smith. His hatred of disputes, and tolerance of others' opinions, makes it difficult to discern his own views on controversial subjects. It is rare to find in his works an outburst like that to which he was goaded by his treatment before the commissioners for insufficient ministers, directed against those who think that knowledge of any language but the vernacular is a positive impediment to understanding scripture: 'Genus hominum plane 'atopon kai alogon', atque huius saeculi lues' ('the plague of this age'; 'Porta Mosis', Twells edn, vii). But his veneration of Grotius and his respect for such writers as Maimonides among Jews and al-Ghazali among Muslims are sufficient indications that he believed that religion should be based on reason. His friendships with Jews, Muslims, and Christians of many persuasions vouch for his tolerance, and his disgust with religious intolerance in his own time and place is easily inferred from his long and detailed account of the sects of Islam in the 'Specimen'. These attitudes may help to answer a question posed by his contemporaries, why after the Restoration he received no ecclesiastical preferment beyond the restoration of his canonry and the DD, while others of smaller attainments and less unblemished records of loyalty were promoted to bishoprics. Pococke's well-attested modesty is a sufficient explanation, but it is possible that his aversion to religious disputation and dogmatism positively dissuaded him from attempting advancement in the church. 
Although Pococke suffered a severe affliction for several years from 1663, which left him permanently lame, he continued in the performance of his duties and his studies to the end of his long life. He died, of old age, at Christ Church, on 10 September 1691, and was buried in Christ Church Cathedral, where a monument was erected by his widow. He was also survived by five sons and two daughters. His great collection of 420 Arabic, Hebrew, and other oriental manuscripts, many of them choice, was bought from his widow for $800 for the Bodleian, and preserved under his name. Pococke had carefully kept his scholarly correspondence, comprising hundreds of letters and drafts. This was the principal basis for Leonard Twells's life of Pococke prefixed to his edition of the 'Theological Works' (1740), but has vanished without a trace since that date, leaving Twells's laborious but unimaginative and not always reliable biography as the primary source for the details of Pococke's life. Only some letters to Pococke in Arabic and Hebrew were kept by his son Edward (Bodl. Oxf., MS Pococke 432). Several noble trees planted from seeds that Pococke brought back from the east commemorated him long after his death. A cedar in the rectory at Childrey was still flourishing in the nineteenth century. A great plane tree was at the end of the twentieth century in 'Pococke's garden' at Christ Church, and a large fig tree (the 'arbor Pocockiana' engraved by J. Storer in 1806) was producing fruit in the garden of the Hebrew professor in 1911. 


@@@@@


doc= 22431


Pococke, Edward (bap. 1648, d. 1726), oriental scholar, was baptized on 13 October 1648 at Childrey, Berkshire, the eldest child of Edward Pococke (1604-1691), the famous Arabist and rector there, and his wife, Mary Burdet. He lived in Childrey until the Restoration, when his father recovered his prebend at Christ Church and the family returned to Oxford. On 30 May 1661, when still only twelve, he was admitted as a student to Christ Church, where his tutor was John Locke (who became a longstanding friend) and where his father instructed him in Hebrew and Arabic. After graduating BA (3 February 1665) and MA (14 March 1668), he undertook a journey to Leiden, where in 1669 he was greeted by his father's admirers. 
Pococke was ordained in 1672, and embarked on an ecclesiastical career, becoming chaplain to Thomas Herbert (later earl of Pembroke), whom he knew at Christ Church. It was doubtless to him that Pococke owed the prebend of Winterbourne Earls at Salisbury Cathedral which he received on 1 September 1675, and which he exchanged first for that of Durnford (31 August 1677) and then for that of Netherbury in Ecclesia (29 March 1693). At Salisbury he became involved in 1683 in the dispute between the dean, Thomas Pierce, and the bishop, Seth Ward, about the right of presentment to prebends. 
Meanwhile, however, although Pococke had little aptitude or inclination for a scholarly career, his father, as the foremost oriental scholar of his time, was ambitious for him to be his successor in the professorships of Hebrew and Arabic at Oxford. To that end he encouraged him to produce a Latin translation of the Arabic philosophical fable, 'Hayy ibn Yaqzan', by ibn Tufayl. Although the son was the nominal author, the project was conceived and largely executed by the father, who provided the Arabic manuscript, wrote the introduction, 'supervised' the translation and (as a delegate of the university press) arranged for the book's publication as 'Philosophus autodidactus' (1671). The work is of extraordinary interest, and this translation had a profound influence throughout Europe, but did little to advance the reputation of the younger Pococke, since it was obvious to all that his father was the real author. Even worse success attended the younger Pococke's attempt to publish his translation of another Arabic text, a book on the wonders of Egypt by 'Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi. Some ninety-six pages of the text and Latin translation of this were printed (about 1685), but then publication stopped, allegedly because of a disagreement about use of the press between the elder Pococke and John Fell, and the book was never formally published, although copies of what was printed survive. The younger Pococke had completed a respectable translation, but made no further attempt to publish it, supposedly because of his discouragement at failing to be chosen professor of Arabic, and most of the unpublished text is now lost, except for a section appended by Joseph White to his own edition of 'Abd al-Latif (1800). The only surviving translation from the Arabic which he produced unaided, excerpts from a letter printed by Twells in his biography of the elder Pococke (1816 edn, 31-3), is very faulty. 
Pococke was also unfortunate in his first attempt to demonstrate his Hebrew scholarship: he had translated the little treatise 'Vessels of the sanctuary' from Maimonides' 'Mishneh Torah' (book 8.3), but in 1680, discovering that Isaac Abendana had already prepared a translation of it for the press, he abandoned it. When the elder Pococke died in 1691, his son was apparently not even considered for the Hebrew professorship, which went to the nonentity Roger Altham. Pococke had hopes for the Arabic professorship, but when Thomas Hyde, a superior candidate, was chosen instead he abandoned scholarship altogether, except for translating a few Arabic excerpts for the abortive biography of his father which Humfry Smith undertook about 1704. 
In 1692 Pococke was preferred to the rich rectory of Minall (Mildenhall), Wiltshire, and spent the rest of his life there. About 1678 he had married Catherine, daughter of Richard Davy, esquire, of Salisbury. Their eldest son, John, was born in 1679. Pococke died on 27 December 1726, survived by his wife, two daughters, and four sons (out of seven children of the marriage). He was buried in Mildenhall church, where a memorial tablet was erected to him by his son John, who had succeeded him as rector. 


@@@@@


doc= 22432


Pococke, Richard (1704-1765), traveller and Church of Ireland bishop of Ossory, of Elphin, and of Meath, was born at Southampton, the son of Richard Pococke LLB (1660-1710). His grandfather, also Richard Pococke LLB, was rector of Colemore, Hampshire, from November 1662 (or possibly from 1660) to his death in 1719. His father was headmaster of the King Edward VI Free Grammar School, and curate under sequestration of All Saints' Church in Southampton. His mother was Elizabeth, only daughter of the Revd Isaac Milles, rector of Highclere, Hampshire. He was perhaps the Richard, son of parents Richard and Elizabeth, baptized on 24 December 1704 at St Sepulchre, London. Pococke's father died when he was six and he and his mother lived for the following ten years with his maternal grandfather, at whose school at Highclere rectory he was educated. In 1720 his grandfather died and he and his mother moved to Newtown near Newbury, Berkshire. Pococke matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 13 July 1720 and graduated BA in 1725, BCL in 1731, and DCL in 1733. 
Pococke's family connections in the church and his ability to get on with patrons ensured his steady promotion through the church hierarchy. As early as 1725 he was appointed precentor of Lismore Cathedral by his uncle Thomas Milles, bishop of Waterford and Lismore, of whose dioceses Pococke became vicar-general in 1734. It was, however, travel rather than church affairs where Pococke made his mark, his clerical duties leaving him ample time to indulge his enjoyment of discovery. He began his travels with a series of tours to Europe between 1733 and 1736; these he made with his cousin Jeremiah Milles, also a protege of Thomas Milles and like Pococke a clergyman and an antiquary. After their travels the two men continued to correspond and later published joint antiquarian works. On their tours they went beyond the normal confines of the grand tour to visit places such as Prussia, Hanover, and Greece. 
Pococke's next and most ambitious journey, from 1737 to 1740, was to the Near East, then virtually unknown to western travellers. On 29 September 1737 he reached Alexandria, and went to Rosetta, where he visited Cosmas, the Greek patriarch. In December he left for Upper Egypt and on 9 January 1738 reached Dendereh. He visited Thebes but did not go up the Nile beyond Philae. In the Nile valley he briefly met the Danish artist Frederik Ludvig Norden. Pococke reached Cairo in February 1738. He next visited Jerusalem, and bathed in the Dead Sea to test a statement of Pliny's about the specific gravity of the water. He travelled in northern Palestine, and explored Balbec. He also visited Cyprus, Crete, where he climbed Mount Ida, parts of Asia Minor, and Greece. He made a thorough survey of the coast of the Troad on horseback in 1740 and made a good guess at the location of Troy (Hissarlik). 
After leaving Cephalonia, Pococke made an extensive tour of Europe. He landed at Messina in November 1740. He visited Naples and twice climbed Vesuvius. He travelled through Germany and on 19 June 1741 with an armed party explored the Mer de Glace in the valley of Chamonix. The Savoy Alps at this time were neither frequently visited nor safe and it was typical of the indomitable Pococke that he reached the Mer de Glace. As the travellers stood on the ice they drank the health of Admiral Edward Vernon to celebrate his recent victory at Porto Bello in the West Indies. This event (described by P. Martel in 'An Account of the Glaciers or Ice Alps in Savoy', 1744) together with his ascents of Mount Ida and Vesuvius cemented his reputation as a pioneer of mountaineering. 
Pococke returned to England in 1742 and his 'Description of the East' appeared in two volumes in 1743 and 1745. The second volume was dedicated to Philip Dormer Stanhope, fourth earl of Chesterfield, then lord lieutenant of Ireland, to whom Pococke was domestic chaplain. The work was acclaimed at the time, and Gibbon in the 'Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire' described it as of 'superior learning and dignity' (ch. 51, n. 69) though he objected that its author too often confounded what he had seen with what he had heard. Pococke did take some licence in his observations, perhaps most famously in his depiction of the sphinx which he shows with a nose that had been missing for some hundreds of years by the time of his observation. None the less the quality and particularly the earliness of his observations and their record in prose, maps, and diagrams make him one of the most important near eastern travellers, ranking with Frederik Ludvig Norden and Carsten Niebuhr, in stimulating an Egyptian revival in European art and architecture, and recording much that has subsequently been lost. 
In 1744 Pococke was made precentor of Waterford, and in 1745 the dedicatee of volume 2 of his 'Description of the East', Lord Chesterfield, gave him the archdeaconry of Dublin. In 1756 he was appointed to the bishopric of Ossory by Chesterfield's successor, the duke of Devonshire. This appointment increased his income significantly and he began the restoration of the cathedral church of St Canice, then still in a ruinous state after damage inflicted by Cromwell's men. With Sanderson Miller commissioned to design the works, Pococke energetically supervised them. He also undertook other building works to churches throughout his diocese and supported charitable works in the city. In June 1765 Pococke was translated from Ossory to Elphin and in the following month was translated again, to the bishopric of Meath. 
At various periods of his life Pococke made tours of England, Scotland, and Ireland, carefully noting what he saw. His manuscripts were printed only in the latter years of the nineteenth century (Scotland by the Scottish Historical Society in 1887 and England by the Camden Society in 1888). A full account of his Irish journeys appeared only in 1995. The publication and scholarly editing of all of these tours reveal that Pococke was not only a pioneer mountaineer and one of the earliest scholarly explorers in Egypt, but was also among the very earliest systematic explorers of the remoter parts of Britain and Ireland. His English and Welsh tours were made chiefly from 1750 to 1757. His Irish tours were in 1749 and 1752, and his Scottish tours were in 1747, 1750, and 1760. He visited many remote parts of Ireland and reached as far north as the Orkney Islands in Scotland. He travelled on horseback, with two servants and a packhorse following at a respectful distance behind him. He carried with him maps and topographical accounts which he compared, often unfavourably, with the reality he saw. What makes his tours so interesting is that he explored areas very rarely visited and made detailed observations of the people he met and the archaeology, botany, geology, and antiquities that he saw. He was often able to describe these features with scholarly knowledge. His style is terse and plain, not least because some parts of his journal were not polished for publication, but he is evidently genuinely interested in what he sees and -- by comparison with other commentators, particularly those on Ireland -- does not fall into stereotyping. 
Pococke was, like many of his contemporaries, interested in 'improvement', which he thought would convey both economic and moral benefits to the nation. In his tours of Britain and Ireland he showed great interest in trade, manufacture, and farming, and from 1750 was a member of the Dublin Society for Promoting Husbandry and Other Useful Arts in Ireland. While he was bishop of Ossory he founded a linen-weaving school at Lintown. By his will (proved in the prerogative court of Armagh in 1766) Pococke left his property in trust to the Incorporated Society for Promoting English Protestant Schools in Ireland for the purpose of endowing his weaving school at Lintown 'for Papist boys who shall be from 12 to 16 years old... said boys to be bred to the Protestant Religion, and to be apprenticed to the Society for seven years'. The school, like many other similar institutions in Ireland, failed to prosper, however, and in 1839 closed as a manufactory and became a school for protestant boys under the name Pococke College (also school or institution). In 1903 this too closed, and since then Pococke's endowment has been used to support Kilkenny College. 
Pococke, who never married, died unexpectedly of apoplexy on 25 September 1765 at Charleville near Tullamore, Ireland, while on a visitation. He was buried in Bishop Montgomery's tomb at Ardbraccan, seat of the bishop of Meath. 
Pococke was a member of several learned societies including the first Egyptian Society, founded 1741 (he was its secretary in 1742-3), the Physico-Historical Society of Dublin, from 1744, and the Spalding Society, a very early antiquarian society. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 11 February 1741, and contributed several papers to its 'Philosophical Transactions', notably on the Giant's Causeway (1748 and 1753). 
Pococke's collection of Greek, Roman, and English coins and medals was sold in London at auction by Langford on 27-8 May 1766. His collection of antiquities and his minerals and fossils were sold by Langford on 5-6 June 1766. Pococke left his manuscripts to the British Museum, although some were not handed over immediately after his death and were bought by the British Museum in 1843 and 1859. 
Pococke was described by Mrs Delany as 'the 'dullest man' that 'ever travelled': but he is a 'good man'' (letter of 2 Jan 1761, quoted in Quane, 41). Richard Cumberland said of him: 'having given the world a full detail of his researches in Egypt, he seemed to hold himself excused from saying anything more about it' and accused him of 'obdurate taciturnity' ('Memoirs', quoted in Quane, 41). Others, however, found him a pleasant enough companion and he was evidently able to get on with both his influential relations and patrons and the common people he met on the road. Pococke was one of the foremost travellers of his day and, though it has taken some 150 years for all the records of his journeys to be published, his accounts are a valuable and in many cases unique record of the areas he visited. 


@@@@@


doc= 22433


Poe, Leonard (d. 1631), physician, was the son of James Poe and grandson of Richard Poe, of Poesfeld, Derbyshire. The Poes were substantial yeomen from Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire and do not appear to have originated in the Rhenish palatinate, as some have suggested. Leonard Poe, identified in the annals of the Royal College of Physicians as a deacon of Lincoln, took up medicine after being sequestered as a puritan. Despite his background, Poe was licensed by the office of the archbishop of Canterbury to practise medicine, which he did in London beginning in 1587. 
From 1589 Poe made numerous appearances before the College of Physicians for unlicensed practice and malpractice. Examinations at the college revealed that he knew neither Greek nor Latin and had no familiarity with academic medicine. This lack of formal knowledge did not prevent him, however, from winning the confidence of a fashionable clientele, or of many others who readily became his patients. Chief among these was the earl of Essex, whose service Poe was in, in 1590. Essex also supported him before the college in 1592, 1594, and 1595, finally winning from it, on 13 July 1596, a restricted medical licence for Poe. He was thereby permitted to treat venereal, cutaneous, and calculous diseases, gout, and simple tertian ague, though he was required to call for the assistance of a member of the college when treating other fevers and severe diseases. Even though he carried a letter of protection signed by seven members of the privy council, including Essex, Poe's troubles with the college continued and reached a head on 30 June 1598, when some younger fellows, including Thomas Moundeford and William Paddy, secured orders for his imprisonment and the revocation of his licence. But once again a settlement was agreed, with the compromise of all parties. 
Essex's death in 1601 did not end Poe's aristocratic patronage. On 11 December 1606, at the suggestion of the earls of Suffolk, Northampton, and Salisbury, all restrictions on his licence were removed. On 12 January 1609 he was made ordinary physician of the king's household, and on 7 July of the same year the persistent influence of his aristocratic patrons, who now also included the earl of Worcester, led to his election as fellow of the College of Physicians. In April 1612 he was one of three physicians in attendance on Lord Treasurer Salisbury, and was present at his death on 24 May. Salisbury's high regard for Poe, whose hand he clasped as he died, increased Poe's respectability. He obtained his MD from Cambridge University by mandate in 1615. 
Poe's tenure at the college was calm throughout. In 1616 he gave what was called a 'splendid feast' at the college, for the fellows and their wives. On 6 June 1625 he attended the death of Orlando Gibbons, the composer, and carried out the post-mortem. In 1629 he was referred to as 'one of her Majesty's doctors in physic for the most part residing at Court'. He died in the parish of Christ Church, in the City of London, on 4 April 1631; his will of the same year (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/159, sig. 37) identified him as a physician-in-ordinary to Charles I. 
Poe was married to Dionisia Boone of Sussex; they had three sons and six daughters. His eldest son, Leonard, suffered from mental illness. His youngest son, Theophilus, who matriculated at Oxford in 1624, was considered a wastrel by his father. His second son, James Poe, retained his trust and was made sole executor of his will. One of the doctor's daughters, Susanna, married the puritan physician John Bastwick, and carried away her husband's ears in 1637, after his mutilation on the orders of the court of Star Chamber. Her younger sister, Judith, also married a physician, Thomas Grent, a fellow of the College of Physicians, who doubtless benefited from his father-in-law's position to become physician-in-ordinary to James I. 


@@@@@


doc= 22434


Poer, Ranulf (d. 1182), administrator, is first recorded in 1166, as a subtenant of William (II) de Briouze's half of the honour of Barnstaple, Devon. Nothing is known of his family. That on 8 December 1174 he witnessed the sealing of the treaty of Falaise, between Henry II and William the Lion, king of Scots, at Valognes in Normandy, may indicate that he was by now serving the Briouze family in the Welsh marches, where it was very powerful, and had crossed to Normandy with some of the Welsh troops put at the king's disposal by their native rulers. He certainly continued to be associated with the Briouzes; in 1175 he is recorded as having paid $63 into the king's chamber on behalf of William de Briouze, sheriff of Herefordshire (that is, William (II) de Briouze), and he was closely associated with the act of treachery perpetrated on Easter eve in that year, when a number of Welsh chieftains were lured to Abergavenny and massacred there. The Welsh chroniclers blamed William (III) de Briouze, but Gerald of Wales describes Poer as the immediate contriver of the crime, though he attributes ultimate responsibility to the king. By Michaelmas 1175 Poer was sheriff of Herefordshire, an office he retained until 1182. In that year, according to Gerald, the Welsh of Gwent treacherously seized Abergavenny Castle. The English response, led by Poer, commanding the Herefordshire levies, was to erect a castle at Dingestow, on the River Trothy west of Monmouth, presumably to defend the approaches to that town. But a sudden attack by the Welsh routed the English, many of whom were killed. Ranulf Poer was among the slain, having made confession to a priest before he died. He left heirs, of whom nothing can be said except that they were required to pay off his debts from his shrievalty, a process never completed. 


@@@@@


doc= 22435


Poer, Robert (d. 1178?), soldier and administrator, was the son of Ralph Poer, who held lands in the de Courcy honour of Stogursey, Somerset. He had sons, Robert ['see below'] and John, and a brother, William. William Poer until 1177, and then Robert, administered the de Courcy honour during the minority of William de Courcy (1171-89). A Robert Poer is found continuously in royal service in England between 1166 and 1189; he accounted for lands in Yorkshire, 1166-7, and answered for the forest of Galtres (in Yorkshire) from 1169 to 1189. He accompanied Henry II to Ireland in 1171-2, where he witnessed Henry's charter in favour of the priory of All Hallows, Dublin, and in 1174 he was in charge of Brabantine mercenaries who were being sent back to the continent from England. In 1176 he returned to Ireland in royal service as one of four knights sent to summon back to England Raymond Fitzgerald, who, according to Gerald of Wales, was accused of acting like a Brabantine. The death in the same year of Richard de Clare (Strongbow) necessitated arrangements for the administration by the crown of the lordship of Leinster during the minority of Strongbow's heir. At the Council of Oxford, 1177, Robert (styled 'marshal' by Roger of Howden, but not on the pipe rolls) was appointed 'custos' of Waterford and the adjoining territory as far as Lismore as well as Ossory. He was one of those royal officials whom Gerald of Wales criticized and held responsible for the abandonment through cowardice of the castle of Leighlin. Although there has been much uncertainty on the point, it is likely that an entry in the unpublished eighteenth-century compilation known as the Dublin annals of Inisfallen (Trinity College, Dublin, MS H.I.18), the sources of which have not yet been traced, recording the death of Robert Poer in 1178 while on an expedition against the O'Tooles in north Leinster, is correct. 
Poer was succeeded by his son 
Other members of the family involved in Ireland included 


@@@@@


doc= 22436


Poer, Roger (d. 1188), soldier, was a contemporary and relative of Robert Poer (d. 1178?) although the precise relationship has not been established. He is first mentioned in Ireland in 1177 when, according to Gerald of Wales, he fought as an unbearded youth alongside John de Courcy at the invasion of Ulster. By contrast with his portrayal of Robert Poer, Gerald's assessment of Roger is favourable, recording that he distinguished himself in Osraige and as commander of the garrison of Leighlin under Hugh de Lacy up to the time of his treacherous murder while still a young man by Irishmen in Osraige in 1188. The cost of hiring a ship to enable Roger Poer to cross into Ireland is accounted for in 1186-7. In a charter issued by John de Courcy he is accorded the title of marshal. He was enfeoffed with lands in Ely by Theobald Walter, and also held lands in Meath in the tenement of Donaghpatrick. He occurs alongside Robert Poer as a witness to a number of charters granted in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 22437


Poer, Walter (fl. 1200-1237), administrator and justice, was of unknown parentage, but seems to have come from Worcestershire. Between 1201 and 1212 he served as under-sheriff for the prominent curialist William (I) de Cantilupe in Warwickshire and Leicestershire, and Herefordshire and Worcestershire. It was in association with Cantilupe, Stephen of Seagrave, and William of Ardern that he was sent in February 1215 to three of these counties by King John, apparently in a bid to secure support. In 1222 he became sheriff of Devon, retaining custody of the county until 1224. In 1225 he acted as one of the collectors of the fifteenth in Worcestershire, and in 1227 he was a junior justice on part of an eyre circuit led by Stephen of Seagrave in Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, and Oxfordshire. His career does not seem to have brought him great profit, for in 1234 his Worcestershire lands were in the hands of a Jewish creditor. He is last mentioned in 1237 when vouched to warranty in a Worcestershire 'quo warranto' suit. 


@@@@@


doc= 22438


Pogson, Norman Robert (1829-1891), astronomer, was born in Nottingham on 23 March 1829. His father, George Owen Pogson, hosiery and lace manufacturer, had him educated privately, intending that he should go into commerce, but at the age of sixteen Pogson went to London to pursue a career in science. He subsisted for four years by teaching mathematics while learning astronomy from his friend and townsman John Hind, observer at George Bishop's Regent's Park observatory. Although on a drudge's stipend, on 1 January 1850 Pogson married Elizabeth Jane (1829-1869), the daughter of Charles Ambrose, a teacher in the same parish of St Pancras -- so perhaps Pogson's employer. Their first child, Norman Everard Pogson, was born early in 1851. 
In the summer of 1850 Pogson was appointed Hind's assistant, to help make ecliptic charts, and in October 1851 he joined the Radcliffe Observatory, Oxford, as Manuel Johnson's second assistant. He borrowed from John Lee an unwieldy 3.75 inch aperture refracting telescope, and in his leisure hours, having by 1858 constructed seven charts extending to magnitude 12, discovered three minor planets (for the discovery of Isis in 1856 he was awarded the Lalande medal) and ten variable stars. In 1854 he was seconded to help the astronomer royal, George Airy, in the Harton colliery experiments to determine the density of the earth. Airy was impressed by his efficiency and gentlemanly manner. 
Pogson was one of the earliest systematic observers of variable stars. This led to his defining the photometric scale, for which he remains best known. He estimated the relative brightness of a variable star in decimal tenths of a magnitude (unit of light). He then needed a ratio between the apparent magnitude of each star and the next above or below, and believed that it was logarithmically proportional to the brightness. Needing a precise scale extending to faint stars, in 1856 he proposed that a difference of five magnitudes should correspond exactly to a brightness ratio of 100 to 1. This remained a footnote to two of his papers until used in the 1870s by Harvard and Oxford astronomers. The Pogson scale was adopted internationally in 1906. 
In January 1859 Pogson became director of Lee's Hartwell observatory, equipped with its excellent 5.9 inch equatorial. Variable stars were the priority, and Lee would publish Pogson's charts. In 1860 Pogson independently discovered a nova, T Scorpio, and in two years sent fourteen papers to the Royal Astronomical Society (RAS) and several to the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS). 
In February 1860 the Pogsons had their sixth child. Pogson was 'tormented by justly clamorous creditors', and an advance by Lee only delayed 'approaching ruin' (Pogson to Lee, 18 May 1860, LPL, Lee MSS, fol. 26). Elected a fellow of the RAS, he could not afford the fee. The only hope was the vacant Radcliffe observership worth $500, but Lee withheld a testimonial. Pogson's first letter seeking support from Sir John Herschel was obsequious; his third was a tactless criticism of the recently deceased Manuel Johnson; his fifth was a sweeping critique of Lee. In July, Airy's assistant Robert Main was appointed, and Pogson's first creditor moved to sue. That month the government astronomer in Madras resigned because the salary -- equivalent to $800 -- was inadequate for a family man and the observatory had become dilapidated. Unaware of these drawbacks, on 24 September Pogson asked Airy to recommend him. Pogson mentioned Madras to Lee as financial succour, but 'a great risk to my wife and certain death to the poor children' (Pogson to Lee, 27 Sept 1860, ibid., fol. 49). Lee, believing him unbusinesslike, ignored the mute plea. In October Pogson was appointed. In January 1861 Airy's 'grateful humble protege' (CUL, RGO 6.146.7, 217) sailed with his wife, two daughters, and infant son, leaving the three elder boys with their grandparents and Pogson's sister Mary Anne in Manchester. 
At Madras, Pogson aspired to be the Argelander of the south by making a southern sky catalogue. He needed a good equatorial telescope, but his imprecise negotiations with London craftsmen and officials created a mess for Airy and waste and annoyance to the Madras government. The climate was exhausting, there was great difficulty with the meridian circle, everything rotted, and official duties left him 'half beside myself' (CUL, RGO 6.147.4, 119). In 1865 Airy lent him a good refractor. 
Between 1862 and 1887 Pogson's Indian first assistant, C. Ragoonatha Charry, made most of the 51,101 observations of 5303 stars for the catalogue, and from 1872 Pogson had an excellent second assistant, L. Moghansing. But the drought and famine of 1876-7 created heavy demands for meteorology, delaying publication of the astronomical observations for 1862 to 1870 until 1887-90. 
Pogson's second aim was to complete an elaborate atlas for each of 134 variable stars to magnitude 12 in both hemispheres. He worked on this from 1853 until 1882, and at Madras discovered five more minor planets, a comet (1872), and eight variable stars by 1877. The project was 'too vast' for one man (Hagen, 60), but his 'invaluable' (Turner, 1904) observations of thirty-one variables were published in 1908. 
Pogson published more than fifty papers in 'Monthly Notices' and other periodicals, as well as reports to the government and the BAAS. In 1868, at Masulipatam, using a spectroscope during the eclipse, he was the first to observe the bright line spectrum of the corona; he also observed hydrogen in the prominences. At the end of an annular eclipse in June 1872 he confirmed the 1870 discovery of a reversing layer in the solar atmosphere by making a tangential spectroscopic observation. But he was in an impossible position. Head of a government department, but reduced to a 'fifth-rate place' (Tennant, 1891), Pogson had no prospects, and could not afford a home leave. His pleas for a European assistant were ignored. In 1866 Pogson fell ill with typhoid. His eldest son, Norman, arrived in April 1869 and assisted for sixteen months without salary. Meanwhile his 'inestimable and intensely loved' wife, Elizabeth, died on 5 November 1869, aged forty, leaving eleven children (CUL, RGO 6.150, 22). Then his son Norman died in 1874. '[D]epressed beyond all hope... shabbily treated' (Pogson to Stewart, 30 June 1877, CUL, RGO 6.152, 192), in 1878 Pogson sought the vacant Radcliffe observership, which presented a rare opportunity. To Airy he exaggerated the state of his catalogue reductions and variable star atlas. But Oxford's professor of astronomy, Charles Pritchard, influenced against him. Airy damned him with faint praise, and ensured that Edward Stone at the Cape, his Cambridge-educated former assistant, was appointed. 
On 25 October 1883 Pogson married Edith Louisa Stopford, the daughter of a colonel; they had three children, of whom one died in infancy. Pogson was in poor health from early 1889, and seriously ill by early May 1891; for the transit of Mercury that month he roused himself, and his wife -- who had a salary as assistant to the astronomer -- observed with the 8 inch refractor. Pogson died at the observatory on 23 June 1891. Edith resigned a month later. Friends subscribed for a memorial plaque in Madras Cathedral, and to educate Pogson's youngest son, aged six. 
Pogson's exceptional observing skills and financial need led him to overambitious plans. His successor found the records in perfect order, the meridian observations good, but calculations by the Indian computers completely unreliable. In the 1880s photography made commonplace the discoveries on which Pogson prided himself. He discovered that lack of Cambridge mathematics precluded directing a British public observatory, but did not appreciate the effect of his lack of management skills and tact. 




@@@@@


doc= 22439


Poingdestre, Jean (1609-1691), lieutenant-bailiff of Jersey and historian, was born in 1609 at Swan Farm near Grainville in the parish of St Saviour, Jersey, where he was baptized on 16 April, the second son of Edouard Poingdestre or Poindexter of the fief es Poingdestre and his wife, Pauline Ahier. He entered Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1626, graduated BA in 1629, and proceeded MA in 1633. He was a gentleman commoner of Exeter College, Oxford, from October 1635 until November 1636, and in August 1636 was admitted as a fellow on the Jersey foundation. 
Poingdestre was ordained deacon at York in 1641, but on the outbreak of the civil war, returned to Jersey. A royalist, he was with Sir Philippe de Carteret in Elizabeth Castle during the siege in 1643. Expelled from his college fellowship in 1648, he was with Sir George Carteret in that same castle when the parliamentary forces reoccupied the island in 1651, after which occupation he helped to draw up the conditions of surrender. In the later 1650s he lived in Jersey under parliamentary rule, and married in 1659 Anne Hamptonne, daughter and coheir of Laurens Hamptonne, vicomte of Jersey. They had one son and one daughter. 
At the Restoration, Poingdestre returned to Oxford for a time, but he was sworn in as a jurat of the royal court of Jersey on 27 May 1668, by virtue of a letter of the king prescribing that he should be elected. His election as jurat was necessary for his appointment as lieutenant-bailiff. He took the oath for this latter office on 21 January 1669 and served until his resignation on 15 June 1676. 
Poingdestre was an accomplished classical scholar but his publications related to local law and history. His pioneering and original history of Jersey, 'Caesarea, or, A Discourse of the Island of Jersey', written in 1682 and presented by the author to James II, provided much material for Philip Falle's important work 'An Account of the Isle of Jersey' (1694). Poingdestre's other notable works are three legal treatises written in French: 'Les commentaires sur l'ancienne coutume de Normandie', 'Les lois et coutumes de l'ile de Jersey', and 'Remarques et animadversions sur la nouvelle coutume de Normandie'. They are considered by many to be superior to the works of Philippe Le Geyt (1635-1716), Poingdestre's successor as lieutenant-bailiff who also wrote on local law, but have been less widely known and less influential because the first two were not published until the early twentieth century and the third remains unpublished. In 1685 Poingdestre was one of the committee that was commissioned to draw up an abstract of the charters granted by various monarchs to the people of Jersey, a work known as 'Les privileges de l'ile'. 
Poingdestre died on 2 September 1691 at St Saviour, Jersey, and was buried two days later in the church of St Saviour, where a monument to him was erected. 


@@@@@


doc= 22440


Pointer, John (bap. 1668, d. 1754), antiquary, was born at Alkerton, Oxfordshire, and baptized on 31 March 1668. He was the son of John Pointer (1630/31-1710), rector of Alkerton, and his wife, Elizabeth Hobell (1644?-1709), daughter of John Hobell, a London merchant. He was educated at Banbury grammar school and at Preston Capes School, Northamptonshire, after which he matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, on 24 January 1687. He graduated BA in 1691 and MA in 1694. Ordained deacon on 24 December 1693 and priest on 23 September 1694, he was chaplain of his college from 1693 to 1732. On 27 September 1694 he was instituted rector of Slapton, Northamptonshire. 
Pointer produced a variety of antiquarian studies and collections and was known also as a collector of natural and antiquarian objects. His circle of friends included antiquaries such as White Kennett, bishop of Peterborough, William Musgrave, and John Morton. In 1713 he became involved in a lively antiquarian debate with his successful first work, 'An Account of a Roman Pavement Lately Found at Stunsfield in Oxford-Shire', in which he attacked and poked fun at the interpretation of the pavement published by the Oxford antiquary Thomas Hearne in 1712. Pointer's conclusions about the iconography of Bacchus, the god depicted on the pavement, were correct and represented the opinion of the majority. Yet he felt the need to defend his work in an advertisement in the 'Evening Post' of 1720. Hearne dismissed, not without some personal bitterness, most of Pointer's subsequent publications as of little importance. Pointer's critical judgement, however, is still accepted by commentators today. 
In 1714 Pointer published his 'Chronological History of England', a two-volume historical compilation which was particularly comprehensive in its description of events from 1660 until the death of Queen Anne. Six supplements, each containing the incidents of a year, and the last two published under the name Mr Brockwel, carried it on to the close of July 1720. According to Hearne: 'John Poynter hath taken his silly Book call'd A Chronological History of Engl. from a Book call'd the Historian's Guide (wch he hath printed verbatim,) & from Sr. Geo. Wharton's Almanacks & other Pieces, & from some silly, trivial Pieces published since. ('Remarks and Collections', 4.401)' Pointer also published a variety of collections and guidebooks, among them 'Miscellanea in usum juventutis academicae' (1718) and 'A Rational Account of the Weather' (1723; enlarged edn, 1738). In 1724 he returned to the study of Roman Britain with 'Britannia Romana, or, Roman Antiquities in Britain, viz., Coins, Camps, and Publick Roads'. In 1729 he applied unsuccessfully for the vacant position of keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, thinking of donating his collection of antiquities and curiosities to that institution. In 1732 he was removed from his chaplaincy at Merton for, according to Hearne, committing sodomy. In 1738 Pointer sent Richard Rawlinson a 'Vindication' of his grandfather John Pointer, canon of Christ Church (MS Rawl. J., fol. 4, 224-8), wishing Rawlinson to correct Anthony Wood's aspersions in his planned continuation of Wood's 'Athenae Oxonienses'. 
In 1743 Pointer published 'Britannia Triumphans, or, An Historical Account of Some of the Most Signal Naval Victories Obtained by the English over the Spaniards', and finally, in 1749, 'Oxoniensis academia, or, The Antiquities and Curiosities of the University of Oxford'. Like John Ayliffe's 'Ancient and Present State of the University of Oxford' (1714), this work was largely derivative, though not without new details of some interest. In it Pointer identified the author of the account of the Bodleian Library in Ayliffe's book as John Hudson, Bodley's librarian. He died, unmarried, on 16 January 1754 in the house of his niece, Mrs Bradborne, of Chesterton in Worfield, Shropshire. He was buried in the chancel of Worfield parish church on 19 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 22441


Polack, Joel Samuel (1807-1882), trader and author, was born in London on 28 March 1807, the son of Solomon Polack, painter and engraver, and his wife, Sarah. He had at least one brother and two sisters. The family were Jews who had migrated from the Netherlands to England. In early life he appears to have travelled both in Europe and America and to have done some work as an artist. He then served in the War Office in South Africa and Mauritius, in the commissariat and ordnance departments. In 1831 he emigrated via Australia to New Zealand. He lived for a year at Hokianga as a trader and traveller, living with a Maori woman. In 1832 or 1833 he moved to the Bay of Islands where he opened a ship-chandler's store in connection with a broker's business at Sydney. He paid long visits to Sydney, for four or five months at a time, and travelled much about New Zealand. He prospered with his flax trading, timber, and general produce businesses. He learned the Maori language and purchased from the Maori about 1100 acres of land. He built a house which he called Parramatta, and developed his land by, among other things, building on it the country's first brewery in 1835. In May 1837 he returned to London. Next year he was a prominent witness before the select committee of the House of Lords on New Zealand, urging the British government to assume full colonial responsibility over it. His evidence was questioned in 'The Times' and Polack brought an action against the paper; on 2 July 1839 he secured a verdict, with $100 damages. 
In 1838 Polack published 'New Zealand: a Narrative of Travels and Adventures', on the strength of which he was elected to the newly formed Colonial Society of London. A more ambitious work, 'Manners and Customs of the New Zealanders', was published in London in 1840 (2 vols.). The book was intended for European emigrants, but is an early and thoughtful account of Maori society. In it he advocated colonization which he claimed would benefit the Maori, unlike the destructive unorganized settlement. The book was well illustrated by Polack himself. 
In 1842 Polack returned to New Zealand, having auctioned off some of his land in a public sale. After the treaty of Waitangi, however, Polack found himself under scrutiny by the new land claims commissioners and then lost all his household goods and his home in the war of 1845. He moved to Auckland where he continued to trade and speculate in land. 
Polack went in 1850 to the United States and settled in San Francisco, where he married Mary, the widow of William Hart, both of whom had been settlers in New Zealand. He died in San Francisco on 17 April 1882. He was buried in Laurel Hill cemetery and was later, in 1946, moved to lie beside his wife in Cypress Lawn cemetery, Colma, San Francisco. Polack's books, together with his unpublished letters, give an usually good and early account of life in New Zealand. 


@@@@@


doc= 22442


Polding, John Bede (1794-1877), Roman Catholic archbishop of Sydney, was born in Liverpool on 18 November 1794; his father was a German Catholic whose family name had been Anglicized from Polten or Poulten, and his mother, Elizabeth, 'nee' Brewer, was of the small community of English recusants. Orphaned by the age of eight he was placed in the hands of the Benedictine community, first with nuns near Liverpool and then at St Gregory's Benedictine College at Acton Burnell, near Shrewsbury, Shropshire. A lively and affectionate boy, his background gave him a European Catholic disposition and outlook, but also a strong consciousness of being English. From childhood his imagination was caught by tales of the convicts of Botany Bay, whom he determined to help. 
Polding entered the Benedictine order at Acton Burnell on 15 July 1811, and transferred with them in 1814 to Downside, near Bath, where he was ordained priest on 4 March 1819. There he remained for twenty years, becoming a mainstay of both monastery and school: he had charm, versatility, zeal, a strong interest in individuals, and even a liking for cricket. However, his wish to remedy Australia's spiritual destitution increased: Australia was already, from 1818, a Benedictine responsibility through the vicariate of Mauritius, and, after various difficulties, in 1834 Polding was appointed bishop and vicar apostolic of New Holland and Van Diemen's Land with adjacent islands. He arrived in Sydney on 13 September 1835 with one priest and five students. 
New South Wales in 1835 was a penal colony with a population of 71,000, about 40 per cent of whom were convicts; there were more than 20,000 Catholics, with eight priests. Polding responded as a dedicated missionary of prodigious energy, travelling everywhere on horseback throughout his diocese. This redemptive role took him away in mind and time from his pressing duties as bishop, which were to build up the essential structures of a new church growing apace in size and complexity in a rapidly developing society. In this growth Polding faced predictable obstacles from the sheer size and extent of his pioneering responsibilities, and from sectarian anti-Catholicism (even though the government's religious even-handedness worked in Catholicism's favour). But his unique difficulties lay within his own church. His ambition was to make English Benedictine monasticism the form and focus of Australian Catholic life, but Polding had neither the resources nor the personnel to pursue his dream properly. His attempts increasingly led to frustration, friction, failure, and alienation within his own communion, which was overwhelmingly Irish. Irish priests strenuously politicked in Dublin and Rome to wrest control of the church from English Benedictine governance, and they gradually succeeded in limiting Polding's power. Polding was also confronted by lay and clerical rebels at odds with his hierarchical style. Such challenges made his episcopate eventful and tumultuous. 
On his arrival in Sydney, Polding faced a hostile Anglicanism, but a government determined on equality of denominational treatment. His first priority was the provision of more priests, and in 1836 he dispatched his vicar-general, William Ullathorne, to recruit them. He himself followed in 1840. Only Irish priests responded to his call, strengthening Irish influence in Australia and effectively thwarting Polding's Benedictine plans, though he refused to face realities which were becoming increasingly obvious to Rome. However, on 5 April 1842 Rome approved the creation of an Australian hierarchy with Polding as metropolitan and archbishop of Sydney, an action which provoked a short-lived sectarian explosion among Sydney's Anglicans. 
Polding's long absence (1840-44) allowed dissident elements to entrench themselves within his church. On his return, his authority as metropolitan was called upon to deal with constant internal disputes as far afield as Western Australia. These absorbed vast amounts of his energy and time; for instance, he spent eight months of 1852 in Perth. To assist him in running his own archdiocese, in 1844 he appointed the Benedictine Henry Gregory as vicar-general. It was a disastrous choice. Gregory was devoted to Polding but was an autocrat, bringing all Polding's policies and plans into contention and disrepute. In 1860 he was recalled to England, against Polding's will. Polding's first coadjutor, Henry Davis, appointed in 1848, was an excellent choice, but he died in 1854; his next coadjutor, appointed in 1873 against Irish wishes, was the English Benedictine Roger Bede Vaughan. 
Polding's intellectual spirituality was beyond the comprehension of his ordinary priests and people and he was often physically away from them, during long absences from his archdiocese, in Europe, or elsewhere in Australia. This allowed his critics to coalesce against him, particularly through the 'Freeman's Journal', their mouthpiece from 1850. Polding increasingly harboured a sense of threat and failure, perhaps symbolized by the destruction by fire on 29 June 1869 of his mother church, St Mary's Cathedral. His enemies included those opposed to his policies and also those critical of his personal shortcomings: he was no administrator or church politician, and an idealist and dreamer rather than a realist. Above all he was defeated (though never abandoning effort or hope) by the sheer enormity of the problems that confronted him -- vast, complex, Australia-wide -- which were beyond the capacity of any individual to resolve. 
On 7 March 1877 Polding, then eighty-two, took to his bed unwell. A procession of public figures called to visit. His long silver hair trailing to his shoulders, his longevity, and above all his personal sanctity and total devotion to the service of religion had made him a legend in life. He died on 16 March 1877 at the Sacred Heart presbytery, Darlinghurst, Sydney, and was buried at Petersham cemetery. He was reinterred in the rebuilt St Mary's Cathedral on 17 March 1901. 


@@@@@


doc= 22443


Pole, Arthur (1531/2-1570?), conspirator, was the eldest son of Sir Geoffrey Pole (d. 1558) of Lordington, Sussex, and Constance (died in or after 1570), eldest daughter and coheir of Sir Edmund Packenham of Sussex. Geoffrey Pole was the youngest son of Sir Richard Pole, cousin of the half-blood to Henry VII, and Margaret Pole, 'nee' Plantagenet, countess of Salisbury, daughter of George, duke of Clarence, the senior brother of Edward IV. Arthur was probably brought up at Lordington; Gentian Hervet of Orleans, who had studied with Erasmus and was a pupil of Thomas Lupset, was appointed his tutor. As grandson of the countess of Salisbury, one of the wealthiest peers in England, his future looked favourable. However, the Pole family's loyalty to the Catholic faith led to their fall in 1538, and the countess and her eldest son, Henry, Lord Montague, were executed in 1541 and 1538 respectively. Geoffrey Pole, whose evidence had been used to condemn his family, suffered a mental breakdown and fled from England without licence in 1548. At some point Arthur was imprisoned, but by December 1552 he had been taken into the service of John Dudley, duke of Northumberland. 
At the accession of Queen Mary, Geoffrey Pole and his brother Reginald, who was appointed archbishop of Canterbury in 1556, returned to England. Possibly as a result of Geoffrey's role in his family's fall and Arthur's period of service with Northumberland, they did not enjoy any particular favour during Mary's reign. After Reginald's death Arthur complained that relations between him and his uncle had been strained and he had not received any bequests in his will. Following Elizabeth's accession Arthur Pole wrote offering to serve her, but his offer was not accepted and in April 1561 he was imprisoned in the Fleet for hearing the mass. Among others imprisoned was Pole's close friend Edward Hastings, Lord Loughborough. Connected to Pole by marriage, Loughborough was the brother of Francis Hastings, second earl of Huntingdon, the husband of Catherine Pole, eldest daughter of Henry, Lord Montague. According to Alvaro de Quadra, the Spanish ambassador, Loughborough treated Pole as his son and allowed him to reside in his house, probably at Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire. Pole also enjoyed a connection with Thomas Percy, seventh earl of Northumberland, and at some point before September 1562 had married Northumberland's sister. 
In September 1562 Quadra reported that the third earl of Huntingdon was among those named as a possible successor to Elizabeth I. Huntingdon was the great-great-grandson of the duke of Clarence, twice in the female line, while Pole was the great-grandson once in the female line. It was possibly this that prompted Quadra to assert that, although Pole's 'claim is not worth much' ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 259, no. 184), he was one degree nearer the crown than Huntingdon. This, along with his loyalty to the Catholic faith and lack of prospects under Elizabeth, prompted Pole to plot to leave the realm and enter the service of either Spain or France. Informed that the duke of Guise would never support his claim to the throne in preference to that of Mary, queen of Scots, Pole hoped to receive the dukedom of Clarence should he help Mary gain the English throne. There was even a rumour that the duke of Guise intended to marry Pole to Mary. 
Actively supporting Pole in these schemes was his brother-in-law Anthony Fortescue, who was married to Arthur's eldest sister, Catherine. Fortescue had been comptroller of Reginald Pole's household, and his family had enjoyed an association with the Pole family for many years. In July 1562 Fortescue had approached Quadra asking for letters of recommendation to the duchess of Parma, and by September Pole had sent word to Quadra, again asking for a letter of recommendation and help to leave England. Described by Quadra as 'turbulent and not very prudent, but spirited and daring', he nevertheless felt that if Pole 'obtained important support he could be very troublesome' ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 259, no. 184). At the same time Fortescue approached the French ambassador who, like Quadra, refused to help them while they remained in England. 
In light of the succession issue the English authorities took a serious view of such plots, and in October 1562 Pole, his brothers Edmund and Geoffrey, and Fortescue were arrested as they prepared to take ship to France. Geoffrey and Fortescue were eventually released but Arthur and Edmund remained in the Tower until their deaths, probably in 1570; both are omitted from their mother's will that year, which describes Thomas as her eldest son. Both brothers carved inscriptions at the Tower. The Salt Tower contains their names, while in the Beauchamp Tower, Arthur's inscription reads: 'Deo Servire / Penitentiam Inire / Fato Obedire / Regnare Est / A Poole / 1564 / IHS' ('To be subject to God, to enter upon penance, to be obedient to fate, is to reign, A Poole, 1564, Jesus'). A further inscription was recorded by the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments in the 1930s: 'IHS/a passage perillus maketh a port pleasant/ Ao 1568, Arthur Poole, Ao sue 37'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22444


Pole, Sir Charles Morice (1757-1830), naval officer and politician, born on 18 January 1757, was the second of five children and the second son of Reginald Pole (died 1767) of Stoke Damerell, Devon, and his second wife, Anne, daughter of John Francis Buller of Morval, Cornwall, and Caroline Hunter. He was the great-grandson of Sir John Pole, third baronet, of Shute, Devon, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir William Morice. 
Pole was educated at Plympton grammar school and on 16 January 1770 entered the Royal Naval Academy at Portsmouth Dockyard. This education, and his choice of professional career, may reflect the influence of his uncle, Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Watson. Two years later Pole was appointed to the 'Thames' (32 guns) under Captain William Locker. In December 1773 he was moved to the 'Salisbury' (50 guns), going to the East Indies with the broad pennant of Commodore Sir Edward Hughes, by whom he was promoted lieutenant in the 'Seahorse' (24 guns) on 26 June 1777. In the following year he was moved to the 'Ripon' (60 guns), and took part in Sir Edward Vernon's encounter with M. Tronjoly before Pondicherry on 9 August. On 25 October 1778 Pole was promoted to command the sloop 'Cormorant' (18 guns) and in her he returned to England with Vernon's dispatches. He arrived on 12 March 1779, his promotion was confirmed on 18 March, and on 22 March he was advanced to post rank and appointed captain of the 'Britannia' (100 guns), flying the flag of Rear-Admiral George Darby. 
On 27 March 1781 Pole was appointed to the 'Success' (32 guns). In her, a year later, he was sent to Gibraltar in charge of the hired armed storeship 'Vernon'. Early on 16 March 1782, off Cape Spartel, he sighted and immediately attacked the Spanish 'Santa Catalina' (34 guns). He was strongly supported by the 'Vernon' and about 8.20 a.m. the 'Santa Catalina' struck, her hull 'like a sieve, the shot going through both sides' (Clowes, 4.79). The necessary repairs were partially complete when, on 18 March, other warships were sighted, and rather than let her fall into enemy hands Pole set her on fire. Too late he found them to be the British frigates 'Apollo' (32 guns) and 'Cerberus' (28 guns) with a convoy. 
The influence Pole's family could exert had already been illustrated by his advantageous placements, rapid promotion, and his employment during the decade of peace from 1783. Between 1783 and 1786 he commanded the guardship 'Crown' (64 guns), itself a mark of Admiralty favour, and on 30 August 1786 he was appointed to the 'Scipio' (64 guns) in the build up to the so-called 'Dutch armament'. During the Spanish armament of 1790 Pole was appointed, on 10 May, to command the 'Melampus' (36 guns), stationed off Brest, and during the following year he was in the 'Illustrious' (74 guns). On 8 June 1792 he married Henrietta (died after 1830), third daughter of John Goddard, a Rotterdam merchant, of Woodford Hall, Essex, and niece to the wealthy merchant Henry Hope of Amsterdam. The couple had two daughters. 
Three weeks after war was declared (20 February 1793) Pole was in the 'Colossus' (74 guns). In her he went to the Mediterranean to become part of Lord Hood's fleet in taking Toulon, and he returned to England in 1794 to join the Channel Fleet under Lord Howe. The 'Colossus' formed part of Rear-Admiral Montagu's squadron, ordered by Howe to cruise, looking for the French grain convoy from America under Vanstabel, but missing both Vanstabel and Howe through lack of intelligence. He therefore did not take part in the action on 1 June 1794, but saw the remains of the French fleet returning to Brest. Outnumbered, Montagu withdrew, reaching Cawsand Bay on 12 June. 
On 1 June 1795 Pole was promoted rear-admiral of the blue and joined Rear-Admiral Sir Hugh Cloberry Christian, appointed to command of the Leeward Islands station. Storms delayed the fleet from leaving England until 20 March 1796. The expedition's aim, to reinforce British troops trying to take St Lucia from the French, was achieved by the end of May. Christian and Pole returned home in the 'Beaulieu' (18 guns), arriving in England in November. 
In March 1797 Pole was appointed first captain of the 'Royal George' (100 guns), flying Lord Bridport's flag, and his captain of the fleet. He was thus closely involved in the mutiny of the fleet at Spithead in mid-April. Bridport sent him to London on 16 April, to give the Admiralty a first-hand account of the mutiny, and he returned with news that the Admiralty board was coming to Portsmouth to confront the situation. With admirals Gardner and Colpoys, Pole conveyed the board's concessions to the delegates of the mutinous crews on 18 April, on the 'Queen Charlotte' (100 guns). But after deliberation the mutineers refused the concessions and insisted that their other demands be met. Admiralty proposals were only finally agreed on 20 April, though crews continued to wait for orders to weigh anchor from the delegates on the 'Queen Charlotte'. It fell to Pole and his colleagues to resolve the delay by securing a royal pardon. Pole's reading of the pardon to the delegates on the 'Queen Charlotte' effectively brought the mutiny at Spithead to a conclusion. But the outbreak of unrest at the Nore in May 1797 kept suspicions alive on both sides. Letters between Pole and his friend at the Admiralty Captain William Young reflect not only the ongoing wariness of the mutineers but irregularities and lack of discipline and order among officers, of which St Vincent was to complain later. Pole wrote regularly to Young, who thanked him for sending news items even when unpleasant. When Admiral Robert Man was offered a seat at the Admiralty in August 1798, Young expressed regret that Pole had not been recommended; it was an appointment Pole himself wished for. In March 1799 Young was asking Pole, promoted rear-admiral of the red on 14 February, for suggestions to fill the vacancy left by the death of Admiral Charles Thompson and responding to Pole's worries as to whether he could hoist his flag and remain captain of the fleet to Bridport. Young also sympathized with Pole on his differences with Admiral Sir Peter Parker and again after the disappointing action at Aix Roads, which Young blamed in part on imperfect orders. 
This action was a product of Admiral Bruix's escape from Brest in April 1799. Bridport, who had been loosely blockading the French base, fell back to protect Ireland, thought to be the French objective. But by June, Bruix was returning to his base and reported heading for Rochefort. Bridport therefore sailed to prevent him. On 4 June he sighted the Spaniards, who made for Aix Roads and were blockaded there by a small squadron of the Channel Fleet. A few weeks later they were joined by the 'Sans Pareil' (80 guns) and the 'Royal George', the latter now flying Pole's flag. Pole attacked the Spanish ships on 2 July, but they were moored between the Isle of Aix and the Boyart shoal and protected by a floating mortar battery whose range was much greater than that of the British ships. Unable to achieve anything, Pole ordered the British frigates and bomb-vessels to withdraw, and though they were followed for a time by enemy gunboats, there was no loss or damage on either side. 
On 1 May 1800 Pole was appointed to the Newfoundland command, and he hoisted his flag in the 'Agincourt' (60 guns) on 28 June at Spithead. He returned on 16 November and was promoted vice-admiral of the blue on 1 January 1801. On 2 June he was appointed to relieve Lord Nelson in command of the Baltic fleet. He sailed in the 'Aeolus' (32 guns), arriving on 17 June and transferring his flag to the 'St George' (90 guns). Little remained to do but bring the British ships home and Pole left the Baltic in early August, distinguishing himself by taking the fleet through the difficult passage of the great belt against a nearly head wind. He reached Spithead on 20 August and immediately set off for Cadiz, arriving off Cape St Vincent on 27 August. He cruised off Cadiz, blockading the eleven enemy ships there, from September to November, and returned home, striking his flag on 4 December. On 18 January 1802 he was appointed to the Newfoundland command but he was replaced on 6 April by Admiral James Gambier, and had no further service afloat, though he was promoted vice-admiral of the red on 23 April 1804 and admiral of the blue on 9 November 1805. His replacement in the Newfoundland command marked Pole's intention to stand in the forthcoming parliamentary election, when he won a seat at Newark, Nottinghamshire, in the Newcastle interest. 
Pole's interest in a Commons seat dated from 1793. In 1796, while in the Caribbean, he had expected to be returned for East Looe, the pocket borough of his Buller relations, managed by his uncle, the bishop of Exeter. He was disappointed there but was put up for Minehead, Somerset, financed by his wife's uncle Henry Hope, the wealthy Amsterdam merchant, as a running partner for John Langston, Hope's brother-in-law. Langston was elected but Pole failed. When there was a vacancy at Plymouth in 1797 Pole asked his brother, Reginald Pole Carew, if Pitt's government would support him, urging that he had subscribed $1000 towards the loyalty loan that year. However, the administration had already chosen their candidate. Created a baronet on 12 September 1801, on the recommendation of his brother's friend Henry Addington, Pole finally gained the seat at Newark in 1802 and represented it until 1806. Admiral Lord St Vincent, now first lord of the Admiralty, on the recommendation of John Markham, his protege, appointed Pole to the commission of naval inquiry into abuses in the civil administration, which was established in December. Pole became its chairman. Established at 24 George Street, Westminster, the commission began work at once. Meanwhile the international situation deteriorated and renewed war seemed likely. In late April 1803 questions were being asked in the Commons about the commission's progress. On 4 May, Pole, making his first known speech in the house, answered these, declaring that the commission, whose work had been arduous and attention unremitting, would report soon; the first report was presented eight days later, on 12 May. Two more reports followed in June. On 11 July Pole had leave to introduce a bill to regulate the administration of the Chatham Chest, the naval charity, which became law on 29 July. A further two reports appeared in August, and others followed in 1804, the fourteenth and last appearing on 30 June 1806. 
Throughout this period attacks on the unpreparedness of Addington's government for war, and Pitt's attacks on St Vincent's Admiralty, intensified. Pole supported St Vincent on 15 March 1805, opposing Pitt's motion for a return showing the number of ships in commission, designed to prove that Addington's defence arrangements were inadequate. He remained an Addington supporter after Addington resigned, though Pole disapproved of Addington's joining Pitt's government. He refuted accusations, in March 1805, that his naval commission had acted like a criminal tribunal. After the publication of the tenth report, on the treasurer of the navy (February 1805), Pole accused George Canning, then treasurer, of trying to obstruct an inquiry into these allegations against Lord Melville, a previous holder of that office. In July he strongly resisted attacks on the commission of naval inquiry, whose powers Pitt had not renewed and which was being replaced by a royal commission headed by Sir Charles Middleton. 
Pitt's death in January 1806 led to a new, chiefly whig government. Pole accepted a seat at the Admiralty once Sir Charles Grey, the first lord, agreed to dispense with the custom whereby former members of the board took precedence in the patent over new members. He served in this office between February and October 1806 but he was not an active figure in the Commons. 
In the general election of 1806 Pole had stood for Plymouth, his native town, and with ministerial backing topped the poll. His position there on the fall of the ministry in 1807 seemed uncertain and friends began canvassing Penryn, Cornwall, for him. But the incoming tory government endorsed Pole's candidacy and he was returned, reportedly 'totally unconnected' with the Portland administration (Fisher, 4.842). But this was not entirely advantageous professionally. In 1807 and 1808 Pole applied three times to the new Admiralty for an active command without success. His speaking and voting record illustrates why this was so: defending Grey's naval administration (July 1807), voting against the government on the Copenhagen affair, and speaking and voting for Burdett's motion for an inquiry into the droits of the Admiralty (both February 1808). In March and April he introduced motions for the reform of Greenwich Hospital's administration and of the Royal Naval Asylum, both of which were opposed and defeated by the government. In December he was blaming setbacks in the Peninsula on the government's inefficiency and voted against them on the issue of the convention of Cintra on 21 February 1809. His hostile attitude to government further hardened with the failure of the Walcheren campaign. In February and March 1810 he argued for reform of the Admiralty court procedure, the reduction of sinecures, selective naval economies, and exemption from the property tax for officers on active service in May, and for reform of prize money adjudication procedures on 13 June. 
The appointment of Charles Philip Yorke as first lord in April 1810 was thought likely to change Pole's opposition; Pole himself told his brother that if Yorke was 'disposed to act honourably by the service... I shall not be disposed to cavil at trifles' (Fisher, 4.843). But his position on naval affairs, on which he chiefly spoke, remained as independent as ever. Although he supported Yorke over the naval estimates in March 1811, he pressed for reform of the court of Admiralty, while in June he moved, unsuccessfully, for a full inquiry into naval pay. 
Such independent attitudes did not commend Pole to the government. In the 1812 election he had again had ministerial backing and was returned unopposed for Plymouth; in return he was expected to support the administration. But though he did so on certain issues, Pole also condemned continued abuses in the administration of the Royal Naval Asylum in March 1815, again pressed for the exemption of serving officers from property tax in May 1815, and supported an inquiry into the management of Greenwich Hospital estates the following year. Political retribution came in 1818. In 1817 Pole had agreed to give up his Plymouth seat to his friend Sir Thomas Byam Martin, comptroller of the navy. But he was annoyed when, in 1818, his colleague at Plymouth, Benjamin Bloomfield, the prince regent's private secretary, vacated his seat unexpectedly and was replaced by another supporter of the regent, Sir William Congreve. Pole thought this move had been kept from him and he had been tricked into an unnecessary sacrifice of his seat. Encouraged by his friends, he determined to contest the election. But Martin and Congreve had considerable ministerial backing and Pole was heavily defeated. 
Pole had been promoted admiral of the white on 31 July 1810 and of the red on 4 June 1814. He was made KCB on 12 April 1815 and a GCB on 17 April 1818. In 1789 Pole had been made a groom of the bedchamber to William, duke of Clarence. When Clarence became William IV, in June 1830, Pole was appointed master of the robes, and on 22 July he was promoted admiral of the fleet. 
Pole died on 6 September 1830 at Aldenham Abbey, Hertfordshire, a house he had bought in 1812 from the Thelluson family, who had converted this modest farmhouse into a fashionable Gothic mansion about 1800. Pole's daughters were Henrietta Maria Sarah ('b'. 1799), who married William Stuart, grandson of the earl of Bute, and Anna Maria ('b'. 1805), who may have been born deaf. 
A member of a long established, politically important Devon family, Pole was naturally drawn to politics, particularly when his naval career ended. His political and social attitudes were essentially conservative. He had been shocked and uncomprehending at the naval mutinies. He opposed the abolition of the slave trade in February and March 1806, forcing a division on his own amendment to postpone abolition until 1812. But he was not a mere reactionary. Although his naval career was somewhat peripheral, on naval matters he spoke with authority in support of necessary reforms, bringing before the Commons abuses in naval administration which governments preferred to ignore. He had been a hard working chairman of a commission whose reports, exposing gross naval abuses, paved the way for more rigorous and responsible administrative standards. 
Despite his connections, Pole never represented a family seat. It is unlikely he regretted this. His concept of honour was not that of a professional borough monger. In May 1812 he told Sidmouth that the conduct of his cousin Admiral Edward Buller, in breaking his pledge to accommodate Vansittart, the new chancellor of the exchequer, at East Looe, the borough Buller owned, had 'increased my abhorrence of House of Commons 'salesmen'; if anything could make me wish to see what is often called reform it would be preventing such men having the power which my cousin now hath' (Fisher, 4.843). 


@@@@@


doc= 22445


Pole, David (d. 1568), bishop of Peterborough, is of unknown origins. He is first recorded in 1520, when he became fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, subsequently becoming law bursar there in 1524-5, and sub-warden in 1528-9. He had graduated BCL by January 1526 and DCnL in 1528. In the following year he became an advocate in Doctors' Commons. He accumulated many benefices, beginning as vicar of St Giles', Oxford, on 25 April 1528 (vacated by March 1531), and subsequently acquiring rectories in Devon, Derbyshire, Norfolk, and Northamptonshire, prebends in St John's, Chester, Lichfield Cathedral, and perhaps St Mary's, Warwick, and the archdeaconries of Shropshire and Derby. In addition he was keeper of the spiritualities for the diocese of Coventry and Lichfield in 1532, was appointed vicar-general and official principal for Bishop Rowland Lee in that diocese on 20 April 1534, and continued as vicar-general under Richard Sampson, Lee's successor, in 1543. He either remained in that office until 1553, or was then reappointed to it. 
Pole was singled out as a persecutor of protestants in 'The Pilgryms Tale', written between 1536 and 1540. From the start of Mary I's reign he was active in restoring Catholicism, serving as commissioner at the reinstatements of Bishop Edmund Bonner to London and Bishop Cuthbert Tunstall to Durham in August 1553, for the deprivation of married clergy in Coventry and Lichfield, and on the panels that condemned John Hooper, John Rogers, Hugh Latimer, Nicholas Ridley, and Thomas Cranmer, as well as on the general royal heresy commission of 26 April 1556, being singled out as one of those who had to be present at any of its sittings. On 30 September 1554 he was empowered to exercise the jurisdiction of the see of Lichfield 'sede vacante'. He assisted at the consecration of his possible relative, Cardinal Reginald Pole, as archbishop of Canterbury on 22 March 1556. Five days later, on 27 March, he was simultaneously appointed vicar-general in Canterbury diocese (he may already have been acting as such), official-principal and dean of the court of arches, and auditor of its court of audience. The experience gained from these positions helped to prepare him for higher office, and on 24 March 1557 the pope provided him to the see of Peterborough; he was consecrated on 15 August following, when he vacated his position in the arches as well as most of his other benefices. No register has survived, however, and apart from a donation of 20's'. to the rebuilding of a parish church he left little evidence for his brief stint as bishop. 
Elizabeth I at first appointed Pole to the commission to consecrate Archbishop Parker, but on 4 December 1558, along with Nicholas Heath, Bonner, Gilbert Bourne, and James Turberville, he sent the new queen a letter on behalf of the Catholic clergy asking her to remain loyal to the papacy. After being deprived of his bishopric before 30 June 1559, Pole may eventually have been imprisoned, possibly by the middle of 1561; if so he was at liberty again perhaps by the end of the year. His fortunes thereafter are far from clear. The claim by the Catholic apologist Nicholas Sander that Pole was among the deposed bishops who died either in prison or in exile was contradicted in 1609 by Lancelot Andrewes, who described him as dying at liberty and at home. Pole certainly seems to have been free from serious constraints in 1565, when Bishop Bentham of Lichfield complained that his residence just outside Stafford with Brian Fowler (the founder of a famous recusant family) was unsettling the area, through the visits of 'diverse lewd priests' to Pole. The latter's subsequent whereabouts are unknown, however, and it can be said only that he died between 17 May and 6 July 1568, the dates on which his will was drawn up and proved. Pole unrepentantly entrusted his soul to the Virgin Mary and the saints. A lengthy list of bequests includes silver goblets and $5 each to Fowler and his wife; $5 each to Martin Audley and Richard Turner, Pole's servants; his household stuff to William Bynneslie, archdeacon of Northampton, who had been his chancellor at Peterborough, and to Christopher Hodgson and Thurston Morrey, cathedral prebendaries there; $5 and Paulus de Castro on will to Thomas Bulkeley; 5 marks to Richard Gwent, nephew of the canonist Dr Richard Gwent, for his exhibition as promised, together with his uncle's ring and two other jewelled rings; and Bartolus in four books to George Dyott. 
The rest of Pole's books went to All Souls on condition that the college pay for their transport in view of Pole's poverty. They included a number of legal texts, but also an extensive list of patristic authors, a considerable amount of Erasmus, current controversial literature by such writers as Alfonso de Castro and Ruard Tapper, writings by Stephen Gardiner and Cuthbert Tunstall, many sermons, and works by some protestant authors, including Luther. His executors were Sir Thomas Fitzherbert and John Wilkinson, a citizen of London living in Watling Street (each was compensated with $7 and a goblet and ring of his choice), with Martin Audley to substitute for Fitzherbert if necessary. Fitzherbert also received another ring and Mrs Wilkinson a gilt cup that Mary I had given Pole as a new year's gift, as well as repayment of a debt of $13 11's'. Forty shillings went to Doctors' Commons. Pole left bequests for the souls of two prebendaries of Chester, Master Skelton and Master Griegson, for whom he may have been an executor, as he was for his Lichfield colleagues Thomas Powell (like Pole a fellow of All Souls) and Steven Sagar. Finally, a noble apiece went to two unnamed kinswomen in 'the New town' and to three other relatives the right to live in his house there. 


@@@@@


doc= 22446


Pole, Edmund de la, eighth earl of Suffolk (1472?-1513), nobleman and claimant to the English throne, was the third son of John de la Pole, second duke of Suffolk (1442-1492), and his wife, Elizabeth Plantagenet (1444-1503/4), sister of Edward IV. Nothing can be said of his early years (it was his older brother Edward, not Edmund as sometimes reported, who attended a theology lecture at Oxford in 1481 and was praised for his precocious scholarship), but the closeness of his links to the Yorkist kings brought Edmund election as a knight of the Bath at Richard III's coronation on 4 July 1483. Because of his youth he escaped involvement both in the dynastic change of 1485 and in the treason of his elder brother John de la Pole, earl of Lincoln, in 1487. Edmund seems to have been close to his cousin Queen Elizabeth, wife of Henry VII, and he is recorded many times at ceremonials held in the early years of Henry's reign, such as Elizabeth's coronation on 25 November 1487 and court entertainments and Christmas festivities, where he associated with other young nobles of Yorkist blood, such as Henry Bourchier, second earl of Essex, and Lord William Courtenay. 
Edmund may however have resented his treatment at the hands of Henry VII following the death of his father in 1492, when he became the king's ward. Duke John had settled many manors on his eldest son and heir, and these were forfeited to the crown following Lincoln's attainder in 1487. As a minor, therefore, Edmund inherited the dukedom with a reduced income, and when he came of age in 1493 he did not possess sufficient wealth to maintain his status as a duke. As a compromise on 26 February 1493 he accepted the title of earl of Suffolk in exchange for licence by indenture to enter certain of Lincoln's estates as if no act of attainder had been passed, but only after paying $5000 in yearly payments of $200 during the life of his mother, and of $400 after her death. This indenture may have marked the beginning of Suffolk's financial difficulties. After his own attainder in 1504, the revenue from his estates for 1503-4 totalled some $876, so the payments demanded for the recovery of Lincoln's manors represented a sizeable portion of Suffolk's annual income. 
Nevertheless Suffolk remained loyal to the Tudor crown. In November 1492, during the invasion of France, he co-operated closely with the earls of Essex and Oxford at the siege of Boulogne. He took part in the jousting when Prince Henry was created duke of York at Westminster in November 1494, and in disguisings in 1496, and he entertained the king at Ewelme at Michaelmas 1495. In February 1496 he was among many English noblemen who stood surety to the Archduke Philip for the observance of the new treaties with Burgundy, and shortly afterwards he became knight of the Garter, replacing Henry VII's uncle Jasper, duke of Bedford, who had died in December 1495. In June 1497 Suffolk was sufficiently loyal to ignore Lord Bergavenny's suggestion that they both join Lord Audley and the Cornish rebels. He commanded royal forces under Oxford and Daubeney at the battle of Blackheath on 17 June 1497, and he was named to all the Norfolk and Suffolk commissions of the peace up to February 1501. 
Once he was financially obliged to Henry VII after 1493, however, Suffolk began to feel greater pressure on his position within the Tudor regime. In 1498 and 1499 he appeared in king's bench over unspecified articles concerning his father's lands in Yorkshire, while in Michaelmas 1498 he was indicted for the murder of one Thomas Crue in the parish of All Hallows Barking by the Tower. Also involved were Suffolk's companions Lord William Courtenay, Thomas Neville, and William Brandon, all then of Westminster. Thomas Crue was reportedly the plaintiff in a case under discussion by Henry VII's council, and although the details are unclear, the king seems to have stopped proceedings at common law, perhaps in order to take political advantage of the vulnerable position of these lords of Yorkist descent. Francis Bacon would later suggest that Suffolk's refusal to accept the humiliating conditions under which Henry expected the earl to plead for pardon prompted his first flight abroad. On 1 July 1499 Suffolk travelled without licence to the lieutenant of St Omer, in Picardy, where he probably hoped for the assistance of another of his aunts, Margaret of York, dowager duchess of Burgundy. Sir James Tyrell, deputy to Lord Daubeney at Guines, also seems to have offered help at that time. 
On 20 September 1499 Sir Richard Guildford and Richard Hatton were dispatched to Brussels to negotiate with Philip the Fair for Suffolk's return. By threatening a trade embargo they secured the archduke's co-operation, and Suffolk was assured that his only hope of restitution lay in submission to Henry VII's terms. Immediately upon his return, therefore, Suffolk was obliged to place land in feoffment until $1000 had been paid to the king. At the same time the earl of Oxford agreed to monitor the behaviour of Suffolk's wife, Margaret, 'nee' Scrope (died 1515), whom he had married before 10 October 1496. In October 1499 several of Suffolk's associates, and also Sir James Tyrell, were probably interrogated before the council for their part in the earl's temporary defection. Henry VII perhaps believed that by the beginning of 1500 clear warnings like these, along with the execution of the Yorkist figurehead the earl of Warwick on 24 November 1499, were sufficient to ensure Suffolk's loyalty. On 5 May 1500 he witnessed at Canterbury the ratification of the treaty for the marriage of Prince Arthur with Katherine of Aragon, and six days later followed the king to Calais for a meeting with Archduke Philip. He was reappointed to the Suffolk bench on 20 November 1500, but lawsuits over unlawful entry into land in Higham, Norfolk, and over the status of one William Ryvett whom Suffolk was claiming as his villein, were lost by 1501 (again after the involvement of the king's council), suggesting that the earl's exercise of authority continued to be frustrated within East Anglia. In August 1501 he again fled the country without royal licence, this time going with his brother Richard de la Pole to the court of Emperor Maximilian, whom he hoped would support his claim to the English crown. 
Suffolk waited at Imst for some time before his steward Thomas Killingworth was able to arrange financial support from Maximilian and the count of Hardeck. From a new base at Aachen, Suffolk began at the close of 1501 to plan for an invasion of England and a rising of his servants and supporters. Henry VII was aware of his plans, however, and by the end of the year the earl of Oxford had placed a number of Edmund's East Anglian tenants under bonds of allegiance to the crown. The king also mobilized a network of spies and informers, probably including Sir Robert Curzon and William Waldegrave, to infiltrate Suffolk's supporters at home and abroad. Edmund's brother William, Lord William Courtenay, and other friends who had remained in England were also imprisoned by 1502, Sir James Tyrell was executed, and Suffolk and his exiled companions were outlawed at Ipswich on 26 December 1502. 
From that time onwards Suffolk was a rather pathetic figure and a pawn of international politics. In July 1502 Maximilian agreed by the treaty of Augsburg not to harbour English rebels within his territories. But although he took an oath to expel Suffolk on 12 February 1503, the emperor maintained the financially desperate earl at Aachen for several months further. Suffolk was attainted in parliament in January 1504, along with his brother Richard and his closest supporters, Thomas Killingworth, Sir John Wyndham, Thomas Wyndham, and Sir George Neville. 
Suffolk's band of followers left Aachen at Easter 1504, with Richard de la Pole remaining behind as hostage for his brother's debts. There survive numerous letters written by Suffolk after 1504 which attest his increasing desperation and also a surprising lack of literacy. Edmund was heading for Friesland and the protection of Duke George of Saxony, when he was imprisoned by servants of the duke of Gueldres in Hattem Castle. Henry VII may have paid Gueldres to restrain Suffolk until negotiations could be completed with Archduke Philip for his return to England. It has been argued that the massive payments to Maximilian and Philip made in Henry VII's later years (Philip was 'lent' $138,000 in 1505) were intended to buy their co-operation against Yorkist conspiracy. Suffolk was transferred to the custody of Philip von Lichtenstein at Namur in October 1505, but he was evidently exhausted and disillusioned by his lack of support on the continent, and on 24 January 1506 he instructed two of his servants to negotiate with Henry VII for his return to England. This process was speeded by the chance arrival in England of Archduke Philip, now king of Castile, that same month. Having received an undertaking that his life would be spared, Suffolk was delivered to Henry VII at Calais and imprisoned in the Tower on 24 April 1506. He was omitted from the general pardon at Henry VIII's accession and lingered in prison until the prospect of foreign-backed Yorkist conspiracy again emerged when Richard de la Pole was recognized as king of England by Louis XII of France, and fought in his service against England in 1512. Edmund was finally executed on 4 May 1513, once it became clear that his brother had claimed the English crown in his own right. The Franciscan provincial was paid $7 15's'. 2died for his burial at Greyfriars without Aldgate in London later that month. He and Margaret, who lived until February 1515, had only one child, Elizabeth, who became a nun at the Minories without Aldgate in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 22447


Pole, Sir Geoffrey (d. 1558), alleged conspirator, was the youngest son of Sir Richard Pole (1458/9-1504) ['see under 'Pole, Margaret] and his wife, Margaret Plantagenet (1473-1541) ['see 'Pole, Margaret], daughter of George, duke of Clarence, and later countess of Salisbury. Little is known of him before his wife, Constance (died in or after 1570), inherited the manor of Lordington, Sussex, from her father, Sir Edmund Pakenham, in 1528 and his own knighting, after 3 November 1529. Lordington became Pole's residence; he and his wife had five sons and five daughters. In 1530 and 1531 he appeared in property disputes, the first arising from his forcible expulsion of a tenant on Christmas eve 1529, the second a Star Chamber case in which he featured as an encloser. He was also then a JP for Hampshire and Sussex, and remained so intermittently until 1538. He sat for Wilton in the parliament of 1529 by his mother's nomination and probably remained a member throughout the Reformation Parliament -- George Crofts later testified that Pole had often expressed dislike of its proceedings. He was a client of Thomas Cromwell by 1533, when he served at Anne Boleyn's coronation on 1 June and was paid $40 on Cromwell's orders. Later that month he dined with the now bastardized Princess Mary, in whose service he may have been, and then or shortly afterwards began to frequent Eustace Chapuys, the imperial ambassador, begging him to inform Charles V how easy the conquest of England would be, and asking to go to Spain. Instead Chapuys used Geoffrey as a conduit to his brother Reginald Pole in Italy. Pole was also in the confidence of the French ambassador, who told him of attempts to defend Reginald. John Stokesley, bishop of London, was among his confidants and patrons, and Pole had a manuscript of Sir Thomas More's 'History of Richard III'. In short, Geoffrey had a much higher profile in the opposition to Henry VIII's policies than his mother or his brother Henry Pole, Lord Montagu. 
In October 1536 Geoffrey Pole was indicted for riot, at about the same time that he was ordered to serve against the Pilgrimage of Grace with twenty men. In January 1537 he learned of Reginald's promotion as cardinal, although unlike his mother and elder brother he was not asked to try to dissuade him from accepting. This was probably because Henry VIII, to whom Pole was now in debt, had already banned him from court; he had certainly done so by April that year. Pole sought Cromwell's mediation, but in October he was flatly refused admission to court. Still trusting in Cromwell, in early 1538 Pole may have gone to him fearing the construction put upon his support of the influential Catholic polemicist John Helyar, who was in exile, through his dependant Hugh Holland, a former pirate. Cromwell promised to take care of him, but did so by committing Geoffrey to the Tower on 29 August 1538. By coincidence, at almost exactly the same time Geoffrey's name came up in the examination near Exeter of one Gulphinus Abevan, who claimed to have been in service with Reginald Pole and to have moved to Geoffrey's. Although this testimony is probably fantasy, Abevan knew enough about the Poles to play on the bad feeling between Geoffrey and his brother Henry; this had a great deal to do with the family's downfall at Geoffrey's hands. His correspondence with his brother Reginald was also held against Geoffrey. 
Pole further suffered as a result of his bad relations with his fellow JPs, notably Sir William Goring and John Gunter. Goring turned up evidence of Pole's patronage of Helyar, and Gunter arrested a woman who claimed that Pole meant to send men to Reginald (although the tale originally came from one of Gunter's own servants). Thomas Theobald from Padua reported just what the government feared most: Sir Geoffrey's arrest was expected to cause Reginald Pole to write more against the king. On 26 October Pole's interrogations began. The first set of questions concerned his correspondence with Reginald and his relations with Helyar. These (and most other surviving sets of interrogatories) may never have been used, since Pole confessed only to approving Reginald's actions and having talked to others, including his brother Henry, about reversing religious policy in England. Almost immediately afterwards Pole made the first of two attempts at suicide. He signed his second confession on 2 November 'Your humble slave, Geffrey Pole', in a state of collapse. 
The evidence continued to mount against Pole. Elizabeth Darrell testified that he had said of Peter Mewtas, sent to assassinate Reginald, 'By God's blood, and if he had slain him I would have thrust my dagger [in] him [althou]gh he had [been] at the king's heels' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/138, fol. 160'r'). The most serious charge quickly became Pole's burning of correspondence on Henry Pole's orders. On 11 November Holland offered the most damaging evidence. In addition to Pole's support for Helyar, he stressed Pole's wish to go overseas, and incidentally revealed his strained relations with his brothers, both of whom tried to make him cease his dangerous actions. As Geoffrey's interrogation progressed, he revealed more and more information about Henry Pole. Geoffrey claimed that his brother had smuggled him to the Calais interview between Henry VIII and Francois I in 1532 and used him to tell Queen Catherine afterwards that nothing had been done about the Boleyn marriage. No doubt motivated by word from his wife (imprisoned with him) that his brother thought him insane, Pole also gave his interrogators the names of two of Henry Pole's servants who produced much damning material, while his former dependant John Collins, then in Henry's service, revealed almost as much hurtful information as Geoffrey did. 
In his final examination Geoffrey testified that Henry Pole had wished him to continue to serve Mary rather than the king, whom he had never loved. Pole also claimed that Crofts had encouraged him to leave England, giving him twenty nobles, but then changed his mind after a vision of the Virgin Mary telling him this would ruin his family. It also began to emerge that Pole had tried to suppress evidence against himself. Crofts, brought into the net, testified that Pole had expressed ambiguous reservations about serving against the Pilgrimage, confirmed Geoffrey's story of his own involvement in the former's plans to flee, and added that he had asked Henry Pole to pay Geoffrey's debts in order to remove a motive for flight, which Henry had done. The preliminary version of Pole's indictment singled out his links with Holland and Crofts (who were both executed) and his distaste for service against the Pilgrims. His formal indictment resembled his brother's, with the added charge about the Pilgrimage. Unlike his brother, Geoffrey pleaded guilty. He was pardoned on 2 January 1539, having once more tried to kill himself. A later story claimed that his wife had begged for his life, and then cured his madness with masses. His testimony made him the star witness in the government's propaganda against the Exeter or Courtenay conspiracy, especially in Richard Morison's 'An Invective Ayenste... Treason' (1539), although Morison could not resist insulting Pole's limited intelligence and 'frenzy'. 
Pole's reward was Cromwell's intercession in a property case at about the same time that the rest of his family was being attainted, and the minister seems also to have assigned Pole a pension. Moreover Cromwell protected Pole in early 1540 when he wounded his fellow JP Gunter in revenge for Gunter's revelations during his imprisonment. Sir William Fitzwilliam, Cromwell's agent in Chichester, worried that imprisoning Pole for assault in early 1540 would 'reduce him into his phrenzy or some other inconvenience' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 15, no. 681). The privy council refused to concur and had Pole committed to the Fleet, but he received a pardon just four days later, albeit along with another banishment from court. A year later Pole attacked his parish priest, but he escaped trouble by delating the priest for treason. In May 1544 he and (perhaps significantly) his wife were granted some of his mother's property, which they immediately alienated to Sir Thomas Moyle, and in December 1545 he was licensed to export 1000 dickers of leather. 
Some time in 1548 Pole fled from England, perhaps because he had hatched a conspiracy with Anthony Fortescue, marshal of the army in Ireland. Before his flight he quitclaimed Lordington to Edmund Ford, a fellow Sussex landowner and Catholic. Pole claimed to have gone to his brother Reginald, from whom he received a pension, and spent much of his time in Liege. He unsuccessfully approached three English ambassadors for permission to return in 1550. In the following year rumours were being spread on the continent about his seditious activities in England, and at the end of 1552 Pole wrote to the duke of Northumberland asking for a safe conduct home, perhaps hoping that his son Arthur Pole, released from prison and in Northumberland's service, would intercede for him; but he was exempted from the general pardon issued in March 1553. 
In September 1553 Geoffrey Pole finally returned home, allegedly on a mission from Reginald, though this is unlikely since the cardinal had officially sent two other much more reliable agents at the same time. Edward Courtenay, son of the marquess of Exeter whom Geoffrey had brought down in 1538, threatened to kill him, and the council had Geoffrey guarded. This episode helped to fuel imperial resistance to Reginald's returning to England. A year later, however, Pole was pardoned and granted an annuity of $50, as well as the keepership of Slindon Park. On 5 April 1555 his brother gave him a dispensation for a portable altar at Lordington. Pole was somehow mixed up in the Dudley conspiracy of 1555-6, but seems to have suffered no consequences. William Peto attended him on his deathbed in early November 1558, and Cardinal Pole tried to provide for his nine children, although he left them nothing in his will and refused to pervert justice by favouring an action brought by a suitor for one of Geoffrey's daughters who had offered to marry her without a dowry. Pole was buried in the church of Stoughton near Chichester. Twelve years later his widow asked in her will to be buried alongside him. Two of their sons, Arthur and Geoffrey, became involved with Sir Anthony Fortescue in a bizarre astrologically inspired conspiracy against Elizabeth in 1562. Arrested and condemned, they were held in the Tower until their deaths, about 1570. 


@@@@@


doc= 22448


Pole, Henry, Baron Montagu (1492-1539), nobleman and convicted traitor, was the eldest son of Sir Richard Pole (1458/9-1504) ['see under 'Pole, Margaret] and his wife, Margaret Plantagenet (1473-1541) ['see 'Pole, Margaret], daughter of George, duke of Clarence, and later countess of Salisbury. He may have been a royal ward after his father's death in 1504, but is first certainly recorded as one of Katherine of Aragon's attendants at her coronation. He was probably in the royal household for several years thereafter, as he was given gowns in the next three years; on the last occasion he is identified as a 'sewer'. In May 1513 he and his mother gave bonds to pay for the lands that she had acquired along with the title of countess of Salisbury. On 5 July he received livery of his father's lands, especially the Buckinghamshire manor of Medmenham, which included what would be his own principal residence of Bockmer. On 25 September he was knighted at Tournai. By 1514 Pole had unofficially acquired the title of Lord Montagu. Before 1520 he married Jane, daughter of George Neville, third Baron Bergavenny. Her father required a jointure worth $200 per annum, and moreover Pole was to pay 1000 marks if he had no male children, but if a son was born, then Bergavenny would give Pole's mother the same amount. This marriage linked Pole with Bergavenny's father-in-law Edward Stafford, third duke of Buckingham, and they often gambled together. When Buckingham was arrested in 1521, so was Pole, but he was imprisoned only briefly, and escorted Charles V during part of the emperor's visit to England in 1522. They had met for the first time at Gravelines in 1520 after the Field of Cloth of Gold. 
In 1523 Pole joined the invasion of France, which must have taxed his finances. He was repaid $133 6's'. 8died the following year for his expenditure on equipment for demi-lances, and in 1527 he was exempted from the surcharge on the subsidy of 1523 because his goods were worth less than $50. He continued to hold Medmenham, even though he was never nominated to the commission of the peace for Buckinghamshire. Instead, he regularly served as a JP in Dorset, Hampshire, Somerset, Sussex, and Wiltshire. On 1 December 1529 he entered the House of Lords as Baron Montagu, and in 1530 signed the English nobility's letter to Clement VII asking him to grant Henry's divorce. Perhaps late in the same year he may have conveyed to the king the willingness of his brother Reginald Pole to compromise over the divorce; he was certainly involved in trying to control the damage after Reginald changed his mind in the early summer of 1531 and gave the king a written opinion opposing the divorce. 
In July 1531 Montagu entered into articles for the marriage of his daughter Katherine to Francis, Lord Hastings, son of the first earl of Huntingdon. The match took place, but Montagu had to settle with Huntingdon in March 1538 for breaking the agreement, although this may also have had to do with Huntingdon's having mortgaged part of his inheritance. In October 1532 he was at Calais during Henry's interview with Francois I. Evidence gathered during investigations in 1538 alleged that he had smuggled his brother Sir Geoffrey Pole to the meeting of the kings and afterwards sent him to tell Queen Katherine that nothing had been done to forward the proposed marriage to Anne Boleyn. Nevertheless at Anne's coronation on 1 June 1533 Montagu acted as her carver. Four days later, however, he, Lord Hastings, and Sir Geoffrey dined with Princess Mary, and Montagu alone on 24 June. He was summoned by writ to parliament in January 1534, and attended regularly. He also became close to Lord Lisle. On 9 July 1534 he served on the jury that acquitted Lord Dacre of treason. 
Montagu was now appearing as a significant figure in the dispatches of the imperial ambassador Eustace Chapuys. It is possible that Cromwell was making use of Montagu when the latter told Chapuys in early July of the French king's warning to Henry VIII not to attack either the pope or Catholicism at a meeting of the two monarchs planned to take place at Calais, but Henry Pole's importance is none the less stressed in a further dispatch of 3 November 1534, recommending that Charles use Reginald Pole against England. In February 1535 Chapuys reported how it was to Montagu that the duke of Norfolk complained of being held in no esteem. Nevertheless, on 29 April Montagu served on the special commission of oyer and terminer that tried the Carthusian priors and others, and on a similar commission on 1 July for the trial of Sir Thomas More. Almost immediately afterwards he fell ill and was expected to die, but recovered after a fortnight. During the time Reginald was writing 'De unitate', his attack on Henry VIII's divorce and the royal supremacy, in late 1535 and 1536, Montagu continued to forward his brother's interests at court. Consequently he probably really was as shocked and disappointed when the work arrived, as he told Reginald in his letter of 13 September 1536, urging his brother 'If there is any grace in you, now you will turn to the right way, and then we may reckon it was the will of God that your ingratitude should show the King's meekness' ('LP Henry VIII', 11, no. 451). For a man who had been working hard to advance his family at court (whatever his possible reservations about royal policy), the book must have been a heavy blow. 
Montagu's status as a noble who could be employed on important juries was reinforced by the trial of Anne Boleyn in May 1536. He may have helped to prepare the way for it by joining the court faction that wished to get rid of her, and certainly told Chapuys in March 1536 that Henry might want a new wife. On 15 May Pole served on the jury that convicted Anne, and perhaps through his mother quickly entered into Jane Seymour's good graces. In July Chapuys reported that Princess Mary would never marry an Englishman, save maybe Reginald Pole or Montagu's son Henry. Montagu attended the parliament of June-July, and his finances had improved enough to place him among the first to pay their subsidy assessments in full. Perhaps through official channels, he received copies of his brother's later correspondence with Bishop Cuthbert Tunstall of Durham, and saw other letters to the king and Cromwell. Cromwell later blamed Montagu's downfall chiefly on this correspondence. He was summoned to serve against the Pilgrimage of Grace with 200 men, but probably did not take the field. A year later he uncovered the basin at Edward's baptism, and at Queen Jane's funeral he attended Princess Mary in her capacity as chief mourner. In early 1538, however, his family's economic fortunes may once more have declined, for he and his mother made several sales of land. 
In October 1538, with the arrest of his younger brother Sir Geoffrey, Montagu found himself in deep trouble, but it is difficult to reconcile many of the accusations against him with the public record of his loyalty. One cause of suspicion was his close friendship with Henry Courtenay, marquess of Exeter, who had even warned Montagu to keep his distance. Nearly all the damaging testimony came from Sir Geoffrey and one of his former dependants (curiously enough, the obviously unstable Sir Geoffrey, whom Montagu had done all he could to protect, accused his brother of being dangerously indiscreet). Two summaries of the evidence against Montagu contain a very mixed bag of charges. They stress his knowledge of moves against Reginald and of contacts with him, the burning of correspondence, his frequently reported fear that there would soon be no honest men left, his statement that Henry's leg would kill him, and his criticizing Lord Darcy for having held back from attacking Henry, as well as his observation that the king never made anyone whom he did not later destroy. Montagu's payment of his brother's debts in order to keep him from fleeing was also (rather oddly) thought suspicious. Exculpatory evidence, especially his mother's claim that he had advised her to tell her servants that Reginald was a traitor, was ignored. 
The formal indictments more straightforwardly reveal the grounds on which Montagu was prosecuted. The opening charge accused him of favouring Reginald's treason, supported by a quotation reported by Sir Geoffrey -- allegedly in late 1536 just when other evidence shows Montagu sharply rebuking Reginald -- that 'I like well the doings of my brother the Cardinal, and I would we were both over the sea, for this world will one day come to stripes', as well as other 'bons mots' at Henry's expense, including 'Knaves rule about the king' ('LP Henry VIII', 13/2, no. 979.7). His indictment in Sussex added the further charge that Montagu had regretted Lord Bergavenny's death before the Pilgrimage of Grace. One witness said that Montagu thought Bergavenny could have raised 10,000 men in the west, another reported that he had said Bergavenny had a large following in Kent and Sussex; these and many similar inconsistencies raise doubts about much of the evidence. Under examination, Montagu said that he wished Bergavenny had not died for his son's sake, and otherwise admitted only having talked to Thomas Starkey about the moves against Reginald, and having burnt letters. Despite this stalwart defence, on 2 December 1538 he was found guilty of high treason, and on 9 January 1539 he and Exeter were beheaded on Tower Hill. 
Montagu's name appeared in the giant bill of attainder of 19 May 1539, in terms which again make it clear that his condemnation arose from Reginald Pole's resistance and hostility to the king. His own career has usually been construed as that of a man who was involved in opposition to Henry VIII from an early stage. But the evidence suggests that if he opposed the king at all he did so late and out of disappointment with Henry's treatment of the nobility (including, of course, his brother Reginald), and that it was the mischance of the possibly demented behaviour of his brother Geoffrey that was principally responsible for Montagu's destruction. 


@@@@@


doc= 22449


Pole, John de la, earl of Lincoln (c.1460-1487), magnate and rebel, was the eldest son of John de la Pole, second duke of Suffolk (1442-1492), and Elizabeth (1444-1503/4), sister of Edward IV, who had married by the beginning of 1458. He was created earl of Lincoln on 13 March 1467, and was knighted with the king's sons on 18 April 1475. He played his part in court ceremonial: he attended Anne Mowbray at her wedding to the duke of York in January 1478, bore the salt at the baptism of Edward IV's daughter Bridget in November 1480, and was present at the king's funeral and interment in 1483. He carried the orb at the coronation of Richard III. 
Lincoln supported Richard against the rebels of October 1483 and was rewarded the following April with land worth $157, and the reversion of Beaufort estates worth a further $178 after the death of Thomas, Lord Stanley, who had been granted a life interest in the land which his wife, Margaret Beaufort, had forfeited for her part in the rising. In the following month Lincoln was granted an annuity of $177 13's'. 4died from the duchy of Cornwall until the reversion materialized. When Richard's only son, Edward, died in April 1484 no heir was formally designated, but the appointment of Lincoln to the lieutenantship of Ireland on 21 August may have been intended to signal that he, rather than Clarence's son Edward, earl of Warwick, was regarded as the heir apparent. Lincoln was also made president of the council in the north, set up in the summer of 1484 as the successor to the prince's council, which had itself replaced Gloucester's ducal council as a way of maintaining Richard's authority in the north. Lincoln's lack of independent standing in the north meant that he would act for the king, rather than in his own right. He was with the king at Nottingham on 1 August 1485 and, although not mentioned in any chronicle accounts, was probably present at Bosworth since the earliest report wrongly lists him among the dead. He escaped attainder -- perhaps the 'great and sovereign kindness' to which Henry VII referred after the earl's subsequent defection ('RotP', 6.397) -- and, unlike the earl of Northumberland, seems not even to have been imprisoned. He was present at Henry's coronation at the end of October. 
Lincoln's apparent attachment to the Tudor cause continued throughout 1486. He was with Henry VII at York in spring 1486, after the collapse of the rebellion of Lovell and Humphrey Stafford, and headed the inquiry into Stafford's treason. He was present at the christening of Prince Arthur at Worcester in September, and was still with the court at Greenwich on All Saints' day. He was present at Sheen in February 1487, when the existence of an impostor claiming to be the earl of Warwick was discussed and it was decided to show the real earl of Warwick to the people. Almost immediately afterwards, however, Lincoln fled to Flanders to join Viscount Lovell, and in his subsequent act of attainder the beginning of his treason is dated to 19 March, although later accounts suggest that he may have been implicated in the conspiracy before his flight. 
With German and Swiss mercenaries provided by Margaret of York, dowager duchess of Burgundy, Lincoln and Lovell sailed for Ireland, and on 24 May a boy claiming to be the earl of Warwick was crowned 'Edward VI' at Dublin. On 4 June the rebels, their forces enlarged by Irish soldiers provided by the earl of Kildare and led by Thomas Fitzgerald, landed in Furness. They headed first east, into the Ricardian heartland of the North Riding, and then turned south. They had the better of a skirmish with Lord Clifford at Tadcaster, and reputedly drove back another detachment of royal troops. But, as in 1486, few former Ricardians of any standing joined them, and when on 16 June they faced a much larger royal army at Stoke near Newark (Nottinghamshire) they were defeated. Lincoln died in the battle -- to the annoyance of Henry VII, according to Polydore Vergil, who claimed that Henry had wanted him taken alive, so that he might learn more about the conspiracy (Bennett, 137-8). His body was buried in an unmarked grave on the battlefield. 
Lincoln was posthumously attainted in the parliament of November 1487. The rights of his father (and by implication those of his widow) were protected in the lands which had been settled on Lincoln at his marriage to Margaret Fitzalan. She was the daughter of Thomas Fitzalan and Margaret Woodville, the sister of Edward IV's queen. Margaret and Thomas had been betrothed in October 1464, so the Fitzalan-Lincoln match is unlikely to have been made much before the late 1470s, and perhaps even later: the duke of Suffolk presented to the living of one of the manors in 1480. There were no children of the marriage. Margaret was still living in October 1524 when her father bequeathed her a great ring with a turquoise. She apparently never remarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 22450


Pole, John de la, second duke of Suffolk (1442-1492), magnate, was born on 27 September 1442, the only son of William de la Pole, first duke of Suffolk (1396-1450), and his wife, Alice Chaucer (d. 1475). 
Although the Suffolk earldom was poorly endowed, perhaps worth no more than the 1000 marks ($666 13's'. 4died) qualifying income for an earl, Alice herself inherited a considerable estate from her father, Sir Thomas Chaucer (died 1434), of Ewelme, Oxfordshire, and held substantial dowers from both her previous husbands, John Phelip and Thomas Montagu, earl of Salisbury. Including $359 of royal annuities, the income of John de la Pole's parents was assessed at only $1667 for tax in 1436. His father's career as Henry VI's favourite brought promotion to marquess (1444) and duke (1448) of Suffolk and substantial royal grants, including the lordship of Pembroke. William de la Pole's access to royal favour, especially royal wardships, promised further acquisitions of property by his son's marriage to either Anne Beauchamp or Margaret Beaufort, two great heirs respectively of the dukes of Warwick and Somerset. Following Anne's death in 1449, John de la Pole did indeed marry his distant cousin Margaret Beaufort (1443-1509) in his father's lifetime, and in 1450 was dispensed by Pope Nicholas V (1443-1509) to remain married. It was claimed that Duke William had intended this match to bring his son the crown: 'presumyng and pretendyng her [Margaret] to be next enheritable to the Crowne of youre Reame, for lakke of issue of your Soverayne lord' ('RotP', 5.177). During the 1440s John de la Pole appeared destined for a more financially secure career than any previous member of his family. It was not to be. 
In the spring of 1450, Duke William was impeached by the Commons and, although not convicted, was first exiled and then murdered. His moving letter of advice to his young son, written on 30 April, survives. Successive attempts to attaint Suffolk as a traitor and to confiscate his possessions were thwarted, but the royal grants that had served to endow his dukedom were resumed. Duke John was exempted from none of the 'Acts of Resumption' of 1450-56: hence he lost the constableship of Wallingford, Berkshire, and the stewardship of the Chiltern Hundreds to which he had been appointed jointly with his parents as an infant in 1445. The desired and anticipated accretions by marriage did not materialize. Moreover, the new duke's mother, Duchess Alice, retained not only her dowers and her inheritance, but also from Easter 1453 her dower of one-third from Duke William. Until she died in 1475, Duke John held only two-thirds of the original Suffolk endowment, valued at just $278 a year, a fraction of the normal endowment of a duke, and inadequate even for an earl or a baron. Certainly he could not maintain the estate worthy of a duke. On her death, Alice's Suffolk dower and jointure did indeed pass to Duke John, but her dowers from her previous two husbands inevitably reverted to their families, and her executors enjoyed the issues of her own enfeoffed estates for an indeterminate period. Moreover, Duke John by then had to provide for an eldest son. In 1478 he 'must make a shift for money and that in all haste' ('Paston Letters and Papers of the Fifteenth Century', 1.611) and had to pledge jewellery to the king. Unfortunately his proximity to the house of York never brought the material advancement that could reasonably have been expected. 
John de la Pole was a mere child at his father's death; although included in commissions from 1457, aged fifteen, he was not to come of full age until 1463. The reversion of the wardship of his person and lands on his father's death had been granted to his mother in 1444 and was confirmed in 1450, but it was resumed in 1450 and the lands were farmed out. His marriage with the seven-year-old Margaret Beaufort was easily set aside in 1453, when Henry VI, forgetful of his obligation to the duke's father, allocated Margaret and her inheritance to his own elder half-brother, Edmund Tudor. In return for a loan of 2000 marks, the estates were then farmed by the dowager duchess of Somerset. No alternative heiress was found for Suffolk. Instead in 1458 he married Elizabeth (1444-1503/4), the daughter of Richard, duke of York, and Cecily, 'nee' Neville. Their son, Richard de la Pole, was a later claimant to the English throne. Elizabeth was John's equal in rank, hailing indeed from the highest nobility, and York secured a second duke for his second daughter. Elizabeth brought only a marriage portion totalling 2300 marks ($1533): while this was a substantial sum for Duchess Alice, it fell far short of other marriage portions in this period -- it was only a third of what York paid for his elder daughter's marriage -- and was payable in instalments, which the financially embarrassed York was ill-placed to pay and some of which were still unpaid in 1472. 
From Suffolk's side the match was made by the duchess, apparently on 1-2 February 1458, when the king was negotiating the political reconciliation of York to the heirs of the lords killed in 1455 at St Albans, and to the queen and the Lancastrian government. It had been York who had pressed for the attainder of Duke William. The marriage was intended to reconcile the de la Poles with a former political enemy, include them in national reconciliation, and tie them to York, who was destined for a prominent role in the ruling regime. Such calculations were misjudged: Suffolk became bound to the opposition to regime and dynasty, and again hazarded the future of his house. The 'Loveday of St Paul's' of 24 March 1458, which it was hoped would end hostilities between the Yorkists and their enemies, brought no permanent peace. York was soon leader of opposition to the crown, driven into exile, and attainted at the Coventry parliament of 1459, when de la Pole himself was allegedly degraded from his dukedom to become mere earl of Suffolk. Benet's chronicle states that this was for marrying York's daughter. 
While this story cannot be substantiated -- there are too few references to the young duke at this stage of his minority -- it was not unjustified on grounds of qualifying income. If incorporated in an act of parliament now lost, like that of George Neville, duke of Bedford, in 1478, it was repealed with the acts of the Coventry parliament in 1460 and in practice earlier. The Lancastrian regime briefly appointed him a JP in 1460. It was kinship to York that caused him to join the Yorkists in the spring of 1461 at the battles of St Albans (7 February 1461) and Towton (29 March), which resulted in the accession of his brother-in-law, York's eldest son, as Edward IV. He was steward of England at King Edward's coronation. As 'brother' of the king, among those who put him on the throne, and one of only two adult dukes, should not he have shared in the fruits of victory that King Edward was to dispense so lavishly? 
Any such hopes were to be disappointed. Suffolk's inability to live at the level appropriate for a duke may have been a factor, although his dignity was explicitly confirmed on 23 March 1463 and his eldest son John de la Pole, the king's nephew, was created earl of Lincoln in 1467. It was only in 1463 that he was allowed to enter his lands: although this occurred three months earlier than the usual age of maturity, it compares unfavourably with the king's brothers, who came into their estates five years early. It immediately followed service against the northern Lancastrians and his attendance at the reinterment at Bisham Priory, Berkshire, of the earl of Salisbury, a Yorkist victim of Wakefield, and preceded his nomination as trier at the parliament of 1463. On 6 April 1465 he was granted 100 marks a year during Duchess Elizabeth's life, until the king could provide land of equal value. 
Suffolk featured prominently in state ceremonials, such as the tournament of Lord Scales against Antoine, count of La Roche, the Bastard of Burgundy, in 1467, and the coronation of Edward IV's queen, Elizabeth, in 1465, at which he bore the sceptre. He escorted Edward IV to London following his release by Warwick in September 1469, participated in the Lincolnshire campaign and Losecote Field early in 1470, was mistrusted by Henry VI's readeption government, and justified their mistrust by joining in Edward IV's victorious Barnet and Tewkesbury campaign in the spring of 1471. He duly took the oath of allegiance to the king's newly born heir, Prince Edward, on 3 July 1471, and did homage to the latter's brother, Prince Richard, in 1477. He may have been entrusted with the custody of Queen Margaret of Anjou in 1472. He was appointed high steward of Oxford University in 1472, elected a knight of the Garter about 1473, and was lieutenant of Ireland for four months from March to July 1478. In 1479-80 he alienated property to Edward IV's favourite foundation and chosen resting-place, St George's Chapel, Windsor. 
As a royal duke and the king's brother-in-law, Suffolk was useful to Edward IV. Undoubtedly he was proud of his dignity, for in 1471 he refused to attend parliament because he was unable to bring a retinue sufficient for his worship. But Suffolk was never a royal councillor. No other major grants came his way. Seen in the wider context of the family policy of Edward IV, who endowed his brothers more lavishly than any predecessor, selected only dukes and earls for his consort's sisters, and secured some of their husbands with substantial endowments, the under-resourced duke of Suffolk fared badly indeed. Apart from Wallingford and the Chiltern Hundreds, he secured little more than the custody of the lands of Lord Lovell in 1471, valuable in themselves and complementary to his own, but not including the marriage of the heir. His misfortune surely reflects unfavourably on the duke himself: on his compatibility with the king, and on his ability. That Duchess Elizabeth fared so much less favourably than her elder sister, Anne of Exeter, implies a weakness of character on her husband's part. Suffolk did not stand aloof from factional politics; he was a loyal member of the Yorkist house and shared in several of its victories that were far from predetermined for success. Luck, rather than studied calculation, explains his escape from the consequences of any major defeats and disasters. He avoided supporting causes that were lost, quickly acquiescing in the successions of Richard III and Henry VII. 
Suffolk's rank, rather than the extent of his estates, explains his presence on the commissions of the peace of Norfolk and Suffolk (in 1460, and from 1464), Oxfordshire (from 1466), and Berkshire (from 1468). He seems to have been as frequently at his mother's house at Ewelme as at his other East Anglian seats. Suffolk tried to influence the choice of sheriff in 1460 and, in co-operation with the duke of Norfolk, the election of Norfolk MPs in 1472. That he felt his relative poverty acutely is suggested by his unsuccessful attempt to buy part of the Fastolf inheritance in 1461, by his unjustified claim to Heylesdon and Drayton, Suffolk, and by his interest in other disputed property in 1462. In 1465 his men attacked Hellesdon, destroying the house and ransacking the church, and in 1467 he bought up the rights of Fastolf's feoffees for a song; maintenance and violence was alleged on other occasions. Suffolk escaped unpunished. His royal connections caused King Edward to turn a blind eye, but the duke was unable to secure the intervention on his side of either the king or the chancellor. 
Suffolk's later career was overshadowed by political events in which he played only a small part. He served on Edward IV's invasion of France in 1475 with 40 men-at-arms and 300 archers, a retinue that fell far short of those of other royal dukes. He remained of use to Richard III and Henry VII, his nephew by marriage, and bore the sceptre at both Richard's coronation and that of Henry's queen, Elizabeth of York. Although only cheap and insubstantial honours were granted to him, he continued to emphasize his dignity, in 1487 declining to attend a Garter feast for which insufficient provision had been made. His compliance with the state trial of his brother-in-law Clarence was secured by the lieutenancy of Ireland, which he presumably expected to last longer than it did, and a favourable (but small-scale) exchange of lands that gained him two Oxfordshire manors. His son Lincoln succeeded Richard III's own son as president of the council of the north, and was perhaps designated as his heir. Such favours did not embrace Suffolk, who even lost Wallingford to his erstwhile ward, Francis, Lord Lovell. Though Suffolk was not at Bosworth, Lincoln was, but escaped forfeiture. Suffolk was immediately reappointed to the constableship of Wallingford forfeited by Lovell, and was a trier in Henry VII's first parliament. In 1487 Lincoln rebelled with Lambert Simnel, taking the lead and perhaps seeking the crown, and was slain at the battle of Stoke. Suffolk himself was not implicated and was apparently still trusted: he was a trier at that year's parliament and took the muster of the Brittany expedition the next year, but lost his constableship of Wallingford. More seriously, when Lincoln was attainted for his treason and suffered forfeiture in 1487, Suffolk was allowed to save those family lands held by his son, but this concession applied to his life only, so that on his death it was an attenuated inheritance burdened by his duchess's dower that passed to his next son, Edmund de la Pole, who gave up the title of duke in return for forfeited land. Still apparently living on 14 but dead by 20 May 1492, Suffolk was buried with his duchess at his college of Wingfield, Suffolk; alabaster effigies were erected over their tombs. 


@@@@@


doc= 22451


Pole, Margaret, 'suo jure' countess of Salisbury (1473-1541), noblewoman, was the daughter of George, duke of Clarence (1449-1478), younger brother of Edward IV, and of his wife, Isabel Neville (1451-1476), eldest daughter and coheir of Richard Neville, earl of Warwick and Salisbury (known as the Kingmaker). 
At her birth on 14 August 1473 at Farley Castle, near Bath, Margaret's father stood third in line to the throne. Her brother, Edward, earl of Warwick (1475-1499), was the duke's only other surviving child. With the usurpation of Richard, duke of Gloucester, in 1483 the dynastic significance of Margaret and her brother increased. Consequently Richard incorrectly stated that Clarence's attainder barred his children from any claim to the throne, and ordered that they take up residence at Sheriff Hutton Castle in Yorkshire from September 1483. Henry VII's tenuous claims to the throne, combined with the disappearance of Edward IV's sons, further enhanced their importance at his accession in 1485. 
Following the Lambert Simnel uprising which championed the dynastic rights of Margaret's brother and culminated in the battle of Stoke on 16 June 1487, Henry arranged Margaret's marriage to 
Born in 1458 or 1459, Sir Richard was the eldest surviving child of Geoffrey Pole, esquire (died 1479), a Welshman who, it has been suggested, could claim descent from the princes of Powys. Richard's mother was Edith St John, half-sister of Margaret Beaufort, so making Richard Henry VII's cousin of the half-blood. Capable and loyal, with an endearing personality, Richard became one of the most crucial members of Henry's regime. Knighted after the battle of Stoke, he was at various times appointed an esquire of the body, constable of the castles of Harlech, Conwy, Montgomery, and Beaumaris, sheriff of Merioneth, chamberlain of north Wales, chamberlain of Chester, and a member of the council in the marches of Wales. In 1495, following Sir William Stanley's fall, Richard replaced him as justice of north Wales, and as constable of Caernarfon Castle and captain of the town. In 1493 he was appointed lord chamberlain to Prince Arthur, whose household was established that year at Ludlow. His high rank was recognized at Arthur's funeral when he received 29 yards of cloth, as was deemed appropriate for a baron with a retinue of six men. Pole was also appointed to commissions of the peace and various other commissions, several times held the position of captain in the king's army, and was steward and receiver of the lordships of Montgomery, Ceri, Cedewain, and Elvell. In April 1499 he officiated at the proxy wedding of Prince Arthur to Katherine of Aragon and was elected to the Order of the Garter in the same year. Following Arthur's death Richard's royal duties continued and in 1503 he accompanied Princess Margaret to Scotland for her marriage to King James IV. Sir Richard died in October 1504 and Henry granted his widow $52 6's'. 8died along with a loan of $40 to be repaid under generous terms, to ensure that her husband's funeral would be honourable. Richard Pole had inherited the manors of Medmenham, Ellesborough, and Stoke Mandeville in Buckinghamshire from his father, while the king granted him the manors of Long Wittenham and Fifield in Oxfordshire, probably upon his marriage. 
Margaret Pole had begun her married life at Bockmer in Medmenham, but she also resided at Stourton Castle in Staffordshire to be near her husband while he carried out his duties in Wales, and it was here that their son Reginald Pole was born. Margaret bore her husband five surviving children: Henry Pole, the future Lord Montagu (1492-1539), Arthur (died 'c'.1527/8), Ursula (died 1570), Reginald (1500-1558), and Geoffrey Pole (d. 1558). From December 1501 Margaret was a member of Katherine of Aragon's household and this marked the beginning of a loyal friendship, but she ceased to serve Katherine after Prince Arthur's death in 1502. Following her own husband's death Margaret was left in a difficult financial situation; her jointure provided little income, while Sir Richard's salary had come to an end. One consequence was that she was forced to give Reginald to the church, relinquishing all financial responsibility for him, an act he resentfully threw back in her face in 1536: 'you never took any care to provide for my living nor otherwise, as you did for other' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 11, no. 92). However, her fortunes improved with the accession of Henry VIII in 1509. She immediately became a member of Queen Katherine's chamber, and in February 1512 was restored to the earldom of Salisbury and all those lands which her brother Edward had held at the time of his death, a tacit recognition of the injustice of his execution. Although Margaret agreed to pay 5000 marks for her restoration, the terms were very generous when compared to the amounts other peers were constrained to pay. Margaret's lands were worth over $2000, but John Tuchet, Lord Audley, paid 6500 marks for the restoration of lands worth only $545 17's'. 17died 
As countess of Salisbury, Margaret Pole was the first and, apart from Anne Boleyn, the only woman in sixteenth-century England to hold a peerage title in her own right. Her estates fell within seventeen English counties, predominantly in the south and the midlands, in addition to lands in Wales and Calais. In 1538 her gross annual income of $2311 revealed her to be among the top five wealthiest peers of her generation and potentially one of the most influential women in England. An active landlord and employer, she appointed her officers, several of whom were women, wisely. Although her position was in direct contradiction to what was advocated for women, in many areas she successfully operated on an equal level with her male counterparts, for instance in the marriage negotiations of her children and grandchildren and in litigation. However, there were some areas in which her gender proved a barrier and it was here that she utilized the services of her sons, particularly Henry, Lord Montagu, who led her men in battle, sat in the Lords on her behalf, and represented her on commissions of the peace. The countess was also a supporter of the 'new learning' and a patron of humanist scholars, including Gentian Hervet of Orleans who translated Erasmus's 'De immensa misericordia Dei' into English at her command. Margaret's association with humanist scholars was no doubt encouraged by her son Reginald, who provided a channel of introduction for his humanist friends to his mother. Margaret maintained four main residences, but her principal seat was Warblington Castle in Hampshire, which she commissioned in 1517. It was at Warblington that she founded a hospital, while further up the coast in Christchurch Priory an impressive chantry was built as her intended resting place. 
Margaret Pole's restoration was obviously beneficial to her children, and in 1514 her second son, 
A similar fate befell Margaret Pole's only daughter, Ursula [
By 1518 Margaret Pole's restoration to the earldom of Salisbury had been marred by the repossession of several of her manors. It was unclear whether they belonged to the earldom of Salisbury or were part of the duchy of Somerset as the king was now alleging. In strict law neither party was entitled to the manors, but the king's claims were stronger and Margaret's stubborn refusal to accept this was a serious misjudgement. Relations were further damaged by Margaret's open support for Katherine of Aragon and Princess Mary following Henry's decision to annul his marriage. By May 1520 Margaret had been appointed governess to the princess and, although she had been removed by July 1521, when her sons came under suspicion of involvement with the duke of Buckingham's treason, she was reappointed in 1525. In 1533 she refused Henry's request to surrender the princess's jewels and plate, prompting the embattled Lord Hussey, Mary's lord chamberlain, to write to Cromwell 'wolde to god that the kyng and you dyd knowe and se what I have had to do here of late' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/78, fol. 160). When Mary's household was dissolved in December 1533 Margaret's offer to serve the princess at her own expense was firmly refused. Suggestions that she was implicated in the Nun of Kent affair, and her attempt to thwart the appointment of Cromwell's nominee as prior of Bisham, contributed to her deteriorating relationship with the king. When Chapuys asked in 1535 that Mary should again be placed under Margaret's care Henry exploded, describing the countess as 'a fool, of no experience' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 8, no. 263). Margaret's return to court in 1536 following the fall of Anne Boleyn was swiftly curtailed by the arrival of Reginald Pole's letter to Henry VIII, 'De unitate', which declared his opposition to the royal supremacy. Following a message from the king Margaret sent Reginald a letter of rebuke which was no doubt intended to be seen by the king's council. Although the letter admonished Reginald, it described his actions merely as 'folly' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 11, no. 93) and could have been delivered in much stronger terms. 
In August 1538 Geoffrey Pole was arrested following the discovery that he had been in communication with his brother Reginald, and the whole family was implicated along with several friends and associates. Margaret's interrogation began on 12 November and was carried out by William Fitzwilliam, earl of Southampton, and Thomas Goodrich, bishop of Ely. Innocent of any treasonous activity, she responded with firm and clear answers to all questions, Fitzwilliam declaring 'we have dealid with such a one as men have not dealid with to fore us, Wee may call hyr rather a strong and custaunt man than a woman' (BL, Cotton MS, appx L, fol. 79). Despite Fitzwilliam's dislike of her, his inability to intimidate her prompted a grudging tribute to her strength of character, 'we suppose, that there hath not been seen or her[d of a] woman, so earnest in her co[untenance] manlique in continuance and... so precise aswell in gest[ure or in] words, that wonder is to be' (ibid., fol. 77'b'). 
Margaret Pole was initially kept in custody at Cowdray, Fitzwilliam's residence, but by November 1539 she had been removed to the Tower. Her attainder passed through parliament in May 1539 in which she was accused, along with Hugh Vaughan, of having aided and abetted her sons Henry and Reginald and of having 'comytted and p[er]petrated div[er]se and sundrie other detestable and abhomynable treasons' (TNA: PRO, C.65/147, m. 22). In order to facilitate the endorsement of her attainder in the Lords, Cromwell produced a tunic allegedly found in one of her coffers which symbolized Reginald Pole's intention to marry Mary and restore papal authority to England. In all likelihood this tunic was fabricated by Cromwell, as Warblington and the countess's coffers had been thoroughly searched at her arrest in November 1538, and it is hard to believe that it did not come to light until six months later. 
The strategic position of Margaret Pole's estates on the south coast, the perceived invasion threat of 1539 in which Reginald Pole was involved, and her embittered relationship with Henry VIII precluded any chance of pardon. However, while in the Tower she was well provided for, the king paying $13 6's'. 8died a month for the diets of herself, her grandson Henry, son of Lord Montagu, and the son of the marquess of Exeter. She was also allowed a waiting woman to attend upon her who was paid 18died a week. In March 1541 the queen's tailor was paid $11 16's'. 4died as reimbursement for apparel bought and made for her and a month later a further 66's'. 8died was spent on necessaries for her. The decision to execute her only two months after Henry had spent a considerable sum on her new clothes suggests that it was a spontaneous, rather than a premeditated, one and might have resulted from her implication in the suspected involvement of Sir Thomas Wyatt and Sir John Wallop with Reginald Pole. The rising in the north in 1541 led by Sir John Neville, motivated by animosity to the royal supremacy, and the possible plans by Reginald to rescue his mother would also have contributed. In any case there seems to have been pressure to clear the Tower; according to Marillac, writing on 29 May, 'before St Johns tide, they reckon to empty the Tower of the prisoners now there for treason' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 16, no. 868). At 7 o'clock on the morning of 27 May 1541, Margaret was hustled out to a small block. After commending her soul to God, asking the small group present to pray for the royal family, and requesting to be remembered to Princess Mary, she suffered at the hands of 'a wretched and blundering youth... who literally hacked her head and shoulders to pieces in the most pitiful manner' ('CSP Spain', '1538-42', no. 166). Upon hearing the news of her death, her son Reginald announced to his 'thunder-struck' secretary that he was now the proud son of a martyr and disappeared into his closet for an hour, 'then came out as cheerful as before' ('Life of Cardinal Reginald Pole', 155-6). 
Margaret Pole's body was laid to rest in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula at the Tower, where her remains were discovered in 1876, revealing her to have been of above average height. The portrait believed to be of Margaret which hangs in the National Portrait Gallery has been approximately dated to between 1515 and 1525, thus probably capturing the countess in her forties. In 1886 she was beatified by Pope Leo XIII because she, and many others, had laid down their lives for the dignity of the Holy See 'and for the truth of the orthodox Faith' (Bartollini, 1). 


@@@@@


doc= 22452


Pole, Michael de la, first earl of Suffolk (c.1330-1389), administrator, was the eldest son of Sir William de la Pole (d. 1366) of Kingston upon Hull and his wife, Katherine. He was born before, though probably not long before, 1330. Although his father had enjoyed a remarkable career as a merchant and financier to the crown, much of his fortune had ultimately been lost as a result of a succession of lawsuits with the king. Most of what survived was held jointly with his wife, who did not die until January 1382. Thus when William died in 1366 Michael inherited little beyond an annuity of 400 marks ($266 13's'. 4died). 
As a young man de la Pole moved away from the mercantile circle into which he had been born, and made a military career for himself. He had been knighted by 1353, and served with Henry, duke of Lancaster (died 1361), in 1355. He also established links with Edward, the Black Prince, and campaigned with him in 1359. By January 1366 he had attained the rank of banneret and was summoned to parliament by individual writ, an honour that had eluded his father, who had sat in the Commons as MP for Kingston upon Hull. 
The Black Prince's patronage may have helped to bring about de la Pole's marriage 'c'.1358 to Katherine ('b'. 'c'.1349, died 1385), daughter of Sir John Wingfield of Wingfield, Suffolk. Sir John was one of the Black Prince's retainers and a member of his council. Katherine, his only child, was heir to an estate in East Anglia that included several manors in the honour of Eye. Much of it remained in the hands of her mother, Eleanor, until the latter's death in 1375, but de la Pole's future as a landowner lay in East Anglia, and in 1384 he received licence to crenellate Wingfield Castle, the centre of his wife's inheritance. 
When the war with France was resumed in 1369, de la Pole appears to have transferred his allegiance to John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and he received a fee from him every year from 1369 to 1382. He took part with the Black Prince in the siege and sack of Limoges in 1370, and remained in Gascony with Gaunt after the Black Prince returned home, an invalid, at the conclusion of the siege. He was with Gaunt on his long march from Calais to Bordeaux in 1373, and his appointment as admiral north of the Thames in November 1376 may have owed something to Gaunt's influence. His military reputation was well established, though his career had not been without its set-backs. He had twice been captured and imprisoned, and presumably ransomed, though nothing is known about the circumstances in either case. 
De la Pole's connections with Edward III's two most influential sons perhaps explain his rapid rise at the court of the Black Prince's son, Richard II, after 1377. He served at sea with Edward III's youngest son, Thomas of Woodstock, over the winter of 1377-8, and with Gaunt on the St Malo expedition later in 1378, but he was now approaching the age of fifty, and his service to the crown henceforth was to be largely of a civilian nature. In the spring of 1379 he was appointed as one of the ambassadors to negotiate the king's marriage. He went first to Milan, where inconclusive discussions were held about the possibility of Richard marrying Caterina Visconti, and then to Germany, where negotiations took place with Wenceslas, king of the Romans, following a proposal, which may have emanated from the pope, that Richard should marry Wenceslas's sister Anne. On the way from Italy to Germany de la Pole and his companions were held captive by brigands and Richard had to send one of his heralds to negotiate their release. They arrived back in England on 20 May 1380. His mission no doubt raised his status in Richard's eyes, but he was not yet completely identified with the court: in the parliament of November 1381 he was appointed, together with the earl of Arundel, to 'advise and govern the person of the king' ('RotP', 3.104). It is not clear what, if anything, he accomplished in this capacity, but it probably brought him closer to the king. 
In 1383 de la Pole's career began a rapid rise. The chancellor, Robert Braybrook, bishop of London, resigned on 10 March and after a brief interval Richard appointed Michael de la Pole to succeed him. The appointment does not appear to have been controversial: it is important not to read back to 1383 the hostility manifested towards him in 1386, which arose from his conduct as chancellor rather than his appointment. 
In explaining the growth of this hostility, foreign policy is probably the key issue. It has been argued that with de la Pole's appointment as chancellor the pursuit of peace with France 'may be said to have become the cardinal feature of English foreign policy' (Palmer, 'England, France and Christendom', 44). In seeking peace de la Pole almost certainly had the full support of the king. The Commons in parliament were reluctant to grant the necessary taxes to finance the war, and in military terms the French had regained the initiative in the Low Countries. There seemed little point in trying to reassert English influence there with inadequate financial resources. 
According to Walsingham, de la Pole attempted unsuccessfully to abort the planned 'crusade' to Flanders led by the bishop of Norwich which was intended to counter Franco-Burgundian influence there. The disastrous outcome of the 'crusade', however, played into de la Pole's hands, and on 8 September 1383 John of Gaunt and Thomas of Woodstock were appointed to negotiate peace with France. A truce was agreed on 26 January 1384, but, following a debate in the Salisbury parliament of April that year, all that was accomplished was a prolongation of the truce until May 1385, by which time the increased belligerence of the French and their Scottish allies rendered any possibility of a negotiated peace very remote. 
Although a strong case could be made on financial grounds for a peace settlement, the political community had not been convinced that de la Pole's proposed terms were in the crown's interests, and his failure afterwards to send military support to Ghent, the last Flemish town to hold out against Philip the Bold, duke of Burgundy, enabled Philip to consolidate his authority in Flanders and bring the county into the war against England. The collapse of English influence in Flanders was in itself enough to explain de la Pole's growing unpopularity: his attempt to negotiate peace had produced nothing but disadvantages for England. 
There can be little doubt, however, that de la Pole had pursued his peace policy with the full support of the king, and despite his failure to secure a lasting settlement he was well rewarded for his efforts. In the summer of 1385 he brought a retinue of sixty men-at-arms and eighty archers to serve on the king's expedition to Scotland. De la Pole was now at least fifty-five years of age, and this was to prove his last campaign. He saw no serious fighting, but 'at Hoselaw in Teviotdale' on 6 August ('Reports from the Lords' Committees... Touching the Dignity of a Peer', 5 vols., 1820-29, 5.69) Richard conferred on him the title of earl of Suffolk, and shortly afterwards granted him lands to the value of $500 from the inheritance of the last Ufford earl of Suffolk, which had escheated to the crown in 1382. Virtually all the lands were in the hands of the queen and Ufford's widow for their lives, however, and for the time being his income had to be secured on other sources. 
The parliament of October 1385 confirmed the king's grant of the earldom of Suffolk to de la Pole, but at the same time it was critical of the king's -- and by implication de la Pole's -- handling of finance. The truce of 1383-5 had not brought about any significant improvement in royal finances, and de la Pole had attempted to finance the Scottish expedition by reviving the obsolete feudal levy of scutage. When parliament met in October, the Commons attributed the government's financial embarrassment to the king's extravagance, and insisted on a series of reforms in return for a grant of taxation. However, the reforms proved ineffective (for which the Commons were later to blame Suffolk), and over the following year the financial crisis deepened further. The threat of a French invasion necessitated expenditure on coastal defence in south-east England, and by October 1386 the government had no alternative but to summon parliament, the so-called Wonderful Parliament, and seek a tax. The tax that Suffolk now requested from the Commons, however, was unprecedentedly high: he asked for four fifteenths and tenths, all to be paid within one year. This provoked a political crisis which led to Suffolk's downfall. 
The Commons demanded the dismissal and impeachment of the chancellor before they would agree to consider any other business, while Richard for his part refused to meet parliament, saying, according to Knighton, that he would not dismiss even a scullion from his kitchen at parliament's request. Under the scarcely veiled threat of deposition, the king gave way. Suffolk was dismissed from the chancery, and the Commons proceeded to impeach him on seven charges, all of which related to his conduct as chancellor. 
J. S. Roskell has analysed the charges under two broad headings, those that accused him of failing in his duties as chancellor, and those that accused him of misusing his office to obtain personal benefits. Three of the four charges relating to his failings in office were substantial, and modern scholarship has established that there was a case to answer on each of them. He was accused of failing to implement the ordinance for financial reform agreed in the previous parliament, of failing to ensure that the tax granted in the previous parliament had been spent in the way parliament had authorized, thus jeopardizing the safe keeping of the seas, and of failing to send military help to the rebels in Ghent, so that the town was lost to the Burgundians. 
Suffolk was able to show, in respect of the first charge, that some attempt at economy had been made, mainly by savings on the cost of the garrisons of Cherbourg and Brest, but he was unable to offer any other examples, and the implication of his defence was that he had indeed failed to achieve savings elsewhere. It was also true that at least $5000 of the tax revenue raised under the terms of the parliamentary grant in October 1385 had not been spent on the navy, as parliament had required. As far as Ghent was concerned, parliament in 1385 had authorized the government to borrow 10,000 marks ($6666 13's'. 4died) to finance a military expedition in support of the rebels holding out in the town against the duke of Burgundy. Most of the money was indeed spent on a force for that purpose, but by the time it was mustered it was too late and the rebels had submitted to the duke. Thus the charge against Suffolk was true in essentials, though the force was diverted to reinforce the garrison of Berwick against the threat from Scotland after the expiry of the truce. 
Although there was substance to all three charges, Suffolk successfully argued that he was not solely responsible, and that the negligence of which the Commons complained was the fault of the government as a whole, not just the chancellor. The Lords' judgment was that Suffolk should not be found guilty alone, without the others who had been members of the council at the time. The final charge in this group, that Suffolk had improperly granted charters of pardons for felonies and had sold justice, was perhaps less significant. He did not try to defend himself seriously against the charge, and it is unlikely that he was doing anything that would have seemed unacceptable to his predecessors in office. In the judgment against him it was merely declared that any illegal grants should be revoked. 
The charges in the second group, which dealt with Suffolk's supposed personal benefits from office, are by their nature more difficult to substantiate. He was accused of purchasing lands for less than they were worth, and it was implied that he had not been worthy of the substantial inheritance conferred upon him when he was created earl of Suffolk. He defended himself by reminding his accusers of his military and diplomatic career. His brother-in-law, Richard, Lord Scrope (died 1403), himself a former chancellor, added that Suffolk had served as a banneret for upwards of thirty years 'without dishonour or reproach' ('RotP', 3.217), and had been sufficiently well endowed to maintain the estate nearest to that of an earl. Suffolk went on to argue that many of the lands granted to him were in the hands of others for their lives: the real benefit to him of the grants was much less than the Commons believed. None the less, he was found guilty of misusing his position as chancellor to further his own interests, and he was sentenced to forfeiture of all the lands he had received by royal grant, though he was allowed to retain his title as earl of Suffolk. The other two articles referred to specific issues. He was accused of misappropriating an annuity of $50 granted by Edward III to Tideman Lemberg (died 1386) and subsequently forfeited to the crown, and of procuring for himself the income in England of the order of St Antoine de Vienne, confiscated by the crown during the papal schism. In all probability Suffolk was guilty on both counts; certainly the Lords found him so, and he was required to forfeit all his income from both sources. 
Thus there was substance to most of the major charges against Suffolk, and in addition to the sentences imposed in respect of specific charges he was sentenced to be imprisoned until he paid a fine, which Walsingham said amounted to 20,000 marks ($13,333 6's'. 8died). In impeaching him, however, the Commons were not just attacking him personally, but also expressing their lack of confidence in the government and in particular their suspicions about the integrity of the royal financial administration. On the other hand Suffolk was more than a mere scapegoat: he had been deeply involved in royal finance and diplomacy, yet, as he argued, others were responsible as well as he for the mistakes and negligence that formed the basis of the charges against him. 
According to the 'Eulogium historiarum sive temporis' parliament ordered Suffolk to be confined within Corfe Castle, but if this is true it proved to be a very brief period of imprisonment. The king remitted the penalty and by Christmas he was free again and joined the king at Windsor. In 1387 he accompanied the king on his progress round England. He seems to have taken an aggressive stance in defence of the king's rights, and his opponents believed that he encouraged the king to defy the commission of government imposed on Richard in the previous parliament. Knighton maintained that he threatened Chief Justice Robert Bealknap with death if he did not put his seal to the document embodying the judges' answers to Richard's questions about his rights put to them at Nottingham in August. In mid-November, when both the king's associates and their opponents were preparing to resort to arms, the Monk of Westminster maintained that Suffolk tried unsuccessfully to persuade the king to have the earl of Warwick put to death on the ground that he was the opposition's ringleader. Some days later, according to Walsingham, he tried so hard to prevent any reconciliation between the king and Gloucester that the bishop of London had to persuade him to be silent. 
Attempts at mediation between the king and his opponents made little headway, and on 14 November Gloucester, Arundel, and the earl of Warwick published an appeal of treason (from which they were known as the lords appellant) against Suffolk, Robert de Vere, earl of Oxford (died 1392), and three others of the king's closest associates. The three original appellant lords were joined by two others, Henry, earl of Derby, and Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham, and de Vere's attempt to settle the issue in favour of the king by force failed at Radcot Bridge on 20 December. By this time Suffolk may already have fled abroad. First of all he attempted to seek refuge in Calais, where his brother Edmund was captain of the castle. According to Knighton he shaved off his hair and beard, and attempted to gain entry to the castle disguised as a Flemish poulterer with a basket of capons. But his brother recognized him -- with difficulty -- and refused to admit him without the agreement of Sir William Beauchamp (died 1411), the governor of the town. This was not forthcoming, and Beauchamp sent him back to London. The king then allowed him to go to Kingston upon Hull, and Suffolk eluded a royal serjeant who had been sent there on 27 December to arrest him by fleeing to Dordrecht. He eventually reached Paris, though possibly no earlier than the summer of 1389. 
Suffolk was convicted of treason in his absence by the Merciless Parliament which assembled on 3 February 1388. The essence of the charges against him, the earl of Oxford, and the other three was that they had accroached the royal power, had sought to impede the work of the commission established in the previous parliament, and had used their influence over the king to further their own ends. All four lay appellees were sentenced to death and all of them to forfeiture of their lands, titles, goods, and chattels. Suffolk himself was out of reach of his accusers, but all his lands and goods were taken into the king's hands and he was deprived of his earldom. Under a statute passed at the end of the parliament, however, the entailed lands of the earldom were exempted from permanent forfeiture. Michael de la Pole did not long survive his downfall. He died in Paris on 5 September 1389, and Walsingham observed that 'his spirit deservedly departed from its earthly pilgrimage' ('Historia Anglicana', 2.187). Walsingham also stated that he left all his money and goods to his fellow exile, Robert de Vere. However, the former archbishop of York, Alexander Neville (died 1392), who had also escaped the appellants in 1388 and was in exile in Paris, said in a letter to the abbot of Selby that de la Pole had bequeathed him 20,000 gold pounds to enable him to pursue his right at the curia in Rome. Even if this sum is taken to mean pounds of Paris or Tours rather than sterling ($4000 sterling if pounds of Paris, or $3000 if pounds of Tours) it suggests that de la Pole had been able to obtain substantial resources from England, in spite of the forfeiture of all his property. 
Michael de la Pole's career was to demonstrate more clearly even than that of his father the opportunities for social advancement in late fourteenth-century England, but also the attendant risks. Despite his impeachment in 1386 and exile in 1388, he brought his family to the front rank of English society, and laid the foundations of its power and prosperity. His rapid advancement through the English nobility and to the highest office in government owed much to his sense of loyalty to the king. In his speech at the opening of his first parliament as chancellor in October 1383 he laid stress on the subject's duty of obedience to the king and his ministers, and his attempt to prevent the king's reconciliation with the duke of Gloucester in November 1387 may have been grounded in this view of the nature of royal authority and the duty of subjects. In his pursuit of peace with France after 1383, too, he may have been motivated in part by a belief that disputes over finance were damaging the authority of the crown. 
Among his contemporaries, however, there was a sense that de la Pole was something of an outsider. For all his eminence, his family's mercantile origins were not easily forgotten, and there may still have been some resentment against the family because of William de la Pole's financial dealings with Edward III. Walsingham acidly observed that Michael de la Pole was a man more suited to commerce than to warfare, and the suggestion at his impeachment that he lacked the status to justify his promotion to an earldom may have reflected the same feeling, however unfair such a suggestion may have been. 
De la Pole himself did not forget his family's origins in Kingston upon Hull. He retained a house there which, at the time of his forfeiture in 1388, had substantial furnishings as well as silver plate to the value of $40 13's'. 10died In 1377 he obtained leave from Edward III to alter his father's plan to found a house of Poor Clares in the town, and establish instead a house of thirteen Carthusian monks with a hospital attached. De la Pole intended his foundation to serve as a family mausoleum. In her will drawn up in 1381 his mother asked to be buried there; his wife was buried there in 1385, and some time in the 1390s de la Pole's own body was brought back from Paris and interred there. 
Michael de la Pole had six children. His eldest son, Michael de la Pole (1367/8-1415), seems to have sympathized with the lords appellant in 1387-8. He gained possession of the entailed lands of his family -- which had been confiscated only during his father's lifetime -- shortly after his father's death. In January 1398 the judgment against his father was annulled, and the younger Michael was restored to the title and lands of the earldom. The first earl's second son, William, became a canon of Beverley, and his third son, Thomas, married Anne Cheyne. Two other sons died, probably in infancy or childhood. His elder daughter, Anne, married Gerard Lisle, while his younger daughter, Margaret, remained unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 22453


Pole, Michael de la, second earl of Suffolk (1367/8-1415), magnate, was the eldest son and heir of Michael de la Pole, first earl of Suffolk (d. 1389), and his wife, Katherine, daughter of Sir John Wingfield. 
De la Pole's father, chancellor of England from March 1383 to October 1386 and one of Richard II's closest advisers, was impeached by the Lords and Commons in October 1386 as a result of his perceived responsibility for the failures of royal policy at home and abroad. He fled into exile following the appeal of treason against him in the Merciless Parliament and the title of earl of Suffolk, together with the de la Pole family estates, were consequently forfeited to the crown, though the younger Michael and his wife were granted three east midlands manors, extended at $100 p.a., for their maintenance. De la Pole's principal occupation over the next decade lay in seeking to reverse, through repeated petitions to the king and council, the effects of this judgment. Following his father's death abroad he successfully obtained piecemeal possession of the entailed family estates between 1389 and 1392 but his closeness to the former appellants, in particular Thomas Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, his wife's uncle, and Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester, with whom he undertook to crusade in Lithuania in 1391, did not recommend his cause to the king. It was not until January 1398, five years after the earldom of Oxford had been restored to the de Veres, that de la Pole regained his own family's comital title and, even then, some of the former de la Pole possessions, such as the reversion of Costessey, Suffolk, continued to elude him. 
The new earl's conduct during the political crisis of 1399 was as equivocal as that of most of the rest of the English aristocracy. Suffolk obeyed the summons of Edmund, duke of York, to defend the kingdom in July 1399, bringing with him a force of 29 men-at-arms and 109 archers, but raised no objection to the subsequent disbanding of York's army and consented to the deposition and perpetual imprisonment of King Richard. Suffolk's reward was not long in coming. Although Henry IV's first parliament annulled all the acts of the Shrewsbury parliament and confirmed all those of the Merciless Parliament, with the result that the de la Pole estates and titles were once again technically forfeit to the crown, they were at once restored to de la Pole 'in consideration of his services after the King's advent' ('RotP', 3.668). His tenacious quest for full restoration of his father's estates nevertheless continued to occupy him until his death. 
The restored earl of Suffolk did not play a prominent part in the government of the early Lancastrian kings. Though a relatively assiduous attender at great councils and parliaments -- where he acted as a trier of Gascon petitions in 1404, 1411, 1413, and 1414 -- de la Pole was never nominated as a royal councillor, never witnessed a royal charter, nor held an office of state. His record of military and diplomatic service was a little more substantial, though his son's later claim that Suffolk had served Henry IV 'in all the viages in his daies both by See and Lande, that were made out of this lande' ('RotP', 5.176) appears a little exaggerated. He campaigned with the king in Scotland in 1400, jointly supplying (with the earl of Westmorland) a large force of 200 men-at-arms and 1000 archers, and undertook in the same year to supply a ship with 20 men-at-arms and 40 archers for the defence of the channel. Later he participated in naval operations himself, most probably those against Sluys and Cadsand commanded by Thomas of Lancaster, in May 1405, and went abroad on the king's service between December 1408 and August 1409, acting as the senior English representative at the Council of Pisa, though he appears to have played no substantive part in proceedings. He acted as one of the principal captains to Thomas, duke of Clarence, on his campaign through France to Gascony in 1412-13. 
It was at the regional, rather than the national, level that Suffolk was most active and successful. Although he did not neglect the family's Yorkshire lands, completing the endowment of the Carthusian house in Hull and the Maisondieu at Myton-on-Humber founded by his father, his principal achievement lay in the revival and consolidation of de la Pole influence in East Anglia. A justice of the peace in both Norfolk and Suffolk from 1399 until his death, and a frequent commissioner of array in Suffolk, the earl used the resources of his estates in the region and his mother's Wingfield connections to good advantage, building up a following among the local gentry, such as Sir Roger Drury, Sir William Bardwell, and the youthful John Fastolf, and marrying several children into neighbouring noble families. At Wingfield, Suffolk, the centre of de la Pole influence in the region, he completed his father's ambitious building plans, augmenting the endowment of the family chantry college and considerably enlarging the church of Wingfield itself. By such means he reinvigorated the tradition of unemphatic but effective local lordship associated with the last Ufford earl of Suffolk and earned his own reputation as 'a knight of excellent and most gracious name' ('Gesta Henrici quinti', 50). By his studied respectability he successfully removed from his family's reputation the taint of scandal that had hitherto hung about it. 
Suffolk served in Henry V's expedition to France in 1415, bringing with him a force of 40 men-at-arms and 120 mounted archers, and died of dysentery on 17 September during the siege of Harfleur. His body was shipped home to England and buried, as he had requested in his will, at Wingfield, Suffolk. De la Pole had married Katherine, daughter of Hugh Stafford, second earl of Stafford, in April 1383. The couple had possibly twelve children, of whom five sons and five daughters survived infancy. Two of his daughters were married into the East Anglian nobility: Isabel, who took with her a dowry of 800 marks, to Thomas, Lord Morley, and Elizabeth to Edward, son and heir of Hugh, Lord Burnell; a third daughter, Katherine de la Pole, became abbess of Barking. Of his sons, Michael ['see below'] was third earl and William de la Pole (1396-1450), who had been placed in the household of his uncle, Edmund Stafford, bishop of Exeter, succeeded him to become fourth earl and first duke of Suffolk. De la Pole's third son, Alexander, was killed at the battle of Jargeau in June 1429, and his fourth, John, died in French captivity soon after the same battle; his youngest son, Thomas, a clerk, died in 1433 while a hostage with the French for his elder brother, completing a toll of war-related fatalities almost unrivalled among the English aristocracy. 


@@@@@


doc= 22454


Michael de la Pole, third earl of Suffolk (c.1395-1415), soldier, served with his father in France in 1415 with a company of 20 men-at-arms and 60 archers. He was one of the few notable English fatalities at the battle of Agincourt and was mourned by the English chroniclers: 'as strong, as active and as daring as any member of the court' ('Gesta Henrici quinti', 51). He had married, before 24 November 1403, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas (I) Mowbray, duke of Norfolk, with whom he had three daughters, Katherine ('b'. 1410), Elizabeth ('b'. 1411), and Isabel ('b'. 1415). 


@@@@@


doc= 22455


Pole, Ralph (b. in or before 1400, d. 1460), justice, was the eldest son of Peter Pole (died 'c'.1443) of Radbourne, Derbyshire, and Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Sir John Laughton and Eleanor, sister and heir of Sir John Chandos. Like his father he became a lawyer, and may have been educated at Lincoln's Inn. Ralph Pole had reached his majority by 1421, and was retained in 1439 as an apprentice-at-law by the duchy of Lancaster, the overlord of much of the Pole estate and employer of both his father and grandfather. Soon after he had become a serjeant-at-law, in 1443, he was named to a series of judicial posts for the duchy -- first in south Wales, and later at Lancaster, where he became chief justice in 1456. In 1452 he was appointed to the king's bench, and assigned to the northern assize circuit, where he also sat as a JP until his death. During the troubled 1450s he was a mainstay of the Lancastrian regime, raising loans for the defence of Calais, and holding sessions under special commissions appointed to quell disorder. 
From 1436 onwards Pole collected fees from a number of private employers, including Henry Grey, Lord Grey of Codnor, James Butler, earl of Ormond and of Wiltshire (died 1461), and Sir John Fastolf (died 1459). He was also part of the team of legal counsel for the city of York in its dispute with St Mary's Abbey over navigational rights in the Ouse River. Humphrey, duke of Buckingham (died 1460), retained him from 1443, and he also enjoyed the good lordship of John Talbot, second earl of Shrewsbury (died 1460), and probably that of John Beaumont, Viscount Beaumont (died 1460). By 1452 he was a member of Queen Margaret's council, but did not share the queen's enmity towards the duke of York, with whom he held oyer and terminer sessions in Derby during the duke's first protectorate. Pole also sat with Justice Richard Bingham in sessions at York in November 1454, during which the Percys were fined for offences against the Nevilles. In April 1457, however, he attended the sessions held at Hereford where supporters of the Yorkist Sir William Herbert (died 1469) were indicted, and remained a committed Lancastrian until his death. 
Pole had inherited his father's large estate in Staffordshire and Derbyshire about 1443. With his wife, Joan, whom he had married by 1434, and who was the daughter of Sir Thomas Grosvenor of Hulme, Cheshire, he had a son, Ralph, and two daughters, Alice and Mary. The younger Ralph married Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of Sir Reginald Motton of Peckleton, Leicestershire, by 1455, and Alice married John, son and heir of Nicholas Fynderne of Findern, Derbyshire, in 1450, after which the justice became closely involved in the legal affairs of that family. Justice Pole died in 1460, probably in the spring, and was buried in Radbourne church, where a tomb survives commemorating him and his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 22456


Pole, Reginald (1500-1558), cardinal and archbishop of Canterbury, was probably born at Stourton Castle, Staffordshire, in March 1500. He was the third son of Sir Richard Pole (1458/9-1504), a client and relation of Henry VII and an important figure in north Wales, not least as chamberlain to Prince Arthur, and his wife, Margaret Pole (nee Plantagenet), countess of Salisbury (1473-1541), who was the daughter of George, duke of Clarence, brother of Edward IV. 
After being educated first either at Christ Church, Canterbury, or at the Charterhouse at Sheen, Pole went to Oxford, where he was a member of Magdalen College from about 1512 until about 1519. In 1512 Henry VIII paid him a pension of $12 and repeated the gift in the following year. William Latimer was apparently his principal tutor and Thomas Linacre may also have taught him between 1518 and 1520. Pole was admitted BA on 27 June 1515. On 12 February 1518 the king granted him the deanery of Wimborne Minster, Dorset (he was deprived in June 1537), and on 19 March he was collated to the prebend of Ruscombe Southbury, Salisbury, only to exchange it on 10 April 1519 for Yetminster secunda (of which he was deprived before 13 July 1537). 
Almost certainly in 1521 Pole went to Padua with a $100 stipend from the king, having persuaded Thomas Wolsey to subvent his trip. The Venetian signory treated him as an important person and lodged him in the Palazzo Roccabonella. Pietro Bembo, doyen of Paduan humanists, introduced him to a wide circle of churchmen and writers, especially Gianmatteo Giberti, formerly Leo X's datary and chief minister, and Jacopo Sadoleto. Through Giberti, Pole met Gianpietro Carafa, the future Paul IV; relations with him remained important throughout Pole's career. Others he knew at Padua included several future cardinals and allies, among them Rodolfo Pio, Otto Truchsess, Stanislaus Hosius, Cristoforo Madruzzo, and Giovanni Morone, as well as Pier Paolo Vergerio the younger, Pietro Martire Vermigli (Peter Martyr), and Vettor Soranzo, the last three to be condemned as heretics. Christophe Longueil, Belgian cultivator of Cicero and polemicist against Luther, died in Pole's household and left Pole his library and some manuscript works. Pole's first published writing was Longueil's biography (1525). 
Niccolo Leonico Tomeo tutored Pole, along with the shadowy Battista Leoni and Lazzaro Bonamico, whom Pole would unsuccessfully try to convert from grammarian into philosopher or theologian. Leonico dedicated his 'Dialogi' (1524) to Pole, who also became known to Erasmus through Thomas Lupset. More important to Pole were Marcantonio Flaminio and Pole's lifelong companion, Alvise Priuli. Priuli, a member of a Venetian banking family whose brother would become doge, shared (when he did not initiate) Pole's most central religious and personal experiences. Pole was away from Padua for much of the first eight months of 1524 and again in 1525, when he made a brief visit to Rome for the jubilee. His studies were partly financed by his election as a fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 14 February 1523, which allowed him to study abroad for three years. 
Pole returned home about the end of that period, having remained in Padua until July 1526, when he went to France, escorted by Lupset. He probably arrived in England in 1527, though his presence there is not recorded before November 1528. Shortly before Pole left Padua, on 10 April 1526, his brother Henry, Lord Montagu, presented him to the living of South Harting, Sussex. On 22 April 1527 he was admitted to the prebend of Knaresborough in York Minster, and on 25 July he was presented to a canonry in Exeter Cathedral; four days later he was elected dean (confirmed on 12 August; deprived June 1537). In October 1529 Pole was sent to Paris in order to help secure a favourable opinion from the university doctors on Henry's divorce. Pole would later make it appear that he had tried to avoid the assignment, but the evidence does not support his version. This was to be only the first of many such reworkings of his life's story. 
In fact Pole succeeded completely in his errand and returned home in the summer of 1530 to great expectations. For at least some of the time which he spent in England he lived in John Colet's former house at Sheen. It may be that Pole began to learn Hebrew from Robert Wakefield; if so, this might mean that Henry intended to make further use of Pole in the divorce project. Yet probably in May or June 1531 Pole gave Henry an analysis of the political difficulties in the way of a divorce, particularly the dangers to the succession and from foreign princes. Pole told various stories, and his biographers added their versions, of what he did before offering that opinion, but none can be corroborated; it is clear only that Pole left England again in January or February 1532 without the promotion, perhaps even the archbishopric of York, that had seemed certain. Pole was soon claiming to have given the king his negative opinion about the divorce, but this seems unlikely, above all since he almost certainly at least tacitly acquiesced in convocation's acceptance of Henry VIII's supreme headship in February 1531. Had he opposed the king's wishes it is difficult to see how he could have avoided an indictment for 'praemunire', like that which fell on fifteen others, or the loss of his benefices. 
Pole's story of an interview with Thomas Cromwell that allegedly caused him to flee England is almost certainly an invention. If it occurred, the encounter must have fallen between Pole's return from Italy (as he stated) and departure for Paris, that is, before October 1529. Had Pole already been as fearful of the consequences of Cromwell's policy as he later maintained, he would have behaved strangely not only in helping enthusiastically in Paris, but also in returning to England for another year and a half. In the story which Pole later told Charles V, Cromwell recommended Machiavelli's 'Prince' as the ideal statesman's manual, and brushed aside Pole's attempts to defend a more traditional political morality as being mere school exercises. 
After he left England in early 1532 Pole made a six-month stop in Avignon and then Carpentras with Sadoleto before heading via Verona for Padua where he arrived before the end of October. On the way he read Sadoleto's 'De liberis recte instituendis' ('On the proper education of boys'), which helped to trigger profound reflections about the limits of human reason and the superiority to philosophy of theology, which Pole claimed had been his sole study for the last four years. That would date to Wakefield's tutoring in Hebrew and produce the great irony that it was Henry who made Pole a theologian. Others quickly saw his potential, especially the imperial ambassador, Eustace Chapuys, who tried as early as 1533 to persuade the emperor of Pole's usefulness against Henry. Chapuys suggested that Pole marry Princess Mary and draw on his family's base of support in Wales. It was probably this dynastic threat which gave most concern to Henry. Pole's client Thomas Starkey also foresaw great things for his patron, casting him as an expert on the commonwealth in his 'Dialogue between Pole and Lupset' written between 1529 and 1532. On 20 December 1532 Pole received his last English benefice, the rectory of Piddletown, Dorset (vacated January 1536). 
During his second visit to Italy, Pole was especially close to Cosmo Gheri, the young bishop of Fano, but more importantly he became a client of Gasparo Contarini, soon to be a cardinal and leader of the reform wing in Rome, and developed deep ties to several Cassinese Benedictines, especially Gregorio Cortese and Marco the monk. Cassinese spirituality was central to Pole's experience and he would later be protector of the order. 
Pole kept mainly to Padua and its vicinity until his call to Rome in July 1536. In the interval he underwent a religious conversion and wrote his most famous book, 'Pro ecclesiasticae unitatis defensione' ('Defence of the unity of the church'), known as 'De unitate' (first published at Rome in 1539). Pole's conversion gave him a scriptural religion especially drawn from Paul, rooted in justification by faith. 'De unitate' was begun in response to Henry's demands for Pole's opinion on two points: the legitimacy of marriage to a dead brother's wife; and the divine establishment of the papacy. Pole did not begin to write seriously until late summer, having on 17 June sent Edmund Harvel to the emperor with plans for dealing with Henry, while Contarini had virtually asked imperial protection for Pole. The emperor replied quickly if noncommittally. Henry urged Pole on by sending copies of books by Richard Sampson and Stephen Gardiner. Pole contemptuously dismissed Gardiner but directed much of 'De unitate' against Sampson's argument for the royal supremacy, the blame for which he now laid squarely on Henry and on Anne Boleyn. None the less Pole also regularly argued after 'De unitate' that bishops like Sampson had betrayed their flocks' trust by failing to resist the king. 
Pole justified 'De unitate's' violent language with the claim that Henry VIII's desperate situation demanded strong remedies. One of these was a joint appeal to the nobility of England and to Charles to take action. The first succeeded only in making the emperor deeply suspicious. Pole correctly claimed that he wrote in defence of ecclesiastical unity, but he did not put forward the strongly papalist views that have often been ascribed to him. Just as important, the work reflected Pole's nascent stress on faith and experience as the basis of his religion (Pole glossed the book as being about how heresy arose from 'confidence in human reason' (MS Vat. lat. 5967, fols. 504ff.)) and deep trust in prophetic solutions. 'De unitate' is also important for its contribution to the hagiography of John Fisher and Thomas More, in which Pole would further interest himself thereafter. It concluded with an extended call to Henry to repent. 
Although Pole insisted that he intended his writing for Henry alone, many others had been involved in its composition, especially Contarini and Priuli. While he was writing 'De unitate' Pole was also instructing Contarini in how to deal with Charles V, then in Rome, as well as planning his own mission to the emperor. He also began spreading defamatory rumours about Henry, not for the last time, being largely responsible for the tale that Henry had Thomas Becket's bones burnt, a probably mythical action that finally triggered publication of the king's excommunication on 17 December 1538. On 27 May 1536 Pole dispatched 'De unitate'. He suggested that Henry appoint a committee to read the book, and the king agreed, among those nominated being Pole's former clients Starkey and Richard Morison. Cromwell increasingly stridently demanded that Pole come home, and Pole reacted by making Cromwell, along with Henry, the villain in the destruction of the English church. He had already opened negotiations via Contarini about a summons for himself to Rome. It came on 19 July 1536. Pole had not given up on England and corresponded with Cuthbert Tunstall throughout the summer. Starkey and Morison also tried to persuade Pole to embrace the marriage and the new English ecclesiastical order, and he admitted that he could see nothing wrong with the ten articles, except for the supreme headship. Even before Pole reached Rome, moreover, Contarini had consulted him on the germ of what became the important (if never executed) reform document, the 'Consilium de emendanda ecclesia' (1538), written by a commission on which Pole served immediately after his arrival in Rome. It blamed excessive papal power for the church's woes. 
On 22 December 1536 Pole was made a cardinal and shortly thereafter, on 7 February 1537, appointed legate with instructions dated 14 February covering peace, the Turks, and the general council. His real assignment was to assist the Pilgrimage of Grace. Since Pole had hoped for such a mission earlier in 1536 and shortly after his promotion spelled out for Paul III exactly what it should do, it seems unlikely, as his biographers claimed, that Pole resisted becoming a cardinal in any more than nominal fashion. The legation had to supply funds to the rebels and Paul III agreed, giving Pole a letter of full papal credit in order to raise money in Flanders. Pole's mission posed three other threats to Henry VIII. He might publish 'De unitate'; he might release Henry's excommunication; but perhaps most dangerously, he had in his company the young earl of Kildare, heir to one of the most powerful Anglo-Irish families, whose father Henry had recently had executed, and was paying particular attention to Ireland. Giberti, sent because of his high diplomatic standing, directed Pole's operations. Two days after his appointment Pole wrote to both Cromwell and the council saying there was no point in further correspondence but expressing his eagerness to talk face to face. The English held out the prospect of a conference in Flanders. The degree of uncertainty Pole's actions aroused in England is well indicated by a report that he might, but also might not, lose his benefices. He travelled slowly, constantly worried about money, leaving Rome on 18 February and reaching Lyons only on 24 March. The encouragement of a bull of 31 March 1537, granting a crusading indulgence to anyone who undertook to overthrow Henry by force, did not make him move much faster. When Pole finally reached Paris on 10 April, Francois I expelled him because of treaty obligations to Henry. Pole then headed for Cambrai, where he spent at least a month and had to dodge several assassination attempts mounted by John Hutton, the English ambassador to Mary of Hungary, as well as avoid marauding soldiers. Pole had to ask several times for permission to enter imperial territory, but was finally licensed to go to Liege. On 2 May, however, he was still at Cambrai, from where he wrote to Cromwell remonstrating about the attacks on him and again protesting that he was only trying to help. Shortly afterwards Pole was recalled but pressed on to Liege anyway, repeatedly asking the pope to let him stay in order to encourage the English rebels should they rise again. After he had reached the Cistercian abbey of Aulne, Hugh Holland came from England to warn Pole of the plots against him. Pole made his formal entry to Liege at the end of May or beginning of June, but this affair -- like his whole stay -- was low-key. He enjoyed the hospitality of Cardinal Erard de la Marck, though he could not stay in de la Marck's palace because it was under repair. On 7 June serious retaliation began in England with the grant of Wimborne Minster to Nicholas Wilson. On 30 June the pope once more demanded that Pole return and this time he agreed, though he did not leave until 22 August, and on the day before his departure fired off one last salvo to Contarini, calling the rulers of England enemies of 'the whole human race' (Mayer, 'Correspondence', no. 203). A week or more after Pole left, William Peto, acting on a plan apparently communicated by Michael Throckmorton, helped to cover the cardinal's tracks by suggesting to Hutton that Wilson be sent to confer with Pole. Cromwell drafted instructions for Wilson and Nicholas Heath, but apparently learned of Pole's departure before dispatching the pair. Cromwell's greatest concern was 'De unitate', the minute of which Pole was to be asked to surrender 'at once' ('LP Henry VIII', 12/2, no. 620). When Pole returned to Rome he apparently took with him the Flemish painter Lambert Lombard, who subsequently returned home to found one of the most important ateliers of the century in the Low Countries. Pole was received in consistory on 18 October. 
On 7 January 1538 Pole was appointed to the commission of cardinals preparing a general council. Paul III confirmed Pole as head of the English hospice in Rome on 8 March, when nearly all its inmates were Pole's dependants. Pole accompanied the pope to the peace conference at Nice in April-June 1538. He had no impact on the discussions, but Ludovico Beccadelli, his first biographer, who claimed to have been present, alleged that Charles V enquired about Pole when being received by the College of Cardinals. Beccadelli also reported as eyewitness another meeting between the cardinal and the emperor at Villefranche-sur-Mer in which Charles treated Pole like a brother. The English ambassador, Sir Thomas Wyatt, and his agents tried to get close to Pole but failed. After a few months at Priuli's house in Treville, Pole returned to Rome in October. During his stay in the Veneto, Harry Phillips appeared, perhaps intending to assassinate him. Robert Brancetor also approached Pole for the first time; he would later be one of his messengers to Protector Somerset. Pole had not forgotten Henry VIII, and shortly after Nice asked for another legation. But before Paul could grant it Henry struck first by attacking the so-called Exeter conspiracy in which Pole's brothers Henry, Lord Montagu, and Sir Geoffrey were implicated, and his mother was also arrested; Montagu was executed on 2 December. Pole received his new legation shortly thereafter, perhaps on Christmas day, with instructions to induce the emperor to help depose Henry by cutting off trade, a possible consequence of the divorce Pole had suggested in 1531. 
Travelling a little faster this time than in 1537, and with Beccadelli in company, Pole reached the imperial court at Toledo on 11 February. But Charles and Pole had almost nothing to say to one another, although Pole could not miss the emperor's refusal to help without French co-operation. Warned by an imperial courtier that Charles disliked Pole's appeal to the nobility against Henry, Pole in disappointment tried to explain himself in a long letter, intended for a preface to 'De unitate'. Although not published until the eighteenth century its impact on later historiography has made it one of Pole's most important works. It probably also had more contemporary resonance than has been thought, especially through its sustained attack on Machiavelli. Pole almost certainly had a hand in the latter's condemnation as anti-Christian by writers like Jeronimo Osorio. Perhaps Pole's most important argument to Charles was religious, that Henry posed the worst threat to the faith, 'the foundation of the church'. The constituents of that faith included belief in martyrs like Becket whose ignominious end, his bones burnt and their ashes scattered to the wind, Pole cast in the form in which it passed into history first through the bull excommunicating Henry and then through the writings of Pole's clients. On 11 April 1539, writing from Carpentras, Pole sent one more appeal to Charles's chief minister, emphasizing how much his opposition to Henry had cost him and pleading with the emperor for vengeance. He asked the pope to inform the emperor of the French king's attitude (Francois claimed he was ready to act whenever Charles was), and Paul did so on 16 April. By mid-May, however, Pole knew that Charles had rejected the pope's appeal. 
On 19 May 1539 Pole was attainted in a monster bill nominally aimed at the Exeter conspirators but really directed against Pole and his family, including his aged mother. Outlawed in England and frustrated in his legation, he was reduced to quiet study in the Observant Franciscan house of Montili at Carpentras. On 17 July he reported encouraging news from Ireland about war plans, but without providing any clear particulars. In late summer Paul proposed to make him bishop of Salisbury, but Pole refused lest he become an object of ridicule, since he could neither occupy the see nor use it for action against Henry. Instead he begged to be allowed to winter at Carpentras or Verona. In late September he headed for Italy. 
When Contarini attended the diet of Regensburg as papal legate in the first half of 1541 he depended on Pole for support in the curia. The conference, part of Charles's efforts to secure religious peace in his realms, marked the last realistic chance for rapprochement between Catholics and protestants. For some reason Pole failed his patron and Rome rejected the compromise on the central issue of justification that Contarini had developed. The matter is the more mysterious in that Pole claimed to approve the compromise, wishing only that Contarini would have a chance to give it a grounding in scripture. 
During the summer of 1541 Pole's relations with Vittoria Colonna, established several years before, deepened for both religious and personal reasons as he took her as a replacement mother after the countess of Salisbury's execution on 27 May. Pole's relation to his mother is difficult to grasp. At the time of 'De unitate' he tried at first to brush her aside in a manner that was well-nigh callous, before admitting that her letter asking him to come home was 'so miserably written' (Mayer, 'Correspondence', no. 122) that his resolve had almost failed. His reaction to her death astonished Beccadelli, although this may be an apocryphal story. Calling her a martyr, Pole offered the stricken Beccadelli the consolation of having 'one more advocate in paradise' (Beccadelli, 329). He then withdrew into his oratory and came out an hour later in his usual good humour. He wrote in very similar terms to several correspondents who had offered condolences, emphasizing how quickly he had recovered from her execution, and converting it from a private loss to a public gain for the church. There can be no doubt that he shared an intense religious and personal relationship with Colonna, one of the more important instances of Pole's success as spiritual counsellor, especially to highly placed women. For her part Colonna claimed that Pole had rescued her from killing herself through her penitential practices. 
On 12-13 August 1541 Pole became legate of the patrimony of Peter, the portion of the Papal States centred upon Viterbo. Although he regularly involved himself in the legation's business he had considerable leisure, and there gathered around him one of the most important groups in the history of the Italian Reformation, notable among them Flaminio and Pietro Carnesecchi. Their most significant product was the 'Beneficio di Cristo' ('The Benefit of Christ's Death', 1543), which became so popular that 40,000 copies were supposedly sold in Venice alone. It conceived of the church as a small group of the elect, justified through salvation by faith alone. Despite this elitist view, Pole and Contarini also engaged in an extensive dialogue about the proper manner of preaching, and both probably accepted that ordinary Christians had to be introduced gradually to true belief. Pole's treatise on preaching, written in 1541 and probably often revised thereafter, has however been lost, the only one of his works to leave no trace. Almost immediately after the refoundation of the Roman Inquisition on 21 July 1541 his circle came under suspicion. The flight of Bernardino Ochino and Vermigli in August heightened the tension, but it would be some years before the Inquisition's interest caused difficulties for Pole. His standing with Paul III and with his successor, Julius III, protected him from the worst that the inquisitors, chief among them Carafa, could do. 
In October 1542 Pope Paul chose Pole as one of three legates to the Council of Trent. Although the first session came to nothing, during it Pole renewed his acquaintance with Giovanni Morone, later Paul IV's most famous victim. The two became close friends and stout allies. Pole was back in Rome by September 1543, where he served as one of the pope's principal advisers about the suspended council. In that capacity he had a hand in the flat rejection of a national council in Germany and in the drafting of 'Laetare Hierusalem', 19 November 1544, the bull resummoning the council that reconvened on 13 December 1545. Pole was again made legate on 22 February, and shortly after Easter (5 April) he left for Trent. Part of the delay was due to fears of an assassination attempt organized by Henry's agent Ludovico dalle Armi, a leading mercenary captain, and part to Pole's writing a small book on the council. Although 'De concilio' is known only in later texts, including a posthumous printing, it agrees sufficiently with Pole's opening sermon to the council to enable it to be said that he thought the council's primary purpose was the determination of the faith that held the church together, an argument grounded almost exclusively in scripture. Pole's own religion depended heavily on the 'Bible', especially the prophets and the Pauline epistles, although he was unable to carry the proposal that the council re-examine the scriptural canon book by book. He did not play a leading role in the council, and left it on 28 June before the inflammatory debate on justification had proceeded very far. He withdrew for reasons of health to Treville, but could not avoid being forced to give his opinion on the draft decree. However reluctantly, he explicitly rejected its emphasis on works at the expense of faith. He then relinquished his legateship and returned to Rome on 17 November 1546. 
Henry VIII died on 28 January 1547, and it was thought at that time that Pole would be sent as legate to Germany in the hope of persuading the emperor to take action against England, but the appointment did not come through. Instead, he became perpetual governor of Bagnoregio, not far from Viterbo. His opposition could not prevent the translation of the general council to Bologna in 1548 and he was made responsible for the pope's reply to the resulting imperial protest. Late in 1548 Pole saw an opportunity to approach Protector Somerset. The English responded favourably and in April 1549 Pole dispatched Richard Hilliard and Brancetor to England. Hilliard was to stress the dangers facing England, foremost among them a boy king, and propose a conference in Flanders. The English government's reply of 6 June 1549 was not encouraging and before Pole answered it the western rebellion and the beginning of the protector's difficulties had altered the terms of discussion. The rebels called for Pole's restoration and his addition to the royal council, and there was a moment when it looked as if Pole would go to England. Instead, he wrote Somerset an enormous letter, begun before the rebellion and finished on 12 October 1549, in which he repeatedly accused the protector of discourtesy, making his case through autobiographical examples, including a detailed treatment of his own family's misfortunes. There the matter ended. 
Less than a month later, on 10 October 1549, Paul III died, just after conferring on Pole 'in commendam' the rich abbey of Canalnuovo or Gavello in the Polesine. After much manoeuvring there emerged a party favouring Pole's candidacy for the papacy, composed of the imperial cardinals and Cardinal Farnese's group. The conclave opened on 29 November and on the first ballot of 3 December, Pole led the field. The following day he had twenty-four of the twenty-eight votes necessary, and Farnese proposed to 'adore' him, or elect him by acclamation. Pole initially agreed before rejecting Farnese's scheme. Nevertheless, Pole's election was considered so certain that the bankers rated him as 95 per cent certain of success; pontifical vestments were made, and his cell was looted as the palace (had he had one) of a successful candidate regularly was. Pole may even have written an acceptance speech. The following day he garnered twenty-six votes, but the remaining two could not be found. Although it is usually claimed that Carafa's attack on Pole as a heretic was responsible, the latter's own steadfast refusal to do anything to forward his candidacy did most to undermine him. Carafa also charged Pole with being a poor governor and having an illegitimate daughter, and many cardinals objected to him as a foreigner. The heart of the opposition to Pole lay in the French camp, and the balance between that and the imperial / Farnese alignment deadlocked the conclave. Pole spent the time writing 'De summo pontifice' in which he further developed his martyrological view of the papacy and argued that the only acceptable candidate would be one who did not want the office. He also offered a radical reinterpretation of the pope's duties towards the church as essentially those owed by the supreme pastor to his flock. In the end Giovanni Maria Ciocchi del Monte was elected as Julius III. 
Almost as soon as the conclave ended Pole drew a portrait of his constancy throughout the proceedings that provided the basis for his earliest biographies by Beccadelli and Andras Dudic. The new pope treated Pole as one of the principal cardinals, assigning him to the congregation of the Inquisition (although Pole failed to serve for long, apparently because he objected to its methods) and also protecting him from investigation. He further appointed Pole to commissions for the reform of the datary and for the council, and greatly increased his papal pension. But perhaps the pope's biggest favour to Pole was the reconciliation he forced on Carafa in March or April 1553 at San Paolo fuori le Mura, Rome, following several new signs of interest in Pole's orthodoxy on the part of the Inquisition. Meanwhile Pole began work on a new edition of 'De unitate', under pressure from a number of cardinals and the chief papal theologian. It was to have a long preface to Edward VI that would explain how the book came to be written and induce the king to reverse Pole's attainder, but neither the new edition nor its preface was published. 
Almost immediately after the confrontation with Carafa, Pole left Rome for the Cassinese Benedictine house of Maguzzano on Lake Garda, where he intended to spend the summer. A withdrawal to such a distance suggests that Pole had earlier told the truth when he said he intended never to return to Rome. In fact he would not, for with the death of Edward VI and the victory of Mary Tudor over Lady Jane Grey the prospect opened of a return to England as legate for its reconciliation. Excitement ran high in both Rome and Maguzzano, and frequent letters and messengers crossed paths both before and after Pole's appointment on 5-6 August. Julius gave him exceptionally wide powers making him virtually equivalent to the pope. Pole was eager to start at once, but his inflexible attitude on two points promised trouble. The restoration of obedience had to come first, as he wrote to the queen on 13 August and even more bluntly to Stephen Gardiner on 28 August; and the former monastic property must be restored. Moreover the imperial ambassador in Venice objected to Pole's mission within five days of his appointment. Thus between the cardinal's attitude and diplomatic considerations his mission soon came to a standstill. Pole willingly acquiesced in efforts to get more information from England, but this did not change his opinion that Mary's first parliament had to settle the two urgent points. A messenger brought back the story of the duke of Northumberland's apostasy, and Pole helped to turn it into a continental propaganda coup. 
On 21-2 August Pole sent to Charles V, spelling out the dangers in delaying obedience. But even before the messenger reached Brussels orders came from the emperor that Pole could go no further than Trent. It may be that Charles was already thinking of a marriage between his son Philip and Mary, and when Pole's opposition to it became known it reinforced Charles's determination to stop the cardinal's return. Pole never clearly spelt out his objections to the match, but probably fear of Spanish domination of England was high on the list. Imperial control of communications with England made it impossible for Mary to act directly on his advice even had she wished to do so. Julius secretly gave Pole a free hand to deal with England and on 20 September recalled his peace legates, replacing them with the cardinal, in part as a cover for his real assignment. Pole reached Trent on 30 September and left again almost immediately. After a brief stay in Dillingen on the upper Danube, he moved on, only to encounter an imperial messenger at Heidenheim who ordered him to return to Dillingen, which was also now the pope's and Mary's wish. Pole did so with an ill grace, remaining there until the end of the year. Meanwhile peace negotiations began in France, and in November 1553 Mary slipped Pole a letter saying she hoped that he could soon come to Brussels under the cover of his peace legation. In December the cardinal both wrote to Mary and also sent several messengers to tell her that grounding her title on parliament's authority was a serious mistake. 
Pedro de Soto's mission to the imperial court at the same time produced permission for Pole to go to Brussels, which he reached on 25 January 1554. The pope then ordered him to turn to peacemaking, and Pole suggested a Habsburg-Valois conference at a neutral site. After many discussions with imperial officials Pole left for France on 26 February. On the road he sent another messenger to Mary, congratulating her on the defeat of Wyatt's rebellion, while also using the occasion to remind the queen of Belshazzar's fate as a profaner of holy vessels, a reference to church property, and an object lesson in the consequences of delaying obedience. On 3 March, Julius sent Pole another breve of faculties, emphasizing that he could do nearly everything the pope could, including temporarily confirming Mary's episcopal appointments. When Pole reached France Henri II refused to see him until after Easter, and the cardinal used the time to compose his 'Oratio di pace', which he dispatched to Henri and Charles. Declaring that peace must be rooted in love between the two monarchs, it proved popular in print both in the original Italian and in Latin translation. 
On 17-18 March 1554 Pole issued his first important documents as legate, absolving seven English bishops of schism and reappointing them to their sees. But when he returned to Brussels without any concrete proposals for peace he was in such disgrace that he may have requested recall, although Charles did not demand it. Rome was not much happier with him, especially because of his attitude to the Spanish match and to the machinations against Mary of his nephew Thomas Stafford. Pole insisted that he approved the English queen's marriage and had rebuffed Stafford to indicate this. Julius kept Pole in place and resolved, or so he thought, the property issue by ordering Pole to allow Mary to deal with it. While continuing to work for peace in the summer Pole encountered criticism from another quarter. Vergerio launched an attack on him as a Nicodemite, one who knowing the truth yet concealed it, and to add force to the blow prepared a new edition of 'De unitate' with a number of anti-papal tracts appended. It appeared in 1555 (or perhaps late 1554). In his defence Pole admitted that he had once believed in justification by faith but after reading the apostle James claimed to have seen the need for works. 
By late summer 1554 prospects for Pole's return to England were brightening, in part because he expressed public approval of Mary's Spanish marriage. Even so, in September Pole wrote Philip a strongly worded letter demanding admission. The stumbling block was still the property, and the 'final' deal struck in October, before Pole received permission to go home, still had to be rehearsed again directly with Philip shortly after the cardinal reached London. The king agreed that the crown would not keep any property it could not hold with a good conscience, and in 1555 Mary renounced first fruits and tenths, under heavy pressure from Pole. Without waiting for an escort from England, and in a great hurry in order to make the shortly to assemble parliament, the cardinal left Brussels on 11 November, meeting Paget and Sir Edward Hastings at Ghent on the 16th. He was both hopeful and fearful, as he wrote to Morone: hopeful that the reconciliation was finally about to happen, and still fearful about church property. On the 19th his party entered Calais, where the marshall and two hundred horse met it, and crossed on the 20th to Dover, where Pole was received by Sir Anthony Browne and Bishop Thirlby, as well as by his nephew Henry Hastings, who had married his brother Henry's daughter Katherine. Pole's return to England allowed him to renew ties to his family, especially to Katherine and another niece, Winifred Hastings. 
Although the patent for the exercise of Pole's legatine jurisdiction had been issued on 10 November, it was still not thought politic for him to use the insignia of his legation lest he appear to infringe the authority of parliament, under which the current ecclesiastical regime had been put in place, but he did not stand on his dignity. The steadily swelling procession reached Canterbury in the middle of the night. Archdeacon Harpsfield offered a long welcoming oration, which Pole interrupted when it turned to personal praise of the legate. On the 22nd Pole's attainder was reversed, their majesties attending parliament to give assent, and at his next stop at Cobham, where he was met by a crowd of eight hundred (fully 1000 at Gravesend), he received the news from the earl of Shrewsbury and Bishop John White. Now finally with his cross in the prow of the royal barge, Pole arrived by water at Whitehall where he met the king and queen. His ascetic looks impressed at least one observer, and he may have greeted Mary with the blessing her namesake received while pregnant with Jesus, 'blessed is the fruit of your womb' ('Luke', 1:42). On 28 November, Pole addressed parliament in English, thanking it for restoring him and urging it to do the same for God. As they had returned him to 'his country and the earthly nobility' so he would them to their 'true country and true celestial nobility' (Querini, 5.312). Since Pole had spoken too quietly his former adversary Gardiner amplified his remarks, and took the occasion to call him a prophet. 
Two days later, on St Andrew's day (30 November), Pole formally reconciled the realm to the papacy. The event was carefully stage managed, beginning with the six Garter knights who conducted Pole in full pontificals from Lambeth to Westminster Palace. The cardinal read out a brief formula beginning 'Our Lord Jesus Christ, which with his precious blood has redeemed us, and purified us of all our sins and pollutions, in order to make himself a glorious bride without stains and without wrinkle, whom the Father made chief over the church, he through his mercy absolves you (Querini, 5.317)' and then confirmed the reconciliation in a formal document. The following Sunday, Pole went to St Paul's where Gardiner preached on the pericope for that day, 'Now it is high time to awake out of sleep'. 
On 24 December, having made one more rearguard attempt to preserve the church's property, Pole dispensed lay holders to keep it (taken into 1 & 2 Philip and Mary, c. 8). This should have ended the matter, but Pole later claimed that one of the reasons he stayed at court after becoming archbishop of Canterbury was in order to continue efforts to get the property back. Despite this reverse he began at once to consult the bishops in convocation about the needs of their dioceses. In early March 1555, after parliament rose and at approximately the same time as he distributed instructions about how to implement the reconciliation, he secured the sending of a mission to Rome. It finally rendered obedience not to Julius III but to his successor but one, Paul IV, the former Carafa. Although a leading imperialist candidate in both the conclaves following Julius's death in 1555, Pole had refused to stand. In the meantime he had convened the long-awaited peace conference at Marcq near Calais. He offered the usual exhortations, but the conference, staged at great cost to Mary, broke up on 9 June without accomplishing anything. Instead the strongly anti-Spanish Carafa was about to sign the treaty of Vaucelles with France which, by preparing the way for war against the empire, would haunt the rest of Pole's life. Nevertheless, on 10 June, in Paul's first consistory, the new pope confirmed Pole's actions and praised him extravagantly, and despite annoyingly minute attention in Rome to the state of the English church, cordial relations obtained between pope and legate until the end of the year. Then Paul explicitly exempted Pole from the recall of legates in Philip's territory as relations between king and pope worsened. When the mission to renew obedience to Rome returned to England in August it brought a number of bulls, including one, 'Praeclara', which rectified the consequences for the property settlement stemming from the pope's sweeping condemnation on 14 July of alienations of ecclesiastical property. 
In 1554 and 1555 Pole was involved in the trial and condemnation of Archbishop Cranmer, although he did not play the leading part assigned him by protestant propagandists. His official involvement was limited to certifying the notaries at Cranmer's trial, which was conducted by authority of the chief inquisitor in Rome, although those of Latimer and Ridley may have depended on the legate. Pole may have been partly responsible for Henry Cole's involvement in Cranmer's case, as he almost certainly was for that of his own clients de Soto and Juan de Villagarcia; however, it was Mary and not Pole who insisted on Cranmer's death. Otherwise, he wrote Cranmer two fairly standard polemical letters, one of which was later published as 'De sacramento' (Cremona, 1584). In addition to arguing for the real presence and papal supremacy, the piece is distinguished by Pole's insistence on the necessity of childlike faith. 
On 2 December, Pole opened a legatine synod in London. This was his most important action as legate, on both the domestic and European stage. Although it was originally summoned to deal with church property, and assembled in the context of the Dudley conspiracy and an unsettled international atmosphere, the synod accomplished a good deal more than has usually been recognized. Something of Pole's hopes for it may be deduced from his sprawling dialogue 'De reformatione ecclesiae' (left unpublished), especially in its emphasis on the responsibilities of bishops and on education, although he later seems to have changed his mind on both issues, coming to stress the importance of episcopal residence to the extent of giving the impression that he did not care whether bishops had any more education than they could get from the Holy Spirit. Pole laid much of the blame for the failings of the English church on its clergy, and most of the synod's decrees concerned their reform, covering the sacraments, clerical residence, preaching (the bishops' principal duty), and church property, mandating a survey of its current state that would continue to the end of the Marian regime. Perhaps the most important canon established diocesan seminaries for the education of boys intended for the clergy, a precedent later adopted by Tridentine legislation. The synod also ordered visitations of all dioceses as well as of both universities (it has been claimed that these provided the model for their Elizabethan successors), and sketched out standards of lay discipline. 
One of the synod's most important calls, for the preparation of sermons that less educated priests could read, was met after some delay. Sermons fared better than the catechism: Pole asked Bartolome Carranza to write one, but it did not appear until 1558 and then only in Latin. Similarly, the synod's discussion of scripture, including the need for a new translation, was not incorporated into the canons. Pole played his characteristic role of exhortation, and also tried to further his educational goals by commissioning a treatise from the noted Roman Aristotelian and physician Girolamo da Ponte, sometime Pole's client, on the education of youth. But apart from this very short work Pole never provided much guidance about curriculum, either in the seminaries or in the universities. Towards the end of the synod Pole preached a sermon in which he excoriated clerical covetousness as encouraging heretics and charged the clergy to improve the level of both their own and their flocks' education. The synod was prorogued, probably on 10 February 1556, and never met again. Its canons proved difficult to draw up and were never officially promulgated. In any case, the clergy (including the bishops who now had to take preaching seriously) were said to be greatly offended by the new regulations. 
Pole's legatine and archiepiscopal registers contain plentiful evidence for his efforts to improve the quality of the clergy, but the numbers on whom he had a direct impact remained small. Nevertheless, many of those to whom he related became leading recusants, among them Nicholas Morton, John Ramridge, and Henry Joliffe, as did several of the men who formed his impressive staff, among them David Pole, Henry Cole, and Nicholas Harpsfield. That Pole's legation failed to have much more general impact was largely due to lack of time (he was legate in England for little more than two years) and to the scale of the problems left by twenty years of schism, above all the decay of discipline and the marked shortage of clergy and administrators. If Pole erred in his response to these difficulties by trying to extend the model of a small Christian community, his quasi-monastic household, to the whole of England, he was making a mistake committed by many other reformers. 
Pole obtained virtually complete control of the English church when in the midst of the synod, on 11 December 1555, he became Cranmer's successor, the pope again lavishly praising him. His patent of possession is dated 17 March 1556, and the see's temporalities were restored on the day Cranmer was burnt, 21 March. The Dudley conspiracy prevented Pole's going to Canterbury for his consecration. Instead, he was ordained priest on 20 March, consecrated in the Observant Franciscan house at Greenwich two days later, and on the 25th received the pallium in St Mary Arches, a Canterbury peculiar in London. There he preached the first of perhaps twenty sermons he wrote, some intended for publication. He did not finally visit Canterbury until 1557. 
Pole was very busy, both supervising the reconstruction of the English church and frequently taking a significant part in council business at Mary's behest. The queen went so far as to propose making him chancellor, but the pope (and Pole) objected. Much of the cardinal's energy continued to go into re-establishing the church's finances and its legal position, although he did not neglect worship or doctrine: he was particularly interested in the restoration of monasticism, especially that of the Benedictines, whom he proposed to transfer to the Cassinese congregation. Pole took only a very small part in the campaign against heresy, continuing to object to the use of harsh methods. In instructions he wrote for his officials he ordered them to exonerate any heretic who would blame his errors on his bishop. John Foxe accurately noted that Pole was a papist, but 'none of the bloody and cruel sort of papists', not only because he restrained the bishop of London, 'Bloody' Bonner, but also because of his 'solicitous writings' to Cranmer, not to mention his own difficulties with Paul IV (J. Foxe, 'Actes and Monuments', 1563, p. 1973). Most dioceses were visited by legatine authority beginning immediately after the end of the synod, as were both universities (of which Pole was also vice-chancellor), Oxford in July-August 1556 and Cambridge in January-February 1557. Both resulted in injunctions and plans for new statutes, but the latter never appeared because Pole soon afterwards lost the legatine authority under which the visitations had been conducted. 
That blow fell on 9 April 1557 when all Pole's legatine powers were withdrawn, including those of a 'legatus natus', and he was recalled to Rome. This outcome would have been hard to predict at the beginning of Paul's pontificate, when Pole sounded almost as pleased by Carafa's election as he had in the case of the latter's predecessor, Marcellus II. Although it may be true that Paul was determined to prevent either Pole or Morone, the protector of England, from succeeding him by branding them heretics, contingent political circumstances led to his final falling out with the English cardinal. First, Pole apparently 'de facto' lost his peace legation with the appointment of Scipione Rebiba in early 1556. Then, as the pope and Philip drifted towards war in the last months of the year, Pole tried to mediate but was often left without worthwhile instructions from Rome. Philip made the situation worse by treating him as one of his agents. In December 1556 Pole sent Henry Pyning on a personal mission to the pope urging him to make peace. 
Philip's arrival in England in March 1557 undid Pole. He realized that he was in an impossible position, and tried to observe the forms by refusing to see Philip officially. They did, however, meet in private, as Pole scrupulously told the pope. He prolonged his withdrawal from court until commanded to return on pain of disgrace, an absence that probably fatally handicapped the peace party he led. On 12 May, when Sir Edward Carne had his second audience with the pope about the revocation of Pole's legation, Paul blamed it directly on Philip. Oddly, the pope also directed Carne to propose that the Inquisition take up the matter and said that if Mary wrote on Pole's behalf he would restore the legation. Similarly complex stalling consumed several months. Philip and Mary and parliament wrote on Pole's behalf, without effect. Pole himself also wrote, promising co-operation with a new legate. At almost the same time, on 31 May, Morone was incarcerated in Castel Sant' Angelo, and next day in consistory Paul named Pole as a suspect. 
On 14 June 1557 the pope took the face-saving opportunity Pole had offered and replaced him as legate with William Peto, whom he made a cardinal on the same day. Six days later the breve recalling Pole was drawn up. Mary prevented the papal nuncio from bringing it to England and threatened another schism, although Pole claimed to have tried to have the nuncio admitted. In August, Pole sent his datary, Nicolo Ormanetto, to Rome, carrying a copy of a strongly worded apologia, together with instructions to tell the pope that he was ready to come to Rome to be imprisoned. Ormanetto arrived by 23 August and had an extraordinary audience with the pope on 4 September, submissively offering Pole's objections to the revocation. The apologia struck a quite different note. It opens with the claim that Pole could find no example of similar treatment of a cardinal and therefore had to rely on his conscience. Defensive points and rhetorical flourishes make up the body of the work, but Pole also offered the important argument that the cardinals were under obligation to resist the pope should he do anything to harm Christ's honour. Even after Ormanetto had brought the apologia to the pope Pole incorporated most of its content into the briefs which accompanied subsequent missions, especially Gianfrancesco Stella's. Small wonder that Philip's ministers showed themselves eager to lay hands on it once they decided soon after Pole's death that he was dangerous. 
Perhaps Pole composed the apologia in his new apartments at Lambeth Palace, built in 1556 and 1557. He spent the largest part of his disposable income here, at least $1000, perhaps as much as one third of his available funds. This provides the greatest exception to his otherwise ideologically motivated patronage. Foxe's conclusion is again acute: 'the pomp and glory of the world carried him away to play the papist thus as he did' (Foxe, 1973). Formerly a poor cardinal (that is, one without independent means and therefore eligible for a pension from the pope) and a leader of the 'spiritual' wing of the church, Pole had attracted opposition in the conclave of Julius III because of the threat he posed to the idea of the church as another species of property. The account in 'De antiquitate Britannicae ecclesiae' (1572) described his building as consisting of 'that long extension to the east... and a residence constructed to the east with lower and connected upper stories' (Parker, 419). Its Italianate loggia was one of the first such in England. 
By one of the articles of the treaty of Cave, between the pope and the Habsburgs, signed on 12-14 September 1557, Pole's legation should have been restored. This seems never to have happened, although Pole did occasionally use his legatine seal thereafter, perhaps by mistake. If anything, Paul was more strongly opposed to Pole after the peace than before. Carnesecchi's summons to Rome as a suspected heretic now supplemented the Inquisition's investigation of Morone. The chief points objected against Pole were association with Flaminio and having read the 'Beneficio'. The section 'Disciplina Poli' ('Pole's discipline') in the 'Compendium processum sancti officii Romae' ('Compendium of dossiers of the Holy Office of Rome') lists eighteen broad charges, from preaching heresy to fostering it in others, and concludes with two attacks against which defence would be almost impossible: Pole was thought suspect by serious witnesses, and he had been defamed among both heretics and Catholics. In December the pope moved directly against him, sending his nephew Carlo Carafa as legate to Philip in order to persuade the king of Pole's guilt. Carafa almost certainly carried a dossier and showed it to Bernardo Fresneda, the king's confessor. It is no longer extant, but Fresneda, earlier Pole's strong ally, thereafter became one of his worst enemies. Pole tried to intercede directly with Carafa in a letter of 14 December which repeated much of the apologia and followed it up with Stella's mission to Carafa in January 1558. The latter approach was made against the background of the loss of Calais on the 7th. 
This traumatic event intensified the demands on Pole. In the depths of one of the worst crises to confront England in the sixteenth century, he was not only more than ever Mary's principal support, a leading member of the council, and still 'de facto' head of the English church, but also had to direct the convocation that met in January. It dealt mainly with ecclesiastical finance and war, although an extensive list of articles, resembling the canons of the London synod but with greater stress on heresy, may have been discussed. Philip continued to support Pole, sending Count Feria to England. Feria found Pole a decent fellow but an incompetent governor, and famously labelled him a 'dead man' ('CSP Spain', '1554-8', no. 413), partly as a result of Pole's coolness to Feria's efforts to introduce the Jesuits to England. They had been trying to gain entry since 1555. Pole probably refused them because of his preference for traditional forms of piety, especially that of the Benedictines, and there may also have been old scores between him and Ignatius of Loyola. 
Meanwhile Pole launched a plan to enlist Fresneda's support, sending him a draft letter to the pope to forward if he thought it appropriate. Its major simile cast Pole in the likeness of Isaac. For the time being Philip was still in Pole's camp, agreeing to make every effort on his and Priuli's behalf, but Fresneda had set a spy on Pole, who was also damaged by the evidence almost daily turned up by the Inquisition's investigation of Morone. By the time Pole contracted his final illness in September 1558 his position had become almost impossible. Early that month he informed the king of his health and by the 23rd thought it necessary to commend the Italians in his household to Philip's protection. Nevertheless Pole summoned the energy to try to block Philip's plan concerning Elizabeth's accession. Feria persuaded Philip to drop his opposition, however, and on 14 November, Pole wrote his last letter to the princess, hoping to leave her 'satisfied of me' (BL, Cotton MS Vesp. F. III, fol. 28). Pole's passion, as George Lily called it, ended on 17 November. Mary died first on that day and efforts were made to keep the news from Pole. Although very worried about the consequences of the queen's death, Pole consoled himself with his faith and confidence in providence. At the moment when he would have communicated had he been able, he asked to be assisted out of bed and, supported by two of his attendants, bowed his head almost to the floor. The scene reminded Priuli of a deposition of Christ, the body being supported by the two Marys. 
Although he was Pole's long-time friend, Priuli also candidly recorded a series of sharp disagreements between them during the cardinal's final days, mainly about his will. Dated 4 October 1558, its principal content was a protestation of abiding loyalty to the papacy in general and Paul IV in particular. It recorded none of Pole's wishes for the disposition of his goods, a job left to Priuli and a few assistants. The will made a deep impact on some of Pole's supporters in Italy, especially Carnesecchi and Giulia Gonzaga, both of whom were deeply disappointed by it. Others rushed it into print as part of the effort to defend his reputation that began almost immediately after his death. Little is known of Pole's funeral. The body stayed at Lambeth until its removal by road to Canterbury on 10 December. The cart was decorated with bannerols worked in gold, banners of Pole's arms, and four more representing saints. The funeral took place on the 15th, with eulogies in both Latin and English on successive days. Only the first survives. It amounts to the first biography and was probably Lily's work. Pole was buried in Becket's Corona in Canterbury Cathedral in a simple chest tomb. A monument, now destroyed, was painted on the wall behind it by Dominic Lampson, a Fleming in Pole's household. Like Pole's building at Lambeth the work was highly classicized and contained many of the elements that would become conventional in English sculptural monuments in the next fifty years. Just as his household observed standards that would become those of Counter-Reformation cardinals, so did Pole's tomb also anticipate Counter-Reformation funerary monuments. It was restored between 1897 and 1900 by the Catholic Truth Society when the present cartouche of Pole's arms was painted by Edward Frampton RA. 
Nearly all observers agree on Pole's personal sanctity, but part company on how effectively he employed it. His first two biographers designed an influential 'Christian gentleman' Pole, but almost equally often adopted was Vergerio's view of him as a coward. (The other contemporary assessment, Paul IV's of Pole as most heinous heretic, struck few later echoes.) The establishment of protestantism in England made Vergerio's interpretation popular, especially once it acquired semi-canonical status in Matthew Parker's 'De antiquitate Britannicae ecclesiae' (first published 1572). The major touchstone of English attitudes to Pole was his treatment of Cranmer. Even Bishop Gilbert Burnet, who otherwise followed Foxe's moderate judgements, parted company with him on this point, while hastening to add that this was 'the only personal blemish I find laid on him' (Burnet, 2.525). Probably the most influential aspect of Parker's treatment was its condemnation of Pole as an 'inglese italianato', an Englishman seduced by effeminate, rhetorical, and, worst of all, papist Italians. The consequence has been the division of Pole's career into two parts. English writers (especially women -- Marie Halle, writing as Martin Haile, produced one of the best biographies, aside from its bias) concentrated on his English career, while Italians and other Europeans found his life on the continent more compelling. 
That his English career was Catholic and reached its apogee under one of the so-called 'little Tudors' also prevented serious understanding of Pole. Both detractors and admirers gave insufficient attention either to the sources for Pole's life or to the shaping of his image. Despite the labours of Angelo Maria Querini on Pole's correspondence in the mid-eighteenth century, for example, his portrait of Pole remained hagiographic, as did Thomas Phillips's in his near plagiarism of Querini first published in 1764-5. It touched off a major controversy, turning (as most such have done) on the relations between England and Rome. 
Most biographies of Pole, with the possible exception of Wilhelm Schenk's brief post-war essay, remain hagiography. Only in the last thirty years of the twentieth century did critical studies begin to appear. One of these, Dermot Fenlon's of Pole in Italy (1972), portrayed a saintly but tortured soul. The other important book, by Paolo Simoncelli (1977), attempted to unmask Pole's 'myth of sanctity'. Heinrich Lutz directed attention to Pole's peacemaking, and in 1981 produced the first critical edition of any of his writings. One of the most important modern contributions to the study of Pole has been the massive work of Massimo Firpo and Dario Marcatto on Morone's investigation. Study of Mary I's reign, too, has brought significant work on Pole, including Rex Pogson and T. F. Mayer on his legatine administration. The latter's full-length biography (2000) attempts to unite the two halves of Pole's life, ground it in the massive documentation, and take account of its literary dimensions. 
Pole's early biographers came closest to getting their man when they insisted on his constancy, although it was not quite the kind they meant. Once he had an idea fixed in his head it was nearly impossible to dislodge it. Henry was an ogre, church property had to be returned, the pope was Peter's successor not as monarch but as martyr, justification came by faith. Yet at the same time, and as his biographers also stressed, Pole revelled in the joys of language. Despite his insistence that he was no author and never wrote for publication, his pen was his strongest weapon. His works and his patronage of writers helped to shape the historiography of the English Reformation. He left at least 3600 folio pages of manuscripts, the vast majority of them devoted to the single theme of resistance to encroachments on the individual (at least on the noble individual) by authorities of any kind. Pole shared his final line of defence with Luther: conscience. His household, bound to him by ideological and emotional ties rather than the usual material ones, provided him with a safe haven from which to mount his resistance. Of vital importance to his personality was his thirty-year relationship with Priuli, which might well be termed a marriage. This genius for intense friendship and for spiritual counsel suggests a private man. Yet he inherited a public position that many others thought had to be maintained, and which came to be converted into an even more exalted role in Rome. 
Pole was one of the most important figures in Europe in his day, and as such he failed. Rather than the champion of papal monarchy which many of his admirers have thought they saw, he represents its doomed efforts to maintain position against the steady centralization of state power. It is intensely ironic that Pole made his greatest contribution to papal monarchy by helping to foster the Counter-Reformation, and that in Paul IV's hands the same movement almost destroyed him. Pole's plans for the English church, in advance of nearly any to be propounded on the continent, stressed discipline and regularity, a high standard of clerical education, and stout if gentle resistance to heresy. This may seem odd in light of his individualistic view of salvation, but accommodating justification by faith to a revivified institution was one of Pole's most significant achievements, albeit one with only a limited future. His religion was rooted in the 'Bible', especially the 'Old Testament', and he modelled his behaviour on the prophets, above all Ezekiel. He combined this protestant attitude with a medieval and Catholic monastic spirituality. It was Pole's tragedy that his circumstances not only did not allow the private and the public to mesh, but also almost split him apart. The only refuge left was writing another world. 


@@@@@


doc= 22457


Sir Richard de la Pole (d. 1345), who was probably the older of the two. Initially the brothers were chiefly importers of Gascon wine, and from 1317 they were the deputies at Kingston upon Hull of the royal chief butler, purchasing wines for the king. Between 1321 and 1327 Richard was likewise a collector of royal customs there. Between 1321 and 1324 Richard and William were also chamberlains of Kingston upon Hull and financed the building of its walls, essential for protection against the Scots. 


@@@@@


doc= 22458


Pole, Richard de la (d. 1525), soldier and claimant to the English throne, sometimes known after 1506 as Blanche Rose, was the fifth son of John de la Pole (1442-1492) and his wife, Elizabeth Plantagenet (1444-1503/4), a sister of Edward IV, and the younger brother of John de la Pole, earl of Lincoln (c.1460-1487), and Edmund de la Pole, earl of Suffolk (1472?-1513). Nothing is known of his life before 1500, when he was present at Calais when Henry VII met the Archduke Philip there. In the following year, however, he fled abroad with his brother Edmund, and in the parliament of January 1504 he was attainted, along with Edmund and their brother William. In March 1504 he was at Aachen with Edmund, and was left there as security for the payment of the latter's debts in the town. Suffolk was so impoverished by that time that threats were made to return Richard to Henry VII unless the debts were paid. Richard, too, complained of poverty and of the treatment he had received in Edmund's company. He managed to secure the patronage of Erard de la Marck, bishop of Liege, however, and extracted himself from Aachen, and by the autumn of 1506 he was at Buda in Hungary. Henry VII sent ambassadors to King Ladislaus VI to demand his surrender, which was evidently refused, since Richard was given a pension. 
In April 1509 Richard, Edmund, and William de la Pole were excepted by name from the general pardon issued at Henry VIII's accession. In December 1510 the emperor Maximilian interceded on Richard's behalf, asking Margaret of Savoy to approach Henry VIII for Richard's pardon, but by June 1512, when France and England were at war, it was known that Richard was being sponsored by Louis XII as a claimant to the English crown, and in December that year he commanded German landsknecht mercenaries during the French invasion of Navarre, where he formed a lasting friendship with the chevalier de Bayard. He led troops against the English again at the siege of Therouanne in 1513. 
In May 1513, following the execution of his brother Edmund, Richard de la Pole assumed the title of duke of Suffolk and openly claimed the English crown. He recruited disaffected Englishmen to his service, including Thomas, illegitimate son of Sir William Stanley executed in 1495, and by June 1514 it was rumoured that Louis XII had provided a fleet and soldiers for a landing in Scotland with John Stewart, duke of Albany, so that they could mount a joint invasion of England. Their departure from St Malo in Brittany was abandoned, however, following the conclusion of peace with England on 7 August. As part of the negotiations Henry VIII had insisted on Pole's surrender. Louis refused, but by September Pole was relieved of his command of the landsknechts and moved, with Louis's support, to the protection of the duke of Lorraine at Metz, where he arrived on 2 September. He took up residence in a house lent by Sir Claude Baudioche, where he remained until early 1519. He became a burgess of the town in February 1515, and was also credited with introducing horse-racing there. 
Pole's position as a conspirator against Henry VIII was maintained following the accession of Francois I as king of France on 1 January 1515. Pole's spies sought support within the garrisons of Calais and Tournai, and by April 1515 unpaid English soldiers of Tournai were threatening to defect to him. He also received information from England via East Anglian merchants trading in Flanders. By the autumn of 1515 Sir Thomas Spinelly, the English ambassador in Flanders, was dispatching spies to infiltrate Pole's circle of followers, and there was also discussion at Westminster of assassination attempts. This espionage was carried on frantically throughout 1516 and 1517, especially after it was reported in December 1516 that Francois had promised troops to Pole for another invasion attempt. During 1517 two of Pole's associates, William Ponder and Thomas Stanley, contacted English agents in the hope of negotiating safe conducts and pardons for themselves, and provided valuable information on Pole's condition and the financial support provided by Francois. According to Stanley he was receiving a pension of 4000 crowns from Francois and was able to provide his servants with a grey and blue livery, though he was also very slow in paying them their wages; Ponder spoke of nocturnal meetings with the French king in Paris. Pole was also reported to be in touch with the king of Denmark, while between June and August 1517 he paid visits to Milan and Venice, and by May 1518 there were rumours that he and Albany were to invade England from Holstein in Denmark. But in the end Pole remained in Lombardy for the rest of that year. 
After the death of the emperor Maximilian on 12 January 1519, Francois I sent Pole as an envoy to Prague, to try to persuade Lajos of Bohemia and his tutor Sigismund, king of Poland, to consider Francois's candidature for the imperial crown. In September that year the discovery of an affair with a married woman in Metz prompted Pole's removal from his lavish house at St Symphorien in the city's suburbs to Toul, where he stayed as a guest of the cardinal of Lorraine for the next three years before the renewal of war between England and France in 1522 revived his usefulness to Francois I. At the close of 1522 he was in Paris with Francois, and was again commanding landsknechts. Francois considered another invasion of England from Holstein, whose duke he urged to assist Pole and Albany, but Brittany became the chosen embarkation point. The capture and interrogation of a number of Pole's servants at that time confirmed attempts to generate support in East Anglia and elsewhere. Throughout February and March the preparations of Pole and Albany were regularly reported to Cardinal Wolsey. Although they departed together, Albany reached Scotland before 27 September 1523 without Pole. His followers within England would not rise until he appeared, nor would more direct French military support be given until Francois was more confident of a successful rising. Pole was expected to mount an invasion, but he did not do so, and nothing further is recorded of his movements until the spring of 1524, when a spy in his service was arrested in Picardy. Two of Pole's letters, intercepted in May 1524, thanked Louise of Savoy, the mother of Francois I, for her previous assistance and begged for his mercenaries to be paid, while the capture of former soldiers of Henry VIII's guard in Pole's company outside Guines later that month confirmed that he remained a focus for English rebels. In September that year large-scale French help for Pole's enterprises was again mooted, perhaps in an invasion of Ireland with the complicity of the earl of Desmond, but any prospect of further assistance ended when he took part in Francois I's invasion of Italy shortly afterwards. On 24 February 1525 Francois was defeated and captured by Charles V's army at Pavia, and Richard de la Pole, prominent in the fighting as the captain of the French landsknechts, was killed. Pole, who had never married, was buried in the church of the monastery of San Agostino in Pavia. The cathedral chapter at Metz ordered an anniversary celebration for his soul, but in England his death caused rejoicing. According to a later and unverifiable report, the emperor's messenger told Henry VIII how 'The White Rose is killed in battle... I saw him dead with the others', to which Henry responded in joy 'All the enemies of England are gone' (Scarisbrick, 136). 


@@@@@


doc= 22459


Pole, Thomas (1753-1829), physician and Quaker minister, was born on 13 October 1753 in Philadelphia, the youngest son of John Pole (1705-1755), a native of Wiveliscombe in Somerset, and his wife, Rachel Smith, of Burlington. Thomas was brought up as a member of the Society of Friends. In 1775 he visited his relatives in England and, with the object of attending Friends' meetings, he travelled some 6650 miles through England and Wales, chiefly on horseback, during the next two or three years. In 1777 he studied medicine with the physician Joseph Rickman at Maidenhead and then continued his training at Reading. In 1780 he moved to Falmouth, on becoming assistant to Joseph Fox. He settled in London, at 45 Cannon Street, in 1781, was admitted a member of the Company of Surgeons, and received the degree of MD from St Andrews University in 1801. On 5 May 1784 he married Elizabeth (died 1823), daughter of William and Mary Barrett of Cheltenham. The couple, who had five children, moved after their marriage to Talbot Court, Gracechurch Street, London, and in 1793 to 102 Leadenhall Street. 
In 1789 Pole was made a member of the American Philosophical Society, of which Benjamin Franklin was then president. His medical practice was concentrated on obstetrics; he lectured on midwifery and, being a skilful draughtsman, recorded instructive cases in sketches which were engraved. In 1790 he published his valuable 'Anatomical Instructor', which illustrated the approved methods of preparing and preserving parts of the human body for purposes of study, with copperplates drawn by himself. In 1802 poor health forced Pole to move, with his family, to St James's Square, Bristol, where he soon acquired an extensive practice. There he continued his medical lectures, James Cowles Prichard being among his pupils; he also lectured on chemistry and other sciences. 
Throughout his life Pole devoted much of his time to ministerial work in the Society of Friends and he took part in many philanthropic schemes. He helped William Smith, in 1812, to establish the first English schools for the adult poor and, in 1814, published a 'History of the Origin and Progress of Adult Schools', to which James Montgomery contributed verse. Pole was praised for his sympathy and tolerance in 'Devotional Verses' (1826) by the Quaker poet Bernard Barton. In addition to being a skilled medical illustrator Pole was a keen watercolourist and silhouettist. He died at Bristol on 28 September 1829 and was survived by four of his children. 


@@@@@


doc= 22460


Pole, Sir William de la (d. 1366), financier and merchant, was of unknown origins. Later tradition reported that he came from Ravenser, the principal harbour of the Yorkshire peninsula of Holderness, whose exposed position (it was later engulfed by the sea) led Edward I to create in 1293 a safer harbour at Kingston upon Hull (now Hull). But any knowledge of the family has been irreparably diminished by the destruction of its records during the peasants' revolt in 1381. 
At the beginning of his career William was frequently recorded as acting with his brother 
The accession of Edward III was followed in February 1327 by the resumption of the Scottish war. As the leading merchants of Kingston upon Hull, Richard and William de la Pole became permanently associated with the central government. In April 1327 Richard became the king's chief butler, a position he held until 1331. In June 1327 the exchequer excused him from accounting because he 'is busied about the provisions for the Scottish war' (Fryde, 'William de la Pole', 16). As Edward III's Florentine bankers were in temporary difficulties, in July the two brothers became for the first time major lenders to the crown. When on 29 August the Bardi were unable to pay for foreign mercenaries, William stepped in with a loan of $2001. Between July 1327 and February 1329 the brothers provided $13,482, not much behind the Bardi, who in 1327/8 advanced $15,470. This first Pole venture into high finance netted them interest of 22 per cent. Their ability to compete with the largest Florentine bank was based on a capacity to borrow from other English merchants, who did not wish to lend directly to the king, but trusted the credit of the Pole brothers. In 1354 William admitted in the exchequer that his loans to the crown were financed by borrowing from other people. 
The overthrow of the rule of Roger Mortimer in October 1330 did not lead (as T. F. Tout suggested) to the Pole brothers' disgrace. Richard appears among the squires of the royal household on the roll of liveries for Christmas 1330, unlike the partisans of Mortimer who were conspicuous by their absence. On 12 July 1331, however, Richard and William ended their partnership. The indenture of partition of their assets mentions a fortune of over $11,200, equivalent to nearly a third of the royal direct tax imposed on the laity in 1332. In 1333, when English armies were invading Scotland, Richard again became the king's chief butler, and remained in the post until 1338. Married to Joan, whose surname is unknown, he was an alderman of London from 1330 to 1340, and was knighted by Edward III in 1340. In his will, in February 1345, he called himself merely citizen of London. After Richard's death, in August, William was one of his executors. Richard's son and heir, another William, was by then principally a Northamptonshire landowner. 
The indenture of July 1331 shows that William controlled a major part of the partnership's capital and that loans to magnates and prelates had formed a notable feature of its business. Kingston upon Hull remained William's main base. In May 1331 Edward III changed it into an autonomous borough, and William was its first mayor, serving until 1335. In March 1333, on the death of the town's last royal warden, the brothers inherited all the royal properties there. William's share included the warden's great mansion, which became his residence. He later bought out the share of Richard's heir. In 1388 the revenues from Kingston upon Hull of William's heir, Michael, amounted to $450. 
Between 1333 and 1337 William de la Pole made an important contribution to the war against the Scots through loans and provision of armaments and other supplies. This was also the time when he was acquiring much property elsewhere in Yorkshire and in the palatinate of Durham. The purchases in the North Riding included estates in some of the best wool-producing districts, notably in Swaledale. All of his properties in the West and North Ridings, as well as his Durham estates, were aligned on, or near, the great northern road running through Yorkshire and continuing towards the Scottish border. They were so spaced that, on a journey between southern Yorkshire and Durham, Pole's agents could have stayed every night and stored their merchandise on his own lands. 
Surviving remnants of Pole's business accounts highlight the reasons for his mercantile success. The commissions paid by him to agents buying wool were twice as large as those paid by other leading merchants. He practised economies of scale. In 1339/40, at Bruges, he hired eight warehouses for wool by disbursing $100, which worked out, in terms of storage per sack, as costing even less than the rates he was paying in Kingston upon Hull, his native town. Pole's accounts were arranged in a uniquely efficient manner, every expense being recorded per unit of merchandise, so that the costs at every stage of a commercial operation could be analysed at a glance. 
The preparations, from 1336, for the war with France, which started openly in May 1337, created vast opportunities for William de la Pole. He probably originated the wool scheme for financing the war and became one of the two heads (together with the Londoner Reginald Conduit) of a wool company formed to run it. The scheme was practicable, if carried out according to plan, but this did not happen. It was ruined by the illicit practices of Pole's associates and by the impatience of the royal envoys in Brabant, where the money was needed to pay for the armies of Edward III's continental allies. The Wool Company, which enjoyed a monopoly of export, a right to purchase wool compulsorily on credit, and control over the revenue from the customs, was expected to ship to Dordrecht in Brabant 30,000 sacks of wool (average yearly exports) and advance $200,000. Its members abused their powers of forcible purchase, thus prejudicing the assembling of the full amount, and smuggled at least 4400 sacks. In December 1337 the company offered to pay the royal envoys a third of what was promised, although if the smuggled wool had been disclosed, they could have offered at least half. The king's envoys then confiscated the whole consignment, precipitating the collapse of the scheme. By February 1338 Edward III had become convinced that Pole was chiefly responsible for this. The failure of the scheme ruined the timetable for financing Edward's two campaigns in the Netherlands (1338-40), and condemned the king to months of penury during his first stay there (July 1338 - February 1340). His allies, deprived of much of the promised money, delayed the invasion of France until it was too late to achieve anything. 
Pole could afford to allow the collapse of the Wool Company, but many of his associates were seriously hurt. He started advancing immense loans single-handedly. Between June 1338 and October 1339 the king incurred debts to Pole amounting to $111,156, of which $100,770 were paid abroad. His rewards included the former London mansion of the Bardi in Lombard Street and the foolhardy purchase, for $22,650, of the lordship of Burstwick, comprising much of Pole's native Holderness. This was the most valuable royal estate (about $1000 a year) and Edward III, who only agreed to the sale because his need for money was desperate, never forgave Pole for forcing it upon him. Raised to the military rank of banneret, Pole sat among the peers of banneret rank in the parliament of October 1339, and was the second baron of the exchequer between November 1339 and June 1340. 
Edward III's second expedition to the Netherlands (June-November 1340) was even more disastrous financially. Pole's loans in 1340 were modest, but by November he had recovered 80 per cent of the debts owed to him. These two things together ruined him in the king's eyes. On his return to England on 30 November Edward III arrested officials and financiers deemed responsible for his misfortunes. He seized Burstwick and never returned it to Pole. As the two heads of the Wool Company, Pole and Conduit were tried between April and July 1341. The true charge was effectively a 'breach of contract', but smuggling of wool in 1337 turned it into a criminal prosecution. Confiscation of all possessions was decreed, and Pole was kept imprisoned longer than anyone else. He was released only in May 1342, and the proceedings were quashed, because his financial help was again needed. 
Once more Pole showed his power to enlist the support of native and German merchants. In 1343, working entirely behind the scenes, he organized a new English company, which he effectively controlled until 1345. It was entrusted with the royal customs and could, on their security, borrow the vast sums needed by the king. Pole apparently invented a scheme to allow this company to buy up old royal debts at huge discounts. This took advantage, unscrupulously, of the king's partial bankruptcy. It enabled Pole to recover covertly some of the debts still due to him, presumably on less unprofitable terms. Royal debts amounting to at least $84,000 were thus 'extinguished' between 1343 and 1355. There were widespread malpractices, including forgeries of royal obligations. 
In 1345, fearing that he might be swallowed by the bottomless whirlpool of royal war finance, Pole withdrew from the company he had covertly created. His successors efficiently financed the Crecy campaign and the prolonged but successful siege of Calais (1346-7). The plague epidemic of 1348-9 afterwards ruined these English financiers, but in November 1353 Pole successfully avoided any responsibility for their debts. This attempt to involve him in the bankruptcy of his former associates was part of a renewed royal attack on Pole. There was a growing and widespread reaction against the king's former financiers. Edward III could now afford to be independent of them, as the years 1350-54 witnessed little warfare. The king could again directly exploit the customs, instead of having to pledge them in advance to bankers. The trial of 1341 was revived. The renewal of charges about the smuggling of wool in 1337 threatened Pole with complete ruin. He escaped it only by remitting all outstanding royal debts and renouncing his claims to Burstwick. But he was still allowed to retain a considerable fortune. In January 1366, five months before William's death, his eldest son and heir, Michael, a knight of the prince of Wales, received a personal summons as a parliamentary peer. 
William de la Pole died on 21 June 1366 and was buried in the Carthusian church of St Michael at Kingston upon Hull, founded by his family. His widow, Katherine, lived in affluence until 1382, with a yearly income of nearly $200. While his second surviving son, Edmund (died 1419), founded a knightly family, Michael de la Pole, who in 1375 inherited the valuable East Anglian estates of his wife, Katherine Wingfield, was in 1385 promoted to the earldom of Suffolk. A century later, in 1484, his great-grandson, John de la Pole, earl of Lincoln, seems to have been informally recognized as heir to the throne by his uncle, Richard III. Had the outcome of the battles of Bosworth (1485) or Stoke (1487) been different, he might have become king of England. 
William de la Pole's activities as an organizer of English merchant companies left a permanent mark on the English wool trade and royal taxation thereof. The transition from a free trade in wool to one controlled by a monopolistic company of English merchants of the staple, and the perpetuation of a large and lucrative royal tax on exported wool, were all developments connected with Pole's enterprises. Some momentous consequences followed. Wool exports began to decline, the English cloth industries expanded instead, and the makers of English woollen textiles were able to penetrate foreign markets in the Netherlands, Germany, and the Mediterranean. 


@@@@@


doc= 22461


Pole, William de la, first duke of Suffolk (1396-1450), administrator and magnate, was the second son of Michael de la Pole, second earl of Suffolk (1367/8-1415), and Katherine Stafford (died 1419). One of possibly twelve children, of whom five brothers and five sisters survived infancy, his younger siblings included Katherine de la Pole, abbess of Barking. 
Like many men of his time, and like many a second son, William de la Pole began his career as a soldier in France. He was born at Cotton, Suffolk, on 16 October 1396, and was allegedly baptized during a fearsome gale, but his activities thereafter are unrecorded, until his service in Henry V's campaign of 1415, a campaign that was to have an unexpected and dramatic outcome for him. De la Pole's father died at the siege of Harfleur, where he himself was wounded, and a few weeks later, on 25 October, his elder brother, also Michael de la Pole ['see under 'Pole, Michael de la], hastily elevated to his father's earldom, fell at the battle of Agincourt. So it was that, a little after his nineteenth birthday, William became earl of Suffolk. With more than one dowager to support from his patrimony, and the rest in wardship for the time being, the obvious course for the young earl to take was to return to France, and he did so in the expedition of August 1417. He was to remain overseas for thirteen years, serving in a variety of different roles and theatres. 
During 1418 Suffolk was mainly employed in the conquest of the Cotentin peninsula, joining Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, at the reduction of Cherbourg. By the end of the year he was with the king at the siege of Rouen, and on 19 May 1419 he was given his first significant command, as admiral of Normandy. The remainder of that year saw him appointed to captaincies on the frontier with Brittany (Pontorson, Avranches) and at Mantes, but his activities before he joined the king at the siege of Melun in the autumn of 1420 are unknown. When Henry returned to England with his Valois bride, he left Suffolk in France, appointing him a conservator of the truce with Brittany in February 1421. On 3 May that year the earl became a knight of the Garter and in the autumn the returning king made him warden of the lower marches of Normandy. 
In the years after Henry's death Suffolk was one of the leading lieutenants of the regent, John, duke of Bedford, frequently entrusted with area commands and also diplomatic missions, such as the important embassy of 1425, sent to the Low Countries to repair the damage caused by Gloucester's invasion of Hainault. It seems unlikely that the earl was a particularly distinguished general: most of the campaigns in which he was active were directed by others, often the earls of Salisbury and Warwick; and much of the work of his admiralty and captaincies was carried out by underlings. Even so, Suffolk put in a respectable performance throughout the 1420s, and his commitment to the war effort was well rewarded. Under Henry V, Suffolk received grants in the Cotentin, where he had been most active, and some time between August 1424 and July 1425, perhaps as a reward for his part in the Ivry-Verneuil campaign, he was given the lands and title of count of Dreux. 
The turning point in Suffolk's military career came in the summer of 1428, when, after a series of rather ineffectual actions along the southern edges of the 'pays de conquete', he joined in the siege of Orleans. As a result of Jeanne d'Arc's intervention in May 1429, the English forces were disastrously split up, and Suffolk's detachment, which fell back to Jargeau, was overwhelmed by the French. On 12 June 1429 Suffolk surrendered, allegedly pronouncing Jeanne the bravest woman on earth and requesting the honour of dubbing her knight. Together with his younger brother Thomas, he was taken into the custody of Jean, count of Dunois, the Bastard of Orleans. 
Suffolk's imprisonment brought the main period of his service in France to an end. To meet a ransom that he later claimed was as high as $20,000, he had to sell land in both France and England, and this must have persuaded him to return home, take possession of his estates, and seek a rich wife. The earl was soon set at liberty -- some time between 28 February and 15 March 1430 -- but, as a condition of his freedom, he had to make some significant and compromising agreements. His keeper was the half-brother of two important prisoners in England, the duke of Orleans and the count of Angouleme, and it appears to have been part of the arrangement for Suffolk's release that the earl would do everything he could to obtain Angouleme's release. 
Suffolk first had livery of his estates in May 1418, and the full de la Pole patrimony was in his hands long before he returned to England. His elder brother had left three daughters, but since the earldom of Suffolk was held in tail male these had posed no obstacle to William's succession. He had, in any case, been granted the three girls' marriages in 1416, but by 1422 two of them were dead, and the third joined her mother as a nun at Bruisyard, Suffolk, in May 1423. Since the widow of the last Ufford earl of Suffolk had died in 1416, and William's own mother had followed her in 1419, the whole earldom was at Suffolk's disposal within a year or two of his majority. 
Even so, it was not until the end of the 1420s that Suffolk's prospects really took off. The first two Lancastrian kings had provided for the rule of East Anglia by linking together the local gentry in a network focused on the duchy of Lancaster estates in Norfolk, and managed on the king's behalf by Sir Thomas Erpingham and Thomas Beaufort, duke of Exeter. From this structure the de la Poles and other local magnates had been more or less excluded, but the deaths of Exeter in 1426 and Erpingham in 1428 opened up the possibility of change, and within a few years Suffolk was emerging as the new head of the crown's East Anglian affinity. His rise to power in the region was assisted both by the scope of his own estates, which were centred in Suffolk but also extended into Norfolk, and (for the time being) by the absence of any serious competition from the other major resident magnate family, the Mowbrays. Even so, it was Suffolk's simultaneous advancement at the centre, in the royal court and council, that made him the rising star in an area where royal control had been growing for several decades. 
A central factor in this advancement was Suffolk's marriage to Alice Chaucer, dowager countess of Salisbury (c.1404-1475), which he seems to have contracted by 11 November 1430, soon after he returned to England. Their only son, John de la Pole, was born in 1442. Alice was a wealthy and well-connected woman, the heir to extensive lands in Oxfordshire and Berkshire, and the daughter of the king's butler, Thomas Chaucer. A close relative of Cardinal Henry Beaufort, and his ally on Henry VI's minority council, Chaucer was a valuable connection. It seems likely that he embraced Suffolk as a son: the earl was soon using men from Chaucer's estates in the Thames valley as his agents, and it was surely with the butler's agreement that the earl became constable and steward of Queen Catherine's honour of Wallingford in June 1434. By the time Chaucer died, at the end of that year, Suffolk had largely stepped into his shoes. Although he is often associated with the rule of East Anglia, he was more normally resident at the Chaucer 'caput' of Ewelme, Oxfordshire, where he and his wife later built a palace and founded a hospital; like his father-in-law, Earl William was to find that the exercise of lordship in the Thames valley fitted neatly with a career in royal government conducted mainly at Windsor and Westminster. 
What part Chaucer may have played in securing Suffolk's appointment to the king's council is not clear, but this was the earl's next step forward after his marriage. In the parliament of January 1431 Suffolk was part of a delegation from the council that visited the Canterbury convocation to ask for supply. On 30 November that year he was solemnly sworn a councillor. Given that Suffolk was present at the council meetings that fixed the terms and conditions of Gloucester's lieutenancy and began proceedings against the cardinal, it seems possible that Duke Humphrey was behind his appointment. Certainly, Suffolk consented to the changes in the council ordinances which preceded and assisted Gloucester's attempt to gain control of the government in February 1432, and it may have been with Gloucester's help that he acquired the custody of the duke of Orleans in the following summer. Even so, if Suffolk was the protector's friend, he was far from being his creature. When Gloucester's initiatives were decisively overturned in the spring and summer of 1433, Suffolk acquired the important post of steward of the royal household. His martial past, his service under Bedford, and his Chaucer connections must have combined to make him acceptable to almost everyone. Having returned to England in 1430, with no experience of domestic politics and a heavy ransom to pay, he was one of the leading figures in the minority regime by the middle years of the decade. 
In the wake of the successes of 1430-33 Suffolk set about securing his position. He was an assiduous attender at the council, claiming to have missed only fifty meetings between 1431 and February 1436; and he was active in some of the major governmental initiatives of the time, joining Cardinal Beaufort in the abortive embassies of 1433 (Calais) and 1435 (Arras), making a detour to settle Normandy in the wake of Bedford's death, and joining the duke of York's army for a last six months of military service in the summer and autumn of 1436. The degree of influence that Suffolk had achieved by that year is shown by the lavish series of rewards that accompanied his final tour of duty: outstanding wages were settled and debts written off; he was granted a pension of 5000 livres (possibly to help pay his ransom); and, tellingly, he was promised that he would not be removed from his office 'in the king's household and about the king's person' ('CPR', '1429-36', 514). This last was important, because it was during the summer of 1436 that the authority to govern first began to edge away from the minority council and towards the adolescent Henry VI. So far, Suffolk had risen to prominence mainly with the backing of peers and patrons; hereafter, the emerging king was to play an important role in his career. 
The new importance accorded to the king as he grew into adulthood presented Suffolk with both opportunities and problems. As steward of the royal household, where the king lived and governed, he was well placed to influence the direction of both policy and favour. On the other hand, Henry's youthfulness (he was fourteen in 1436) and weakness of character meant that the exercise of royal authority by his ministers and intimates was always open to contest and controversy. In order to avoid this, and to realize the full potential of his own position, Suffolk had to do two things: he needed to establish a single hierarchy in the household, with himself at its head; and he had to convince the lords that such a hierarchy could satisfy their interests as effectively as the minority council had done. His work began in the household. 
The period between July 1436 and November 1437, which saw the king admitted to full authority in the making of grants, also saw Suffolk established at the well-head of several different streams of royal patronage. Together with his stewardship of the royal household, the chief stewardship of the 'north parts' of the duchy of Lancaster, which Suffolk obtained in April 1437, and the post of justiciar of south Wales, which he had by June 1438, enabled the earl to exercise influence over a very wide range of royal patronage. There is some evidence to suggest that he used this influence to afforce his own authority in the household: for example, by rewarding its servants with posts in Wales and the duchy, and also by finding places for his local associates, such as the Hampdens of Oxfordshire and Sir Thomas Tuddenham, within the household and elsewhere. 
The second major development of this period was the establishment of a 'modus vivendi' between Suffolk and his main potential rival for power in the court, the chamberlain, Sir William Phelip. After a brief tussle in the early months of 1437 the two men seem to have reached an accommodation: Suffolk -- richer, better connected, and higher in blood -- was to have precedence both centrally and in East Anglia (where Phelip's Lancastrian connections had made him a plausible candidate for lordship); while the chamberlain's interests were to be well represented (not least by his appointment to the chief stewardship of the 'south parts' of the duchy in May 1437). This was a formula that was to be repeated many times over in the ensuing years, as other potentially independent powers in the household -- James Fiennes, Sir Ralph Boteler, Sir John Beauchamp of Powick, Sir John Stanley -- set their terms for the acceptance of Suffolk's leadership. Even so, from 1437 Suffolk had the advantage of priority: once he was established, there was almost certainly more to gain from working with him (which generally, of course, meant working under him) than from challenging his leadership. He was ever attentive to the interests of his supporters; and, as later became clear, the disruption of his hegemony was in the interests of no one. 
In the wider world beyond the household Suffolk moved slowly and skilfully. Both he and Phelip were members of the council, as well as of the royal household, and they were in no hurry to transfer power from one place to the other until the rest of the nobility were ready to move with them. Suffolk was once again among the most active attenders at the council in the later 1430s and seems to have been closely associated with Cardinal Beaufort, who generally had the upper hand over policy. As it became more important to draw Henry VI into the council's activities, during 1438 and 1439, Suffolk acted as the principal link between the king and his advisers, bearing authority from one and counsel from the other. It was a powerful position, but only if the earl preserved the sense among the lords that he would not use it improperly. He did this partly by using his influence over royal favour and royal justice to ensure that those who had been dominant in the 1420s and early 1430s retained their importance into the later 1430s and 1440s, and partly by avoiding radical departures in either the distribution of authority or the development of policy. As far as authority is concerned, it is clear that the earl did not make waves: instead, he took discreet advantage of whatever circumstances permitted. 
Suffolk's first opportunity came when the duke of Gloucester launched the last of his many assaults on Cardinal Beaufort's control of affairs in the parliament of 1439-40. Suffolk's actions are poorly documented, but it seems likely that he resolved to exploit Beaufort's discomfiture to advance his own political interests. First of all, he attempted to take control of the great tracts of the duchy of Lancaster which were in the hands of the cardinal and other feoffees. On this occasion, the attempt failed, but the ultimate destination of these lands, which were re-enfeoffed between 1443 and 1445, reveals what lay behind the move. Towards the end of 1439 the first steps were taken in what was to be the most famous and enduring project of Henry VI's reign: the foundation of royal colleges at Eton and Cambridge. Suffolk played a leading part in every aspect of the scheme, from its financing and planning through to the actual building of the colleges and the devising of their statutes; tellingly, it was the earl and not the king who laid the first stone of King's College chapel. The reasons for Suffolk's interest are not hard to find. On the one hand, it provided a means to express and demonstrate the new personal authority of the king, which was important because it justified the exercise of power from within the household. On the other hand, the foundations meant the creation of a kind of guild among the upper echelons of the court, a means of binding together leading courtiers, clerks, and bishops in a spiritual enterprise linked closely to the king's personal assumption of rule. 
In the event, this personal rule was rather slow to take hold, but the measures taken during the brief period of independent royal rule between 1439 and 1441 -- the release of Orleans in 1440, in particular -- were absolutely of a piece with those pursued under Beaufort's influence in the later 1430s, and there were no significant changes in the personnel of government. Continuity was the order of the day in the late 1430s and early 1440s, and Suffolk seems to have accepted this as readily as his peers. In the summer of 1441 Beaufort and the council regained a measure of political control, but -- owing to the confidence he must have built up among the lords and the continuing need to incorporate the manifestly adult king in the government -- Suffolk's rise to supremacy was barely halted. The earl was the leading noble attender at the council during 1441-3 and once again played the important role of bridging the gap between conciliar policy and royal authority. Since attempts to negotiate a marriage for the maturing king bulked so large in the politics of these years, the significance of this role was growing ever greater; and it was surely Suffolk's success in contracting a marriage alliance with the house of Anjou in 1444-5 that permitted the inauguration of full royal rule from a court now operating under his direction. When the French ambassadors arrived to settle the desired peace terms in July 1445, they found Henry VI apparently in full control of affairs, a splendid coterie of magnates around him, and Suffolk, promoted to marquess on 14 September 1444, highest in importance. De la Pole had risen to the top and he was to stay there for the following four years, but the position he had obtained was something very different from the absolute and royally sponsored power traditionally ascribed to him. 
One of the most controversial features of Suffolk's career was his involvement in Anglo-French diplomacy during the mid- and late 1440s. Commonly seen as the architect of a narrowly supported and ill-conceived policy of peace at any price, Suffolk did indeed play a prominent role in the numerous initiatives to obtain a measure of peace in France that arose during the 1430s and 1440s, but there is no reason to assume that, as C. L. Kingsford once suggested, 'in his peace policy Suffolk was consistent throughout' (Kingsford, 'Policy and fall of Suffolk', 149). In fact the overall aim of Suffolk's diplomacy may have been to build support for the Lancastrians among leading French magnates, a policy pursued by Bedford and Henry V before him. 
During his period as gaoler of the duke of Orleans (1432-6) the earl is supposed to have been converted to the cause of peace by his captive, but the interest in a general settlement that he professed during a meeting held in 1433 between the duke and some Burgundian ambassadors was quite conventional. Suffolk took Orleans to Calais later that year, for a conference with other French princes that never took place, but then and on his next embassy (to Arras, in 1435) he was working in tandem with Cardinal Beaufort and the dominant faction in the council: there is no reason to see him as the maker of policy, let alone the maker of unacceptable policy. Nor is there any reason to see him as a pacifist: the line taken by the English delegation at Arras was so uncompromising that no peace could be concluded, and in 1436 Suffolk had once again been a participant in the war. In 1437 he agreed to serve on another embassy, though there is no evidence that it actually took place, and in the next major attempt to negotiate peace with the French, the conference at Oye in May 1439, he played no part. Suffolk's role in the decision to release Orleans in 1440 is unknown, but it is worth noting that he was not mentioned in Gloucester's various invectives against the measure. Throughout the 1430s and early 1440s Suffolk's part in the formation of policy towards France was only such as befitted his place in the regime: there is no evidence that he had any distinctive agenda. 
In many ways the story is the same for the later 1440s, when Suffolk was more clearly the leading figure in the planning and conduct of English diplomacy. Following the failure of more bellicose policies in 1441-3, the earl was instrumental in reopening negotiations with the French and paving the way for the major embassy that he himself led to Tours in the spring of 1444. In a series of meetings with the French king and the leading members of the house of Anjou, Suffolk contracted a short truce with France on 20 May 1444 and, four days later, a marriage between Henry VI and Margaret, daughter of Duke Rene. In all probability he also made a number of proposals intended to strengthen the English diplomatic position by building an alliance with the Angevins and by encouraging a longer truce with Charles VII; these were a temporary suspension of the English title to the French throne, and a suggestion that English claims and lands in Maine and Anjou might be ceded to Margaret's family. The following November Suffolk went back to France to collect the new queen and escort her to England. In April 1445 he returned home, and on 4 June he received the rapturous thanks of the duke of Gloucester and the other lords and commons in parliament. 
In all this Suffolk was working well within the established frameworks of English policy, and -- at least from 1445 -- with the full knowledge of other leading politicians. His attempt to refuse a place in the embassy of 1444, on the grounds that he had many contacts in France, and that there was already popular suspicion about his motives, should not be read as the sign of a guilty conscience; rather, it was an elaborate attempt to secure the lords' recognition that responsibility for what he did on royal orders must lie with the king. His declaration of 1447, that he had done nothing at Tours beyond the terms of his commission -- a declaration endorsed by several lords, including York and Cromwell -- must be seen in a similar light: the fact that rumours circulated about the way in which the risky and unsuccessful policy of the later 1440s had come to be conceived and executed is testimony to Henry's insufficiency, not to Suffolk's softness or slipperiness. In the end, of course, the English found that they had to hand over Maine not to the Angevins, but to Charles VII -- and that as a condition merely for keeping the truce in being; but, in trying to co-ordinate the royal response to French initiatives, Suffolk acted as part of a group. As he later pointed out, 'so grete thinges coude not be doon nor broughte aboute by hymself alone, onlesse that other persones had doon her parte and be pryvy therto aswell as he' ('RotP', 5.182). Nobody knew how best to preserve the residue of Henry V's conquests, and Suffolk's approach seems to have been no different from anyone else's. This was demonstrated by his involvement in the more aggressive scheme to assert English interests in Brittany, which culminated in the coup at Fougeres in the summer of 1449. This policy also failed, but the key to understanding Suffolk's role is to see him not as the friend of peace, nor yet of war, but (as he himself insisted) as the true servant of Lancastrian interests, and so the man most obliged, by his pre-eminence in the court of the useless king, to take responsibility for pursuing them. 
The paradox at the heart of Henry VI's government in the mid- and late 1440s lay in the fact that, although the king was nominally adult and responsible for policy, everybody knew, or suspected, that this was a fiction. As a result, it was continually necessary for Suffolk, as manager of the regime, to gather support from leading men and to face down allegations that he, and others at Henry's side in the household, were running affairs in their own interests. The marquess certainly seems to have been aware of the realities of his position. At least until 1448 efforts were made to keep the magnates involved in decision making, and Suffolk was almost certainly a participant in the various attempts to limit the king's open-handedness in the interests of financial stability. The real problem facing him was that the king's freedom to distribute favours to all comers was both the corollary of royal authority and, in a sense, a guarantee of the regime's representativeness. Applications for royal grace could not easily be denied, and this was central to the collapse of the regime's legitimacy in the crisis of 1449-50. 
Suffolk himself, of course, was one of the greatest beneficiaries of royal patronage, and this has done more than anything else to blacken his reputation. The grants he received fell into two main groups. First, there were those that helped to strengthen his position within the governing establishment. Into this category, perhaps, fell the offices of justice of Chester and north Wales (1440), chamberlain of England (1447), admiral of England during the duke of Exeter's minority (1447), head of the staple (1448), and chief steward of those parts of the duchy of Lancaster held in feoffment for the royal colleges (1448): these offices gave Suffolk authority in, or at least an entree into, the many spheres where a proper king would have been active; someone had to exercise authority on Henry VI's behalf. In a like way, Suffolk's acquisition of the lordship of Guines (made under highly secret conditions in February 1441) may have helped the government to wrest Calais from the duke of Gloucester; while his appointment some time before 1445 as great steward of England, and his promotion within the peerage, must have helped him to maintain his status as other peers ascended all around him. Suffolk was no altruist: he must have sought and valued the offices and honours he achieved, but his manufactured ascendancy nevertheless filled a political vacuum. His function in the years of Henry's personal rule was to supply the single direction that political society required: so it was that many others, besides Suffolk himself, benefited from his ascendancy. 
Even so, it is clear that not all of the favours Suffolk received can be related to the necessities of his position. If his reversion of Gloucester's earldom of Pembroke (1443) might have been intended to afforce the regime's position in Wales, the wardships of the heiresses of Beaufort (1444) and Beauchamp (1446) seem merely to have served the dynastic interests of the house of de la Pole. The commons of the parliament of 1449-50 accused Suffolk of intending to marry his son to Lady Margaret Beaufort and to place the crown upon his head, using the Beaufort claim as justification. While such an extravagantly disloyal scheme seems unlikely, it is clear that Suffolk was not embarrassed either to fish for the highest rewards available or to help himself to portions of the royal estate (the earldom of Pembroke was to be held in tail male, for example). His acquisitiveness was, to say the least, indiscreet and it provided the regime's critics in the country with powerful ammunition when trouble began in the later 1440s. 
Suffolk first began to run into political difficulties in the wake of the parliament held at Bury St Edmunds in February 1447. The assembly had gathered at a tense moment: negotiations with the French had reached an impasse, and some sort of attack on government policy seems to have been anticipated from the duke of Gloucester. Under orders that can only have come from Suffolk and his colleagues, Duke Humphrey had been arrested on charges of treason, only to die in suspicious circumstances a few days later. Public opinion seems to have held Suffolk responsible for both the duke's downfall and his death, and it is from this moment, according to several chroniclers, that murmurings against the king's advisers began to spread among the people. Suffolk could not have moved against Gloucester without the support of the lords, many of whom profited directly (as Suffolk did himself) from the old duke's demise, but this support was not unshakeable. As the diplomatic and financial situation deteriorated further in 1448, the more important lords seem to have distanced themselves from the regime, leaving Suffolk (who was promoted to duke on 2 June 1448) and the officers and men of the household looking exactly like the curial clique about whom the government's critics were beginning to complain. As the renewal of war became first a threat and then, in 1449, a reality, these men struggled to raise the necessary funds and men to fight it effectively. Suffolk himself lent large sums (as much as $2773 in the second half of 1449 alone), but the attitude of MPs was unsympathetic. The first parliament of 1449 countered requests for taxation with demands for a resumption of royal gifts; the second went much further, demanding action against the king's advisers and dragging its feet on all other business. To those outside the inner circle of power it seemed that Henry's ministers had brought their troubles on themselves. By late 1449 Normandy was practically lost, the government was bankrupt, and a coherent explanation of these disasters -- one which put the blame mainly on the shoulders of Suffolk -- was being developed by MPs and other exponents of public opinion. 
A final cause of trouble for the duke was the mounting evidence of disorder and injustice in the localities, and particularly in those areas where Suffolk and other courtiers were dominant. The commons of 1449-50 presented Suffolk as the grand co-ordinator of a group of disorderly and opportunistic men drawn from Henry VI's household, but those historians who have followed them in this have overlooked the fact that anyone with access to the king in the later 1440s was able to obtain authority for his actions. On the whole Suffolk seems to have spent more time trying to repair the damage caused by the interventions of minor household men than in inspiring their activities. If he had sometimes to excuse what they had done (as in sponsoring a pardon for the disgraceful William Tailboys, for example), this was either to meet the demands of other courtiers (Viscount Beaumont in this case), or to try to retain some purchase over men who were learning that they could act for themselves. If, meanwhile, there was a growing number of curial sheriffs in the later 1440s, this may have been because few other gentlemen could be persuaded to accept the office now that the crown estate had been so much depleted by royal acts of grace: there is no reason to believe that Suffolk, or anyone else, was constructing a network of courtiers for the programmatic exploitation of the realm. 
In East Anglia, where the evidence of the Paston letters has tended to dominate historical accounts, it has been widely concluded that Suffolk, aided by John Heydon, Thomas Tuddenham, and a host of courtiers, used his power at the centre to conduct a reign of terror at the expense of the region's rightful lord, John (VI) Mowbray, duke of Norfolk. Recent research has shown, however, that if anyone had the right to rule the region, it was Suffolk himself in his triple role as king's chief minister, local agent of the duchy of Lancaster connection, and lord of the de la Pole-Ufford patrimony. The troubles of the 1440s arose in large part because Norfolk was determined to force his way in and because Suffolk, with responsibilities elsewhere and a complex position to maintain, took the simplest course and tried to keep him out. Certainly, Suffolk's handling of the situation left something to be desired, but he was far from being the gangster figure of the Pastons' imagination. Norfolk himself and, above all, the supine king must take much of the responsibility for the region's problems; while the chaos of the later 1440s -- with Thomas Daniel, Robert Hungerford, Lord Moleyns, and others marauding about East Anglia seizing vulnerable property -- is symptomatic of the kind of confusion happening in other areas, where minor men with access to the king were defying Suffolk's carefully constructed regime and taking the law into their own hands. Suffolk's probity and effectiveness as a territorial lord may be better demonstrated by the rapid recovery of de la Pole authority in East Anglia once the convulsions of 1447-51 had died down, or by the calmer situation that prevailed in the Thames valley -- perhaps the main centre of Suffolk's lordship -- throughout the reign. 
By November 1449, when another angry parliament gathered at Westminster, Suffolk's tottering regime had more or less collapsed. Since September a loosely organized council of lords seems to have taken control of government, and, while Suffolk was an important participant, it seems likely that he was no longer the director of affairs. The new year brought disturbances in London, Kent, and Portsmouth, where a mob of soldiers murdered the keeper of the privy seal, Bishop Adam Moleyns, and these events may have convinced the lords -- and possibly Suffolk himself -- that the government would have to respond to criticisms which, as the duke himself acknowledged, ran 'almost in every commons mouth' ('RotP', 5.176). On 22 January 1450 Suffolk appeared before the king in parliament to protest his loyalty, and to challenge his critics to make formal accusations against him so that he could defend himself. His declaration emphasized his long service in both France and England, the many losses he had sustained in the war, and his great inheritance, which he was unlikely to have risked 'for a Frensh mannes promisse'. It was a moving performance, but predictably it unleashed allegations of treason from the commons, and, on 28 January, the king and the lords reluctantly agreed to imprison Suffolk in the Tower of London. 
The commons' charges emerged in detail in two batches: eight counts of treason on 7 February, and eighteen lesser offences on 9 March. Suffolk's diplomatic efforts were presented as plotting with his French allies; his activities in government became the most outrageous sequence of corruptions, peculations, and maintenances imaginable. The curious conditions that had created and surrounded the duke's hegemony undeniably provided the commons with plenty of material for their accusations: Suffolk did have friends and connections in France; he had been 'pryviest of [Henry's] counseill' when the disastrous policies of the 1440s were put into effect; he had, for example, helped himself to the earldom of Pembroke, procured a pardon for Tailboys, and, in all probability, influenced the appointments of sheriffs; he had (until recently) been able to affect the distribution of royal patronage. Even so, the picture of diabolic malignity conjured by the duke's accusers carries no conviction whatsoever, and Suffolk, who finally appeared before king and lords to answer the charges against him on 13 March, was able to dismiss the commons' more extravagant assertions with a flat denial. Central to his defence was the substantially true claim that he had consistently acted with the knowledge, support, and assistance of others; this counted for a lot in the desperate political situation of 1450. The lords were unable to deny the point, though they hardly wished to acknowledge it, or, indeed, to explore the matter further. This must explain the slow progress of the proceedings against the duke (now halted for a further four days) and also the solution which emerged on 17 March. In return for submitting himself to the king's 'rule and governaunce' ('RotP', 5.183), and abandoning his right to a trial by his peers, in which all manner of damaging details about the operation of royal government under Henry VI were likely to become public, Suffolk was formally exonerated by the king and sentenced to five years' banishment, to begin on 1 May 1450. 
While this award was avowedly made at 'the kynges owne demeanance and rule', it was clearly the result that the lords themselves would have sought. Nothing was to be gained by staging trials of powerful magnates at the behest of the populace. The duke was escorted away from Westminster by night on 19 March, with a party of outraged Londoners in hot pursuit. He spent the ensuing six weeks at his manor of East Thorp, in Suffolk, while news of his release spread and public anger mounted. As the final session of the parliament of 1449-50 opened at Leicester on 29 April, with calls for the execution of Suffolk and other so-called 'traitors', the duke himself prepared to take ship for the Low Countries. Two days later his little fleet was intercepted by a privateering vessel called the 'Nicholas of the Tower'. Suffolk was taken prisoner by its crew, subjected to a mock trial, and, in the name of the 'community of the realm', beheaded as a traitor on 2 May 1450. He was buried at Wingfield in Suffolk, probably in June following. Despite the best efforts of their rulers, and notwithstanding the duke's persuasive claim to have acted truly towards both king and people, the commons of England had begun to obtain their justice: Suffolk's murder was the first act in a summer of mayhem that was to change the face of English politics forever. 
By his contemporaries the duke of Suffolk was little mourned, and to most historians he has appeared both corrupt and inept, being generally presented in terms not far removed from the image of arrogant ambition displayed in the young Shakespeare's 'Henry VI' parts 1 and 2 -- the former play concludes with Suffolk, having successfully wooed Margaret of Anjou in King Henry's name, declaring that 'I will rule both her, the king and realm' ('Henry VI', V.v). Yet C. L. Kingsford found Suffolk 'perhaps at once the most tragic and the most pathetic figure in the history of fifteenth-century England' (Kingsford, 'Policy and fall of Suffolk', 146), and a closer look at his career reveals a more complex picture than traditional accounts have allowed. Suffolk was no more blind to his own advantage than any of his contemporaries, but -- like his grandfather, the first earl, whose career was strikingly similar -- he was also something of a statesman, doing his best for king and realm in very difficult circumstances. Service to the crown was the keynote of his career, as it had been for other Lancastrian noblemen: the difficulty facing Suffolk was that service to Henry VI inevitably meant the usurpation of the king's unexercised authority. How eagerly the duke sought the brief supremacy he achieved will never be known, but it is worth noting that he worked hard at his self-appointed role, that his pre-eminence made a kind of government possible for a time, and that he paid a heavy price for it. 


@@@@@


doc= 22462


Pole, Sir William (bap. 1561, d. 1635), antiquary, was baptized at Colyton, Devon, on 27 August 1561, the son of William Pole ('c'.1514-1587) of Shute, Devon, a gentleman whose family had extensive estates in east Devon, and Katherine, daughter of Alexander Popham, lord chief justice of England. In February 1579, like his father before him, he entered the Inner Temple. On 20 July 1583 at Shobrooke, Devon, he married Mary, the daughter and one of the heirs of Sir William Peryam of Crediton, and they had six sons and six daughters before Mary's death from a fall in May 1606. 
Pole represented Bossiney, Cornwall, in the parliament of 1586, became justice of the peace for Devon by 1592, and served as high sheriff for Devon in the year 1602-3. He was for many years one of the feoffees of Colyton. On 15 February 1606 he was knighted by James I at Whitehall. He paid $37 10's'. to the Virginia Company and was one of the incorporators of the third Virginia charter in 1612. His second marriage was to Jane, the wealthy widow of Roger How of London and daughter of William Simmes or Symes of Chard, Somerset. There were no children from this marriage. 
Pole is best known as an antiquary and must have begun his work well before 1608 when Ralph Brooke, York herald, made extracts from his writings. Two folio manuscript volumes, probably completed about 1617, were eventually printed as 'Collections towards a Description of the County of Devon' by John Nichols in 1791. A transcript had previously been made by John Anstis and further transcripts were made from this copy. Another volume of 622 pages, described by the historian John Prince as 'a vast manuscript volume in folio as big as a church 'Bible', containing copies of deeds, seals and grants' (Prince, 505), was used by Prince to compile his 'Danmonii orientales illustres' (1701); his manuscript extracts also survive (BL, Add. MS 28649). A small proportion privately printed by Sir Thomas Phillips as 'Sir William Pole's Copies of Extracts from Old Evidences' ('c'.1840) bears witness to the industry of Pole in searching out historical source material. Some 4600 documents scattered in the charter chests of the gentry in the west of England are described with varying amounts of detail, including cartularies of Tavistock and Newenham abbeys which have otherwise disappeared. This thoroughness makes him, in Prince's words, 'the first as the best antiquary (for certainty and judgment) that ever we had in our county' (Prince, 506), although ironically Prince is inaccurate in his account of Pole's early life, confusing father and son. Pole was also acknowledged by the antiquary Tristram Risdon as being the man 'from whose lamp I have received light in these my labours' (Risdon, 29). According to Prince, much of the material collected by Pole 'miscarried in the time of the late civil wars' (Prince, 506) when Colcombe Castle was burned, but, as well as the two items already mentioned, a folio volume containing 'The coats of arms of the Devonshire gentry drawn with a pen' and another folio compilation containing copies of deeds and charters relating to Tor Abbey survived in the library at Shute House; they were transferred to Antony in Cornwall, the home of the Carew Pole branch of the family, when the senior line of the Poles of Shute became extinct in 1926. 
Pole retired from Shute House to Colcombe Castle in the parish of Colyton which he had 'new built' (Prince, 505) and where he died on 9 February 1635. He was buried in the chancel of Colyton church and was succeeded by his second son, John, who was created a baronet and added to his father's writings. John died on 16 April 1658. 


@@@@@


doc= 22483


Polwhele, Richard (1760-1838), writer, was born at Truro, Cornwall, on 6 January 1760, the only son of Thomas Polwhele (died 1777) and his wife, Mary (died 1804), the daughter of Richard Thomas, alderman of Truro. The Polwheles claimed descent from the chamberlain of the Empress Matilda, Drogo de Polwhele, on whom a grant of Cornish lands had been bestowed in 1140. The family was long established in Polwhele, in the parish of St Clement, Cornwall, about 2 miles from Truro, and several of its members were among the Cornish representatives in parliament. 
Polwhele was educated at Truro grammar school by Cornelius Cardew DD. He began to write poetry when about twelve years old, and his juvenile productions were praised by John Wolcot, then resident at Truro, but with some judicious qualifications. On his father's death in 1777 Polwhele accompanied his mother on a visit to Bath and Bristol, where he met many literary personages, including Catharine Macaulay and Hannah More. He presented the first of these ladies with an ode on her birthday, which was printed at Bath, with five others, in April 1777; and he was induced by the flattery of his friends to publish in the next year a volume of poems called 'The Fate of Lewellyn'. The title-page concealed the author's name, stating that it was 'by a young gentleman of Truro School', whereupon a critic in the 'Monthly Review' stated that the master of that school should have kept it in manuscript, and Cardew retorted that he was ignorant of the proposed publication. This premature appearance in print impaired Polwhele's reputation. 
Polwhele matriculated as commoner at Christ Church, Oxford, on 3 March 1778, and received from it two of Fell's exhibitions. He kept his terms until he was admitted a student in civil law, but he left the university without taking a degree. In 1782 he was ordained by Bishop Ross as curate to the Revd Thomas Bedford, rector of Lamorran, Cornwall, and in the same year married Loveday (1764/5-1793), second daughter of Samuel Warren of Truro and his wife, Blanche Sandys, of an old Cornish family. They did not remain in Cornwall for long, as in the same year he was offered the curacy of Kenton, near Powderham Castle, Devon, the seat of the Courtenays. On 1 February 1793, however, his wife died at Kenton, aged twenty-eight, leaving one son and two daughters. Polwhele then moved with his children back to his mother's house in Cornwall, but after a short stay there returned again to Kenton. There, on 29 November 1793, he married Mary, the daughter of Captain Robert Tyrrell or Terrell of Exmouth, and early in 1794 he was appointed to the curacy of Exmouth. Both Kenton and Exmouth were close to Exeter, where Polwhele joined a literary society which published in 1792 'Poems Chiefly by Gentlemen of Devonshire and Cornwall' (2 vols.), edited by Polwhele, and in 1796 'Essays by a Society of Gentlemen at Exeter'. A quarrel over the second publication gave rise to a bitter controversy between Polwhele and his colleagues ('GM', 1st ser., 66, 1796). Meanwhile he projected his 'History of Devonshire', and derived considerable assistance from the documents at Powderham, Mamhead, and Haldon, and from the diocesan records at Exeter. His list of subscribers was soon full, but the work proved unsatisfactory. 
On the nomination of the bishop of Exeter, Polwhele was appointed in 1794 to the small living of Manaccan, near Helston, Cornwall, and he also undertook for a non-resident vicar the charge of the still smaller and poorer living of St Anthony in Meneage, to which he was appointed in 1809. The parsonage of Manaccan was a mere cottage, and Polwhele spent much time and money on repairs and enlargements. To secure the requisite education for his children, he accepted, about 1806, the curacy of the large parish of Kenwyn, within which the borough of Truro is partly situated, and obtained from the bishop a licence of non-residence at Manaccan. John Croker records in 1820 that Polwhele, who appeared 'to have very little worldly wisdom', was in trouble for restoring his church without proper authority, and that the parishioners had threatened him with legal proceedings ('Croker Papers', 1.165). 
Polwhele was, by turns, poet, topographer, theologian, and literary chronicler, and his fame has been marred by a fatal fluency of composition. Before he was twenty he wrote, besides the works already mentioned, an ode called 'The Spirit of Frazer to General Burgoyne' (1778) and an 'Ode on the Isle of Man to the Memory of Bishop Wilson' for the 1781 edition of Wilson's works. His works are well documented in the 'New Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature' (2.675-77). Among his more noteworthy works of poetry are: 'The Art of Eloquence', a didactic poem, published in 1785, the later editions and following books being known as 'The English Orator', which was revised by Bishop Ross and others, and 'Influence of Local Attachment' (1796, 1798, and 1810). This latter poem gave 'indications of a higher excellence' which were not fulfilled (Moir, 37). Long extracts from it are given in Nathan Drake's 'Winter Nights' (2 vols., 1820), and it was compared by some of the critics to the 'Pleasures of Memory' by Samuel Rogers. Polwhele's collection, 'Poetic Trifles' (1796), was suppressed after a very few copies had been sold on account of its satirical references to Montauban (that is, Sir John St Aubyn). 'The idylls, epigrams, and fragments of Theocritus, Bion, and Moschus, with the elegies of Tyrtaeus' (1786) was often reprinted in the early nineteenth century, the translations of Tyrtaeus being included in a polyglot version published at Brussels by A. Baron in 1835. 
One of Polwhele's poems attracted some attention in the twentieth century for its concern with the burgeoning debate of Polwhele's era concerning the essential nature and societal role of women. 'The Unsex'd Females, a Poem' (1798) was reissued in facsimile as a part of the 'Feminist Controversy in England 1788-1810' series, edited by Gina Lurie, in 1974. In her introduction to the poem, Lurie explains how the relatively conservative Polwhele creates in it a dispute between Christ and the devil as embodied by the politically diametrical personalities of Hannah More and Mary Wollstonecraft. 
Also reissued in facsimile in the twentieth century were Polwhele's two major topographical studies: 'The History of Cornwall' (7 vols., 1816; repr. in facsimile, 3 vols., 1978) and 'The History of Devonshire' (3 vols., 1793-1806; repr. in facsimile, 1977). The style of his topographical volumes was attractive, and the descriptions of the places which he had himself seen were excellent. But the author was wanting in application, particularly with respect to his work on Devon; large districts of the county were unknown to him, and the topography was not described on an adequate scale. The historical section on Devon was followed by a querulous postscript with complaints of the withdrawal of subscribers and of the action of some of his friends in publishing separate works on portions of the history of the county. Much matter was omitted, particularly of the later history of Devon, and the whole work was a disappointment to both author and public, which was not mitigated by the separate publication of 'Historical Views of Devonshire' (1793), of which four more volumes were announced, but only the first was ever published. Further information on these works will be found in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for 1793 and following years, and in William Upcott's 'A Bibliographical Account of... English Topography' (1978, 1.150). 
Polwhele's 'History of Cornwall' also came out piecemeal in seven detached volumes from 1803 to 1808, and a new edition, purporting to be corrected and enlarged, appeared in 1816. The most useful of the volumes is the fifth, which deals with 'the language, literature, and literary characters'. The editors of a 1994 study of English county histories observe that Polwhele's method 'was a considerable advance on that of his predecessors, being that of the historian-entrepreneur, taking advantage of the more widespread circulation of the printed word' at this time (Currie and Lewis, 119-20). The complicated bibliography of his Cornish study can be seen in Boase and Courtenay's 'Bibliotheca Cornubiensis' (2.510-11), the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for 1803-4, Upcott's 'English Topography' (1.88-93), and in the 1978 facsimile reprint of 'The History of Cornwall'. Polwhele also gave much assistance to John Britton in the compilation of the 'Beauties of Cornwall and Devon' in the 'Beauties of England and Wales' series (18 vols., 1801-15). 
Polwhele's 'Traditions and Recollections' (2 vols., 1826) contains some civil war letters, anecdotes of Foote and Wolcot, and many of his own juvenile poems. His chief correspondents were Samuel Badcock, William Cobbett, William Cowper, Erasmus Darwin, William Hayley, Edward Gibbon, Catharine Macaulay, Sir Walter Scott, Anna Seward, and John Whitaker DD. A memoir by Polwhele of the last of these worthies formed the subject of the third volume of his 'Biographical Sketches' (3 vols., 1831). 
Polwhele also published, in connection with the Church Union Society, two prize essays (respectively on the scriptural evidence as to the condition of the soul after death, and on marriage), printed many sermons, and conducted a vigorous polemic against the Methodists. His chief opponent on this topic was Samuel Drew, who first confuted Polwhele's arguments and afterwards became his firm friend. Throughout his life Polwhele was also a contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and from 1799 to 1805 he was a frequent contributor to the 'Anti-Jacobin Review'. He also supplied occasional articles to the 'European Magazine', the 'Orthodox Churchman's Magazine', and the 'British Critic', and some of his poetry appeared in literary periodicals and annuals. 
Polwhele vacated the living of Manaccan in 1821 on his appointment to the more valuable vicarage of Newlyn East, and he resigned St Anthony in favour of his eldest son, William, in 1828. Although he retained the benefice of Newlyn until his death, the last ten years of his life were spent on his estate of Polwhele, where he devoted himself to the composition of his autobiographical volumes. He died at Truro on 12 March 1838, and was buried near his father's grave in St Clement's churchyard, where a monument preserves his memory. With his second wife he had a large family; among the sons were Robert, vicar of Avenbury, Herefordshire, and author of some small theological works; Richard Graves, a lieutenant-colonel in the Madras artillery; and Thomas, a general in the army. 


@@@@@


doc= 22484


Polwhele, Theophilus (d. 1689), Independent minister, was of Cornish birth but was living in Somerset when, on 29 March 1644, he entered Emmanuel College, Cambridge, as a sizar. He was placed under the tutorship of William Sancroft, later archbishop of Canterbury, and graduated BA in 1648. On 5 September 1649 the county committee of Dorset ordered his appointment as rector of Langton Long Blandford, Dorset. Soon afterwards, Polwhele married a daughter of William Benn (1600-1681), minister of All Saints in nearby Dorchester. On 27 May 1650 the town corporation voted $10 'out of the parsonage monny' to be paid to Polwhele 'as a testimony of our respects to Mr Ben (whose eldest daughter he hath lately marryed)'. The marriage produced a son, Isaac, and three daughters, Elizabeth (possibly the playwright E. Polewheele), Susanna, and Johannah. 
On 18 June 1651 'whereas Mr Theophilus Polwhele late minister... hath lately left the place, so that the people there have no preaching minister', a successor was appointed at Long Blandford (Mayo, 'Minute Books', 572). It seems that Polwhele returned to Cambridge for admission in 1651 to the degree of MA, but soon moved to Carlisle as a preacher, for he later referred to the kindness to him of its governors and citizens, while he was 'a student in the university, and afterwards a preacher in their city' (T. Polwheile, 'A Treatise of Self-Deniall', 1658, title-page). On 29 March 1653 the commissioners for the propagation of the gospel wrote from Newcastle confirming that he had been examined and approved by a panel of godly ministers to preach at Carlisle, and allocating for his use rents to the value of over $100. In 1654 he was a member of the committee for ejecting scandalous ministers in the counties of Cumberland, Durham, Northumberland, and Westmorland. His impressive stipend, however, was not actually paid in full; on 18 May 1655 it was ordered that the shortfall be paid him by the collector. 
However, Polwhele had already left the north-east. On 8 January 1655 he was admitted to the Clare and Tidcombe portions of the vicarage of Tiverton, in succession to John Rowe, newly appointed preacher at Westminster Abbey. Having come to a financial agreement with the sequestered rector, Richard Newte, Polwhele compounded for the first fruits of this well-endowed benefice in 1658. On 24 October 1657 he was appointed an assistant to the commissioners into the ministry of Devon. The following year he published 'A Treatise of Self-Deniall', which included a notable attack on the hypocrisy of those who pretended to live virtuous lives while drinking, gambling, and committing adultery behind closed doors: 'there is no difference betwixt the grossest anti-scripturists, as familists, ranters, etc, and many of those that seem to be their greatest adversaries and opposers but in words only' (sig. A3'v'). Polwhele sympathized with the Independent or congregational outlook, and the work contains a second preface by the minister Ralph Venning which describes the author as his friend. In May 1660 Polwhele was one of the signatories of the address to Charles II from congregational ministers in Devon. 
To John Walker's charge that Polwhele had allowed the parsonage at Clare to fall into ruin, Edmund Calamy responded with the claim that the damage dated back to the civil wars. He adds that Polwhele rebuilt and lived in the parsonage house of Tidcombe, remaining there until his ejection in 1660. In 1665 he was still living at Tiverton, and 'there keepes seditious Conventicles' (quoted in 'Calamy rev.'). In 1667 he published 'Of Quencing the Spirit', to which Lewis Stuckey contributed a preface. In 1669 he was reported to be preaching at Cruwys Morchard and was bound over at the Devon assizes and later fined. One of Polwhele's chief enemies was 'Mr Foot, an eminent merchant of Tiverton', a former member of his congregation, who on becoming mayor is reported to have interrupted his preaching and 'committed him to the custody of a sergeant' (Dunsford, 371-2). 
Polwhele had married a second wife, Maria, but she died before 7 April 1671. On 5 August 1673 at Bideford, he married Jane Strange of Huntsham; there seem not to have been any children of these two marriages. On 2 April 1672, under the indulgence, he was granted a licence to teach as a congregationalist at Tiverton. He was living there when he signed on 10 October 1674 the preface to his 'Of Ejaculatory Prayer', dedicated to a merchant, Mr Matthew Skinner. In 1687, after the declaration of indulgence by James II, the Steps Meeting-House was built at Tiverton. Polwhele was appointed its first minister; Samuel Bartlett was made his assistant, and succeeded him as pastor. Polwhele died in 1689 and was buried in the churchyard of St Peter, Tiverton, on 3 April. His daughter Elizabeth (died 1691) had married fellow Independent minister Stephen Lobb (d. 1699); their son was the physician and nonconformist minister Theophilus Lobb (1678-1763). 


@@@@@


doc= 22485


Pomfret, John (1667-1702), poet, was born at Luton, Bedfordshire, the son of Thomas Pomfret (died 1705) and his wife, Catherine, daughter of William Dobson of St Andrew's, Holborn, London. A graduate of Trinity College, Cambridge (BA, 1655-6; MA, 1661), Thomas Pomfret served as vicar of Luton (1666-79), prebendary of Lincoln Cathedral (1685-1705), rector of Maulden (1689-94), and chaplain to Robert Bruce, earl of Ailesbury. He was the author of an assize sermon, 'Subjection for Conscience-Sake Asserted' (1682), preached at Ampthill, Bedfordshire, on 11 March 1682. His son, John, studied at Bedford grammar school before matriculating as a sizar at Queens' College, Cambridge, on 27 November 1680. He graduated BA in 1684/5 and MA in 1688. At Luton on 13 September 1692 Pomfret married Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of George Wingate of Lewsey Manor, Bedfordshire. Ordained into the Church of England, Pomfret was appointed curate of Maulden in 1687 and rector on 12 December 1695. He shared his father's dislike of nonconformity and was annoyed when people confused him with the dissenting minister Samuel Pomfret. 
Pomfret's earliest known poems were 'An Epistle to Charles, Earl of Dorset' (1690) and 'A Pastoral Essay on the Death of Queen Mary, anno 1694', which exalts emotion: '
So great a Loss as this deserves Excess 

Of Sorrow, all's too little, that is less. 
(Pomfret, 48)' In 1699 he completed a collection of verse; published as 'Miscellany Poems on Several Occasions', it reached the eleventh edition in 1748. Finding tragedy in the rebellion of the duke of Monmouth, 'the brave, betray'd, unhappy Man', Pomfret poignantly describes his followers' fate in 'Cruelty and Lust'. Whereas the vanquished found pardon following David's triumph over Absalom, James II's troops were '
sagacious Blood-Hounds, skill'd too well 

In all the murd'ring Qualities of Hell. 
(ibid., 59, 62)' Love is Pomfret's theme in a number of poems, and in 'Upon the Divine Attributes, a Pindaric Essay', he meditates on God's unity, eternity, power, wisdom, providence, omnipresence, immutability, justice, and goodness. Like many contemporary religious authors, Pomfret was intrigued by eschatology, the subject of 'On the general conflagration and ensuing judgment, a Pindaric essay', which depicts hell as 'the vast Abyss of endless Woes' (ibid., 116), and 'Dies novissima, or, The epiphany: a Pindarick ode, on Christ's second appearance to judge the world'. 
Pomfret's best-known poems were 'The Choice: a Poem' (1700, though it appeared in December 1699) and 'Reason: a Poem' (1700). Adapting the 'Bonheur de ce monde' theme in 'The Choice', Pomfret exalts the genteel country life, eschewing extremes, valuing the utilitarian, and shunning those who are 'busy Medlers with Intrigues of State'. One's library must be well stocked with Horace, Virgil, Juvenal, and Ovid, and one's cellar with fine wine and ale, though inebriety is unacceptable. Money must be plentiful enough to assist friends and relieve the indigent. Although Pomfret recommends the single life, the company of 'some obliging Modest-Fair' woman is essential. 'Reason' is an unrelenting critique of the limits of human rationality, with barbs directed against Thomas Aquinas, Duns Scotus, 'the noisie Jargon of the Schools', physicians ('What Health can That contentious Tribe Impart?'), and even tradition, which makes us 'Debtors to the famous Dead'. 
Some time after his appointment as rector of Millbrook, Bedfordshire, on 2 June 1702, Pomfret went to London, seeking a lucrative preferment from Bishop Henry Compton. Reportedly displeased with Pomfret's purported sanctioning of a mistress in 'The Choice', Compton delayed an appointment. While in London Pomfret contracted smallpox and, in November, died; he was buried at Maulden on 1 December 1702. His sole surviving son, John, was baptized at Maulden on 21 August 1702, appointed Rouge Croix pursuivant of arms on 26 July 1725, and died on 24 March 1751. Pomfret was also survived by his widow, Elizabeth, and their daughter ('b'. 'c'.1696). Elizabeth and Michael Arnald of Ampthill, Bedfordshire, were the administrators of his will. Thinking Pomfret had 'been always the favourite of that class of readers who, without vanity or criticism, seek only their own amusement', Samuel Johnson included him in the 'Lives of the English Poets' (1.265). However, Pomfret never attained the stature of a major poet. In 'The Choice', Leigh Hunt depicted him as a pastry chef who created verse out of insignificant materials: '
There's a skill 

In pies, in raising crusts as well as galleries. 
(in Fussell, 191)' 



@@@@@


doc= 22486


Pomfret, Samuel (1650?-1722), Presbyterian minister, whose parents' names are unknown, was born in Coventry, where he received his early education at the grammar school and then at the academy of Obadiah Grew. From there he went to Cambridge (though he has left no trace in the admission records), where at the age of nineteen, following his mother's death, he seems to have undergone a religious conversion experience. He later recalled how 'the days of my youth were miserably spent in vain, foolish disobedient ways, serving divers lusts and pleasures'. Now finding that he could no longer comply with the customs and practices of the university, and determined on becoming a nonconformist minister, he entered the academy of Ralph Button at Islington. After completing his studies he was for a while in the mid-1670s private chaplain to Sir William Dyer, first at Tottenham, Middlesex, and then at High Easter, Essex. For a short time afterwards he served as chaplain on a merchant ship trading in the Mediterranean. On his return to England he preached with considerable success a weekly lecture at Lincoln's Inn Fields which brought him to public notice. 
Pomfret began his regular ministry at Sandwich, Kent, about 1677. There were apparently two nonconformist congregations in the town and Pomfret only accepted the invitation from one of them to become their minister 'on condition of their laying aside all differences' (Timpson, 400). He continued as minister there for seven years and became noted for his 'fervent zeal and indefatigable diligence' (Reynolds, 61). However, under the persecution of dissenters in the last years of Charles II's reign Pomfret 'was at last taken and imprisoned in Dover Castle, but escaped from thence at night, out of a window and made off to Canterbury and hence to London' (Calamy, 'Continuation', 1004). There he preached on an itinerant basis, especially in Hackney, Bethnal Green, Wapping, and Nine Elms. 
It was probably only with the 'Toleration Act' of 1689 that Pomfret again commenced a settled ministry at a meeting-house in Winchester Street, where he attracted so many listeners that the floor collapsed and a new meeting-house, capable of accommodating 1500 people, was erected in Gravel Lane, Houndsditch. There he acquired a reputation as a 'lively and awakening preacher', who it was later claimed had attracted a larger number of communicants than any other minister in London (Wilson, 1.397). Not only a popular preacher, he was also noted for his piety, disregard for material possessions, and generosity to the poor. In his religious beliefs he scarcely deviated from orthodox Calvinism. He was a subscriber at the Salters' Hall debate in 1719, but no bigot. In the last two years of his ministry at Gravel Lane he had the assistance of William Hocker. 
Pomfret was not a prolific writer and is credited with only three publications: two single sermons and 'A Directory of Youth', which was published posthumously in 1722. His declining years were spent in much pain from gout, asthma, and a gallstone. He died on 11 January 1722 and was buried in Bunhill Fields six days later. His funeral sermon was preached by Thomas Reynolds. 


@@@@@


doc= 22487


Punch, John (1599-1672/3), theologian, was born in Cork. Nothing is known of his parents. At an early age he went to study in the Irish college at Louvain, where he entered the Franciscan order. After studying philosophy at Cologne he moved to Rome to join the newly established Irish college at St Isidore's on 7 September 1625. Upon graduating, he taught philosophy and later theology at St Isidore's. By 1630 he was rector of St Isidore's, and on 8 June that year became governor of the Ludovisian college at Rome for the education of Irish secular priests. 
During the 1640s Punch was an active agent at Rome for the Catholic confederation of Ireland. He did not trust the royalists and strongly supported the stance taken by Giovanni Rinuccini, papal nuncio to Ireland from 1645 to 1649. After the defeat of the confederates several Irish exiles established themselves in Paris, where they engaged in bitter recriminations; Punch himself was based mainly in Paris from 1648, lecturing there and at Lyons. Taking exception to Richard Bellings's criticisms of Rinuccini, Punch published his 'D. R. Bellingi vindiciae eversae' in 1653. This defended the nuncio's rather questionable 1648 excommunication of those confederates who supported a truce with protestant forces commanded by Murrough O'Brien, Lord Inchiquin. Punch also attacked John Callaghan, an associate of Bellings, for his Jansenist views. In a withering riposte Bellings characterized Punch as having spent too long abroad in academia to appreciate the realities of Irish politics. Throughout the 1650s Irish Franciscan refugees continued to arrive in Paris, arousing the ire of the local friars. In September 1657 Punch was given jurisdiction over the Irish Franciscans to investigate accusations made against them. 
Punch is best remembered for being foremost among the Irish scholars under Luke Wadding at St Isidore's who contributed hugely to the seventeenth-century revival of Scotism. From 1634 he assisted Wadding in the laborious task of producing the first complete edition of the works of John Duns Scotus. Wadding describes him as combining a subtle intellect with the capacity to communicate knowledge. Punch's first major work, 'Philosophiae cursus integer', was published at Rome in three volumes in 1642-3. The celebrated Scotist theologian Mastrius challenged Punch's conclusions, leading the latter to reply in 1648 with the 'Appendix apologetica'. In the 'Appendix' Punch declared that while he accepted Scotus's conclusions, he did not agree with all his proofs. Mastrius subsequently accepted the force of Punch's reasoning. In 1652 Punch published a textbook on Scotism, derived mainly from his 'Cursus'. This was a hugely significant contribution to the study of Scotism, as it was the first time a complete course of Scotist theology, as opposed to the traditional commentaries, had been written. He continued to publish books related to this subject during the 1650s and early 1660s, the most significant being his magnum opus, 'Commentarii theologici', in 1661. He died between early 1672 and early 1673, presumably at Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 22488


Pond, Arthur (bap. 1701, d. 1758), artist and printseller, was baptized on 2 August 1701 in the parish church of St Magnus the Martyr, London. The oldest surviving son of John Pond (died 1749), a wealthy surgeon of London Bridge, and his wife, Mary Marshall, he was the only member of his family to abandon trade for a riskier, potentially genteel profession. His artistic education may have begun under the portrait painter John Vanderbank, whose name appears near Pond's in the first subscription list of the St Martin's Lane Academy, founded in 1720. There Pond must have met William Hogarth and the painter George Knapton, probable source of a crucial introduction to Jonathan Richardson senior, portrait painter, author, and art theorist, whose books were published by John and Paul Knapton. Pond's subsequent career in the world of art, letters, and learning might be considered a realization of Richardson's visions of the learned artist, the gentlemanly connoisseur, and the revival of Italian artistic greatness in England. In 1725 Pond visited Italy in the company of the scholar Daniel Wray and John Dyer, painter and poet, and returned to England in 1727. The prestige of his Roman experience gave Pond access to important British art patrons, but his mediocrity as a painter anchored him in the lower tier of London practitioners, and his main successes occurred with pastel portraits in imitation of the Venetian artist Rosalba Carriera and the Swiss Jean-Etienne Liotard. 
Pond's greatest impact on English art and taste resulted from his printmaking and publishing in partnership with the Knapton booksellers, and as an art dealer. His single-minded promotion of the continental old masters, and of Italian art of all eras, earned him a comfortable fortune, prestige, and the enmity of both George Vertue and William Hogarth, insular champions of English art. In partnership with the landscape etcher Charles Knapton, Pond etched and published 'Prints in Imitation of Drawings' (1735-6), depicting Dutch and Italian old master drawings in British collections, and 'Caricatures' (1736-42), popularizing the drawings of the Roman artist Pier Leone Ghezzi. However, it was Pond's 'Italian Landscapes' (1741-8), commercially produced engravings after paintings by Claude Lorrain and Gaspard Poussin, and his 'Roman Antiquities' (1745-51), engraved views of ruins after Roman artist Gian Paolo Pannini, that established widespread British appreciation of Italian classical landscape. 
Thanks to his Roman contacts, Pond maintained a steady and lucrative trade in old master art and copies. Ironically, he is admired today as an ambitious collector of Rembrandt prints and paintings, acquired in Amsterdam while on business for the Knaptons, or from the dispersal of British collections. In the late 1740s Pond's collecting extended to exotic shells, perhaps stemming from his involvement in the Knaptons' publication of 'Anson's Voyages' in 1748. In 1752 Pond was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and of the Society of Antiquaries, the only artist of his generation to receive both honours. Although records of the last seven years of his life are thin, he planned to withdraw from the messy business of painting in 1757. Ongoing publication of the prints had already been entrusted to his mistress, Elizabeth Knapton, widow of his former partner Charles, who had died in 1743. Contemporaries attributed Pond's failure to marry to his social ambitions. He died of a fever in September 1758 at his house in Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, and was buried in his sister and brother-in-law's parish of Sanderstead, outside London. 


@@@@@


doc= 22489


Pond, Edward (d. 1629), almanac maker, was born and educated around Ingatestone, Essex. His family background is unknown, though an Edward Pond was recorded at Fryerning in 1572 and another was baptized at Great Waltham on 10 March 1576. According to his almanacs Pond lived variously at Billericay (1602 and 1610) and Chelmsford (1609), and in 1611 he had a shop at the Globe outside Temple Bar in London selling clocks, watches, and mathematical instruments. 
Pond published a series of almanacs from 1601 to 1612 and from 1625; others may not have survived. They were variously calculated for London, Chelmsford, Stamford, and Peterborough and that for 1602 was dedicated to Sir John Peter (Petre?) of Essex. His almanacs offered a miscellany of essays, chronologies, astrological prognostications, calendars, advice on health and husbandry, and a woodcut zodiac man. They were written, he claimed, 'In a most plaine & vulgar manner, for the better and more easie understanding of the unlearned, or those of a meane capacity' ('Pond's Almanac, 1603'). 
Pond's almanacs were successful and spawned a number of imitators. In October 1623 the Stationers' Company, believing they held a monopoly on printing almanacs, petitioned the privy council, complaining that Cantrell Legge, the Cambridge University printer, was infringing upon their patents. They claimed that he still printed an ABC and Pond almanacs, notwithstanding a prison sentence from Star Chamber, and requested that the matter be referred to the privy council. In December the council declared that the university and the company had joint rights in all books, save bibles, privileged to the university, and almanacs, which belonged exclusively to the company. The university printer ignored the judgment. 
Pond also wrote some didactic works promoting astrology and related disciplines. In his parts of 'A Helpe to Discourse' (1619), where he is described as 'Philomathem', he offers answers to questions on astronomy, astrology, mathematics, and natural history. In his almanac for the year 1604 he defends astrology and astronomy as a means to the proper appreciation of God's creation, and suggests that the common criticisms of these arts are more properly directed at those who abuse them. His labours are, he says, 'taken for the common good of all men' ('Pond's Almanac, 1604', sig. A2'r'). 
Pond died in 1629: the register of St John the Baptist, Peterborough, records the burial of 'Edward Pond Gent. Famous for Mathematical Science' on 10 September. He was remembered in the most famous ballad of the civil war, Martin Parker's 'When the king enjoys his own again', in which the speaker asserts, against parliamentarian prognosticators, 'My skill goes beyond the depth of a Pond' (written 1644-7). Pond's death did not halt the publication of his popular almanac, which continued, under a modified title and prepared for Saffron Walden, at least until 1709. 


