@@@@@


doc= 22490


Pond, John (bap. 1767, d. 1836), astronomer, the second child of John Pond and Arabella Raven, was baptized twice at the church of St Katharine Coleman in the City of London, first 'privately' on 18 November and then 'publickly' one week later; his elder sister, Arabella, was baptized at the same church on 19 December 1766. His father was very successful in trade and retired to Dulwich. Pond had a very varied education. According to a contemporary obituary he was sent away to school at Hadleigh, near Barnet, at the age of seven, and a few years later went to the free grammar school at Maidstone. By the age of fourteen he was at home and received private tuition from William Wales, the mathematics master at Christ's Hospital, who had been one of the astronomers on Cook's second voyage; Pond is said to have drawn the attention of Wales to discrepancies in Greenwich observations which could be attributed to imperfections in the instruments, but Wales did not transmit this criticism to the astronomer royal Nevil Maskelyne, who was a close friend. Pond was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner, on 1 April 1784 and matriculated later in the same year. He intended to study mathematics but was distracted by a great enthusiasm for chemistry. Ill health forced him to interrupt his studies, and he spent a few years in Spain and the south of France. Details of his career at Cambridge are few, but there is no record of him taking a degree. He was admitted at the Inner Temple on 3 November 1794 but cannot have stayed long for, in a letter to William Herschel written from Lisbon in August 1795, he stated that he had been there already for eight months, having been forced to leave England because of his health. In the same letter he remarked that he was sufficiently recovered to resume his 'astronomical amusements' and asked Herschel to dispatch the 7 foot reflecting telescope which he had ordered during the previous year. His main interest at that time seems to have been in double stars, and it is said that he observed also in Italy, Malta, Egypt, and Constantinople. 
By 1799 Pond had returned to England, where he settled in Wells, Somerset, and set up an observatory at Westbury-sub-Mendip. He had acquired from his friend Edward Troughton an altazimuth instrument with a vertical circle of 2 foot 6 inches diameter, with which he observed the declinations of bright stars during 1800-01, in order to investigate further the accuracy of the Greenwich quadrants. A feature of Pond's technique was the frequent reversal of his instrument through 180 degree in azimuth. The brass quadrant, by Bird, had been in use at Greenwich since 1750 and Pond suspected that it had become distorted. By the end of the century the art of graduating complete circles had been perfected by Ramsden and by Troughton himself, and so-called circular instruments were being brought into use at a number of observatories. In June 1806 Pond read a paper to the Royal Society in which he described his methods and compared his observations, combined with those from other circles at Armagh and Palermo, with the results from Greenwich. This clearly demonstrated that all the circles confirmed that there was a serious error in the Greenwich measurements of the declinations of stars south of the equator. This important paper was communicated to the Royal Society by the chemist Smithson Tennant, who, although six years older than Pond, had evidently been a close friend for a number of years, since he had earlier managed financial transactions with Herschel on his behalf while he was abroad; they would have been near contemporaries at Cambridge. Within six months of the publication of Pond's paper a committee of the board of visitors of the Royal Observatory recommended that an instrument closely following Troughton's design be provided there. Pond was invited to attend a subsequent meeting of the committee which accepted a revised proposal by Troughton that, instead of an altazimuth, a larger, mural circle should be purchased. Pond was invited to join the board, but apparently never attended a meeting before becoming astronomer royal himself. 
On 26 February 1807 Pond was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and on 16 April in the same year he married Ann Gordon Bradley (1789-1871) at the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields. He had impressed Humphry Davy during a visit by the latter to Westbury in 1800, and from the end of 1808 he became closely involved with the Royal Institution. During each of the following two years he gave courses of lectures on physical and popular astronomy. He was elected a member in 1810, and for the next five years was a member of its scientific committee on mathematics, mechanics, and mechanical inventions. In 1809 he published a translation, in two volumes, of the 'Systeme du monde' by Laplace. 
On Maskelyne's death, Pond was appointed astronomer royal by the prince regent, and took up his office at Greenwich on 13 April 1811. The new mural circle by Troughton was delivered in 1812, and for the next few years Pond made an extensive series of observations on bright stars in order to establish a standard catalogue of declinations to complement Maskelyne's catalogue of right ascensions of thirty-six standard stars. In 1816 a new transit instrument, also by Troughton, replaced the one which had been in use for over sixty years. Pond's great contribution to positional astronomy was in the improvement of declination measurements. In 1822 he devised a very elegant method of determining the horizontal reference by combination of observations made directly and by reflection in a mercury horizon; this enabled the true zenith distance to be derived without recourse to the use of a plumb line or spirit level. A second circle, similar in all respects to the Troughton circle, was being constructed by Thomas Jones for the new Royal Observatory at the Cape of Good Hope. In 1823 Pond persuaded the Admiralty that this circle should be set up permanently at Greenwich, and from 1825 he used both circles in parallel, observing directly with one and by reflection with the other. The accuracy achieved by this technique was demonstrated more than sixty years later by S. C. Chandler, who detected variation of latitude in Pond's observations; further evidence is given by the investigation by Richardson, one of Pond's assistants, who derived a value of the constant of aberration of starlight which is very close to the true value. The culmination of Pond's career was the publication in 1833 of a catalogue of the positions of 1113 stars. 
Between 1817 and 1825 Pond was engaged in a celebrated controversy with the Revd John Brinkley, Andrews professor of astronomy at Dublin, over the measurement of stellar parallaxes. In 1808 Brinkley instigated a programme with the new 8 foot Ramsden circle at Dunsink which was aimed at detecting parallaxes of certain bright stars. By 1810 he announced that he had measured parallaxes of a second of arc or more for four stars, and sought confirmation of his results from Pond. Brinkley's mathematical techniques were far superior to those of Pond, but Pond was able to demonstrate that, while his observations showed some apparent variations with season, they were not as large as those found by Brinkley. As a further check, Pond installed two special telescopes which were fixed in the declinations of the stars Alpha Aquilae and Alpha Cygni, and compared the observations of these stars, each with a comparison star at the same declination, but he could not confirm Brinkley's results for these two stars. 
Pond's prowess as a practical astronomer received recognition at home and abroad. He was highly regarded by Bessel, and by his own successor, G. B. Airy. In 1817 he was awarded the Lalande prize from the French Academie des Sciences, of which he was a corresponding member, and in 1823 the Copley medal of the Royal Society. He published his researches in the 'Philosophical Transactions' and the 'Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society', and in the volumes of 'Greenwich Observations'. It cannot be said, however, that his general management of the affairs of the observatory was entirely successful. The quality of the 'Nautical Almanac' deteriorated in his earlier years, and further criticism came from Stephen Lee, assistant secretary of the Royal Society, who, in a letter to its president in 1825, charged Pond with incompetence and drew attention to many numerical inconsistencies in some of the printed 'Greenwich Observations'. Many of these were trivial, and Pond was exonerated by a committee of the society, but he conceded his own 'little want of vigilance as an editor'. He resisted an offer from the Admiralty for the appointment of a superior class of assistants, indicating that what he wanted were 'indefatigable hard-working and obedient drudges...'. This was in line with his dedication to his prime duty of routine observation. 
During his last years Pond was afflicted by ill health, which caused his absence from the observatory for long periods. Discipline among his staff became lax, and he resigned on 30 September 1835. During his twenty-four years at Greenwich the structure of the Royal Observatory was fundamentally changed; the number of assistants was increased from one to six, and, in spite of administrative shortcomings, the tradition of excellence became firmly established. Pond died at his home at Blackheath on 7 September 1836 and was buried at Lee, Kent, in the same tomb as his predecessor, Edmond Halley. 


@@@@@


doc= 22491


Ponet, John (c.1514-1556), bishop of Winchester and religious controversialist, was a native of Kent. Nothing else is known of his life before early 1533, when he graduated BA from Queens' College, Cambridge. That year he was elected a fellow of the college, and he proceeded MA in 1535. A student of Thomas Smith (1513-1577), who had three years' seniority on the fellowship, Ponet showed great promise as a scholar, especially in Greek. In a later treatise Smith claimed that about 1535 he, Ponet, and John Cheke, then fellow of St John's College, had introduced to Cambridge the new method of Greek pronunciation developed by Cheke. Ponet was ordained priest at Lincoln on 10 June 1536, and served as bursar of his college from 1537 to 1539 and dean from 1540 to 1542. For eight years from 1543 he was rector of St Michael, Crooked Lane, London. In 1545, by which time he was a chaplain to Thomas Cranmer, he was also presented by the archbishop to the rectory of Lavant, Sussex, but the circumstances were controversial and he held it only briefly. On 29 January 1546 he was presented by John Sandford and Peter Lylly to the eighth prebend at Canterbury and the following year he became proctor for the diocese. 
A man of multiple talents, Ponet was accomplished in Greek, Latin, Italian, and German. He was also renowned for his mathematical and astronomical abilities and was something of an engineer. He constructed a dial 'showing not only the hour of the day, but also the month, the sign of the sun, the planetary hour; yea, the change of the moon, the ebbing and flowing of the sea, with divers other things and strange' (Strype, 'Ecclesiastical Memorials', 2.607). Ponet presented this device to the king, to whom he was acting as chaplain by the last months of the reign and whose penchant for such curiosities was well known; it was received with enthusiasm. Ponet was also responsible for building 'a very elegant and curious summerhouse' for Cranmer at Lambeth; in the time of Archbishop Matthew Parker this 'solar', which had fallen into disrepair, was restored (Strype, 'Parker', 2.26, 79). 
By 4 November 1548 and before Edward VI's parliament had legislated to abolish compulsory clerical celibacy, Ponet had married. On that date he and his wife, whose name is unknown, obtained an archiepiscopal dispensation to eat meat in Lent. The following year he published a treatise defending clerical marriage. His dedication of the work to Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, and his general partisanship of the recently fallen protector probably account for his arrest in November 1549. The treatise also drew considerable fire from religious conservatives, although it was not until Mary's reign that Thomas Martyn responded in print with 'A traictise declaryng and plainly prouving, that the pretensed marriage of priestes and professed persones, is no mariage' (1554). Ponet also issued 'A Trageodie, or, Dialoge of the Unjust Usurper Primacy of the Bishop of Rome' (1549), a translation of Bernadino Ochino's dialogue in which a fictional Cranmer proved conclusively before Henry VIII and the pope that the latter was Antichrist. In addition to writing a treatise on the eucharist published in 1550, it has been suggested that Ponet was engaged in research in support of Cranmer's preparation of the new 'Book of Common Prayer', the ordinal, and the 'Book of Homilies', and that he may have been the real author of 'An Answer unto a Crafty and Sophistical Cavillation' (1550), ostensibly Cranmer's reply to Stephen Gardiner's objections to liturgical innovation. 
Ponet's association with Cranmer ensured that the former's suffering from the temporary disgrace of Somerset did not last. By Lent 1550 his reputation had risen to the point where he was invited to preach before the king and council. While John Hooper delivered the Wednesday sermons with characteristic passion and controversy, Ponet preached on Fridays to great effect. Having been initially nominated in February to succeed Edmund Bonner as bishop of London, in March he was finally nominated to Rochester. The appointment to a see whose occupant traditionally served as a 'stand-in' for Canterbury is indicative of the degree of trust Cranmer had in him and of the close nature of their relationship. He was consecrated at Lambeth on 29 June, in probably the first such ceremony to use the new ordinal. Because of the see's poverty and the lack of an episcopal palace, Ponet was licensed on 4 July to hold other preferments 'in commendam'; he was the last bishop to be allowed to do so. In January 1551 he was appointed to the commission set up to investigate and discipline Anabaptists and sacramentarians in Essex and Kent. With Cranmer and Nicholas Ridley, bishop of London, he was consulted by the privy council on the matter of Princess Mary's hearing the mass. Their response that 'to give licence to sin was sin; nevertheless they thought the king might suffer or wink at it for a time' reflects a pragmatic or conciliatory approach that has sometimes been ascribed to Ponet (Strype, 'Ecclesiastical Memorials', 2.451; Hudson, 48). 
On 8 March 1551 Ponet was presented by the king to the bishopric of Winchester in succession to Gardiner, who had been deprived. On the same day he was one of the bishops who consecrated John Hooper as bishop of Gloucester following the latter's capitulation over the matter of vestments. Ponet himself was enthroned at Winchester by proxy on 3 June. His appointment was not without controversy. In exchange for the surrender to the crown of the lands of one of the wealthiest sees in England, he was to receive a fixed income of 2000 marks a year; this arrangement was reversed during the reign of Mary. His chaplains were John Bale and Hugh Goodacre, both later made bishops in Ireland, while his archdeacon was John Philpot, a radical protestant executed in 1556. Ponet's relationship with the latter was soured by a dispute over a pension due to be paid to the bishop by the archdeacon; this was finally settled in Ponet's favour by the privy council. This dispute, his earlier pluralism, and later reports that he lost goods and money worth some 4000 crowns in a fire at Strasbourg, gave rise to a reputation for avarice, but this characterization of Ponet seems unduly harsh. 
Meanwhile a more embarrassing, but surprisingly less remarked problem arose in relation to Ponet's marriage, when the couple were arraigned on charges of bigamy. It transpired that the supposed Mistress Ponet was the wife of a Nottingham butcher -- a social as well as a legal misalliance. The consistory court sitting in St Paul's Cathedral pronounced a formal separation in late July 1551, leaving Ponet free except for the annual payment of a sum of money to the woman's husband. He soon made a much more suitable marriage, at Croydon parish church on 25 October, with Cranmer in attendance. His bride, Mary, was the daughter of the archbishop's 'leading fiscal officer' (MacCulloch, 325), Peter Hayman, a Kentish gentleman long known to Ponet. Curiously, Ponet's opponent in the argument over clerical marriage, Thomas Martyn, mentioned nothing about this in his book of 1554. 
To the end Ponet was identified with the doctrinal innovations of the Edwardian regime. Partly at the request of the duke of Northumberland he wrote the text for the new catechism, eventually published in May 1553 after some delays and amid continuing uncertainty as to its authorization. His movements at the time of Mary's accession remain largely speculative. He claimed that efforts were made to convince him to conform to the new order, but he refused, was ejected from his see and was eventually deprived for being married. He was apparently imprisoned, but the date and duration of this is unknown. John Stow claimed that Ponet was deeply involved in Wyatt's rebellion, only leaving when it became clear that the rising was doomed. While this later led to accusations of cowardice, Stow is the only source for the story: Bale, who was in a position to know, does not mention it. Although it is known that it was the policy of Gardiner (who had been reinstalled at Winchester) to allow as many protestants as wished it to leave surreptitiously rather than be prosecuted, it seems unlikely that Ponet was one of these, especially if he had been involved in rebellion. In any case, Ponet seems to have made his escape some time after Wyatt's failure. 
Ponet settled in the German city of Strasbourg, where he and his wife baptized a child in 1554, and where he was granted citizenship in February 1555. Apart from the house fire, nothing is known of his sojourn there or his position within the community of English exiles. Suggestions that he was deeply involved in the troubles of the sister community at Frankfurt am Main prove unfounded. He does not seem to have been too troubled by exile, writing about it to Heinrich Bullinger in the most sanguine terms, but he was certainly not idle. In 1556 he published 'An Apologie Fully Answeringe... a Blasphemous Book', another contribution to the debate on clerical marriage directed at Gardiner, and his most important work, 'A Shorte Treatise of Politike Power'. While most protestant thinkers struggled with the topical issue of obedience to civil authority when that authority was opposed to 'true religion', 'A Shorte Treatise' was an innovative and forceful statement of the lawfulness of forcible resistance. Starting from the radical protestant standpoint that rulers were called by God to discharge a particular office and 'ordained to do good, not evil' (Skinner, 222), Ponet considered the case of a ruler who had instead inflicted grievous injuries on his people. Drawing on the 'Bible', on civil and canon law, on John of Salisbury's 'Policraticus', and on Thomas Aquinas, Ponet argued that such a ruler had exceeded his office and demanded what was unlawful. He thus should be treated as a normal criminal and punished accordingly. Having discussed in detail particular instances of the magistrate abusing his office, most notably that where he 'goes about to betray and make away his country to foreigners' (ibid., 224), evidently at least in part a comment on contemporary England, Ponet concluded that a duty of resistance might in the most notorious cases extend to deposition and even tyrannicide. 
Ponet died at Strasbourg in August 1556. Greatly admired by his protestant contemporaries and seen by John Foxe, John Strype, and others as one of the more important reformers late in the reign of Edward VI, Ponet's peculiar marital arrangements, and the accusations of avarice during his career and of cowardice at the end of it, have since tended to overshadow his reputation. He was vilified by S. R. Maitland in the nineteenth century and called 'quarrelsome, avaricious, unscrupulous and a coward' in the twentieth (Garrett, 253). Given his equivocal but potentially significant standing, it is surprising that no detailed biography of him appeared before 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 22492


Ponsonby, Lady Emily Charlotte Mary (1817-1877), writer, was born on 17 February 1817 in Margaret Street, London, the third daughter of the six daughters and eight sons of John William Ponsonby, fourth earl of Bessborough (1781-1847), politician, and his wife, Lady Maria Fane (1787-1834), the daughter of John Fane, tenth earl of Westmorland. The family was important in social and political circles; her brother was Frederick George Brabazon Ponsonby (1815-1895), who was to become the sixth earl of Bessborough, and she herself became Lady Emily upon the succession of her father to the earldom in 1844. She was also the niece of the author Lady Louisa Ponsonby, better known by her married name, Lady Lamb. 
Relatively little is known of the life of Lady Emily Ponsonby. She was her father's eldest unmarried daughter, and consequently, upon the death of her mother, it fell to Lady Emily to manage his household and establishment at Bessborough, co. Kilkenny. She also acted in a vital capacity as his secretary, entrusted with much important political correspondence, as the illegibility of the earl's handwriting was notorious. A great deal of responsibility devolved upon her in the last three to four years of her father's life, as he found writing increasingly difficult after a serious fall from a horse, and his correspondence had grown with his assumption of the duties of the lord lieutenantship of Ireland (1846-7). 
Most of Lady Emily Ponsonby's 'gently didactic' novels (Blain, Clements & Grundy, 'Feminist comp.', 863) were therefore published anonymously after the death of her father, but continued to draw upon her earlier life's exercise of filial duty. 'The Discipline of Life' (1848) is typical, relating the story of two sisters in 'the trials and temptations of common life' (preface), and advocating self-sacrifice for women; a sequel, 'Pride and Irresolution: a New Series of the Discipline of Life', appeared in 1850. Her other works include: 'Mary Gray, and other Tales and Verses' (1852), 'Edward Willoughby' (1854), 'The Young Lord' (1856), 'Sunday Readings, Consisting of Eight Short Sermons Addressed to the Young' (1857), 'A Mother's Trial' (1859), 'Katherine and her Sisters' (1861), 'Sir Owen Fairfax' (1866), and 'A Story of Two Cousins' (1868). As some of the titles demonstrate, her fiction was largely set firmly within the upper classes; it challenged few conventions with its uniformly beautiful heroines and consistently happy endings. Her final novel, 'Olivia Beaumont and Lord Latimer', appeared in 1873. 
Lady Emily Ponsonby should not be confused with another novelist of the same period, Catherine Ponsonby, who appears to have been no relation; Catherine Ponsonby's novels include the regional tales 'The Border Wardens' (1844), and 'The Desborough Family' (1845). 
Lady Emily Ponsonby died of asthma and bronchitis on 3 February 1877 at her home, 3 Mount Street, Grosvenor Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 22493


Ponsonby, Sir Frederic Cavendish (1783-1837), army officer, born on 6 July 1783, was the second son of Frederick Ponsonby, third earl of Bessborough (1758-1844), and Henrietta Frances Ponsonby (1761-1821), second daughter of the first Earl Spencer. Lady Caroline Lamb was his sister. He attended Harrow School and then entered the army in January 1800 as a cornet in the 10th light dragoons, becoming lieutenant on 20 June of that year, and captain on 20 August 1803. In April 1806 he exchanged to the 60th regiment, and served on the staff of the lord lieutenant in Ireland. He became major in the army on 25 June 1807, and on 6 August obtained a majority in the 23rd light dragoons. He went with them to Spain in 1809, and distinguished himself at Talavera. 
Ponsonby served on the staff as assistant adjutant-general at Busaco and Barossa. Graham, in his report of the latter action, said that a squadron of the 2nd hussars, King's German Legion, under Ponsonby's direction, made 'a brilliant and most successful charge against a squadron of French dragoons, which were entirely routed' (Gurwood, 4.697). He had become lieutenant-colonel on 15 March 1810, and on 11 June 1811 obtained the command of the 12th light dragoons, and led that regiment for the rest of the war. He played a principal part in the cavalry action near Llerena on 11 April 1812, when he was in temporary command of Anson's brigade, to which his regiment belonged. The French cavalry under Pierre Soult was about 2000 strong, while Ponsonby had about 600, as one regiment of the brigade was still in the rear. He was told by Sir Stapleton Cotton to detain and distract the French while Le Marchant's brigade moved round upon their flank. The French, seeing his lack of numbers, advanced, and he retired slowly before them into a narrow defile between some stone walls. They were on the point of charging when his missing regiment came up, and the head of Le Marchant's brigade appeared on the right. The French turned, and were pursued by the two brigades to Llerena, where they rallied with their infantry, having lost more than 150 men. Ponsonby was praised by Cotton for his gallantry and judgement. 
Ponsonby was actively engaged with his regiment in covering the movements of the army immediately before Salamanca, and in the battle itself on 22 July 1812, towards the evening, he made some charges and dispersed some of the shaken French infantry, his horse receiving several bayonet wounds. After the failure of the siege of Burgos he helped to cover the retreat of the army, and was wounded. At Vitoria his regiment formed part of the force under Sir Thomas Graham which turned the French right, and barred their retreat by the Bayonne Road. Engaged in the action at Tolosa, when Graham overtook Foy, the regiment covered the communications of Graham's corps during the siege of San Sebastian. Ponsonby took part in the subsequent operations in the Pyrenees and in the south of France, and brought to Wellington, after Toulouse, the news that Napoleon had abdicated. He returned to England in July 1814, and on 4 June of that year was made a brevet colonel and aide-de-camp to the king in recognition of his services. Ponsonby's frequent letters on his experiences in the Peninsula are printed in 'Lady Bessborough and her Family Circle', edited by Lord Bessborough and A. Aspinall (1940). 
In 1815 the 12th light dragoons, with Ponsonby still in command, formed part of Vandeleur's light cavalry brigade. At Waterloo this brigade was at first posted on the extreme left; at about half past one, when the two heavy brigades charged, it was moved towards the centre, and two regiments, the 12th and 16th light dragoons, were ordered to charge, to cover the retirement of the Union brigade. They were told to descend the slope, but not to pass the hollow ground in front; once launched, however, they were not easily stopped or rallied. Ponsonby himself, after receiving wounds in the lung and both arms, fell from his horse on the crest of the ridge occupied by the French guns. He later admitted they had advanced too far. He lay on the field all night and was plundered by soldiers but, contrary to all expectations, he recovered, nursed by his sister Caroline. 
Ponsonby left his regiment on 26 August 1820, exchanging to half pay, and on 20 January 1824 he was appointed inspecting field officer in the Ionian Islands. He married, on 16 March 1825, Lady Emily Charlotte Bathurst (died 1 Feb 1877), second daughter of Henry Bathurst, the third Earl Bathurst, and left three sons and three daughters. His eldest son was Henry Frederick Ponsonby. 
Ponsonby became major-general on 27 May 1825, commanding the troops in the Ionian Islands, and on 22 December of the following year he was made governor of Malta, where he remained until May 1835 and where a column, later destroyed, was erected in his honour. On 4 December 1835 he was given the colonelcy of the 86th regiment, from which he was transferred to the 1st (Royal) Dragoons on 31 March 1836. In 1831 he was made a KCB and a KCH; he was also a GCMG (1828), and had Portuguese and Austrian orders. He kept up his interest in cavalry issues, on which Wellington consulted him, for the duke was quite a close friend, which proved of value to his son, Henry. When in Spain he had made an abridgement of 'Instructions for Cavalry on Outpost Duty', drawn up by Lieutenant-Colonel von Arentschildt, who commanded the hussar regiment which was to have charged with the 23rd at Talavera; this abridgement was printed at Freneda in 1813 and reprinted, together with the original instructions, in London in 1844. 
Ponsonby was a brave soldier, but impetuous. He was in youth a gambler, but cured himself of the habit. He died suddenly at the Wellesley Arms, Murrell Green, near Basingstoke, on 11 January 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 22494


Ponsonby, Frederick George Brabazon, sixth earl of Bessborough (1815-1895), politician and cricketer, was born on 11 September 1815 in London, the second son of John William Ponsonby, fourth earl of Bessborough (1781-1847), and Lady Maria Fane (1787-1834), third daughter of the tenth earl of Westmorland. He was educated at Harrow School from 1830 to 1833 and then at Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating MA in 1837. He subsequently trained for the law and was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 16 June 1840. He played cricket for his school in the match against Eton at Lord's in August 1832, scoring a pair, and subsequently played for his university, featuring in the varsity match of 1836. Later he appeared in a number of important matches, for the Gentlemen of England as well as a number of All England elevens, before he gave up playing in 1845 after being incapacitated by an arm injury. His playing was noted for its fine, free, forward style -- he pulled especially well on the leg side; his most famous stroke was a clean hit for 9 -- all run -- on Parkers Piece for the MCC against Cambridge in 1842. 
Ponsonby was a good actor and played in private theatricals; these became formalized when he and his friends founded the Old Stagers, the oldest amateur theatrical company in the world, which performed annually from 1842 at the Canterbury cricket week. In July 1845, at a supper in the Blenheim Hotel, Bond Street, London, he founded -- with his brother Sir Spencer Ponsonby Fane, John Loraine Baldwin, and R. P. Long -- the famous wanderers' cricket club, I Zingari; this, with its aim of encouraging amateur cricket, succeeded beyond all expectations. Earlier he had kept the Gentlemen v. Players match going at Lord's with a private subscription, and subsequently, as a member of the MCC, he became one of the original trustees when the club purchased the freehold of Lord's in 1866. He was also instrumental in forming the Surrey County Cricket Club in 1845 and supervised the removal of the club from the Old Beehive to the market garden in Kennington, which became the Oval. He remained vice-president of the Surrey cricket club from 1845 until his death in 1895. When his playing days were over he coached the Harrow eleven, and as one of Harrow's most famous cricketing sons he is remembered, along with his lifelong friend the Hon. Robert Grimston, in the Harrow song book. According to his 'Wisden' obituary, 'there was no more honoured figure in the cricket world' (Green, 74). 
There is a portrait of Frederick Ponsonby at Harrow and another in the Long Room at Lord's. He was a true Ponsonby not only in looks and physique -- 6 feet tall, hatchet-faced, with lugubrious eyes -- but also in his interest in charades and amateur theatricals, in which he could give full play to his dry sense of humour, and in his engagement in sporting activities; though primarily a cricketer, he also rode to hounds. 
On the death of his brother John, the fifth earl and a Liberal politician, who had been master of her majesty's buckhounds, Ponsonby succeeded, on 28 January 1880, to the Irish title of earl of Bessborough and the English title of Baron Ponsonby of Sysonby. There followed a brief interruption in a life largely devoted to cricket, both as a player and as an administrator, when Bessborough, who previously had taken no part in politics, was propelled into the political limelight by his appointment, in June 1880, to chair the royal commission to review the 'Irish Land Act' of 1870, a position for which he was eminently suited by reason of his legal background as a barrister, his working experience as agent of the Fitzwilliam estates, and his own large Irish estates. 
The Bessborough commission, as it became known, sat between September 1880 and January 1881. It held sixty-five sessions and heard evidence from 80 landowners, 70 agents, 500 tenants, and a rich assortment of other people. The commission ranged over all possible questions connected with Irish agriculture, and its report filled two volumes of parliamentary papers. It provides a unique insight into the impact on rural Ireland of the great agricultural depression wrought by the opening of the American prairies. The report came out in favour of the three Fs: fixity of tenure, fair rents, and free sale; it was not pre-ordained but provided Gladstone with the opportunity, in his 'Land Act' of 1881, to separate the Irish tenantry from Parnell's Land League. That the act did not succeed in its economic objective of transforming the Irish rural economy was because nothing in the landlord-tenant relationship could alter the fact that land was cheaper on the prairies. 
Bessborough was himself a great Irish landowner -- his estates in co. Kilkenny, co. Carlow, and co. Tipperary amounted to some 37,000 acres -- and a model landlord. He belonged to the middle party in Ireland, who sought to resolve the agrarian problems by improving their estates and reorganizing tenant rights on the lines of English copyhold customs. The recommendations of his report eventually transferred the land from the landlords to the tenants, but without resolving any of the economic difficulties facing Irish agriculture. Although taking the view that there could be a joint settlement between England and Ireland, Bessborough refused to support Gladstonian home rule and did not vote in the divisions on the 'Home Rule Bill' in 1893. 
Bessborough died on 11 March 1895, of bronchitis, at his London home, 45 Green Street, Mayfair, and was buried at Bessborough House, Piltown, on 19 March. Having remained unmarried, his titles passed to his next brother, Walter Ponsonby. 


@@@@@


doc= 22495


Ponsonby, George (1755-1817), lord chancellor of Ireland, was born on 5 March 1755, the third but second surviving son of John Ponsonby (1713-1789), speaker of the Irish House of Commons (1756-71), and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Cavendish (1723-1796), daughter of the third duke of Devonshire. Having received his schooling at Dr Benson's school, Fownes' Court, Dublin, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a fellow-commoner on 1 December 1773 but he did not graduate. Admitted to Lincoln's Inn in February 1776 he appeared to have found his true calling, since he entered the office of a special pleader and 'read law, a thing seldom done by the generality of students' ('Hibernian Magazine', 1782, 97-8). Called to the Irish bar in 1780, a year before he married (on 18 May 1781) Lady Mary Butler (1755-1826), the daughter of the earl of Lanesborough, he was admitted to the inner bar two years later. 
Ponsonby's early promotion has been attributed to the intervention of the duke of Portland, since he had yet to distinguish himself as an advocate. This is plausible, as his father's decision to leave the direction of the sizeable family political interest to George and to George's elder brother, William Brabazon Ponsonby, following his own failure to regain the speaker's chair in 1776, meant that George Ponsonby was someone whom successive lords lieutenant ignored at their peril. He certainly profited personally. First elected to the Irish parliament as representative for the borough of Wicklow in 1777, he was made clerk of the ships' entries, worth $500 p.a., by Lord Carlisle in 1781. Carlisle's successor, the duke of Portland, controversially appointed him to the coveted position of counsel to the revenue commissioners (worth $1400 p.a.). In return Ponsonby stood forward bravely in support of the administration in the House of Commons on 16 April 1782 but, when he realized that the patriots would not compromise their demand for 'legislative independence', he promptly acceded to the weight of public and political opinion. Though he still possessed the reputation of a man who was more interested in field sports than in business Ponsonby shrewdly assured Portland of his attachment on the formation of the Fox-North coalition. The coalition did not bring him further preferment but his courting of Portland demonstrated his independence of his father, who admitted that he 'could not manage him' ('Fortescue MSS', 1.210). Conscious of the expectation of him as an office-holder, and fully aware that to do otherwise would be disadvantageous both personally and politically, Ponsonby supported the administration throughout the mid-1780s. His vote, and the votes of his family interest, could not be assumed, as he demonstrated in 1785, when the commercial propositions were being agitated, but his stand in opposition to parliamentary reform in November 1783, pension reform in 1786, and tithe reform in 1787 was not unappreciated. 'He does not', one Dublin Castle insider acknowledged, 'want abilities' but the fact that the administration did not believe him 'fit for high promotion' demonstrates that he was not deemed entirely trustworthy (Johnston and others, 198). Given Ponsonby's known whig sympathies this was a defensible conclusion, and his strong support for an address from the Irish parliament to George, prince of Wales, inviting him to become regent in 1789, indicated that the administration had got him right. It was logical therefore, following the failure to bring a regency into being, his subsequent dismissal as counsel to the revenue, and his founding membership of the Irish Whig Club, that he should embrace the politics of opposition. 
Pursuant to his role as an Irish whig MP George Ponsonby took an increasingly liberal political stand in the 1790s. In 1790 he inveighed strongly against the sizeable increase in the pension list authorized by the marquess of Buckingham. His efforts in 1790 and 1791 to make a political issue of the partisan adjudication over the law on the employment of 'fiats' by the chief justice of the king's bench, Lord Clonmell, in the celebrated case of 'John McGee v. Francis Higgins', elevated him in the public mind into the company of Henry Grattan and John Philpot Curran as one of the leading opposition voices in the House of Commons. Parallel with this his advocacy in a number of high-profile political legal cases -- of which that on behalf of the common council of Dublin corporation against the court of aldermen, in their contest over the election of a lord mayor in 1790, was the most celebrated -- increased his popular appeal and enhanced his reputation as an advocate of distinction. In practice, like many whigs Ponsonby was more than a little uneasy at the direction of political events in the early 1790s. His remark to Napper Tandy in December 1791 'that any attempt to introduce French systems, and the coalition between Catholic and Dissenter for those purposes, would oblige the opposition to throw themselves into the arms of government, and to press an immediate union with Great Britain' illustrates how perturbed he was by the foundation of the United Irishmen ('Fortescue MSS', 2.238). His observation on the passage of the 1792 relief act, that Catholics should not expect further relief soon, was consonant with this but it is a measure of Ponsonby's capacity to adapt in this fast-changing environment that he was able to argue in 1793 that assertions that Catholics should not be enfranchised were 'inconsistent with reason' ('Parliamentary Register (Ireland)', 8.273). Significantly he introduced a bill for 'the more equal representation of the people in parliament' late the same session. The bill did not become law but both he and 'the reasonably well-disciplined' Irish whig party (Malcomson, 202), received a potentially glorious opportunity to shape the political future when he was controversially designated attorney-general in the administration of Earl Fitzwilliam. It was the post for which 'he was most peculiarly qualified as well by his professional knowledge and talents, as by his parliamentary eloquence' ('Carlisle MSS', 705). Had Fitzwilliam remained in office Ponsonby would have played the leading role with Henry Grattan in 1795 in admitting Catholics to parliament, among a range of other reforms aimed at healing the growing political cleavages in Irish society. Instead its dramatic collapse disenchanted him, and his inability in the two sessions that followed to advance plans for Catholic relief and for parliamentary reform prompted him and other Irish whigs to withdraw in protest from the House of Commons in 1797. 
Ponsonby did not remain out of politics for long. Though he busied himself defending suspected rebels in the aftermath of the 1798 rising the realization that the government was intent on agitating a legislative union prompted his return to the House of Commons as MP for Galway in 1798 and, until Henry Grattan joined him there in 1800, he was 'the chief conductor of opposition' to the measure ('Correspondence of... Cornwallis', 3.238). His finest moment came on 22 January 1799, when his intervention effectively prevented the advancement of the union that session, but his best efforts were repeatedly repulsed in 1800. Despite his determined opposition to the abolition of the Irish legislature Ponsonby adjusted easily and well to the imperial parliament when he took his seat for co. Wicklow in 1801. Because he was an experienced politician with well-established connections in the whig party hierarchy much was expected of him, and he fulfilled these high expectations by taking an active part in debate on his entry into the house. He did not sustain this level of engagement but his eminence and ability ensured that he achieved his goal of the Irish lord chancellorship on the formation of the Fox-Grenville ministry in 1806. 
It cannot be said that Ponsonby made much of a mark in the short time that he held this office, but he did his reputation no harm and before the government fell he was being heralded as potentially 'the most effective leader' of the whigs in the House of Commons ('Fortescue MSS', 8.347). Ponsonby, by his own admission, had 'really and truly no wish for the situation'; he believed he was 'not qualified for it' (Smith, 'Grey', 152) but nobody else was acceptable to the rival Foxite and Grenvillite wings of the party. The Catholic question was one issue upon which they could unite but Ponsonby's enthusiastic endorsement of an extensive state veto on Catholic ecclesiastical appointments in 1808 caused him considerable trouble in Ireland. As the representative for Tavistock (1808-12) and for Peterborough (1812-16) Ponsonby could afford to disregard criticism from this quarter. His lack of fire and his failure to strike a telling blow at the government, arising out of its supposed mismanagement of the war in Spain and other matters, caused some to suggest in 1809 that Lord Henry Petty should take over as leader of the whigs, but Petty's elevation to the Lords caused Ponsonby to withdraw his offer to step aside. Ponsonby resolved to 'be a good deal more stout' thereafter but his resort to the line of argument appealed to by the Irish whigs in 1789, during the debates on a regency in December 1810, did not impress ('Fortescue MSS', 10.34). In addition he lacked the 'firmness and resolution' demanded of a party leader (ibid., 141). He continued to perform capably in the Commons and to conduct himself honourably but he was, and remained, a stopgap leader until his death, which occurred on 8 July 1817 at his London home in Curzon Street, eight days after he was seized by paralysis in the chamber of the house. He was buried, appropriately, in Kensington church, since in his later political life he was a visible personification of the union of British and Irish politics that came into being on 1 January 1801. 


@@@@@


doc= 22496


Ponsonby, Henry (d. 1745), army officer, was the second son of 
Henry Ponsonby was made a captain on 2 August 1705 in the 27th foot (later the Royal Irish Fusiliers) and served with the regiment in the West Indies. He was ordered home in 1706 to reform the regiment, which was placed on the Irish establishment. In 1709 he sailed with his regiment on the aborted expedition to Cadiz under Major-General Charles Wills and landed at Catalonia. The regiment remained at Alicante until December 1710, when it sailed to reinforce the garrison at Minorca, where it remained for eight years. Ponsonby was promoted to regimental major on 11 January 1711 and brevet lieutenant-colonel on 1 December 1712. He was made lieutenant-colonel of the 27th foot on 16 September 1715 and commanded the regiment in Ireland until his appointment as colonel of the 37th foot (the North Hampshire regiment) on 13 May 1735. He represented Fethard in the Irish parliament in November 1715, and afterwards sat for Clonmeen, Inistioge, and Newtown. In 1723 he inherited the estate of Ashgrove, co. Kilkenny, from his father. On 18 February 1742, when Great Britain was preparing to take part in the War of the Austrian Succession, he was made brigadier-general, and in April he embarked for Flanders with the force under John Dalrymple, second earl of Stair. He was present at Dettingen, and was promoted major-general on 2 July 1743. At the battle of Fontenoy on 11 May 1745, as one of the major-generals of the first line, he was at the head of the 1st battalion of the 1st foot guards, and therefore in the forefront of the famous charge made by the British and Hanoverian infantry. He was in the act of handing over his ring and watch to his son, Chambre Brabazon (died 1762), a lieutenant in his own regiment, when he was killed by a cannon shot. Ponsonby and his wife, Lady Frances (died 4 Nov 1751), youngest daughter of Charles Brabazon, fifth earl of Meath, had one son and one daughter, Juliana; their son, Chambre Brabazon Ponsonby, was the father of Sarah Ponsonby, one of the ladies of Llangollen. 


@@@@@


doc= 22497


Ponsonby, Sir Henry Frederick (1825-1895), courtier, was the eldest son of the six children of Major-General Sir Frederic Cavendish Ponsonby (1783-1837) and his wife, Lady Emily Charlotte, 'nee' Bathurst (died 1877), and was born on 10 December 1825 on the island of Corfu while his father was inspecting field officer there. He was educated by a tutor in Geneva and then at a school in Coombe Wood, Kingston. He was at Sandhurst from 1839 to 1841. At the age of fifteen he attended the annual Waterloo banquet and he was from an early age well connected in London society. He became ensign in the 49th foot in December 1842 and lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards in February 1844. In 1846 he became aide-de-camp to his uncle, Lord Bessborough, lord lieutenant of Ireland. His calm and discreet nature equipped him well for attendant duties and he stayed in Ireland in the same post with lords Clarendon and Eglington; he was also private secretary to Clarendon and to lords St Germans and Carlisle. He fought in the Crimea with the Grenadier Guards, commanding his men in trench warfare and being promoted lieutenant-colonel on 31 May 1855. Ponsonby held strong reforming views about the army and in army circles was regarded as a radical. In December 1856 he was appointed Prince Albert's equerry (perhaps as a result of their meeting during Albert's visit to Dublin in 1853), in which position he served until Albert's death in 1861. Though he had few duties beyond routine attendance he picked up Albert's reforming tendencies. 
On 30 April 1861 Ponsonby married one of Queen Victoria's maids of honour, Mary Elizabeth Bulteel ['see below']. Their marriage was exceptionally affectionate -- they wrote daily when apart -- and produced five children, including the author Frederick Edward Grey Ponsonby. Ponsonby and his wife wrote jointly for the press, particularly the 'Pall Mall Gazette', and he wrote on military matters as Sebastian; from 1869 he wrote for the 'Naval and Military Gazette' as Major Quill, and for other periodicals. 
Despite being made extra equerry to the queen when Albert died, Ponsonby's position in the 1860s was uncertain: he was partly at court, partly with his regiment (in Canada 1862-3 and commanding its 1st battalion from 1864). This uncertainty was not resolved until he was appointed private secretary to the queen on 8 April 1870, a post he held almost until his death. He succeeded General Charles Grey, his wife's uncle. His appointment was controversial in court circles and was opposed by the duke of Cambridge, for Ponsonby was well known as an army reformer and a Liberal in politics. From 1878 he was also keeper of the privy purse and responsible for most aspects of the royal finances. He became KCB in 1879, GCB in 1887, and was sworn of the privy council in 1880 (on Disraeli's recommendation). He declined various other honours, including a peerage in 1880, offered him by the queen to match the ennoblement of Disraeli's secretary, Montagu Corry. 
Ponsonby became private secretary just when the queen became unpopular. His early years in the post were spent working with W. E. Gladstone, as prime minister, to persuade her to be more visible to her subjects and more conveniently available to her ministers, an endeavour in which they had only modest success. As Victoria grew older she became, especially after 1874, predominantly and often openly Conservative in her politics and isolated and lonely in her life at court. Ponsonby became an indispensable link both with prime ministers (except Disraeli, whose letters went directly to the queen) and with the queen's children, who used Ponsonby as an intermediary on the many subjects on which they were too frightened to approach their mother directly. He worked well with all the queen's prime ministers after 1870, though his closest relationship was with Gladstone, who wrote to him on retiring in 1894: 'you are 'to the manner born' and such a combination of tact and temper with loyalty, intelligence and truth I cannot expect to see again' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 5 March 1894). He disliked many of Disraeli's politics, both foreign and domestic, but their personal relations were cordial; Disraeli commented: 'Perhaps I am a gainer by his Whiggishness as it makes him more scrupulously on his guard to be always absolutely fair and lucid' (Monypenny & Buckle, 5.210). 
Politically, Ponsonby's chief contribution was to filter the queen's correspondence with Gladstone, which during the latter's four premierships became, on her side, increasingly intemperate. Ponsonby, Gladstone, and Lord Granville co-operated to prevent other members of the Liberal cabinet knowing the full extent of Victoria's anti-Liberal vehemence. Ponsonby's phlegmatic character and dry wit were ideal for this exercise in damage limitation. His role was to serve, but on occasion Ponsonby acted on his own, notably in January 1886 when -- the queen's efforts to engineer a coalition led by G. J. Goschen faltering -- he cut the knot by visiting Gladstone at bedtime and verbally conveying the queen's commission to form a government. This was, however, a rare initiative. For the most part, Ponsonby saw his task as that of defending the queen from herself. He was also looked to by the rest of the court and the royal family to limit the influence of John Brown, the queen's increasingly drunken highland servant, and, after Brown's death, the Munshi Hafiz Abdul Karim, the queen's Indian servant. With Randall Davidson and Lord Rowton, he was successful in persuading Victoria not to publish the memoir of Brown which she drafted after his death in 1883; Ponsonby destroyed the memoir and Brown's diaries. In his later years he was helped by Sir James Reid, the queen's physician, who shared many of his views (Reid later married Susan Baring, Mary Ponsonby's niece). 
Ponsonby received few thanks at court for what Arthur Bigge called his 'entire effacement of 'self''. Victoria complained to him of his lack of enthusiasm for Conservatism, and members of the court used him as something of a political whipping boy, especially during the Eastern question in the late 1870s (on which Ponsonby was strongly Gladstonian and during which the prince of Wales tried to persuade the queen to replace Ponsonby with Montagu Corry) and home rule for Ireland in the mid-1880s (on which Ponsonby was mildly Liberal Unionist in inclination). His family was a vital source of sustenance to him in a job aspects of which he strongly disliked, especially the long spells at Balmoral (sometimes six months in the year), where Ponsonby had to co-ordinate a quarrelsome household, which at times of friction communicated almost entirely by letter, most of the correspondence going via the queen's secretary. He disliked highland sports and on return from another residence wrote 'Every private house strikes me as so comfortable after the severe dreariness of our palatial rooms here' ('Henry Ponsonby', 116). 
Despite his difficulties and his wife's increasingly odd position at court, Ponsonby never seems to have considered alternative employment or retirement. He derived satisfaction from the flow of business and from serving the aged queen. He and his family lived in the Norman Tower at Windsor, with apartments in or cottages near Osborne House and Balmoral. He had a stroke at Osborne Cottage, Isle of Wight, on 6 January 1895, resigned as private secretary in May, and died there on 21 November 1895. He was buried at Whippingham church, near Osborne, the duke of Connaught representing the queen. In his last years he was assisted as secretary by his son Frederick Edward Grey Ponsonby (1867-1935), later created Baron Sysonby and a secretary of Edward VII. 
Ponsonby was a tall, striking man with blue eyes, a beard, a slight stoop, and a deep voice. He was known for scruffy dressing -- the queen and the prince of Wales both complaining about his ugly trousers -- and it was often found that his uniform was in some respect incorrect. His casual appearance emphasized sartorially his more general difference from most other members of the court. Whether Ponsonby's careful disguising of the true character of the Victorian court was in the long run a service to the monarchy is hard to judge. He and Gladstone tried but failed to persuade the queen to integrate the prince of Wales into governmental procedures, and Ponsonby had little success in guiding the monarch in the direction he would have preferred. But he enabled the queen almost to complete her reign without a major scandal and he was influential in helping to train a new generation of royal secretaries, notably Arthur Bigge. His biography, by his son Arthur, is one of the best accounts of the Victorian court. 


Mary Ponsonby was a member of the committee which from 1863 planned the foundation of Girton College, Cambridge, and was a member of the college from 1872 until her death. A prize there was given in her memory by her family. Throughout her life she supported the advancement of women, especially in the professions, and was active with Jessie Boucherett on one of the committees for the employment of women which flourished in the 1870s. Her political opinions, informed by wide reading in philosophy, became increasingly liberal; her younger daughter, Magdalen, described her as becoming 'a disciple of George Eliot and Herbert Spencer' ('Mary Ponsonby', xviii). She wrote extensively for 'Nineteenth Century' and other periodicals. Her liberalism -- more pronounced and more publicized than her husband's -- made her position at court uneasy: Victoria suspected her (rightly) of both 'cleverness' and 'advanced views', and (wrongly) of unduly influencing her husband's opinions, but none the less appointed her an extra woman of the bedchamber after her husband's death. Mary Ponsonby found a more sympathetic character and friend in the queen's eldest daughter, the Empress Frederick of Germany, who shared her intellectual interests. In later years, her close friends included the composer Ethel Smyth and A. C. Benson. Her progressive views were a profound influence on her children, particularly Arthur Ponsonby, who was later a Labour MP, and her daughter Magdalen. She died at her home, Gilmuire, Ascot, on 16 October 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 22498


Ponsonby, John (1713-1789), speaker of the Irish House of Commons, was born on 29 March 1713, the second son of Brabazon Ponsonby, second Viscount Duncannon and later first earl of Bessborough (1679-1758), landowner and politician, and his first wife, Sarah, 'nee' Margetson (died 1733), widow of Hugh Colvill of co. Down and daughter of James Margetson and Alice Caulfeild. His elder brother was William Ponsonby (1704-1793), politician, who succeeded to his father's titles. John Ponsonby entered the Irish parliament in 1739 as member for the borough of Newtown, co. Down. In 1742 he was appointed secretary to the revenue board, and in 1744 succeeded his father as first commissioner. He held this post for twenty-seven years. On the outbreak of the Jacobite rising of 1745 he raised four independent companies of horse, and received the thanks of the viceroy, Lord Chesterfield. In 1748 he was sworn of the privy council, and on 26 April 1756 he was unanimously elected speaker of the House of Commons, succeeding Henry Boyle, who was created Lord Shannon. 
Though his family was not without influence in the Irish parliament, Ponsonby's position was bolstered by his marriage, on 23 September 1743 to Lady Elizabeth Cavendish (1723-1796), daughter of William Cavendish, third duke of Devonshire (1698-1755), and Catherine Hoskins (died 1777). His brother William had married Elizabeth's sister, Caroline, in 1739 and this dual alliance, in combination with Ponsonby's links with the primate, Archbishop George Stone, raised his family to undertaker status. This meant that his services as a manager in parliament were purchased by the viceroy in return for a share of government patronage. Ponsonby clashed with the pre-eminent Boyle family, both in the revenue board and in parliament, and their rivalry played a major role in fomenting the money bill dispute of 1753. 
The settlement introduced by the British government in March 1756 to defuse tension in Ireland enabled Ponsonby to become speaker of the Commons. However, his loyalty to the British government was mercurial, and in 1757, when the duke of Bedford became viceroy, he joined Stone in his campaign to disrupt the session's business, by backing opposition motions against the growing pensions list. Bedford was forced to negotiate, and Ponsonby, along with Stone, returned to the government fold; both were appointed lords justices on Bedford's departure. Ponsonby's independent streak did much to redefine the speaker's role in the Commons, where he became a servant of the house rather than of the British government. This was demonstrated in 1760 when Ponsonby and his fellow lords justices refused to transmit a money bill that was not drawn up by the Irish Commons. 
In 1761 Ponsonby was elected MP for the county of Kilkenny, and he held that seat until 1783. He was more amenable to the Halifax and Northumberland administrations, and he continued to support Dublin Castle even after the so-called 'massacre of Pelhamite innocents' and the passing of resolutions in Ireland supporting the treaty of Paris. The Rockingham ministry, formed in 1765, expected Ponsonby's co-operation in the Commons. However, he initially boasted 'What matters it to us who are ministers in England? Let us stick to our own circle and manage our own little game as well as we can' (PRONI, D562/1757). His bullish stance was short-lived and he was forced to apologize after supporting a series of patriot measures. Clearly the increasingly patriotic temperament of the house made the speaker's job very difficult, and Ponsonby only succeeded in alienating both the British government and the patriot MPs. In 1766 Lord Bristol was appointed viceroy by Lord Chatham's administration which was determined to curb Ponsonby's influence. Lord Bessborough, Ponsonby's brother, claimed that Bristol intended 'fair war' when he arrived ('Correspondence of George III', 1.484-6). In Ireland it was said that: 'the Speaker is going about and stopping every man who sells a halfpenny worth of tobacco to tell him of designs that are hatching against Ireland -- the gentlemen of the country are all to be removed and set at nought -- not a place to be given away by the commissioners of the revenue -- a union, a land tax. (Derby County RO, D3155/WH3469)' When Bristol was replaced by Lord Townshend, Ponsonby made a number of patronage requests, which were refused by the British ministry. As a result he did not give his support to the augmentation of the Irish army in April 1768, a measure vital to British imperial policy. Though he pretended to be in favour of the 'Octennial Bill', which would limit the duration of the Irish parliament to eight years, in reality he realized that this measure would undermine his influence in the Commons. On hearing the news that the bill had been passed, it was said that 'his countenance fell. He turned pale, and it was visible to every one that some fatal news had been received' ('Charlemont MSS', 1.24). Ponsonby also sided with the opposition when the money bill was rejected on 21 November 1769. A frustrated Townshend, by now a resident viceroy, declared war on the undertakers, and with Prime Minister North's backing he stripped Ponsonby of his revenue office. Townshend's construction of a Dublin Castle party independent of the undertakers secured mastery of the Commons for his administration, and forced Ponsonby's resignation as speaker, as he was determined not to present an address of thanks to Townshend. He no doubt expected to be re-elected, but the Commons chose Edmund Sexton Pery in his place. Ponsonby failed in his bid to regain the office of speaker in 1776, despite a concerted campaign by his supporters. 
Townshend's replacement, Lord Harcourt, was more amenable towards Ponsonby. But despite the offer of a return to the revenue board, Ponsonby opted to retain his independent position in the Irish parliament. Influenced by his British relatives, he opposed the absentee tax in 1773. He also opposed the motion of 10 October 1775 in support of the war with America. Although he seemed sympathetic to the administration of the earl of Buckinghamshire (1777-80), he was ultimately unwilling to co-operate with government, and he was a staunch supporter of the free trade campaign in 1779. Lord Carlisle had hopes of gaining the Ponsonby interest for government, and John Ponsonby did offer his support in a number of key debates. But it was only with the accession of the Rockingham ministry in Britain and the arrival of Portland as viceroy in 1782 that Ponsonby made a firm commitment to government. 
John Ponsonby was an able parliamentarian, but he was outshone by many of his contemporaries. He was not a gifted orator, and the British government regarded his managerial abilities as vastly inferior to those of Henry Boyle. Yet he, and perhaps more importantly his family, did much to shape the nature of Irish politics in the eighteenth century. His consistent commitment to patriotism lent credibility to the opposition, and his tenure as speaker allowed his successors, Edmund Sexton Pery and John Foster, to consolidate the office's newly found independent status. 
Ponsonby died on 12 December 1789. He was succeeded by the eldest of his ten children, William Brabazon Ponsonby, first Baron Ponsonby (1744-1806), politician and sportsman. His third son, George Ponsonby (1755-1817), became lord chancellor of Ireland in 1806. His daughters Catharine and Charlotte married, respectively, Richard Boyle, second earl of Shannon (1728-1807), and the Irish patriot MP Denis Daly (1747-1791). 


@@@@@


doc= 22499


Ponsonby, John, Viscount Ponsonby (c.1770-1855), diplomatist, was the eldest son of William Brabazon Ponsonby, first Baron Ponsonby (1744-1806), politician, and Louisa, 'nee' Molesworth (died 1824), and brother of Sir William Ponsonby. He sat for Tallagh, co. Waterford, in the Irish parliament of 1797, for Dungarvan, 1797-1800, and for Galway town, in the first parliament of the United Kingdom, 1801-2. He was a handsome man, dissipated, and without political prospects. He had an affair with Lady Jersey, who arranged his marriage to her fifteen-year-old daughter, Elizabeth Frances Villiers (died 14 April 1866), on 13 January 1803. There were no children of their marriage. Soon after his marriage he had an affair with Harriette Wilson, which she made public. He took to diplomacy. 
On the death of his father on 5 November 1806 Ponsonby succeeded him as second Baron Ponsonby, and for some time held an appointment in the Ionian Islands. Canning sent him to South America to please George IV, who resented his success with Lady Conyngham, the royal mistress. On 28 February 1826 he went to Buenos Aires as envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary, and in July 1828 was moved to Rio de Janeiro in the same capacity. On 1 December 1830 he was appointed to succeed Thomas Cartwright at Brussels as joint commissioner of the conference of the five powers on the Belgian question; he remained there until June 1831, being withdrawn partly as a result of the conference's ultimatum to Belgium to accept its terms of separation, partly as a result of exceeding Palmerston's instructions. His dealings with this matter were adversely criticized in 'The Guet-a-Pens Diplomacy, or, Lord Ponsonby at Brussels' (1831). But Lord Grey eulogized him in the House of Lords on 25 June 1831. Ponsonby was envoy at Naples from 8 June to 9 November 1832, a trial for future promotion. He was considered for St Petersburg, but rejected, perhaps because his affair with Princess Lieven might have compromised him there. Instead he was ambassador at Constantinople from 27 November 1832 to 1841. There he was an effective if controversial executor of Palmerston's policy. He was rewarded with the Vienna embassy, which he held from 10 August 1846 to 31 May 1850. 
Through Lord Grey, who had married his sister Mary Elizabeth, Ponsonby had great influence, but his behaviour as an ambassador sometimes embarrassed the government. He had a lively relationship with Palmerston, finally quarrelling with him in 1849. He was one of the few in the diplomatic corps who could match Palmerston for will, and the latter respected him for it. He was gazetted GCB on 3 March 1834, and, largely on Palmerston's urging, created Viscount Ponsonby of Imokilly, co. Cork, on 20 April 1839. Having published 'Private Letters on the Eastern Question, Written at the Date Thereon' (1854), he died at the Bedford Hotel, King's Road, Brighton, on 21 February 1855 and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 




@@@@@


doc= 22500


Ponsonby, John William, fourth earl of Bessborough (1781-1847), politician and landowner, was born on 31 August 1781, the eldest son of Frederick Ponsonby, third earl of Bessborough (1758-1844), and his wife, Henrietta Frances Ponsonby (1761-1821), the second daughter of John, first Earl Spencer, and was baptized at St Marylebone. From 11 March 1793 he was known by the courtesy title of Viscount Duncannon until, in July 1834, he was himself created Baron Duncannon and called to the House of Lords; on 3 February 1844 he succeeded his father as fourth earl of Bessborough. On 16 November 1805 he married, at her father's house in Berkeley Square, Lady Maria Fane, third daughter of John Fane, tenth earl of Westmorland, and his first wife, Sarah Anne Child (daughter and heir of Robert Child of Osterley Park, Middlesex) with whom he had eight sons, including the cricketer Frederick George Brabazon Ponsonby, and six daughters; she had been born on 11 May 1787 and she died on 19 March 1834. Duncannon attended Harrow School (1790-98), matriculated at Oxford (Christ Church) on 14 October 1799, and was created MA on 23 June 1802. In 1800 and 1802-3 he travelled on the continent. 
The Ponsonbys formed an integral part of the whig political and social cousinage and Duncannon was related to many of the leading figures who supported the whig cause. During his early years in the House of Commons he represented boroughs controlled by whig patrons: Knaresborough (Devonshire) in 1805-6, Higham Ferrers (Fitzwilliam) in 1810-12, and Malton (Fitzwilliam) in 1812-26. He unsuccessfully contested St Albans in 1807 on the interest of his maternal uncle, Earl Spencer. As, however, his father's chief residence was at Bessborough House in co. Kilkenny and all the family's lands (reckoned in the 1870s to amount to 35,440 acres with a gross annual value of $22,384) lay in Ireland, he moved in 1826 to the co. Kilkenny constituency, for which he sat until 1832, though not without some (temporary) opposition from the O'Connellite party at a by-election in February 1831. From 1832 until July 1834 he was MP for Nottingham. He was lord lieutenant of co. Carlow in 1831-8 and of co. Kilkenny in 1838-47. 
Although Duncannon's parliamentary activity was at first modest -- and he remained a poor speaker throughout his life -- his social poise and lively sense of humour soon made him a popular political figure. Within a decade of entering parliament he had become an important member of the Holland House circle ['see also 'Holland House set]. By 1817 his talents for efficient and unobtrusive organization were well enough established for him to be involved in high-level discussions concerning whig tactics. Indeed, the party leadership in the Commons might have been his had he not disliked debate and preferred the backstairs role of whip under the nominal supervision of his cousin, George Ponsonby (1807-17) and of George Tierney (1817-27). 
As an early nineteenth-century politician Duncannon's most important contributions fall under three main headings: his role as negotiator and manager; his membership of the committee which drew up the 'Reform Bill' in 1831; and the connecting link which he provided between the whig leadership and O'Connell's political movement in Ireland. Throughout the 1820s he, Russell, Ebrington, and Normanby constituted a coherent group under Holland's patronage determined to spur the ageing party leadership into more determined opposition. Both then and in the 1830s he played an active part in organizing elections in England and Ireland and stood out for his willingness to concern himself with the often tedious details of selecting suitable candidates, raising money, and orchestrating local campaigns. The necessity of finding room in Grey's administration for Canningites, Huskissonites, reformers, and others meant that he obtained the comparatively poor reward of being appointed in February 1831 first commissioner of woods and forests (and also sworn of the privy council). He held this post (outside the cabinet) until Grey retired in July 1834 when he was appointed to the cabinet as home secretary by his brother-in-law, Melbourne. After the brief tory ministry of November 1834 to April 1835 he was re-appointed to the woods and forests (and was also lord privy seal until January 1840) with a seat in the cabinet, and held that post until the defeat of Melbourne's ministry in August 1841. Although he headed an important spending ministry for more than nine years and was responsible for an imaginative public parks programme and for much of the building of the new houses of parliament, Duncannon's talents lay more in the area of party manoeuvring and policy formation than in administration. 
In 1831 Grey asked Durham, Russell, Graham, and Duncannon to form a committee to draw up proposals for reform bills. Durham proved the most radical of the group, Graham the most conservative. Duncannon probably owed his position to his friendship with O'Connell (whose parliamentary support was badly needed) and to his expertise on Irish matters generally. He fully approved of the committee's comparatively dramatic proposals, including that for the introduction of the secret ballot (though this was rejected by the cabinet). Although his draft 'Irish Reform Bill' was designed to produce an electorate proportionate to that of England and Wales, it was later greatly watered down by the Irish chief secretary, Stanley (later fourteenth earl of Derby), who was probably also largely responsible for the 'Irish Reform Act's' poor drafting and manifold technical inadequacies. 
Throughout the 1830s Duncannon belonged to that group of aristocratic whigs who supported a forward policy of reform over a wide field. As such he tended to act with men like Russell rather than with more resistant figures like Lansdowne or Melbourne himself. His talents as a negotiator were formidable: 'the only one among us', noted Holland in 1839, '(and by far the best that could be selected among us) who is in friendly communication with all parties and enjoys in any degree the confidence of all'. And it was largely his efforts which brought about the adherence of O'Connell and his party to the Lichfield House compact of 1835 by which the Irish agreed to act with whigs and reformers in return for concessions short of repeal of the 'Act of Union'. More generally, Duncannon played the part of intermediary between O'Connell and whig administrations, an arrangement which suited all concerned: O'Connell was able to obtain minor favours as well as hints about possible shifts in policy; the whigs were able to deal with the Irish without having to meet them much directly. Duncannon increased yet further his indispensability as a universal go-between. 
After Melbourne's defeat in 1841 Duncannon became less active politically. He concentrated upon his estates and succeeded as fourth earl of Bessborough in 1844. In July 1846, however, Russell appointed him to the post of lord lieutenant of Ireland, the first resident Irish landlord to hold that office for very many years. Although his intentions were of the best, his efforts as viceroy were overwhelmed by the potato blight and famine which had begun the previous year. Russell's determination to make the Irish landlords pay for relief, though utterly unrealistic, proved too great an obstacle for even a politician of Bessborough's experience who clearly saw that greater government help and intervention were required. 'I know all the difficulties', he told Russell in January 1847, 'that arrive when you begin to interfere with trade, but it is difficult to persuade a starving population that one class should be permitted to make 50 per cent by the sale of provisions, while they are dying in want of them' (Russell MSS, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/22/6). By then Bessborough was, in any case, a sick man, and he died at Dublin Castle, surrounded by seventeen members of his family, on 16 May 1847 of (according to contemporary diagnoses) hydrothorax or dropsy on the chest. He was buried at Fiddown, some 3 miles from Bessborough House, on 22 May. 
Bessborough's latter years had been somewhat marred by an over-fondness for alcohol and by an equally public involvement with a series of married women. Already as a young man he had disturbed his parents with a variety of flirtations; as viceroy (and by then a widower) he was constantly in the company of the novelist Catherine Charlotte Maberly (1805-1875), the wife of William Leader Maberly (1798-1885), joint-secretary of the General Post Office, whose 'ostentatious effrontery' Greville noted, generated 'universal ridicule and disgust'. Yet until the end Bessborough, as Greville also observed, continued, in every other respect, to be remarkable for: 'calm and unruffled temper and very good sound sense. The consequence was that he was consulted by everybody, and universally and constantly employed in the arrangement of difficulties, the adjustment of rival pretensions, and the reconciliation of differences, for which purposes some such man is indispensable and invaluable in every great political association. ('Greville Memoirs', 5.447)' 



@@@@@


doc= 22501


Richard Ponsonby (1772-1853), Church of Ireland bishop of Derry, brother of John Ponsonby, was born in Dublin and educated at Dublin University, where he graduated BA in 1794 and MA in 1816. During 1795 he was ordained deacon and priest, and was appointed prebendary of Tipper in St Patrick's Cathedral. He succeeded by patent to the precentorship of St Patrick's on 25 July 1806, and became dean on 3 June 1817. In February 1828 he was consecrated bishop of Killaloe and Kilfenora, was translated to Derry on 21 September 1831, and became also bishop of Raphoe, as a result of the 'Church Temporalities Act', in September 1834. Bishop Ponsonby was a talented, handsome man with a reputation for sloth. He was a notorious gambler and despite his episcopal income of $14,000 p.a. was usually in debt. He married, in 1804, his cousin Frances, second daughter of the Right Hon. John Staples. She died on 15 December 1858, having borne William Brabazon, fourth and last Baron Ponsonby, who died on board his yacht, the 'Lufra', off Plymouth, on 10 September 1866. Bishop Ponsonby died in his palace at Derry on 27 October 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 22502


Butler, Lady (Charlotte) Eleanor (1739-1829), elder of the two Ladies of Llangollen, was born at Cambrai, the youngest daughter of Walter Butler of Garryricken (1703-1783) and his wife, Eleanor (died 1794), daughter of Nicholas Morres of Latargh, co. Tipperary. Her father was the only lineal representative of James Butler, second duke of Ormond, attainted in 1715 for his Jacobite sympathies, and his estates and titles forfeited. The Irish titles were later claimed by Eleanor's brother, John (1740-1795), and were restored in 1791, when he was acknowledged sixteenth earl of Ormond and his sisters granted the rank of earl's daughters. 
Like many upper-class Catholics of the time Eleanor Butler was educated abroad. Under the influence of the French Enlightenment, the intellectual climate of the convent of English Benedictines at Cambrai was both liberal and anti-clerical, and gave her not only 'a certain degree of refinement in literature' according to a friend, but 'a distaste for Irish priests and Irish popery' (Mavor, 27). This was to become uncomfortably evident on her return from France to live at the castle of Kilkenny, where her parents were now ensconced in impoverished and priest-ridden grandeur, and where she was to spend upwards of twelve frustrating and unhappy years. Apparently of too 'satirical' and 'masculine' a cast of mind to make the advantageous marriage that might help restore the family fortunes, she seemed doomed to a life of narrow solitude when, in 1769, and aged almost thirty, she met Sarah Ponsonby. 

Sarah Ponsonby (1755-1831), second of the Ladies of Llangollen, was the orphaned daughter of Chambre Brabazon Ponsonby, a cousin of the earl of Bessborough, and had newly arrived to attend school in Kilkenny. She met Eleanor Butler soon after, and it was not long before the Butlers had the strange experience of seeing their difficult bluestocking daughter embarking on a friendship with a schoolgirl of thirteen. Over time the relationship became closer, not only on account of their mutual love of the arts and their strong inclination to lead a life of Rousseauesque 'retirement', but because both women were, in their separate ways, unhappy. 
On leaving school Sarah Ponsonby, shy, bookish, and with little money of her own, had gone to live with distant relations at Woodstock House, near Kilkenny. Here her life was soon plagued by the unwanted attentions of her middle-aged guardian. Meanwhile Eleanor Butler's family, despairing of ever finding her a suitable husband, had, in the interests of economy, determined to send her back to Cambrai. These difficulties drove both women to make secret plans to run away to England and find a cottage where they might live together. Accordingly, on the night of 30 March 1778, disguised as men and armed with pistols, they fled their homes and made for Waterford and the boat for England. Their families caught up with them 2 miles from the port, and they were ignominiously brought back as prisoners. Nothing daunted, Eleanor Butler made a second escape shortly afterwards and joined Sarah at Woodstock. Here, after a lengthy psychological war of attrition, their exasperated relatives at last gave them permission to go away together. Accompanied by Mary Carryll, the devoted Woodstock housemaid, they for a time toured north Wales, finally settling at Plas Newydd, a rented cottage on the outskirts of the village of Llangollen. This, either by luck or good judgement, happened to be one of the main staging posts for travellers between England and Ireland. 
They now began to live the 'retirement' that would make them famous. It was a life almost conventual in its simplicity, lived according to a strict timetable, regulated by careful, if not always very accurately kept, accounts, concentrating on good works (though in moderation), self-improvement, reading, gardening, and delicious meals. Two years after setting up house together Queen Charlotte, having heard of them from an increasing number of visitors and admirers (though the terms were not always synonymous), was writing for plans of their cottage and garden. The duke of Wellington was to become a treasured friend; Wordsworth, Southey, and Anna Seward, 'Queen Muse of Britain', were to compose poems upon them beneath the cottage roof. Josiah Wedgwood lectured them on rock formations, Erasmus Darwin called on them, and John Lockhart with Sir Walter Scott. Mrs Thrale (now Piozzi) wrote of them admiringly, as did Madame de Genlis in 'Souvenirs de Felicie', and there were many others. 
In time their comparative poverty was relieved by special pensions from George III, while Louis XVI honoured Lady Eleanor, as she had by then become, with the coveted decoration of the Croix St Louis, and Prince Puckler-Muskau would soon dub them 'the most celebrated Virgins in Europe' ('N&Q', 4th ser., 4, 1869, 220-21). Yet apart from their aristocratic connections the two women were not, as often supposed, either artists or writers, though Lady Eleanor kept a voluminous journal. Nor, judging from sketches of them and a late double portrait, were they particularly handsome (though their devotees thought otherwise), both ladies being inclined to the embonpoint. 
For some, it seems, their fascination lay in the myths of their retirement: that they had both been born on the same day of the same year, that both were orphans, that they later never spent one night away from home -- all of which were false -- and that they dressed always as men, when in fact they only wore the usual Welsh countrywoman's riding habit and beaver hat. Later down the years and even to modern times they were rumoured to be spies, men dressed as women, suffragettes, or nymphomaniacs. For others their charm lay in the rumoured story of their elopement and the tantalizingly ambiguous nature of their relationship. To yet more the picturesque elegancies and, later, the Gothic extravaganzas of their cottage and its garden proved irresistible. All were convinced, or affected to be, that the two women were perfect living examples of devoted friendship and romantic retirement. They had become icons. 
In fact the retirement was not always romantic: it had to survive jealousies, unnerving rows with tradesmen, unpleasant newspaper reports about their private life, disastrous bills, and far too many visitors. Yet it had its highlights, the highest perhaps when they finally managed to purchase their cottage, thus ensuring the continuing safety of their quiet life together. It was a life attached to the seasons, so somewhat repetitive, but a repetition they loved and savoured, finding in it always, as Lady Eleanor regularly insisted, 'Pleasures unknown to Vulgar minds' (Mavor, 157). Lady Eleanor died at Plas Newydd on 2 June 1829, and her friend died there on 9 December two years later. They are buried with their maid, Mary Carryll, beneath a substantial neo-Gothic tombstone in Llangollen churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 22503


Ponsonby, William (1546?-1604), printer and bookseller, was apprenticed for ten years from 25 December 1560 to William Norton, the printer. He was admitted to the Stationers' Company on 11 January 1571, and in 1577 began business on his own account at the sign of the Bishop's Head in St Paul's Churchyard. He engaged his first apprentice, Paul Linley, on 25 March 1576, and his second, Edward Blount, on 24 June 1578. He registered his first book, the anonymous 'Praise and Dispraise of Women', on 17 June 1577, but did not publish it until 1579. What seems to have been his first publication, about 1577, was a sermon of Heinrich Bullinger. 
A few political and religious tracts followed in the next five years. In 1582 Ponsonby issued the first part of Robert Greene's romance 'Mamillia', and in 1584 the same author's 'Gwydonius'. At the end of 1586 he sought permission, through Sir Fulke Greville, to publish Sir Philip Sidney's 'Arcadia', which was then circulating in manuscript. His proposal was not received with much enthusiasm by Sidney's representatives, but Ponsonby secured a licence for its publication on 23 August 1588, and in 1590 he published it, having edited and rearranged the text. A new issue of 1593, 'augmented and ended', introduced a few changes, but in 1598 Sidney's sister, the countess of Pembroke, by arrangement with Ponsonby, revised the whole and added Sidney's 'Defence of Poesie', with his remaining poems. 
Ponsonby had entered 'The Defence of Poesie' on 29 November 1594, and it was printed for him under that title by Thomas Creede in 1595. On 12 April 1595 one Henry Olney entered a manuscript called 'An Apologie for Poetrie', and had it printed by James Roberts in the same year. Not until then did the wardens who had licensed both items realize that the two titles referred to the same work. Since Ponsonby's entrance had priority, Olney's was deleted, and the two publishers came to an agreement, whereby Ponsonby apparently bought some or all of Olney's remainders, probably at cost. Several copies survive in which Ponsonby's title page has been substituted for Olney's preliminaries. Ponsonby seems to have been on friendly terms with the countess of Pembroke and in 1592 published her translations of De Mornay's 'Life and Death' and Garnier's 'Antonius' in a single volume, reissuing the first piece, the 'Life', separately in 1600. 
Ponsonby chiefly owes his fame to his association with Spenser. He published ten volumes of Spenser's work, the first three books of 'The Faerie Queene' appearing in 1590. In 1591 he issued 'Complaints', containing various hitherto unpublished pieces by Spenser, prefixed by an address to the reader of his own composition. 'The Tears of the Muses' and 'Daphnaida', also in 1591, were followed by 'Amoretti' and 'Colin Clout's Come Home Again' (1595) and, in 1596, the fourth, fifth, and sixth books of 'The Faerie Queene', a collected edition of the six books, and two other volumes, respectively entitled 'Fowre Hymns' and 'Prothalamion'. 
The date of Ponsonby's marriage to Joan, daughter of Francis Coldock and Alice Waterson, is unknown. He was elected to the livery on 6 May 1588, became an assistant exactly nine years later, and served as under-warden in 1598-9. On 15 January 1599 he was one of four assistants made eligible for future election as upper warden even though they had not yet qualified by serving twice as under-warden. Two were excused this second term, one being Ponsonby, for which exemption he had to pay a fine of $5. As it happened, he was never elected upper warden. He last appeared in the Stationers' registers as one of the proprietors of a new edition of Sir Thomas North's great translation of Plutarch, on 5 July 1602. 
Ponsonby's will was drawn up on the last day of 1603 and proved on 23 January 1604. On 9 February Simon Waterson, half-brother to widow Joan Ponsonby, was bound in $100 to guarantee that she would prepare an inventory of her husband's estate. After outstanding debts and funeral expenses had been subtracted, the final valuation was $1156 7's'. 2died, of which one third belonged by city custom to Ponsonby's six under-age children, Nathaniel, William, Simon, Joan, Anne, and Alice. The total presumably included whatever Waterson had paid for Ponsonby's chief copyrights, which were transferred to him on 3 September 1604. 


@@@@@


doc= 22504


Ponsonby, William, second earl of Bessborough (1704-1793), politician, was the second but first surviving son of Brabazon Ponsonby, second Viscount Duncannon and later first earl of Bessborough (1679-1758), politician, and his first wife, Sarah (died 1733), widow of Hugh Colvill, and daughter of John Margetson, son and heir of James Margetson, archbishop of Armagh. The Ponsonbys originally held estates in Cumberland, and came to Ireland in 1649 in the service of Cromwell for whom the first John Ponsonby (1608-1678) raised a regiment of horse. The estates which he acquired at Kildalton, co. Kilkenny, as a reward for his services were confirmed to the family by the 'Act of Settlement' (1662) and its name was changed to Bessborough. William Ponsonby's inheritance included a close commitment to, and identification with, the protestant interest. His grandfather and namesake, the first Viscount Duncannon, successfully intervened to prevent the premature surrender of the besieged garrison at Londonderry in 1690. From this service stemmed the involvement of the Ponsonbys thereafter in Irish politics at the highest level, along with the dignities of Baron Bessborough and Viscount Duncannon. 
William Ponsonby was educated privately at home and undertook the grand tour to France, Italy, and Constantinople. When he was eleven his grandfather was sworn of the Irish privy council, as was his father in 1724. Little is known of Ponsonby's life until his marriage on 5 July 1739 to Lady Caroline Cavendish (1719-1760), eldest daughter of William Cavendish, third duke of Devonshire (1698-1755), and Catharine Hoskins, and his appointment in the same year as private secretary to his father-in-law who was then lord lieutenant of Ireland. Membership of the Irish privy council followed within two years and Ponsonby began to consolidate the foundations laid by his father of the power base which would soon make the Ponsonbys one of the principal parliamentary families in eighteenth-century Ireland. 
Ponsonby's earliest actions as adviser to Devonshire indicate that he had inherited the family's strong protestant streak: an attempt was made by the Irish Roman Catholics both to testify to their continuing loyalty at a time of approaching war with Spain, and to bring their sense of grievance at the penal laws to the attention of the lord lieutenant. This was met, partly at Ponsonby's instigation, with a determined repudiation and a decision to continue the long-held policy of disarming Catholics for the duration of the war. Devonshire in fact was a viceroy who was easily circumvented and sometimes embarrassed by the ambitious Ponsonbys. He quickly became dependent on the advice of his son-in-law, whom he appointed as his chief secretary in 1741. Both Devonshire and Ponsonby survived the fall of Walpole. Ponsonby must have watched with satisfaction as his brother John Ponsonby (1713-1789) was married in 1743 to his wife's sister and Devonshire's younger daughter, Lady Elizabeth Cavendish. John had already been appointed secretary to the Irish revenue board. Ponsonby would also eventually be the heir to an assemblage of electoral interests in constituencies which spanned the length and breadth of Ireland. When Carteret, Walpole's successor, fell from power in London he took Devonshire with him, and Ponsonby resigned also. 
Ponsonby's connections, both marital and political, with the Devonshire family meant that he had many English party interests also. As well as holding his Irish seat as MP for Kilkenny (1727-58) he later sat in the Westminster parliament for constituencies in Derby (1742-54), and later still in Saltash (1754-6) and Harwich (1756-8). Most of his life and virtually all of his political career thereafter was spent in England. In the aftermath of his departure from the Irish chief secretaryship his father-in-law's influence assisted him in becoming commissioner of the Admiralty and admiral of Munster, positions which he held until 1756. While he was no longer personally at the forefront of Irish parliamentary politics, his new position in the higher echelons of naval administration was a prominent one. For the most part the Admiralty in Ponsonby's period of office had a relatively minor role in the advancement of naval policy and discipline and a more prominent part to play in co-ordinating the activities of other government offices. 
Whether through lack of seamanship or, more likely, the fact that the position was but a stepping-stone to higher office, Ponsonby seems not to have made any particular mark during his time at the Admiralty board. At the beginning of the Seven Years' War, a moment when the role of the Admiralty took on a particular prominence, he was promoted to the Treasury board, where he sat, again apparently without notable achievement, until 1759. His father, of course, was still politically active. It seems probable that William Ponsonby, by mutual agreement as much as by his own inclinations, was deputed to look after the family's political interests in London while old Brabazon dealt with politics in the Irish parliament. It was indeed the Ponsonby element who acted as firm supporters of the Irish government during the great money bill dispute of 1753. William's younger brother John became speaker of the Irish House of Commons in 1756, a position he retained for some sixteen years. 
On his father's death on 4 July 1758 from 'a surfeit of fruit' ('GEC', 'Peerage', 2.107) Ponsonby succeeded to the English House of Lords as second Baron Ponsonby of Sysonby, as well as to the Irish earldom of Bessborough. He was then appointed joint postmaster-general, an office he held until 1762. At this point he resigned in protest at the enforced removal of his brother-in-law, the duke of Devonshire, from the office of lord chamberlain. Ponsonby's family connections and his powerful political links in Ireland compelled the government to reinstate him. A year later he was sworn of the privy council, but he was growing disillusioned with the art of politics. In 1766 he relinquished the Post Office following a failed attempt on his part to have himself replaced by Lord Edgcumbe, who had recently been relieved of his treasurership. Ponsonby was one of those who protested loudly and successfully against the proposed Irish absentee tax of 1773, the abandonment of which marked a significant victory for the Rockingham faction with whom he continued to associate. 
While he could not be said to have retired altogether from active politics, Ponsonby's lifelong interest in the arts began to take precedence. He was elected a trustee of the British Museum in 1768, a position he held until his death. One of the original adherents of the Society of Dilettanti, he was also an enthusiastic freemason, and as a young man had been senior grand warden of the grand lodge of freemasons of Ireland. He was also a member of the Accademia di Desegno at Florence. He died on 11 March 1793, aged eighty-eight, and was buried in the Devonshire family vault at All Saints' Church, Derby, on 22 March. 
Ponsonby having spent most of his life in England, it was said that the family's Irish seat at Bessborough remained unoccupied for many years after the death of his father in 1758. It was, nevertheless, a profitable estate: at the time of Ponsonby's own death in 1793 his gross Irish rental was estimated at $11,660. Infant mortality deprived him of all but one of his five sons. Frederick Ponsonby, born in January 1758, succeeded to the earldom and would later be remembered for his skill and assiduity in the cultivation of his Irish estate. Likewise, only two of Ponsonby's six daughters survived childhood. 


@@@@@


doc= 22505


Ponsonby, Sir William (1772-1815), army officer, was the second son of William Brabazon Ponsonby, first Baron Ponsonby (1744-1806), and his wife, Louisa (1749-1824), fourth daughter of Richard Molesworth, third Viscount Molesworth of Swords. John Ponsonby, Viscount Ponsonby (c.1770-1855), was his eldest brother. Both Ponsonby and his second cousin, Frederic Cavendish Ponsonby (1783-1837), were great-grandsons of the first earl of Bessborough. 
After serving for a year and a half as ensign and lieutenant in the independent companies of Captain Bulwer and Captain Davis, Ponsonby obtained a company in the 83rd foot in September 1794, and on 15 December of that year became major in the loyal Irish fencibles. On 1 March 1798 he was transferred to the 5th dragoon guards, and he obtained command of the regiment on 24 February 1803, having become lieutenant-colonel in the army on 1 January 1800. He married the Hon. Georgiana Fitzroy, sixth daughter of the first Lord Southampton, on 20 January 1807. 
Ponsonby became colonel on 25 July 1810. In 1811 he went to Spain with his regiment, part of Le Marchant's brigade. His was the leading regiment of the brigade in the action at Llerena on 11 April 1812, and he won the commendation of Sir Stapleton Cotton. At Salamanca he was at the head of his regiment in the charge of the brigade which broke up the French left and took 2000 prisoners, and after the fall of General Le Marchant in that charge Ponsonby assumed command of the brigade. He was officially appointed to this command three days afterwards, on 25 July 1812, and he led the brigade at Vitoria. He was promoted major-general on 4 June 1813, and was made KCB on 2 January 1815. 
In the campaign of 1815 Ponsonby was given command of the Union brigade (so called because of its combination of English, Scottish and Irish regiments) of heavy cavalry (Royals, Scots greys, and Inniskillings), and led it at Waterloo in the famous charge on d'Erlon's shattered corps on 18 June. Lord Anglesey's order was that the Royals and Inniskillings should charge and the Greys should support, but the Greys came up into front line before the other regiments were half way down the slope. The French columns broke up, and 2000 prisoners were taken. Sir George de Lacy Evans, who was acting as extra aide-de-camp to Ponsonby, wrote: 'The enemy fled as a flock of sheep across the valley, quite at the mercy of the dragoons. In fact our men were out of hand. The general of the brigade, his staff, and every officer within hearing exerted themselves to the utmost to re-form the men; but the helplessness of the enemy offered too great a temptation to the dragoons, and our efforts were abortive.' They mounted the ridge on which the French artillery were drawn up, and, meeting two batteries which had moved forward, sabred the gunners and overturned the guns. The Household Cavalry brigade, which had charged at the same time on the right, became to some extent intermixed with the Union brigade. Napoleon, seeing the situation, sent two regiments of cuirassiers to fall on the front and flank of the disordered cavalry, and they were joined by a regiment of Polish lancers. According to Evans: 'Every one saw what must happen. Those whose horses were best, or least blown, got away. Some attempted to escape back to our position by going round the left of the French lancers. Sir William Ponsonby was of that number. (Siborne, 61)' Ponsonby might have escaped if he had been better mounted, but the groom with his chestnut charger could not be found at the moment of the charge, and he was riding a small bay hack which soon stuck fast in the heavy ground. Seeing he must be overtaken, he was handing over his watch and a miniature to his brigade major to deliver to his family, when the French lancers came up and killed them both. He was buried at Kensington, in the vault of the Molesworth family (his ancestors in the female line), and a national monument was erected in St Paul's Cathedral. Wellington, in his report on the battle, expressed his 'grief for the fate of an officer who had already rendered very brilliant and important services, and was an ornament to his profession'. 
Ponsonby left one son, William, who succeeded his uncle John Ponsonby as third Baron Ponsonby -- a title which became extinct later in the nineteenth century -- and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 22506


Ponsonby, William Brabazon, first Baron Ponsonby (1744-1806), politician and sportsman, was born on 15 September 1744 in Dublin, the eldest of the ten children of John Ponsonby (1713-1789), speaker of the Irish House of Commons, and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Cavendish (1723-1796), second daughter of William Cavendish, third duke of Devonshire. George Ponsonby, later Lord Chancellor of Ireland, was his brother. 
In the first half of the eighteenth century the Ponsonbys became one of the most powerful political families in Ireland, their modest personal electoral interests in co. Kilkenny and, after 1744, in Newtownards, co. Down, being bolstered by kinship with the dukes of Devonshire, who had extensive estates in counties Waterford and Cork. By the 1750s the Ponsonby connection, which had been formed out of a combination of personal, inherited and 'borrowed' interests, constituted one of the 'undertakers' -- the select group of Irish families who managed the Irish parliament on behalf of the British government. 
Ponsonby entered Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1760 and in 1764 he was returned for Cork City to the Irish House of Commons; he continued to represent this constituency until the dissolution in 1776. He represented Bandon Bridge from 1776 until the general election of 1783 when, having been returned on the family interest both for Newtownards and co. Kilkenny, he chose to sit for co. Kilkenny, a seat he continued to represent until his elevation to the peerage in 1806. On 26 December 1769 he married Louisa Molesworth (1749-1824), fourth daughter of Richard, third Viscount Molesworth, and his second wife, Mary Usher; they had five sons, including Sir William Ponsonby, and one daughter. 
Throughout his parliamentary career Billy Ponsonby acted in conjunction with the rest of his family. Initially he was a beneficiary of his father's position on the revenue board and he was appointed examiner of customs. In 1770, however, he was a victim of Lord Townshend's dismantling of the undertaker system and, having accompanied his father in opposition, he was removed from his post. Some years later he and his family renewed their support for Dublin Castle under the viceroyalty of Lord Buckinghamshire; Ponsonby's own objectives were to be elected to the powerful speakership, vacated by his father in 1771, and, more generally, to defend the Irish protestant elite in the political system. It was the latter cause that led him to oppose Henry Flood's 'Parliamentary Reform Bill' on 29 November 1783. 
Although the Ponsonbys were allies of the Rockingham whigs in 1782-3 -- Ponsonby was a relative of Rockingham's political heir, the duke of Portland -- they threw in their lot with Pitt in 1784. Ponsonby was appointed joint postmaster-general of Ireland and he became a member of the Irish privy council and the Irish linen board. He also gradually assumed the headship of the Ponsonby connection in the room of his ageing father, although the pleasures of hunting were a powerful distraction. However, neither the chase nor his official duties prevented him from opposing the Irish commercial propositions in 1785 or from even mounting an aborted campaign to be elected to the speakership of the Irish Commons on that ticket -- a desertion which Pitt felt strongly but which failed to lead to Ponsonby's dismissal and did not stand in the way of his obtaining the deputy governorship of co. Kilkenny in 1787. The fair-weather support of the Ponsonby group, which amounted to between ten and fourteen MPs and was the second largest in the Irish Commons, was evidently too important to the government. 
In the regency crisis of 1788-9 Ponsonby and his colleagues took the side of the prince against Pitt and Ponsonby was dismissed from the Post Office. At the end of the year Ponsonby's father died and he succeeded to the family estates. On this occasion the change of direction was permanent. He had been elected an original member of the Whig Club, founded in Dublin on 26 June 1789; and he and his brother George -- whom some regarded as the more effective leader of the family group -- aligned themselves with Fox and gathered together the various small groups of Irish whigs to form a party of systematic opposition under their own leadership. One of the party's first operations was another unsuccessful campaign to have Ponsonby elected speaker in 1790, a failure which his brother-in-law Lord Shannon attributed to Ponsonby's 'indolence and obstinacy' (Hewitt, 8). Moreover, although the circumstances were different, the ultimate objective of their leadership was similar to that of Fox and the English whigs -- to re-establish the political influence of the landowning classes and to diminish that of the crown. In 1793, 1794, and 1797 Ponsonby introduced measures of parliamentary reform with this objective in mind and he became committed to the necessity of Catholic relief in order to enable the protestant elite to earn the credit and prolong its ascendancy. 
Pitt's coalition with the Portland whigs in July 1794 and Earl Fitzwilliam's consequent appointment as lord lieutenant gave Ponsonby and his followers the opportunity they had been looking for since their humbling by Townshend in 1770. The chief beneficiary then had been John Beresford and it appears that it was Ponsonby who was instrumental in persuading Fitzwilliam to dismiss Beresford from his post as head of the revenue on the grounds of alleged corruption. This inaugurated a political crisis that led in 1795 to Fitzwilliam's recall, Beresford's re-instatement, and Ponsonby's humiliation. Thus, although he had been on the brink of becoming secretary of state and had sat ostentatiously on the Treasury bench, Ponsonby found himself in opposition once again and he apparently admitted that the case against Beresford was in essence more political than moral. As a consequence his enthusiasm for politics, like that of the Foxites in Britain, waned and he spent more time in the country. As he told Fitzwilliam on 29 May 1797, in words that reveal his deficiencies as a leader of the relatively new but by now demoralized party: 'You know I consider myself as an Irish country gentleman. I take no part in public affairs but when I think my good wishes to the country call upon me to do so, and I do so then without fear or expectation. (Jupp, 866)' Ponsonby was a prominent opponent of the Union, but in his first speech as a Westminster MP he recommended that 'the wisest policy' in the future was for British governments 'to treat the people of Ireland like the people of England' (Jupp, 866). In keeping with these assimilationist views he, three other Ponsonbys, and two of their relatives became part of the whig opposition, voting against the Addington and Pitt ministries and in favour of the prince of Wales and Catholic relief. It is a measure of his declining influence, however, that by 1803 Fox regarded Ponsonby's younger brother, George, as the spokesman for the Irish whigs. By the time the Foxites took office in 1806 his health was poor, with the result that his wife pressed his claims for a peerage, arguing that it was merited by the 'persecution' that his family had suffered since the 1760s, by his 'formidable' opposition to the 'Regency Bill' and the Union, and by his staunch support for the Foxite whigs at Westminster (ibid., 867). As a consequence he was raised swiftly to the British peerage on 13 March 1806 as Baron Ponsonby of Imokilly in the county of Cork. He took his seat in the House of Lords on 25 April, but never took part in the debates. He died in Seymour Street, Hyde Park, London, on 5 November 1806, and was buried in Ireland. His widow, who married on 21 July 1823 William Wentworth Fitzwilliam, died on 1 September 1824. 
The rise and decline of the Ponsonbys after the 1730s was one of the more dramatic trajectories in the history of the Irish protestant elite. Ponsonby himself must bear some of the responsibility for the downward movement. At a personal level he was as interested in sport as he was in politics and he was said to have kept 'the best hunting establishment in Ireland' in Bishop's Court, his seat in co. Kildare, where it was also reported that he lived 'in the most hospitable and princely style' (GEC, 'Peerage', 10.576). In addition, he was a man who was easily irritated, especially if his status and pretensions went unacknowledged. As A. P. W. Malcomson puts it: 'He seems to have been a man who sought to engross power, not to share it' (Malcomson, 403). Thus, although he played a part in creating a whig opposition in Ireland in the 1790s, he overplayed his hand in 1795 by trying to settle old scores, and then relapsed into intermittent and ineffective activity. 


@@@@@


doc= 22507


Pont, Robert (1524-1606), Church of Scotland minister and judge, was born, according to George Buchanan, at or near Culross in Fife, a son of John Pont of Shires Mill and Catherine Murray, daughter of the laird of Tullibardine. Shires Mill, whose property his father held, belonged to Culross Abbey as superior, and at the Reformation Robert Pont himself paid to the abbey $4 4's'. 4died in annual dues for a 'third of Schyris Myln' (Kirk, 'Books of Assumption', 290). 
Educated in Culross, Pont proceeded to St Andrews University where he matriculated at St Leonard's College in 1544, with John Row, later fellow reformer and minister of Perth. His brother James also entered St Leonard's College in 1551, graduated in 1554, and went on to serve as examiner, bursar, and regent in the university. Pont's pre-Reformation career remains elusive, although he acquired an expertise in law. 
By 1559 Pont had settled in St Andrews. That year he signed the declaration of the protestants there to assist the reforming lords of the congregation in 'mayntening of the trew religioun of Christe, and downe putting of all superstitioun and idolatrie' (Fleming, 6-8). He was also prominent as an elder on the kirk session of Holy Trinity Church in St Andrews. As a commissioner from the town, along with the minister, Christopher Goodman, and another elder, he attended the reformers' general assembly which met in Edinburgh in December 1560. This found Pont and twenty other individuals in the area around St Andrews to be qualified to serve as ministers and teachers in the reformed church. In July 1562 his appointment as minister of Dunblane was approved by the general assembly and his brother James was appointed to serve Melrose for a spell before being assigned as minister to Lord Erskine, later earl of Mar, commendator of Dryburgh and Cambuskenneth abbeys and Inchmahome Priory. It was perhaps about this time that Pont married his first wife, whose name is uncertain but who is thought by some sources to have been Katherine, daughter of Adam Masterton of Grange. 
Pont was minister of Dunkeld in December 1562 when he was shortlisted for the superintendentship of Dumfries and Galloway, though the post remained unfilled, and another minister was appointed to Dunkeld. From 1563 he acted as the assembly's commissioner for visiting churches and placing ministers in the area of Inverness, Moray, and Banff, though he requested to be released from the burden of overseeing Gaelic-speaking congregations on account of his 'laicke of the Irish tongue' (Thomson, 1.40). Despite his plea in 1568 'to be placed in a particular congregation' (ibid., 1.129), the assembly encouraged Pont to continue as commissioner of Moray. Only with the election of a protestant bishop of Moray was Pont able to demit office as commissioner in 1574. In those years he seems not to have held a parochial charge. Although he received a presentation to the vicarage of Birnie on 13 January 1568, he did not act as minister there, as a subsequent presentation to James Johnston, minister of Birnie, on 26 February 1568 makes clear. 
In 1566 Pont had been selected by the assembly to examine William Ramsay's answer to Heinrich Bullinger's 'Judgement declaring it lawfull for ministers of the Church of England to weare the apparell prescribed by the lawes' (1566), and he was a signatory to the letter sent by the general assembly to the bishops of England that year, interceding in the vestiarian controversy on behalf of the conscience-stricken in the English church who 'refuse the Romish ragges' (Thomson, 1.85-8). At that point, too, he translated and published, at the behest of the assembly, the second Helvetic confession of faith, omitting the section on the commemoration of certain holy days to which the Scottish church took exception. He later issued a catechism of his own, 'Parvus catechismus' (1573). 
Elected moderator of the general assembly on six occasions -- in July 1570, August 1575, April 1581, October 1583, March 1596, April 1597 -- Pont was prominent in the councils of the church. His legal training doubtless contributed to his selection to a committee of assembly in 1564, and again in 1570, to determine the extent of the church's jurisdiction and to his appointment in 1572 as a senator of the college of justice (or judge on the court of session). The general assembly, which gave grudging acceptance to the arrangement, insisted that the appointment should not be interpreted as precedent for other ministers to follow suit and that Pont should remain a minister. 
Pont's nomination by the crown to the provostry of Trinity College in Edinburgh in January 1572 provided him with an annual income of some 200 merks and in November 1573 he gained a pension of 300 merks from the bishopric of Moray. With his resignation as commissioner of Moray in 1574, he was admitted minister of the second charge in St Cuthbert's Church beside Edinburgh and gained a presentation from the crown on 29 December 1578 to the vicarage of St Cuthbert. 
Present at the convention of Leith in 1572, which attempted to solve the vexed question of ecclesiastical endowment by introducing a protestant episcopate, Pont also sat on the assembly's committee which produced a critical appraisal of the implications of the Leith settlement. In 1573 he was chosen one of the assembly's representatives for discussions with the government, and in 1575 to confer with the regent, Morton, on the church's jurisdiction and polity. He took an active part in preparing the 'Second Book of Discipline' (1578), was present at the conference, summoned by the king, at Stirling Castle on the contents of the 'Second Book of Discipline', and was selected by the assembly in 1580 to help devise a scheme for establishing presbyteries. 
In 1578, with James Lawson and David Lindsay, Pont accompanied the English ambassador to Stirling in an effort to achieve reconciliation among the political factions following Regent Morton's downfall, engineered by the earls of Atholl and Argyll. Efforts by the town of St Andrews to secure Pont as their minister in 1581, and again in 1582, ended in failure. At the assembly's behest, he took part in 1582 in proceedings against Robert Montgomery, promoted by the crown to the archbishopric of Glasgow in defiance of the wishes of the general assembly. Pont urged Montgomery to 'give over all simplie, and come in the kirk's will' (Calderwood, 3.604). He also informed the privy council that the presbyteries of Dalkeith, Linlithgow, and Edinburgh refused to recognize its interference in the proceedings against Montgomery in the ecclesiastical courts. 
A supporter of the presbyterian cause, Pont composed, with Thomas Smeton, the act of the general assembly in October 1582 approving the Ruthven raid, when a group of ultra-protestant lords led by the earl of Gowrie had ended the ascendancy of the duke of Lennox in August 1582 in a palace revolution by capturing the king. Following James's escape from the Ruthven raiders in June 1583, the onset of the Arran regime, with its hostility to presbyterianism, signalled a strong conservative reaction. In May 1584 Pont protested 'in name of the rest' that the church was not obliged to acquiesce in the 'Black Acts' which asserted royal supremacy over the church and its government by bishops, in the belief that the legislation was 'repugnant to the Word of God' ('CSP Scot.', 7, nos. 146, 148). He refused to sign the subscription required by the crown acknowledging the authority of bishops and when charged to compear before the privy council, he followed the example of other ministers by fleeing. In July he was reported to be forfeited for his action in protesting against the 'Black Acts'; and in December he was numbered among the banished ministers. According to John Spottiswoode, after the two Edinburgh ministers James Lawson and Walter Balcanquhal had fled to England, Pont 'took instruments in the hands of a notary of the Church's disassenting' from the legislation of 1584, after which 'he likewise fleeing was denounced rebel' and removed from his position as judge (Spottiswoode, 2.315). 
With the return in November 1585 of the lords and some of the ministers who had sought sanctuary in England under Arran's administration, Pont resumed his ministry at St Cuthbert's and, together with Andrew Melville and others, wrote to the remaining ministers in England urging them to return home also. In May 1586 he opened the first general assembly to have met since Arran's fall from power and welcomed the presence of the king, if with reservations: 'we trust your Majestie speeketh without hypocrisie' (Calderwood, 5.549). He opposed Archbishop Patrick Adamson's relaxation from excommunication in 1586, and, on the general assembly's advice, he declined the king's offer of the bishopric of Caithness in 1587. As the assembly explained to the king, Pont was 'alreadie a Bischop according to the doctrine of Sanct Paul, and qualified to use the functioun of a Pastor or Minister at the Kirk of Dornoch' and to serve as visitor for the churches in Caithness, 'but as to that corrupt estate or office of them quho hes bein termed Bischops heirtofoir, we find it not agreable to the Word of God, and it hes bein damnit in diverse uther our Assemblies' (Thomson, 2.697-8). At a meeting of parliament in 1587 Pont and others, with the general assembly's approval, submitted a petition -- only to be rejected -- opposing churchmen who sat and voted in name of the church but not on behalf of the church. By 1598, however, he did come to accept in principle the idea of ecclesiastical representation in parliament, which the king promoted as a means for reinstating bishops. 
Pont was invited to attend the queen's coronation in 1590. He remained steadfast in upholding the liberty of the church, reminding the king in 1591 that 'there is a judgment above yours and that is God's putt in the hand of the ministrie' (Calderwood, 5.131); and in 1592 he was one of several appointed by the assembly to draw up articles for the annulment of the 'Black Acts' of 1584. Rebuking the nation's lukewarmness in caring for religion, in a sermon preached in 1594, he censured the king's behaviour, affirming that 'we could not pray with David's people to fulfill the desire of the king's heart, becaus we suspected our king's heart not to be upright; which the countenancing of evill men, and unreverent hearing of the Word, declared' (Calderwood, 5.329). 
By 1587 Pont's first wife had died, leaving two sons, Timothy Pont (fl. 1574-1611) and Zachary, minister of Bower, and four daughters, Helen, Margaret, Catherine, and Beatrix. With Margaret Smyth, his second or third wife, he had three sons, James, Robert, and Jonathan. It was earlier thought that he had married in 1587 Sarah Denholm as his second wife and that she was the mother of his daughter Beatrix but this is now not considered the case. 
Meanwhile Pont began to publish again. 'Against Sacrilege: Three Sermons' and 'A newe treatise of the right reckoning of yeares, and ages of the world and mens lives, and of the estate of the last decaying age thereof' both appeared in 1599. When a new translation of the 'Bible' was proposed in 1601, Pont was asked by the assembly to revise the metrical translation of the 'Psalms'. By November 1602 the assembly approved a petition by Pont: 'desyreand, in respect of his great age, and long travells takin in the Kirk of God, and continuall seiknes quhilk followeth age, that he might be releivit from the ordinarie burdein of the teaching, upon conditioun that he sall substitute ane in his place quhen through infirmitie he sall not be able to teach himselfe. (Thomson, 3.1001-2)' Pont celebrated James VI's accession to the English throne in 'De unione Britanniae' (1604), which he dedicated to the king, extolling the benefits of unity for religion and political stability. The same year he issued 'Canticum canticorum Solomonis', an exposition through 'Song of Songs' of the allegory of Christ and his church. He was still active enough two years later to protest at the prosecution of those ministers imprisoned for approving the Aberdeen general assembly which James had prohibited from meeting, but he died on 8 May 1606. He was buried in the churchyard of St Cuthbert's. Another chronological work appeared posthumously as 'De Sabbaticorum annorum periodis chronologica a mundi exordio ad nostra usque secula et porro digestio' (1619). 


@@@@@


doc= 22508


Pont, Timothy (fl. 1574-1611), map maker and chorographer, was the second son of Robert Pont (1524-1606), minister of the Church of Scotland, and his first wife, whose name is uncertain. Later sources give it as Katherine Masterton, but this may be a confusion with Robert's mother. Timothy had one brother, Zachary, and four sisters, Helen, Margaret, Catherine, and Beatrix. He had three stepbrothers, James, Robert, and Jonathan, born to his father's second or third wife, Margaret Smyth. The earliest documentary evidence of Timothy is dated 1574, when his father, then provost of Trinity College, Edinburgh, granted him, by charter, church lands in Forfarshire (Angus). He followed in his father's footsteps by matriculating from St Leonard's College, St Andrews, in 1580 from where he graduated BA in 1583. In 1592 or shortly thereafter Timothy was commissioned by Lord Menmuir, master of the metals, to visit and report on the mines and minerals of Orkney and Shetland. A letter from the dean of Limerick dated 1596 refers to Pont's having travelled all over Scotland. In 1600 or 1601 Timothy was appointed minister of Dunnet, Caithness; his elder brother Zachary officiated in the adjoining parish of Bower. Timothy was minister of Dunnet until at least 31 May 1611, on which day a bond records him as minister and refers to his wife, Isobell Blacadder. 
Pont travelled throughout most of the mainland and islands of Scotland, recording some 20,000 place names on sketch maps and compiling detailed textual records of local history, economy, and genealogy, following contemporary chorographical practice. While some of his maps survive in manuscript, his texts are known only in transcription, so that many texts can be attributed only tentatively to him. An exception is 'Cuninghame topographized' ('c'.1604-1608), transcribed and attributed to Pont by Sir James Balfour of Denmiln, who was instrumental in getting Pont's maps engraved and published. 
Pont's maps have attracted much more attention than his texts. Seventy-eight of his manuscript maps survive on thirty-eight sheets (NL Scot.). They were probably compiled between 1583 and 1596. With one or two possible exceptions his maps were not published in his lifetime. Following his death, lack of interest among his heirs, the economics of publishing, and copyright difficulties may all have militated against their publication. However, before 1629 Pont's manuscript maps were acquired by James Balfour, whose neighbour in Fife, Sir John Scot of Scotstarvet, had been approached by Willem Blaeu in Amsterdam for assistance in obtaining maps of Scotland for publication. Probably the entire collection of Pont's manuscript maps was passed to Blaeu in the early 1630s. 
Blaeu engraved the more legible of Pont's maps without further reference to Scotland; these amounted to at least thirty-five plates, including one or two plates already in hand. Nevertheless, large gaps remained in his coverage of Scotland, and Pont's rougher drafts were too imperfect to be copied by Dutch engravers. Some of Pont's manuscripts, mainly his earlier and rougher working documents rather than the well-finished drafts already engraved, were returned to Scotland. (It is not known what happened to the rest, but they may have been lost in the fire which destroyed Blaeu's premises in 1671.) Before 1636 Robert Gordon of Straloch in Aberdeenshire began to collaborate with Scot on the completion of Blaeu's coverage and to compile maps for his own purposes. Over a period of some twelve years Gordon, with the support of church and state, prepared at least five and possibly as many as ten further draft maps for engraving in Amsterdam and inclusion in the Blaeu 'Atlas', using Pont's maps as virtually his sole source, except in his native north-east. He also drafted the map of the whole of Scotland, while his son, James Gordon of Rothiemay, compiled a new map of Fife. It was Pont's work in the field, however, which laid the foundations for this later work and which resulted in Scotland's becoming one of the most comprehensively mapped countries of Europe. On the death of Robert Gordon the Pont manuscript maps were passed to his son, James, and eventually to Sir Robert Sibbald, geographer to Charles II. After Sibbald's death in 1722 they were deposited in the Advocates' Library in Edinburgh, where they were catalogued by George Paton and later by Caleb Cash. They subsequently passed, with the rest of the Advocates' general collection, to the newly created National Library of Scotland. Some of the maps seen by Robert Gordon have not survived. 
The forty-seven regional maps of Scotland published in Blaeu's 'Atlas novus' (1654) provide almost complete coverage of the country excepting Angus and represent, therefore, a more extensive historical source for place names and their geographical locations than Pont's surviving manuscript maps, which cover only part of the country. Nevertheless, Pont's manuscripts are primary sources, and afford a rare opportunity for comparing the seventeenth-century printed map against the original observations. 
Pont's motive for drawing his maps is unknown. He may have seen his work as a complement to that of William Camden. Pont and Camden were working at much the same time and knew of each other's activity. Camden's name appears on a Pont manuscript, and in his 'Britannia' (1608) Camden excuses the brevity of his chapter on Scotland on the grounds of work in hand by someone else in Scotland. There is little information about Pont's methods of map compilation, other than what can be deduced from the extant manuscripts. There have been suggestions that he used survey techniques requiring instruments, but there is no independent evidence for this, and such techniques would have been difficult or impossible to use for a man working alone and at some speed. Pont seems to have simply transferred the mental image of what he saw on the ground to paper, locating settlements, churches, mills, castles, and large houses in relation to the rivers and streams which ran through the landscape, and in effect making sketch maps by eye. He used symbols, albeit rather inconsistently, to identify some named places. His manuscript maps contain much additional information, including sketches of prominent buildings, names of occupants, and textual entries on a range of subjects. Pont was a chorographer, not a topographic surveyor, and his maps should be understood, not as free-standing works, but as part of a larger chorographic record of Scotland, and he was perceptively described in 1776 as 'the great chorographer of Scotland' (Nicolson, 84). 
The date and whereabouts of Pont's death, like those of his birth, are not known, but he may have died by 1614, by which time he had been replaced as minister of Dunnet. A plaque was erected to his memory in Dunnet church about 1912. 


@@@@@


doc= 22509


Pontack (fl. 1666-1711), tavern-keeper, was the original proprietor of Pontack's tavern, or eating-house, an establishment notable for its fine wines and the luxurious dinners provided there. As such it became an important gathering place for the social and political elite of post-Restoration London. Little is known about Pontack himself. The presumption that Pontack was a son of Arnaud de Pontac (1599-1681), president of the 'parlement' of Bordeaux, must be dismissed, for Arnaud de Pontac's only son, Francois Auguste de Pontac, died in 1694 and Pontack the tavern-keeper was alive in London in 1695. Pontack no doubt associated himself with the name and prestige of Arnaud de Pontac, for he displayed the sign of the president outside his tavern, and the assumption that the tavern-keeper Pontack was related to Arnaud de Pontac was current by the early eighteenth century. The president was renowned for his wisdom, but also gave his name to a renowned French wine, which also promoted the tavern's success: his vineyard at Haut-Brion produced 'the choicest of our Burdeaux-Wines' (Evelyn, 4.329). In 1720 John Strype described Pontack's tavern as 'a noted Ordinary for the better Sort, and for a kind of French Wine so called' (Strype, 2.190). 
Pontack's tavern was initially established on the site of 16 and 17 Lombard Street in the City of London, near the Royal Exchange, some time after the great fire in 1666. About 1688-90 Pontack moved his tavern from Lombard Street to the east side of Abchurch Lane in Candlewick ward and his old premises were soon occupied by Edward Lloyd, a coffee-house keeper and founder of the famous Lloyd's Coffee House. 
Soon after relocating Pontack's became the most fashionable eating-house in London. The Royal Society held its annual dinners there until 1746, when they were moved to the Devil tavern at Temple Bar. Fellows of the Royal Society frequently patronized Pontack's and could gather in numbers as large as forty on a single evening. The quality of the customers entertained at Pontack's, the rather high cost of the meals, and the lack of many other serious competitors allowed the place to maintain its reputation as London's premier eating-house. In 1697 the Frenchman Henri Misson's guide to travel in England noted that 'those who would dine at one or two guineas per head are handsomely accommodated at our famous Pontack's [but] rarely and difficultly elsewhere' (Misson, 146). Pontack himself, however, boasted to Jonathan Swift in August 1711 that 'although his wine was so good, he sold it cheaper than others -- he took but seven shillings a flask', and Swift agreed, exclaiming that these were very 'pretty rates' (Swift, 1.334). 
Like the coffee houses of post-Restoration London, Pontack's tavern also seems to have been a notable centre for disseminating news and political rumour, and thus Pontack's own discourse with his customers could have great impact outside his tavern. On 17 August 1695, Narcissus Luttrell reported that Pontack was 'examined before the Lord Mayor for being author of the late report that the king was missing, and gave bail to answer for the same' (Luttrell, 3.513). Pontack's was certainly a favoured place of resort for whig nobles, as Jonathan Swift observed on 25 January 1713, surmising that 'they have some damned design' (Swift, 2.608). It also hosted occasional meetings of the Candlewick wardmote inquests in the early eighteenth century (Lillywhite, 452-3). 
The social scene at Pontack's tavern was commonly ridiculed as host to the excessively luxurious and Francophile tastes of London's social elite. Susannah Centlivre ridiculed the 'modish kick-shaws' such as 'famed ragouts', and 'new invented sallad', pretentiously desired by the 'nice beaus' at Pontack's in the preface to her play 'Love's Contrivance' of 1703 (Centlivre, 2. sig. A3'v'). After the collapse of the South Sea Bubble 'Mist's Journal' shed few tears over the 'Jews and late South Sea directors' ('Mist's Journal', 1 April 1721), who could no longer afford to dine at Pontack's and were thus forced to resort to a common chop house. 
It is not known when Pontack died, but by 1736 the tavern was no longer in his hands and was run by Mrs Susannah Austin, a widow who married William Pepys, a banker in Lombard Street. By this time Mrs Austin had already 'acquired a considerable fortune' through her proprietorship of the famous tavern ('Weekly Oracle', 15 Jan 1736). Pontack's fame continued well after his death, and his head is seen on some copies of plate three of Hogarth's 'Rake's Progress'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22510


Ponton, Mungo (1802-1880), inventor of photographic processes and lawyer, the only son of John Ponton, farmer, and his wife, Isabell 'nee' Ponton, was born at Balgreen, near Edinburgh, on 23 November 1802. Educated as a lawyer, he was admitted to the Society of Writers to the Signet on 8 December 1825. He was one of the founders of the National Bank of Scotland on 21 March 1825, and served as its law agent and subsequently secretary from 1825 until 1846, when ill health forced him to abandon his career for scientific pursuits. He married: first, Helen Scott Campbell (died 7 Aug 1842), youngest daughter of Archibald Campbell of Edinburgh, on 24 June 1830; second, Margaret Ponton, daughter of Alexander Ponton, procurator fiscal, of Edinburgh, on 7 November 1843; and third, Jane McLean, eldest surviving daughter of Dougald McLean, merchant, of Edinburgh, on 1 August 1871. He had at least one son, Archibald Campbell Ponton, an architect. 
On 29 May 1839 Ponton communicated to the Society of Arts for Scotland 'a cheap and simple method of preparing paper for photographic drawing in which the use of any salt of silver is dispensed with' ('Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal', 27, 1840, 169). In this paper he announced the important discovery that the action of sunlight renders potassium dichromate insoluble, a discovery which, more than any other, made possible the production of permanent photographs. It forms the basis of nearly all subsequent photomechanical processes, including the production of printed circuit boards. His other papers included an account of using photography to register automatically the hourly variations of the thermometer, improvements to the electric telegraph, and papers on optics, including polarization, chromatic dispersion, and spectroscopy. In later life he wrote a number of scientific and religious books, including devotional verse. He became a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1834. He died at his home, 4 Paragon, Clifton, Bristol, on 3 August 1880. He and his second wife had moved to the town from Edinburgh in 1854. His third wife survived him for almost thirty years; she died on 24 January 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 22511


Poole, Arthur William (1852-1885), bishop in Japan, the son of Thomas Francis Poole and his wife, Jane, was born at Shrewsbury on 6 August 1852. He was educated at Shrewsbury School, and went in Michaelmas term 1869 to Worcester College, Oxford; he took a third class both in the classical moderations in 1871 and in the final classical school in 1873. He graduated BA in 1873, MA in 1876, and DD in 1883. On leaving Oxford Poole became a tutor. He thought of medicine as a profession, but in 1876, having abandoned a leaning towards the Plymouth Brethren, he was ordained deacon, and became curate of St Aldates, Oxford. Early in boyhood Poole had wished to be a missionary, and the old desire was renewed in March 1876 by an appeal for men to aid in educational work at Masulipatam. After some hesitation Poole offered himself to the Church Missionary Society, on 20 June 1876. He was accepted, and sailed for India in October 1877, having married that year Sarah Ann Pearson, who bore him several children. 
At Masulipatam, Poole threw himself into the work of the Noble High School, and fostered the growth of Christian literature in the vernacular. However, early in 1879 he showed signs of consumption and, after twice visiting the Nilgiri hills, he was invalided home in June 1880. There was little prospect of his being able to return to India, and he resigned in October 1882. At the anniversary meeting of the Church Missionary Society in May 1883, a speech by Poole attracted the attention of the archbishop of Canterbury, E. W. Benson, who offered him the missionary bishopric in Japan which it had just been decided to establish. After much hesitation and with reassuring reports from the medical board, Poole accepted the offer, and was consecrated at Lambeth in London on St Luke's day 1883. He was warmly received in Japan, where he was based at Kobe, and at once began to visit the chief missionary stations in his diocese. But, his health failing, he spent the winter of 1884-5 in California. He did not recover, but returned to England, and died at his home, Fairfield, Coton Hill, Shrewsbury, on 14 July 1885, his wife surviving him. Bishop Poole Memorial Girls' Schools was founded in his memory in Osaka. 


@@@@@


doc= 22512


(Edward) Stanley Poole (1830-1867), Arabic scholar, edited a new edition of his uncle Edward Lane's 'Thousand and one Nights' (1859), and the fifth edition of 'The Modern Egyptians' (1860); he also wrote many articles for Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible' and contributed to the eighth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and to various periodicals. He became chief clerk of the South Kensington Department of Science and Art. He married Roberta Elizabeth Louisa, daughter of Charles Reddelien, a naturalized German. He was devoted to her and their children. His wife died in 1866 after a lingering illness and he followed soon afterwards, on 12 March 1867, leaving two sons, Stanley Lane-Poole and Reginald Lane Poole. 


@@@@@


doc= 22513


Poole, George Ayliffe (1809-1883), Church of England clergyman and author, was educated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge (BA 1831, MA 1838). He was ordained in 1832, and was curate successively of Twickenham; St John the Evangelist, Edinburgh; and St Chad's, Shrewsbury. On 16 March 1839 he was appointed perpetual curate of St James's, Leeds; in 1843 he was presented to the vicarage of Welford, Northamptonshire, which he held until his presentation to the rectory of Winwick, near Rugby, by the bishop of Peterborough in 1876. Here he acted for a few years as rural dean of the district. He married Susanna, a daughter of Jonathan Wilks of St Ann's, Burley. 
Poole was a prolific writer, publishing volumes on a wide variety of subjects. But the main work of his life was the promotion of the revival of Gothic architecture, and this constituted the most significant portion of his literary output. His most substantial work on this subject was 'A History of Ecclesiastical Architecture in England' (1848), a detailed and scholarly account of its subject. He also published 'Churches: their Structure, Arrangement and Decoration' (1845) -- originally issued in 1842 as 'The Appropriate Character of Church Architecture' -- a more popular attempt to stimulate interest in the furnishing of churches. In 1840 he had been an early advocate of what he argued was a more reverential approach to this subject in 'The Anglo-Catholic Use of Two Lights upon the Altar, for the Signification that Christ is the Very True Light of the World, Stated and Defended'. He also composed many minor works on particular churches, such as 'An Historical and Descriptive Guide to York Cathedral' (1850), and on the ecclesiastical buildings of a particular area, such as 'Churches of Yorkshire' (1842). 
Poole was a traditional high-churchman and an admirer of W. F. Hook, vicar of Leeds, and his writings on the various church parties of the day are of some significance, especially as revealing his attitude to the Oxford Movement. While comments on this subject pervade many of his works, the most developed exposition of his position is to be found in 'On the Present State of Parties in the Church of England: with Especial Reference to the Alleged Tendency of the Oxford School to the Doctrines and Communion of Rome' (1841), written in the wake of Froude's 'Remains' and 'Tract 90'. In this Poole reveals the ambivalent attitude of his school to the Tractarians. On the one hand he is sympathetic to the aims of the movement, especially as enunciated in the earlier tracts; on the other he is critical of their dislike of the links between church and state, and of their low opinion of the Reformers. By 1841 Poole was attempting to warn both the Tractarians and other churchmen of the tendency of the movement towards Rome. 
Among Poole's other publications are some works of church history, especially two studies of St Cyprian. He was also a writer of popular works of history and historical fiction, such as 'A History of England, from the First Invasion by the Romans to the Accession of Queen Victoria' (2 vols., 1844-5), 'The Exile's Return, or, A Cat's Journey from Glasgow to Edinburgh: a Tale for Children' (1837), and 'Sir Raoul de Broc and his Son Tristram: a Tale of the Twelfth Century' (1849). He also published a number of sermons and addresses. Poole published few works after 1850, and died at Winwick rectory on 25 September 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 22514


Poole, Jacob (1774-1827), antiquary, was born at Growtown, co. Wexford, on 11 February 1774, the son of Joseph Poole (1731-1800), farmer, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Jacob Martin of Aghfad, co. Wexford. His parents were members of the Society of Friends, and he was seventh in descent from Thomas and Catherine Poole of Dortrope, Northamptonshire. Their son, Richard Poole, came to Ireland with the parliamentary army in 1649, became a Quaker, was imprisoned for his religion at Wexford and Waterford, and died in Wexford gaol, to which he was committed for refusing to pay tithe in 1665. Jacob Poole succeeded to the family estate of Growtown, in the parish of Taghmon, in 1800, and farmed his own land. On 13 May 1813 he married Mary, daughter of Thomas and Deborah Sparrow of Holmstown, co. Wexford; they had three sons and three daughters. 
Poole studied the customs and language of the baronies of Bargy and Forth; his estate lay on the edge of the former. The inhabitants used to speak an old English dialect, dating from the Anglo-Norman invasion of the country, and he collected the words and phrases of this expiring language from his tenants and labourers. This collection was edited by the dialectologist William Barnes from the original manuscript obtained from R. D. Webb, and was published in 1867 as 'A Glossary, with Some Pieces of Verse, of the Old Dialect of the English Colony in the Baronies of Forth and Bargy'. The glossary, amplified from other sources, contains about 1500 words, noted with great fidelity. The dialect was more or less extinct by 1840, and this glossary, with a few words in Holinshed and some fragments of verse, is its sole authentic memorial. Poole produced his glossary and a further vocabulary or gazetteer of the local proper names in the last five years of his life. He died on 20 November 1827, presumably at Growtown, and was buried in the graveyard of the Society of Friends at Forest, co. Wexford. Richard Davis Webb, his nephew, who had known and admired him, published a poem in Poole's memory, 'The Mountain of Forth' (1867); it was owing to Webb's exertions that the glossary was published. 


@@@@@


doc= 22515


Poole, John (1785/6-1872), playwright and writer, was deliberately vague concerning his early life, his 'Notes for a memoir' (1831), published in the 'New Monthly Magazine', revealing no more than the fuller 'Sketches and Recollections' (1835). 
Poole's reputation as a theatrical wit was established by the publication of his 'Hamlet Travestie' in 1810. The characteristic method of this three-act version is to intersperse Shakespeare's familiar lines with Regency colloquialisms, locking the two styles together in a sequence of doggerel rhyming couplets. A two-act version was selected by the low comedian John Liston for his Drury Lane benefit on 17 June 1813. Charles Mathews the elder played a comic Hamlet and Liston played Ophelia. It was the first of eight collaborations between playwright and actor. Like any jobbing dramatist of the period, Poole was adept at supplying vehicles for leading performers. The names of the characters Liston played for Poole (Tristram Sappy in 'Deaf as a Post', Van Dunder in ''Twould Puzzle a Conjuror', Simon Pengander in ''Twixt the Cup and the Lip', Von Noodle in 'The Young Hopefuls') fairly indicate the nature of the relationship, which reached its high point when Liston played the title role in 'Paul Pry', which opened at the Haymarket on 13 September 1825. 'Go where you would 40 years ago', noted 'The Times' on 31 August 1866, 'you could not, by any means, avoid 'Paul Pry'.' It was, perhaps, the most popular single piece on the London stage since 'The Beggar's Opera' in 1728. 
Sadly, Poole blamed Liston for the failure of 'The Young Hopefuls' at the Olympic on 15 March 1832, and refused to write for him again. Poole had a reputation for quarrelsomeness, and his witticisms often had a vindictive edge, but his contributions were welcomed at dinner tables and by magazine editors for more than thirty years, until, in 1845, he subsided into sudden literary silence. A portrait frontispiece to 'Sketches and Recollections' shows a handsome, clean-cut face, well suiting his evident status as a society gentleman. During his prosperous years he was prominent in the Garrick Club, where he displayed a talent for making enemies. The actor William Macready, a sensitive victim of his gibes, called Poole 'that very wretched creature' ('Diaries', 1.385), and yet Poole counted Macready among his friends. There were too few of these, and when in 1845 Poole found himself, for whatever reason, unable to write, he became dependent on the kindness of the three men most loyal to him, Thomas Noon Talfourd, John Forster, and Charles Dickens. Together they negotiated for him grants of $80 and $50 from the Royal Literary Fund in 1846 and 1849, and in 1847 Dickens donated a part of the proceeds from his amateur theatrical 'celebrity' performances at Liverpool and Manchester to the impoverished playwright. 
Perhaps in the belief that he could live more cheaply there, Poole had taken up residence in Paris in 1846. Dickens saw him there in June 1850, and, shocked by his severe physical deterioration, wrote to the prime minister on 18 December 1850, pleading that Poole be given a civil-list pension. At the age of sixty-four, Dickens explained, Poole was in a 'prematurely shattered state', virtually unable to write even a simple sentence, his hands shaking and his whole body 'trembling and staggering over a small wood fire' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 6.239-40). Within a week Lord John Russell announced the award of a pension of $100 per year. The pension sustained Poole for the rest of his long life. From Paris in 1853, Dickens reported that he 'looks quite fresh and well -- and is, if possible, more disagreeable than ever' (ibid., 7.164). The recovery was partial, although Poole's much observed eccentricities may have owed something to the taste for French brandy that the pension allowed him to indulge. (He was, for example, seen to insert a pinch of snuff into the marble nostril of Mlle Clairon's bust at the Comedie Francaise.) Towards the end of his life Poole returned to London. He died at his home at 67 Highgate Road, Kentish Town, on 4 February 1872, and was buried in Highgate cemetery on 10 February. 
Poole never married: 'I doubt it may be but a rusty instrument for want of use, the Pooleish heart', wrote Dickens in 1846 (4.686). He was the author of some forty now forgotten plays, but his 'Hamlet Travestie' was the witty model for its several successors, and 'Paul Pry' has the distinction of adding the catchphrase 'I hope I don't intrude' to the comic discourse of at least two generations. He capitalized on the play's success in a long series of humorous essays, brought together in 'Paul Pry's Journal of a Residence at Little Pedlington' (1836), 'Paul Pry's Delicate Attentions' (1837), and 'Little Pedlington and the Pedlingtonians' (1839), which still provide lively insight into a period's taste in humour. 


@@@@@


doc= 22516


Poole, Jonas (bap. 1566, d. 1612), sea captain, was baptized at St Botolph, Aldgate, London, on 8 January 1566, the son of William Poole and Katherine Fullett. William Poole, a naval captain, had taken part in the assault on the groyne at Corunna on 24 April 1589. He and his wife brought up five sons to nautical careers, notably Richard, a Trinity House pilot ('fl'. 1561-1630), and Jonas. 
Jonas Poole, having become a proficient seaman, volunteered to learn about commercial whaling and exploration. On 10 April 1603 he joined the 'Grace' (30 tons) under Stephen Bennett after she had been refitted at the expense of Sir Thomas Cherry, governor of the Muscovy Company, to sail for Archangel. Their plan was to use the return voyage to check Dutch claims to have found islands to the north-west of the Kola River at about 80 degree N. Poole and Bennett returned to London with confirmation of the Dutch discovery on 10 September 1603. Under Bennett, who came to live at Tower Wharf, Poole returned to Svalbard five more times before 1609. His navigational and descriptive skills thus became known to the governor of the Muscovy Company and to Sir Thomas Smythe, well before he took sail for Smythe and the Virginia Company with the first colonists bound for Jamestown in 1607. That year Smythe displaced Sir Thomas Cherry as governor of the Muscovy Company, amid recriminations over Cherry's private trade, assuring Poole of annual commercial commissions to return to Arctic waters. Poole's 'Relations' (later published by Purchas) reveal that he sailed from Blackwall to exploit new walrus and whaling grounds every year from 1603 to 1612 except in 1607. Poole's summary of all his exploratory voyages before 1610 was given to Richard Hakluyt late in 1610, probably with a lost account of the Jamestown colony. He also records locating exploitable lead deposits, bringing home samples of galena from Bjornoya in Svalbard and laying formal claim to and naming his own discovery Cherrie Island after Sir Francis Cherry. 
Samuel Purchas published several of Poole's journals in 'His Pilgrimes' (London, 1625, vol. 3, pp. 556-67). They reveal he was made master of a pinnace in 1606 and then of the ship 'Lioness' in 1609. Although 31 tons of whale oil was gleaned on the 1608 voyage, a loss of $1000 was later declared. Poole details the abundance of 'morses' or walruses and a steady increase in the numbers killed and rendered into saleable products. Another shorter account (Purchas, 3.464-6) shows that in 1609 Poole brought back two polar bear cubs which were kept at the Paris Garden in London. Although Purchas follows Henry Hudson and Thomas Edge in renaming some of Jonas Poole's earlier landfalls, Poole's dramatic accounts of the fauna of those shores agree with a detailed map showing these discoveries and vignettes of the onshore tryworks updated to 1616 by Edge. That map, at pages 472-3 of Purchas's text, shows Svalbard (not Greenland as it states) with Hakluyt Headland (on Amsterdam Island) and waters up to 80 degree N by Purchas Plus Ultra and Purchas Point (Zeeland Bay). In March 1610 Poole took command of the 'Amitie' (70 tons) on behalf of the Muscovy Company, writing a lively account of the walrus caught and rendered into oil and of the narwhal horn taken there (ibid., 3.699-707). The Muscovy Company's commissions of 31 March 1611 reveal Poole as 'Grand Pilot of the expedition' taking charge of the 'Elizabeth' of Dover (60 tons) with Stephen Bennett as his master and six experienced Biscayan harpooners in his crew (ibid.). Edge would take overall charge of the fleet of four ships from the ill-fated 'Lady Margaret' of London. To Poole's consternation the master of another ship in his fleet of 1609, Mr Woodcock, was seen off Svalbard in 1611 in command of a whaler from San Sebastian; Purchas adds that on his return to London in 1612 Woodcock was gaoled in the Gatehouse and the Tower for sixteen months. Poole's account, 'My voyage of discovery to Greenland and towards the west of it' was supplemented with a passage written by his brother Randolph (ibid., 3.712-13). In 1611 Poole had sailed as far as an ice field just beyond 80 degree N, noting the presence there of polar bears, deer, and white Arctic foxes, and many species of seabirds, whales, grampuses (sea lions) and morses. On Cherry Island Poole suffered a broken skull and collar bones while transhipping his own cargo of fat hides and walrus ivory out of the 'Elizabeth''s hold before lading the higher value whale oil rendered from the catches of the abandoned wreck, 'Mary Margaret'. Edge later contracted with the master of a rival whaler, the 'Hopewell of Hull', to bring home the injured Poole plus his cargo of 21 tons of whale oil, 5 hogsheads of walrus ivory and 106 bundles of baleen. Poole was back in London by early August, recovering his health so quickly that in 1612 he sailed again for the Muscovy Company as master of the 'Sea Horse' alongside a new and bigger ship, the 'Whale', commanded by Edge. Poole's last and unfinished 'Relation' of the voyage of 1612 describes a successful voyage until they encountered ice floes north of Svalbard on 7 July 1612. His text, reproduced by Purchas (ibid., 3.713-15) reveals several rivals: a Dutch presence, Woodcock's Basque crew from San Sebastian, plus the 'Diana of London', skippered by Thomas Bustian of Wapping. An East India Company source shows that Poole's ships earned a 90 per cent profit from 17 whales rendered into 180 tons of oil at Svalbard in 1612. 
Samuel Purchas added a significant note (Purchas, 3.707) that Jonas Poole was, unusually, 'entertained by a certayne stipend' before he 'was, as I have heard, miserably and basely murthered betwixte Ratcliffe and London after his returne from this voyage'. Poole's murder in Wapping in August after the voyage of 1612 left his widow, Joanne, with no will to administer. The administration of his estate, given in November 1612 (GL, MS 9168/16, fol. 158), records that Joanne Poole, widow, of Stepney, was due after his death on 8 September just $14 8's'. 4died On 2 December 1612 John Brumbridge was acquitted of Poole's murder before the Middlesex sessions but the judge sent him back to prison without bail pending good conduct. Joanne Poole had two sons, Robert, married in St Dunstan's in 1611, and Jonas (1612-1666), who married Mary Wild at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney on 23 June 1635. Joanne lived to see a grandson, Jonas, ('bap'. 17 March 1636), who enjoyed a naval career lasting from 1652 to 1665. 


@@@@@


doc= 22517


Poole, Joshua (c.1615-c.1656), schoolmaster and author, was of obscure origins; he attended Wakefield grammar school in Yorkshire before being admitted as a sizar at Clare College, Cambridge, on 17 January 1632. He graduated BA early in 1636 and proceeded MA in 1639. It appears that he taught for some years at Dronfield grammar school near Sheffield before taking control, in 1641 or 1642, of a private school for gentlemen's sons established by Francis Atkinson in his house at Monken Hadley, near Barnet, Middlesex. In 1643 he married Atkinson's daughter, Mary. 
Influenced, like others, by the educational ideas of Comenius and by practical observation of what was lacking in the teaching methods of the day, Poole wrote a number of widely used school texts. His dissatisfaction with the prevailing method of teaching Latin before a command of English had been attained brought about his 'The English Accidence' (1646), one of the first grammars designed to facilitate the learning of Latin by way of English. His best-known work, 'The English Parnassus', published posthumously in 1657, was an aid to poetry writing, comprising lists of rhymes, epithets, and felicitous phrases alphabetically arranged. A further posthumous publication, 'Practical Rhetoric' (1663), was a formulary rhetoric based on an influential work of Erasmus. Poole died about 1656, apparently still master of the school at Monken Hadley. 


@@@@@


doc= 22518


Poole, Matthew (1624?-1679), biblical commentator, son of Francis Pole and Mary Topham, was born at York and baptized on 6 December 1626 at St Cuthbert's Church. His father was descended from the Poles or Pools of Spinkhill, Derbyshire; his mother was a daughter of Alderman Matthew Topham of York, and he had one elder and two younger sisters. He was admitted at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 2 July 1645, under the tutelage of John Worthington DD. He graduated BA at the beginning of 1649 and succeeded Anthony Tuckney DD in the sequestered rectory of St Michael-le-Querne. This parish was then in the fifth classis of the London province, under the presbyterian church government introduced a few years previously by parliament. This was Poole's only preferment. He proceeded MA in 1652, and on 14 July 1657 he was one of eleven Cambridge graduates incorporated MA at Oxford on the occasion of the visit of the university chancellor, Richard Cromwell. 
In 1654 Poole became one of the first Englishmen to publish a work attacking the opinions of the Unitarian John Biddle, in a tract entitled 'The Blasphemer Slain with the Sword of the Spirit, or, A plea for the Godhead of the Holy Spirit... Against... Biddle'. It was the first of many controversialist publications produced by Poole. In 1658 he published a scheme for a permanent fund to support the university studies of young men of promise seeking entry into the ministry. The plan was approved by John Worthington and Anthony Tuckney, and had the support also of John Arrowsmith DD, Ralph Cudworth, William Dillingham DD, and Benjamin Whichcote. The fund raised about $900, and it appears that William Sherlock, afterwards dean of St Paul's, received assistance from this fund during his studies at Peterhouse, Cambridge, until 1660, when he graduated BA. Those entrusted with administering the fund sent Poole regular reports on students interviewed and the ratings they had received in philosophy, logic, and languages. The scheme was abandoned at the Restoration. 
Another plan devised by Poole that proved stillborn was his 'Designe for registring of illustrious providences'. This was an ambitious project to co-ordinate reports of instances in which God's providence was observed, to verify the accounts and collect accounts for future publication. The idea was transported to North America and enacted by Increase Mather in the early 1680s. 
Poole was a 'jure divino' presbyterian, and probably an authorized defender of the views on ordination of the London provincial assembly as formulated by William Blackmore. In 1658 he published a work entitled 'Quo warranto, or, An Enquiry into the... Preaching of... Unordained Persons', which may have been written some years earlier, as the assembly does not seem to have met after 1655. In this tract Poole systematically refuted the arguments advanced in defence of preaching by lay persons, and maintained that the activity was the exclusive preserve of ministers. 
In 1659 Poole printed a letter to Lord Charles Fleetwood, a key figure in the government of Richard Cromwell, which was delivered to him on 13 December. In this letter he expressed his sentiments regarding the current state of national affairs. Following the Restoration, in a sermon delivered on 26 August 1660 before the lord mayor of London, Sir Thomas Aleyn, at St Paul's, Poole issued a plea for simplicity of public worship, anticipating a return to Laudian practices loathed by presbyterians. On the passing of the 'Uniformity Act' in 1662 he resigned his living rather than subscribe to the new church order, and was succeeded by R. Booker on 29 August 1662. In a work published four years later, 'Vox clamantis in deserto', he delivered his highly unfavourable view of the current ecclesiastical situation. The government of Charles II identified him as a potential troublemaker in the early years of the Restoration. Although he delivered a number of sermons during this period, Poole seems to have made no attempt to gather a congregation. He had a patrimony of $100 a year, providing him with sufficient income. He was one of those who presented to the king 'a cautious and moderate thanksgiving' for the declaration of indulgence of 15 March 1672, and who were hence offered royal bounty: Gilbert Burnet reports, on the authority of Edward Stillingfleet, that Poole received a pension of $50 a year for two years. Early in 1675 Poole participated with Richard Baxter in negotiations for comprehension, promoted by John Tillotson, which proved fruitless. According to Henry Sampson MD, Poole developed plans for a nonconformist ministry and day school at Tunbridge Wells, Kent. 
In 1666 Poole printed the first of two publications against the Roman Catholic religion. In a work entitled 'The Nullity of the Romish Faith' he defended the protestant faith from Catholic denunciations and refuted the doctrine of papal infallibility. The following year he published 'A Dialogue between a Popish Priest and an English Protestant', in which a dialogue was conducted concerning the principal points and arguments of both faiths. Unsurprisingly, the conclusions reached were distinctively unfavourable to the Roman Catholic position. This work was frequently reprinted, into the nineteenth century. Poole's wife, about whom nothing is known, died in 1668 and was buried on 11 August at St Andrews Holborn. The funeral sermon was preached by Edward Stillingfleet. 
Despite his refusal to subscribe to the Restoration church order, Poole developed amicable relations with leading ecclesiastics. It was on the suggestion of one of these, William Lloyd, ultimately bishop of Worcester, that Poole undertook the great work of his life, the 'Synopsis criticorum aliorumque sacrae scripturae interpretum', a synopsis of the critical labours of biblical commentators. He commenced his studies for the project in 1666, and took ten years to complete it. During this time he would rise at three or four in the morning, take a raw egg at eight or nine, and another at twelve, and continue at his studies until late in the afternoon. He frequently spent evenings at the house of a friend, commonly that of Henry Ashurst. Here 'he would be exceedingly but innocently merry', though he always ended the day in 'grave and serious discourse', which he ushered in with the words 'Now let us call for a reckoning' (Calamy, 15). 
The prospectus for the 'Synopsis' bore the names of eight bishops and five continental scholars, besides other divines. Simon Patrick, Tillotson, and Stillingfleet, with four laymen, acted as trustees of the funds raised by subscription for the project. A royal patent for the work was granted on 14 October 1667. The first volume had been prepared for the press when a London bookseller, Cornelius Bee, challenged the legitimacy of the project. Bee had been the publisher of the nine-volume 'Critici sacri' in 1660, a compilation of Renaissance biblical exegesis. He accused Poole of invading his own patent, by utilizing works reprinted in the 'Critici sacri', and damaging prospective sales of a mooted second edition. Poole had offered Bee a fourth share in the property of the 'Synopsis', an offer Bee declined. Both disputants printed a series of acrimonious pamphlets in defence of their case before the matter was referred to Henry Pierrepont, marquess of Dorchester, and Arthur Annesley, first earl of Anglesey. They decided in Poole's favour, granting Bee the fourth share originally offered by Poole. Four thousand copies were printed, and sold relatively quickly. The work constituted an important compendium of biblical commentary and exegesis, condensing into brief notes a great deal of study. As well as abridging texts from the 'Critici sacri', Poole also included extracts from a large number of minor treatises. He used rabbinical sources and Roman Catholic texts extensively, but as with the 'Critici sacri' little was taken from Calvin and nothing from Luther. In April 1693 the work was placed on the Roman index. The 'Synopsis' was originally produced in Latin for a scholarly audience; afterwards Poole began a smaller series of annotations in English for a broader, less educated readership. He reached 'Isaiah' 58 by the time of his death, and other scholars completed the project, published in two volumes as 'Annotations upon the Holy Bible' (1683-5). The work was frequently reprinted, into the twentieth century. 
During his depositions regarding the Popish Plot in September 1678, Titus Oates represented Poole as being singled out for assassination on account of his publications against the Roman Catholic religion. In a work published the following year, entitled 'A True Narrative of the Horrid Plot and Conspiracy of the Popish Party', Oates maintained that 'the Society in London would procure Dr Stillingfleet to be knockt ['sic'] on the head, and also Poole, the Author of 'Synopsis Criticorum', for writing some things against them' (p. 19). Poole apparently gave the report no credit, until an incident occurred late one night when he believed two men designed to kill him but desisted when they saw he had a companion. 
Poole left England in 1678, and settled in Amsterdam. He died there on 12 October 1679. An unsubstantiated suspicion was expressed that he had been poisoned. He was buried in a vault under the church belonging to the English merchants trading in Amsterdam. He left a son, who died in 1697. His portrait was engraved by R. White, and was printed in the first volume of 'Annotations upon the Holy Bible'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22519


Poole, Paul Falconer (1807-1879), history and genre painter, fourth son of James Paul Poole, a Bristol coal merchant, was born at 43 College Street, Bristol, on 28 December 1807. He was baptized Paul Fawkner Poole at St Augustine's on 22 July 1810. An elder brother, James Poole, a merchant, was mayor of Bristol in 1858-9 and chairman of the docks committee; he died aged seventy-five on 24 December 1872. Paul Falconer Poole received little general education and was largely self-taught as an artist. He received a free season ticket to the Bristol Institution's exhibitions in 1824 when he was already described as 'a young artist' (Bristol RO, proceedings of the Bristol Institution's Exhibition Rooms subcommittee, 1824). The amateur artist George Cumberland mentioned his work with enthusiasm in 1826 and two years later wrote to Sir Thomas Lawrence, president of the Royal Academy, lobbying on Poole's behalf. 
In the winter of 1828-9 Poole was sent by his father to Italy to obtain the signature of a parson that was required for the building of Holy Trinity, Hotwells. He visited the Louvre in Paris and stopped at Genoa, Milan, Florence, Rome, and Naples. This 'raw lad from the Hotwell Road with a fine strong feeling for art and nature but utterly uncultivated' (John King to John Gibbons, 8 April 1829, Gibbons papers) sent back letters to his closest artist friend, James Johnson (1803-1834), that greatly impressed the surgeon John King. Both Francis Danby and John King imply that after he returned from Italy Poole enjoyed the drawing parties organized by Bristol artists in 1829 ['see 'Bristol school of artists], and two sepia wash drawings of harem scenes (Bristol Museums and Art Gallery) come close to the exotic fantasies that William West (1801-1861) produced at the meetings at this time. In July 1829 Francis Danby visited Bristol and spent a day with Poole in Leigh Woods, which, as he reported back to his patron, John Gibbons, 'is an excellent place for painters to become acquainted, and I liked him [Poole] very much' (Francis Danby to John Gibbons, 23 July 1829, Gibbons papers). However, Danby had seen Poole's earliest exhibited works at the Bristol Institution's 1829 exhibition which were titled 'The Clarinet Player', 'The Woodman's Daughter', and 'The Drunken Fiddler', and of these Danby expressed his intense dislike, while recognizing Poole's talent. 
In November 1829 Poole moved to London and George Cumberland anticipated that he would soon surpass the Bristol genre artists Edward Bird and E. V. Rippingille 'if his modest opinion of himself does not impede his studies... you will find him very good tempered and companiable, but high in his notions, as usual, of the consequence of a Painter... His family are coal merchants and very respectable. (G. Cumberland sen. to G. Cumberland jun., 20 Nov 1829, Cumberland papers, BL, Add. MS 36513, vol. xxiii, fol. 231)' In 1830 Poole showed 'The Well: a Scene at Naples' at the Royal Academy. He received a commission from John Gibbons, and Rippingille took him to call on Sir Thomas Lawrence. 
By June 1830, however, rumours of scandal were already circulating in Bristol. It seems probable that by December of the previous year Poole had been giving guitar lessons to Francis Danby's wife, Hannah ('bap'. 1794, died 1879). Danby had just fled to Paris, ostensibly from his creditors. However, Danby's mistress, perhaps already pregnant, had probably gone to Paris with him in December; his seven children joined them in Bruges by June 1830. Poole and Hannah Danby, who was thirteen years or so his senior, may have left London before the children's departure, allowing Danby the subsequent luxury of accusing her of desertion. By early May Poole himself had left London. In June he was in north Wales, perhaps with Hannah, and in September he wrote to John Gibbons from near Birmingham. In August 1831 they visited Bristol but saw almost no one, and Bristol friends were unaware of the location of their self-imposed exile. This unhappy story adds meaning to William Bell Scott's expressive description of Poole: 'Shy, sensitive, nervous, full of large conceptions, with a pathetic sadness in his manner... possessed of a strong individuality, a man of peculiar powers of mind and vivid conceptions... a man with a strain of savage in his blood and a good hater. (Scott, 1.111)' Those 'vivid conceptions' were slow to take form and Scott's words may owe more to his memory of Poole's paintings and circumstances than of Poole's character. 
Poole initially concentrated upon the type of work for which he continues to be best-known: 'routine pieces, smiling country girls with their children posed against the rocky streams of the West Country' (Reynolds, 142). These works appear regularly in the salerooms but were seldom exhibited by Poole. They were evidently a vital and regular source of income and one obituarist described them as 'always sweet, simple and tender' ('Art Journal', 1879, 263). Today they can seem insipid, but they are mercifully lacking in Greuze's salaciousness and are impressively varied in pose and landscape setting, even if similar in format. Exhibits at the Society of British Artists from 1833 to 1835 suggest that Poole was living in Southampton, but in 1837 he once again showed at both the Royal Academy and the British Institution after a lapse of seven and six years respectively. He now gave a London address. Henceforth, Poole exhibited almost annually at the Royal Academy. 
There was, however, little in those exhibited works to prepare the viewer for the convincing dramatic power and exceptional popularity of 'Soloman Eagle Exhorting the People to Repentance, during the Plague of the Year 1665' (Sheffield Art Gallery), shown at the Royal Academy in 1843 and the following year at the British Institution (where he was not again to exhibit). Impressively, Poole followed up this success with almost equally powerful works. For example, at the Royal Academy in 1844 he showed 'The Moors Beleaguered by the Spaniards in the City of Valencia' (Wolverhampton Art Gallery) and in 1846 he showed 'The Visitation and Surrender of Syon Nunnery' (Bristol Museums and Art Gallery) and was rewarded with election as an associate of the Royal Academy. 'Arlete, a Peasant Girl of Falaise, in Normandy, First Discovered by Duke Robert le Diable' (Leicester Art Gallery) depicts six posturing and ill-proportioned girls by a wooded stream and was shown in 1848. In 1851 came 'The Goths in Italy' (Manchester City Galleries). 'The Escape of Glaucus and Ione, with the Blind Girl, Nydia, from Pompeii' illustrated Bulwer-Lytton's novel 'The Last Days of Pompeii' and was exhibited in 1860, the year of Poole's election as a full academician. 'The Athenaeum's' reviewer noted this painting's 'vague, dream-like style' and thought that 'such a picture... would have nearly the effect of opium-eating' upon the viewer ('The Athenaeum', 12 May 1860, 654). Similarly ambitious works continued to be shown and perhaps the latest in date to be in a public collection is the Tate's 'Ezekiel's Vision' exhibited in 1875 and selected by the National Gallery from Poole's studio after his death. In 1843 Poole entered the Westminster Hall competition with 'The Death of King Lear' and in 1847 he won a prize of $300 in this houses of parliament project for his cartoon of 'Edward's Generosity to the People of Calais during the Siege of 1346'. 
Poole is said to have been a tall, elegantly built man, unassuming and without pretension. In the mid-1850s he built himself a house in Haverstock Hill, but as London progressively surrounded him he moved further out to Uplands, Greenhill, Hampstead, in 1872. The landscape painter Thomas Danby, Francis and Hannah Danby's fourth son, lived with Poole for several years from 1855 and the two artists collaborated on some minor works. In 1861, following Francis Danby's death, Poole and Hannah Danby were married. Poole died at his home, Uplands, on 22 September 1879 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. Three of Hannah and Francis Danby's children, including Thomas, were legatees of Poole's will and substantial estate, and the artist John Mogford, their son-in-law, was one of Poole's executors. 
Poole's work continues to be hard to assess. His obituaries noted both his inept drawing and his feeling for colour and chiascuro: 'To Academic accuracy in his figures he never pretended, for, in the strict sense, he had had no academic training; but the dramatic instinct was strong in him, and in suggestiveness and in imagination he stood quite alone. ('Art Journal', 1879, 263)' Graham Reynolds's reassessment in 1966 referred similarly to Poole's 'uniquely personal colour sense' and found the expressions on the faces of the figures in 'The Last scene in 'Lear'' of 1858 (V&A) 'human, unforced and tragic. Here is something barbaric, which corresponds to the elemental in Shakespeare's most moving and absolute work' (Reynolds, 142-3). The showing of twenty-seven of Poole's paintings, including a dozen major works, at the Royal Academy's winter exhibition in 1884 seems to have prompted significantly little enthusiasm and it may be that his exhibition pieces will always be most enjoyed individually, as bold, personal, and deeply felt interpretations -- a welcome foil to the ponderous academic accomplishment of his contemporaries. Bristol City Museums and Art Gallery, the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, and Manchester City Galleries have examples of his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 22520


Poole, (Reginald) Stuart (1832-1895), numismatist and Egyptologist, born in London on 27 February 1832, was the younger son of Edward Richard Poole ('c'.1805-1884), bibliophile and vicar of Alvaston, Derbyshire (1846-84), and Sophia Lane Poole (1804-1891), sister of Edward William Lane. From July 1842 to October 1849 he lived with his mother and her brother in Cairo, where his education was directed by Lane and by the Revd G. S. Cautley. He began at an early age to study ancient Egypt, examining private collections in Cairo and Alexandria and twice travelling up the Nile. Before he was seventeen he contributed a series of articles to the 'Literary Gazette', which were republished in 1851 as 'Horae Aegyptiacae, or, The Chronology of Ancient Egypt', under the patronage of Algernon Percy, fourth duke of Northumberland. The duke was a trustee of the British Museum, and through his influence Poole was appointed a first-class assistant (lower section) in the department of antiquities (26 February 1852). In 1858 the museum's trustees discovered that only three printed catalogues of the coin collection existed -- the most recent dated 1826 -- and directed that a complete catalogue be made, beginning with the Greek coins, which at that time, with the Roman series, were the most valuable part of the collection. Poole, who had dealt with this series, was asked to undertake the work. When the department was divided in 1861 on the retirement of the keeper of antiquities, Edward Hawkins, Poole was assigned to the new department of coins and medals, with the more senior Samuel Birch becoming keeper of the department of oriental antiquities (which included Egyptian antiquities). Poole's career would therefore be as a numismatist, although his private interest in Egypt persisted. He was promoted to the upper section of the first class on 11 November 1865 and assistant keeper (deputy to the keeper) on 4 July 1866. Following the resignation of W. S. W. Vaux he succeeded as keeper on 29 October 1870. On 6 August 1861 he had married Eliza Christina Forlonge, daughter of William Forlonge. She survived him, as did three of their four children. 
Poole was an energetic keeper. He was the driving force in the production of British Museum catalogues of Greek coins, which still remain the standard reference set, and whose publication is the foundation-stone of modern Greek numismatics. In 1873 he published the first volume (on Italy), which was followed by three further volumes (Syria, 1878; Ptolemies, 1883; Roman Egypt, 1892). More importantly, between 1873 and 1894 (in collaboration with Barclay Head, Percy Gardner, and Warwick Wroth) he worked on and edited seventeen volumes of a total of over thirty produced during his keepership, a quite remarkable achievement. His energy was felt in other areas such as his involvement in the catalogues of Anglo-Saxon coins (1887, 1893), of Swiss coins from the Townshend collection, then in the South Kensington Museum (1878), and of the shahs of Persia (1887). Eager to make the collections generally accessible, he introduced exhibitions of electrotypes and subsequently original coins and medals in the public galleries, for which popular guides were written by his staff. 
From 1879 Poole urged the necessity of constructing a new medal room above the Lycian gallery, a project which was achieved in 1894. Outside his official work, he wrote articles on Greek, Arabic, Persian, and other coins in the 'Numismatic Chronicle' and in the 'Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature', and lectured frequently. During his keepership the collection expanded rapidly. The Wigan collection of Roman coins was purchased in 1872, although the Treasury's insistence that the museum repay its cost made it difficult to purchase other major collections which subsequently came on to the market. Poole did, however, acquire the south Indian series of Sir Walter Elliot and, by purchase and bequest from Sir Alexander Cunningham, 'the finest collection of Indian and Bactrian coins ever got together by any collector' (British Museum officers' reports, 29 Nov 1887). He successfully negotiated the transfer to the museum of the numismatic collections of the Bank of England (1877) and the India Office (1882). 
Poole's essentially amateur writings on Egyptology have endured less well than his numismatic scholarship. Some of his essays were collected in 1882 as 'Cities of Egypt'. He contributed numerous articles to Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible' (from 1860) and to the eighth and ninth editions of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. He read papers on Egyptian subjects before the Royal Asiatic Society and the Royal Society of Literature, and was an occasional reviewer in 'The Academy'. In 1869 he was sent by the museum to report on antiquities at Cyprus and also to Alexandria on the death of A. C. Harris, a trip that resulted in the purchase of the Lang collection of antiquities and coins discovered at Idalion and the Harris collection of Egyptian antiquities and papyri. In 1883-5 Poole was appointed to lecture on Greek, Egyptian, and medallic art at the Royal Academy, and in 1889 he succeeded Sir Charles Newton as Yates professor of archaeology at University College, London. His principal contribution to Egyptology came in 1882, when at her urging he joined Amelia B. Edwards in founding the Egypt Exploration Fund to promote excavation and study of ancient Egypt, after Samuel Birch had refused to become involved in this project. Poole and his wife developed a strong friendship with Miss Edwards. His involvement gave the fund the British Museum's support and some facilities, although as the fund's activities became centred round Poole's department, this led to criticisms that it was being run from Bloomsbury. 
Poole devoted most of his spare time and energy to the fund, and was its honorary secretary (1882-5) and later its vice-president (1885-95). Many of his decisions are in retrospect considered misguided, such as favouring Edouard Naville over the more meticulous archaeologist Flinders Petrie. His relations with the latter were for a time cool, after Petrie had blamed Poole for the fund's poor administration, which was largely owing to Poole's being seriously overworked. Poole's relations with Birch also deteriorated and he seems never to have overcome his disappointment at losing the oriental keepership: he deplored Birch's emphasis on Assyriology, and in 1885 wrote that he had 'blocked out the only possible Englishman who could succeed him' (Egypt Exploration Society IIIg158, 31 Dec 1885). Poole founded, in conjunction with the artist Professor Alphonse Legros, in 1885 the Society of English Medallists, in the hope of reviving the design and production of cast medals. In 1876 he was elected a correspondent of the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres of the Institut Francais and in 1880 he received the honorary degree of LLD at Cambridge. On 31 January 1893 he retired from the British Museum and in 1894 he resigned his professorship because of failing health. He died of heart disease on 8 February 1895 at his home, 2 Gledstanes Road, West Kensington. 


@@@@@


doc= 22521


Poole, Robert (1707/8-1752), physician and theological writer, about whose childhood nothing is known, completed his initial education at the Academy of Liberal Arts and Sciences in London. Nearly everything known about him comes from his own writings, and some of his early accounts describe the years he spent under Professor John Eames FRS, a theology teacher of the dissenting academy, who was especially famous for his teaching of science. Poole also attended the lectures of Frank Nichols, professor of anatomy at Oxford, who lectured in London, and the chemistry lectures of Henry Pemberton at Gresham College, London. 
On 2 March 1738 Poole entered himself as a physician's pupil at St Thomas's Hospital, London. First he was attached to Edward Wilmot, and then, as he became more confident of his ability to take notes, he also walked the wards of the other two physicians, Abraham Hall and Joseph Letherland. He was particularly interested in the treatment prescribed for patients, and claimed he was so busy he did not have time to eat. St Thomas's made a profound impression on Poole. Under the pseudonym Theophilus Philanthropos he published 'A Physical Vade Mecum, or, Fifth Gift of Theophilus Philanthropos' (1741), a meticulous description of the hospital which listed the governors, the rules, the wards and the number of beds and fireplaces in each, all the staff and how much they were paid, and the number and methods of in-patient and outpatient admissions; the work ended with the hospital's dispensatory (only the second after Henry Banyer's 'Pharmacopoeia'), a catalogue of diseases and the medicines used, and for good measure, Poole added the dispensatories of St Bartholomew's and Guy's hospitals. Everyone who has since written about the 'Physical Vade Mecum' has commented on its great interest. 
Poole was an observant and indefatigable student of physic and midwifery, a careful taker of notes, and a hard worker. He left his home in Islington on 21 May 1741 to study midwifery in Paris, and wrote a detailed account of his time abroad. He knew no French when he arrived, but rose at five each morning for an hour's study of the language before setting off for the Hotel Dieu or La Charite hospitals. These two institutions are described and compared in detail: the staff, the wards, the teaching, and the pupils. Poole's midwifery course of eight lectures, which included demonstrations with models, cost him $1 7's'. 3died, and he also attended one difficult home delivery. In July he travelled to Rheims, where four examiners tested him in Latin on anatomy, physiology, diseases and their cure, consumption, and surgery; at the end of the day he was granted his doctor's diploma. 
However, more important to Poole than saving bodies was saving souls; by 1741 he had published five pamphlets to that end, under the name Theophilus Philanthropos. In these pamphlets, which he called 'gifts', Poole portrayed himself as vile, but he claimed that God showed love to him and that he atoned for his sins by writing. Already devout, he had a vision-like dream in which Christ called to him. The third 'gift', 'The Christian Convert' (2nd edn, 1741) had clearly caused offence; one copy had been publicly burnt in Ann's Ward at St Thomas's Hospital on 21 April 1739, and some people wanted to destroy as many further copies as they could find in other wards. Poole wrote that he had 'long been the Object of their Banter and Ridicule, Laughter and Buffoonery' (Poole, 'A Friendly Caution', preface, iv). However, he did have the support of Samuel Lessingham, the hospital's treasurer. Other themes recur in Poole's writings: the evil of swearing; that parents should not force their children to marry; that love matters more than wealth; and that precious time should not be thrown away in long courtships. Some of the 'gifts' have curious frontispieces, such as a kneeling figure with prayers from his mouth rising in strips to heaven, while hell and demons lurk below to one side. As well as upsetting his contemporaries, Poole's religious works were seen as 'revivalist' in the nineteenth century (Church, 231) and 'permeated with fanatical religiosity' in the twentieth (Berman, 791). There is no morsel of humour in any of his works -- religious, medical, or travel. 
Although George Whitfield was his 'much esteem'd Friend' (Poole, 'A Journey', 92), Poole, a member of the Church of England, disclaimed being a Methodist. Many matters caused him upset in Paris in the summer of 1741: the casual way religion was treated by the resident Church of England clergyman, Mr Thompson; the banker's charges and the rate of exchange; the frequent processions of the host through the street; the junketings on Sundays after mass; and 'loose' dressing by women. However, Poole did have some like-minded St Thomas's Hospital friends in Paris. Dismayed by Mr Thompson, Poole regularly attended the sermons of a noted Jesuit preacher, and his antagonism to the Catholic church became less strident. 
Poole clearly had independent means. After returning to London he became the first physician elected to the new Middlesex Infirmary (later the Middlesex Hospital), in 1746, but he resigned in the same year. Immediately he became physician to the new Smallpox Hospital, established on 26 September 1746. He resigned two years later, when he went abroad again, this time to Gibraltar and the West Indies. By then Poole was almost certainly married, and his reason for going to the West Indies may well have been to find out if it was a suitable place to settle. The apprehensive 'companion of [his] life' (Poole, 'Beneficent Bee', 297) came to say goodbye to him at Greenwich. In Gibraltar he took care to visit both the sailors' and soldiers' hospitals, and found the sailors' institution much the better. In the West Indies he went first to Barbados, and then to ten other islands. 
By this time Poole's religious fervour and his moral criticisms of swearing and scanty clothing had become more moderate. Poole explored the islands and described at length the weather -- so hot that men did not wear wigs and women had discarded their hoops; the cost of goods; and the geography, vegetation, and agriculture. He deplored what he considered to be some unjustifiably harsh treatment of slaves, but he did not criticize slavery as such. Of all the islands, Barbados appealed to him the most, though Tortola with its Quaker inhabitants pleased him greatly. He recounted that he was always nervous when having to introduce himself at each new place, but seems to have managed well. Poole's journal ends in Santa Cruz, where he became seriously ill, probably with malaria. He returned to Britain, where he lived until his death at the end of May or the beginning of June 1752. He was buried on 3 June in the churchyard of St Mary's, Islington, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 22522


Poole, Sophia Lane (1804-1891), travel writer, was the youngest child of Theophilus Lane (died 1814), prebendary of Withington Parva, and Sophia Gardiner. She was born at Hereford on 16 January 1804. Her elder brothers were Richard James Lane, the engraver, and Edward William Lane, the Egyptian scholar, with whom her life was particularly linked. In 1829 she married Edward Richard Poole, clergyman and miscellaneous writer, but from 1842 lived apart from him -- drink and debt, resulting from his over-extravagant expenditure on books, have been suggested as the explanation for their separation. In 1842 Sophia Poole and her two sons accompanied her brother Edward to Egypt, and lived in Cairo for seven years. She published an account of her experiences in 'The Englishwoman in Egypt' in Knight's weekly volumes (1844 and 1846). The book was the first in English to describe from direct observation the life of Egyptian women, whose domestic life was still very largely unaffected by western influences. It created something of a sensation when readers learnt that she had dressed in Turkish trousers, taken Turkish baths with the local people and, particularly, visited some of the harems of Mehmet Ali's family -- although it was far from salacious, not least as it was tempered by Lane's notes and revised by him. After her return to England with her brother in 1849, she collaborated with her younger son, Reginald Stuart Poole, in a series of descriptions of Francis Frith's 'Photographic Views of Egypt, Sinai, and Palestine' (1860-61). After the early education of her children she lived in Worthing, devoting herself to her brother Edward, until his death in 1876, and to the children of her elder son, Stanley, who were left orphaned on his death in 1867. Her last years were spent in her younger son's house at the British Museum, where she died on 6 May 1891. 
Sophia Poole's elder son, 


@@@@@


doc= 22523


Poole, Thomas (1766-1837), tanner and friend of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, was born on 14 November 1766 in Nether Stowey, Somerset, and baptized there on 12 December, the second child of Thomas Poole (died 1795) and Elizabeth Buller (died 1801). Of six children born to his parents, only Tom Poole, his eldest sister Sarah (later the wife of Thomas King, a Bristol merchant), and his brother Richard survived to adult life. Tom Poole's father, a prosperous tanner and farmer, was one of four able brothers whose family had long been established in the area of Nether Stowey. He discouraged his son's intellectual ambitions and denied him the education that he longed for. Instead, Tom Poole was set to work at an early age as his father's apprentice, expressing his resentment by 'ostentatious inattention' to the work of the tanyard (Mrs H. Sandford, 1.9). As a young man he studied for four or five hours a day and became proficient in Latin and French. His strength of character and practical ability also ensured that, despite his early distaste for tanning, he was soon greatly respected in his trade. 
In 1791 Poole was sent as a west country delegate to a meeting of tanners in London and by them was elected to speak to William Pitt concerning the distressed state of the tanning industry. Poole's London visit was important in shaping his radical sympathies, and on his return to Nether Stowey after an absence of several weeks his family were alarmed to find him filled with enthusiasm for the French Revolution. By 1794 the government was said to consider him 'the most dangerous person in the county of Somerset' (Mrs H. Sandford, 1.92). In reality, though he welcomed the 'glowing spirit of liberty' (ibid., 40) which the revolution seemed to represent, he was never an extreme political radical and deplored the execution of Louis XVI. 
Coleridge's first meeting with Tom Poole took place at Poole's house in Castle Street, Nether Stowey, on 18 August 1794. Coleridge, on a walking tour in Somerset with Robert Southey, was introduced by Poole's kinsman, Henry Poole of Stogursey. Coleridge's chief theme on this occasion was Pantisocracy, the plan he had developed with Southey for founding an ideal community in America. Although Poole had recently considered emigration himself, he was not persuaded by Pantisocracy. The two men nevertheless quickly established a deep and trusting friendship which was to be formative for both of them. 
Coleridge settled in Bristol early in 1795, and thereafter depended increasingly on Poole's forthright advice and practical support. Poole contributed an article on the slave trade to Coleridge's periodical 'The Watchman', and when publication ceased, with considerable losses, in May 1796, it was Poole who arranged for a group of friends to supply Coleridge with a generous annuity. At the end of the year Poole yielded reluctantly to Coleridge's persuasion by finding him a cottage in Lime Street, Nether Stowey, where Coleridge, with his wife Sara and infant son Hartley, took up residence on 1 January 1797. In July it was Poole as well who arranged for William and Dorothy Wordsworth to become tenants of Alfoxden, a mansion 3 miles west of Nether Stowey. By that means was achieved the conjunction of personalities which led to the publication in the following year of 'Lyrical Ballads'. 
Poole quickly became known to the wider circle associated with Coleridge and Wordsworth. The radical orator John Thelwall, visiting Alfoxden in July 1797, called him 'Arcadian Pool' (Thelwall, 'Lines written at Bridgewater, in Somersetshire'), and others, including Charles Lamb and William Hazlitt, also met and admired him. It was probably in 1797 that both Poole and Coleridge came to know the Wedgwood brothers, Thomas and Josiah, and at some time in 1799 that Poole was first introduced to Humphry Davy, then newly appointed as superintendent of the Pneumatic Institution in Bristol. Poole's affectionate friendship with Davy continued until the latter's death in 1829. 
Tom Poole's stories of Somerset life and customs contributed to the poetry of Wordsworth in particular. Poole's account of John Walford, a charcoal burner hanged in 1789 for murdering his wife, was the basis of Wordsworth's unfinished poem 'A Somersetshire Tragedy' (destroyed in 1931). Poole was also a source for 'The Idiot Boy' and, it seems likely, 'The Last of the Flock'. His garden in Nether Stowey was the setting for Coleridge's poem 'This Lime-Tree Bower my Prison', and it was for Poole that Coleridge wrote his resonant autobiographical letters, completed during 1797-8. 
In August 1797, when fears of a French invasion were at their height, the activities in Somerset of Coleridge, Wordsworth, and Poole came under Home Office scrutiny. The government agent who was sent to investigate described Poole as 'a most Violent Member of the Corresponding Society and a strenuous supporter of Its friends', reporting also that Poole had the 'intire command' of 150 poor men belonging to the Nether Stowey Benefit Club (Roe, 260-61). The report mixed exaggeration and inaccuracy (Poole never belonged to the London Corresponding Society) but demonstrated the degree of suspicion which he was now arousing. 
During Coleridge's absence in Germany, from September 1798 to July 1799, Poole took responsibility for Coleridge's family and gave his sometimes inept support to Sara Coleridge when her second child, Berkeley, was taken ill and died. Poole bitterly regretted Coleridge's decision to settle at Keswick in July 1800, attributing it to Coleridge's uncritical subservience to Wordsworth. Thereafter the two men continued to correspond intermittently, though with something less than their former openness, and in October 1800 Coleridge used three essays by Poole, entitled 'Monopolists and farmers', in a series which appeared in the 'Morning Post' ('Works', ed. Erdman, 1.243-4; 3.40-58). 
Later meetings were few. Coleridge visited Poole at Nether Stowey in 1801-2 and 1803, and stayed for three months during the summer of 1807. Other members of the family also visited, including, in 1817, Hartley Coleridge, of whom Poole was consistently supportive. Coleridge and Poole met for the last time in London during May 1834, a few weeks before Coleridge's death. By then any differences between them had been forgotten. As Coleridge wrote to Poole in 1813, following one in a series of minor disagreements, mostly about money, 'Love so deep & so domesticated with the whole Being, as mine was to you, can never cease 'to be'' ('Collected Letters', ed. Griggs, 3.435). 
Poole grew prosperous not only as a tanner but also as the farmer of '195 Acres of good land... on which I endeavour to exhibit the best husbandry I can' (Mrs H. Sandford, 2.147). After his mother's death in 1801 Poole gave up management of his tanning business to his assistant Thomas Ward, and in 1802 travelled extensively in Europe, visiting Tom Paine in Paris. In the same year he met John Rickman for the first time, and at Rickman's suggestion took responsibility during 1804 for compiling the official abstract of returns made under 43 George III, c. 144, an act concerning the maintenance of the poor. Poole was an energetic justice of the peace for Somerset from 1814 until his death, and also took a lifelong interest in the welfare of local people. He established Nether Stowey's Book Society in 1793, its Female Friendly Society in 1807, and its elementary school in 1812-13. Thomas De Quincey, who met Poole in 1807, wrote of him that he had 'so entirely dedicated himself to the service of his humble fellow countrymen... that for many miles around he was the general arbiter of their disputes, the guide and counsellor of their daily lives' (De Quincey, 35). His friends, while acknowledging his attractive personality and great generosity of heart, were not blind to his faults, which included a short temper and a sometimes bombastic manner. Southey, a frequent visitor to Nether Stowey, wrote that Poole 'would at times come clodhopping over one's feelings' and that 'he was never content to be your friend, but he must be your saviour' (Crosse, 1.95). 
Poole at the age of forty was, in De Quincey's description, 'a stout plain-looking farmer' (De Quincey, 35). His voice, ruined by excessive snuff-taking, remained proudly expressive of his Somerset origins throughout his life. There are three known portraits, of which one by Thomas Barber of Nottingham, showing a balding, thick-set man in middle age, was twice engraved. 
Tom Poole died suddenly of pleurisy at Nether Stowey on 8 September 1837, never having completed the memoir of Coleridge he was being urged to write in his final years. Representatives of west Somerset's leading gentry families were pall bearers at his funeral on 15 September. He was buried next to his parents in the churchyard of St Mary's Church, Nether Stowey, and a memorial to him, recording his friendships and his great qualities, was erected in the church itself. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 22524


Poor, Herbert (d. 1217), bishop of Salisbury, was almost certainly the son of Richard of Ilchester, bishop of Winchester (died 1188). Richard Poor (d. 1237), who succeeded him as bishop of Salisbury, was his younger brother. It is unlikely that he was connected with Roger Poor, son of Roger of Salisbury (died 1139). 
Herbert Poor was probably employed under his father in the exchequer, but the first mention of him is in 1167 as a canon of Lincoln Cathedral. He is most probably also to be identified with the Herbert who occurs as archdeacon of Northampton in 1174-5. He was one of the three archdeacons of Canterbury appointed by Archbishop Richard (died 1184) within the space of three months in 1175, one of whom, Savaric, was probably appointed before Herbert and soon exchanged the archdeaconry for that of Northampton, in which he succeeded Poor. After 1175 Poor occurs as sole archdeacon of Canterbury until his election as bishop of Salisbury in 1194. On 11 December 1183 Poor, in his capacity as archdeacon of Canterbury, enthroned Walter de Coutances (died 1207) as bishop of Lincoln. In July 1184 he was one of the commissioners sent by Henry II to the monks of Christ Church, Canterbury, to warn them to prepare for the election of an archbishop. From 1185 to 1188 he had custody of the see of Salisbury and he was a canon of Salisbury and of Wells, as well as of Lincoln. In May 1186 the chapter of Lincoln elected him as their bishop, but Henry II refused his consent. A little later the majority of the canons of Salisbury, in their turn, chose Herbert Poor as bishop, and on 14 September 1186 the king gave his assent; but the minority appealed to the pope, on the ground that Poor was the son of a concubine, and the election came to naught. On 29 September 1186 Poor enthroned his successful rival, Hugh (died 1200), as bishop of Lincoln. According to Roger of Howden, in May 1193 he appealed to the pope against the election of Hubert Walter (died 1205) as archbishop, on the ground that the king was in captivity and the English bishops were not present at the election. 
In 1194 the canons of Salisbury, having no dean, unanimously elected Herbert Poor as their bishop. The election was confirmed by Archbishop Hubert on 29 April. Herbert was at this time only in deacon's orders, but on 4 June he was ordained priest, and on 5 June was consecrated by Hubert in St Katherine's Chapel at Westminster. He was enthroned at Salisbury on 12 June. Between 1190 and 1197 Poor was occasionally one of the justices of the bench at Westminster. On 16 June 1196 he was at Rouen with Walter de Coutances. At the council of Oxford in December 1197, when Hubert Walter demanded in the king's name a force of 300 knights to serve for a year overseas, or the monetary equivalent, Herbert supported Hugh of Lincoln in his successful resistance to the demand. For his share on this occasion Poor was, by Richard's orders, deprived of his possessions and obliged in February 1198 to cross over to Normandy, where, on payment of a heavy fine, he was reconciled to the king. He returned to England on 8 June. A letter from Peter of Blois to Herbert consoling him on his afflictions apparently belongs to this period. Poor was present at the coronation of John on 27 May 1199, and was with the king in Normandy in September and October. He was there again with John in May and early June 1200, and attended Hubert Walter's provincial council at Westminster, which opened on 19 September. Possibly at about this time he was one of the papal delegates who sat at Westminster to effect a reconciliation between Archbishop Geoffrey and the chapter of York, and on 22 November was at Lincoln when the king of Scots did homage to John. On 14 December 1201 he was summoned to join the king in Normandy, but had returned to England by June 1202 when he ordained a vicarage for the church of Waltham (St Lawrence), Berkshire, by a charter whose witnesses appear to have been essentially the bishop's 'familia' -- as well as four 'magistri' and four chaplains, they included two stewards, a butler, a clerk, a cook, and a marshal. 
Herbert Poor seems to have been on quite good terms with the king in 1204-5, witnessing royal charters in England fairly frequently and receiving a gift of ten tuns of wine in January 1205. In 1208, although his lands were seized by the crown immediately after the interdict was proclaimed, the king ordered their restoration on 10 April, probably for a proffer of 500 marks. Poor appears to have remained in England until November 1209, when John's excommunication forced him into exile. Unlike most bishops, Herbert and Gilbert Glanville of Rochester (died 1214) sought refuge in Scotland and, according to the Dunstable annals, stayed there with John's permission. It has accordingly been thought that both bishops may have accompanied John in his successful campaign against King William of Scotland in July 1209, and remained in the north until entering Scotland in November. In January 1209 the two bishops had been commissioned by the pope to supervise his order to John to restore Queen Berengaria's dower lands, and in May 1210, in the face of the king's delays, they were instructed to publish an interdict on these lands. In 1212 the papal legate Pandulf appointed them to release the Scots from their fealty and homage to John. There is no evidence that these instructions were carried out, and the fact that Herbert's temporalities, seized by the crown in 1210, were restored to his steward on 13 December 1212, seven months before the formal restitution to the bishop on 18 July 1213, suggests that Poor did not actively oppose John during the interdict. While in Scotland Poor lived at Kelso until his return to England in 1213. 
After this there is no reference of importance to Poor. He died in 1217, probably on 7 January, the date when his obit was observed at Salisbury. He was buried at Wilton. Herbert is noteworthy in the history of the see of Salisbury for having formulated the plan of removing it from Old Sarum to a more suitable site two miles to the south. However, although he obtained the sanction of Richard I, he lacked the energy and confidence to implement his design, which was further delayed by the troubles of the next reign. It was eventually carried out by his brother and successor, Richard Poor. 


@@@@@


doc= 22525


Poor, Richard (d. 1237), bishop of Salisbury, was the illegitimate son of Richard of Ilchester, sometimes called Le Poer, bishop of Winchester (died 1188). His mother's name is not recorded, nor is it known exactly when he was born. He was granted papal dispensation to hold a plurality of benefices despite his illegitimacy in 1206, but he had gained ecclesiastical preferment by the 1190s, and a date of birth in the mid-twelfth century seems probable. His brother, Herbert Poor, also rose in the church to the rank of bishop, at Salisbury. Both brothers were left land by their father, in Winchester, Hampshire, and in London. Richard attended the University of Paris, where he was a pupil of Stephen Langton, afterwards archbishop of Canterbury (died 1226). Later, as an exile in France during the interdict, with Hugh of Wells, bishop of Lincoln (died 1235), and Jocelin of Wells, bishop of Bath (died 1242), he returned to Paris, where he taught theology until his return to England. 
Richard Poor was a member of a curial family; his father was first recorded in the royal service in 1156 and worked both as a royal justice and within the exchequer. Richard had been appointed as one of the executors of King John, although this was probably an honorary position, and like his father he acted as a justice itinerant, visiting Oxfordshire, Berkshire, and Hampshire in 1218-19. However, he was most active at court between 1223 and 1232, in the period of Hubert de Burgh's rise to power and Archbishop Stephen Langton's prominence. In 1223 Peter des Roches (died 1238), Ranulf (III), earl of Chester (died 1232), and Falkes de Breaute (died 1226) fell from power, and Hubert de Burgh (died 1243), Richard Poor, and Bishop Jocelin of Bath, with the support of Langton, formed what was in practice a new government. These four men were responsible for the deprivation of Breaute and many others who in 1223 refused to accept papal letters declaring the young Henry III able to control the government of the kingdom and granting him control of his castles and the royal seal. In 1224 it was Poor who replaced Peter des Roches as castellan of Winchester, Portchester, and Southampton. The same four men brought about a reconciliation between the king and his opponents later that year, possibly to prevent the dispatch of a papal envoy to England. In 1225 Poor was given responsibility for one of the two special exchequers set up to administer that year's fifteenth on movables. In 1228, when he became bishop of Durham, Richard Poor withdrew from the court. However, he was affected by the events of 1232-4, the years when Peter des Roches's influence revived following the disgrace of Hubert de Burgh. In December 1232 Poor and the bishop of Bath were questioned concerning the collection of the fifteenth of 1225, as part of an offensive against Walter Mauclerc's administration of the treasury, and from then until February 1233 both men worked in the exchequer. But thereafter Poor was rarely at court, being forced, like many of his episcopal colleagues, into opposition by des Roches's conduct of affairs. 
It was as a churchman, however, not a courtier that Richard Poor made his greatest mark. His rise within the church was swift, aided by the power and influence of his relatives. After his brother Herbert was made bishop of Salisbury in 1194, Richard was appointed archdeacon of Dorset, and in 1197 dean of Salisbury, a post he held until his election to the see of Chichester. During this period he held the prebend of Charminster and Bere. Attempts to elect him bishop of Winchester in 1205, at the urging of his father's connections, and bishop of Durham in 1213, both failed. Matthew Paris described Poor as a man of both unparalleled piety and profound learning, and during these years he did not neglect his intellectual gifts. He was responsible for the completion of Osmund's 'Institutio', which set out the duties and privileges of senior members of the cathedral chapter at Salisbury. It is also probable that he compiled the 'Ordinale', which summarized custom concerning the conduct of services and provided a general framework for the use of specific service books. He followed this, about 1210, with the 'Consuetudinarium', which provided both additions to, and a commentary upon, the 'Institutio', summarizing procedural custom at Salisbury. The 'Ordinale' and the 'Consuetudinarium' together made up a guide to the use of Sarum, that form of services whose use became widespread in the English church during the thirteenth century, and which was to remain influential. 
In 1215 Richard Poor was at last raised to the episcopate, being elected bishop of Chichester early in January and consecrated at Reading on the 25th. His time there was brief, however, as two years later, on 9 May 1217, he was granted custody of the bishopric of Salisbury at the instigation of Guala, the papal legate, although he was still described as bishop of Chichester on 28 May. He held the temporalities of the see of Salisbury by 27 June, when he received royal confirmation of his election. His work at Salisbury demonstrates his concern for church reform (one shared by many bishops of his day), and his wide-ranging abilities and interests. He was an active legislator, issuing a detailed set of statutes for Abingdon Abbey in 1219, concerning the status and rents of the servants of the obedientiaries there, as well as what were probably the earliest English diocesan statutes. These statutes, probably first issued between 1217 and 1219, and later amplified, display a remarkable clarity of thought and demonstrate the bishop's theological training, as well as his interest in the cure of souls, particularly the training and conduct of priests, and in the importance of penance. None of this is surprising in a man trained in Paris, who had attended the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215, and who, before his rise to the episcopate, had urged Robert of Flamborough, a canon of St Victor at Paris, to write his penitential. Poor's statutes were to influence diocesan statutes as far afield as Canterbury and York. The bishop also ordered an inventory of all church property, an important step towards the division of episcopal and chapter property. 
Richard Poor was also the prime motivator behind the ambitious rebuilding of Salisbury Cathedral in the mid-thirteenth century. The old cathedral, at Old Sarum, was in a poor position, too near to the royal castle, and both small and cramped. Permission was sought, and received, from Pope Honorius III ('r'. 1216-27) to move it two miles to the south in 1217, and the foundation stone was laid in 1220 by Richard Poor himself. The east end was dedicated in 1225, but the cathedral was not consecrated until 1258, more than twenty years after Poor's death, and the roof was not completed until 1266. This cathedral is remarkable, distinctive in style from other cathedrals of the same date, lacking the extravagant ornamentation of, for example, the work at Lincoln. Its unusual design reflects the influence of Bishop Poor, in that its simplicity has been linked to the reform movement of which he was so great an exponent, and to the French Gothic which his time abroad would have given him the opportunity to examine. Possibly, too, the bishop was affected by the well-known views of the Parisian master, Peter the Chanter, on extravagant buildings, views that one of Peter's eminent pupils, Stephen Langton, may well have expounded. The ordered layout of the floor plan can be linked to the processions of the use of Sarum, and the terminology of the use is also reflected in the iconography of the lady chapel. These matters must have been of great importance to the author of the 'Ordinale' and the 'Consuetudinarium'. 
The cathedral's move seems to have encouraged interest in the cathedral's past, and at a time when the cults of so many local saints were being promoted it is unsurprising that attempts were made in the last years of Poor's episcopate to have Osmund, the first bishop of Salisbury (died 1099), canonized. In 1226 the bishop had had the bodies of Osmund, Roger (died 1139), and Jocelin (died 1184) -- the first three bishops of Salisbury -- moved to the new cathedral. The chapter at Salisbury can hardly have been unaware of the translation of several saints in the decade before this. Richard Poor himself had been present at the translation of St Wulfstan at Worcester in 1218, and, more importantly, at the translation of St Thomas of Canterbury in 1220, when he had been the only member of the episcopate to aid his former tutor, Archbishop Langton, in the secret examination of the saint's body. Two other canons of Salisbury had been central in the organization of this ceremony; indeed, one of them, Master Elias of Dereham (died 1245), may have designed Becket's shrine. In 1228 Pope Gregory IX ('r'. 1227-41) was petitioned for Osmund's canonization, and Poor's letters show that he was anxious to urge the matter forwards, but this was to no avail. Osmund was not canonized until 1457, although his tomb did in the meantime become a centre for popular devotion. 
In the same year in which the bishop and chapter were petitioning the pope so urgently Poor was again translated, this time to the see of Durham. He was elected on 9 May 1228 and received papal confirmation of his translation five days later, on 14 May. He received the temporalities of the see on 22 July, and was enthroned on 4 September of the same year. At Durham he pursued the interests that he had demonstrated at Salisbury. His earlier statutes were reissued with suitable amendments, for example omitting the clause concerning bequests to the cathedral church at Salisbury, and he also maintained his interest in architecture, drawing up plans for the chapel of the nine altars at Durham, a project not undertaken until 1242, after his death, but one that shows clearly the influence of the work at Salisbury. It was his relationship with the cathedral chapter, however, that overshadowed his years at Durham. At his arrival he found a monastic chapter that had been involved in a bitter conflict with its previous prelate, Richard Marsh, concerning the powers of the bishop in respect to the cathedral priory. As recently as 1220-23 the monks of Durham had appealed to the papal court, disputing the bishop's right to undertake a visitation of the priory. 
Almost immediately upon his arrival Poor took an important step towards resolving this quarrel, drawing up the first written agreement on the matter, 'Le convenit', in 1228. In this extremely detailed document the monks were granted free election of their prior, subject to canonical legality and episcopal approval, a greater role in the administration of the affairs of the church, and more jurisdictional power in the liberty of Durham. The prior was given the right to stand next to the bishop, on his right, in the choir, and was also granted a court, free of certain episcopal customs. The monks gained the right of presentation to several churches and the custody of their churches 'sede vacante'. The prior could appoint and dismiss all monastic officials, and the monks were to be free of procuration fees, and were granted certain rights in respect to the correction of faults discovered by the bishop during his visitation. Professions made to the prior were to be confirmed without delay by the bishop. The respective interests of the bishop and the prior in judicial pleas, the profits of justice, the spoils of wrecks, woodland, and navigation on the River Tees were defined, and the right of way over the bishop's land for water supplies was agreed. This settlement, detailed as it was, could not define all points of disagreement, and disputes over the rights of the bishop and chapter in Durham continued. Nevertheless, up to the dissolution this document remained the basis for the monastery's claims, and its existence was a remarkable achievement for a bishop with no direct experience of the particular problems of a monastic chapter. In addition Poor worked to settle other disagreements involving the chapter, for example ending a dispute between the cathedral priory and the archdeacon of Durham concerning their rights in several churches and chapels. 
Richard Poor did not only settle disputes within his own diocese. Throughout his career he seems to have enjoyed a reputation for sound judgement, which led him to be appointed on many occasions as a papal judge-delegate. He had acted in this capacity before his appointment to the episcopate, for example with the prior of Dunstable in 1214 in a dispute concerning the right of election of the abbot of Bury St Edmunds. As bishop of Chichester he was called on to act as a judge for Salisbury Cathedral, and later as bishop of Salisbury he decided numerous cases both within the diocese, for example Breamore Abbey's claim to Coldstone Wake church, and outside it, as in the quarrel between the priory and the canons of Coventry concerning the right of election of their bishop. His work continued up to his death: in 1235, together with William of Raleigh (died 1250), treasurer of Exeter and senior justice of the 'coram rege' court, he settled a dispute between the bishop of Bath and Thomas Maudut and Nicholas Avenel, knights, over a portion of a prebend of Wells Cathedral. Richard Poor died on 15 April 1237 at the manor of Tarrant Keyneston in Dorset. Despite later claims in different sources that his tomb could be found at both Durham and Salisbury, it seems that he was buried in the churchyard of Tarrant Keyneston itself, as was his wish. 


@@@@@


doc= 22526


Pope, Alexander (1688-1744), poet, was born on 21 May 1688, the son of Alexander Pope (1646-1717), linen merchant of Plough Court, Lombard Street, London, a convert to the Catholic faith probably from his time as an apprentice in Flanders, and of Edith Turner (1643-1733), daughter of a Yorkshire landed and trading family that had, for several generations, carefully trodden the borderline between Catholicism and protestantism, those of the former faith depending on those prepared -- publicly at least -- to profess the latter. 
It is probable that Alexander Pope senior married Edith Turner to secure a mother for his daughter Magdalen, with a former wife, with whom he had also had an earlier son, Alexander, who died in infancy. It was doubtless a surprise (perhaps they thought it a miracle) when Edith, aged forty-four, gave birth to a son, also to be named Alexander, in that significant year of English history which saw the invasion of William of Orange, the expulsion of the Catholic James II, and civil war in Scotland and Ireland. This son was to be the poet Pope. 
The education of the young Alexander was largely in the hands of relatives (his aunt Elizabeth Turner taught him to read and write) and Catholic priests: first, John Taverner, a family priest who was later master of the Catholic school at Twyford, Hampshire, which the young Pope attended about 1698-9, and where, according to his half-sister, he was 'whipped and ill-used' (Spence, 20). Taverner, sometimes known as Banister, employed the method (sometimes said to have been Jesuit) of teaching Latin and Greek grammar simultaneously, which Pope seemed later to approve (ibid., 15). The young Pope was subsequently at two 'little [Catholic] schools' in London, that of John Bromley, perhaps in Bloomsbury, and that of the Catholic controversialist Thomas Deane, in Marylebone (ibid., 15-17). Pope seems to have been unimpressed by the two last, though if, as is often repeated, he wrote a satire on one of his schoolmasters, it is most likely to have been on Taverner or one of his assistants at Twyford (ibid., 15). Other priests likely to have influenced Pope are William Mannock and Thomas Southcott. The former, a secular priest educated at Douai and the English College at Rome, was the elder brother of the well-known John Anselm Mannock OSB, author of 'The Poor Man's Catechism' (1752), whose manuscript works, dating back to 1717, are at Downside Abbey. William Mannock is a source in Spence's 'Anecdotes'. Southcott, head of the English Benedictines from 1718 to 1738, devoted Jacobite, admirer of Archbishop Fenelon, and prolific correspondent in the Stuart papers, seems to have been humorous, imaginative, manipulative, and a man who, apart from his intervention to get medical advice from Dr John Radcliffe when the young Pope thought himself to be dying, would write to King James III (James Stuart, the Old Pretender) in November 1722 about the effect of Pope's satire on 'the lesser tribe of Poets' (Windsor Castle, Royal Archives, Stuart papers, 64/33). It is probable that Pope and Southcott had something in common and shared what the poet's half-sister Magdalen spoke of when she said to Spence: 'to speak plain with you, my brother had a maddish way with him' (Spence, 28). 
Pope deliberately allowed his Catholicism to fall into the shadow as he began to make his way in the protestant England of Queen Anne, but it is the key to a continental network of acquaintance with some of whom he evidently corresponded. An early friend was Charles Wogan, who like Southcott escaped from England after the 1715 Jacobite rising. He informed Swift in 1733 that 'Mr. Pope and I lived in perfect union and familiarity for two or three Summers before he entered upon the stage of the world' and that he 'had the honour' to bring Pope 'up to London, from our retreat in the forest of Windsor, to dress a la mode, and introduce at Will's Coffee House' (J. Swift, 'Correspondence', ed. H. Williams, 1963-5, 4.113). Thus the soldier and adventurer, who managed the escape of Clementina Sobieska from Innsbruck to marry James III, had been a friend of Pope's boyhood. Such information reveals that Pope moved between two worlds, one of covert presences in England and of exiles overseas, the other of those who could be confident and influential at home. 
In 1700 Pope's family retired from Hammersmith, where they had moved from Lombard Street about 1692, to Binfield in Windsor Forest. With the assistance of Charles Rackett, husband of Pope's half-sister, and of Samuel Mawhood, a protestant relative, they effectively acquired Whitehill House, Binfield, despite the penal laws against Catholics, while the Racketts themselves lived in the grander house of Hallgrove, not far away, near Bagshot Heath. Pope's formal education now ended and his often rigorous self-education began. Late in his life he told Spence that he never would have pursued anything 'that I could not follow with pleasure' (Spence, 17). This may apply not only to his favourite reading but also to his choice of vocation. As a Catholic in the penal period, and of no great or wealthy family, only three or four professions were open to him, debarred as he was from university and (as he was later to put it) from 'Posts of Profit or of Trust' (Epistle 2, ii.61, 'Poems', 4.169). He might, in principle, have become an officer in Jacobite regiments beyond the seas, like his friend Wogan, but his delicate health ruled that out. He could have become a monk on the continent, or trained abroad as a priest to return to the English mission; that too was physically arduous and Pope probably did not have in his heart that degree of religious devotion. He might have become a lawyer, like his friend Nathaniel Pigott, or a merchant like his father; that would have bored him. So long as his sight held out he might, it appears, have made a living as a portrait painter, an art which he actually practised and in which he took instruction from his friend Charles Jervas. (His maternal aunt Christiana had married the celebrated miniaturist Samuel Cooper, some relics of whose work were bequeathed to Pope after the death of another aunt, Elizabeth Turner.) Poetry, however, a felt vocation for him, seems to have been the one obvious way out of his dilemma. Writing, again later, of the penal situation suffered by Catholics, he said of himself and his father: '
And me, the Muses help'd to undergo it; 

Convict a Papist He, and I a Poet 
(Epistle 2, ii.66-7, 'Poems', 4.169)' thus turning back, through a pun, the surname which had offered so obvious an opportunity for enemy jibes.Settling down in Windsor Forest the Popes allowed their obviously precocious son to read, study, and translate, in many cases teaching himself languages by the act of translating poetry out of them into English. He read, of course, English works also, and works already in English translation. Among his earliest books to have survived are his first Chaucer (the 1598 folio given to Pope by his Binfield neighbour Gabriel Young in 1701), John Ogilby's translation of Homer's 'Iliad' and 'Odyssey', 'that great edition with pictures' as Pope told Spence in 1743 (Spence, 30), and Charles Cotton's translation of the 'Essaies' of Montaigne (1685, 1693), inscribed by Pope in 1706 in the back cover: 'This is (in my Opinion) the very best Book for Information of Manners, that has been writ. This Author says nothing but what everyone feels att the Heart. Whoever deny it, are not more Wise than Montaigne, but less honest.(Mack, 'Collected in Himself', appx A 121.431; see too ibid., appx A 56.401, Spence, 30)' As for Pope's earliest literary compositions (and setting aside the story of the childhood satire, and of the 'drama' based on Ogilby's Homer), it seems that these are: his juvenile epic, 'Alcander, Prince of Rhodes', about 'a prince, driven from his throne' (Spence, 36-8), a lampoon on William III published anonymously in 'State Poems', 1705, and a tragedy 'on a very moving story in the legend of Saint Genevieve' (ibid., 34), prompted, perhaps, by the chief source on this saint, 'Vita s. Genovefae' (1687) (ibid., 34). Genevieve de Brabant may have been the more likely subject. 
In 1729 Pope positively claimed to have seen Dryden 'when I was about twelve years old' and to have 'observed him very particularly' (Spence, 57). Osborn in his edition of Spence makes it clear that -- owing to Dryden's latest movements and final illness -- this must have been before the Pope family removed to Binfield, when Pope would have been more probably ten not twelve. It thus seems likely that this was during Pope's London period, and before the Popes retreated to Binfield. At Binfield, Pope had at least the opportunity to know one great man, the actor Thomas Betterton, close associate of Dryden, with whom (Pope said) 'I was acquainted... from a boy' (ibid., 52). Betterton had a farm near Reading. Pope's society at this time comprised William Mannock regularly, Thomas Southcott probably occasionally, the Racketts of Hallgrove, the closer Catholic family of the Dancastles, at Binfield, and, more distant, the Catholic Englefields at Whitenights, near Reading, where Anthony Englefield was, according to Pope, ''vir jocosissimus'' and 'a great lover of poetry and poets' (ibid., 101). Nearer at hand, across the shallow valley to the south of Binfield, lay Easthamstead House, where lived the retired whig secretary of state Sir William Trumbull. After the illness from which Pope, aged then about seventeen, thought he would die, and Radcliffe's subsequent advice that he should ride for his health, he and Sir William apparently often rode and conversed together. Through the Englefield family Pope became acquainted with his most long-lasting correspondent, John Caryll; indeed he seems to have known Caryll eight years before their formal correspondence began in 1711. Again through the Englefields Pope got to know, from about 1711, the Blount family of Mapledurham, and especially Teresa and Martha Blount. Pope's poetic career was by that time well launched, and Teresa is as celebrated in Pope's earlier poetic epistles, as Martha was to be in epistles written later in his life. 
The question of Pope's health, touched on above, needs to be considered here, because the most severe ill health dogged him all his life. What seemed at first merely the result of too intense an application to reading and writing was in fact a case of Pott's disease (tuberculosis of the bone). It seems likely to have been contracted in infancy from the milk of his nurse, Mary Beach. It inhibited his growth, gave him fevers, inflammation of the eye, severe problems of the lung and heart, and turned him into 'a dwarf and cripple' (Mack, 'Life', 153). 
It was evidently after the first onset of his illness, when he was still about fifteen, that Pope resolved to 'go up to London and learn French and Italian', Father Mannock told Spence long after. 'We in the family looked upon it as a wildish sort of resolution', but 'He stuck to it, went thither, and mastered both those languages with surprising dispatch' (Spence, 26). In London, polite London rather than the City or Hammersmith, he made new literary acquaintances: William Wycherley, the greatest comic dramatist of the Restoration (to be a Catholic convert on his deathbed), Henry Cromwell, and, surely the most useful to him, William Walsh MP, 'the Muse's Judge and Friend' ('An Essay on Criticism', 1.729, 'Poems', 1.325), at whose country house of Abberley, Worcestershire, he stayed (as he averred) for 'a good part of the Summer of 1705' though perhaps it was actually 1707 (Spence, 72). These were no doubt in the centre of the circle among whom Pope's first well-meditated poem, the 'Pastorals', passed in manuscript, though the most distinguished author who now saw Pope's work and became his acquaintance was William Congreve, the great comic dramatist of the Orange period, when he had been at once a whig and a friend of Dryden. 
The 'Pastorals' (eventually to be printed in 1709) actually prompted a letter to Pope, dated 20 April 1706, from Jacob Tonson, the greatest publisher of the day, offering to print the poem. An exquisite distillation from English pastoral in the Virgilian tradition, it was meticulously revised in manuscript in accordance with the advice of its readers and especially of Walsh, whose criticisms of Pope's own revisions are printed in 'Poems', 1.477-82. Pope's delicate eye for the scenic: '
Soon as the Flocks shook off their nightly Dews 

Two Swains, whom Love kept watchful, and the Muse 

Pour'd o'er the whitening Vale their fleecy care 
('Spring', ll. 17-19, 'Poems', 1.62)' and his mastery of verbal and metrical harmony: '
Where-e'er you walk, cool Gales shall fan the Glade, 

Trees, where you sit, shall crowd into a Shade 
('Summer', ll. 73-4, 'Poems', 1.77)' are here unparalleled; this is the poetry of artifice of an era when artifice was a term of praise. It is also poetry of perception and emotion. Pope wrote one further pastoral, 'Messiah. A Sacred Eclogue' (1712). A blending of 'Isaiah' with Virgil's fourth eclogue (once thought to prophesy the birth of Christ), it was published in 'The Spectator', no. 378. 
It is often said, and with reason, that the course of Pope's earlier work follows a Virgilian trajectory: as Virgil developed from pastoral 'Eclogues' to the rural-descriptive 'Georgics' and from Georgic to epic in the 'Aeneid', so Pope moved from his own 'Pastorals' to his Georgic poem 'Windsor-Forest' (1714), and thence to epic in his mock epic 'Rape of the Lock' (1712, 1714) and to his own translation of Homer's 'Iliad' which was begun in 1711. Even in the early 'Miscellany', however, in which the 'Pastorals' first appeared, there appeared also his version of Chaucer's 'The Merchant's Tale', 'January and May', and, more notably, 'The episode of Sarpedon, translated from the twelfth and sixteenth books of Homer's 'Iliad''. That Pope's actual development was less linear than a Virgilian pattern would allow may also be seen in his second major poem, 'An Essay on Criticism' (1711), virtually completed, perhaps, in 1709. This poem, which has an intellectual brilliance and eloquence of a kind required by neither pastoral nor epic, deviates into a different track, that of the familiar, discursive, Horatian poem, something like Horace's 'Ars poetica', Vida's Renaissance 'Poetica', and the late seventeenth-century English rhyming essays of the earls of Mulgrave and Roscommon. Pope's art here is essentially diplomatic: the intellectual and historical reach of the poem is amazing, but it seeks to dramatize only to modify and reconcile contrary views. 
This may be seen in the way Pope deals with the notion of rules in literary composition. 'Useful Rules' are commended, but '
Those RULES of old discover'd, not devis'd 

Are 'Nature' still, but 'Nature Methodiz'd'. 
(ll. 88-92, 'Poems', 1.249-50)' Rules alone cannot guarantee success; furthermore, '
If, where the 'Rules' not far enough extend, 

(Since Rules were made but to promote their End) 

Some Lucky LICENCE answers to the full 

Th'Intent propos'd, 'that Licence' is a 'Rule'. 

' The poet may '
From 'vulgar Bounds' with 'brave Disorder' part, 

And 'snatch' a 'Grace' beyond the Reach of Art... 
(ll. 146-9, 154-5, 'Poems', 1.256-8)' This last line exemplifies Pope's capacity to coin expressions which have become proverbial in English -- and often attributed to Shakespeare. 
Intelligence and learning here seem to run direct into lively and often comic expression, epigram, maxim, and mimetic effect. From the self-satisfied critic not even the church is free: ''there' they'll talk you dead;/For 'Fools' rush in where 'Angels' fear to tread' (ll. 624-5, 'Poems', 1.310). This blend of satire and reverence is characteristic of the poem, which moves backwards and upwards to distant authority and divinity, forwards and downwards to the follies of the day. This is the larger movement which lends coherence to an outwardly discursive poem. 
Pope did not please all his readers. For example, he had used the poem to measure a distance between himself and his fellow Catholics. Reflection on the doctrine of no salvation outside the church and satire on the monks of the middle ages as ''Holy Vandals'' (l. 696) dismayed Pope's sympathetic Catholic readers. Pope defended himself rather evasively at first, but on the last charge he stuck to his guns, declaring his model to be the Catholic humanist and reformer Erasmus. (John Anselm Mannock, in his manuscript 'Miscellanea', returns almost obsessively to this subject and his defence of monastic learning may well have been prompted by Pope's public attack.) If Pope seemed to Catholics no very devoted papist, however, his not very severe allusions to the dramatist and critic John Dennis provoked the first of those personal attacks which lasted Pope's entire life. And here, amid Dennis's extravagant assault on the poem, the charge is that Pope is a Catholic and a Jacobite (Guerinot, 1-11). Pope's attempt to show himself a moderate and critical Catholic had not entirely worked, and he was criticized from both sides. 
Through Caryll, Pope had got to know Richard Steele, and through Steele the difficult and important figure Joseph Addison. Addison gave measured praise to 'An Essay on Criticism' in 'The Spectator', no. 253, and in due course Pope wrote the prologue to Addison's tragedy of 'Cato' (1713), a drama of a certain political poise which whigs and tories alike sought to appropriate to their own side. To Pope's papist friends he must have seemed a turncoat, and for his part Addison, who was reported by the whig Thomas Burnet to have hated Pope 'worse than Beelzebub', showed him favour to prevent his lending his pen to the tories (Sherburn, 117). However, Pope's descriptive and historical poem on his native region of Windsor Forest which he had long meditated and revised was now, at the invitation of the tory and in fact Jacobite poet and statesman Lord Lansdowne, extended into a poem in favour of that general peace which the tory administration of Queen Anne's last years was struggling to establish. ''Non injussa cano'' was Pope's epigraph, 'not without warrant I sing' (Virgil, 'Eclogues', vi.9): Lansdowne, the dedicatee, had encouraged him. 'Windsor-Forest' is a historical and political poem in which the scenic, the Thames in the past, present, and future, and the active, hunting and what hunting may metaphorically convey, are the unifying features of the work. The vision of peace with which the poem ends, while it accords with what was then tory rather than whig policy, goes much beyond party conflict. Pope was aware that the treaty of Utrecht, then in negotiation to settle the peace, was supposed to give Britain increased access to the slave trade. Yet his concluding vision explicitly includes abolition of slavery (ll. 407-12, 'Poems', 1.192). Among scores of poems on the peace, 'Windsor-Forest' appears to be the only one to mention actual (not metaphorical) slavery and oppose it. It at once caught the attention of the most celebrated pro-government writer of the day, Jonathan Swift: 'Read it', he wrote to Stella, two days after it was published (Mack, 'Life', 199). Thus began (no doubt) perhaps the most celebrated literary friendship of the earlier eighteenth century (the exact date of their first meeting is not known). 
By the time 'Windsor-Forest' was published, the earliest version of Pope's mock heroic poem 'The Rape of the Lock', composed in a fortnight during summer 1711, had for nine months been anonymously printed in Bernard Lintot's 'Miscellany'. The masterpiece of Pope's earlier period, 'The Rape of the Lock' (1712, 1714) had its origin in a quarrel between two Catholic families, apparently over the provocative cutting off of a lock of hair by Lord Petre from the head of Arabella Fermor. Pope's friend Caryll, a friend of each family and always interested in Pope's literary projects, suggested that he write a poem to 'laugh them together again' (Spence, 104). This is probably the only grain of historical truth in the story, acknowledged in the third line: 'This Verse to 'C'[aryl]'l', Muse! is due'. Caryll's invitation was a sheer gift to Pope. Obviously aware of the celebrated mock epics of Boileau ('Le lutrin', 1674) and Dryden ('Mac Flecknoe', 1676), and of 'The Dispensary' (1699) by Sir Samuel Garth, Pope might be thought to have been waiting for the right occasion to arise to call on his epic and comic talent. 
The poem, especially as expanded into its five-canto version of 1714, published with decorations and no longer anonymous, is far from being a mere social satire in which a trivial quarrel is mocked by being presented in epic terms. Indeed, by the time the poem has been thoughtfully read it is not really clear that the quarrel 'is' trivial. The 'Heroi-Comical' in Pope's hands is a volatile mixture: some of its comedy rebounds on the epic conventions that are primarily deployed to mock the foolish and vain. In the shining lock of hair Pope contemplates beauty, reputation, conquest in love and war, anger, humour, and resignation. The political facets of the poem, parts only of the total multi-faceted effect, have recently come more into the light, so that the work has its own angle on historical change. Not only does the poem have many targets, all seen through the prism of Belinda and her lock, but it also has many tones, those of subtle comedy, outright farce, and lofty sadness. This last is the predominant tone of Clarissa's speech in canto 5 which Pope added only on the publication of his 'Works' (1717). Pope did not add this speech 'to open more clearly the MORAL of the Poem' as his editor Warburton would after the poet's death make him say. All Pope ever said of this speech was that it was a parody of ''the speech of' 'Sarpedon' 'to' 'Glaucus' 'in' 'Homer'' (l. 7n., 'Poems', 2.199), which he had already translated in epic mode. Clarissa's speech is a moral in the poem, not the moral of it. 
Even before the five-canto 'Rape of the Lock' appeared Pope had, with remarkable temerity in view of his health, and the politically riven condition of literature in Anne's last years, issued a proposal for a new verse translation of Homer's 'Iliad'. To be published by subscription, it was modelled on Dryden's 'Virgil' as a publishing enterprise, save that Pope made no attempt to emulate Dryden's system of multiple dedications. Pope was now a famous poet, still in his earlier twenties, in civil or friendly contact with the whig writers grouped around Steele and Addison at Button's Coffee House, but drawn increasingly and with a deeper friendship to the group of writers who centred on Swift and were close to the tory administration led by Harley and St John. The chief members of this group jokingly styled themselves the Scriblerus Club, after a fictional pedant and antiquarian, Martinus Scriblerus, this club being dedicated to the ridicule of false learning. Swift was by far the most important figure in this regard, but he released in the others currents which were still finding expression in Pope's final 'Dunciad' in 1743. Other members of the Scriblerus Club were Dr John Arbuthnot, Thomas Parnell, and John Gay, with Robert Harley, the queen's first minister, as a kind of honorary member in his moments of leisure. 
The relation of Pope's Homer project with the Scriblerus Club is interesting: out of an ethos of the mockery of false learning and false antiquarianism comes a work of true translation and modern homage to antiquity. This relation also caused what Pope evidently felt to be the first betrayal of his poetic career, when Addison's group, having failed to capture Pope's talent for their political purposes, began to move against him behind the scenes. Pope signed a contract for the 'Iliad' version with Bernard Lintot on 23 March 1714; on 31 May Addison's protege Thomas Tickell signed one with Tonson, also to translate the whole 'Iliad'. Addison told Pope only that Tickell was to publish an earlier version of book 1 and that Addison could not therefore advise on Pope's book 1; he agreed to read Pope's book 2 and highly commended it. Pope was unaware of Tickell's contract with Tonson, but soon began to suspect that Tickell's book 1 was new work -- perhaps even assisted by Addison himself -- designed to check or marginalize Pope's project. His later account of the affair to Spence, including Addison's stated desire to avoid 'an air of double dealing' and Pope's own growing suspicion that 'there was some underhand dealing in that business' (Spence, 162-4), gives a pretty clear picture. Not all details are consistent, and a letter of Pope to Addison in his 'Letters' (1735) may be suspect, but the conclusion of the careful editor of Spence, J. M. Osborn, that 'Addison's conduct on this occasion seems very close to double dealing' (ibid., 2.624) is hard to deny. The satiric consequence of all this was Pope's 'Atticus portrait', his satire on Addison, first drafted about 1715, sent to Addison in manuscript by Pope before 7 May 1716, circulated widely, and anonymously published on 15 December 1722. More boldly devious than Addison, Pope thus checked his enemy by a satire which espoused the very values that his enemy had professed. The 'portrait' would become one of the most famous parts of Pope's Epistle 'To Arbuthnot' (1735). 
For the moment the enormous 'Iliad' project occupied Pope's energies. It took him six years, and at first 'I wished any body would hang me', he told Spence; he was 'under great pain and apprehensions' over it and 'dreamed often of being engaged in a long journey and that I should never get to the end of it' (Spence, 197, 193). The twenty-four books of the poem were for the most part drafted on the backs of letters (now preserved in BL, Add. MSS 4807-4809). Pope earned $1275 from Lintot for his translation. Subscriptions raised this sum (by a modern estimate) to about $5000. Pope's version of the 'Odyssey', for which he recruited William Broome and Elijah Fenton as collaborators, was completed in 1726 and brought him (he said) $600 0's'. 0died from Lintot; again subscriptions are thought to have raised his profit to around $5000 (Spence, 201; Foxon, 63, 101). In 1976 David Foxon estimated that the value of Pope's 'Homer' to the poet, translated into the financial values of that year, was about $200,000. This established Pope's fortune and set his fame on a firmer foundation. As he wrote in 1737, 'But (thanks to 'Homer') since I live and thrive,/Indebted to no Prince or Peer alive' (Epistle 2, ii.68-9, 'Poems', 4.169). A third large-scale enterprise, an edition of Shakespeare, and a work of informal collaboration, was complete in 1725. His preface is a notable critical essay, the editing hardly competent by the best eighteenth-century standards. 
The publication of his 'Works' in 1717 kept Pope's original poems to the fore while he translated Homer. Two unexpected new poems were published here: 'Verses to the Memory of an Unfortunate Lady' and 'Eloisa to Abelard'. Each is passionately concerned with female consciousness though in the first a man speaks in defence of a lady, while in the second Eloisa delivers her own soliloquy and imaginary address to her lover, on the general pattern of Ovid's 'Heroides'. Far from a classical poem, however, this may be the first 'Gothic' work in English literature. Its setting is medieval since Eloisa and Abelard were medieval lovers. The medieval is here not a subject of satire but a site for tragedy. Pope's sympathy with love which affirms itself against restraint, or expresses itself from the monastic cell, may have been prompted by his Catholicism; not one of the Catholic families he knew but placed some daughter in convents in France or Flanders. These poems, favourites in the later eighteenth century when taste began to turn against satire, remained popular in the twentieth century, when satire was revalued. 
While Pope was collecting his 'Works' and pressing on with Homer, a seismic shift in the body politic was taking place. On the accession of George I (which despite the 1701 'Act of Settlement' must have seemed improbable to many) the tories not only lost power but fell into the suspicion of treason. There was in those days no settled assumption of alternating party administrations. King George, like his predecessors, bestowed office as he thought fit. In this case he trusted those who had prosecuted the war, and much distrusted (as implicitly anti-Hanoverian) those who had established the peace. Of Pope's circle, Harley (now earl of Oxford) and Lansdowne were imprisoned in the Tower; St John (now Viscount Bolingbroke) fled abroad, as did the duke of Ormond, the popular captain-general of the British forces. All became embroiled, or more deeply embroiled, in the Jacobite cause. After the failure of the 1715 Jacobite rising, Oxford appears to have directed from the Tower the Swedish plot of 1717 in favour of James III. Thereafter the leadership of the English Jacobites passed to another friend of Pope, and a close one at that, Francis Atterbury, Anglican bishop of Rochester, whose significant conspiracy of 1722 was revealed by the French regent to British ministers after one of them, Sunderland, who was himself double-dealing in this plot, suddenly died. Atterbury too did time in the Tower and, after a kind of show trial in the Lords, was sent into exile, and became the next secretary of state to James III. At the same time Bolingbroke, who had himself filled this office but had purchased his remission from exile, returned to England. 
The 1715 rising saw the Popes disposing of their property at Binfield and coming to live in Chiswick 'under the wing of my Lord Burlington' ('Correspondence', 1.339). Burlington, patron, architect, and connoisseur, was in a position to protect Catholics, at a time when the oaths to be tendered to papists, nonjurors, and other disaffected persons were administered with special rigour. This accounts for the sudden removal of the Pope family into rented property at Chiswick and unless the summons and non-appearance in nearby Chelsea of a 'Mr. -- Pope' to take the oaths be taken as referring to Alexander Pope, father or son, their quick footwork probably saved them from penalty (LMA, MR/RR/23, fol. 3). 
Pope now needed to conduct himself with care. His closest political and literary associations were with the losing side or (as he would later put it) 'the suff'ring Party' ('Correspondence', 3.420). Whether between 1717 and 1723 Pope knew what Atterbury was engaged in remains uncertain, but there are enough distancing references in his otherwise appreciative letters to Atterbury to suggest that he did. Pope's edition of the duke of Buckinghamshire's 'Works', coming out just at the time of Atterbury's arrest, angered the government who called it in and for a time allowed publication only in expurgated form. Again at this time Pope's kinsfolk Charles and Michael Rackett were charged with Jacobite activity, though the charges appear to have been dropped, and both father and son seem to have disappeared into exile. Atterbury nevertheless asked Pope to be a witness at his hearing in the House of Lords that his activities at Bromley had been of an innocent and literary character. Pope bravely agreed, but felt under such pressure that he bungled his, perhaps, not very important evidence. He corresponded with Atterbury in the Tower, writing in his support with high emotion and intensity, even suggesting that he too might soon have to face exile. This was probably the point in Pope's life when he was in most political danger. Yet he behaved more defiantly at this crisis than at any previous point. Such defiance was no doubt in his nature, but it is open to question whether the restraining counsel of his father (who died in 1717) would not have made a difference had he been alive. 
Pope emerged from this crisis and even got on social terms with the new first minister, Sir Robert Walpole, whose recent legislation had probably caused his kinsfolk the Racketts to abscond. No doubt Pope felt he had drawn too near the fire, but some in the circle of Walpole may have felt it would be worth the effort to recruit Pope into the interests of the powers that be. One who would have wished to save Pope from himself, and who sincerely supported Walpole and his government, was William Fortescue, friend of the poet and now secretary to the prime minister (1724-36). Pope began to go to informal suppers given by Walpole. This is also the period when Pope's old friend Father Southcott wished to be given the French abbey of Villeneuve-les-Avignon, so that its revenue might help fund the Jacobite intellectual Andrew Michael Ramsay. Pope persuaded Walpole to drop his opposition to this manoeuvre to the French government, as a result of which Southcott got his abbey. This was managed through Fortescue (Spence, 70, appx, 2.615). 
In 1719 Pope had leased from Thomas Vernon several pieces of land and cottages at Cross Deep, Twickenham. Here he began to build a riverside villa in the Palladian style which must have involved the demolition or (less likely) the incorporation of a small earlier dwelling. Also a tunnel was made which led from the riverside frontage under the villa and the road behind to a garden beyond. Adjoining the tunnel was Pope's famous grotto, which still survives. It was adorned progressively with rare and shining stones. The garden was one of the first 'wild gardens' and, on its small scale, was in the very vanguard of fashion in landscape gardening. The classic symmetry of the villa, the subtle asymmetry of the garden, and the mysterious and mythopoeic grotto, formed with the Thames the fourfold character of Pope's carefully designed home, which was constantly being changed and improved through the remainder of his life. 
If during the later 1720s Walpole, and Pope's whig friends, thought the poet had been netted and brought under control, a relatively small poem, anonymously published, probably on 18 May 1728, brought all this in question. This was the first of Pope's 'Dunciads'; an expanded 'Dunciad' came out in 1729, a 'New Dunciad' in 1742, and a 'Dunciad' in four books in 1743. Even the earliest 'Dunciad', Scriblerian satire on bad writers though it was, contained lines and allusions which seemed to challenge the Hanoverian kings and the 'great 'Patricians'' who had brought them to the throne. If 'Still +'Dunce the second reigns like Dunce the first?'' (i.3, 6, 'Poetical Works', 725) alludes to George II and George I, the former having come to the throne in the previous year, Pope's mock heroic satire reaches from the bottom (the hack writers of Grub Street) to the top (the monarch) of the state. The belief that writing and rule are in civilization intimately linked, and that it is possible to write dangerous things about rulers by seeming to write only about writers, is at the heart of 'The Dunciad', the line quoted above being an allusion to a line of Dryden (as Pope's footnote: '+'Dryd'.' hints) which does precisely this ('To my dear friend Mr. Congreve', l. 48). This is one of the features which may be thought to save Pope's poem from the meanness with which it has been often charged. Further, there is such a variety of tone and effect arising from the poet's mock Virgilian narrative of the fall and restoration of the kingdom of dullness that it often assumes the character of dream or fantasy. Pope's manner is far from being relentlessly scornful, but can move in a few lines from Bedlam, through 'The air-built Castle, and the golden Dream' to the 'Poet's vision of eternal fame' (iii.7-12, 'Poetical Works', 742). Such points are important because a causal narrative of how Pope's 'Dunciad' came to be written inevitably presents the poem as Pope's final stroke in his literary wars. Yet such an account suggests a poem less complex and daring than Pope actually produced. 
The causal narrative goes back to Pope's rivalry with Addison's circle, to the many attacks on his person, background, and writings, and, more recently, to the criticisms, many of them well judged, of Pope's edition of Shakespeare (1725) by Lewis Theobald. Theobald is the mock hero of 'The Dunciad' in 1728 and 1729. Pope had, in addition, published in 1727 the ironic Scriblerian parody of Longinus, 'On the Sublime', which he called 'The Art of Sinking in Poetry'. The many names hinted at by blanks and initials in this text produced a furore of attack against Pope. The 1728 'Dunciad', when it appeared, seemed a justly provoked counter-attack. The great Scriblerian Swift now urged Pope (16 July 1728, J. Swift, 'Correspondence', ed. H. Williams, 1963-5 2.293) to make the poem even more Scriblerian, an 'oeuvre melee' of verse and prose, in which a pseudo-scholarly apparatus and footnotes of varying irony would help to identify the more obscure of Pope's literary targets. Pope took this advice in the 1729 'Dunciad variorum', still published anonymously but with broad hints as to its authorship, also expanding the verse and adding, among other things, his tribute to Swift himself: '
Whether thou chuse Cervantes' serious air, 

Or laugh and shake in Rab'lais' easy Chair... 
(i.18-19, 'Poems', 5.19-20)' Pope saw the humanist prose comedy of Cervantes and Rabelais as enriching Swift's work ('Gulliver's Travels' had been published in 1726) and 'The Dunciad' itself is responsive to these authors in its comedy of the flesh and its fantasy of the mind. 
The final comic stroke of the 1729 'Dunciad' came when, if a Scriblerian report is to be believed (Arbuthnot to Swift, 19 March 1729, J. Swift, 'Correspondence', ed. H. Williams, 1963-5, 3.326), Walpole presented it to George II. After perusing the poem, the king pronounced Mr Pope 'a very honest Man', by this time a well-known term for a Jacobite. This was the climax of Walpole's attempt to appropriate Pope's muse. Only the sharper readers of the time would have seen in this Pope's boldest comic confidence trick to date, but, unless Arbuthnot were only cracking a joke, George II already knew more or less what to think about Pope. 
The outcry against 'The Dunciad' had at its pitch been extraordinary, and Pope's half-sister Magdalen said that at that time he seldom ventured out alone without his Great Dane Bounce (one of Pope's succession of large dogs so named) and pistols in his pocket. The second earl of Oxford wrote to Swift: 'Pope stands by himself Athanasius Contra Mundum' (J. Swift, 'Correspondence', ed. H. Williams, 1963-5, 3.295). Pope's reputation at this point seemed irretrievably associated with personal satire, and all the personal attacks on him from earlier years were now redoubled and recycled. 
Pope now contemplated a new kind of poem. It was to grow into 'An Essay on Man' (1734-5). Urged by more than one friend to turn away from satire, and with part of his mind no doubt in profound reaction against literary warfare, he turned from particular to general, and from the long cultural and historical myths of 'The Dunciad' to a wider, natural philosophical and metaphysical vision. Though defiant over 'The Dunciad', he reached back for the conciliatory and diplomatic modes of the poetic essay. He is also likely to have remembered an ecumenical hymn, 'The universal prayer', he had written not later than 1715. Pope's admired friend Bolingbroke, invoked at the opening of the new poem, credited himself with setting Pope off on a new philosophical path and may have done so through freethinking conversation. Pope was also in touch, however, with a better philosopher, and a fervent Christian one at that, over the new poem. To this friend, Berkeley, he seems to have submitted an invocation to Christ, based on the invocation to Epicurus at the opening of the philosophical poet Lucretius's 'De rerum natura'. Berkeley advised Pope to abandon the idea, and no draft has survived (Spence, 305). This desire to 'convert' a pagan poet to a Christian vision may have been at one extreme of Pope's range of views at this time, but it does not suggest that his faith was cooling into secular enlightenment. 

'An Essay on Man' began as a single epistle, from which the manuscripts show that it developed into a four-epistle poem on the limits of human knowledge (1), self-knowledge and ethics (2), the growth of society (3), and man's hope of happiness (4). It is a poem which in recent times (and usually on a cursory reading of Epistle 1 only) has been stigmatized as complacent, and as 'cosmic toryism'. The charge of complacency is hard to square with Pope's constant polemic against human pride, while, from a biographical point of view, one of the poem's most complained-of aphorisms: 'Whatever IS, is RIGHT' (i.294, 'Poems', 2.i.51) has to be read in the light of what Pope wrote by its side in one of the working manuscripts: 'Thy will be done, in Earth as it is in Heaven' ('Poems', 3.i.xxiv). In the poem itself there was no mention of Christ by the poet who had written 'Messiah'. To questions from dismayed Catholic friends Pope replied that such a specific fidelity lay outside the plan for the poem on which he had eventually settled. This was that it should concentrate on what all mankind seemed to have in common, rather than what marked out the Christian or Catholic vision. Inevitably this left the argument for God's existence from design in nature in a position of lonely salience, and this sooner or later was likely to lead to accusations of deism, especially from any who might have heard something of the spoken opinions of Bolingbroke. Though the poem speaks of the chain of being, the heavenly hierarchy, the life of God in as well as beyond nature, and of the interdependence of love of self with love of others, and though it speaks of 'the throne of God' (i.256, 'Poems', 3.i.46), he was challenged from the continent by Jean Pierre de Crousaz and by the Abbe Louis Racine, each relying on imperfect translations. Against the former, William Warburton, Pope's editor-to-be, defended him; in the case of the latter, Michael Alexander Ramsay intervened, and Pope, schooled by Ramsay perhaps, professed that his Christian model was Fenelon, the saintly archbishop of Cambrai, some of whose work (it is worth noting) had fallen under papal interdict, Fenelon then submitting to the authority of the church. In 1757 Samuel Johnson, seeing some affinity between certain of the doctrines of the poem and the shallow theodicy of Soame Jenyns, proposed what can only be an unsatisfactory distinction between the ideas and the poetic ornament of the work. 

'An Essay on Man' may not yet be fully understood. It is no use extracting philosophical arguments from its poetic text and assessing them as pure philosophy. They operate in a work which is rhetorical and poetic almost as if they were metaphors, or at least aesthetic features of some kind. Its decisive aphorisms depend on preceding physical exploration and, really, the whole work is exploratory. It rests on paradox as, drawing on Pascal's 'Pensees', it sees man as 'The glory, jest, and riddle of the world' (ii.18, 'Poems', 3.i.56). Further, no poem could be more responsive to a mysterious divinity within nature. 
Pope's authorship of 'An Essay on Man' was at first a closely kept secret. The poem was fully anonymous and was at once hailed by readers as the work of a new and (they thankfully said) unsatirical poet. Pope's own artful suggestion that it seemed to be the work of 'a divine' was widely supported. When the plaudits were at their height, Pope quietly acknowledged his authorship. His enemies must have been aghast. Pope had turned the tables on them in the literary wars, but, at a deeper level, had also shown them that there was more to him as a poet than a personal satirist, or indeed a satirist of any kind. 
The hue and cry after the Pope of the earlier 'Dunciads' had continued until 1731 when his Epistle 'To Burlington', published on 14 December of that year, quickened the hunt when it was alleged to satirize Cannons, the great house of the duke of Chandos. It has been plausibly suggested that this red herring was deliberately introduced by pro-government writers to deflect an assumed attack on Walpole's great house of Houghton. 'Timon's Villa' in this epistle is, however, more likely to have been a composite satiric portrait of bad taste and thoughtless expenditure. The poem is far from wholly satirical, however; together with 'Windsor-Forest' it is remarkable for a positive and visionary conclusion: '
Another Age shall see the golden Ear 

Imbrown the Slope, and nod on the Parterre... 
(ll. 173-4, 'Poems', 3-ii)' 
'To Burlington' and three other notable ethic epistles were intended to be, or were perhaps pressed into being, parts of an ambitious scheme for Pope's later work known as his 'Opus magnum'. 'An Essay on Man' was to have been a kind of introduction or ''general Map'' of what was to come. The project, which probably owes something to the advice of Bolingbroke, never really worked out though it survived in titles, subtitles, and various attempts to reorder the later epistles. The 'Opus magnum' failed to make progress, it may be supposed, because it was at once too ambitious and too conceptual even for the author of 'An Essay on Man'. Pope's still developing talent desired shorter and more varied literary forms with a greater scope for self-presentation. The 1730s would witness this development in both prose and verse: in Pope's publication of his own letters, and in his 'Imitations of Horace'. 
To turn first to the 'Letters', it is interesting to note how in Pope's poetic epistles, from 'My Muse' in the manuscript of 'To 'Robert' earl of 'Oxford'' (Pope, 'Poems', 6.239) to the 'I' of 'To Burlington' -- 'I curse such lavish cost, and little skill' (l. 167, 'Poems', 3.ii.148) -- there is a steady move towards a drama of the self. This became for obvious reasons involved in Pope's growing resolution to publish his own correspondence. Pope seems not to have followed a common eighteenth-century practice of preserving copies of more important letters in their rough draft. As early as 1712 he began to ask friends to return his letters; originally it may have been because he proposed to use them as a basis for periodical essays, but later because he feared some of his letters had been personally or politically indiscreet. There was a considerable interest in his correspondence, and in 1726 and again in 1731 letters by him had come into the public sphere without any consent on the part of their writer. Pope redoubled his requests to his friends to return his letters, and some eventually complied. Burlington was one of the first to do so, and these letters seem to have been destroyed. Caryll and Swift each returned letters after a long campaign on Pope's part (Caryll retaining transcripts which the poet may not have known about; Swift after, in all probability, knowingly and teasingly resisting Pope's manipulative designs). Thus, when the piratical publisher Edmund Curll advertised for materials for a biography of Pope, Pope was in a good position anonymously to supply him with pages of correspondence he himself had arranged and had even had printed. Curll took the bait, and published in 1735, to an appreciative public, 'Letters of Mr. Pope, and Several Eminent Persons, from the Year 1705, to 1711' (in fact letters up to 1734 are included). Pope was now able to disavow this pirated volume, which he had himself carefully shaped, and bring out in 1737 an authorized edition of his 'Letters'. Whether Caryll ever disclosed to Pope that he had kept transcripts, or Pope ever confessed to Caryll that he had used many of these letters as redesignated letters to other people, is not thus far known. When, however, the Caryll transcripts were rediscovered by C. W. Dilke in 1852, part of a huge archive of political, religious, and literary papers attesting to a Catholic and Jacobite world then lost, but which had been very real in Pope's lifetime, a full picture of Pope's epistolary activities was at last revealed. While he may well have used letters originally to Caryll to resurrect similar but lost letters to others, still in Pope's published correspondence, the correspondence with Caryll, the longest of all, was reduced to a very small compass indeed. 
Pope's next poetic initiative was his 'Imitations of Horace' (1733-8). It was again Bolingbroke, here in his most positive light, who seems to have precipitated a new development. In January 1733, when Pope was sick in bed, Bolingbroke took up a copy of Horace from his bedside and observed how well 'Satires', II.i. 'would hit my case, if I were to imitate it in English', as Pope later told Spence (Spence, 321). There followed a brilliant series of imitations of Horatian satires and epistles, with some other poems Horatian in mode and style, which form a body of poetry the most familiar, most personal, most poised, most combative, most varied in 'personae' and tone he had ever written. The subtle range of these poems is their ultimate achievement, but for the biographer of Pope two themes are salient. The first is the way in which, through the enabling example of Horace, Pope evolved a form of autobiographical poetry with little precedent in English literature. The second is the way that in these poems, in well-managed crescendos, pregnant comparisons, and well-judged asides, Pope becomes far more explicitly than before a poet of political opposition. Never perhaps had a long-standing and powerful ministry been so openly assailed as that of Walpole was now by Pope, and since the practice of poetic imitation revealed significant divergence from the original as well as significant fidelity to it, Pope often presses the less aggressive Horatian mode towards the anger of the later Roman satirist Juvenal. This open and exhilarating opposition was made possible for Pope by Bolingbroke's long campaign to construct a united 'patriot' opposition to Walpole which, publicly at least, had renounced the Jacobite option, albeit drawing on Jacobite support. Pope could thus be overtly anti-Walpole, but only intermittently and implicitly anti-Hanoverian. 
Poetic autobiography and political opposition come together in Pope's Epistle 'To Arbuthnot' (January 1735), sometimes seen as the masterpiece of his later years. It raises as an issue the later phase of Pope's literary wars, which connects with other questions concerning his personal relationships. As a young man in London, Pope affected, perhaps sought to act, the part of a rake. He was also in love with three women, Teresa Blount (from about 1712), Lady Mary Wortley Montagu (from about 1716), and Martha Blount (from about 1720 to his death). The first two ladies bitterly offended him, perhaps (as has been speculated) when they made it plain they did not take him seriously as a lover. Pope's 'affaire' with Lady Mary, a married woman, was primarily a literary courtship; as the friendship cooled there may have been provocations now untraced, but a couplet in 'The Dunciad' against her rankled; none of their mutual acquaintance could prevail on Pope to withdraw it; and finally, in 'Verses Address'd to the Imitator of Horace' (March 1733), Lady Mary and her new literary ally Lord Hervey, both whigs, published an all-out attack on Pope. Pope continued to snipe at Lady Mary, but it was his attack on Lord Hervey, as 'Paris', then 'Sporus', in 'To Arbuthnot' which constituted his most powerful stroke against these two antagonists. Hervey was no mere personal foe. As chamberlain he held court and government together through the queen, as Pope's lines recognize. Even here, the occasion fades, and the 'Sporus Portrait' is probably as religious and metaphysical as it is political and personal. One of Pope's most effective poetic decisions was his placing within the structure of this epistle the more civilly devastating 'Atticus portrait' (ll. 193-214, against Addison) as a lead-up to that apostrophe to evil, the 'Sporus Portrait' (ll. 305-33), and to conclude, in a calmer catharsis, with a measured tribute (ll. 388-419) to his parents and to Arbuthnot himself. 
The very final episode of enmity concerns Colley Cibber, poet laureate since 1730. His readable autobiography had come out in 1740, his pamphlet attack, 'A Letter from Mr. Cibber, to Mr. Pope', in July 1742. In March of that year Pope, taking up a hint in the 1729 'Dunciad' and drawing on educational and religious material already in mind for the poem prior to 1728, had published his 'New Dunciad', in effect an additional book of the poem. Cibber, hitherto a minor target of Pope, was in many ways well qualified to figure prominently in 'The Dunciad'. Pope had seemed to praise him in his Epistle 'To Augustus' (ll. 91-2, 'Poems', 4.203), though he had often scoffed at him too, and generally Cibber's art was characterized by a complacent shallowness. A political placeman, Cibber must have seemed the aesthetic face of the Hanoverian court and the Walpole administration. But without doubt Cibber's attack, including in its allegations a story of Pope as no very effective performer in a brothel, spurred the poet on to dethrone Lewis Theobald and enthrone Cibber as mock hero in the refashioned 'Dunciad' he had evidently long planned. 'The Dunciad in Four Books', with modified apparatus, and a more challengingly dark conclusion, has recently been edited in proper form by Valerie Rumbold (1999). As in the earlier episodes in Pope's long literary wars, so here, his poetic responses are never merely personal strokes: what he writes is always more interesting at a higher level. 
It is hard to sum up a life of such concentrated diversity. Poet, critic, and religious humanist, Pope was also a good conversationalist and letter writer, an influential garden designer, and a connoisseur of architecture and art. He had many enemies and was a good hater, but he had many more friends, men and women alike, and his generosity, esteem, and unforgettable compliments -- 'And 'Congreve' lov'd, and 'Swift' endur'd my Lays' ('To Arbuthnot', l. 138, 'Poems', 4.105) -- show the positive side of his human relations. His relations with women were various. He was attracted to and loved female society; women, perhaps, enjoyed his company, wit, and attentions, without being able to love a man of his invalid constitution. Pope sometimes found this difficult to bear. Teresa Blount eventually prompted his disapproving letters to mutual acquaintances; Lady Mary, more contemptuous and aggressive, as Pope may have thought, received aggression back in good measure. Martha Blount, on the other hand, he came to love 'upon unalterable principles' ('Correspondence', 4.511). In his imitation of Horace's 'Ode to Venus' (7 March 1737) he wrote her an undoubted love poem, while his earlier Epistle 'To a Lady' (1735), actually but not explicitly dedicated to her, trembles on the brink of proposal while certainly offering his devotion. The two were intimate friends, and Martha was chief beneficiary of Pope's will, much to the anger of his half-sister. 
In character Pope showed remarkable self-confidence and strength. Throughout what he called 'this long Disease, my Life' ('To Arbuthnot', l. 132, 'Poems', 4.105) he constantly counted on the power of his own talent, and it never let him down. The boy with 'the maddish way' became the man of courage as well as cunning. Like his early friend Southcott he was manipulative, imaginative, and steadfast. He manoeuvred to survive in a society where the odds were against him. For a while he ran with the whigs; he trimmed and equivocated; on behalf of himself and the Blount sisters he speculated in the South Sea Company, yet on other occasions he acted not only imprudently but bravely. In the end he was an unpredictable tory (in the eighteenth-century sense of the term), a Jacobite sympathizer at least, and a lasting Roman Catholic. Even at his death in May 1744, when his friend Nathaniel Hooke, a Catholic, asked whether 'he would not die as his father and mother had done, and whether he should not send for a priest', Pope, surrounded by Catholics, Anglicans, and freethinkers, said: 'I do not suppose that is essential, but it will be/look right [textual crux in Spence], and I heartily thank you for putting me in mind of it'. On the arrival of the priest, 'he exerted all his strength to throw himself out of his bed, that he might receive the last sacraments kneeling on the floor' (Spence, 655 and note). This textual crux seems to carry Pope's equivocation to the end, though he might have quit his Catholicism, had he wished, once both his parents were dead. He himself died at Twickenham on 30 May 1744, and was buried next to his parents in Twickenham church on 5 June. 
A crux in Pope's life is his constant claim that moral virtue was more important to him than poetic reputation, whereas his readers, including many of his friends, valued him first as the best poet of the age. Even Swift sought fame through having Pope address an epistle to him. It was of course important for a moral satirist to be thought a good man, but one or two challenged him on this score. In a notable exchange with Pope, Aaron Hill insisted that it was Pope's poetic talent that led to his fame, and to Pope's moral claims Hill replied that: 'at any other time, you would have remembered, that 'Humility' is a moral Virtue'. Still, Pope insisted, 'it is my 'Morality' only that must make me 'Beloved' or 'Happy'' ('Correspondence', 3.168, 172). Certainly Pope was loved by many as well as admired. He had a gift for friendship. His attacks need to be balanced by his tributes, just as his equivocations need to be balanced by his bravery and his long record of physical endurance. After his death, his friend the fifth earl of Orrery wrote that he would leave 'his poetical character' to the learned, 'his faults to the envious, the foolish and the vain, but I could dwell for ever on his Virtues'. 'He had a heart... susceptible of friendship... was of a generous hospitable Nature', had 'a mildness in his composition and a sweetness in his Voice... He assumed to himself no superiority from his genius or his character'. Most 'delicate and feeble in the frame of his constitution', he was one whose 'strength lay in his Mind. There he was a Hercules to conquer Hydras and demolish Monsters of every kind' (Harvard U., Houghton L., Eng. MS 2182, vol. 4, Orrery to Barry, 4 June 1744). Orrery's tribute is relevant to the interdependence of personal morality and moral satire, and is the more convincing in not denying faults. 
What marks Pope out from virtually every other classic writer of verse and prose in the eighteenth century -- from Defoe, Swift, Richardson, Fielding, Sterne, and Johnson; from Addison, Gay, Thomson, Smart, Gray, and Goldsmith (and among the many noted women writers of the eighteenth century it would be equally hard to find an example who could vie with him) -- is the extraordinary sequence of different imaginative works which he achieved, almost, as it seems, every five years of his short adult life. Further, a book could easily be written on his small and often non-couplet poems. The rhyming couplet itself, employed in all Pope's major works, is managed with such skill and feeling, that what at a superficial glance looks like relentless uniformity is on a closer and more sensitive reading, infinite variety. An example may be allowed at this point, one in which Pope is himself reflecting on his art and his time of life: '
This subtle Thief of Life, this paltry Time, 

What will it leave me, if it snatch my Rhime? 

If ev'ry Wheel of that unweary'd Mill 

That turn'd ten thousand Verses, now stands still. 
(Epistle 2, ii.76-9, 'Poems', 4.171)' The heroic couplet is a simple and easily scanned symmetry -- or asymmetry. Even a slight shift from an expected paradigm is thus perceptible and may be questioned for its aptness. Here the not quite medial pause in line 76 (six syllables first, then four) lends an intensifying brevity to the paradox: 'paltry Time'. Line 77 is exactly balanced, five and five, on a true medial pause and ironically counterpoints the implication that the poet will be left with virtually nothing, reminding the reader as by its symmetry it does of the common notion that what is lost is balanced by what is gained or retained. These two end-pausing lines are succeeded by a rolling enjambment in which the sense almost, but not quite, reaches without a pause the end of line 79: this is Pope's 'unweary'd Mill' of verse, an image of labour, associated with the grinding of corn and the stamping of coin, with currents of water and the winds of heaven, suddenly checked by the late pause in the last line. Not one of these four lines is structured in the same way, but varies with its meditated sense. Further, the rhyming couplet gives rhyming words a prominence beyond their position in syntax. The salience here of 'Time' and 'Rhime' is the more marked because it reverses a conventional expectation of the opposite order ('Rhime' and 'Time'), and indeed Pope had often remarked that he had more important things to do with his time than just carry on rhyming. Here then the rhyme stresses a notable turn. It is noticeable, too, that 'Rhime' is aligned with 'Life', each stolen and snatched away, as Belinda's lock by the Baron. The association of 'subtle', 'Thief', and 'snatch' also suggests, not steady ageing but sudden loss of ability ('What if I woke up one morning and found I couldn't write any more?'). To all this may be added how plain and simple is Pope's diction here. No word is elaborate. No word flaunts exceptional learning. Of the thirty-three words in the two couplets, only six are of more than one syllable. Only one word is of more than two syllables and that, appropriately, is 'unweary'd', salient in the one unpausing line. 
Pope's young friend Henry Brooke, protege of Swift, told him in 1739 (two years after the above passage was written) that: 'there is one great and consistent genius evident through the whole of your works, but that genius seems the smaller by being divided... each distinct performance is as the performance of a separate author, and no one being large enough to contain you in your full dimensions, though perfectly drawn... your genius is like your sense, one is too crowded for the common eye, and the other for a common reader. ('Correspondence', 4.199)' It is a striking tribute, but not without its problems. Brooke did not attempt to define Pope's 'one great and consistent genius' but went on to suggest that the poet would have done better to excel rather than imitate Homer, and that 'I wish you had wrote more upon divine subjects'. Like the work of many of the great artists of the world Pope's art still defies his most admiring critics. 
Pope's reception after his death may be thought first to have divided, then rejected, and finally restored the two things which he insisted on as interdependent parts of his achievement: his moral record as a man, and his poetic record as a public satirist. 
When Pope in his will left the copyright of his printed works to William Warburton, expecting that Warburton would both edit his works and write his biography, he cast his reputation into the hands of Hanoverian England. He may have thought this the best strategy to protect his fame. It certainly secured him an influential defender in the short term. Warburton's edition of Pope's 'Works' (1751; revised 1766) can be neither relied on nor ignored. A wrong point is his extension of Pope's footnote on Clarissa's speech in 'The Rape of the Lock'; a moot point his designation of 'To Arbuthnot' as 'Prologue to the Satires' (that is, chiefly, to the 'Imitations of Horace'). Unable, in the end, to write the life of Pope, he persuaded his protege the lawyer Owen Ruffhead to do so: Ruffhead's 'Life of Alexander Pope, esq.' was published in 1769. Joseph Spence would have been a better choice as a biographer, since he had known Pope longer than Warburton, and was reasonably familiar with the Catholic side of Pope's life and connections. His records of Pope's conversation could almost have made him his Boswell. Warburton may have felt Spence knew too much. Yet while Ruffhead saw Pope through the lens of Warburton, his 'Life' has a lot to be said for it. He was allowed to consult Spence's collections, gives a good account of Pope's falling out with Addison, and is almost always an appreciative defender of the poetry. The religious issue comes out mainly at the end where he seems to claim Pope a protestant in all but name. 
Ruffhead's defence of Pope was directed against Joseph Warton who, in volume 1 of his 'Essay on the Writings and Genius of Pope' (1756), was disposed to think him not in the highest rank of poets, masters of the sublime and pathetic such as Spenser and Milton, but eminent in a lower rank. Warton's book betokened a change of taste and of times. It may not be entirely accidental that it was in the 1750s, when the Hanoverians were firmly in the saddle, that public stability prompted poets and readers to turn inwards. Grand public satire was less admired and less needed, together with the joy of wit and the exhilaration of attack and defence. For Warton, Pope was mainly to be admired for the nature poetry of 'Windsor-Forest', the inventiveness of 'The Rape of the Lock', and the pathetic and passionate appeal of 'Eloisa to Abelard'. 
The great defender of Pope in the later decades of the eighteenth century was Samuel Johnson. Like Spence, Johnson went back a long way. He had himself been part of the literary opposition in the late 1730s and, though he never met Pope, the two had had several shared acquaintances, including the poet Richard Savage and the fifth earl of Orrery. In his 'Lives of the Poets' (1779, 1781) he far outgoes Ruffhead as a biographer and Warton as a critic. Johnson approaches Pope from late eighteenth-century political and literary viewpoints. On both life and writings he is judicious in the strongest and most positive sense of the term. His readiness, in his magisterially independent mode, to acknowledge faults and failings in Pope and his writings lends force to his positive judgments though, as always in Johnson, every word and every period must be pondered: 'Pope had likewise genius; a mind active, ambitious, and adventurous, always investigating, always aspiring; in its widest searches still longing to go forward; in its highest flights still wishing to be higher; always imagining something greater than it knows, always endeavouring more than it can do. (Johnson, 3.217)' The biographical details of Johnson's 'Life' are exquisitely chosen and suggestive: 'His dress of ceremony was black, with a tye-wig, and a little sword' and he 'once slumbered at his own table while the Prince of Wales was talking of poetry' (ibid., 3.198). 
The poets of the Romantic period, sometimes supposed to be in total reaction against Pope, were nevertheless subtly divided over him. Wordsworth, perhaps the greatest first-generation Romantic, denounced the school of Dryden and Pope as not writing from 'the amiable, ennobling and intense passions' (to Walter Scott, 7 Nov 1805). Byron, perhaps the greatest second-generation Romantic, defended him and imitated him. 'We are sneeringly told that he is the 'Poet of Reason', as if this were a reason for his being no poet' ('Some observations upon an article in 'Blackwood's Magasine'', 15 March 1820). A third major poet of the period, George Crabbe, imitated but changed the vision of Pope's couplet art. 
This balance of views may not look too bad for Pope, but the case for his continual influence goes deeper. It is no accident that, at the opening of an early sequence in each of Wordsworth's and Byron's greatest long poems, each poet used the same locution, designed to introduce bitter disappointment: 'Was it for this...?' ('The Prelude', 1805, i.271, 'The Prelude, 1799, 1805, 1850', ed. J. Wordsworth, M. H. Abrams, and S. Gill, 1979, 1, 42-3; 'Don Juan', i.147-51, Lord Byron, 'The Major Works', ed. J. McGann, 1986) familiar from Pope's 'Rape of the Lock', iv.97-102 ('Poems', 2.191-2). There were, indeed, examples of the phrase before as well as after Pope's poem, and it goes back to Harington's translation of 'Orlando Furioso', but both Byron and Wordsworth here drew on a common current of rhetorical poetry which flowed through the work of Pope. Wordsworth's card-game in 'Prelude', i.532-62 imitates and echoes Pope's card-game in 'The Rape of the Lock', iii.25-100 ('Poems', 2.171-4), the game in each case being used to comment on high politics. Further, a couplet of Pope which might in itself seem almost pre-Romantic: '
So slow th'unprofitable Moments roll, 

That lock up all the Functions of my soul 
(Epistle 1, i.39-40, 'Poems', 4.281)' echoes into 'Prelude' (1805), i.248: 'Doth lock my functions up in blank reserve', each poet using 'functions' to express a natural spiritual activity which presses against the 'lock' of circumstance and constraint. Byron, for his part, wrote a new heroi-comical poem in 'A Vision of Judgement' (1822), while in 'Don Juan' he frequently recalls and recasts Pope, as here where Byron quotes from Pope's 'Verses to the Memory of an Unfortunate Lady', line 9: '
He that reserves his laurels for posterity 

Who does not always claim that bright reversion... 
(Dedication, l. 9)' Despite Byron's telling defence of Pope, the lake school locked away for many decades any 'bright reversion' in favour of Pope. 
Meanwhile Pope's other world, the recusant world of the Catholic with its continental connections, was almost entirely forgotten. Then, in 1852, Charles Wentworth Dilke seems to have heard of an archive of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century papers still apparently preserved by Catholic priests in the Harting area of west Sussex. He discreetly bought it. They were the Caryll papers, eventually given by Dilke's family to the British Museum (Add. MSS 28224-28554, 28259, 28618-28619). Among the thirty-three manuscript volumes (as eventually ordered) he discovered Caryll's transcripts of Pope's letters to him. This revelation of Pope's procedure with his own letters, seen out of the context of the poet's situation, seemed, to his next editor, the Revd Whitwell Elwin, the final proof of Pope's duplicity. Elwin thought that Pope had simply faked his correspondence and cheated his friends. Thus Pope's moral satire and his moral record were both now seen in the worst of lights. In these unpropitious circumstances the great Victorian edition of Pope's 'Works' (including his letters) was produced by Elwin and J. C. Courthope (1871-89). Courthope added a short and balanced biography. Yet this was Pope's lowest point, and even while the new edition was in process Matthew Arnold, in a much quoted essay, described Dryden and Pope as 'not classics of our poetry but classics of our prose' (M. Arnold, 'Thomas Gray', 'The English Poets', 1880). 
Of Pope there remained in the mind of that time a residual air of elegance, a dim memory of brilliance, and a perverse and perhaps puerile relish for Pope's imputed wickedness as a satirist. This was the age of Aubrey Beardsley and Lytton Strachey. Three factors, however, restored Pope to admiration and fame in the twentieth century. The first was an academic tradition of literary history, represented by Courthope and George Saintsbury in Britain, and by R. H. Griffith, Austin Warren, and George Sherburn in the USA. Secondly, the 'new criticism', a fresh interest in the close analysis of literary texts irrespective of biographical or cultural context, now served Pope well. Wit was again appreciated and artifice not deplored. It is in this light that Pope figures in Virginia Woolf's 'Orlando' (1928): '
Then the little gentleman said, 

He said next, 

He said finally,* 

Here it cannot be denied was true wit, true wisdom, true profundity. The company was thrown into complete dismay. 




*These sayings are too well known to require repetition, and besides they are all to be found in his published works. 
('Orlando', chap. 4)' William Empson, T. S. Eliot, and F. R. Leavis found in him something to relish and something to admire. Eliot, at one point, found something he thought he could exploit, for in his drafts for 'The Waste Land' (1922) he originally opened 'The fire sermon' with a long passage of heroic couplets in the manner of Pope. Of this pastiche Ezra Pound wrote to Eliot: 'Pope has done this so well that you cannot do it better' ('T. S. Eliot, The Waste Land, a Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts', ed. V. Eliot, 1971, 127). Eliot abandoned the passage. 
This notable conjunction, however, indicates the third reason why Pope rose again. It was because before and still more after the First World War it was hard to feel confident in the western world. Both 'The Dunciad' and 'The Waste Land' disclose visions of fallen empires and broken cities. When the nation is challenged or declines, when the civil order seems in jeopardy, Pope and Dryden are likely to come up. They understood a riven and contested society; they knew something of the fidelities and anxieties of civilization. 
All these interests and concerns contributed to the twentieth-century 'Twickenham' edition of Pope's 'Poems' -- in eleven volumes (1939-69), with John Butt as general editor -- which includes the Homer translations. George Sherburn published 'The Correspondence of Alexander Pope' in 1956; J. M. Osborn published the first full and reliable edition of Spence's 'Anecdotes' in 1966, and in 1985 Maynard Mack, Pope's most learned and intelligent advocate in recent times, published 'Alexander Pope: a Life', of which it has been written that 'it stands as the rock of all biographical studies of Pope', offering 'a wealth of authenticated detail unlikely ever to be seriously challenged' (Baines, 45). 
There was in the later twentieth century a further development. Revisionist history grew dissatisfied with historiography written from the winners' viewpoint. It was recognized that at any given moment few particular outcomes are or seem inevitable: to live with intelligence is to live with a sense of more than one possible future. Thus (for example) new attention was now paid to the Levellers in the seventeenth century and to the Jacobites in the eighteenth: two movements which at various points looked powerful but travelled towards eventual defeat. The Catholic recusant community was largely Jacobite while the Jacobite movement (at least in England and Scotland) was largely protestant. The Catholics, who eventually secured social equality, have been drawn out of the shadows by modern Catholic historiography. Jacobitism, which barely survived the end of the eighteenth century, has been the focus of what has recently been described as 'an explosion of work on Jacobitism and literature' (K. King, 'Jane Barker, Exile', 2000, 147). Thus of the two worlds Pope inhabited, the one more shadowed, touched on at the beginning of this life, is at present coming back into view, to pose new questions about both Pope the man and Pope the poet. 


@@@@@


doc= 22527


Pope, Alexander (c.1706-1782), Church of Scotland minister, was the son of Hector Pope (died 1719), minister of Loth, Sutherland. He was educated at King's College, Aberdeen, where he graduated MA on 15 April 1725, having received a contribution from the synod in 1720 to enable him to study for entry into the ministry of the Church of Scotland. On 28 July 1730 he was elected session clerk and precentor of Dornoch in Sutherland, in the far north of Scotland, where probably he was also a schoolmaster. He is said to have ridden in the summer of 1732 on his pony from Caithness to Twickenham to visit his namesake, the poet, who presented him with a copy of the subscribers' edition of his translation of Homer's 'Odyssey' and a handsome snuff-box. A letter from the poet to the minister refers to the 'accidental advantage which you say my name has brought you' (28 April 1738, 'Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 4.93), which would seem to indicate that there was no blood relationship between them. 
Pope was licensed as a preacher by the presbytery of Dornoch on 19 February 1734, and was ordained minister of Reay, Caithness, on 5 September. He was one of the early evangelical ministers of Caithness. A man of exceptional bodily strength, he won over the population of his parish through his feats of physical prowess. He was known to use a stick to disperse those he found playing games on Sunday. In 1773, when the heritors of the parish had refused to provide a school, he petitioned the court of session and won his case. 
On 3 July 1735 Pope married Margaret ('c'.1715-1744), daughter of Andrew Sutherland of Pitgrudy. They had three sons. Following her death on 22 December 1744 he married (on 2 December 1745) Janet Ross ('c'.1725-1793); there were a daughter and four sons from that marriage, including James ('b'. 1750), who became his father's assistant, but who died soon after his ordination. Pope translated a large part of the 'Orcades' of Torfaeus, extracts from which are published in Charles Cordiner's 'Antiquities and Scenery of Northern Scotland' (1780). He also wrote the account of Strathnaver and Sutherland in Thomas Pennant's 'A Tour in Scotland' (1771), a description of the Dune of Donadilla in 'Archaeologia Scotica', as well as making a collection of Ossianic literature about 1739. He died at Reay on 2 March 1782. 


@@@@@


doc= 22528


Pope, Alexander (1763-1835), actor and painter, was born in Cork. Both his father and his elder brother, Somerville Stevens Pope, were miniature-painters, and Alexander was trained as an artist under Francis Robert West at the Dublin Art School, and, for a time, under H. D. Hamilton in London. Hamilton's influence is evident in Pope's crayon portraits, the best of which date from the early 1790s. He practised as an artist for a time in Cork, but, after appearing as Norval at a fancy-dress ball and then taking the same part in private theatricals, he turned to the stage for a profession. He had a success in Cork in the title role of a stage adaptation of Aphra Behn's 'Oroonoko', which led to his engagement to play the same part at Covent Garden in January 1785. He went on to perform a number of roles that season, including Jaffier in Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd' and Horatio in Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent', and Othello for his own benefit. In the same year he began exhibiting at the Royal Academy, a practice he maintained until 1821. 
In August 1785 Pope returned to Dublin, where on 9 August he married Elizabeth Younge (1739x45-1797) ['see 'Pope, Elizabeth], an actress more than twenty years his senior. But his career was to be based in London, where he was favourably received, and where he played the principal tragic parts at both Covent Garden and Drury Lane. He also made occasional appearances in the provinces, especially in Edinburgh, where he first appeared in June 1786 as Othello to the Desdemona of his wife and became a favourite with the audience. He was soon well known for an entire round of parts, chiefly tragic. In Shakespeare alone he played Antonio, Banquo, King Henry in 'Richard III', Bassanio, Iachimo, Leontes, Romeo, Hotspur, Wolsey, Richmond, Macduff, Lear, Hamlet, Ford, Posthumus, Tullus Aufidius, the Ghost in 'Hamlet', Henry VIII, Polixenes, Macbeth, Proteus, Antipholus of Syracuse, Antonio, Iago, John of Gaunt, Henry VI, Hubert, Friar Lawrence, and Kent. Except for the Kembles, Pope had at the outset few formidable rivals. 
The first original character assigned Pope at Covent Garden seems to have been St Preux in Reynolds's unprinted tragedy 'Eloisa' (December 1786); the second was Haswell in Elizabeth Inchbald's 'Such Things Are' (February 1787). At this period he was assigned a wider range of parts than was afterwards allotted him, and he played Lord Morelove in Cibber's 'The Careless Husband', Lord Townly in Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Husband', Young Bevil in Steele's 'The Conscious Lovers', and Young Mirabel in Farquhar's 'The Inconstant'. At the end of 1789, on a question of money, he left Covent Garden, to which he returned after an absence of three years. His wife, however, remained there even during his absence. On his return, apart from playing the first Columbus in Morton's 'Columbus, or, A World Discovered' (December 1792) and Falkland in Sheridan's 'The Rivals' (May 1793), Pope confined himself principally to serious parts; he made his first attempts at Hamlet and Lear, and played the Earl of Pembroke in George Watson's 'England Preserved', the prince of Wales in Pearce's 'Windsor Castle', and Mordant in Holcroft's 'The Deserted Daughter'. In Lent, with John Fawcett, Charles Incledon, and Joseph George Holman, Pope gave readings, accompanied with music, at the Freemasons' Hall. For his benefit the following year he played Sir Giles Overreach, and in January 1797 he was the first Charles in Morton's 'A Cure for the Heartache'. 
On 15 March 1797 Pope's first wife, Elizabeth, died and on 24 January 1798 he married his second wife, the actress Maria Ann Campion (1775-1803) ['see 'Pope, Maria Ann], at St George's, Hanover Square. In the meantime he continued at Covent Garden. For his benefit in April 1799 he was Henry in 'The Count of Burgundy', translated from Kotzebue by Anna Plumptre, and adapted for the English stage by Pope himself. During this season he was one of the eight actors who published the statement of their case against the management. Pope continued at Covent Garden during the following season, in which he played Hastings in Rowe's 'Jane Shore' for the first time, and one or two other parts, but was little seen; the next year he transferred his services to Drury Lane, and appeared in January 1802 as Othello; on 2 March he played the first Major Manford in Cumberland's 'Lovers' Resolutions'. The second Mrs Pope died on 18 June 1803, and in 1804 Pope's son, a midshipman, also died. At the close of the season Pope was dismissed by the Drury Lane management, which had secured the services of the child prodigy Master Betty as tragedian. He had played very little recently, and expressed his intention of retiring and devoting himself to painting. In February 1806, however, he reappeared at Covent Garden as Othello. 
Pope married, on 25 June 1807, his third wife, Clara Maria ('bap'. 1767, died 1838), a painter, the daughter of Jared Leigh, and the widow of Francis Wheatley RA ['see 'Pope, Clara Maria]. After visiting Ireland, being robbed in Cork, and narrowly escaping shipwreck, he was again seen at Covent Garden, as the original Count Valdestein in Charles Kemble's 'The Wanderer', in January 1808. After Covent Garden burnt down he played the original Count Ulric in Reynolds's 'The Exile' at the Haymarket (November 1808). At the smaller house in the Haymarket, to which the company migrated, he appeared as Pierre in 'Venice Preserv'd'. Pope was then dismissed from Covent Garden, and for three years was unheard of in London, though he played at times in Edinburgh. He returned to the new house at Drury Lane (28 November 1812) as Lord Townly, and in January 1813 was the original Marquis Valdez in Coleridge's 'Remorse'. He remained at Drury Lane until his retirement. Among the more notable parts he played were Cardinal Beaufort in 'Richard, Duke of York', compiled from the three parts of 'Henry VI' (December 1817), and Farneze in an alteration of Marlowe's 'The Jew of Malta' (April 1818). After a short absence, in October 1819 he made what was called his 'first appearance for two years', as Strictland in Benjamin Hoadley's 'The Suspicious Husband', and in March 1820 he was Prior Aymer in Soanes's 'Hebrew', a version of 'Ivanhoe'. However, his popularity and his powers had diminished, and he began to be assigned subordinate parts, such as Zapazaw, an Indian, in 'Pocahontas' (December 1820), Drusus to Macready's Caius Gracchus in Sheridan Knowles's 'Caius Gracchus' (November 1823), and Lord Burleigh in 'Kenilworth' (January 1824). In 1824 he also played at the Haymarket, but his last appearance on stage was at Drury Lane, on 21 May 1827, as the original Clotaire in Grattan's 'Ben Nazir the Saracen'. In 1828 he applied for a pension from the Covent Garden Fund, to which he had contributed for forty-four years, and obtained a grant of $80 a year, which was later raised to $100. 
On Thursday 22 March 1835, Pope died at his house in Store Street, Bedford Square. He had been a mainstay of one or other of the patent theatres for many years, and his Othello and Henry VIII were held in his day to be unrivalled. He was strong and well formed, and he had much harmony of feature, but was, in spite of his excellence in pathos, deficient in expression. He possessed a mellow voice and a graceful and easy deportment. 
Throughout his life Pope practised miniature-painting, and between 1785 and 1821 he exhibited at the Royal Academy fifty-nine miniatures. Many portraits by him were engraved, including those of Henry Grattan, John Boydell, Henry Tresham, the actor William Lewis, and Anna Crouch. He also engraved a mezzotint plate from a picture by himself, entitled 'Look before you Leap'. 
Pope was a confirmed gourmand, and went so far as to offend people of distinction and influence by his pretensions, such as refusing to sit with Angelica Catalani because she cut a fricandeau with a knife; and ordering expensive luxuries, for which he did not pay, to be sent in to houses to which he was bidden. Many of these stories are probably coloured, if not apocryphal; but there is abundant proof of his gluttonish propensities and supercilious ways. 


@@@@@


doc= 22529


Pope, Clara Maria (bap. 1767, d. 1838), flower painter, was born in London, and baptized on 12 April 1767 at St Andrew by the Wardrobe, London, the youngest daughter of Jared Leigh (1724-1769), a proctor in Doctors' Commons and an amateur artist, and his wife, Elizabeth (1729/30-1807). She married first, probably in the mid-1780s, Francis Wheatley RA (1747-1801), portrait, landscape, and genre painter, with whom she had one son and three daughters; and second, on 25 June 1807 at St George's, Hanover Square, London, as his third wife, Alexander Pope (1763-1835), actor and miniature painter. 
The portraits of Clara Maria by Wheatley, for whose fancy pictures she was also a model, show a woman of great charm and elegance. The determination of her character, first to provide for her debt-laden family when Wheatley's health declined by becoming a teacher of drawing and later, against the advice of her friends, to marry Pope, is observed by Joseph Farington RA from the mid-1790s. With the encouragement and assistance of Farington and of the architect John Soane, who befriended her, she contributed to supporting her family by teaching and painting, finding a generous pupil in Princess Sophia of Gloucester and patronage in the close at Salisbury and exhibiting miniatures, portraits, and genre scenes at the Royal Academy from 1796. After 1812, when she showed a portrait of the renowned soprano Madame Catalani (engraved), she exhibited, until her death, examples of the fruit and flower paintings on which her reputation rests. 
Following the Dutch tradition well known in late eighteenth-century England through engravings, Mrs Pope's elaborate watercolours include 'A Group of Flowers in a Classical Vase' (exh. RA, 1818), 'Fruit, Flowers and a Squirrel on a Stone Slab' (exh. RA, 1829; ex Christies 16 March 1923, lot 3), and 'The Flowers of Shakespeare' (exh. RA, 1835; Sir John Soane's Museum, London) depicting the bust of Shakespeare in its niche on the staircase of Soane's house encircled by all the flowers mentioned in his works. As a botanical illustrator she worked for Samuel Curtis (1779-1860), florist and proprietor of the 'Botanical Magazine', producing spectacular large-scale watercolours, engraved in aquatint and hand-coloured for his 'Monograph on the Genus Camellia' (1819) and for 'The Beauties of Flora' (1820) with life-size flowers painted in strong colours set in a paler landscape background. Eleven highly finished watercolours of paeonies painted in 1821 and 1822 (Natural History Museum, London) were never published; 'Moss Roses' in a Chinese vase (1832) was made into a more delicately coloured lithograph. Mrs Pope's work was well received during her lifetime and the grand manner of her illustrations has ensured her a place in the history of botanical illustration. She died at her home in Store Street, London, on 24 December 1838. 


@@@@@


doc= 22530


Pope, Elizabeth (1739x45-1797), actress, was born near Old Gravel Lane, Southwark; she may have been the Elizabeth Young baptized at St Olave's, Southwark, on 14 January 1744, the daughter of Samuel and Mary Young. Little is known about her family and background, and what is available seems to be anecdote or conjecture. Her parents probably died when she was young. 'The Secret History of the Green Rooms' credits her with a good education and reports a broken engagement to a lawyer. She supposedly became a milliner, but about 1767-8 secured through the actor father of a fellow worker an introduction to George Garrick. He was so impressed by her talent as an actress that he took her to his brother, David Garrick. Circumstances were to favour Miss Younge, for during that season Hannah Pritchard retired, and Garrick was also having trouble with the difficult Ann Barry. Garrick had a policy of keeping a good actress in reserve -- a 'bisque', as he called them -- which he used to balance the demands of his star players. Seeing that she would strengthen the Drury Lane company, Garrick not only employed her but gave her his personal instruction. 
Elizabeth Younge's first appearance at Drury Lane was as Imogen in 'Cymbeline', on 22 October 1768. The prompter William Hopkins wrote of her debut in his diary: 'Miss Younge -- an elegant Figure in both dresses, has a very good voice, but wants management, -- a great deal of acting about her, and would make a great figure, if she had a better face. Upon the whole she played the part amazingly well, and had deserved the applause. (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA')' Garrick thought well enough of her to raise her salary from $2 to $3 per week. Her next roles were Jane Shore and Ovisa in the premiere of Alexander Dow's 'Zingis'. The play was mocked by audiences and Younge was among the performers hissed. She played Perdita in Garrick's 'Florizel and Perdita' for her benefit on 7 April 1769, reciting the epilogue entitled 'Bucks Have At Ye All'. In summer 1769 she worked at Richmond with James Love, but in the autumn returned to Drury Lane and played Juliet in 'Romeo and Juliet' (2 October), among many other roles. 
Younge began the new season of 1770 at Drury Lane with Imogen in 'Cymbeline', followed by Alcmena in 'Amphitryon', Lady Easy in 'The Careless Husband', and Almera in 'The Mourning Bride', but on account of a dispute with Garrick over her salary she moved to Capel Street Theatre in Dublin, where she enjoyed great success in both tragedy and comedy. She spent summer 1771 in Bristol and, after renegotiating her terms with Garrick, went back to Drury Lane to play Imogen again (26 September), which, according to Hopkins, she 'played Well & was receiv'd with Great Applause'. Francis Gentleman, writing in 'The Theatre', objected to her wearing men's breeches, finding it 'rather a breach of female delicacy' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'), though he found her performance spirited, despite her being 'in actions stiff' (ibid.) and 'oft dissonant in tone' (ibid.). 
From 1771 to 1778 Younge remained at Drury Lane, where she gained a reputation as a leading actress of both tragedy and comedy. In the summer months she also performed in Bristol, Edinburgh, Birmingham, Liverpool, and Cork, earning as much as $10 per night at Liverpool in 1777. Garrick seems to have had a great respect for her talent, though at times she caused him irritation, particularly over the negotiation of salary and role allocation. On 11 January 1775 she performed Viola before George III, but only following a stern letter from Garrick which cautioned her for trying his patience after she threatened to withdraw from the play, pleading a cough. In October 1775, when Younge, Mary Ann Yates, and Frances Abington were being temperamental, Garrick cast a lesser actress Mary King, in a leading role to play before the king in order to belittle the three. Despite these disputes Garrick seemed to have had a warm affection for Younge. In the green room during his final performance of King Lear, on 8 June 1776, according to one account, they played out a scene from the play, she being Cordelia, during which he affectionately gave her a mock father's blessing. 
Younge was the fifth highest paid actress at Drury Lane by the time of Garrick's retirement, earning $12 per week. At her benefit on 30 March 1778 the box-office receipts amounted to $285, which was a considerable sum for the time. 
It was again a dispute over salary that caused Younge to move to Covent Garden after the 1778-9 season, despite the fact that Sheridan offered her $20 per week, a free benefit, and a substantial clothing allowance. She remained at Covent Garden until her death. In 1784 she again played Juliet and was satirized poetically in the 'Public Advertiser' for not acting her age. 
Younge was as subject to scandalous gossip as other actresses, but she was more discreet than many. A batch of anonymous letters to the poet Edward Jerningham may be hers. If so, they represent an association of some fondness on her part. It was during her summer seasons at Dublin and Cork from 1782 and 1785 that Younge met her husband, Alexander Pope (1763-1835), a young Cork artist and actor. They were married in Dublin on 9 August 1785, causing some comment to arise from the age difference of two decades. After the marriage Mrs Pope returned to Covent Garden but worked only part of the 1785-6 season, probably because she was pregnant. The Popes had one son, who is reputed to have died as a midshipman on the frigate 'Doris' in 1804. Mrs Pope had secured her husband a position at Covent Garden, to which she returned in September 1786, after both of them had played at Norwich and Edinburgh that summer. She was now being paid $20 and her husband $9 per week. 
From all accounts Elizabeth Pope was a solid performer, an exemplar of the Garrick style who excelled in characters of sentiment such as Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice'. She was not among the greats of tragedy, like Sarah Siddons, or comedy, like Elizabeth Farren, but she had the talent and flexibility to move between the two; comedy, however, was her forte. It was reported that she was not a beauty, though it is suggested she became more attractive with age. A biographer in the 'Monthly Mirror' (1775) had the following adulatory word portrait of her: 'Her features, without being regular, were soft, and her natural complexion the most delicate in the world... eyes blue... mouth well formed... teeth white. Her neck, her shoulders, her arms, were models of statuary... Her height was commanding, yet easily elegant. Such also were her manner and conversation. Her heart spoke of every thing said.' George III supposedly admired her resemblance to Lady Sarah Lennox, the object of his affections as a young man. 
On 10 January 1797 Mrs Pope created the role of Helen Vortex in Thomas Morton's 'A Cure for the Heartache', and this proved to be her last original piece. Seriously ill from the start, she rapidly deteriorated and had to abandon the role by 26 January. She died on Wednesday 15 March 1797, at her home, 5 Half Moon Street. The records at Westminster Abbey give her age at death as fifty-two, but Ralph Wewitzer, in his 'Dramatic Reminiscences', wrote that she died aged fifty-seven, which has been echoed by other accounts (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). During her life, by agreement with her husband, she had retained control over her own property and finances; however, she died intestate, so her considerable estate of $7000 and house went automatically to him. She was buried in the west cloister of Westminster Abbey on 22 March 1797, and her funeral was attended by colleagues from Covent Garden and members of the School of Garrick, the society of Garrick's former colleagues, in which she was the only woman to be given honorary membership. 


@@@@@


doc= 22531


Pope, Jane (1744-1818), actress, was the daughter of William Pope (1707/8-1784), barber and wigmaker for the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, until his retirement in 1782. According to a manuscript note on the Pope family, now in the Sterling Memorial Library at Yale University, Jane Pope was born on 20 January 1744 in Little Russell Street, London; this seems to be confirmed by the baptism of Jane Pope, daughter of William and Susanna, on 26 January 1744 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. Nothing is known of her mother, beyond the fact that she had at least three sons and two daughters. To judge by the terms of Jane Pope's will, though, the family was a close one. Jane and her sister Susanna, neither of whom married, lived together for much of their adult lives, caring, in the latter stages, for a possibly orphaned niece, who married in the year following Jane's death. William Pope prospered by an association with the theatre that necessarily had an impact on his children. His shop in Little Russell Street was adjacent to the stage door of Drury Lane, and on 3 December 1756 Jane and one of her brothers featured in the novelty production of David Garrick's farce 'Lilliput', in which the Lilliputians were all played by children and Gulliver by the adult Astley Bransby. There is no evidence that William Pope provided his daughters with a formal education, but Jane's surviving letters are literate and fashionably allusive, evidence in themselves of the sophistication of Garrick's Drury Lane company, of which she was a full member from 27 October 1759, when she played Corinna in Sir John Vanbrugh's 'The Confederacy'. With the exception of the single season of 1775-6, she remained at Drury Lane until her retirement at the end of the 1807-8 season, thus giving a half-century of service for which there are few parallels. 
Playing Flippanta in 'The Confederacy' when Jane Pope made her adult debut was Catherine (Kitty) Clive, whose career Pope, in many ways, shadowed and several of whose roles she inherited when Clive retired. The friendship that developed between the old actress and the debutante was an unusual one. It lasted until Clive's death in 1785, and was memorialized when Pope oversaw the erection of a monument to her in the churchyard at Twickenham. In 1790 Kitty Clive's brother, James Raftor, left $250 each to Jane and her sister Susanna and appointed them executors of his will. It may have been on Kitty Clive's advice that Jane confined her acting career to comedy. It was a career that never reached the heights or plumbed the depths. Like Clive before her, she began by playing pretty young coquettish women, or soubrettes, such as Biddy in Garrick's 'Miss in her Teens' and Prue in William Congreve's 'Love for Love' (1759-60) and the title role in George Colman's 'Polly Honeycomb' and Lucinda in Samuel Foote's 'The Englishman in Paris' (1760-61). She played these parts with sufficient spirit to attract praise from the demanding Charles Churchill in 'The Rosciad' (1761). By the time she came to select a role for her benefit at the end of the 1761-2 season, however, she was confident enough of her maturity to plump for Beatrice in 'Much Ado About Nothing', and in the 1762-3 season the Drury Lane management trusted her with the flighty but knowing Widow Belmour in Arthur Murphy's 'The Way to Keep Him'. 
Pope was now receiving a salary of $4 per week, an amount inferior only to that of the star actresses in the company. In the major success of the 1765-6 season, Colman's and Garrick's 'The Clandestine Marriage', she created the secondary role of Miss Sterling, and on 4 December 1767 she played Polly Peachum in John Gay's frequently revived 'The Beggar's Opera'. She was, according to contemporary critics, an indifferent singer, though a talented dancer until a rapid increase in weight during the 1770s led her to abandon dancing. She was also celebrated by audiences for the clarity of her speaking voice and by theatrical colleagues for her even-temperedness. Her on-stage reliability was reflected in the prudence with which she conducted her private life. Of her two known romantic attachments, her engagement to the actor Charles Holland the elder (1733-1769) was broken off in 1768 when Holland, a well-known philanderer, was found in a boat on the Thames with the actress Sophia Baddeley. Her second engagement, to John Pearce (1727-1797), a stockbroker, ended (at an unknown date) when Pearce made it clear that, as his wife, Pope would be expected to abandon her stage career. 
The single interruption to Jane Pope's Drury Lane career followed a dispute with Garrick over salary at the end of the 1774-5 season. She was, by then, receiving $8 per week, and Garrick, not without some misgivings, rejected her demand for $10. Out of work in London, Pope performed in Dublin through the 1775-6 season, Garrick's last at Drury Lane, but the relationship between actress and manager was fundamentally warm enough to survive the salary dispute. Garrick wrote to her in February 1776, expressing his eagerness to secure her place with the new managers of the theatre, and she replied fondly, with an agreement to settle for her former salary. As a result of Garrick's negotiations she was back at Drury Lane in good time to create the role of Mrs Candour at the sensational opening of Richard Brinsley Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal' on 8 May 1777. From then on, her major contribution to comedy was in frumpish parts such as Audrey in 'As You Like It' and eccentric older women such as Mrs Heidelberg in 'The Clandestine Marriage'. For her new manager, Sheridan, she created the comically exaggerated Tilburina in 'The Critic' (1779-80) and played Mrs Malaprop and the title role in revivals of 'The Rivals' (1796-7) and 'The Duenna' (1801-2). Her last original role was as the Dowager Lady Morelove in the ill-fated single performance of Sophia Lee's 'The Assignation' on 28 January 1807. She gave her farewell performance on 26 May 1808, as Deborah Dowlas in George Colman the younger's 'The Heir at Law', taking her leave of Drury Lane with a speech in the character of Audrey. 
Jane Pope's retirement must have been comfortable. Living with her sister Susanna, or living alone, she amassed sufficient wealth to bequeath upwards of $5000 to Susanna, as well as various properties, including the house in Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, where she had lived from 1782 until her retirement from the stage. Her last years were spent, initially at no. 25 and then at no. 17 St Michael's Place, in Brompton, where she died on 30 July 1818. She was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 10 August 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 22532


Pope, Maria Ann (1775-1803), actress, was born in Waterford, Ireland, the second daughter of a merchant named Campion, of an old Cork family. Her mother died in the same year as her daughter. After her father's death she was brought up by a relative. She started to read many plays and attend the Waterford Theatre. This gave her a taste for the stage, and her relative took her for an audition in Dublin with Richard Daly. However, she was considered too young to be taken on; indeed the manager at first thought he was auditioning the older woman. But she persisted and was eventually engaged by Hitchcock, on behalf of Daly, for the Crow Street Theatre in Dublin, where she made her debut on 13 February 1790, as Monimia in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan'. She was very nervous and had to be propelled on to the stage by Hitchcock and promptly fainted. After a rapid recovery she went on eventually to become the heroine of the Irish stage. 
Maria Ann Campion appeared with G. F. Cooke as Desdemona to his Othello at Crow Street on 19 November 1794 and next played with F. E. Jones at the theatre in Fishamble Street. She soon adopted the name Mrs Spencer at the behest of some relatives. Although she had hoped to go to America, the move came to nothing, and on 13 April 1795 she received admiring reviews as Juliet in Belfast. She moved to England for a brief spell in Liverpool and in York with Williams, where a benefit was held for her on 9 April 1796. She then moved between Ireland and England, being in Kilkenny later in 1796 and in York again for the 1796-7 season, where on 31 January she recited Collins's 'Ode to the Passions'. In Dublin she met W. T. Lewis, who procured for her an engagement at Covent Garden. There she played Monimia again for three nights, and gained enthusiastic reviews from the 'True Briton', the 'European Magazine', and the 'Monthly Mirror'. She played Juliet to the Romeo of H. E. Johnston and the Mercutio of Lewis, followed by Cordelia with C. Murray, by Jane Shore, and by Indiana. On 24 January 1798 she married, at St George's, Hanover Square, the actor and painter Alexander Pope (1763-1835), a widower of some ten months, and two days later she was announced as 'Mrs Pope, late Mrs Spencer' in Thomas Morton's 'Secrets Worth Knowing'. On 13 February she was the original Maria in Thomas Holcroft's 'He's Much to Blame'. 
Mrs Pope played a variety of parts during the season, including an original role in 'Curiosity' for Holman's benefit performance. She was the first Princess of Mantua in 'Disinterested Love'. In the summer of 1798 she and her husband both played in Edinburgh, and by 15 October she was back at Covent Garden on a salary of $8 a week as Desdemona, followed by the first Lady Julia in Thomas Dibdin's 'Five Thousand a Year'. She played Elizabeth in 'The Count of Burgundy', written by her husband for his benefit. For her own benefit she played the Queen in 'King Henry VIII', which earned $391 gross. The next season saw her as Cordelia and as Juliana in Frederick Reynolds's 'Management', and on 7 November 1799 as Jane Shore, which received hostile notices. The following summer she spent in Birmingham, with a return to Covent Garden and a tour to Manchester, Hull, Sheffield, and Liverpool. In 1801 she accompanied her husband to Drury Lane, making her first appearance there as Juliet on 1 February. On 2 March she was Lady Caroline Malcolm in the first production of Richard Cumberland's 'Serious Resolution', and later that year visited Nottingham and Brighton. Other important roles followed, but on 10 June 1803, while playing Desdemona for Cooper's benefit, she was taken ill. On 18 June she had a stroke and died, at 5 Half Moon Street, Piccadilly, where she had lived for several years, leaving a daughter, born in 1801 (a son, born in 1799, died soon after birth). She was buried on 25 June in the same grave as Elizabeth Pope, her husband's first wife, in the west cloister in Westminster Abbey. Maria Ann Pope was slender in figure, with a sweet face and expression and a retentive memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 22533


Pope, Sir Thomas (c.1507-1559), founder of Trinity College, Oxford, was the elder son of William Pope, a yeoman of Deddington, Oxfordshire, and of his second wife, Margaret, daughter of Edmund Yates of Standlake, Oxfordshire. At his death in 1523, William Pope's estate was valued at $6 a year; he bequeathed half the land and $100 to Thomas. Throughout his life Thomas Pope attached great importance to family ties, and he remained close to his brother, John, and his three sisters. His mother's second husband was John Bustard of Adderbury, Oxfordshire; she died on 25 August 1557. 
Pope was educated at Banbury grammar school and at Eton College. He was subsequently articled to Richard Croke, comptroller of the hanaper, for whose family he retained a lifelong affection, even remembering Croke's son in his will. Such loyalty to those who had helped him was characteristic. Pope needed no family influence to rise steadily through the Tudor civil service. His superiors appreciated his efficiency and reticence and the genuine quality of his friendship. In the 1530s he secured a series of increasingly lucrative posts: October 1533, clerk of the briefs in the Star Chamber; the same month, a reversionary grant of the clerkship of the crown in chancery (the position became his in 1537); November 1534, keeper of the change and money in the Tower of London; and, December 1536, treasurer of the newly established court of augmentations. He now ranked as a principal officer of state, responsible for valuing and receiving or selling the land and property of the dissolved monasteries. He was entitled to his own chaplain and to considerable fees and perquisites. 
Pope's rise in office was matched by personal advancement. On 26 June 1535 he was granted a coat of arms, and on 15 October 1536 (or perhaps 18 October 1537) he was knighted. Pope quickly impressed, and became a protege of, the lord chancellor, Thomas Audley, in whose household he was found in 1535. Echoes of his patron's compliance to the monarch, and of his guarded generosity in founding Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1542, are evident in Pope's later life. A very different friend and influence was Audley's predecessor, Thomas More. On 5 July 1535 Pope shouldered the heartbreaking task of informing More of his imminent execution; it was an emotional farewell. In 1538 Pope incurred the displeasure of Thomas Cromwell when he pre-empted him in the purchase of the manor of Drayton, Gloucestershire. His tactful handling of the situation was masterly. 
The great love of Pope's life was Margaret, 'nee' Townsend, the widow of Ralph Dodmer, mercer and mayor of London in 1529. Pope may well have been married before -- one uncorroborated antiquarian source records a divorce, from Elizabeth Gunston, performed by the archdeacon of London on 11 July 1536. Six days later he married Margaret; she brought him much happiness and four stepchildren, whom he enjoined the executors of his will to treat as his own. Pope's only child, Alice, was born on 16 April 1537. The couple's family life was short-lived. Alice died in infancy, and Margaret died on 16 January 1539. Both were interred at St Stephen Walbrook in the city of London. 
During five years at the court of augmentations Pope was only once personally involved in the actual workings of the dissolution, when he went to receive the surrender of the abbey of St Albans on 5 December 1539. Typically, he retained a lifelong sentimentality towards St Albans, purchasing its former property Tyttenhanger, at Ridge, Hertfordshire, for his country home in 1547. The treasurership was a lucrative post, and offered great opportunities to make a fortune. To buy 'church lands without money' ('Brief Lives', 2.157) was quite possible with a little help from Pope's extensive and obliging family circle. Some at least of his purchases were paid for by means of large entry fines, levied in return for a long lease at a low rent. By 1555 Pope claimed to hold twenty-seven manors in seven counties, principally in his own Oxfordshire. With his accumulated riches, he was generous, but careful. He always demanded value for money in his multifarious gifts and charities. 
On 1 January 1541 Pope married Elizabeth, the daughter of Walter Blount, of Blount's Hall, Staffordshire, and widow of Anthony Basford or Beresford, of Bentley, Derbyshire. She brought another stepson, John, and two brothers into Pope's ever-expanding menage. An ambitious and intelligent woman, Elizabeth wholeheartedly shared her husband's aim to found an Oxford college. By 1546 they were living at Bermondsey in Southwark, and the following year Pope moved his London residence to the former Benedictine convent at Clerkenwell. 
There is considerable evidence for Pope's adherence to the Roman Catholic religion, yet no suggestion that his role in or his profit from the Reformation ever troubled his conscience. Although very much part of Henry VIII's establishment, he was not offered a part in the administration of Edward VI. On the accession of Mary, however, he was appointed a privy councillor and entered into the most active part of his career. In the first year of Mary's reign Pope was deputed to arrest Lord Russell, to remain in London and victual the Tower in the queen's absence, and to examine those involved in Northumberland's rebellion. Mary's confidence was such that in 1556 she entrusted the Princess Elizabeth to his guardianship at Hatfield House in Hertfordshire. Pope showed appropriate kindness and respect, and deftly managed communications when Eric of Sweden proposed marriage to Elizabeth. 
The apogee of the 'novus homo' is the creation of an everlasting memorial. The foundation of Trinity College, Oxford, meant much to Pope. The college would be a real contribution to society and a fitting home for the cycle of obits which were to be celebrated for the souls of all whom he loved. The considerable personal prestige and recognition offered by the project was a bonus. On 20 February 1555 he purchased the site of the former Benedictine Durham College which lay outside Oxford's northern wall. Royal licence was granted on 8 March, and on 28 March 1555 Pope issued his foundation charter and delivered seisin in person. There was to be a president, twelve fellows, and, eventually, twelve scholars. The material endowment was comprehensive and practical, even to chains for the library books, but the main emphasis was on plate and vestments for the chapel. Sentiment can be detected in the choice of manors and land to be given to the college on 25 March 1556. The most valuable manor was Pope's first major acquisition, Wroxton in Oxfordshire, which was let on a long lease to his brother. 
Pope certainly enjoyed having his own college, taking great pains over the statutes and keeping the Princess Elizabeth informed of progress. He enrolled various family members as fellows, scholars, and undergraduates. He wrote enthusiastically to the first president, Thomas Slythurst, a learned man and a devout Catholic, and a frequent guest at Clerkenwell and Tyttenhanger. Another correspondent was Arthur Yeldard, himself a protege of Pope's, trusted with the tuition of the founder's inattentive stepson John Basford. And with practical foresight Pope left money for the erection of a quadrangular building at Garsington (the presidential living) to accommodate the college in plague years. It was eminently satisfying to be the founder of a college. 
However, it was not to last. Thomas Pope died on 29 January 1559 at his house in Clerkenwell, victim of a fever epidemic. He had made his will six weeks before, with many generous bequests to individuals and institutions. His funeral was fittingly splendid, and, according to his instructions, he was laid to rest beside his beloved Margaret and Alice at St Stephen Walbrook on 6 February. But he did not rest undisturbed. His widow Elizabeth married the distinguished military commander Sir Hugh Paulet. With him she maintained a close interest in the life of the young college, styling herself foundress and doing much to consolidate a somewhat insecure financial position. A shrewd judge of posterity, in 1567 she had the bodies of both Thomas and Margaret Pope removed to a tomb in Trinity College chapel, beneath life-sized alabaster effigies of Thomas and herself. Elizabeth died on 27 October 1593, and she too was laid in the tomb she had thus prepared. In 1691 the medieval building was demolished and the tomb reverentially incorporated into the design of the new chapel. The church of St Stephen Walbrook, however, was utterly destroyed in the great fire of London in 1666. 
There is a single contemporary portrait of Thomas Pope, traditionally ascribed to Holbein, perhaps by Stretes. Kept at Wroxton Abbey, property of the descendants of Pope's brother, John, it was purchased by Trinity College in 1930. Pope's face is somewhat fleshy, calm, and comfortable with life. The expression is inscrutable. Thomas Pope left little record of his own inner thoughts and feelings. His faith was private. His personal motto was that inherited by Trinity College: 'quod tacitum velis nemini dixeris' ('tell your secrets to no-one'). 


@@@@@


doc= 22534


Pope, Thomas, second earl of Downe (bap. 1622, d. 1660), nobleman, was baptized at Cogges, Oxfordshire, on 16 December 1622, the eldest son of Sir William Pope (1596-1624) and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Watson of Halstead, Kent. After his father's death his mother married Sir Thomas Peniston of Cornwall, Oxfordshire. His grandfather Sir William Pope ('bap'. 1573, died 1631) of Wroxton Abbey, near Banbury, was made knight of the Bath in 1603 and a baronet in 1611; he was created Baron Belturbet and earl of Downe in Ireland in 1628. 
On his grandfather's death on 2 July 1631 Pope succeeded to the earldom of Downe and the estates in north-west Oxfordshire settled on the family in 1555 by his great-uncle Sir Thomas Pope, founder of Trinity College, Oxford. However, Wroxton remained in the occupation of his father's younger brother, Sir Thomas Pope, later third earl of Downe ['see below']. 
The second earl was brought up at the house of his guardian, John Dutton (1594-1657) of Sherborne, Gloucestershire ['see under 'Dutton family (per. 1522-1743)]. He married Dutton's daughter Lucy (died 1656) on 26 November 1638, but claimed that he had been bullied into the match by his stepfather and that 'there was no liking' between him and Lucy (GEC, 'Peerage', 4.450 n. c). In June 1639 he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, as a nobleman. While there he attracted attention by fighting with William, son of Dr John Prideaux, rector of Exeter College, and had left the university by March 1641. 
Downe's financial problems were evident before the civil war, for he was described as being destitute in 1640, when North Leigh Wood of 80 acres was sold to raise money for him. In the following year he complained of ill treatment by his stepfather and that his allowance was inadequate. His difficulties were exacerbated by the war, in which he was an active royalist, and by 1646 his estates between Oxford and Banbury were said to have been 'consumed by the King's garrisons' ('Calendar of the... Committee for Compounding', 934). His tenants protested that he and his grandfather had converted copyholds into leases and had evicted some tenants, replacing them with others. 
In October 1645 the earl petitioned to compound for his delinquency. His estate was valued at $2202 per annum, and his fine was set at $5000. He had paid $1000 by June 1646, but was unable to raise the remainder, which was still owing four years later. In May 1650 a bill was introduced in the House of Commons to permit him to sell manors and land to the value of $4000 to raise the fine and to pay other creditors. This was redrafted as applying to property worth $500 per annum, and in that form it was passed in February 1651. He retained the manors of Cogges and Wilcote, Coberley, Gloucestershire, which he held in the right of his wife, and Enstone. Edward Twiford became tenant of the remainder of his estates at an annual rent of $1300, but excluding several farms, all of the woods, and the power to keep courts. 
Countess Downe died on 6 April 1656, having 'fasted from eating or drinkinge' for ten days before her death, and was buried at Coberley (GEC, 'Peerage', 4.450 n. d). Following her death the earl sold Coberley to Paul Castleman. 
Shortly after the discharge of his sequestration, in April 1651, the earl left England and travelled in France and Italy. He died in the house of Arthur Tilliard, an apothecary, in St Mary's parish, Oxford, on 28 December 1660. He was buried at Wroxton on 11 January 1661. The only child of his marriage, Elizabeth, was born at Cogges on 15 April 1645 and married first Sir Francis Henry Lee, fourth baronet, of Ditchley, and second Robert Bertie, earl of Lindsey. 
The peerage passed to Pope's uncle, 
The succession to the Wroxton lease and estates was disputed between the three daughters of the third earl and their cousin, Lady Elizabeth Lee. In 1671 Frances Pope, one of the third earl's daughters, married Francis North, afterwards Lord Guilford, and in 1680-81 he bought out the other coheirs and subsequently settled at Wroxton. A portrait of the second earl, attributed to Isaac Oliver, is at Wroxton. The third earl was painted by William Dobson. 


@@@@@


doc= 22535


Thomas Pope, third earl of Downe (1598-1668), nobleman, the younger son of William Pope ('bap'. 1573, died 1631), later first earl of Downe, and his wife, Anne (1561-1625), widow of Henry, Lord Wentworth (died 1593), and daughter of Sir Owen Hopton and his wife, Anne Itchingham. He matriculated at Oxford in 1614 and was knighted at Woodstock in 1625. On 30 April 1636 he married Beata (died 1678), daughter of Sir Henry Poole of Sapperton, Gloucestershire. The royalists imprisoned him at Oxford for six weeks during the civil war and he was held in 1656 on suspicion of complicity in the 'cavalier' plot. He died on 11 January 1668 and was buried at Wroxton on 20 January. His only son, also Thomas, was born in 1630. He matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, in 1658, and died on 18 May 1668, when the titles became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 22536


Pope, Walter (bap. 1628, d. 1714), astronomer and writer, was baptized at All Saints', Oxford, on 30 November 1628, the son of Francis Pope (died 1631), officiating minister at All Saints', and his wife, Jane (died 1635), daughter of the puritan preacher John Dod (1550-1645); John Wilkins (afterwards bishop of Chester) was his half-brother from his mother's previous marriage. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1645. He was appointed scholar of Wadham College, where Wilkins was warden, by the parliamentary visitors in October 1648; he graduated BA on 6 July 1649, was admitted to a fellowship on 9 July 1651, and graduated MA on the following day. He held various offices in his college, including that of sub-warden in 1658, and, as junior proctor of the university, successfully resisted in 1658 an attempt to abolish the wearing of caps and hoods. Later in the same year he went abroad, and in September 1659 wrote to Robert Boyle from Paris that he spent his time reading Corneille's plays and romances, 'which we hire like horses' ('Works of... Boyle', 5.631). He was elected dean of Wadham College for 1660-61, had the degree of DM conferred upon him at Oxford on 12 September 1661, and succeeded Christopher Wren as professor of astronomy at Gresham College, London, in June 1662. 
Pope obtained licence to travel in 1664 and spent two years in Italy, while Isaac Barrow and Robert Hooke took his lectures. He had a reputation for wit as well as for learning; he acquired French and Italian abroad and taught them to Wilkins, and he could also converse in Spanish. He was among the first members of the Royal Society, being admitted on 22 May 1661; he sat on the council in 1667 and 1669. Wilkins made him registrar of the diocese on his elevation to the see of Chester in 1668, and Pope held the post until his death. 
At Salisbury in 1686 Pope suffered severely from an inflammation of the eyes, but was eventually cured by Dr Daubeney Turberville, whose epitaph he gratefully wrote. It was probably this infirmity which induced him on 21 September 1687 to resign his professorship and withdraw to Epsom, Surrey. On 16 November 1693 he lost all his books through a fire in Lombard Street. He was also annoyed by a protracted lawsuit. Wood, who was very bitter towards him, accused him of having led 'a heathenish and epicurean life', but John Ward regarded Pope's intimacy with Seth Ward, bishop of Salisbury, as alone sufficient to refute the charge (Ward, 111-16). 
Pope often stayed in Ward's house, received from him a pension of $100 a year, and endeavoured to console the bishop and divert his melancholy in his last years. Most of Pope's publications consisted of poetry and translations. Of his letters to the Royal Society on natural history subjects arising from his travels, only two were published in the society's 'Philosophical Transactions' -- one in 1665 on the mercury mines of Friuli, and one in 1666 on a solar eclipse seen in London. Pope's later years were passed at Bunhill Fields, London, where he died in 1714. A few days before his death he executed a deed of gift to Anne Shargold, who had cared for him for many years. She was to receive all his possessions and remaining money, the purpose of the deed being to prevent his relations disputing her rights. He was buried in St Giles Cripplegate, London, on 25 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 22537


Hennessy, Sir John Pope (1834-1891), politician and colonial governor, was born on 8 August 1834 in Cork, the third of five sons of John Hennessy (died 26 April 1867), hide merchant, of Cork, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Casey, butter merchant, of Cork. Hennessy's parents were Roman Catholic and anti-British. His father's family claimed descent from the indigenous Irish landed gentry and styled themselves Hennessy of Ballyhennessy, co. Kerry. As a boy Hennessy suffered from chronic bronchitis, and was educated by a private tutor. His family intended him for a medical career and for five years he attended Queen's College, Cork, gaining first-class honours in surgery and medicine. In May 1855 he went to London, where he continued his medical training at Charing Cross Hospital, but later that year he procured a clerkship in the Privy Council Office. Small, pushy, arrogant, ambitious, manipulative, and an accomplished charmer and bluffer, he was part of the migration of 'middle-class or 'petit bourgeois' careerists... micks on the make' (Foster, 'Paddy and Mr Punch', 283-4). He started to read for the bar, in preparation for a political career. 
Like some other Irish Catholics then, angered by the Liberals' policies on the Queen's Colleges and the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Bill', Hennessy became a Conservative, and he especially admired Disraeli. In the general election of 1859 he stood as 'Irish Nationalist Conservative' candidate for King's county, generally supporting Disraeli but independent on Irish issues. Surprisingly, with no money or powerful patrons, he was elected, the first Roman Catholic Conservative MP. Surviving on arrogance, bluff, and possibly a clandestine subsidy from Conservative Party funds, he publicized himself, intrigued, cultivated Disraeli and others likely to be useful to him, and baited the Liberal leaders. He advocated amendment of Irish land laws and the reclamation of bogs to counter emigration, and criticized the government system of education. He supported the causes of Poland and Italy, and contributed to some minor reforms: amendment of the Irish poor law (1861-2), the 'Prison Ministers Act' (1863), and amendment of the 'Mines Regulation Acts'. In November 1861 he was called to the bar at the Inner Temple. His rise had been meteoric and some contemporaries considered him the model for Trollope's Phineas Finn. However, at the general election of 1865 he was defeated by seven votes, through not paying his debts from the previous election to the King's county jaunting-car owners; they refused to work for him, so he could not transport rural voters to the polls. He was involved in business speculation, and acquired a mistress, Miss A. M. Conyngham, with whom he had two illegitimate daughters. In 1866, with $2000 borrowed from a moneylender, he attempted to gain wealth by snaring a rich heiress, a Miss Canning, into marriage, but failed. In debt, he lived in hiding in the country. In 1866 the Conservatives returned to office and, through Disraeli's patronage, Hennessy procured a colonial governorship, of Labuan, a small island off Borneo. With typical arrogance he accepted under protest, wanting Queensland -- which was not even vacant -- and complained of being given 'such a small place' (Pope-Hennessy, 51). In fact it was only because of lingering 'old corruption' and jobbery, and mid-Victorian metropolitan irresponsibility towards the lesser tropical dependencies that so dubious a failed politician -- without colonial, naval, military, or administrative experience -- was given a position he so little deserved. In September 1867 he sailed for Labuan. 
Hennessy was governor of Labuan from 1867 to 1871. It was swampy, unhealthy, backward, and impoverished, and he achieved little there. He freed prisoners (a favourite gesture of his), increased taxes, quarrelled with other officials, and was reproved by the Colonial Office. On 4 February 1868 he married a beautiful but dowryless Eurasian girl, educated in England and Switzerland, Katherine (Kitty) Elizabeth (1850-1923), second child and only daughter of Hugh Low (1824-1905), colonial treasurer at Labuan and botanist, and his wife, Catherine (1828/9-1851), herself half Scottish and half Malay. They had three sons, but reportedly their marriage was not happy. In 1871 Hennessy was designated to the governorship of the Bahamas. He left Labuan in September 1871 and reached London in December. 
From February 1872 to February 1873 Hennessy, temporarily seconded from his Bahamas appointment, was governor-in-chief of the British west African settlements -- Sierra Leone, the Gambia, the Gold Coast, and Lagos -- with his headquarters at Freetown, Sierra Leone. Against Colonial Office advice he insisted on taking his first born, three-year-old son, John Patrick (Johnnie). Soon after arrival at Freetown the child died of dysentery: that year over a quarter of the Europeans died. Hennessy tried to curry favour with the local people and, despite corruption scandals -- the creole Treasury cashier stole over $800 -- wanted the appointment of Creoles to more senior positions: the Colonial Office refused. He criticized missionaries and missionary education (presumably because of his anti-protestant prejudice), praised the Muslims of the interior, and supported Edward Wilmot Blyden's proposal for the establishment of a west African university. He introduced limited sanitary reform in Freetown, and abolished Sierra Leone land and other direct taxes, leaving specific duties the mainstay of the local budget. His tariff chiefly benefited French traders. He also abolished timber duties, removing the only check on deforestation. He was popular with Freetown Africans, and for years afterwards 'Pope Hennessy day' was celebrated annually. Before leaving, Hennessy announced a $5000 surplus: later the auditor found he had omitted a month's expenditure. Hennessy claimed that customs revenue would rise, but it fell. By the end of 1873 there was a colonial deficit, the first for nearly twenty-five years. Following the Anglo-Dutch treaty of 1872, Hennessy in April 1872 received from the Dutch their Gold Coast forts. He was made CMG. However, as so often during his colonial career, trouble followed policies. His unpopular appointment of a new civil commissioner at Elmina led to riot and murder there. 
At Lagos, annexed by Palmerston in 1861, the British administrator from 1866 was Captain John Hawley Glover RN (1829-1885), a dynamic 'man on the spot' who favoured British expansion and had a vigorous, interventionist, anti-Egba and pro-Ibadan policy. In 1872 the colonial secretary, Lord Kimberley, instructed Hennessy to caution Glover. Hennessy went to Lagos in April 1872 and quickly formed an antipathy to Glover. The newly arrived Hennessy told Glover, who had fifteen years' west African experience and spoke Yoruba, 'you know nothing of the country, the place or the people' (Pope-Hennessy, 135). Exceeding Kimberley's instructions, in June he sent Glover home. Kimberley disapproved but did not reverse this. Hennessy quickly and with evident animus reversed Glover's anti-Egba policy. Hennessy's pro-Egba policy soon failed. Glover criticized to Kimberley Hennessy's 'vanity and culpable weakness' (Newbury, 372). On the Gold Coast Hennessy was hostile to the Fante confederation and contributed to its failure. He negotiated with the Asante and as usual thought he was doing well. The Asante invasion of 1873 surprised him, and he initially denied that there was an invasion. However, he left the problem to his successor, as he sailed for Liverpool in February 1873. Back in Britain some blamed him for the Second Anglo-Asante War: he blamed others. Controversy continued between him and the officials with whom he had quarrelled. Sir George Barrow, head of the Colonial Office African department, wrote in February 1873: 'one of the 'pope's' failings is to endeavour to establish infallibility & at the same time to obtain supremacy -- hence his liability to anathematise all around him... but... he may be the victim of his own selfish policy' (Pope-Hennessy, 145). He continued to hope to re-enter Irish politics. 
The Colonial Office insisted that Hennessy next be governor of the Bahamas, a post which he had earlier accepted. He demanded a superior governorship and, with mendacious effrontery, claimed he had been insufficiently rewarded after he 'abandoned another career to enter the Colonial service' (Pope-Hennessy, 150). In fact when he procured his first colonial appointment he had been a careerless, disreputable adventurer, in debt and in hiding. He arrived in the Bahamas in May 1873. He introduced some minor reforms and demanded that the crown agents buy a $300 carpet from a shop in Cork. He again mismanaged colonial finances and made false claims about them. A Colonial Office official noted that 'when Mr Hennessy leaves a Colony the state of the Finances are not found to be in so satisfactory a state as he has led us to believe' (ibid., 153). He stayed for only eight months, a tranquil interlude he enjoyed, then in June 1874 was called home on leave and never returned. 
In 1874 Hennessy's patron Disraeli again became prime minister, and in 1875 Hennessy was promoted to the governorship (salary $4000) of the Windward Islands, with his capital in Barbados, where he arrived on 1 November. The Colonial Office favoured federation of the Windward Islands, and this Hennessy tried to implement. Always more sympathetic to criminals than to their victims, he released convicts and abolished flogging. He encouraged emigration to other West Indian islands. In Barbados the planters still dominated the assembly, and they opposed federation. Some formed the Barbados Defence Association and, with their allies in London, pressed for Hennessy's recall. At Easter (April) 1876 labourers, their hopes raised by Hennessy, rioted (the federation riots). Hennessy suppressed them. In May the assembly voted for his recall. The imperial government defended him, but in November moved him to Hong Kong. 
Appointed governor of Hong Kong in November 1876, Hennessy arrived there in April 1877. The traveller Isabella Bird (Mrs Bishop) described him as 'a little man much overdressed in white kid gloves and patent leather boots with a mouth which smiles perpetually and sinister eyes which never smile' (Pope-Hennessy, 188). An inefficient administrator, he favoured the Chinese and in 1880 appointed the first Chinese member of the legislative council, and increased the revenue from opium. British residents criticized his 'Chinomania' and 'native race craze' (Lowe and McLaughlin, 228). Prejudiced against the protestant Scots and English there, he promoted his Catholic favourites. He quarrelled with the merchants, the military commander, and the governor of Macau, and was censured by the Colonial Office. In 1878 an official told the new colonial secretary, Sir Michael Hicks Beach, that Hennessy 'cannot ever gain the confidence of those over whom he is placed' (Pope-Hennessy, 195). Despite a disastrous fire and demands from the residents, he failed to establish an effective fire service. He again freed convicts. His pro-criminal sympathies and failure to act effectively against increased violent crime alienated the British population, who called for his dismissal and boycotted Government House. Nevertheless in April 1880 the outgoing Conservative government, to his delight, made him a KCMG. Finally, following a scandal -- in April 1881 Hennessy publicly assaulted with an umbrella a former favourite, Thomas Child Hayllar QC, member of the legislative council, apparently because of Hayllar's relationship with Hennessy's wife -- Hennessy was removed from Hong Kong. He left in March 1882 ostensibly on leave. When it was rumoured that he might return, the leading British merchants sent 'the strongest remonstrances' (Eitel, 567) to the British government. 
In December 1882 Hennessy was appointed governor of Mauritius, and he arrived on 1 June 1883. He favoured the Francophone Creoles -- who demanded 'Mauritius for the Mauritians' -- and Indian immigrants, openly and extravagantly condemned British rule, and quarrelled with Charles Dalton Clifford Lloyd, the lieutenant-governor, and other British officials. In September 1886 a royal commission was issued to Sir Hercules Robinson, governor of Cape Colony and high commissioner in South Africa, to inquire into Hennessy's administration: an unprecedented situation. The subjects for special inquiry were Hennessy's relations with Lloyd, pro-Creole partisanship, financial maladministration, 'persecution' of English officials, and pro-criminal bias. Robinson arrived in early November 1886, and on 16 December suspended Hennessy. In January 1887 the colonial secretary, Sir Henry Thurstan Holland (from 1888 Lord Knutsford), ordered Hennessy back to England. In July, Holland decided, after a long inquiry, that sufficient cause had not been shown for Hennessy's removal, though he had been guilty of 'want of temper and judgment', 'vexatious and unjustifiable interference' with the magistrates, and undue partisanship. Accordingly he returned to Mauritius and served out his time, retiring on a pension in December 1889. 
When Hennessy left Mauritius he was suffering from tropical anaemia, and Holland had made it clear that he would be offered no further governorship. He had become a governor only by default, and returned to his true metier of politician. He hoped Gladstone would later make him a peer, and in 1890 bought a large house, Rostellan Castle, near Cork. In December 1890 he contested the by-election at North Kilkenny -- described by 'The Times' as a 'priest-ridden agricultural constituency' (Callanan, 69) as anti-Parnellite home rule candidate. Tim Healy and Michael Davitt organized the anti-Parnellite campaign, Parnell campaigned for Vincent Scully, Fenians supported Parnell, and Catholic clergy and farmers opposed him. The contest was bitter and violent. Hennessy, who campaigned despite the winter cold, was apparently almost incidental: the election was fought for and against Parnell. Hennessy was elected by a majority of 1165: a disaster for Parnell, shattering his mystique of electoral invincibility. 
Hennessy died of heart failure on 7 October 1891 at his residence, Rostellan Castle, near Cork, and was buried in his father's grave, with no separate headstone or monument, in Cork city cemetery. A statue by M. Loumeau (1908) was erected in Port Louis, Mauritius. Hennessy's widow in 1894 married a much younger man, Edward Francis Thackwell JP ('b'. 1868, only son of Major-General W. de W. R. Thackwell of Aghada Hall, co. Cork). She was superstitious and a spiritualist and, following supposed messages through a ouija board, she sold Hennessy's books and destroyed most of his private papers. His grandson (Richard) James Arthur Pope-Hennessy (1916-1974) wrote a sympathetic but not entirely accurate or impartial biography of Hennessy, 'Verandah: some Episodes in the Crown Colonies, 1867-1889' (1964). 
Hennessy was controversial and, according to his biographer, 'essentially a man who produced the most violent reactions in all those with whom he came in contact' (Pope-Hennessy, 23). To his admirers he was the champion of the underdog and of racial equality. Others saw him as prejudiced, perverse, deceitful, arrogant, autocratic, and quarrelsome. Ernst Johann Eitel, his private secretary in Hong Kong, wrote that 'the centre of his world was he himself' (Eitel, 573). 'The Times' obituary stated: 'he ought never have been placed in charge of such colonies' (Pope-Hennessy, 22). More recently Frank Welsh has written that he had 'an almost complete lack of common sense, method, reliability, tact or management skills' (Welsh, 255), and H. J. Lethbridge that he 'would have been analysed by Adler as suffering from an inferiority complex, as someone who 'overcompensated' for physical miniaturization... an egomaniac who imposed his will regardless' (Eitel, vii). As C. A. Harris wrote: 'he never acquired the habit of making definite and accurate statements' ('DNB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 22538


Popham, Alexander (1729-1810), politician and penal reformer, the only son of Alexander Popham, rector of West Monckton, Somerset, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Gatchell), was born on 18 July 1729. His family was closely allied to the Pophams of Littlecote, Wiltshire. He matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford, on 11 November 1746 but migrated to All Souls, where he graduated BA in 1751 and MA in 1755. He was called to the bar from the Middle Temple in 1755, becoming a bencher of his inn in 1785, reader in 1793, and treasurer in 1800. 
Popham was elected MP for Taunton in 1768. As chairman of quarter sessions he acquired an insight into the state of the county gaols, and during his first parliament an outbreak of fever killed eight out of nineteen prisoners at Taunton. On 17 February 1774 Popham brought forward a bill with a view to mitigating gaol distemper. It was framed in accordance with the disclosures and recommendations of John Howard, who, at Popham's instance, gave evidence before a committee of the House of Commons on 4 March 1774, and was afterwards called to the bar to receive the public thanks. Popham's bill was ultimately formed into two separate measures. The first of these abolished the fees demanded by gaolers from acquitted prisoners. The second provided for a more efficient control of the prisons by the magistrates: proper ventilation was to be provided, rooms were to be allotted for the immediate treatment and separation of the sick, arrangements were to be made for bathing, and, finally, a qualified, salaried surgeon or apothecary was to be appointed to each gaol, and to report to the justices at quarter sessions. The provisions of this last bill were very largely evaded, and little real progress was made until 1784, when the sale of alcoholic drinks in prisons by gaolers was prohibited, and gaolers were paid a fixed salary. 
Unseated at the election of 1774, Popham was returned for Taunton on a petition in March 1775 but lost the election of 1780, only to return in 1784 and then hold his seat until 1796. In his early parliamentary career Popham had voted with the opposition, but came to support the Pitt administration in the 1780s and 1790s. In 1791 he introduced a poor-law amendment bill, a measure that many thought too radical and which was subsequently much amended. 
Popham was married, although details are unknown, and had one daughter. He died at his house in Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, on 13 October 1810, and was buried in London at the Temple Church. Most of the $80,000 he left in his will went to his grandson, Alexander Wadham Wyndham. 


@@@@@


doc= 22539


Popham, Edward (c.1610-1651), naval and army officer, was the fifth son of Sir Francis Popham (1572/3-1644) of Littlecote in Wiltshire and Wellington in Somerset, and his wife, Anne Dudley ('b'. 1575). He was not sent to university but was admitted as a student to the Middle Temple on 14 November 1632. He first came to notice as lieutenant of the 'Henrietta Maria' in the ship money fleet of 1636, commanded by the earl of Northumberland. The following year he was promoted to be captain of the sixth-rate 'Fifth Whelp'. In May 1637 he was commended for 'a very good piece of service' in rescuing two merchant ships from a Dunkirk privateer ('CSP dom.', '1637', 136). On 28 June he lost his ship when she sprang a leak in storm-force winds and sank 16 leagues off Holland, while returning from escorting the ships carrying the goods and baggage of the elector palatine. Seventeen men were drowned but the remainder got into a small boat and reached Brill safely. Popham was not blamed for the mishap because the whelps had been made of unseasoned timber in 1628 and were all leaky. By the beginning of the civil wars only two of them were still in service. 
Popham did not go to sea the next year because of family problems. His father was a rich man but transferred much of his estate to his eldest son, John, on his marriage. John proved to be a spendthrift and when he died in 1638 he left debts of $38,000. The mortgaging of North Petherton rectory by Edward and his need for a temporary loan of $200 from the countess of Castlehaven may well have been part of the fall out ('CSP dom.', '1637-8', 384; '1638-9', 154, 158). In 1639 he was at sea again, commanding a ship in Sir John Pennington's squadron which kept a watchful eye on the Spanish fleet under Oquendo when it took refuge from the Dutch in English coastal waters. He shared the humiliation of having to watch Tromp sail into the Downs and destroy the Spaniards in English territorial waters, unable to intervene. 
Like his father and his elder brothers Alexander and Hugh, Popham supported parliament in the first civil war. He was present at the muster at Wells called by Sir John Horner to put into force the parliamentary militia ordinance. He probably served under Alexander in the early stages of the war but he is not mentioned individually until the parliamentary foray against Sherborne and Portland in April 1643 in which his brother Hugh was killed (Underdown, 48). In June 1643 he commanded a cavalry detachment involved in a stand between Glastonbury and Wells against Hopton's advancing royalist army. He fought at both Lansdown and Roundway Down and after the fall of Bristol went into Wiltshire to rally support for the parliament there. His movements during 1644 are difficult to piece together but in June he, his brother Alexander, and Colonel Ludlow established a committee at Devizes to raise soldiers and secure the county. His intervention in December played a crucial part in persuading parliament to send a force to relieve Blake at Taunton. 
By May 1645 Popham was a colonel in the New Model Army and responsible for organizing the regiments as they arrived at the rendezvous at Romsey in Hampshire ('CSP dom.', '1644-5', 585), where he also maintained contact with the force under Colonel Ralph Weldon which had just raised the second siege of Taunton. He did not take part in the battle of Naseby, being assigned to the brigade commanded by Major-General Edward Massey which was left to keep a watchful eye on the west. He is not mentioned again by name but he may have fought at Langport and been present at the sieges of Bridgwater and Bristol under his brother's command. Sir Francis Popham died in 1644 and when the recruiter elections were held in 1645 Edward succeeded him as MP for Minehead. The Pophams were allies of the notorious Somerset 'county boss' John Pyne, a grandnephew of Sir Francis Popham, and in 1645 a leaked letter from Pyne to Edward Popham, warning that the Scots intended to do a deal with the king, caused a political storm (Underdown, 121-2). The Pophams supported the candidates favoured by Pyne in the Somerset county election of December 1645. On 15 October 1645 at Guildford, Popham married Ann, daughter of William Carr, a groom of the bedchamber. 
Just before the beginning of the second civil war Popham was offered the command of the third-rate 'Swallow' in March 1648 in place of Leonard Harris, who was the original selection; he did not take it up and Harris was reinstated. In August, Popham and Alexander Bence were nominated as commissioners to accompany the fleet under the earl of Warwick against the royalists but again Popham declined office, being replaced by Walter Strickland ('CSP dom.', '1648-9', 195; 'JHL', 10.397). 
In February 1649 Popham became one of the three generals-at-sea appointed by the Commonwealth. He was already a close associate of Robert Blake, who later wrote that he had accepted the position because of Popham's persuasion ('Leyborne-Popham MSS', 38). Blake, who was very conscious of his lack of seagoing knowledge, seems to have begun his military career as a client of the Pophams and there was a close friendship between him and the younger brother. When the 1649 campaign began Popham went to sea with the first detachment of ships to force a squadron of royalist ships out of the channel. An encounter in fog, in which the royalists lost the 'Constant Charles', forced them to retreat westwards. Deane and Blake then joined Popham at Plymouth and the combined force sailed to Kinsale to confront Rupert. After consultation the generals decided to separate. They drew lots for the different stations as a result of which Popham returned to the Downs. For the rest of the campaign he had the dull but essential task of monitoring the movements of foreign warships and ensuring that Deane and Blake receive their supplies promptly. 
Rupert escaped from Kinsale in October 1649 when Blake was blown off his station by a storm, and in March 1650 Blake pursued him to Portugal where he had taken refuge. Information that the French intended to send four powerful frigates to reinforce the royalists led the Commonwealth to dispatch Popham with a squadron of eight ships to supplement the eleven Blake already had. This was counter-productive. King John was embarrassed by Rupert's presence, particularly when Blake and Popham stopped the annual Brazil fleet, but the royalists were reluctant to move while the parliamentarians had such an overwhelming force. Rupert only tried once while Popham was there, on 22 July, and the powerful Commonwealth ships soon had the royalists and their French and Portuguese allies hurrying back to the shelter of the Tagus. At the beginning of September Popham returned to England with most of the fleet, leaving Blake to keep watch with a small squadron of frigates. 
The generals separated again in 1651. Deane was now onshore and Blake was given the task of capturing the Isles of Scilly, leaving Popham in the Downs to police the channel and the North Sea. Popham died of a fever at Dover on 19 August 1651 and was given a state funeral in the Henry VII chapel in Westminster Abbey on 24 September, attended by the speaker, Cromwell, and the council of state. His remains were removed by the royalists in 1660 and returned to the family. One year's salary was granted to his widow, Ann, who married Philip, fourth Lord Wharton, in 1661. Popham left two children, Letitia and Alexander. 


@@@@@


doc= 22540


Popham, Sir Francis (1572/3-1644), politician, was the only son of Sir John Popham (c.1531-1607) of Wellington, Somerset, and his wife, Amy Adams. He entered Balliol College, Oxford, in 1588 at the age of fifteen, but in the following year left the university to commence legal studies at the Middle Temple. He was granted much of his father's property in Somerset at his marriage in 1590 to Anne ('b'. 1575), the heir of John Dudley, who brought with her dower lands amounting to 700 acres in Stoke Newington and Tottenham, Middlesex. In 1597 he settled at Littlecote, Wiltshire, and soon afterwards inherited an estate from his father which was said by Aubrey to be worth $10,000 annually. His participation in the Cadiz expedition in 1596, during which he was knighted by Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, was an early indication of his martial interests, which by 1598 had led to his appointment as deputy lieutenant of Somerset and Wiltshire and colonel of his own regiment of foot; he served as a JP for both counties. In 1606 he became a director of the Virginia Company but although he occasionally took part in company meetings his involvement with its ventures, and with promoting his father's colonial settlement in Maine, is uncertain. He also had an interest in the company for the mines royal. 
Popham's subsequent life was characterized by his long parliamentary service. He represented Somerset in 1597, for which return, in respect of his youth, he had evidently gained assistance from his father, then the lord chief justice; in subsequent parliaments he sat as a member for Wiltshire and the boroughs of Marlborough, Chippenham, and Great Bedwyn, all of which were close to his seat at Littlecote. He chose not to put himself up for the Short Parliament, but was returned to the Long Parliament as a member for Minehead, a seat which he probably owed to the assistance of his son-in-law, Thomas Luttrell. He was made KB in 1603. In common with his father before him, he earned a deserved reputation as a litigant, and was criticized by observers for relying upon his wealth to exhaust his unfortunate adversaries in the courts. One suit which preoccupied him for almost a decade involved his attempts to secure for his eldest son, John, a third share of the estate of Sir Sebastian Harvey, whose only daughter John had married. The share was believed to be worth $13,000, but although Popham eventually agreed to a settlement which included extensive properties and a dowry payment of $10,000 his victory was pyrrhic, for the financial settlement was more than outweighed by his crippling legal costs. By the end of the 1630s Popham, though still rich in lands, was reputed to be living on a pittance, his income stretched both by constant legal expenses and by the extravagant indulgences of his extensive family. 
Popham's opposition to the crown led to his being exempted from the royal pardon in 1642. Although during the civil war he is not known to have fought in any engagements, he took an active part in the military organization of parliament's army in Wiltshire and Somerset. His continuing ties to the west country reflected his extensive estates in the region, but by the mid-1630s he had moved to his house in Stoke Newington, having by then settled Littlecote on his son John. He died at Stoke Newington on 28 July 1644, and on 15 August his body was taken to the parish church in a long procession attended by his remaining family, his domestic chaplains and servants, and numerous dignitaries, lords, and MPs. His wife had probably died before him; of his three sons John, who represented Bath in the 1628 parliament, died in Covent Garden in 1638, reportedly as a result of his own excesses, but Edward Popham and Alexander Popham were to distinguish themselves in the navy and parliament respectively. 


@@@@@


doc= 22541


Popham, Sir Home Riggs (1762-1820), naval officer, was born on 12 October 1762 at Gibraltar. His father, Joseph, was consul at Tetuan. Home was the fifteenth child of his mother, who died giving him birth. Joseph remarried, and with his second wife, Catherine ('nee' Lamb), had six more children, making a total of twenty-one. Popham was educated at Brentford School and Westminster School, and he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in January 1776. 
In February 1778 he entered the navy as a captain's servant on board the 'Hyaena' (Captain Edward Thompson); she was in the Channel Fleet in 1799, in the 'moonlight battle' off Cape St Vincent in January 1780, and in the West Indies. In April 1781 he was transferred to the 'Sheilah-nagig' (14 guns). She was captured in May, and Popham was taken prisoner, but released on parole three months later. In June 1783 he was promoted lieutenant, and later rejoined Thompson in the 'Grampus'. In January 1786 Thompson died; Popham transferred to the 'Nautilus' and surveyed the coast of south-west Africa. His charts from this founded his reputation as a hydrographer. 
Early in 1787, unemployed and on half pay, he obtained leave from the Admiralty and went to Ostend, where he bought his first ship, the 'Madona'. In her he sailed for India under the Tuscan flag and went into trade. At Calcutta he was well received by Lord Cornwallis, at whose behest he surveyed in the Hooghly. In 1788 in Bengal he married Elizabeth Moffat Prince (1772-1866), daughter of Captain Prince of the East India Company's military service; they had five sons and four daughters. In late 1788, with a larger ship which he renamed 'L'Etrusco', he returned to Ostend. In 1790 he returned to India with a cargo from Robert Charnock, an English company at Ostend. At Calcutta, commissioned to supply the company's army on the Malabar coast, he was driven eastwards by the monsoon to Prince of Wales Island (Penang). There, while the ship was refitting, he made a survey of the island which he later published as 'A Description of Prince of Wales Island' (1791; with charts, 1799). He also discovered a new channel between the island and the mainland through which, in the spring of 1792, he piloted the company's fleet to China. For this he was presented with a gold cup by the governor-general in council, who also strongly commended him both to the directors and the Admiralty. Nevertheless his commercial activities were coming increasingly under suspicion. In December 1791 he sold 'L'Etrusco', bought a larger ship -- to which he gave the same name -- and took her to Canton (Guangzhou) where, with two partners, one Swiss and one French, they took on a cargo worth $50,000. At Ostend the ship was seized by an English frigate as a prize of war, brought into the Thames, and condemned as a droit of Admiralty for having traded in contravention of the East India Company's charter. The case was unclear and Popham continued to appeal, eventually receiving $25,000 between 1805 and 1808, which left him seriously out of pocket. There was also a suggestion that he might have been smuggling. Moreover he had failed to renew his leave and been struck off the lieutenants' list. In September 1793, reinstated, he was appointed agent for transports at Ostend for the campaign in Flanders under the duke of York. Popham quickly distinguished himself, among much else forming a corps of sea fencibles to defend Nieuport; and on 27 July 1794 the duke requested the Admiralty that he be appointed superintendent of inland navigation, and promoted commander. This was done on 26 November, and he acquired the sobriquet 'The duke of York's admiral'. During the retreat in 1795 Popham was in charge of the evacuation of the allied forces; and in March of that year the duke wrote to the first lord requesting that Popham be promoted to the rank of post captain, and this was gazetted on 4 April: his rapid promotion coming through the army did not endear him to his naval colleagues. 
During the invasion threat of 1798 Popham drew up a plan for, and then commanded a district of, sea fencibles. In May he submitted a plan for destroying the Saas lock at Ostend and was given, rather reluctantly, command of the expedition. The lock was destroyed, but because of worsening weather, the troops under Major-General Eyre Coote could not be re-embarked, and surrendered. In May 1799 Popham was sent to St Petersburg in the lugger 'Nile' to persuade Tsar Paul to provide troops for a proposed landing in the Netherlands. He took the tsar and his family for a sail, and they enjoyed it so much that they gave him a gold snuff-box and a diamond ring, and the tsar dubbed him a knight of Malta. Popham secured the force needed and returned to England. In the late summer he was once again involved in inland navigation as an allied expedition under General Sir Ralph Abercromby landed on the Helder peninsula -- ill-supported by the 10,000 Russian soldiers sent by the tsar. Once again an attempted continental campaign ended in ignominy, and Popham had to supervise another evacuation. This he managed brilliantly and was rewarded with a pension of $500 a year. That winter he was sent back to Russia to try to mollify the tsar. After an arduous overland journey of eighty-eight days he reached St Petersburg -- where Paul refused to see him. 
In 1800 he was appointed to the 'Romney' (50 guns), and while at Copenhagen in August first conceived the signalling system for which he became renowned. His 'Telegraphic Signals, or, Marine Vocabulary', by providing ships with a flag system containing letters, words, and common phrases, enabled captains to communicate effectively. Popham's code, used notably by Nelson and his frigates at Trafalgar, supplemented but did not supplant the official 'Signal Book for the Ships of War'. He improved it in successive editions -- at his own expense -- over the next twelve years, and it was widely used; but it was not accepted officially by the Admiralty until 1812. The definitive edition appeared in 1816 and the system continued in use for as long as communication by flag. 
Before Christmas 1800 the 'Romney' sailed with a troop convoy to co-operate with Abercromby's army invading Egypt. This done, Popham was commissioned by the secret committee of the East India Company to negotiate trade treaties with the sheriff of Mecca and other Arabian states as ambassador directly responsible to the governor-general of Bengal, Lord Wellesley; but he was successful only with the Sultan of Aden. 
On his return to England in the spring of 1803 Popham found himself accused of having incurred 'enormous and extraordinary' expenses on repairs to the 'Romney' in Calcutta. After a series of investigations, initially of dubious impartiality, during which Popham published a robust, if prolix, rebuttal entitled 'A concise statement of facts relative to the treatment experienced by Sir Home Popham since his return from the Red Sea', it emerged that the case was a fabrication by Lord St Vincent's secretary, Benjamin Tucker, to ingratiate himself with his master, first lord of the Admiralty, who loathed Popham. The matter finally went to a select committee of the House of Commons which, in July 1805, reported that the figures had been grossly exaggerated and Popham was innocent. His enemies, however, preferred to remember the accusations. It was during this troubled period that he published in 1804 the superb chart of the Red Sea which he had undertaken -- on his own initiative -- while he was there. 
Popham's political career was significant in itself and explains much in his naval career. He was ambitious and hoped to become a lord of the Admiralty. He was a Pittite MP for the Isle of Wight (1804-6), Shaftesbury (1806-7) and Ipswich (1807-12), and his naval appointments were in part the result of ministerial favour. In the summer of 1804 Popham became involved with the American inventor Robert Fulton, who was trying to interest the government in his 'submarine bombs' (moored mines). Under Popham's supervision several were manufactured, but in the few operations in which they were launched the results were nugatory. During this period also Popham met the Venezuelan patriot Francisco Miranda. Schemes for attacking the Spanish colonies in South America had been discussed within the British government for a decade and expeditions had been planned, then cancelled; Popham himself had submitted a paper on the subject to William Pitt in 1804. 
At the end of 1804 Popham was appointed to the 'Diadem' (64 guns), and in August 1805 he sailed as commodore and commander-in-chief of an expedition to the Cape of Good Hope with a force under General Sir David Baird. They reached Table Bay on 4 January 1806, were ashore by 7 January, and had occupied Cape Town by 10 January. Popham himself led his marine battalion during the operation. The Dutch surrendered the colony. The squadron remained in Table Bay, alert to a possible French attack, until April; meanwhile Popham decided to attack the River Plate. With the tories and Pitt, his patron, in power, he could expect tacit approval, particularly if he were successful. Reluctantly Baird let him have 1200 men; the squadron sailed on 14 April and at St Helena, Popham 'borrowed' a further 180 men. There he heard that Pitt was dead, but not who had replaced him. 
On 25 June 1806 the small force under the command of Brigadier-General William Carr Beresford landed near Buenos Aires. With the addition of the marine battalion it totalled 1635 men; the Spanish were taken by surprise, the governor fled, resistance was slight, and on 2 July the city surrendered, and Beresford took possession. Rashly Popham sent an ebullient open letter to the merchants of England announcing this lucrative new market for their goods. Very soon, however, under the leadership of Santiago Liniers, a French officer in Spanish service, a force of about 2000 Spaniards was assembled. They entered the city on 10 August, overwhelmed Beresford's men, and forced their surrender. The honourable terms Popham had arranged with Liniers were rejected by the Spanish authorities; Beresford and his troops were marched off into the country; and Popham and his squadron could do nothing but blockade the river and wait for reinforcements. When they arrived he was able to capture Maldonado and Goretti at the mouth of the river; but on 3 December Rear-Admiral Charles Stirling arrived to supersede him and with orders for him to return to England. Popham was shattered but could only obey, and on his arrival on 20 February 1807 was put under open arrest to await court martial on two charges: of having withdrawn his squadron from the Cape without orders; and of having launched his Argentine enterprise 'without direction or authority'. Oddly enough Popham is regarded in Argentina not as a foreign aggressor but as the catalyst of the independence which followed 'los invasiones ingleses'. This paradox was matched by his reception at home: to the Admiralty he was an officer who had acted improperly; to the City of London he had made a bold attempt to open up new markets, and he was presented with a sword of honour. 
Popham's trial took place at Portsmouth between 6 and 11 March 1807. He defended himself vigorously, but was found guilty and severely reprimanded. This had no visible effect on his career, though when in July he was appointed captain of the fleet with Admiral James Gambier in the expedition against Denmark, captains Hood, Keats, and Stopford protested. After the capitulation of the Danes, Popham was one of the commissioners -- with Sir Arthur Wellesley and Colonel George Murray -- for settling the terms by which all the Danish warships were handed over. 
In 1809 Popham was given command of the 'Venerable' (74 guns), in yet another ill-managed assault on the continent -- the expedition to the Scheldt under Sir R. J. Strachan -- and again emerged with credit from a military fiasco. In 1810 he was sent to northern Spain to assess possibilities for co-operating with the guerrillas and 'carrying on a desultory and distracting kind of warfare' against the French in support of Wellington. This, two years later and still in 'Venerable', he achieved most successfully, keeping an entire French army 'distracted', and capturing Santander. To his chagrin he received no recognition for it. He was too controversial and had made too many enemies; he had lost what influence he once had, and he was not employed on active service again. In June 1814, none the less, he was promoted rear-admiral, and in the following year he was made KCB. From 1817 to 1820 he was commander-in-chief of Jamaica, three years darkened by a severe outbreak of yellow fever, the death of his son Home and one of his daughters, and by his own failing health. In 1818 he was made KCH. In June 1820 he suffered another of a series of strokes and wrote to the Admiralty asking to be relieved of his command. On 15 June he sailed for England with his wife; they arrived at the end of July; and on 11 September, at Cheltenham, he suffered a third and final stroke. He was buried on 16 September in the churchyard of St Michael and All Angels at Sunninghill in Berkshire, close to his home, Titness Park. His wife died in Bath, aged ninety-four in 1866. 
Home Popham's career was not that of the traditional naval officer. Nevertheless his achievements were considerable and varied. His 'Telegraphic Signals' alone have been enough to ensure his lasting fame. But he also designed the semaphore which replaced the old shutter system of the Admiralty. He was a member of the chart committee which founded the reputation of Admiralty charts. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1799. In navigation, combined operations, and hydrography, as in his more spectacular exploits, his intelligence, curiosity, and enthusiasm -- always at the service of the navy and his country -- shine throughout his life. He was perhaps 'plausible', and certainly unconventional and controversial, yet he was a brilliant empiricist, a fine seaman, and a just and enlightened captain. 


@@@@@


doc= 22542


Popham, Sir John (c.1395-1463), military commander and diplomat, was the son of Sir John Popham (died 1418), a younger son of the Hampshire family of Popham, which lies between Basingstoke and Winchester. His mother was Matilda, probably the daughter of Oliver Zouche of South Charford, Hampshire, and Eynesbury, Huntingdonshire. Both his father and his uncle, Henry Popham, sat in various parliaments as knights of the shire for Hampshire and held the shrievalty. Sir John senior was also constable of Southampton Castle from 1404 to his death in 1418. Sir John junior may have been educated at Bishop Wykeham's College of St Mary at Winchester. 
Both Popham and his cousin Stephen served as men-at-arms in the retinue of Edward, duke of York, on the campaign of 1415. In York's will he was bequeathed some armour, a helmet, and a horse, and also received the grant of a life rent from the deceased duke's manor of Vastern in Wootton Bassett, Wiltshire, an annuity subsequently confirmed by Richard, duke of York. It is likely that he was knighted before or after Agincourt: he later claimed that the royal annuity of 100 marks granted on 12 February 1417 was in recognition of his services at the battle. He indented to serve again on 23 February 1417 and crossed to Harfleur in March; he then joined the king in his conquest of Lower Normandy. He was appointed 'bailli' of Caen in December 1417 and captain of Bayeux in January 1421, and granted houses in those towns, as well as the lordships of Torigni-sur-Vire and Planquery, and, in October 1418, the governorship of Southampton Castle in succession to his father, which he held until 1441. Shortly after Henry V's death his appointments at Bayeux and Caen were terminated. Thenceforward he was closely associated with the regent, John, duke of Bedford. He was variously described as chancellor of France or of Normandy between September 1422 and January 1424, and later as Bedford's chancellor, his lieutenant at Rouen (January-November 1429) and chamberlain (from April 1429). He brought reinforcements from England in the summer of 1425, was captain of St Suzanne (Maine) from 1425 to 1435, and served at the sieges of Pontorson and Orleans. He was closely involved with arranging the defence of Paris following French successes under Jeanne d'Arc in 1429. He probably returned to England in November 1429 but crossed again in the summer of 1430 with the coronation expedition. 
There is a puzzling gap in Popham's career for the next four years: he is next found present at a great council held at Westminster from 24 April to 8 May 1434 at which Bedford and Gloucester quarrelled over the conduct of the war. In the next seven years he went to France on six further occasions: to the Congress of Arras in July 1435 and the 'grand conseil' at Rouen that October; as councillor to Richard, duke of York, in May 1436, having negotiated special terms with the council and become a knight-banneret; to inspect the Norman garrisons and negotiate with the French and Bretons in the spring and summer of 1438; as a member of the peace embassy in 1439; and, following further concessions from the crown, as councillor to York between November 1441 and February 1442. 
In England, Popham was treasurer of the household from 17 April 1437 until April 1439 and was elected MP for Hampshire in November 1439. From 1442 he served on local commissions in Hampshire. Although Popham was nominated to the Order of the Garter by the duke of Buckingham and Lord Sudeley at the chapter of April 1447, Alfonso of Portugal was appointed instead. He was again elected MP for Hampshire for the parliament which met at Westminster on 6 November 1449. It was probably his extensive military and diplomatic experience rather than his links with the house of York which led to his nomination as speaker. He declined the office on the grounds of ill health, but he may have been all too well aware of the parlous situation in Normandy and of growing political disquiet at home. Although he served on a few more local commissions, he was not in close touch with politics or government after 1449. On 1 July 1460 he was admitted to the confraternity of the London Charterhouse. He died on 14 April 1463, and was buried in the Charterhouse in one of the two chapels he had endowed in 1453. 
Popham never married. At his death the main Popham estates, which had passed to him at the death of his cousin, Sir Stephen, in 1444, reverted to the latter's four daughters. The estates which he had inherited from his mother's family along with his own extensive purchases passed, by the terms of a settlement made in 1459, mainly to Alice, probably a kinswoman on his mother's side, daughter of John Malyns and wife of William Hertshorn (MP for Bedfordshire in 1449), with the reversion to her daughter, Elizabeth, wife of Charles Bulkeley. 


@@@@@


doc= 22543


Popham, Sir John (c.1531-1607), judge and speaker of the House of Commons, was born into a Somerset family of considerable antiquity. He was the second son of Alexander Popham of Huntworth (died 1557) and Joan Stradling of St Donats, Glamorgan. He is said to have been educated at Balliol College, Oxford, but is not recorded as having taken any degree. He proceeded to the Middle Temple, where he was autumn reader in 1568 (on the 'Statute of Fines'), Lent reader in 1573 (on the 'Statute of Wills'), and treasurer in 1580. He served as recorder of Bridgwater and of Bristol, which latter borough he represented in the parliaments of 1571 and 1572. His legal career developed rapidly alongside his parliamentary activities. He was created serjeant-at-law in 1578, but discharged from the degree (as was the custom) on his appointment as solicitor-general in 1579. In 1581 he was elected speaker of the House of Commons, and later that year appointed attorney-general. In 1592 he resumed the coif and was appointed chief justice of the king's bench on the death of Sir Christopher Wray, retaining the position until his death. 
It was perhaps through his mother's connections that Popham met and married, by 1556, Amy, the daughter and heir of Hugh Adams of Castleton, Glamorgan. They had one son, Sir Francis Popham, and six daughters, and were only parted by Popham's death more than fifty years later. Her property, together with land in Bridgwater and elsewhere subsequently left to him by his father, put the family on a secure economic base. This was soon built upon. Popham's legal practice was extremely lucrative, and he was able to invest substantially in lands in Somerset, Wiltshire, and Devon. At his death his estate, which passed largely to his eldest son, Sir Francis, was reputed to be worth $10,000 per annum. 
Popham was an excellent technical lawyer. Lord Ellesmere described him as 'a man of great wisdom and of singular learning and judgement in the law' ('State trials', 2.699); and Sir Edward Coke was no less fulsome in his praise: 'a most reverend Judge, of a ready apprehension, profound judgment, and excellent understanding in the true reason of the law' (Coke, fol. 75). During his tenure of the chief justiceship of the king's bench he moved the common law forward, in opposition to the strongly conservative tendencies of Chief Justice Sir Edmund Anderson of the court of common pleas. As attorney-general and then chief justice, he played an active part in many state trials. Most notably, he presided over the trials of the earl of Essex (where his own evidence as one of those sent by the queen to quell the incipient uprising was material), Sir Walter Ralegh (where he had to intervene to control the invective of the attorney-general, Sir Edward Coke), and the Gunpowder conspirators. He had a reputation for impartiality and 'wholesome severity' (Camden, under Wellington) in criminal matters, and was known as a hanging judge who opposed the overgenerous use of pardons. This is alluded to in a verse epistle to Ben Jonson, attributed to John Donne but probably by Sir John Roe: '
And when I true friendship end 

With guilty conscience let me be worse stonge, 

Than with Pophams sentence theeves, or Cookes tongue 

Traitors are. 
('Poems of John Donne', 2.214)' Yet when he felt it appropriate he was capable of going far beyond the demands of judicial office in ensuring a fair trial for the accused: on one occasion he is reported to have prompted from the bench a poor man accused of a very minor act of sedition, feeding him with answers to the questions being put to him and then acquitting him of the charge. Like most lawyers of his time he collected notes of cases; a volume of reports attributed to him was published in 1656.As chief justice, Popham's duties extended far beyond the purely legal. He was heavily involved in enforcing religious policy, with providing advice relating to overseas trade, and more generally with economic regulation. He took his responsibilities very seriously. When charged with testing the efficacy of a new technique for the dyeing of cloth, for example, he carried out the necessary trials in the privacy of his own chamber with an independent assistant, using a variety of substances including scalding wine, vinegar, water, and salt, then subjected the dyed cloth to a rigorous regime of hard wearing, finally drawing up a patent for the technique in such terms that it would be void should the patentees attempt to pass off less effective dyes as the genuine product. Even well into his eighth decade, and notwithstanding that he was afflicted with the stone, he would travel between London and Wiltshire or sit up late into the night examining suspected traitors. 
Popham's severity towards thieves may have been notorious, but it was only the most visible aspect of his deep-seated and almost obsessive concern for the operation of the criminal justice system and for what he clearly recognized as the related question of the relief of poverty. On the one side, as chief justice he was assiduous in his oversight of the mechanics of the criminal law, and on the other side he was in all probability one of the principal architects of the poor law of 1598; but it was in the middle ground between these that his efforts were primarily concentrated. In an unprinted memorandum dated just before his death in 1607, written jointly with James Altham, he proposed the setting up of workhouses in Essex 'for loose and lewd people which are delivered and set free from imprisonment at every assize, so that they can be kept at some labour', in the absence of which they would in all probability turn out as common thieves. Similar sentiments underlay the foundation by his will of a house of correction or workhouse in Wellington, Somerset, coupled with a hospital for two orphans ('not base-born') and twelve paupers, among whose duties was to be the management of the house of correction. 
Popham's work in parliament reveals other concerns. As well as intervening on a range of technical legal matters and the combined questions of poverty and vagabondage, he spoke several times on issues connected with maritime trade and the state of the navy. Later on in life he had an interest in reclaiming land by draining the fens, leading to a complaint in 1606 that 'covetous bloody Popham' would ruin many poor people ('CSP dom.', '1603-10', 300). No less important was his involvement in early American colonization projects. He was said to be the principal patron of the Plymouth Company, and through it the main inspiration for the attempted colonization of Maine in 1606-7. The foray proved unsuccessful after a particularly harsh winter brought about the death of most of the colonists, though a contemporary account suggests that the real cause of its decline was Popham's death and the consequential loss of leadership and direction in the company. He was, too, a prime mover in the foundation of the Virginia Company and the grant of its charter in 1606. There are clear hints that he saw this not simply as a means for increasing the wealth and prestige of the British crown, but also as a way to deal with the social problems caused by the numbers of 'cashiered captains, of poor artisans that would and cannot work, and of idle vagrants that may and will not work' ('Salisbury MSS', 18.84); but, if this was his plan, there is no clear evidence that it was ever brought to fruition. 
John Aubrey's brief biography suggests that in his youth Popham himself was riotous and not wholly law-abiding, and hints at his having been a cutpurse. This is improbable, but there is more than a whiff of sharp practice about some of his business dealings. Most notable of these was his obtaining the manor of Littlecote, Wiltshire, on the death of Wild William Darell in 1589. Darell, who was involved in various intrigues and was several times prosecuted for slandering the queen, had conveyed the reversion of the land to Popham, his legal adviser, in 1586; the circumstances of the transaction are obscure, but since a similar arrangement had been made between Darell and his previous lawyer, Thomas Bromley, it may well have been intended as a means of ensuring the security of the property should he have been convicted. Whatever the truth of the matter, Popham's retention of the manor after Darell's death generated a degree of criticism and spawned some demonstrably inaccurate folk myths, uncritically retailed by Aubrey, which did not reflect well on Popham's probity. 
Few judges of the period were renowned for their elegant good looks, and Popham was no exception. Aubrey's description of him as 'a huge, heavy ugly man' ('Lives', ed. Walker, 2.493), though uncharitable, was thoroughly well justified. He died on 10 June 1607, and was buried in the parish church at Wellington, Somerset, where his monument survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 22544


William Popple (1638-1708), was born in Hull on 4 February 1638, the son of Edmund Popple, sheriff of Hull in 1658, and Mary Marvell ('b'. 1616), sister of Andrew Marvell, under whose guidance Popple was educated, and with whom he corresponded. In 1663 he married Mary Alured (died 1723). After moving from Hull to London in the early 1660s to embark on a career as a merchant Popple resided at Bordeaux from 1670 to 1688, whence he dated his first publication, entitled 'A Rational Catechism' (1687). After returning to London he met William Penn, became secretary of the Dry Club, set up by John Locke to debate issues of religious liberty, and translated Locke's 'Letter on Toleration' (1689) from the Latin. When Locke was appointed a commissioner of the Board of Trade in 1696 Popple became the board's secretary. He served as secretary for eleven years before retiring in favour of his son. Manuscript verses, a play, and translations survive in the British Library (Add. MS 8888). He died in 1708 in the parish of St Clement Danes. 


@@@@@


doc= 22545


Popple, William (1700/01-1764), government official and writer, was the only son of William Popple (1665/6-1722), government official, and Anne (1673/4-1730), of St Margaret's, Westminster. 
Popple's grandfather, also 
Popple's grandson's life of government service began in 1723 as secretary to Horatio Walpole in Paris. In early 1729 Popple replaced the deceased William Congreve as an under-searcher in the port of London, and by the time Walpole returned from France in 1732 as cofferer to the royal household, Popple was already employed in the cofferer's office. 
Popple had first published some verses in a 'Collection of Miscellaneous Poems' edited by Richard Savage in 1726. Encouraged by Aaron Hill, Popple penned two comedies which Nicoll deemed 'of the Cibber type of moral-immoral sentimental comedy' (Nicoll, 2.200). 'The Lady's Revenge' (published 1734) ran for four nights at Covent Garden in January 1734, and 'The Double Deceit' (published 1736) first played there for a single night on 25 April 1735. As co-editor of 'The Prompter' (with Hill; 172 numbers, 12 November 1734 - 2 July 1736), Popple displayed a clear understanding of stagecraft in some important early professional theatrical criticism, and given his genuine knowledge of drama he was probably justified in ascribing his playhouse failures to political resentment of his loyalty to Walpole. 
In 1737 Popple transferred to the Board of Trade and Plantations, and in 1745 he succeeded his brother Alured (1699-1744) as governor of the Bermudas. Although his command was often strained and his salary frequently in arrears, Popple remained there until shortly before his death with only one visit to England, from November 1751 to November 1754. Having relinquished the stage for colonial administration, Popple's only other publications were a smooth but diffuse translation of the 'Ars poetica' of Horace (1753) and an anonymous verse satire, 'The Age of Dullness' (1757). Surviving manuscript works include a stage adaptation of Petronius's 'Ephesian Matron' (BL, Add. MS 18614), translations from Juvenal, and several satires attacking religious conservatism and the literary opinions of William Warburton (Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 201). Stuart Gillespie has further identified a manuscript at Yale University (Yale U., Beinecke L., Osborn fc 104, 1-2) as Popple's complete translation of Horace's works and has published editions of the Juvenal and selections from the Horatian collection in two valuable essays in 2006 and 2007. All of these verses appear to have been written while Popple was in Bermuda and prepared for publication upon his return to London. Popple retired to London in late 1763 and died in Hampstead on 8 February 1764, bequeathing half his estate to his natural son, William Prosper Popple, and half to Elizabeth Fielding. He was buried on 13 February in Hampstead churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 22546


Pordage, John (bap. 1607, d. 1681), religious leader and physician, was baptized on 21 April 1607 in the parish of St Dionis Backchurch, London, the eldest son of Samuel Pordage (died 1627), citizen and grocer, and Elizabeth (died in or after 1657), daughter of Thomas Francknell, citizen and goldsmith. A merchant with contacts in the City, Norfolk, and abroad, Samuel Pordage was, for his diligent action against malefactors, rewarded by the court of aldermen in May 1619. 
John Pordage was admitted a pensioner at Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 21 April 1623, and matriculated on 3 July. Upon petition to the Grocers' Company his father secured for him an exhibition valued at $5 per annum. Pordage graduated BA in 1626. The previous November, Samuel Pordage was admitted as one of the marshals of the City of London, for which he received an annual salary of $66 13's'. 4died, but his death in an accident in March 1627 reduced his family to poverty. With seven children to support, his widow, Elizabeth, petitioned the court of aldermen and the Grocers' Company for relief. In July 1627 the Grocers' Company granted 5 marks to her son John to buy books but shortly after his father's death he seems to have left his studies at Cambridge. Again following petitions from his mother, in March 1630 he was awarded 20 nobles by the Grocers' Company towards the expenses of attaining his master's degree and later that year he was awarded an exhibition worth $5 a year by the Skinners' Company. However, he left the university before proceeding MA. On 17 January 1633, described as a gentleman of St Dionis Backchurch, London, he was licensed to marry Mary [
In 1634 Samuel Hartlib noted that John Davenport, vicar of St Stephen, Coleman Street, had preached against 'one Pordage' who 'broches new-fangled opinions concerning the signes, that No Man can trie himself by them, but was to stay by for an over-powring light' (Sheffield University Library, HP 29/2/40B). It appears that about this time Pordage also began to practise medicine in London without a licence. In June 1637 a complaint was made to the College of Physicians against 'one Pordage pretended Dr. of physique' dwelling in Barbican. Pordage, it was alleged, had prescribed harmful medicines to a patient in the form of 'powders' (annals, RCP Lond., 3.170'v'). In January 1638 he appeared before the college desiring licence to practise, but upon examination he confessed that its statutes already barred him since he was in deacons' orders, was chaplain to Mary, Lady Vere, and had preached on several occasions. Undeterred, Pordage nevertheless applied himself to the study of medicine. On 9 August 1639 he was admitted as a candidate in medicine at Leiden University and allowed to dispute for the degree of doctor of medicine (doubtless to legitimize his calling). On 11 August, the degree of MD was conferred on him. It may have been during his stay in the United Provinces that Pordage became acquainted with John Durie, the Scots ecumenist: Durie was to write from Amsterdam that he had done what Pordage and 'Dr Boot [Arnold or Gerard Boate] did require of me in their businesse' (Sheffield University Library, HP 2/5/5A). After returning to England, Pordage was incorporated MD at Cambridge on 10 October. The following year he was given official reference letters testifying to his degree. 
On 3 December 1640 Pordage appeared once again before the College of Physicians and confessed that he had practised medicine for six years and that he was in holy orders. Once again the college denied him licence to practise. The following month, Pordage appeared before the college charged with letting blood in a patient suffering from the final stages of fever. He was further charged with prescribing a vomit made from an infusion of crocus mettalorum, a cordial, and an aperient apozem. The patient responded to this treatment by breaking out into cold sweats, voiding 'many stooles', and dying (annals, RCP Lond., 3.210'r'). Pordage was judged guilty of malpractice but had clearly been making a profitable living. In 1642 he invested $100 in Irish land (his name appears in a list of adventurers above that of his brother-in-law, Henry Faldoe, haberdasher of London). 
In May 1643 Pordage was appointed physician to Colonel John Venn's regiment. He was stationed at the garrison in Windsor Castle, where Christopher Love (1618-1651) was minister. Pordage's annual salary was to be $60, though by his own account a considerable sum was to remain in arrears; small recompense, perhaps, for frequently venturing his life 'by daily visiting the common souldiers that had the plague-sores on them' (TNA: PRO, SP 18/97/30 II). Pordage probably served as physician to Venn's regiment until autumn 1644. Thereafter, according to John Etherington, a one-time boxmaker, Pordage went to Reading in expectation of the 'chief publike place there'. Etherington, who had himself been denounced as a sectary, added that Pordage had 'taught the doctrine' of Henrick Nicleas (1502?-1580?), publicly 'in the midst' of London (Etherington, 10). The charge was to foreshadow accusations that Pordage preached blasphemous tenets. 
In autumn 1644 Pordage began officiating at the parish church of St Lawrence, Reading. He was to serve as minister there for more than two years, receiving an annual salary of $50; a payment made to him in November 1646 described him as vicar. Afterwards Pordage was appointed by the committee for plundered ministers to the sequestered rectory of Bradfield, Berkshire, and arrived to find that the parsonage, garden, and outhouses were in a state of disrepair (TNA: PRO, SP 18/97/30 II). His son Benjamin was baptized in the parish on 1 April 1647. 
In 1649 Giles Calvert issued a work by 'M.P.' entitled 'The Mystery of the Deity in the Humanity, or, The Mystery of God in Man'. The author of this tract wrote vividly of the 'burning fiery flames of the Nature of his Godhead'. Elsewhere, the 'silly damosel' envisaged the Godhead as 'the Fountain, from whence all honor and justice flows into this center man', suggesting a Behmenist vision of the deity (sigs. A2'v', A4'r', p. 12). In the eighteenth century Richard Roach observed that it was from some of the 'Inward Mystical way in England' that the Philadelphian Society arose, and he attributed the 'fresh Concurence & Holy Gale of a Divine Life & Power', which accompanied it, as occurring 'first & Principally in Mrs Pordage wife of John Pordage Doctor in Physick: who married her for ye Ex[c]ellent Gift of God he found in her' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D. 833, fols. 63'v'-64'r'). It seems that Mary Pordage may have been the author of 'The Mystery of the Deity'. 
About the time of its publication a sermon was delivered by John Pordage at Ilsley, Berkshire, in which Pordage paraphrased 'Daniel' 9: 24, saying in effect, 'That the imputative righteousness of another, was a sapless righteousness to all those that had no right or interest in it' (Pordage, 6). Among his hearers at Ilsley was John Tickell, who reproved him for maintaining this. Tickell also censured Pordage for declaring that: 'the fiery deity of Christ did mingle and mixe it selfe with our flesh, and was in the center of our Soules, burning and consuming' (Tickell, To the reader). Following the conclusion of his sermon Pordage entered into debate with John Pendarves (1622-1656) concerning the question 'whether Christ was a Type or no?', to which Pordage answered in the affirmative. He also, as he later confessed, said that 'the common gifts and graces of the Spirit were but flesh' (Pordage, 7). 
On 16 August 1649 Pordage appeared at Reading before Berkshire county committee charged with blasphemy 'against Christ, God the Son' (Pordage, 6). In the presence of the committee's chairman, Daniel Blagrave, a 'hot dispute' ensued between Pordage and Tickell about the nature of blasphemy during which Pordage uttered the 'bare' expressions 'That Christ is not God, That Christ is not Jehovah' (Fowler, 51; Pordage, 5). After examining witnesses on both sides the committee ordered Pordage to preach at St Lawrence, Reading. In this sermon Pordage attempted to vindicate himself from 'the horrid imputation of denying the Godhead of Christ' ('Truth Appearing', 2). He was judged 'innocent in that particular' and cleared by vote of the committee (Pordage, 49). 
About this time Pordage began receiving a number of visitors at Bradfield. One alleged guest was Richard Coppin, to whose 'erroneous and blasphemous' book, 'Divine Teachings' (1649), Pordage 'gave his approbation' (Coppin, 18; Fowler, 61). Other callers included the prophet Elizabeth Poole, and the Baptist preacher Abiezer Coppe whose heterodox opinions became notorious. William Everard, previously an acknowledged leader of the 'True Levellers', was often at Pordage's house and in the summer of 1650 he stayed in Bradfield in the guise of a harvest worker. During this time 'many strange and wonderfull apparitions' were seen in Pordage's house (Pordage, 25). Then on Sunday 1 September 1650 a thirteen-year-old boy named William Snelling 'fell into a very strange Fit, foaming at the mouth for the space of two hours' ('A most Faithful Relation of Two Wonderful Passages', 4). When at last the boy began to speak he recited mysterious verses proclaiming the Great Jehovah. The following Sunday, while preaching in the parish church, Pordage 'fell into a Trance, running out of the Church, and bellowing like a Bull, saying that he was called, and must be gon'. After retiring to his parsonage, Pordage found his wife upstairs, 'Cloathed all in White Lawne, from the crown of the Head, to the sole of the Foot, with a White Rod in her hand' (ibid., 2). The next day 'a very mournfull cry' was heard in the parsonage, 'as if it had been one in extream pains' (Pordage, 18). It seems likely that Pordage, Everard, and Theaurau John Tany, the self-proclaimed Lord's high priest of the Jews, were all at Bradfield parsonage in early September. Local suspicions, however, pointed to Everard, a reputed 'Conjurer' (ibid., 9), and a man 'suspected to be a Sorcerer or Witch', as the malefic presence in the parsonage. Shortly after, Everard was seen in a 'frantick posture' in London, where he was eventually apprehended and committed to Bridewell ('A most Faithful Relation', 4). As Pordage observed in his sermon on Sunday 29 September, Bradfield had become a place made partly famous, 'partly infamous, by reason of the false and lying reports that are abroad' (Pordage, 28). 
However, Everard and Tany were not the only visitors to Bradfield in early September 1650, for inside a horoscope cast on 30 August the astrologer and botanist Elias Ashmole had recorded the time he came to Bradfield. It is suggestive that the next day Ashmole noted the time he first saw Dr William Currer, a Leiden-educated iatrochemical physician. Ashmole was married to Mary, Lady Mainwaring, widowed daughter of Sir William Forster, who held jointure house and lands in Bradfield, but such were Ashmole's difficulties with his wife's relations that in October 1650 he contemplated leasing her estate to Pordage. That the most important witness to the 'wonderful' events at Bradfield in early September 1650 was William Forster, a relative of Ashmole's wife, may be more than coincidental. 
At an unknown date a number of articles were presented against Pordage before the committee for plundered ministers. Among the allegations were that he preached that Christ was not God, but only a type, that his imputative righteousness was unefficacious, and that 'the fiery Deity of Christ mingles and mixeth it self with our flesh' (Pordage, 5-7). He was further charged with giving a rabbinical interpretation to 'Genesis' 1: 27, that: 'By male we are to understand... The Deity, by the female, the Humanity' (ibid., 44). However, on 27 March 1651 the committee for plundered ministers, after a thorough investigation, acquitted him. 
Pordage had survived two attempts to remove him from his ministry, yet still he continued to expound his allegorical interpretations of scripture. Some of the sermons he preached at Bradfield during this period concerned Christ's birth ('Matthew' 1: 23), the Word made flesh ('John' 1: 14), and the 'inward' household of Abraham ('Genesis' 18: 19). This last was particularly resonant, for Pordage had established a 'Family' community at Bradfield whose members adopted biblical names: he was Father Abraham, his wife was Deborah, and a follower named Mary Pocock was Rahab. This community was to be joined by Thomas Bromley (1630-1691) and Edmund Brice ('b'. 1632, died in or after 1696), two members of Oxford University who heard Pordage preach a powerful sermon at St Mary's, the university church. Another associate was Philip Herbert, fifth earl of Pembroke (1619-1669). Pordage and his 'Family' were said to have cried down 'flesh & carnal Relations' and appear to have objected to the lawfulness of marriage (DWL, Baxter MS, Treatises, III 67, fol. 302'v'). Theirs was a Behmenist universe, consisting of a dark world ('mundus tenebrosus') and a light world ('mundus luminosus') -- a cosmos populated by good and evil angels visible to the 'inward eye' (Pordage, 75). 
On 28 February 1654 Simon Ford, vicar of St Lawrence, Reading, preached a sermon at Reading assizes. Alluding to Pordage he claimed that one of the 'most eminent Church-Livings' in Berkshire was 'possessed by a blasphemer' (S. Ford, 'Primitiae regiminis Davidici', 1654, 26). The living of Bradfield was indeed lucrative (it was valued at about $300 per annum in 1654) and Ford's sermon seems to have signalled the start of a locally orchestrated campaign to oust Pordage. On 18 September Pordage was issued with a summons to appear before the newly appointed commissioners for ejecting scandalous ministers for the county of Berkshire to answer articles exhibited against him. As the trial progressed over the autumn Pordage's enemies set about tightening the noose. The old charges against him were revived, further articles exhibited, and witnesses examined upon oath. Then on Friday 8 December, after several hearings at Speenhamland and Reading, Pordage was found guilty of 'denying the Deity of Christ, and the merit of his bloud and passion'. He was condemned as 'Ignorant and very Insufficient for the Work of the Ministry' and ejected out of the rectory of Bradfield (Pordage, 96). 
After his ejection Pordage went to London and petitioned Oliver Cromwell for justice, while his supporters issued a pamphlet 'clearly evincing the unjustness and illegality' of his sentence ('Truth Appearing', title-page). Several weeks later John Sadler, master of requests, delivered Pordage's petition to the lord protector. Cromwell referred the matter to the council of state, which, after some debate, rejected it. Pordage then published a vindication of his conduct, 'Innocencie Appearing Through the Dark Mists of Pretended Guilt' (1655). At about the same time he petitioned the protector again. The matter was again referred to the council of state, which in turn referred it to a committee. They advised Cromwell to present a new incumbent and recommended that Pordage be allowed $80 per annum out of the profits of the rectory. This arrangement, however, proved to be unsatisfactory, and on 11 May 1655 it was decreed that Pordage and the new incumbent, Gualter Adams, were each to receive $100 a year from the profits of the rectory during their joint lives. Pordage was also to vacate Bradfield parsonage and deliver up the glebe. Yet that was not to be the end of the affair. On 27 July 1655, after Adams had prudently declined to take up the living and Pordage had petitioned the protector yet again, it was further ordered that Pordage be given leave to reap his harvest and gather the arrears due to him before he was ejected. 
Pordage continued to live at Bradfield for many years, though how long he remained at the parsonage is unknown. According to the antiquary Anthony Wood, Pordage was restored to the living after Charles II returned from exile. This seems doubtful, for the sequestered incumbent, Richard Bayly, was to be restored to the living upon petition. Indeed, a payment made to Pordage in 1663 suggests that he may have reverted to practising medicine. Between 1662 and 1664 Pordage occupied a dwelling in Bradfield assessed at five hearths; perhaps this was Ashmole House, an apparently 'old & smoaky' abode where he later resided (TNA: PRO, C 5/60/15). This property yielded an estimated annual profit of $60 from the produce of the lands and gardens. After some structural repairs Pordage agreed to sell the place for $775. The purchaser, however, reneged on this agreement, obliging Pordage to bring a lawsuit in the court of king's bench, and the purchaser a writ of error in the court of exchequer and a counter-suit in the court of chancery. 
In October 1663 Pordage began attending both divine service and sermons at Bradfield. How long he had been absent from church is unknown, but it is clear that he continued to dissent from the Restoration church. In the episcopal returns of 1669 he and Thomas Bromley were suspected of holding a conventicle at Bradfield. Pordage, moreover, was reportedly the teacher of two conventicles in Reading frequented by 'tradesmen of every parish of the towne, & neere, wth their wives & families' (G. L. Turner, ed., 'Records of Early Nonconformity under Persecution and Indulgence', 3 vols., 1911, 1.113). Nor were his activities confined to Berkshire. During the plague of 1665 Pordage and his 'Family' were apparently in London, though in the fire that followed in September 1666 only Pordage 'staid to sett his house, and had not remov'd his goods, the greatest part of which were devour'd and involv'd in the common calamity' (M. Nicolson, ed., 'The Conway Letters', revised edn, 1992, 279). 1666 was also the year that Pordage became acquainted with John Sparrow, an Essex gentleman who had translated many of the works of Jacob Boehme from German into English. Another intimate acquaintance was said to have been Oliver Hill ('b'. 1630?, died after 1702), who was elected to the Royal Society in 1677 but then elbowed out because of his arcane views. 
Mary Pordage died in 1668 and was buried at Bradfield on 25 August. Richard Roach remarked that after her decease Pordage was joined in his work by Mistress Jane Lead, 'whose Extraordinary gift of Revelatio[n] the Dr gave great Regard to & Attendance upon' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D. 833, fol. 64'v'). Her future son-in-law Francis Lee placed the beginning of their 'familiar friendship' in August 1673 or 1674, though this seemingly contradicts Lead's own statement that she first became acquainted with Pordage in 1663. Her published testimony may have been incorrectly transcribed. 
As a physician now living in London in the parish of St Andrew's, Holborn, Pordage drew up his will on 28 November 1681. To Thomas Bromley he bequeathed money for a mourning ring. Elizabeth Douglas, Elizabeth Blagrave, Jane Lead, and Pordage's daughter Sarah were the witnesses. A few days before his death and in some agony, Pordage called for Jane Lead. As a gentleman from Red Lyon Fields he was buried in the parish church of St Andrew's, Holborn, on 11 December. Writing to Anthony Wood in May 1686, Elias Ashmole denied knowledge of Pordage's death and burial, but commended him 'for his knowledge in, or at least his great affection to, astronomy' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1100). John Aubrey described Pordage as a 'physitian & astrologer' ('Brief Lives, Chiefly of Contemporaries, Set Down by John Aubrey', ed. A. Clark, 2 vols., 1898, 2.161). In Richard Baxter's opinion Pordage and his 'Family' were the leading Behmenists in England. Pordage was survived by six children: Samuel; John ('c'.1635-1688), physician and author; William ('b'. 'c'.1639, died in or after 1691); Benjamin (1647-1698); Sarah; and Abigail (died in or after 1697). Two daughters had predeceased him: Mary (died 1670), wife of Ellis Crispe, citizen and haberdasher of London, and Elizabeth (died 1663). 
In his last years Pordage wrote a number of treatises. Although none of the original texts appear to have survived, manuscript copies of some of these works circulated both during and after his lifetime. Shortly after his death and apparently at his behest, Edward Hooker published 'The Archetypal Globe', an abbreviated version of Pordage's untitled work, together with Pordage's treatise 'Of Eternal Nature' (1671) under the title 'Theologia mystica, or, The Mystic Divinitie of the Aeternal Invisibles' (1683). The following titles by Pordage have also been identified: 'Sophia: that is the Lovely Eternal Virgin of the Godly Wisdom' (1675), 'Of the Spirit of Faith and from the Various Arts and Degrees of Belief' (1676), 'Experimental Discoveries, Concerning Union of Natures, of Essences, Tinctures, of Bodies, of Persons, and of Spirits' (1676), 'The Angelical World' (no date), 'The Dark Fire World' (1681), 'Of the Paradise' (no date), 'A Short Abstract and Idea of the Holy English World and of its Spiritual Population' (no date), 'Of the Newest Birth and Incarnation of Jesus Christ' (no date), 'Of the Mysticism and Inner Birth and Incarnation of Jesus Christ' (no date), 'That for so Long a Time Lost but since Rediscovered Secret of History and Revelation' (no date), and 'A Thorough Philosophical Letter on the Lawful Stones of Wisdom' (no date). German translations of many of these treatises, probably by Loth Fischer of Utrecht, were published at Amsterdam between 1698 and 1704, either anonymously or by the Wettstein family. In 1715 a three-volume edition of Pordage's works entitled 'Gottliche und wahre Metaphysica' ('Godly and True Metaphysics') was issued at Frankfurt and Leipzig. Some of Pordage's treatises were also translated into Russian in the early nineteenth century (these manuscripts are in the Russian state library). Pordage, moreover, appears to have collaborated with his son Samuel in the writing of the Behmenist poem 'Mundorum explicatio, or, The Explanation of an Hieroglyphical Figure' (1661). 


@@@@@


doc= 22547


Pordage, Samuel (bap. 1633, d. in or after 1691), poet and translator, was baptized on 29 December 1633 at St Dionis Backchurch, London, the eldest son of John Pordage (bap. 1607, d. 1681) and his wife, Mary Pordage, nee Lane (d. 1668) ['see under 'Pordage, John]. In 1644 Samuel went to study at the Merchant Taylors' School, but how long he remained there is uncertain. He had certainly spent enough time at Bradfield to testify in 1654 to the harmlessness of his father's occult interests. 
Pordage was living with his father when he finished work on his first publications, a translation of Seneca's 'Troades' and 'Poems Upon Several Occasions', both published in 1660. The latter contained panegyrics to the king and to Monck, in addition to love poems. The influence of his father's occult interests is evident from the description of the restoration of the monarchy in these poems and in 'Heroick Stanzas on His Majesties Coronation' (1661) as an alchemical refinement. 
At this time, in 1660, Samuel married Dorcas Langhorne. A son, Charles, was born in 1661, and two children are mentioned in the will of Samuel's father, John. Pordage may have entered the service of the duke of Buckingham before spending the mid- and later 1660s as steward to the earl of Pembroke. In 1661 Pordage's long poem 'Mundorum explicatio' was published by Lodowick Lloyd, who was well known for his interest in mystical works. This, Pordage's longest and most important poem, is a Creation epic written in accordance with the German mystic Jakob Boehme's version of the book of 'Genesis'. Most significant here is the double Fall, first from the androgynous Adam into man and womankind, and second the temptation to eat the forbidden fruit. After the Fall, magic and prophetic gifts are the means available for mankind to return to a prelapsarian state. The 'Hieroglyphical Figure' attached to some copies of the poem, and of which the subtitle proclaims it to be an interpretation, contains a fusion of imagery from familist and Boehme works. The strong presence of Boehme in the poem (typified in the extensive explanation of the principles of light and darkness that permeate the created world) has led some to suggest that John Pordage was the author. There is no doubt that John Pordage introduced his son to Boehme, but equally no doubt that the poem, by dint of some stylistic similarity with his other works, is Samuel's. Collaboration between father and son is quite possible. 
To Pordage has also been ascribed the unsigned prose romance 'Eliana' (1661). If this long work, largely concerned with passion and desire, as opposed to politics and war, is indeed Pordage's, it was probably written during the 1650s: like 'Mundorum explicatio', it was most probably a product of the relative confinement of these years. 
Pordage published nothing more in the 1660s, but spent most of the following decade writing heroic tragedies, which were favourably received on the London stage: 'Herod and Mariamne' (first published in 1673, probably first performed in September 1671, and possibly written as early as 1661) and 'The Siege of Babylon' (performed in September 1677, first published in 1678). The dominant theme, common to this genre, was love versus honour, of Platonic love versus the passions, and the conflicting claims of public versus private life. Pordage combed the huge French prose romances of the mid-seventeenth century for plots and characters: he was indebted particularly to Gauthier de Costes de La Calprenede's 'Cleopatra' (1647) and 'Cassandre' (1645-60). 'Herod and Mariamne' was published anonymously, but contained an epistle dedicatory to the duchess of Albemarle, written by Elkanah Settle. Pordage claimed that the play was in fact assumed to be Settle's, who in turn claimed that Pordage had asked him to finish the play. Pordage himself claimed that he had been out of the country while the play passed as Settle's. 
Pordage's connections with aristocrats, like Buckingham, who were out of power in the 1660s, and hence likely to be opposed to government policy, was a foretaste of things to come. During the Popish Plot furore, Pordage dedicated an edition of John Reynolds's 'The Triumph of God's Revenge Against the Sin of Murther' (1679) to the whig leader, the earl of Shaftesbury. In 1681 Pordage's libellous attack on Danby, then Charles II's chief minister, 'A New Apparition of S. Edmund-Bery Godfrey's Ghost to the E. of D -- ', was issued anonymously. Its appearance was shortly followed by a public apology from its printer. In 1682 Pordage produced 'Azaria and Hushai', an attack on Dryden's famous satire of Shaftesbury, 'Absalom and Achitophel' (1681), turning Dryden's allegorical technique against himself. Later in the same year Pordage answered Dryden's next attack on Shaftesbury, 'The Medal: a Satire Against Sedition' in 'The Medal Revers'd: a Satire Against Persecution'. Both responses have had their admirers, some claiming that Pordage was the best of the whig poets responding to Dryden. Tory pens, including Dryden and L'Estrange, ignored the courteous temperance that was present in his writings as well as his character, and mocked him for poverty, anti-literary sentiments, for being out of fashion, and for being the son of a notorious enthusiast. Pordage reserved his strongest criticism for the duke of York, the duchess of Portsmouth, and for Dryden. He exposed time-servers on both sides of the dispute, and the tyranny of mob rule, while defending monarchy founded on a sovereignty which was located ultimately in the people. Despite his whig connections, Pordage remained loyal to Charles II, and wrote 'The Loyal Incendiary, or, The Generous Boutefieu' in 1684 on the burning of Rye House, and the consequent frustration of the plot to assassinate the king there. 
In his later years Pordage devoted himself to further translations: in particular, several treatises on neurology and psychology by Thomas Willis, which appeared in English between 1681 and 1684. In the translation of 'De anima brutorum' (1683), Pordage gave 'psychology' its first use in the modern English sense. He is last mentioned in 1691 as a member of the Worthy Society of Lincoln's Inn. 


@@@@@


doc= 22548


Porden, William (bap. 1755, d. 1822), architect, was born in Hull and baptized there on 29 January 1755, the son of Thomas Purden or Porden, a labourer, and grandson of Roger Pourden of York, described as an architect. In 1774 he became a pupil of James Wyatt, to whom he was apparently introduced by the poet William Mason. Porden later claimed to have been responsible for drawing Wyatt's attention to the beauties of Gothic architecture by taking him to York Minster, where he spent two months sketching details in 1777. In 1778 Porden exhibited a design for a Gothic church at the Royal Academy, and in the following year he was co-author, with the painters Robert Smirke and Robert Watson, of 'The Exhibition, or, A Second Anticipation', a satire on the Royal Academy and its professor of architecture, Thomas Sandby, which appeared under the pseudonym 'Roger Shanhagan, Gent'. He may subsequently have spent some time in the office of his near contemporary Samuel Pepys Cockerell, and for some time after 1779 he acted as secretary or paymaster to John Baker-Holroyd, Lord Sheffield, who had recently raised the 22nd regiment of dragoons. The regiment was later reduced in size, and in 1784 Porden exhibited once again at the Royal Academy. That same year, on 16 October, he married Mary Plowman (died 1819), with whom he had two daughters. In 1785, having returned to Wyatt's office probably as senior assistant, he 'superintended' a festival in honour of the composer George Frideric Handel in Westminster Abbey, where Wyatt was surveyor; in or about the same year he was appointed surveyor to the London estate of Richard, first Earl Grosvenor. He also became surveyor to the vestry of St George, Hanover Square, London, in 1785, and from then onwards began to build up an independent practice. 
Porden took some time to establish himself as an architect. His first known executed work was a row of houses in Phillimore Place, Kensington, built in 1787-9 and since largely demolished. He subsequently gained some minor country-house commissions and exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy, but failed to be made an associate in 1797. His place in the history of English architecture rests mainly on two almost contemporary buildings: the stables (now called the Dome) and riding house of the Royal Pavilion at Brighton, built for George, prince of Wales (later George IV), in 1803-8, and Eaton Hall, Cheshire, remodelled and greatly extended for Robert, second Earl Grosvenor, in 1803-12 (but subsequently altered and demolished). Porden succeeded Henry Holland as the prince's architect in Brighton, and was first employed to make unexecuted designs for the external remodelling of the pavilion in the Chinese style. The new, circular stable block had a spectacular domed interior surrounded by stalls for forty-four horses, with a roof of timber and glass based on that of the Halle au Ble in Paris (1782; burnt down in 1803). But stylistically Porden anticipated both S. P. Cockerell (at Sezincote, Gloucestershire) and John Nash (at the pavilion itself) by drawing on the architecture of Muslim India, recently publicized in 'Views of Oriental Scenery' (1795-1808), by Thomas and William Daniell, and in doing so he created one of the most striking examples of orientalism in English architecture. The rebuilding of Eaton Hall, by contrast, was carried out in the Gothic style, already much employed by Wyatt in his domestic work, and recommended by Porden in a letter to Lord Grosvenor on the ground that it was 'preferable [to classical architecture] on the score of preserving that distinction of Rank and Fortune, which it is the habit of the age to diminish' (Acloque and Cornforth, 304). With its profuse Perpendicular Gothic external detailing, lavish upholstered interiors, and cast-iron windows and pinnacles, Porden's Eaton Hall was one of the most ambitious and (with a cost of over $100,000 by 1812) expensive houses of its age, and its construction marked an important step in the advance of the Gothic revival in domestic architecture. 
Porden failed to capitalize on the fame of these buildings. At Brighton he designed a house for the prince's mistress Mrs Fitzherbert in 1804, but he was later superseded in the prince's favour by John Nash. In 1805 his Gothic design for Downing College, Cambridge, was turned down in favour of a Grecian one by William Wilkins, and an austere Grecian scheme of 1807 for Broomhall, Fife, was likewise set aside by Thomas Bruce, seventh earl of Elgin. Porden was employed by Lord Grosvenor to rebuild Grosvenor House, London (since demolished), in 1806-8, but he was described as 'incurably dilatory' in his work as estate surveyor ('Survey of London', 44), and by 1819 he had been dismissed from Eaton Hall, having quarrelled with both his patron and the craftsmen; the project was completed by the clerk of works, Benjamin Gummow. By then Porden had long ceased taking outside commissions, and in September 1821 his surveyorship of the Grosvenor estate also came to an end after further disagreements with Lord Grosvenor following the failure of a scheme to redevelop the north side of Berkeley Square. These reverses 'preyed on his spirits' (Redgrave, 'Artists', 338), and he died at 59 Berners Street, London, his home since 1796, on 14 September 1822. He was buried in St John's Wood chapel, London. His wife, Mary, had died on 23 December 1819, but his two daughters survived him. The elder married the architect Joseph Kay, a pupil of S. P. Cockerell who assisted Porden at Eaton Hall; the younger, Eleanor Porden, was a poet and married the Arctic explorer Sir John Franklin. His pupils included his nephew Charles Ferdinand Porden (1790-1863) and P. F. Robinson (1776-1858). 


@@@@@


doc= 22549


Porrett, Robert (1783-1868), chemist, was born on 22 September 1783 at the Tower of London, the son of Robert Porrett, ordnance storekeeper at the Tower. The interest he showed in his father's work prompted the War Office to offer him a post as assistant in his father's department in 1795, and he became its head when his father died. He took the opportunities afforded him by his post, and residence in the Tower, to study antiquities, and became an authority on armour. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1840, and made contributions to the society's 'Proceedings' and to 'Archaeologia'. 
From 1811 Porrett was a member of the Spitalfields Mathematical Society, which was devoted to experimental natural philosophy, including chemistry. When, in May 1845, its dissolution became imminent, its membership was incorporated in the Royal Astronomical Society. His most noteworthy scientific achievements were, however, in chemistry, and he joined the Chemical Society on its formation in 1841, serving for many years as its treasurer. 
Porrett's most valuable work was his contribution towards elucidating the complex chemistry of the derivatives of prussic acid (hydrocyanic acid). The older name of the acid stems from its association with the pigment Prussian blue, discovered in 1704 by a maker of artist's colours in Berlin. The Swedish chemist C. W. Scheele (1742-1786) first obtained prussic acid from this pigment in 1783. When Porrett began his investigation of the acid in 1808, it had been established that it contained carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen, but a difference of opinion existed among leading chemists as to whether it also contained oxygen. His specific aim was to resolve this problem. 
In the course of his investigation, which began by boiling Prussian blue with potassium sulphide, Porrett isolated an acid, the properties of which differed from those of prussic acid. He was persuaded by some of his experiments that it was 'sub-oxidised prussic acid', and in conformity with the then current rules of nomenclature he called it 'prussous acid' ('Memoir on the prussic acid', 'Transactions of the Society of Arts', 27, 1809, 89-103). He was awarded the Society of Arts' silver medal for this work. Later, in the first of two papers on the subject read to the Royal Society ('PTRS', 104, 1814, 527-56; 105, 1815, 520-30) he related his subsequent discovery that this new acid was actually a compound of prussic acid and sulphur, and renamed it 'sulphuretted chyazic acid' (from carbon, hydrogen, and azote, an older name for nitrogen). It is now known as thiocyanic acid. 
Some years previously the French chemist P. J. Macquer (1718-1784) had obtained what became known as the 'yellow prussiate of potash' and later as potassium ferrocyanide. By adding an acid to barium ferrocyanide Porrett obtained free ferrocyanic acid, which he called 'ferruretted chyazic acid'. When he subjected a salt of the acid in solution to electrolysis, he found that the iron in these salts formed part of the acid radical, which migrated to the anode. This was the first known complex ion. 
Porrett's second Royal Society paper (he was elected FRS in 1848) describes attempts at an analysis of ferrocyanides and thiocyanates, but his techniques were not good enough to obtain accurate results. Of his other papers, the most important is that in which he rediscovered electroendosmosis ('Curious galvanic experiments', 'Annals of Philosophy', 8, 1816, 150-1). He observed the movement of a liquid through an apparently impervious partition, when a potential difference was applied across two electrodes, one on each side of the partition. He would certainly have been unaware that this had been observed some years previously by the German chemist F. F. von Reuss (1778-1852). 
Porrett retired from the Ordnance in 1850, and died at his home, 49 Bernard Street, Russell Square, London, on 25 November 1868. He was unmarried. Robert Porrett Collier, Lord Monkswell, was his nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 22550


Porson, Richard (1759-1808), classical scholar, was born on 25 December 1759 in East Ruston, a remote village in Norfolk, about 4 miles from the coast, the third of seven children, four of whom survived to adulthood, of Huggin Porson (died 1806) and Ann Palmer (died 1784). 
Porson's childhood was unusually academic and, somewhat like the young Montaigne being taught Latin at home before he spoke French, his youth was invested with high hopes and imaginative energy on the part of his parents. His father was a worsted weaver by trade who became the local parish clerk, succeeding his own father in the position. Porson's mother was the highly intelligent daughter of a shoemaker in a nearby village. She learned to read and then, while in service at the house of a gentleman with a well stocked library, pursued a passion for Shakespeare, Milton, Spenser, and other English standard authors, which she passed on to her children. 
From the earliest possible age Porson and his siblings, boys and girls alike, were given strenuous memory and mathematical lessons and exercises by their father and it is known that Richard had the opportunity to study haphazardly but deeply in the 'Bible', John Jewel's 'Apology', Greenwood's 'English Grammar', an odd volume of Chambers's 'Encyclopaedia' (picked up from a wrecked and stranded cargo vessel on the Norfolk coast), and several volumes of the 'Universal Magazine of Knowledge and Pleasure'. 
At about nine Porson was sent to the free school in the neighbouring coastal village of Happisburgh, when he was taught by a remarkable schoolmaster, himself only about twenty, a Mr Summers, who found not only that the boy could extract cube roots in his head but that he was 'shrewd, sensible and intelligent'. Under Summers's guidance, Porson soon learned formal mathematics, the fundamentals of Latin, and, importantly, an extraordinary skill and neatness in penmanship. Even at this early age Porson seems to have enjoyed and to have learned from meticulous copying; examples of professional calligraphic quality survive on subjects such as great circle sailing and astronomical problems under the Copernican system. 
In due course Porson's achievements caught the attention of Thomas Hewitt, the local vicar, and of John Norris (1734-1777), a man of wealth and benevolence in nearby Witton, and founder of the Norrisian professorship of divinity at Cambridge. Hewitt was educating his own sons at home, in Bacton (a coastal village some 3 miles from East Ruston), and offered the eleven-year-old Porson the opportunity to join them each Monday to Saturday, which he did. This arrangement continued for about two years, whereupon the boy was tested for ability by James Lambert, who had recently been elected regius professor of Greek at Trinity College, Cambridge. Thus, by a remarkable series of connections and chances, while barely a teenager, Porson ('the Norfolk boy', as some at Cambridge described him), was on course not only towards his eventual area of expertise but was in direct high-level contact with an important representative of the very college and professorial chair in which he would attain his own fame, both in Britain and abroad. 
By about March 1773 it was recognized even by his Norfolk patrons that the young Porson had remarkable abilities but that he was 'an unwinning cub' who needed allowances made for the awkwardness of his manners. Bearing a letter of introduction from Hewitt, the young Porson arrived in Cambridge and was tested, favourably, by senior tutors, including Thomas Postlethwaite, later master of that college. After a further year of home study with Hewitt, Porson entered Eton in August 1774, largely on the basis of a considerable fund collected by Norris, and administered by Sir George Baker, president of the College of Physicians and physician to the king and the queen. Thus, before the age of fifteen, such was the promise held out for Porson that his name was already known within some of the top academic circles in the country. 
The three and a half years Porson spent at Eton, however, must have done little to satisfy the more ambitious expectations of Summers, Hewitt, Norris, and Baker and one can only speculate what goals the boy awaited from himself. He was occasionally in poor health (from asthma) and was never physically robust, although he grew to 6 feet and was to all appearances a healthy man. Writing about this period of Porson's life, one of his earliest biographers, Thomas Kidd, claimed (without personal knowledge) that at Eton, Porson was inclined to drink, at night, and usually alone. Kidd asserted that he developed habits and attitudes which would be seen as characterizing the rest of his life: ability coupled with indifference, punctuated by periods of feverish, sometimes brilliant, effort and long periods of reading without systematic production of work of his own. 
On the purely academic side it was clear at Eton that Porson's scholarly attainments had been overrated. He was not inclined to take his lessons seriously and he knew little Greek and little of prosody, compared to classmates such as Richard Wellesley, Marquess Wellesley, who was rated 'infinitely superior to [Porson] in composition'. Porson took some solace at Eton both acting in and in writing plays, including one called 'Out of the Frying-Pan into the Fire' -- the title is both suggestive and revealing. Many years later he repeated the play from memory to a friend at Trinity College. The 'Frying-Pan' play ends with a soliloquy in which the Dr Faustus part (Porson's reincarnation of the friar in the Friar Bacon legend who proposed a brass wall around Britain to fend off her enemies) reasons that the island can defend itself by valour alone. This is essential Porson: truth and courage and defiance concealed behind apparent light-hearted but ironical humour and metaphorical word play. 
Any expression of Porson's own lifelong dialogue, deep within himself, he reserved to silent penmanship and to one massive treatise on the Christian Trinity, a detailed and obscure work. Occasionally he gave more sarcastic vent to his feelings, but did so in ways that were clever and passed for mere wit, sober or otherwise -- and he generally chose the objects of his satire with great care. Even under Summers he had shown signs of 'a little spirit of satire' and while at Eton he wrote a lampoon on his schoolfellow Charles Simeon, later the evangelical leader, who in his youth had affected some of the airs of a dandy, whereas all his life Porson was careless, even negligent, about his appearance. Aware that his humble background severely limited his future prospects, Porson sought to make his mark, either by displaying his brilliant insights into classical learning, or by dazzling those around him with his feats of prodigious memory. 
Porson's memory was considered amazing even in an era where much more emphasis was placed on rote learning than today. There are literally hundreds of surviving Porson anecdotes attesting to his skill, most of them strongly suggesting that he thoroughly enjoyed displaying himself in this way. Some such stories have him behaving almost like a circus oddity, reciting lengthy passages of Greek from memory, or reciting them both from memory and backwards. Others have Porson allegedly identifying which edition of Thucydides a reader was testing him from by being able to remember which side of the page a particular word occurred in a particular edition and then being able to regurgitate the entire relevant passage on the page of the edition in question, sight unseen. Many of his memory feats were no doubt authentic, but many sound embellished for effect, if not by Porson himself, then by his many admirers. Porson's feats of memory did not come without intense effort and he admitted that to retain information he sometimes had to copy it several times and read it a dozen. 
The memory skill was developed early on and, coming late to Latin and Greek as compared to other boys with whom he studied, Porson must have found that his mathematical skills would serve well for words. Indeed, he later found that memory could form the search engine for some of his most famous classical text emendations. Rather than having the unwanted memory powers of some kind of 'idiot savant', Porson's memory seems to have been developed by him as a necessary adjunct to his scholarship and no doubt went along with his lifelong habit of writing out his notes in calligraphic fair copy. 
In March 1778 Porson entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner. In 1781 he won the Craven scholarship with Greek iambics of a technical quality that revealed he had more than made up whatever had been gaps in his knowledge before his arrival in Cambridge. They were much admired at the time, although by modern standards they are defective, inasmuch as they violate Porson's own celebrated metrical law by allowing three out of seventeen lines to have a caesura in the fifth foot preceded by a long syllable. In the following year he won the chancellor's medal and in 1785 was elected to a fellowship, despite a rule making junior bachelors ineligible. 
Porson thereafter devoted his time to Greek, with virtually nothing by way of teaching duties, until a great turning point came in his academic life. The statutes of Trinity required that fellows must be in holy orders after seven years had elapsed from the taking of their MA degree. Porson's time was up in 1792, and it was clear that he would not choose to be ordained. At the time there were two fellowships open to laymen and Porson believed that the master of Trinity, Postlethwaite, had promised him one of them, but instead the master awarded it to his own nephew, a person of no particular academic merit or distinction. The incident created something of a scandal at the time and it deeply affected Porson -- he spoke to a friend about how hard it was to 'renovate' a man's spirit when it had been broken. He moved to London and for the rest of his life, only rarely returned to Cambridge. 
At just this time the regius professorship of Greek, for which Porson had long been hoping, became vacant and, not requiring ordination or subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', Porson was encouraged by Postlethwaite to make himself available as a candidate. He was unanimously elected in 1792. Porson took Euripides as the subject of his prelection, the public address in Latin required in connection with taking up the professorship. Friends, including Clayton Mordaunt Cracherode and Charles Burney, raised a large fund for Porson's support, of which he declined all but the annual interest, which amounted to about $100. 
The remaining years of Porson's life were spent in London. He never left England and was clearly piqued when the Cambridge Syndics denied him the means with which to travel to Florence in order to collate the famous Medicean ('Laurentian') manuscript of Aeschylus, claiming, with deliberate malapropism, that Porson 'could collect ['sic'] his manuscripts at home'. Porson correctly saw that as the slap it was intended to be. The valuable estate and library which he assembled suggests that Porson could have found the means to travel but this open rejection of his request must have eroded or even have killed off his desire. Without the approval he deserved, he retreated into a life of supposedly excessive drinking but at the same time produced most of his best scholarly work. 
In London on 24 November 1796 Porson married Mary Lunan, 'nee' Perry (died 1797), the divorced sister of his very close friend James Perry (1756-1821), editor of the 'Morning Chronicle'. The marriage seems to have been happy, and the well-known portrait of Porson by John Hoppner dates from this time. Mary's death on 12 April 1797, barely six months into the marriage, was a severe blow to Porson, who later always spoke about her to friends with great emotion and sincere affection, sometimes with tears in his eyes. 
Porson's reputation as a formidable critic was confirmed beyond doubt by the 'Letters to Mr Archdeacon Travis, in Answer to his Defence of the Three Heavenly Witnesses' (1790), which were first published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' as a series of seven letters in 1788-9. The matter at issue was a disputed verse in the first epistle of 'John' (5: 7), about the three heavenly witnesses, which had been condemned as spurious by Edward Gibbon in his 'Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire'. The interpolated words in this verse had been rejected by serious scholars, including Richard Bentley, who had made it the subject of his prelection as divinity professor in Cambridge in 1717. In 1782 a hapless archdeacon in Chester, George Travis, ventured to defend the genuineness of the added words in the verse and to attack Gibbon at the same time, by publishing a series of 'Letters to Edward Gibbon' in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', which were reprinted, with additional errors, in 1784. Despite the flimsiness of its learning and the error of its conclusion, Travis's defence stood unchallenged until Porson decided to enter the fray. His 'Letters to Archdeacon Travis', which were later turned into a weighty book containing much additional research, mercilessly exposed the errors of Travis. Gibbon was delighted and hailed Porson's 'Letters' as 'the most acute and accurate piece of criticism since the days of Bentley'. Some readers were offended not only by Porson's conclusion but by the fact that he had used wit and even flippancy to reach it. There is evidence that an old lady from Norfolk was so infuriated with Porson for having written 'against Christianity' that she changed her will to exclude him from what would have been a large cash legacy. Porson did not care. 
Commentators have generally concluded that Porson wrote to confute Travis because of Porson's strong love of truth, which he surely had (Porson had written that 'he does the best service to truth, who hinders it from being supported by falsehood'). Others have pointed out that Porson loved a good fight, in which he could display his learning and his wit. The timing of his intervention in a controversy that had been running since 1782 suggests, however, that there was a deeper motivation for Porson's energetic and enthusiastic engagement in the debate. Approaching the end of his fellowship in 1792, Porson had to decide whether to enter the church and the controversy offered a way in which he could try to work out in his own mind the dilemmas regarding the Trinity and the Christian religion in general, without which no truthful man would be able to take the oath required for holy ordination. If Porson did not persuade Travis about the errors of the controversial verse, it seems obvious that he did persuade himself that he could not take orders, even if it meant losing his fellowship at Trinity. He once commented that one needed fifty years of study to give proper consideration to matters of religion. 
Porson subsequently distanced himself further from Anglican orthodoxy by aligning himself with the Unitarians. In one of his incidental poems he ridicules Thomas Kipling, a deputy regius professor of divinity who was subordinate to Bishop Richard Watson. Justifiably considered by Porson to be ignorant as well as orthodox to the point of bigotry, Kipling was publishing a facsimile of the great 'Codex Bezae Cantabrigiensis', a manuscript of the 'New Testament' (circa fifth century) but also a very controversial one, because of textual differences between it and 'normal' 'New Testament' text. In his poem Porson writes: '
Orthodoxy's staunch adherent, 

Bishop Watson's great Vice-gerent, 

Sub-professor Dr. Kipling, 

Leave off your Yorkshire trick of tippling; 

For while thy Beza is in hand, 

Man's salvation's at a stand. 

' Kipling's bad Latin was proverbial (a 'Kiplingism' became synonymous with an execrable grammatical mistake). More importantly, Kipling was one of the leaders of the university prosecution of William Frend, attacked for sedition and for his openly Unitarian views. Porson's own sympathies in the matter can be seen glistening beneath the surface of his rhymes. 
One of the most famous Porson anecdotes originated in this period. Porson was being told by someone that the proof of the Trinity would be found when three persons (that is, the deity) could be found riding in one buggy (that is, the godhead). Porson instantly and incisively replied that such proof would actually be forthcoming only when one person was seen to be riding in three buggies. He presumably saw insuperable problems with the first of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' which posits a 'godhead of three persons' but he uttered his doubts no more openly than in this apparent mathematical jest. 
Having reached a workable compromise, at least within himself, on the matter of religion, Porson then produced a series of serious critical works on the classics, mainly in the field of Greek drama, by which he secured his scholarly reputation for generations. He began a famous edition of four plays of Euripides in 1797, with 'Hecuba' (1797), 'Orestes' (1798), 'Phoenissae' (1799), and 'Medea' (1801), the first in the series to bear his name. In his second edition of 'Hecuba', he includes a supplement to the preface in which he sets forth and illustrates Porson's law. 
Porson spent about a year laboriously transcribing in his own calligraphic handwriting the entire 15,000-line 'Codex Galeanus' text of the lexicon of Photius, the ninth-century Byzantine scholar and patriarch, eponymous with the Photian schism between the Latin and Greek churches and a vigorous denouncer of the 'Filioque' clause ('And the Son'), followed in the Nicene-Constantinopolitan creed and in the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. When Porson's transcription of the lexicon was destroyed by fire about 1796 he stoically repeated his prior meticulous work. 
Porson also worked on Homer, Aristophanes, Pausanias, and Suidas, and the results were published by his friends, after his death, as were his transcript of Photius (1822) and his conjectural restoration of the Rosetta stone (1812). This was in addition to his work on the lexicons of Suidas and Hesychius, his collation of the Harleian manuscripts of the 'Odyssey' (1801), and his many notes on Athenaeus and on various Greek poets, which were published as 'Adversaria' (1812). 
Porson's work immediately earned him a European reputation as a careful, patient, insightful scholar whose vast fund of knowledge yielded numerous emendations to corrupt texts and wise conjectures which have rarely left room for improvement. He was brilliant but cautious and declined to produce an edition of Aeschylus, as he could not base it on the Medicean manuscript. His handwritten text for 'Medea' and 'Phoenissae' formed the basis for the Porson Greek type, first used by Cambridge University Press in 1809 for a few words in Edward Daniel Clarke's 'Greek Marbles brought from the Shores of the Euxine, Archipelagi, and Mediterranean'; the first full text to use it was the Cambridge edition of 'Prometheus' in 1809, followed by its use for other plays of Euripides. 
Meanwhile, Porson did not neglect the literature and topics of his own day. Besides numerous contributions to the 'Morning Chronicle', many submitted pseudonymously, he wrote hundreds of epigrams and light poems, often with classical allusions of a somewhat boyish humour, such as: '
When Dido found Aeneas would not come, 

She mourned in silence and was Di-do-dum. 

' He wrote a longer piece in 1787 about Sir John Hawkins's 'Life of Johnson' which was read in his day and considered a model of parody, in the style of Jonathan Swift. He also wrote a variety of political tracts, of which the best-known was 'A New Catechism for the Use of the Swinish Multitude' (1792), in which Porson expresses strong Jacobinical sentiments, as he also did in an unknown number of unsigned articles printed in the 'Morning Chronicle', that were often recognized by his contemporaries as coming from his pen. He wrote miscellaneous literary criticism, sometimes in prose and sometimes in verse. Of Robert Southey's unreadable narrative poem 'Madoc' (1805) he was reported by Byron as having said that 'it will be read when... Homer and Vergil are forgotten... but not until then'. Porson could also make fun of himself in the same light sarcastic vein, writing: '
I went to Strassburg and got drunk 

With that most learn'd professor, Brunck; 

I went to Wortz, and got more drunken 

With that more learn'd professor, Ruhnken. 

' He here refers to two eminent classicists, Richard Brunck, of Strasbourg, and David Ruhnken, a German who spent most of his time at Leiden, contemporary with Porson. Ruhnken, in fact, was a pioneer of serious classical studies in Germany at a time of which Porson quipped that, in general, 'Germans in Greek are sadly to seek.' Porson admired Brunck for his courage in making original corrections to otherwise unintelligible Greek texts and he admired Ruhnken for making great progress in freeing many Greek texts from Christian theological interpretation. As often is the case, Porson's levity conceals a mind keenly aware of the serious but able to retain objective distance, through subtle or obscure humour, even with respect to those ideas and persons which he deeply admired. 
Porson considered Gibbon's 'Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire' one of the greatest of modern books, but he was not above quipping that 'there could be no better exercise for a schoolboy than to turn a page of it into English'. In a more serious vein, he wrote what is unquestionably one of the best book reviews of the eighteenth century, a one-page model of making his point with a degree of insight, sarcasm, and elegance which is the equal of Gibbon himself; it was published in the preface to the 'Letters to Travis'. Gibbon's reserve and primness did not accord very well with Porson's rather caustic (but correct) analysis and although Gibbon expressed gratitude for Porson's efforts to expose Travis to the world he did not take so well to the same skills being turned on himself. 
In April 1806 Porson became principal librarian of the London Institution, on a salary of $200 per annum, plus a set of rooms at 8 Old Jewry, and a servant. There he apparently carried out his strange mixture of solitary scholarship, solitary and communal inebriety, steady flashes of brilliant classical scholarship, and a ready flow of wit deemed worthy of remembrance, until the end of his life. 
On 19 September 1808, while walking near the Strand, Porson collapsed in a fit and was taken to a nearby workhouse, since his identity was not readily ascertainable and, when not actually unconscious, his speech was paralysed and incoherent. A newspaper report of the event on the following day -- describing his appearance, his clothes, and some scraps of Greek and algebra found in his pockets -- brought forth immediate attention from several of his friends. They attended him until he died in his rooms at the London Institution on 25 September, aged forty-eight. Before he died he regained sufficient of his former intellectual acuteness to recite at length in Greek, as if it were his native tongue. The cause of death was possibly a subdural haematoma. He was buried on 3 October in Trinity College chapel, Cambridge, in a funeral ceremony with considerable pomp and sorrow, which was attended by many eminences of the day. His tomb lies at the foot of Isaac Newton's statue and is not far from the remains of Bentley. Burney and his friends erected a plaque to his memory with a simple Latin inscription. 
Much of Porson's library was auctioned by Leigh and Sotheby over seven days in June 1809 in 1351 lots; it realized the sum of $1254; Burney was among the purchasers. The remainder of the library was acquired by Trinity College for about 1000 guineas, together with many of Porson's manuscripts, and is still intact. The quality, beauty, and value of the books that were auctioned are indisputable. In addition to more than fifteen editions from the Aldine Press, there were numerous later editions, such as from the Foulis Press in Glasgow, that are principally valued for their typography. Others, such as the Grenville Homer, realized almost three times the amount of Porson's annual income as regius professor. Convincing evidence that he was still deeply engaged in scholarship in his last years is provided by the dates of many of the books, some of which were published as late as 1805 to 1808. In addition to a great number of books containing annotated texts of the Greek and Roman classics, there was an exceptionably large number of dictionaries and glossaries. There were also many bibles, religious works, Bayle's 'Dictionary', books on calligraphy (including two copies of John Hodgkin's 'Calligraphica Graeca', 1794 and 1807, to which Porson was a subscriber), plus many volumes of Shakespeare, Milton, Pope, Swift, Johnson, Locke, and Gibbon. Among the numerous unexpected items was a copy of Beccaria's 'Crimes and Punishments' in Greek. 
Some two hundred years after his death, Porson survives in numerous small ways, seldom accorded to any classical scholar, however eminent. There is a Porson Road in Cambridge, fittingly placed parallel to Bentley Road. As well as Porson's law, there is Porson's bridge, which asserts that a word with a final heavy syllable may not implement third anceps in Archilochus, Semonides, Solon, or the Greek tragedians but may be found in Hipponax and the comedians. A Porson prize and Porson scholarship exist, both of which were first administered by Burney and funded by the capital from which Porson declined to accept anything but the annual interest. The Porson prize has been awarded since 1817 for the best translation into classical Greek verse (of a specified rhythmic type) of a text from the Elizabethan dramatists, often Shakespeare but also Marlowe, Jonson, Massinger, and others, and did much to arouse interest in England for academic Greek versification. Among the winners of the prize have been Sir John Edwin Sandys and Sir Richard Claverhouse Jebb, author of the biography of Porson (1896) in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. The Porson scholarship has been awarded since 1855 and has been conferred upon Jebb (1859), among others. Porson's reading chair, his tobacco pot, and a few other minor mementoes are preserved at Trinity. Good life portraits of him exist, by Hoppner and by John Opie, as well as a miniature attributed to George Engleheart, and there is a bust of him by Sir Francis Chantrey in Trinity College chapel. 
Porson's great work, the textual emendations, have entered the mainstream and his scholarship, academic integrity, and originality have never been doubted. However, his rarefied focus on the minutiae of metre and textual criticism has not kept pace with a world where the Attic dramatists are most commonly read in modern language translations which obliterate the very linguistic mysteries Porson laboured so hard to elucidate. 
Although Porson taught no pupils and founded no lasting 'school' of literary, or even of textual, criticism, in the generation just after his death he had a number of followers who were proud to have their names linked with his. His 'disciples', such as Charles James Blomfield, Peter Paul Dobree, Thomas Kidd, and James Henry Monk, were a group of Trinity men so closely bound by their excessive Porsonian devotion as to be dubbed the 'Porsonulettes' and edited and published many of their master's unfinished projects. The Porson 'industry' seems to have peaked by about 1867, with the publication of Porson's correspondence by Henry Richards Luard, registrar of the University of Cambridge and author of the Porson biography for the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'; it was later revised by John Edwin Sandys for the eleventh edition. After that, the anecdotal side of the Porson persona tended to predominate and no serious original work on him was done until 1937, with the publication of M. L. Clarke's biographical study. 
Porson's reputation has been compromised by his much publicized propensity to drink. Gossip about his excessive drinking was circulated by the numerous anecdotal biographies and sensational newspaper obituaries which appeared shortly after his melodramatic death. Ten years later, in a letter of 20 February 1818 to the publisher John Murray, Lord Byron referred to Porson's 'bestial intoxication' at Cambridge, yet admitted that he had more often seen Porson sober than drunk. In his own lifetime Porson's name served as a byword either for the pinnacle of scholarship or for the depths of drunkenness and wasted talent. 
Perhaps Porson's most lasting legacy resides in that most characteristic expression of his better self -- his Greek handwriting. It is elegant, it is sensitive, it is self-confident, it is a visual embodiment of all the best which the reader hopes from the best ideas within the text. Porson type is now the most commonly printed font for classical Greek text in the English-speaking world and is likely to continue as such for centuries. It is directly copied from Porson's own manuscript. His handwriting was deemed so perfect that the punches were said to have been cut directly, by Richard Austin, of the Cambridge University Press, between 1806 and 1808, from Porson's own script and under his own supervision, and 'Porson Greek' is a great improvement over the wiry curlicues of the Aldines and the ambiguity of Granjon, Plantin, Estienne, and other predecessors. First used to print a classical text in Blomfield's Cambridge edition of 'Prometheus vinctus' (1810), it has become one of the most familiar type fonts for all students of the Greek classics. 


@@@@@


doc= 22551


Adam de Port (d. c.1213) of Basing, Hampshire, a 'curialis' of King John, to whom he was distantly related. In 1161 Port answered for scutage on seven and a half knights' fees. In 1166 the barony consisted of just over twenty-one and a half knights' fees 'de veteri' and one and two-thirds fees 'de novo'. Later scutage was charged on twenty-three knights' fees. 


@@@@@


doc= 22552


Port, Sir John (c.1472-1540), judge, was one of the sons of Henry Port (died 1512) and his first wife, Anne, daughter of Roger Barrow of Chester. Henry was a mercer in Chester who served as mayor of that city in 1486, and it was probably through a local connection with Richard Sutton that John was entered at the Inner Temple in the early 1490s; John was later associated with Sutton in various transactions, including the foundation of Brasenose College, Oxford. Port was in practice by 1503, when he is named twice as counsel in the court of requests. By 1509 he was attorney-general in the county palatine of Chester, and surveyor of the honour of Tutbury for the duchy of Lancaster. In 1507 he delivered his first reading in the Inner Temple, and two years later was appointed by Henry VIII as his first solicitor-general. With his new rank he moved to chambers next to the Inner Temple hall, from which central position he played an active part in the life of the inn, serving as its treasurer from 1514 to 1517 and giving a second reading in 1515. By 1521 he was recorder of Nottingham, and in the same year, while involved in the prosecution of the duke of Buckingham for treason, was created a serjeant-at-law. As a serjeant he became an assize commissioner and went to the northern circuit in company with Sir Anthony Fitzherbert (c.1470-1538). 
As early as 1495 Port settled in Derbyshire as a result of his marriage with Jane (died 'c'.1520), the widow of John Pole of Radbourn, who was a daughter of John Fitzherbert (died 1502), king's remembrancer of the exchequer, and a cousin of Anthony Fitzherbert; they had a son, John ['see below'], and three daughters. His father-in-law settled upon him the estate in Etwall where he established his seat. Although his father continued to live in Chester, John Port erected a monument to him in Etwall church displaying the family's new arms granted in 1506. Port served as a justice of the peace for Derbyshire from 1502, acquiring extensive properties in that county and, to a lesser extent, in Nottinghamshire. In the 1520s he married as his second wife Margery, daughter of Sir Edmund Trafford, widow of Sir Thomas Gerard (died 1523); she died childless in May 1540. In his lifetime Sir John gave Brasenose College an endowment for scholarships, which were restricted in favour of Port's kinsmen until 1854, a garden, and vestments for the chapel; his arms, impaling Fitzherbert, were once displayed in the windows of the college hall. 
On 11 July 1525 Port was appointed one of the justices of the king's bench, apparently as an additional member of the court, and also became a member of Princess Mary's council in the marches, changing his circuit to the western. He was knighted soon afterwards. His correspondence with Cromwell as an assize judge seems to a modern reader improperly subservient, but it was usual for the government to keep in close touch with the judges on circuit as one of their principal means of obtaining and transmitting information. Port remained a judge for fifteen years, and from 1533 was the secondary justice of his court. His most famous judgment does not reflect well on his boldness; according to Spelman, he spoke so softly in 'Lord Dacre's Case' (1535) that he was counted on the wrong side, thereby giving the crown a bare majority. Whether or not his inaudibility was politically calculated, Port's mumbling altered the whole course of the law concerning uses. In another case, in 1536, Spelman rather critically noted that Port drew a distinction without giving any reason and that all the other judges took a contrary view. During the Lent assize of 1540 Port was taken ill at Worcester and carried to Bewdley, where he died on or about 14 March. In accordance with his will, he was buried at Etwall, Derbyshire. An effigy in bas-relief, between those of his two wives, was erected in the church there; he wears judicial robes with a collar (perhaps a collar of SS) underneath the mantle, but the face and hands have been broken off. 
In 1979 Port's previously unrecorded autograph notebook was purchased at auction by the Huntington Library. Besides miscellaneous collections, it contains an alphabetical digest of cases from Westminster Hall and other legal notes, beginning around 1493, notes of dicta at readings and moots in the Inner Temple from at least 1494, notes of readings in the same inn from 1497 to 1503, and reports in the king's bench for Michaelmas term 1529 and Hilary term 1530. Unlike other contemporary reporters, such as Caryll and Spelman, Port kept his best reports in his student days. There is a smattering of later cases, including one in which we hear Wolsey speaking in the Star Chamber, but those from his period as a judge are not particularly illuminating. The principal interest of the manuscript is that it is the earliest collection of law reports written by an identifiable hand. The most important of its contents were published in 1986. 
Port's granddaughter Jane married Richard Harpur, who also became a bencher of the Inner Temple, a judge, and a law reporter. Port's only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 22553


Sir John Port (b. before 1510, d. 1557), was born shortly before 1510 and went to Brasenose College in 1524 on his father's foundation, proceeding to the Inner Temple at his father's instance in 1528. He entered Cromwell's service, and in 1547 was created a knight of the Bath. Twice, in 1539 and 1553, he represented Derbyshire in parliament. He married in 1531 Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Giffard, and second, Dorothy, daughter of Sir Anthony Fitzherbert, and widow of Sir Ralph Longford (died 1543). On 6 June 1557 he died without male issue. His two sons had died in infancy, and his estates were partitioned in 1565 between his three daughters, one of whom, Dorothy, married George Hastings (died 1604) who inherited the earldom of Huntingdon in 1595. By his will he left $200 to Brasenose College to build chambers and found lectureships in philosophy and humanity 'according to my father's old wisshing and devise', and left part of his patrimony to provide almshouses at Etwall and to found Repton School, where the scholars every day were to pray for the souls of his parents and other relatives. 


@@@@@


doc= 22554


Portal, Abraham (bap. 1726, d. 1809), goldsmith and playwright, was born in Clowne, Derbyshire, and baptized there on 10 May 1726, the son of Peter William Portal (1685-1768), a Church of England clergyman whose family had migrated to England as Huguenot refugees in 1699, and his wife, Mary Magdalene Findlater, 'nee' Meure (died 1754). Abraham Portal spent the first eight years of his childhood in rural Derbyshire before his family moved to London. In 1740 he was bonded to a seven-year apprenticeship for a premium of $35 as a goldsmith to Paul De Lamerie, probably through the influence of his mother's cousin Peter Meure, also in that trade. On 21 August 1748, at St George's Chapel, Mayfair, Portal married Elizabeth Nethersole (1723-1758), the daughter of a lieutenant in the marines. The families were close; Portal's elder brother and younger sister also married into the Nethersole family. Elizabeth had a son in 1749, but he died in infancy, and they had no further children. 
Portal had continued to work for De Lamerie, but on 26 October 1749 he registered his own mark with the Goldsmiths' Company as a 'large worker', and later set up business for himself on Ludgate Hill. He did well at his trade, and some fine examples of his work have survived dated between 1754 and 1764. Portal's first wife died in 1758, and in that year his brother Andrew, who had become vicar of Abingdon, introduced him to the Bedwells, a local family; by the end of 1758 Portal had married Elizabeth Bedwell (1739/40-1808). They had nine children, six of whom survived into adulthood: Elizabeth Portal (1759-1834), Mary Portal (1762-1803), Ann Cracroft Portal (1766-1843), Martha Portal (1768-1855), William Nash Portal (1770-1804), and Richard Brinsley Portal (1784-1859). 
Portal, however, was not content with his work as a goldsmith, and while maintaining the business attempted to launch a literary career. He was encouraged by John Langhorne, the translator of Plutarch, who took a great interest in the progress of this 'tradesman-poet'. Portal's first play, 'Olindo and Sophronia: a Tragedy', was based on a story from Tasso and appeared in two editions in 1758. 'Vortimer, or, The True Patriot: a Tragedy', set in the time at which the Romans left Britain, was probably written in 1762, although not published until 1796. Another play, 'The Indiscreet Lover: a Comedy', was performed at the Haymarket theatre for the benefit of the British Lying-in Hospital in Browlow Street, and appeared in two editions in 1768. While David Baker took a dim view of this work, remarking that 'charity covereth a multitude of failings', John Genest found two of the characters, Old and Young Reynard, 'excellent'. The work is concerned with the oppression of women, and two of the best roles are those of a prostitute and a servant girl. It was more sophisticated and satiric than Portal's other more moralistic work, and he appended a list of 'errata' to the printed versions, in which the reader was requested to substitute polite paraphrases for coarse expressions found in the original text. It was this kind of fastidiousness that probably led to Portal's being wrongly named as the author of 'Antiprofanus, a Letter to David Garrick' (1760), a pamphlet by 'A.P.', attacking blasphemy and obscenity on the stage. Portal also published 'Songs, Duets and Finale' (1778) from the comic opera 'The Cady of Bagdad' (music by Thomas Linley the younger, libretto by Portal). 
Portal went bankrupt in 1778, and this has been attributed to a combination of worsening economic conditions for goldsmiths, and to the fact that his literary efforts had led to a decreasing involvement in the business. Portal then set up as a small bookseller and publisher in the Strand; it was at this time that he issued by subscription the collected edition of his poetry, entitled simply 'Poems' (1781), and dedicated to Richard Brinsley Sheridan, who had acted as godfather to his youngest son, and from whom Portal hoped for some kind of patronage or assistance. In 1781 this came in the form of the post of box-keeper at the Drury Lane theatre, a position which he held for many years. Portal continued working as a stationer, however, until in 1786 he re-established himself as a silversmith at 54 Shoe Lane, albeit in a much reduced line of business. In 1790 he moved to 19 Castle Street, Holborn, where he spent the remainder of his life. He suffered a further blow, however, by the unspecified dishonest actions associated with the secret marriage in 1793 of his eldest son, William Nash Portal, formerly his assistant in the renewed business. As Christopher Portal puts it: 'It is a sign of his integrity that he was still paying a dividend to the creditors [from his original bankruptcy] in 1791, a few years before he was again reduced to penury by the dishonesty of his elder son. (Portal, 103)' Unfortunate in business and unsuccessful in his literary endeavours, Portal died a disappointed man in London in 1809. His plays and poetry: 'vary widely in quality, but the best of them are interesting and seem only narrowly to have missed commercial success. However, his surviving work as a silversmith shows a talent which could have gained him a place among the best craftsmen of a brilliant age had he maintained his early standard and level of production throughout his career. (Portal, 160)' 



@@@@@


doc= 22555


Portal, Sir Gerald Herbert (1858-1894), diplomatist, second son of Melville Portal (1819-1904) of Laverstoke, Hampshire, and Lady Charlotte Mary Elliot (died 1899), daughter of Gilbert Elliot Murray Kynynmound, second earl of Minto, was born at Laverstoke on 13 March 1858, and educated at Eton College, where he played in the school cricket team. He entered the diplomatic service on 12 July 1879 and after the usual period of probation in the Foreign Office was sent to Rome on 29 July 1880. He became third secretary of legation on 22 July 1881. 
In June 1882 Portal had the good fortune to be temporarily attached to the consulate-general at Cairo at a critical period in the history of British relations with Egypt. He was present at the bombardment of Alexandria, and for his services on that occasion received a medal with clasp and the khedive's star. He became a favourite with Sir Evelyn Baring (afterwards Lord Cromer), the British representative, and in April 1884 was confirmed as third secretary at Cairo. On 1 April 1885 he was promoted second secretary. For some weeks in the summers of 1886 and 1887 he took charge of the residency during Cromer's absence, and conducted its affairs with credit. 
On 17 October 1887 Portal was ordered to attempt a reconciliation between the king of Abyssinia and the Italian government. On 21 October he left for Massawa. To succeed in such a mission was almost impossible, but he made every effort, and showed rare judgement and coolness in travelling through a disturbed country. He returned on 31 December, unsuccessful, but with a considerably enhanced reputation. He was made CB, and gave an account of the expedition in 'My Mission to Abyssinia' (1888). 
Returning to his duties at the Cairo agency, Portal was charge d'affaires in the autumn of 1888. From 30 April to 14 November 1889 he acted as consul-general at Zanzibar, and on 10 March 1891 was permanently appointed to the agency there, under the scheme of the British protectorate, which was then inaugurated. To these duties he added those of consul-general for German East Africa on 2 June 1891, and for the British sphere in east Africa on 11 February 1892. He vigorously entered upon the duties of his new post, and reformed the administration. He was made KCMG on 4 August 1892. On 1 February 1890 he married Lady Alice Josephine, daughter of Montagu Arthur Bertie, seventh earl of Abingdon, and his first wife, Caroline Theresa (died 1873). They had no children. 
In the autumn of 1892 the future of Uganda (its chartered company being effectively bankrupt) became the subject of an intense row within Gladstone's cabinet, with the Foreign Office mounting an energetic campaign for the annexation of Uganda. A compromise was reached, whereby Portal was requested to report on whether the country should remain under British control. Appointed commissioner for Uganda on 1 December, Portal toured the country, with his brother Captain Melville Raymond Portal ('b'. 1856) as chief military officer; his brother died on the journey, on 27 May 1893. Portal reached the coast again on 21 October 1893 and reached London in November. Strongly though covertly encouraged by Lord Rosebery, the foreign secretary, Portal, in his report, completed in December 1893, recommended against British evacuation, though drawing attention to the difficulties of settling Uganda. His report was less enthusiastic than Rosebery had hoped, and it may be that the latter rewrote parts of it; he certainly delayed its circulation. Portal was writing his account of his journey when he died, on 25 January 1894, at his home, 5B Mount Street, Grosvenor Square, London, of fever contracted in Uganda. His book, 'The British Mission to Uganda', was published posthumously later that year. Rosebery declared Uganda a protectorate in June 1894. Portal was handsome and athletic, and was a skilled publicist, adept at leaking news to the papers. The town of Fort Portal in western Uganda is named after him. In October 1897, his widow married Commandant Reynteins of Belgium; the couple had several children. 


@@@@@


doc= 22556


Porten, Sir Stanier (bap. 1716, d. 1789), government official, was the only son among the four children of James Porten (1665-1750), merchant of London, of Huguenot descent, and Mary Allen. He was baptized on 26 June 1716 in Putney, Surrey, where his family lived in an old redbrick house adjoining Putney Bridge. His youngest sister, Judith, married on 3 June 1736 Edward Gibbon of Buriton, Hampshire, and their eldest son, Edward Gibbon the historian, spent many of his holidays in the Porten household in Putney. Following Judith Porten's death in 1747, Gibbon stayed with the Portens until the family was forced to leave the house at Christmas 1748 because of James Porten's failure in business. Thereafter, Gibbon was cared for by his eldest aunt, Catherine Porten (died 1786), who established a boarding-house for Westminster School, which proved very successful. 
Porten entered the diplomatic service, and for some years before 1760 he was British resident at the court of Naples. He was transferred in April 1760 to the post of consul-general at Madrid. In July 1766 he was appointed secretary to the extraordinary embassy of Lord Rochford to the court of France; he arrived in Paris on 31 August 1766. He compiled several reports in 1766-7 on the terms 'of liquidating the Canada paper in France' ('Third Report', HMC, appx, 138). In November 1768 he was appointed as under-secretary to Lord Rochford, then secretary of state for the northern department, and in December 1770 he followed Rochford to the southern department, where he remained under-secretary until 1782. 
Gibbon wrote on 24 May 1774 that Porten was 'seriously in love' with Miss W., 'an agreeable woman', and that he was 'seriously uneasy that his precarious situation precludes him from happiness. We shall soon see which will get the better, love or reason. I bet three to two on love' ('Miscellaneous Works', 2.125). Gibbon's prophecy proved correct. Porten married Mary Wibault (1737-1819) of Titchfield Street, London, on 29 December 1774. They had two surviving children: a son, Stanier James Porten (1779-1854), and a daughter, Charlotte (1776-1827), who married, on 7 February 1798, Henry Wise, rector of Charlwood. 
Porten was knighted on 5 June 1772, appointed keeper of the state papers at Whitehall in 1774, and from 1782 until November 1787 was a commissioner of the customs. He was characterized as the 'man of business' in his department, and as possessing a gravity of demeanour which was exaggerated by his long official residence at Naples and Madrid (Hawkins, 2.7-11). After 'long infirmities and gradual decay' he died at Kensington Palace, London, on 7 June 1789. His widow was left with a moderate pension for her subsistence. Gibbon thereupon proposed adopting and educating the eldest child, Charlotte, 'a most amiable, sensible young creature', and rewarding 'her care and tenderness with a decent fortune' ('Miscellaneous Works', 1.296), but Mary Porten would not be persuaded. By his will, dated 1 October 1791, Gibbon left his money to these two children, his nearest relatives on his mother's side. 


@@@@@


doc= 22557


Porteous, John (c.1695-1736), army officer and victim of crowd violence, was probably born in the burgh of the Canongate, Edinburgh, the son of Stephen Porteous, a tailor. Little is known of his early life other than that he served in the army in Flanders. On his return to Edinburgh he was appointed in 1716 as a part-time drill master to the Edinburgh trained bands and then, in 1718, an ensign to the city guard, becoming captain in 1726. Porteous seems to have been an overbearing and unpopular figure, hated by 'the mob', the lowest level of Edinburgh's highly stratified society. He and they frequently clashed, and it is for the last and most serious of these encounters that he is known. 
On 14 April 1736 a condemned smuggler, Andrew Wilson, was taken to be executed in the Grassmarket. After Wilson was hanged, perhaps because of concern about a possible rescue, Porteous asked, but was denied, permission to cut the body down early. A few minutes later when the hangman tried to remove Wilson's body, the crowd began to stone the city guard and, in the confusion, the corpse was cut down and rushed off with a view to attempted resuscitation. 
What happened next is disputed. Porteous said he tried to restrain the guard as they withdrew under attack from a hostile crowd. But unknown guardsmen fired into the crowd, killing six protesters. Porteous maintained that the guard had acted in self-defence. Many witnesses told a different story, however. It was reported that Porteous had waved his musket threateningly at the crowd and had fired on them at point-blank range, killing the first victim. Porteous had then ordered his men to fire which they did, but over the crowd's heads, resulting in injuries to spectators at the high tenement windows. He had then ordered them to fire into the crowd, and two more victims were killed. As the crowd retreated in some panic, the guard had withdrawn towards the West Bow before, on Porteous's order, turning back to face the crowd. A third order to fire had then been heard and three more members of the crowd were killed. The guard had then completed its march up the West Bow. 
Porteous was arrested that afternoon, disarmed, and charged with murder. His trial was held on 5 July 1736 before Andrew Fletcher, the lord justice clerk, the senior criminal judge in Scotland. Nineteen prosecution witnesses swore that Porteous had fired into the crowd on 14 April. Sixteen defence witnesses were less certain, but all stated that they had not seen him fire. The jury duly and unanimously found Porteous guilty of murder. To the satisfaction of many of the city's residents, he was sentenced to be executed in the Grassmarket on 8 September 1736 and secured in the Tolbooth prison, close to St Giles. Porteous's sentence caused alarm in government circles. The earl of Ilay, Sir Robert Walpole's manager in Scotland, made a grave miscalculation when he sought to appease his political masters with little consideration as to the depth of feeling in Scotland. An appeal was petitioned for on behalf of Porteous and an order for a deferment of six weeks arrived in Edinburgh on 2 September. 
Rumours of a plot to murder Porteous began almost immediately. In early September Robert Lind, now captain of the city guard, had reported his concerns to Provost Wilson, and plans were made for the number of guardsmen at the Tolbooth to be increased on 8 September. There were thus only fifteen unarmed guards on duty on the evening of 7 September. At about 9 p.m. a crowd began to gather in the Portsburgh, west of the Grassmarket. Apparently well organized and about 4000 strong, the crowd entered the city through the West Port which they immediately secured. They crossed the Grassmarket to the Cowgate where they secured both the Cowgate and Netherbow ports, cutting the city off from the regular troops at Holyrood. The crowd then made its way up the High Street and overpowered the guards. The civic authorities were paralysed as the crowd began to attack the Tolbooth. Troops stationed at the castle were prevented from gaining access by the crowd which stood between them and the magistrates. Eventually the city's MP and former lord provost Robert Lindsay went to General Moyle at Holyrood for military assistance. Critically, however, he did not take a warrant with him and Moyle refused his request. The Tolbooth withstood the crowd's assault until about 11.30 p.m. when Porteous was dragged from the prison, up the Lawnmarket towards the castle, and then down the steep West Bow towards the Grassmarket. Someone broke into a shop on the way and left a guinea for a rope to hang their victim. In the Grassmarket Porteous was quickly strung up on a dyer's pole as a makeshift gallows. After a few minutes he was dragged down and his nightshirt was wrapped around his head. Stringing him up for a second time, the crowd forgot to tie his hands and, as he struggled to prevent his own strangulation, they broke his arm and shoulder. Porteous was brought down from the pole a third time, badly beaten, before being hauled up again. He died shortly before midnight on the very eve of the date set for his judicial execution. He was buried in Greyfriars churchyard, Edinburgh, on 8 September 1736. 
Porteous's murder deepened the sense of alarm in London. Numerous theories existed to explain what was variously characterized as a Jacobite plot, an extreme Presbyterian conspiracy, or revenge by smugglers, a wild drunken rabble, or friends of those killed on 14 April. It is quite likely that elements of all these were present in the 4000-strong crowd. The planning and organization, however, seems to have been the work of a small group of Edinburgh tradesmen and journeymen, led by James Maxwell, a journeyman carpenter, who gave detailed and damning evidence against Porteous at his trial and who absconded from the city after the riot, along with about seventy other tradesmen, journeymen, and apprentices. The despised 'mob' had had its revenge on an overbearing official. 
Of more serious concern to the government was the threat presented to the management of Scotland. Walpole, the duke of Newcastle, Ilay, and Queen Caroline felt that the magistrates had sacrificed Porteous rather than risk the fury of the crowd. General Moyle and the lord justice clerk likewise believed that the magistrates had been party to the conspiracy. Opposition peers seized their opportunity and brought in a bill to imprison Provost Wilson, debar him from office, disband the city guard, and pull down the Netherbow Port. The government argued that the proposals were excessive, infringed the liberties of the city and the Scottish legal system, and were a slur on Scottish loyalty to the Union. 
In the Commons, the Scottish MPs were similarly critical of the bill and would not be placated. The opposition was forced to alter its demands. Accepting that the bill could indeed be interpreted as an attack on liberties and a threat to the constitution, they secured the disqualification of the lord provost and the imposition of a $2000 fine on the city for the benefit of Porteous's widow, details of whom are unknown. Walpole's government made one further miscalculation in the aftermath of the Porteous affair. In pursuit of Porteous's murderers an act was passed offering a reward of $200 for evidence. Unfortunately, the act required that it be read in churches on the first Sunday of every month for a year. A large and increasing number of ministers refused, regarding acquiescence as Erastian heresy. Amid an explosion of pamphlets on the subject, Walpole withdrew the measure. No further information about Porteous's killers was ever uncovered. The Porteous riots, as they came to be called, form the opening scene of Sir Walter Scott's novel 'The Heart of Midlothian' (1818). 


@@@@@


doc= 22558


Porteous, William (1735-1812), Church of Scotland minister, was born on 11 March 1735, the eldest surviving child of James Porteous (1701-1780) of Dalveich, minister of Monzievaird and Strowan, Perthshire, and his first wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Haley (died 1738). He matriculated at the University of Glasgow and, after training for the ministry there, was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Auchterarder on 13 September 1757. In November 1759 he was presented by Lady Mary Cunninghame to the parish of Whitburn in Linlithgowshire, and was ordained there on 10 June 1760. On 26 August he married Grizel Lindsay (died 1774), the daughter of the Revd George Lindsay of North Leith; they had three sons and a daughter. He was translated to the Old Wynd or West Parish Church, Glasgow, on 28 June 1770 and remained a minister of that parish for forty-two years, the last five of them at the newly constructed St George's Church. His wife having died four years after the move to Glasgow, he married, on 8 August 1785, Marion Moore (died 1817), daughter of the Revd Charles Moore of Stirling and sister of the novelist and travel writer John Moore (1729-1802). 
After his move to Glasgow, Porteous was a leader of the popular or orthodox party in the west of Scotland. His piety was praised in a poem by the Revd Alexander Cunningham, dated 30 June 1778 and published in Glasgow the following year in his 'Poems on the British Authors'. In December 1778 Porteous published a fast day sermon, 'The Doctrine of Toleration, Applied to the Present Times', which accepted the principle of toleration in general but argued warmly against its extension to Roman Catholics at a time when that measure was under consideration by the government. In 1782 he sponsored an alternative reply to the king from the general assembly of the Church of Scotland which praised the appointment of the new (Rockingham) ministry and intimated opposition to the British government's handling of the American War of Independence; the measure was defeated in a party vote, 86 to 49, but Porteous was among those entering a dissent affirming the church's right to speak out against government policies harmful to the social welfare. His connection with America was enhanced by his personal ties with John Witherspoon, the president of the College of New Jersey (later Princeton University), which granted him an honorary DD degree in November 1784. 
In Glasgow, Porteous fought unsuccessfully to block the opening of John Jackson's Dunlop Street Theatre in 1782 and took an active part in the administration of social relief programmes. His 'Letter to the Citizens of Glasgow' (1783) contains detailed tables of the town's parishes and their poor, listed by name and occupation, and begins with this memorable exhortation: 'The poor of the city are 'your' poor, and it is your 'duty' to make provision for them.' Yet Porteous was so rigorous in investigating claims for relief at the town's hospital that he was popularly known as 'Buff (a Scots word for 'Beat') the Beggars' (Addison, 51). Like most of his colleagues in the popular party he turned sharply against the French Revolution, as evidenced by the two fast day discourses he delivered on 18 April 1793 and published soon afterwards as 'The Good Old Way Recommended'. At the end of the century he attacked aspects of the doctrine and practice of a branch of presbyterian seceders in 'The New Light examined, or, Observations on the proceedings of the Associate Synod against their own standards' (1800), which provoked a critical pamphlet from James Peddie in the same year. In 1807-8 Porteous became embroiled in a controversy over the introduction of organs in public worship, which he strongly opposed. He died on 12 January 1812. 


@@@@@


doc= 22559


Porter, Anna Maria (1778-1832), novelist, was born on 22 December 1778 at Salisbury, Wiltshire, the daughter of William Porter (1735-1779), surgeon, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Blenkinsop (1745-1831). She was the younger sister of Sir Robert Ker Porter (1777-1842), painter and traveller, and Jane Porter (bap. 1776, d. 1850), novelist. Anna Maria was educated at Edinburgh with her sister, both deciding from an early age to devote their lives to literature and the arts. When only thirteen, Anna began a series of stories which eventually appeared as 'Artless tales, ''by Anna Maria Porter, ornamented with a frontispiece, designed by her brother, R. K. Porter''' (1793). A second volume, this time with the subtitle ''Romantic effusions of the heart'', was published under her name in 1795. Within another two years she had completed two three-decker novels: 'Walsh Colville' (1797) and 'Octavia' (1798?). 
In 1807 the Porter family moved to a cottage in Esher, Surrey, and it was here that Anna wrote and published a historical romance, 'The Hungarian Brothers', which appeared under her own name after a brief flirtation with anonymity. She had been spurred on, as she later confessed, by the immediate and continuing success of her sister's 'Thaddeus of Warsaw' (1803). Anna's novel was soon translated into French, and later English editions made appearances until as late as 1832. 
Anna Porter's other works included: 'Don Sebastian, or, The House of Braganza' (1809), 'Ballad Romances and other Poems' (1811), 'The Recluse of Norway' (1814), 'Tales of Pity on Fishing, Shooting and Hunting' (1814), 'The Knight of St John' (1817), 'Roche Blanche, or, The Hunters of the Pyrenees', and at least two other novels on which both sisters' names appeared. Jane said of Anna that 'the quickness of her perceptions gave her an almost intuitive knowledge of everything she wished to learn', while Mrs S. C. Hall described her as blonde, and by nature gay. 
After their mother's death, the Porter sisters moved to London in 1831, Anna's novel 'The Barony' having recently appeared in the usual three-volume format. They went to visit their brother William Ogilvie Porter, who practised medicine at Bristol, and to the family's dismay, Anna fell ill there. Despite the best efforts of her brother, she died of typhus fever on 21 September 1832, and was buried in St Paul's churchyard, Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 22560


Porter, Sir Charles (1631-1696), politician and lord chancellor of Ireland, was born on 6 September 1631, the second son of Edmund Porter (died 1670?), rector of Heveningham, Norfolk, and prebendary of Norwich, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Sir Charles Chibborne of Messing Hall, Essex. In his youth Porter served as an apprentice in Norwich, until his involvement in the royalist riots in 1648 necessitated a rapid escape to the Netherlands, where he initially served as an enlisted soldier, and then kept an eating-house for cavaliers. This latter venture failed owing to the inability of his clientele to pay their bills, so that Porter soon returned to England, where he found employment as an under-clerk in chancery. In 1656 he entered the Middle Temple, was called to the bar in 1663, became a bencher in 1682, a reader in 1685, and treasurer in 1688. He was married twice, first, in 1666, to Sarah Mitchell of Edmonton, Middlesex, and second, in 1671, to Letitia (died 1692), daughter and coheir of Bartholomew Coxeter of Weald Manor, Bampton, Oxfordshire, with whom he had a son and two daughters. 
Porter's legal career was marked by a steady rise through related government offices. In 1660 he was appointed solicitor to James, duke of York, a post he held until 1685. In 1678 he was made deputy remembrancer, and in 1688 remembrancer, of the first fruits and tenth parts in the exchequer, which office he held until his death. From the outset he proved to be an able lawyer, though his career also benefited from his association with Francis North, Baron Guilford, and his involvement as a junior counsel in a case in 1675 which brought into question the jurisdiction of the House of Lords and which resulted in Porter and his three associates being sent to the Tower by the House of Commons on 4 June. His imprisonment was short-lived, owing to the prorogation of parliament five days later. In 1685, at the outset of James II's reign, Porter was elected MP for Tregony, while in the same year he was made a king's counsel. In early 1686 he was knighted and was also appointed lord chancellor of Ireland, a post which carried with it the speakership of the Irish House of Lords and a salary of $1000 p.a., which in May 1686 was increased by $500. With other perquisites of office the theoretical annual income for the lord chancellor was $1900. This remuneration may have represented the main reason for Porter's acceptance of a post in a country where he had no familial, political, or professional connections, as despite his successful legal career he was always in financial difficulty, reputedly because of his great liking for 'women and the bottle' (North, 1.382). Burnet believed that Porter's appointment was made on the grounds that his financial problems would ensure that he was a 'person fit to be made a tool of' by the king ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.73). However, Porter was not as pliable as was expected, and his first sojourn in Ireland proved a difficult time. His appointment was not looked upon favourably by the lord lieutenant of Ireland, Henry Hyde, second earl of Clarendon, though Porter's early activity, especially in declaring to everyone that James II would not tamper with the 'Acts of Settlement', soon altered Clarendon's opinion, the earl later recounting that Porter was one of only two honest lawyers he met with on a visit to the Temple in January 1689. However, it was Porter's failure to maintain good relations with James II's future Irish chief governor, the Roman Catholic Richard Talbot, earl of Tyrconnell, which led to his dismissal in early 1687. Porter's experiences in Ireland served to alienate him from James II, and it was not surprising that despite his high-church tory leanings he was an early adherent of William of Orange in 1688. His attitude did not harm his stalled legal career either, as he was reappointed king's counsel under William and Mary, and in 1690 lord chancellor of Ireland and one of the lords justices appointed to act as chief governors. 
Having been returned on petition as MP for New Windsor in May 1690, Porter travelled to Ireland later that year. He spent the next two years serving as a lord justice alongside Thomas Coningsby, who was joint Irish paymaster and receiver-general with Charles Fox. Initially Porter's period in office was dominated by the need to bring the war in Ireland to a speedy conclusion, and although not party to the negotiations of the articles of Limerick in September-October 1691, he was one of the main signatories of the treaty. However, his association with this treaty, which was disliked by many Irish protestants for its apparently beneficial treatment of Jacobites and Roman Catholics, and his earlier association with James II's reign in Ireland, earned him many enemies in the Irish body politic. At the same time accusations of mismanagement and corruption in the government during 1690-92 reflected badly upon the lords justices, not least because of Coningsby's central role in the Treasury. Porter, by association if not actual involvement, suffered the consequences of the investigations into these accusations over the next few years. 
The first crisis for Porter arose in the Irish parliament of October-November 1692, when the Commons took the opportunity, presented by the delay in sending the main body of government legislation from England, to embark upon detailed investigations into the management of government, the embezzlement of forfeitures, and the favour shown to Roman Catholics. The lord lieutenant, Henry, Lord Sidney, who had replaced Porter and Coningsby as chief governor earlier in the year and who was closely associated with Porter, having served briefly as a lord justice with him in 1690, prorogued parliament before matters could come to a head. However, this action only delayed the attack on Porter. In February 1693 the complaints raised in Ireland were brought before the English parliament by several Irish MPs, supported by English whig MPs. Although the whigs were using Irish affairs primarily as a way to disrupt government business in Westminster, the investigations and ensuing addresses to the king from both houses further undermined Porter's position, which was made evident in June when Sidney's removal resulted in his being appointed only as an interim lord justice prior to the arrival of three new lords justices, despite it being the case that the lord chancellor was usually a member of any such commission. The English parliament's investigations had also prompted Porter and Coningsby to request a royal pardon for their time in the Irish government. This action prompted a petition in June requesting that the pardon be stopped, as it was intended to impeach both men in the next session of the English parliament. Although the petition received little countenance at the privy council, Porter still had to travel to England in the autumn to defend himself against the impeachment brought before the English Commons on 16 December 1693. The impeachment was dismissed by the house on 29 January 1694. 
With the granting of a royal pardon in April 1694 it appeared that Porter's travails were at an end. However, two factors combined in Ireland to ensure that there was to be one last attack on him. The first was the continuing desire of leading Irish opposition MPs to bring about his downfall, and the second was the presence of the whig Henry, Lord Capell, in the commission of lords justices. Capell's political opinions were diametrically opposed to Porter's, while it is also evident that he believed that Irish affairs would benefit from Porter's removal from office. Capell, who had formed an alliance with the leading Irish opposition MPs, was made lord deputy in May 1695, with orders to summon parliament. Porter's fear that this new court party, made up of men who had led the previous attacks upon him, would do so again in parliament, proved true, and on 30 September articles of high crimes and misdemeanours were presented against him in the Irish Commons. The impeachment proceedings were eventually rejected 121 to 77, following a personal appearance in the Commons by Porter on 25 October. Although once again saved from impeachment, his remaining fourteen months alive were far from peaceful. The conflict between himself and the Capellite party continued unabated, including a personal affront by the speaker of the Commons, Robert Rochfort, following the rejection of the impeachment, and an attempt by a section of the Irish government to exclude him from the commission of lords justices following Capell's death in May 1696, while in the autumn there were rumours that a further attempt to impeach him would be made in Westminster. However, no such action was taken as Porter died suddenly of an apoplexy, on the evening of 8 December 1696, while writing a letter in the study of his house in Chancery Lane, Dublin. He was buried at Christ Church, Dublin. His financial circumstances were such that he left no provision for his family, and although leading junto whigs believed that Porter's death was good for the king's affairs, William III felt differently, and granted a parcel of forfeited lands to the family in order to provide for Porter's two daughters. This grant was the only one to be exempted from the 'Resumption Act' in 1700, suggesting Porter's reputation among English tories remained high after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 22561


Classon Emmett Porter (1814-1885), half-brother of John Scott and William Porter, was born at Artikelly in 1814, the eldest son of the Revd William Porter and his second wife, Eliza Classon (died 1852), of Dublin. He was educated locally and in Manchester College, at that time in York, from 1828 until 1834. On 3 July 1834 he was ordained and installed by the presbytery of Antrim in the non-subscribing congregation of Larne in co. Antrim, where he remained until his retirement in 1875. He married in 1853 Eliza Ann Wallace, from Omagh, to whom he was distantly related; they had three sons. He was widely respected for his integrity, scholarship, and efforts to improve the quality of life of his local community. He promoted non-sectarian education, and laid the foundations of Larne grammar school. In 1840 he set up a female industrial school to train poor girls in embroidery and knitting skills. He also initiated a local loan fund to lend money at reasonable rates of interest. He disliked public controversy, and avoided it after exchanges with his orthodox Presbyterian neighbour, the Revd H. W. Molyneaux; these were over the 'Dissenters' Chapels Act' of 1844, which secured unitarians and non-subscribing Presbyterians in the possession of their congregational properties. Porter's contributions to local and church history were numerous, appearing originally in local newspapers. Some collections of his pieces were published, notably 'Irish Presbyterian Biographical Sketches' in 1883 and 'Ulster Biographical Sketches' in 1884. A farmer as well as a minister and a major beneficiary of his half-brother William's estate, he retired early to live in Ballygally Castle on the Antrim coast road. He died on 27 May 1885 and was buried three days later in Cairncastle churchyard, where his grave is marked by a handsome Celtic cross. There are substantial collections of his papers and publications in the Public Record Office of Northern Ireland and in Larne Public Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 22562


Porter, Endymion (1587-1649), courtier, was born in 1587 in the manor house of Mickleton, Gloucestershire, the eldest of the eight children of Edmund Porter (died 1623) and his wife, Angela, the daughter of Giles Porter. 
The Porters were a minor gentry family settled in Warwickshire since the late fifteenth century, which was, however, remarkable in developing connections with Spain in the Elizabethan period. Endymion's grandfather Giles had gone to Castile in the 1560s where he had married Dona Juana de Figueroa y Mont Salve. Although a Catholic Giles had returned with his wife and two daughters to England around 1585 to settle in Mickleton, while his son Luis Porter de Figueroy stayed behind and later entered the Spanish diplomatic service. Endymion grew up in Mickleton. However, when Giles Porter accompanied the earl of Nottingham on his embassy to Spain in 1605 as an interpreter, he and his brother Thomas followed him to Valladolid, then the Spanish capital. In Spain Endymion became a member of the conde de Olivares's household, where he served the conde's heir, Don Gaspar de Guzman, who was the same age as himself. Porter presumably conformed to the Catholic faith of his master while he lived in the Olivares household, although he later returned to the Church of England. Don Gaspar was to become Philip IV's ('r'. 1621-65) most powerful minister and favourite, and continued to see Porter as a trustworthy confidant at the English court in later years. In 1607 Porter left the household of Olivares and took service with William Calley, an English merchant in Madrid. About 1612 he returned to England having established important contacts at the Spanish court. 
In England Porter entered the service of Edward Villiers, half-brother of George Villiers, who was to become King James I's favourite and duke of Buckingham. Buckingham took Porter into his own service as his master of horse and secretary for his Spanish correspondence late in 1617 or at the beginning of 1618. He soon became one of the more influential members of the favourite's entourage and, allegedly, a 'gateway to all favours, with whom nothing but money prevails, and who has become most rich' ('CSP Venice', '1621-3', 439). He reinforced his ties with the Villiers family by marrying Olivia (or Olive) Boteler (died 1663), daughter of Sir John Boteler and Elizabeth Villiers, one of Buckingham's sisters, in 1619. In 1621 he became a member of the prince of Wales's household, where his knowledge of the Spanish language was seen as a valuable asset. In the following year, in October 1622, he was sent to Spain on a diplomatic mission, to find out whether Philip IV was prepared to make concessions regarding the Palatinate which was occupied by Spanish and Bavarian troops and to take soundings about Madrid's attitude towards a matrimonial alliance between Spain and England. He was injured during an accident while crossing the channel and his journey was largely a diplomatic failure as Olivares, his old master, was not prepared to commit himself to any concessions. In fact Olivares -- according to Porter's later testimony -- exclaimed in anger 'I am ashamed thou should ask such a thing' when Porter somewhat naively demanded a Spanish promise for help against the emperor should the latter refuse to reinstate the elector palatine ('Proceedings, 1626', 1.598). Moreover relations between Porter and the English ambassador at the Spanish court, the earl of Bristol, were fraught with tension. In January 1623 Porter returned to England. In spite of the setback his mission had suffered he was asked to accompany the prince of Wales and the duke of Buckingham on their journey to Spain shortly afterwards. Although the prince's journey to Spain was a complete failure, Porter's standing with the future king was improved, having acted as an important intermediary between the prince and the Spanish court in Madrid, and having demonstrated his knowledge of works of art, so important to Charles I. After his return he resumed his duties in the prince's household in which he held the position of a groom of the bedchamber. When Charles I succeeded his father Porter retained his status as a groom and became a member of the new royal bedchamber. Shortly afterwards, in 1626, he got involved in the parliamentary proceedings which were to determine whether James I's ambassador to Spain, the earl of Bristol, had betrayed the king's trust by working towards the conversion of the prince of Wales to the Catholic faith. Bristol answered this charge in the House of Lords with a counter-accusation directed against the duke of Buckingham but also against Porter (which in the latter's case was related to his visit to Spain in 1622). Porter was examined by a committee of the House of Lords and tried to depict Bristol as the real culprit, but before the trial could proceed parliament was dissolved. 
Buckingham's death in 1628 meant that Porter lost his most important patron at court. He remained faithful to the duke's memory and to his family and mentioned Buckingham in his will in 1639 as the one person 'to whom I owe all the happiness I had in the world' (Fonblanque, 82). However, like other members of the Villiers connection he continued to prosper after the duke's death. The king rewarded him generously with grants and lucrative offices complementing the pension of $500 per annum which he received as groom of the bedchamber. He was appointed receiver of fines in Star Chamber in 1628, bought a reversion to the office of surveyor of petty customs in the port of London in 1638, had a share in the Irish customs farm, and held mining rights in Ireland, where he and William Murray were also given in 1634 a patent to discover first fruits and other income from livings and church lands illegally withheld from the crown or the church. He participated in the profits of the Westminster Soap Company, founded in 1632 and dominated to a considerable extent by Catholics or crypto-Catholics like himself, and he also became a member of the Corporation of Salt Makers of Great Yarmouth in 1636. Furthermore he was Sir William Courteen's principal partner in setting up a trading company which was licensed by Charles I in December 1635 to compete with the East India Company in trade with Asia. Even before this so-called Interlopers Company was founded, Porter had invested money in privateering raids in the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean. These raids and the activities of Courteen's association were much resented by the East India Company as they infringed its monopoly and threatened to endanger its co-operation with the native authorities in India and Arabia. In December 1640 the directors of the East India Company were about to present a petition to parliament to complain against Porter's and Courteen's infringement of their privileges. However, the king persuaded them that Porter had only acted as his own agent in all these matters, and the petition was dropped. Porter was in many ways the quintessential projector and monopolist, and he continued to play this role right up to the end of Charles's personal rule. In the late 1630s he pursued a controversial project which was to entitle him and the other principal patentee, the marquess of Hamilton, master of the horse to the king, to compound with persons who had rendered fraudulent accounts to the crown. As late as 1640 he and three associates were granted a monopoly to produce a special and allegedly new kind of white writing paper. Moreover he also held a patent as deputy postmaster-general from 1635 to 1642, and was involved in various schemes to drain fenland and marshes in England and Ireland. Thus he received a grant of 1000 acres of marshland in north and south Somercotes in Lincolnshire, where, however, his endeavours to improve the quality of the land and raise the rents met with strong resistance by the local population. 
Porter never enjoyed any serious political influence at court, although he was undoubtedly the most prominent of Charles I's grooms of the bedchamber and had more access to confidential information than most courtiers. He was occasionally employed in diplomatic negotiations, as in 1628 (to further the cause of peace with Spain) or when he was sent to Brussels in 1634 to congratulate the Cardinal-Infante Ferdinand on his appointment as governor-general of the Spanish Netherlands. However, he played an important role in matters of patronage both before and after the duke of Buckingham's death. He regularly received a great number of letters from suitors who wanted him to present their petitions to the king, or influence Charles in their favour. He also helped to advance anti-Calvinist clergy in the church such as John Cosin, and his and his family's religious attitude, increasingly marked by Catholic leanings, helped to 'define what was acceptable, even pleasing to the King' (Hibbard, 56). He was at the centre of the court's artistic and cultural life, he collected pictures, wrote verse, was a patron of many artists and poets, and acted as an important agent and adviser to the king in matters of cultural patronage. Like other painters, Van Dyck was among his friends. He was instrumental in bringing the artist to England in 1632 and having him appointed painter in ordinary to the king. There were even rumours that he shared the favours of Van Dyck's mistress, Margaret Lemon, with the artist. Van Dyck painted a remarkable double portrait of himself and the courtier in the mid-1630s (now in the Prado), and also portrayed Porter's wife and his family. Another well-known portrait of Porter (in the Tate collection), by William Dobson, probably dating from the early 1640s, shows him as an elegant huntsman with a certain air of joviality and 'bonhomie' posing at the same time as a patron of the arts. The poet Robert Herrick dedicated a number of poems to him, and Porter also supported and protected William d'Avenant, who was closely associated with his family. 
What made Porter a controversial figure at court even before the meeting of the Long Parliament were his wife's and his own sympathies with Catholicism. His wife, Olive, was one of the first ladies of the court whom Father Con, the papal agent in England, managed to convert after his arrival at court in summer 1636. Olive went on to persuade her own friends and family to convert. Her father, Lord Boteler, was the first to become a Catholic (on his deathbed) in spring 1637. She then turned her attention to Mary Fielding, marchioness of Hamilton, who was also about to die. It took the joint efforts of Mary's father, the earl of Denbigh, and the bishop of Carlisle to prevent the dying woman's conversion. However, Lady Newport, Olive's sister married to a staunchly protestant husband, did succumb to her influence and that of the duchess of Buckingham soon after this event. Her conversion created quite a scandal but the Porter household continued to be a hotbed of Catholicism. Olive kept a Jesuit chaplain, and had her sons educated as Catholics. Her husband, however, who took soundings at one stage about the possibilities of converting in secret while continuing to accompany the king to protestant worship, remained a protestant mainly for political reasons and out of loyalty to the king. 
The letters which Porter exchanged with his wife during his absences from home or the court show his marriage to have been an affectionate one, though not without its moments of tension. Olive bore Endymion twelve children, seven of whom survived beyond infancy. Next to the two daughters, Mary ('b'. 1629?, died March 1643) and Lettice ('b'. 1631?), there were five sons, of whom the eldest was George Porter (bap. 1621, d. 1683). Charles, the second son ('b'. 1623), fell in the battle of Newburn in 1640 as a cornet in Lord Newport's troop of horse. The third son, Philip ('b'. 1628), was much given to violent brawls and was imprisoned in the 1650s; he died in 1655. Thomas Porter, born in 1636, achieved some success as a playwright after the Restoration. James ('b'. 1638) became groom of the bedchamber in the duke of York's household and subsequently, after the duke had succeeded his brother as king, James II's vice-chamberlain. He followed James into exile and acted as his chamberlain in St Germain. 
In the 1630s, at the height of his career, Porter spent his life mostly at court and in his house in the Strand. His family seat in Aston-sub-Edge in Gloucestershire was much less frequently visited and in later years he preferred to stay at Woodhall, near Hatfield, which came into his wife's possession in 1637, when he was not at court or in London. Because so much of his income was derived from royal grants or monopolies of one sort or another, his financial situation deteriorated rapidly when his numerous patents became difficult or impossible to enforce or were revoked altogether at the end of the 1630s and in the early 1640s. Embodying in his person many of the traits the critics of the personal rule disliked most in courtiers (the Catholic, pro-Spanish projector with a distinctly non-puritan attitude to life) he was bound to become the object of attacks when Charles I's authority crumbled. In August 1640 Archbishop Laud was told by the English ambassador in the Netherlands, Boswell, who relied on material provided by a Bohemian protestant in exile, Andreas ab Habernfeld, that there was a Jesuit plot to kill Charles I, in the hope of establishing a Catholic monarchy under his son. Porter was one of the courtiers allegedly implicated in this plot. He and his wife, it was maintained, were not only fanatical Catholics but enemies of the king and willing agents of the pope's envoy in England. At the time Habernfeld's fantastical accusations did not affect Porter's position at court, but when William Prynne got hold of the material in 1643 he was publicly branded a Catholic conspirator. Even earlier he was wrongly accused of having sealed the commission Sir Phelim O'Neill produced to justify the Irish rising of 1641 with the great seal of Scotland, which had indeed at times been in his custody during the king's stay in Scotland in 1641. 
Porter was elected to the Long Parliament in November 1640 for Droitwich in Worcestershire. He may have owed his seat to the local influence of Thomas, Lord Windsor, who probably shared his pro-Catholic sympathies. Porter was among the 'Straffordians' in the House of Commons and withdrew with the king from London after the failed attempt on the five members. Named by the Commons in February 1642 as one of the courtiers who should be removed from the royal household, he was not disabled from sitting in parliament until 3 March 1643. During the civil war he belonged to the king's personal entourage but did not command a regiment himself although nominally a colonel. He was also a member of the Oxford parliament. He was one of the few members of the king's court who were fully familiar with the plans to recruit a Catholic army in Ireland for the royalist cause and he personally affixed the great seal to the earl of Glamorgan's commission to treat with the Irish in April 1644. He went into exile to France in July 1645 where he was joined by Olive in April of the following year. Out of favour with Henrietta Maria and financially totally destitute he moved on to Brussels early in 1647, where he was more welcome than at the French court. He returned to England at the beginning of 1649. The committee for compounding fixed his fine at the comparatively small sum of $222 10's'. 0died, probably because he was already financially ruined. He died in London in August 1649 and was buried in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields on 20 August. His wife, Olive, received the office of surveyor of the petty customs to which Endymion had bought a reversion after the Restoration but died in 1663, and was buried next to her husband on 13 December 1663. 


@@@@@


doc= 22563


Porter, Walter (1631/2-1702), Franciscan friar, was born in Kingstown, co. Meath, in 1631 or 1632, the son of Simon Porter. In September 1653 he received a testimonial from the Jesuits in their college at Lille on completion of his studies in the humanities. He may have entered the Franciscan noviciate in Rome in October that year; certainly in September 1654 he wrote a testament (as Franciscans did before their religious profession), resigning his right of primogeniture and any possible future income to his brother Patrick. He was a priest at St Isidore's College, Rome, in April 1663, and was appointed lecturer in philosophy there on 17 June 1664, and in theology on 8 October 1668 (though he did not teach it until March 1669) and in June 1674 he was acting superior at St Isidore's. He was appointed procurator for the Irish Franciscan province in 1672 and 1684, the year he was declared 'lector bis iubilatus', though the double honour was questioned. He sought to become bishop of Meath following the death of Patrick Plunkett in 1679, and had the anti-religious Meath diocesan statutes corrected by the Holy See in 1686. 
In 1674 Porter had published 'Securis evangelica ad haeresis radices posita', of which distinctio 9, comprising one-sixth of the work, relied on Bossuet's 'Exposition de la doctrine catholique' (1671). The anonymous translator of the latter into English (identified as Henry J. Johnson) erroneously stated that Porter had translated it into Irish, a task undertaken instead by Francis Molloy OFM in his 'Lucerna fidelium', a third of the second part of which is based on Porter's 'Securis evangelica'. This long 'Axe of the gospels put to the roots of heresy', a work of controversy, was published in both Rome and Bohemia, first in 1674 and again posthumously in 1722 after an enlarged second edition in Rome, 1687. In it Porter aimed to convict all heretics of atheism using their own principles, and to reduce all Christian debates to the question of the infallibility of the Roman church. He contributed to 'Informatio cum favourabili decreto' (1676/7) concerning the parentage of the Capuchin friar Francisco Gough de Xerez. By 1679 he was working for a condemnation of Jansenism in Rome and published two further works of controversy or apologetics, 'Palinodia religionis praetensae reformatae suam reformationem per propria principia reprobantis' (1679) in which he again turned the reformers' principles against themselves, and 'Syntagma variarum ecclesiae definitionum' (1681), in which he collected condemnations of errors and commented on them. Though printed in the Vatican this latter work was placed on the Index in 1682, by enemies he believed. It was, however, enlarged and republished at Avignon in 1693 in an expensive edition entitled 'Systema decretorum dogmaticorum', serving as a useful collection of ecclesiastical decrees (some of Franciscan and Irish interest) in the days before the concise codification of canon law. His brother Patrick, tutor since 1688 to Henry Fitzjames, son of James II and Arabella Churchill, was in Avignon in 1696 and perhaps earlier, and helped with his expenses. 
In France on 6 October 1690 Porter was appointed theologian and historian to the exiled James II. In Rome in 1689 he had solemnly blessed a statue of Our Lady of Consolation commissioned by him for the Dublin friary. It never reached Dublin, and is now in the cathedral at St Malo, Brittany, with its history attached; the Porter family had business connections there ('Seanchas Ardmhacha'; Lyons, 121). His 'Compendium annalium ecclesiasticorum regni Hiberniae' (1690), a brief account of Ireland, and of its history from 1532, was written in the Stuart cause, and translated into French by Sebastian Mambre Cramoisy. Later it was used in the contentious chapter 7 of Thomas de Burgo's 'Hibernia Dominicana' (1792). Porter's very rare pamphlet 'Disquisitio theologica, de praesenti foedere inito et continuato cum principe Auriaco' may have been published at Rome in 1690. 
Further rare works of Porter include 'De abolitione consuetudinis praestandi iuramentum reis', published at Rome in 1696, 'Opusculum contra vulgares quasdam prophetias de electionibus pontificum S Malachiae' (Rome, 1698), a translation (with additions) of the French work of Father Menestrier SJ against the invention of the prophecies of St Malachy concerning the popes, and 'Tractatus de amphibologia et restrictione mentali earumque natura et licito usu'. He did not write 'Interpretatio numeri 666' (1677), a translation of 'An Interpretation of the Number 666' (1642) by Francis Potter. His 'Directorium confessarium', ready for the printer, is in the Franciscan library at Killiney, with his 'Exceptiones' to the censuring of it by Francesco M. Campione, and other papers. 
Porter died at St Isidore's College, Rome, on 6 April 1702 and was buried there. According to his monument, erected in 1736, he was aged about eighty, but he himself said in 1696 that he was then sixty-four, which gives his age at death as seventy. 


@@@@@


doc= 22564


Porter, George (bap. 1621, d. 1683), royalist army officer, was baptized on 7 November 1621 at Hatfield, Hertfordshire, the eldest of five sons born to the courtier Endymion Porter (1587-1649) and his wife, Olive or Olivia (died 1663), daughter of John Boteler, Baron Boteler of Brantfield. Thomas Porter was his brother. Some time in or before 1646 Porter married Diana, daughter of George Goring, first earl of Norwich (and sister of the royalist general George Goring) and widow of Thomas Covert of Slaugham, Sussex. They had three sons and five daughters, including George, Aubrey, Edwin, Anne, and Olivia (who were mentioned in his will), and Mary (who married Philip Smyth, fourth Viscount Strangford). Porter, like his father, supported the king with enthusiasm at the start of the civil war in 1642. He was major-general of royalist cavalry on 21 March 1644, when he helped Prince Rupert and Lord Loughborough to relieve Newark. Next day he rode to Lincoln to strengthen the town's defences and then combined with John Belasyse in an unsuccessful attack on Bradford, deserting him at a crucial moment (25 March). 
As Lord Goring's commissary-general of horse, Porter fought on the left wing in the duke of Newcastle's army at the battle of Marston Moor on 2 July, in which he was both wounded and captured. Imprisoned in the Tower, he was eventually exchanged by parliament on 2 December for Major Kerr, after lengthy negotiations. He was then appointed lieutenant-general of horse in Goring's army in the west of England, but failed to distinguish himself in the battle of Langport (10 July 1645). Goring, based on Ilminster, had sent Porter with three brigades towards Taunton as a decoy to distract the advancing New Model Army. Porter, however, allowed himself to be surprised and routed when he was 'in his utmost debauches with some of his officers' (Bulstrode, 136-7) and his men were 'asleep, some a swimming and the rest carelessly walking in the fields' (Carte, 131). Goring, whose army was subsequently defeated at Langport, angrily observed that Porter deserved 'to be pistolled for his negligence or cowardice'. On another occasion, he had commented that 'his brother-in-law was the best company, but the worst officer that ever served the king' (Bulstrode, 136-7). 
Many felt at the time that this dissolute man exercised an influence over Goring which damaged the royalist cause, encouraging the latter's predisposition to drunkenness and debauchery. By October 1645 Porter was also suspected of treachery, rumours circulating that he planned to defect to parliament and had regularly been in communication with the enemy. This speculation was proved to be correct when, in November, he obtained a pass from Sir Thomas Fairfax for safe passage to London. Although his estates were confiscated and he was subsequently fined $1000 as composition by the Goldsmith's Hall committee (28 February 1646), this fine was eventually remitted by parliament, which also pardoned him for his delinquency on 23 March. 
Porter was both irritable and quarrelsome by nature. In November 1644 he apologized to Rupert for his disagreeable and impetuous reaction to the prospect of serving under Colonel Hunke; and in October 1645 after reneging on a promise to support Colonel Tuke's promotion he immediately challenged him to a duel. In a subsequent letter Tuke accused Porter of having 'little or no religion, in turning the bible and all sacred things into ridicule in his great and constant debaucheries, with many other vices not fit to be named' (Bulstrode, 144). In May 1646 the speaker was forced to intervene in a dispute between Porter and Captain Sackville, and in June 1654 Cromwell's council issued a warrant to end a quarrel between Porter and the earl of Oxford. Having involved himself in 1659 in plots to restore Charles II, Porter was eventually appointed to the office of gentleman of the privy chamber to the queen consort, Catherine of Braganza, on 31 May 1665. When his will was drawn up on 3 October 1683, shortly before he died, he was living in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields in Middlesex. His bequests, based on his estates in Lincolnshire and property in Allfarthing in Surrey, included for his daughter Anne a $2000 dowry on the day of her marriage and 'for my wretched daughter, Olivia Porter, who hath so unpardonably dishonoured her family by her prostitution, one shilling as a character of her infamy' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/375, sig. 46). 


@@@@@


doc= 22565


Porter, George (c.1659-1728), Jacobite conspirator and informer, was probably born in London, the only son of the dramatist Thomas Porter (1636-1680) by his second, legal, marriage to his first wife Anne Blount ('c'.1637-1659). His paternal grandfather was the courtier Endymion Porter. Porter inherited his fatness, Catholicism, and a streak of crazy violence from his father. He received a $5000 legacy under the will of his maternal grandfather Mountjoy Blount, first earl of Newport. This was tripled after his cousin Anne Knollys, by marrying without consent, forfeited to him Newport House near Charing Cross, their childhood home. He sold it for redevelopment in 1682 for $9500; a Porter Street, named after him, was destroyed in cutting Charing Cross Road. During the 1680s he wasted his inheritance in gross debauchery. On 11 October 1684 he mortally wounded Sir James Halkett when jostled at Dorset Garden playhouse. He was convicted of manslaughter but pardoned. When in 1688 he bought a $200 annuity from Thomas Bruce, earl of Ailesbury, venereal disease and quarrelsomeness made him an apparently bad 'life'. 
Before William of Orange's invasion Porter became captain of a proposed new troop in Henry Slingsby's regiment. In summer 1689 he prepared a rising against the new king at Epsom, his frequent haunt. He was named in the proclamation of 9 May 1692, but surrendered after the French invasion attempt failed. In 1693 Colonel John Parker made him senior captain of his Jacobite cavalry regiment. In May 1695 Sir William Parkyns brought Porter to two tavern meetings at which Jacobites headed by Ailesbury, Viscount Montgomery, and Sir John Fenwick sent his fellow captain Robert Charnock to France seeking an immediate invasion. Characteristically, Porter then helped to turn a Jacobite demonstration in Drury Lane on 10 June into a counterproductive drunken riot, which left him and other Jacobite officers detained, awaiting trial just when the invasion was hoped for. Despite similar indiscretions Porter's criminal activities, including highway robbery, made him a suitable participant in the plots to kidnap or murder William, discussed by extremists every winter from that of 1693-4 onward. Sir George Barclay, Charnock, and Parkyns therefore initiated him early into the 1696 assassination plot, and he took a leading part in planning and recruiting for it. However, he unintentionally doomed the conspiracy by recruiting his friend Thomas Prendergast, who was horrified and betrayed it. When William avoided going hunting on 22 February 1696, the assassins scattered. 
A proclamation offered $1000 for each of the conspirators, and Porter, his servant Thomas Keyes, and Prendergast were captured on 27 February at Leatherhead. Unaware of Prendergast's determination to save him, Porter instantly offered to betray his comrades, demanding not only life but rewards. William promised a pardon, and on 28 February Porter made a full confession, which falsely implicated James II. On 11 March Porter was the main witness against Charnock, Edward King, and Keyes. That his testimony hanged the servant whom he had inveigled into the plot provoked widespread disgust. To ensure his being rewarded, Porter was required to take part in the prosecution of the Jacobite leaders who had supported Charnock's 1695 mission. This required a second witness, and he pretended that his fellow assassin Cardell Goodman had attended one meeting. Goodman deduced from his interrogators' clumsy leading questions what they believed he knew, and grasped Porter's lifeline. The perjury made Ailesbury feel justified in lying (even in his memoirs) about the 1695 meetings, and pretending that Porter had been the earl of Portland's 'agent provocateur'. Porter continued to testify against other fellow assassins, including Parkyns, Ambrose Rookwood, and (changing his testimony to hang another subordinate) Charles Cranburn, and against lesser supporters of Charnock's mission, Sir John Friend and Peter Cook. In May Fenwick's and Montgomery's wives tempted him through intermediaries to flee to France, with insincere promises of pardon and an annuity. Porter kept government ministers informed, and got the intermediaries arrested at a rendezvous. To please unscrupulous whigs, he also privately revived the nonsensical popish plot charges against the duke of Leeds. While giving evidence against Fenwick in parliament that winter, Porter panicked when Sir John's supporters encouraged a false murder charge against him. In 1697 he was accused of rape. 
Porter received a pardon, payment of $1700 debts, a $260 pension, and a $60 rented house near Whitehall Privy Garden. Decent people shunned him, but Ailesbury's claim that Queen Anne cancelled his pension is untrue -- he received it until his death. On 31 December 1712, having evidently converted to Anglicanism, he married Elizabeth Jones ('b'. 'c'.1684) at St Martin-in-the-Fields. He died on 4 July 1728, and was buried at the same church two days later. His will left everything to his wife, cutting off his natural daughter Anne Fenn with a shilling and her son George with a 20's'. ring. Ailesbury's phrase 'that monster of a man' ('Memoirs of... Ailesbury', 1.354), seems a fair moral summary. 


@@@@@


doc= 22566


Porter, Sir George Hornidge, first baronet (1822-1895), surgeon, was born in Kildare Street, Dublin, on 24 November 1822, one of the two sons and five daughters of William Henry Porter (1791-1861), surgeon, and his wife, Jane (died 1858), daughter of Cuthbert Hornidge, of Blessington, co. Wicklow. He was educated privately before becoming indentured to Josiah Smyly on 6 November 1838. He took the LRCSI on 2 November 1844, and was elected a fellow two weeks later. He had entered Trinity College on 18 January 1840, and became BA in 1845, MB in 1848, and MD considerably later, in 1865. He was awarded the honorary MCh degree by Trinity College in 1873, and in 1888 he was granted a doctorate in science by the University of Glasgow. In 1861 he married Julia, the second daughter of Isaac Bond of Flimly, Cumberland. They had one surviving son. 
Porter's career followed a pattern set by his father, who was surgeon to the Meath Hospital and professor of surgery in the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland (RCSI), and who enjoyed the reputation of being a courageous surgeon as well as an excellent anatomist and pathologist; William Porter was also president of the RCSI in 1838. George Hornidge Porter joined the staff of the Meath Hospital in 1849. He was president of the RCSI in 1868-9, and in 1891 he was elected regius professor of surgery in the University of Dublin. He was in demand as an expert witness in the coroner's court, and he was one of those asked to examine the bodies of Lord Frederick Cavendish and Thomas Henry Burke, who were murdered in Phoenix Park in 1882. In addition to his major appointment at the Meath Hospital, Porter was surgeon to Simpson's Hospital, consulting surgeon to St Mark's and Dr Steevens' hospitals, and sometime president of the Dublin Pathological Society and of the Dublin branch of the British Medical Society. His publications included reports in the 'Dublin Quarterly Journal of Medical Science' on excisions of the ulna and the upper jaw, and he also wrote on lithotomy, tracheotomy, and other surgical problems. 
Porter became a member of the Kildare Street Club at a time when that body was dominated by the landed gentry, and he risked being blackballed. He is reputed to have possessed the social graces in full measure and was active on numerous charitable boards. His uncle, Frank Thorpe Porter, a stipendiary magistrate, was a well-known raconteur and the author of 'Grand Juries in Ireland' (1840), 'Recollections of an Irish Police Magistrate' (1875), and 'Gleanings and Reminiscences' (2nd edn, 1875). 
Porter was appointed surgeon-in-ordinary to the queen in Ireland in 1869, received a knighthood in 1883, and was created baronet in 1889. To crown his success, he purchased an estate in co. Wexford. He was proud of his position as a country gentleman, and especially of being high sheriff of the county. He died of heart disease on 16 June 1895 at his residence, 3 Merrion Square North, Dublin, and was survived by his wife. His son succeeded as second baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 22567


Porter, George Richardson (1792-1852), civil servant and statistician, was born in London, the son of a merchant. Educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, he traded from 1813 in sugar and wine from various London addresses. About 1820 he married Sarah, daughter of Abraham Ricardo and sister of David Ricardo. Sarah Porter (1790-1862) wrote several works on education. In 1831 George Porter contributed to Charles Knight's 'Companion to the Almanac' for 1831. When Knight declined Lord Auckland's invitation to work for the Board of Trade he recommended Porter instead. The post was temporary, but from 31 January 1834 he became permanent superintendent of the board's new statistical department, with a salary of $525 p.a. Hitherto, each demand from parliament for statistics had required a tailor-made reply. The role of the statistical office was to produce the main series in print and to keep it up to date, so that it would be much simpler to provide the figures requested. Better data could also help in the formation of policy on major questions such as the corn laws. Although much information was collected, it was too little to contribute decisively to major issues. This was not entirely Porter's fault. With only a handful of clerks he had to get much of his information from sources such as chambers of commerce. If they failed to supply it, he could not compel them to do so. His department's work appeared in a series of reports, known as 'Porter's tables', from 1833 until his death. 
Porter took part at least once in trade negotiations with a foreign government, namely France. Following the 'Railway Regulation Act' of 1840, the Board of Trade set up a railway department. Porter was given the additional responsibility of supervising it. One wag asked whether he had statistics 'to show how many of any 100 men would survive for one month a journey of 50 miles in winter in a second or third class carriage on the GWR' (Parris, 95). The new work brought Porter in contact with leading figures such as George Hudson and Robert Stephenson. Porter was senior member of the railway board in 1844-5. In 1846 the whigs transferred responsibility to a new body, the commissioners of railways. Porter applied in vain for one of these posts. By this time his salary was $1200 p.a., including a special increment of $200 for the railway work. This rose to $1500 when he succeeded John MacGregor as joint secretary in August 1847. He retained this post until his death. 
Porter was a founder member of the Statistical Society in 1834, and read papers to the statistical section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1838 and a member of the Political Economy Club in 1841. His best-known publication was 'The progress of the nation in its social and commercial relations from the beginning of the nineteenth century to the present day' (3 vols., 1836-43), which ran into several editions. It has been criticized for its author's indifference to economic organization, industrial processes, and the trade cycle. He wrote on other subjects as diverse as the cultivation of sugar and tropical agriculture. Porter was a staunch free-trader. When Lord John Russell failed to form a government in 1845, Porter wrote: 'The turn which things have taken is... most satisfactory. The Whig party would have entered upon their task with great doubt of success. Some of them were... unwilling converts to the cause and some would even think more of the advantages of office than of the task... for... which alone they would have been called to office' (McCord, 199). In successfully urging his claims to the joint secretaryship in 1847, he used the argument that his appointment would be popular with businessmen because of his known support of free trade. Towards the end of his life he lived at Putney Heath, but died on 3 September 1852 at Tunbridge Wells, where he was buried. The immediate cause of death was an insect bite on the knee which caused mortification. 


@@@@@


doc= 22568


Porter, Henry (d. 1599), playwright, is known to literary history as the author of a single play, 'The Pleasant History of the Two Angry Women of Abington' (1599). The play was, the title-page states, 'lately played by the right Honorable the Earle of Nottingham, Lord high Admirall, his servants', and it may be assumed that it was performed at the Rose playhouse on the Bankside. The date of composition is not known. There is no record of it in the account book or 'Diary' of Philip Henslowe, the financier of the Admiral's Company. It may be argued therefore that it belongs to a date before 1597 when Henslowe started the practice of recording his payments for plays the company was to perform, or (as often suggested) it may be present in the diary under another name. Certainly it must have existed before 22 December 1598 when $6 were paid for a play called 'The 2 Parte of the 2 Angrey Wemen of Abengton'. Porter also received 40's'. 'in earneste of his boocke called ii mery wemen of abenton' on 28 February 1599; but it is not clear if this refers to yet another play in the Abington sequence or is simply a specimen of Henslowe's disregard for lexical consistency. 
Porter's name appears ten times in Henslowe's diary, between 16 December 1596 and 26 May 1599, and this provides the titles of plays he wrote in that period. On 30 August 1598 Henslowe paid Porter and Thomas Downton (a manager of the company) $4 for 'Love Prevented'; on the 18th of the same month he lent the company $6 to buy a play by Porter, Chettle, and Jonson called 'Hot Anger Soon Cold'; on 4 March 1598 he paid 10's'., and on 22 March another $6 10's'., for 'The Spencers', written by Porter and Chettle. The references in the diary also trace an increasing exasperation with Porter's requests for unsecured loans and unfulfilled promises of repayment. They provide evidence that in collaborative work (usual with Henslowe's dramatists) he was equally unreliable. On 26 June 1598 Porter and Chettle were paid 20's'. to write a play called 'The Second Part of Black Batman of the North', but not before Porter 'hath geven me his worde for the performance of the same and all so for my money' ('Henslowe's Diary', 92). 
The title-page of his one surviving play calls Porter 'Gentleman', and for all his unreliability he appears in the record as a person of considerable presence, prized by the actors as a valuable property: the company seems to have started rehearsal of 'The Second Part of the Two Angry Women' before the script was finished. On 28 February 1599 the managers of the company persuaded Henslowe to lend Porter 40's'. in return for 'his faythfulle promysse that [they] shold have alle the boockes which he writte ether him sellfe or with any other' ('Henslowe's Diary', 105). Certainly the extant play is a highly professional and successful piece of theatre, lucidly organized at the various interlocking levels of the plot, and justifying the appearance of Porter in the list of 'the best for comedy amongst us', in Francis Meres's 'Palladis tamia' of 1598. The location of the action of 'Two Angry Women' indicates a familiarity with the area around Oxford. A classical sense of play construction accompanied by considerable verbal facility further supports the idea that he had been a student in Oxford University (he calls himself 'a poor scholar' in the prologue). Would-be biographers have, however, combed the university archives and have turned up many Henry Porters, but none with any probability of being the dramatist. 
It is only at the end of Porter's life that any specific biographical evidence can be found. On 6 June 1599 (only eleven days after his last loan from Henslowe) the Southwark assizes reported a charge against 'John Day yeoman' that he 'made an assault [with a rapier] upon a certain Henry Porter... giving to the same Henry Porter a mortal wound on the left breast', so that he died on the following day. John Day was almost certainly another member of Henslowe's team of writers, first appearing in the diary in 1598, when he was twenty-four years of age (having been sent down from Cambridge in 1593 for stealing a book). The quarrel thus appears to have been between fellow dramatists and fellow dependants on Henslowe. In spite of Day's confession of guilt, the grand jury reduced the charge to manslaughter, finding that Porter had been the aggressor. 


@@@@@


doc= 22569


Porter, Sir James (1710-1776), diplomatist, was born in Dublin, the son of a captain of a troop of horse in James II's army, who changed his original name of La Roche to Porter following the failure of James's campaign in Ireland. His mother, who died on 7 January 1753, was the eldest daughter of Isaye Daubuz (1637-1685), a Huguenot minister from Guienne, and his wife, Julie ('c'.1639-1714); her brother was Charles Daubuz (1673-1717), vicar of Brotherton. 
After a slight education Porter was placed in a business in the City of London. In his spare time he studied mathematics and became fluent in French and Italian; he also joined the Robin Hood debating society, where he distinguished himself as a speaker. Through his friend Robert Adams, who became recorder of the City of London and a baron of the exchequer, Porter was introduced to Lord Carteret and was employed by him on several secret commercial missions to the continent. While in Germany in 1736 Porter visited Count Zinzendorff's Moravian settlement near Leipzig, of which he wrote an account, later published in 'Turkey: its History and Progress'. In 1741 he was sent to Vienna to assist Sir Thomas Robinson in the negotiations between Austria and Prussia; he returned the following year to Vienna on a special mission to Maria Theresa. 
On 22 September 1746 Porter was appointed ambassador at Constantinople, where he remained until May 1762. He won praise from Sir William Jones for protecting Britain's mercantile interests in the Ottoman empire. On 7 May 1763 he was appointed minister-plenipotentiary at Brussels, and on 21 September was knighted, apparently having refused the offer of a baronetcy. Finding the expenses of maintaining his position in Brussels beyond his means, he resigned his post in 1765 and returned to England, where he divided his time between London and Ham. He had married in 1755 Clarissa Catherine (died 1766), the eldest daughter of Elbert de Hochepied, second Baron de Hochepied of the kingdom of Hungary, who was the Dutch ambassador at Constantinople. They had five children: John Elbert, who died in infancy in Pera in 1756; the diarist Anna Margaretta (1758-1832) ['see 'Larpent, Anna Margaretta], who married John Larpent; George (1760-1828), who was born at Pera and succeeded as sixth Baron de Hochepied in February 1819; Sophia Albertini, who died unmarried; and Clarissa Catherine (1764-1833), who married James Trail, secretary of state for Ireland. 
In his retirement Porter devoted himself to scientific and literary pursuits. A fellow of the Royal Society, he declined to be nominated president in 1768, 'not feeling himself of sufficient consequence or rich enough to live in such a style as he conceived that the president of such a society should maintain' (Larpent, 11). He published three papers in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' on astronomical observations he had made at Constantinople and on the earthquakes he had experienced there. His journals and correspondence were published by his grandson Sir George Gerard Larpent, together with a somewhat inaccurate memoir of his life, under the title of 'Turkey: its History and Progress' (2 vols., 1854). Porter died in Great Marlborough Street, London, on 9 December 1776, aged sixty-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 22570


Porter, James (1752/3-1798), political writer, was born the eldest of eight children at Tamna Wood, near Ballindrait, co. Donegal, the son of Alexander Porter (died 'c'.1773), a farmer and owner of a flax-scutching mill. On his father's death, Porter gave up the farm and mill to a younger brother, and became a schoolmaster at Dromore, co. Down. In 1780 he married Anna Knox (died 1823); they had at least seven children, five daughters and two sons. In the same year he moved to a school at Drogheda. Intending to enter the Presbyterian ministry, he went to Glasgow as a divinity student and was licensed, in 1786 or 1787, by Bangor presbytery. 
After his unsuccessful candidature for the Presbyterian congregation of Ballindrait, Porter received a call to Greyabbey, co. Down, through the influence of Robert Black, the minister and political reformer. He was ordained there by Bangor presbytery on 31 July 1787. His professional income did not exceed $60, and he supplemented his resources by farming. He fitted up a workshop and constructed models of improved farming implements. By this and other means he did much to promote the physical well-being of his parishioners, to whom he was in all respects a conscientious pastor. He is said to have been an Arian, but there seems to be no evidence of his attachment to a special school of theology. 
Porter had joined the volunteer movement which began in 1778, but took no prominent part in its activities. He was not a United Irishman, although he supported the principles of that association, and was not publicly known as a politician until after the suppression of the volunteer movement by the 'Convention Act' of 1793. The effect of this dictatorial measure was to throw into alliance with the United Irishmen those who, like Porter, were in favour of parliamentary reform and Catholic emancipation, but were now debarred from holding open meetings for the encouragement of constitutional reforms. 
In 1794 Porter became a contributor to the 'Northern Star', founded in 1792 by Samuel Neilson, and was involved with it until his death, acting briefly as editor during Neilson's imprisonment in 1797. For this paper he wrote anonymously a number of patriotic songs, which were afterwards reprinted in 'Paddy's Resource'. Among his other songs were an attack on tithes and clerical subservience to government, and a song, 'The Rights of Man', set to the tune of 'God Save the King'. In 1796 he contributed to the paper a famous series of seven letters by 'A Presbyterian', which were at once reprinted in Belfast as 'Billy Bluff and Squire Firebrand'. This satire enjoyed much popularity in Ulster and was reprinted there until well into the twentieth century. The work was a satirical attack on the Irish aristocracy, their agents, and the system of local espionage employed in Ireland to control and observe potentially subversive elements. Having achieved widespread fame for his letters, Porter toured Ulster giving lectures on natural philosophy and science. The authorities suspected that his demonstrations were the pretext for the dissemination of the political principles of the United Irishmen. 
In December 1796 Porter began another series of letters addressed, with the signature of Sydney, to the second marquess of Downshire. In these he vehemently attacked the policy of William Pitt, and the publication of the paper was for some time suspended by the authorities. On 16 February 1797, the government feast-day of thanksgiving for the storm which had dispersed the French fleet off Bantry Bay, Porter preached a sermon, which was published in Belfast as 'Wind and Weather' (1797). This was an ironic work, suggested by the text, 'Ye walked according to... the prince of the power of the air' ('Ephesians' 2:2). 
On the outbreak of the rising of 1798 a large reward was offered for Porter's arrest. There is no evidence that he was aware of the rebels' plans, and his publications called for peaceable measures of constitutional reform. Nevertheless, he was arrested in June 1798 and taken first to Belfast and then to Newtownards for trial by court martial. He was charged with being one of a party of rebels who, between 9 and 11 June, had intercepted the mail between Belfast and Saintfield, co. Down, and had read a dispatch from the commanding officer at Belfast to a subordinate at Portaferry, co. Down. In fact, Porter had probably only read the dispatch aloud to assist the perpetrators, who were illiterate, and was almost certainly not involved in the actual seizure of the mail. Despite his own impressive appeal to the court, Porter was sentenced to be hanged and quartered. 
Anna Porter's attempts to have her husband's execution suspended secured only the commuting of the order for quartering. Tradition states that she waylaid Lord Londonderry's carriage, but was ignored, Londonderry apparently being unable to forgive the depiction of him as Lord Mountmumble in 'Billy Bluff'. Porter was executed on 2 July 1798, close to the road which led from his meeting-house to his home. At the gallows he sang the '35th psalm' and prayed; his wife was with him to the last. He was buried in the abbey churchyard at Greyabbey; a flat tombstone gives his age '45 years'. His wife died in Belfast on 3 November 1823. It is claimed that Porter's eldest son, Alexander, carried a stand of colours at the battle of Ballynahinch (12 June 1798) when he was fourteen, and that he fled to Tamna Wood, and was there recognized (but not betrayed). He later emigrated to Louisiana, of which state he became a senator, and he died there on 13 January 1844. Another son, James Porter, became attorney-general of Louisiana. 


@@@@@


doc= 22571


Porter, Jane (bap. 1776, d. 1850), novelist, was born at Durham and baptized there on 17 January 1776 at St Mary-le-Bow, North Bailey, the third child and elder daughter of the five children of William Porter (1735-1779), army surgeon with the 6th Inniskilling dragoons, and Jane, 'nee' Blenkinsop (1745-1831). Her ancestors included Sir William Porter, present at Agincourt, Endymion Porter, royalist patron of Jonson, and, on her mother's side, John Tweddell, traveller in Greece. 
In 1780, after Jane's father's death, her mother moved the three younger children to Edinburgh, where a good, cheap education could be obtained. Jane and her sister, Anna Maria Porter (1778-1832), attended George Fulton's school, where both shone and Anna Maria was apparently a prodigy. The children read widely -- ballads, Shakespeare, Spenser, and Sidney, as well as history and biography. They also had an important formative education in the romantic environment of Edinburgh. An old woman, Luckie Forbes, told them stories of ancient heroes, especially William Wallace. Their mother was acquainted with Walter Scott's mother, and he is said to have played with the girls when he was a boy (Scott, however, makes no reference to the family in his letters or journals). 
The girls had an early literary bent, and their brother Robert Ker Porter (1777-1842) showed promise as a painter. It was probably to assist his career that the family moved to London, having first spent some time in the north of England, in the area round Bamburgh and Lindisfarne; it may be this interlude that is commemorated in Northcote's sketch of the three young Porters reading and drawing in a Gothic chamber ('GM', 1st ser., 102, 1832, 578). But the significant move was to the artistic and literary circles of the metropolis, where the family lived in various locations -- St Martin's Lane, Great Newport Street, and Gerrard Street, Soho. The Porters were usually short of money -- many family letters mention financial affairs -- but Mrs Porter contrived to be sociable for her children's sake. The girls became acquainted with Elizabeth Inchbald, Anna Laetitia Barbauld, Hannah More, Elizabeth Hamilton, and Mrs De Crespigny; Robert, through the influence of Benjamin West, entered Somerset House as an academy student, joining a group of young men making their way in the art world. 
Robert, Jane, and Anna Maria were involved in a periodical, 'The Quiz', founded by Thomas Dibdin, which ran for a short time. Dibdin's recollections evoke a group of lively young people, flexing their literary muscles; Jane, he remembers, as in her portrait by Kearsley, was 'pensive, meditative' (T. Dibdin, 'Reminiscences of a Literary Life', 1836, 1.175). Jane's diary reveals that in these early years she wrote a eulogy on Mary Wollstonecraft. 
Although Jane Porter claims in her foreword of 1831 that the 'historical' romance 'Thaddeus of Warsaw' (1803) was her first substantial publication, 'Fraser's Magazine' names her as author of 'The Spirit of the Elbe' (1799), a romance in the German taste. An unpublished letter indicates that 'The Two Princes of Persia: Addressed to Youth' (1801), a moralistic fable published under the name I. Porter, was also her work. Neither was kindly treated by contemporary reviewers, which may explain Porter's unwillingness to admit authorship. 
Although she is now remembered mainly for 'The Scottish Chiefs' Jane Porter was more celebrated in her lifetime as the author of 'Thaddeus'. Neither 'Thaddeus' nor 'The Scottish Chiefs' is a historical novel in the manner of Scott's later 'Waverley' novels: although she did some research for both, Jane Porter shows little interest in understanding either historical or contemporary events. Her more modest boast was that she was first in making fictional and real historical characters interact. Even this is probably not the case, but Porter believed it to be so, and certainly her method was popular with her readers. 'Thaddeus' was inspired by Jane's hero-worship of the Polish patriot Kosciusko, whom Robert had met, and by the Polish refugees who wandered about the area of St James's Park. To the 'real' exploits of these unfortunate men is added the fictional tale of Thaddeus Sobieski, supposed descendant of John Sobieski. After the unsuccessful nationalist struggle in Poland in 1794-5, Thaddeus flees to London, where he plays a virtuous part in various adventures, and finds both love and his long-lost, and wrongly supposed traitorous, father. 
The liveliest parts of the novel concern Thaddeus's attempts to make a living by his painting; his embarrassments with dealers are based on the early life of Robert's friend John Sell Cotman, and have a solidity about them not evident throughout the novel. Porter recounted that General Gardiner, the last British minister to the court of Stanislaus Augustus, was amazed that she had never been to Poland, but this was probably gallantry. Yet 'Thaddeus' gained her extraordinary accolades: a relative of Kosciusko sent her a gold ring containing a portrait of the hero, and, when the novel was translated into German, she was made canoness of the Teutonic order of St Joachim. A drawing of her by Harlow in the appropriate garb was widely reproduced, and remains the most famous image of her. 
In 1804, when Robert, who had achieved some fame as a painter of historical scenes, was appointed court painter to Tsar Alexander I of Russia, the Porter women moved to Long Ditton, Kingston. Here Jane wrote her second major novel, 'The Scottish Chiefs', based on William Wallace and Robert Bruce, which was taken even more seriously than 'Thaddeus'. Napoleon amazingly proscribed a book that was accused even at the time of being unhistorical and wildly sentimental. Yet it was very widely read and translated, and reprinted nine times before the turn of the century. 
Porter's belief that she influenced Scott is mostly wish-fulfilment: Scott himself is reported by Hogg as disappointed with her conception of Wallace (J. Hogg, 'Familiar Anecdotes of Sir Walter Scott', 1834, 237). Nevertheless, the jealous passion of Lady Mar, who betrays Wallace when he spurns her advances, is nearly credible, and it may be that Jane Porter's Christian morality inhibited a talent for the treatment of the paradoxical attractiveness of wickedness. Certainly she was horrified by her own success with the profligate Wharton in her later work 'The Pastor's Fire-Side' (1817). This novel shows a more than usually acute sense of local colour in its delineation of the area round Lindisfarne, of which Porter may have refreshed her early acquaintance when she went in 1804 to nurse her friend the man of letters Percival Stockdale. In 1824 she drew another exemplary hero, at the request of George IV, in 'Duke Christian of Luneburg'. 'I could not but obey so distinguishing a command', said Porter (Porter, 'Retrospective introduction', xxxv-xxxvi), but even Porter's admirers found the duke an insipid creation. 
Porter's minor literary productions confirm her somewhat inflated sense of herself as a woman of letters. These include 'A defence of the profession of an actor' (1800); a 'Sketch of the campaign of Count Suwarrow Ryminski' (1804), probably a catalogue entry for one of Robert's paintings; 'The Aphorisms of Sir Philip Sidney' (1807); some pieces for periodicals, including 'Fraser's Magazine' and Samuel Hall's 'Amulet'; and a preface to a sentimental novel, 'Young Hearts' (1834). 
Jane Porter also made some disastrous excursions into the theatre. As a young woman she had a sentimental attachment to Kemble and she tried in 1805 to persuade the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, to produce an opera by her brother Robert, even making suggestions about casting. Nothing seems to have come of this, and it might have been better had the same remained true of her own dramas. 'Switzerland', presented at Drury Lane on 15 February 1819, was withdrawn on the night by the manager. Kean took the central part and seems to have deliberately sabotaged the performance. It was the belief of the actor W. C. Macready that Porter had tried again three years later with 'Owen, Prince of Powys'. The play, which Macready pronounced 'a sad failure' (W. C. Macready, 'Reminiscences', 1875, 1.233), was in fact the work of the actor Samson Penley (McLean, 148). 
Porter's stock did not stand high with those writers who have come to be most admired: some (Wordsworth and Coleridge) never mention her; others (Lamb and Keats) avoided meeting her. Saintsbury later dismisses her work as characterized by a 'general diffusion of silliness' (Saintsbury, 2.305-6), but Porter's admirers were not uniformly silly or gullible, and notably included Joanna Baillie; others, Thomas Campbell and Tom Moore, seemed happy to know her. Her success is explicable by the increasing voracity of the public's appetite for narrative, by her promulgation of evangelical Christian ethics as the 'real' basis of Western history, and by a contemporary fascination with the woman writer, a fascination which simultaneously allowed contempt and approval. 
After Porter's early successes the popular taste for historical romance began to wane and by the thirties had given way to the craze for the fashionable novel. Anna Maria made forays into the contemporary but Jane was unsuited to the actual. A natural hero-worshipper, Jane Porter turned even daily life into a romance. Porter admired 'great men', particularly Sir Sidney Smith, the dedicatee of 'Thaddeus', and she was devoted to her brother Robert, who obliged with his exciting life in Russia, in the Peninsular War with Sir John Moore, as an Eastern traveller, and from 1826 as consul in Venezuela. Her other brothers were less heroic. John may have died a debtor in 1811 in Castle Rushen on the Isle of Man. William had a life of some vicissitude as a naval surgeon, was twice married, and finally settled in a practice in Bristol, where he remained in close correspondence with the Porter women, who moved about 1826 to Esher in Surrey. 
The Porter sisters collaborated on two collections, 'Tales Round a Winter's Hearth' (1826), for which Jane wrote 'Berenice's pilgrimage', drawing on Robert's Eastern travels, and 'Coming Out, and, The Field of Forty Footsteps' -- Jane's 'The field of forty footsteps' is set in Cromwell's time. After 1828 Porter wrote no further extended work. She has been credited with 'Sir Edward Seaward's Narrative' (1831), the alleged eighteenth-century narrative of a shipwreck and subsequent colonizing of some Caribbean islands. Porter presents herself as editor of Sir Edward's papers but this is not, as was assumed, a way of concealing 'her' authorship but rather that of her brother William. William drew on his shipboard experiences to produce a work that is a loss to the Jane Porter canon, since it could previously be adduced to show her versatility. There is some evidence that William also incorporated more intimate experiences: Sir Edward's wife, Eliza, an ideal of womanhood, seems to be based on William's ward, Eliza, who died tragically young of consumption, but not before, the family correspondence suggests, causing some disquiet about her real status in William's life (Porter family correspondence, MS E). 
After this joint adventure Jane Porter's personal and literary life declined, yet she bore the decline courageously. Her mother died aged eighty-six in 1831, and Anna Maria tragically of typhus, in Bristol in 1832. Jane's earlier fame had not secured her fortune and she was obliged to live largely with and off friends in London and in the country. She failed to obtain a civil-list pension, though she did get a grant of $50 from the Literary Fund in 1842. She occupied herself preparing her novels for new editions in which her retrospective prefaces offer a distinctive voice and valuable biographical information. She still managed to go into society and mostly seems to have been liked and respected. She even, her diary indicates, formed a sentimental, probably motherly, attachment to the American writer Nathaniel Willis. 
Comments on Porter's appearance abound. There is Haydon's celebrated story of Lord Abercorn, who, having invited the Porter sisters and paid their travel, sneaked a secret look at his guests, pronounced them frights, and left the house until they had gone. Mostly, however, Jane Porter was found handsome: dark and stately, she was dubbed 'Il Penseroso' by S. C. Hall, as opposed to Anna Maria's fair and lively 'L'Allegro'. Miss Mitford found Porter the only literary lady not 'fit for a scarecrow' (L'Estrange, 2.152), but Lady Morgan found her ill-dressed, 'lackadaisical' with the 'air of a regular Melpomene' (Owenson, 'Memoirs', 2.396). Maginn, however, remarks that even in her later years she had a 'long and handsome face' (Maginn, 404). 
Porter's most energetic exploit during her nomadic years had a sad conclusion. Robert Ker Porter returned from Caracas to see his married daughter, Nina Kikine, in St Petersburg, and in 1842 Jane travelled there to meet him, only to find herself bringing his remains back to England, after his death from apoplexy. His affairs, once settled, brought little benefit to Jane. A last accolade was a gift of a rosewood armchair sent in October 1844 by the mayor of New York from the booksellers, publishers, and authors of that city. Jane Porter retired about 1847 to William's home at 29 Portland Square, Bristol, where, exhausted, she died on 24 May 1850. She was buried in St Paul's churchyard there, and with William, Robert, and Anna Maria was commemorated in a tablet in Bristol Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 22572


Porter, Jerome (d. 1632), Benedictine monk, is said to have come from Allerby, Cumberland, a son of William Porter and his first wife, Ellen, daughter of Robert Briggs. Nothing is known of his life or circumstances until 8 December 1622, when he was professed as a Benedictine monk at St Edmund's, Paris, for St Gregory's, Douai. He died young of fever at St Gregory's on 17 November 1632. That same year the first and only volume of his 'Flowers of the Lives of the most Renowned Saincts of the Three Kingdoms' was published at Douai which covered the calendar of saints to the end of June. He claimed, against Baronius, that St Gregory, St Augustine of Canterbury, and most of the country's earliest saints were Benedictines. Extracts concerning St Edward the Confessor were published in two editions in London in 1710. 


@@@@@


doc= 22573


Porter, John Scott (1801-1880), non-subscribing Presbyterian minister and biblical scholar, was born on 31 December 1801 at Newtownlimavady in co. Londonderry, the eldest son of William Porter (1774-1843) and his first wife, Mary (died 1809), daughter of John Scott of Cranny near Omagh. William Porter, who was Presbyterian minister in Newtownlimavady (1799-1830) and clerk of the synod of Ulster (1816-30), was one of the founding fathers of the non-subscribing Remonstrant Synod and its first moderator (1830-31), after which he was its clerk until his death. 
John Scott Porter was educated locally and in a classical school in Artillery Lane, Londonderry, founded in 1810 by two Presbyterian ministers, George Hay and William Moore. Received as a student for the ministry by the Strabane presbytery, he took his courses in arts and divinity at the Belfast Academical Institution from 1817 until 1825 -- with an interval (1819-21) spent as tutor in a family in co. Kilkenny. Described by a contemporary as 'the ablest student of his time' (Gordon, 'Memorial Addresses', 6), he was licensed by the non-subscribing presbytery of Bangor in October 1825. On 1 January 1826 he was called to the English Presbyterian congregation in Carter Lane, not far from St Paul's Cathedral in London, in succession to John Hoppus, who had been appointed to a professorship of philosophy in University College, London. The theological complexion of the Carter Lane congregation was Arian (essentially anti-trinitarian but holding to a measure of divinity for Christ), and Porter's ministry there brought him into friendly association with the Revd Thomas Belsham, friend and disciple of Joseph Priestley, though Porter never shared their radical unitarianism. Scholar that he was, he shared in running a school at his home, Rosoman House, Islington Green, in north London. A stern pedagogue, he was nicknamed the Lion by his pupils, who included two future lord mayors of London. He also edited an Arian monthly magazine, the 'Christian Moderator', in which the orthodox party in the synod of Ulster were derided as 'empty skulls' ('Christian Moderator', June 1826, 50). 
Having declined a call to the Second Presbyterian Congregation in Belfast in 1829 Porter accepted one to the First Congregation in September 1831, in succession to William Bruce (1757-1841). He was a colleague of Bruce's son, also named William (1790-1868), whose appointment as professor of Greek in the Belfast Academical Institution in 1821 sparked off the conflict which divided the synod of Ulster in the 1820s and led to the remonstrant schism in 1830. Porter was installed in the Belfast congregation by the presbytery of Antrim on 2 February 1832 and on 8 October 1833 he married Margaret Marshall (1812-1879), daughter of Andrew Marshall MD, of Belfast. Porter quickly became a leading proponent of the Arian, non-subscribing Presbyterian cause in Ulster, 'always ready to defend these views when they were assailed, some might think with excessive ardour' (Gordon, 'Memorial Addresses', 6). In 1834 he participated in a public theological debate with Daniel Bagot, later dean of Dromore. The published account of their exchanges, the 'Authentic Report of the Discussion on the Unitarian Controversy', went through four editions and Porter received a presentation of nearly $1000 from his admirers. 
In 1838 Porter and the Revd Henry Montgomery were appointed as divinity professors in the Belfast Academical Institution for the Association of Irish Non-Subscribing Presbyterians, and in 1847 these chairs were endowed by government with salaries of $150 a year. Porter's subjects were biblical criticism and theology, to which were added Hebrew and Greek in 1851. Porter was as inspiring a teacher as he was an effective preacher and faithful pastor. He played an active role in the literary, educational, musical, and charitable life of Belfast, where he became a familiar and respected figure, tall and handsome, distinguished in his later years by his snow-white hair and beard. For two periods, 1835-6 and 1838-42, he edited the 'Bible Christian', a monthly journal of the non-subscribers in reply to the 'Orthodox Presbyterian', and he also contributed to the 'Irish Unitarian Magazine', the 'Christian Reformer', and the 'Christian Unitarian'. His thirty-eight publications were chiefly sermons and polemical pieces but they included contributions to biblical and theological scholarship. His 'Twelve Lectures in Illustration and Defence of Unitarianism', published in Belfast in 1841, was republished in London in a second edition in 1853. In his special field of textual criticism his 'Principles of textual criticism... illustrated with plates and facsimiles of biblical documents' was published in London in 1848. 
Porter supported J. W. Colenso in his higher critical work on the 'Pentateuch', and accepted that elements in the nativity stories in 'Matthew' and 'Luke' were unhistorical. Yet he published a defence of the integrity of the fourth gospel as the authentic gospel of 'John'. He always maintained his belief in the authority of scripture as divine revelation and of Christ as risen and ascended king and head of the church. In 1862 he led a secession of five congregations from the presbytery of Antrim, of which he had been clerk; this followed the presbytery's rejection of a resolution prohibiting it from licensing or ordaining any person unless satisfied that he believed both in Christ's divine authority and that the scriptures contained divine revelation. Porter acted as clerk of the breakaway presbytery until 1878, and the schism was not healed until 1894. Porter was as much opposed to radical theological reductionism as he was to orthodox Calvinism. 
Following the death of his wife, Margaret, on 7 April 1879 Porter fell ill; he died at his home, Lennoxvale, Malone Road, Belfast, on 5 July 1880. A black marble Celtic cross marks his grave in Belfast's borough cemetery, where he was buried on 8 July 1880. His portrait, painted by Ebenezer Crawford, is in the First Presbyterian Church in Belfast, where there is also a memorial tablet. His eldest son, Andrew Marshall Porter, was master of the rolls in Ireland from 1883 to 1906. 


After retiring as attorney-general in 1865 Porter was elected to parliament and continued to campaign for responsible government and religious freedom, advocating such advanced ideas as the abolition of capital punishment and the provision of higher education for both men and women. Tall and handsome, well-read both in law and in literature, he was an effective orator and wielded considerable influence in the colony and in its parliament. He declined many offers of honours and advancement, including a knighthood and the prime-ministership in the Cape parliament, accepting only a CMG in 1872 before he left the colony. On his retirement as attorney-general his full salary was continued for life, though he devoted the extra income this gave him to endowing a university in Cape Town, of which he became chancellor in 1876. 
Porter never married, but had a lifelong relationship with Hugh Lynar, whom he met in Dublin and who accompanied him to Cape Colony where he became his clerk and shared his home -- without, apparently, attracting adverse reactions from either Porter's family or from public opinion in the colony. After Lynar's death in 1873 Porter returned to Ireland to live with his brother John Scott in his home in College Square East in the centre of Belfast, and later in Lennoxvale in the suburbs. He died on 13 July 1880 after a brief illness, only eight days after his brother's death, and was buried in the borough cemetery, Belfast, on 16 July. His continuing interest in Cape Colony was reflected in his generous provision from his substantial estate for institutions in the colony, including $20,000 to a reformatory for boys in Cape Town. 


Two other sons were born to the Revd William Porter and his second wife; the second, James Nixon Porter (1815-1875), became a unitarian minister in Carrickfergus near Larne (1838-62), and in Warrington, Lancashire (1862-72). The youngest son, Francis, followed William Porter to Cape Town, where after a career in business he died on 28 February 1886. A daughter of the Revd William Porter, Mary Ann, married F. D. Finlay, founder of the Belfast Liberal newspaper the 'Northern Whig'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22574


Porter, Josias Leslie (1823-1889), missionary and promoter of Irish education, born on 4 October 1823, was the youngest son of William Porter of Carrowan, parish of Burt, co. Donegal, and Margaret, daughter of Andrew Leslie of Drumgowan in the same parish. The father farmed several hundred acres of land. Noted for his great stature and immense bodily strength, he raised, during the Irish rising of 1798, a troop of yeomanry in Burt, and kept a large district in order, services for which he received the thanks of parliament and an honorary commission in the army. 
The son, Josias, after being educated privately between 1835 and 1838 by Samuel Craig, Presbyterian minister of Crossroads, co. Londonderry, and afterwards at a school in Londonderry, matriculated in the University of Glasgow in 1839, with a view to entering the ministry of the Irish Presbyterian church. He graduated BA in 1841 and MA in 1842. In November 1842 he proceeded to the University of Edinburgh, where, and afterwards in the New College, he studied theology under Thomas Chalmers. He was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Derry on 20 November 1844, ordained on 25 February 1846, and until 1849 was minister of the Presbyterian congregation of High Bridge, Newcastle upon Tyne. That year he married Margaret Rainey, youngest daughter of the Revd Dr Henry Cooke (1788-1868), whose biography he wrote (1871); they had several children, two sons and two daughters surviving him. 
Later in 1849 Porter was sent to Damascus as a missionary to the Jews by the board of missions of the Irish Presbyterian church. He reached Syria in December 1849, and remained there for ten years. While discharging his duty as a missionary he acquired, by frequent and extensive journeys, an intimate knowledge of Syria and Palestine, which he turned to good literary account. In 1855 he published his first book on the East, 'Five Years in Damascus' (with his own map, plans, and woodcuts), in which he tells most graphically the story of his life there, and of adventurous journeys to Palmyra, the Hauran, Lebanon, and other places. In 1858 he published his 'Handbook for Travellers in Syria and Palestine', in John Murray's series. A second edition, largely rewritten, appeared in 1875, Porter having in the interval revisited the country and made an extensive tour on both sides of the Jordan and along the borderland between Egypt and Sinai. Many of his letters, addressed to the Revd David Hamilton, honorary secretary of the Irish Presbyterian Jewish Mission, were printed in the pages of the 'Missionary Herald'. 
In 1859 Porter returned home on furlough, and in July 1860 he was appointed professor of biblical criticism in the Presbyterian college, Belfast, in succession to Robert Wilson. In 1864 he received the degrees of LLD from Glasgow and DD from Edinburgh. In 1867, on the death of Professor William Gibson (1808-1867), he became secretary of the college faculty at Belfast. Through him Adam Findlater of Dublin in 1878 gave $10,000 for additions to the buildings, and this gift proved the means of raising a further $11,000 for the professorial endowment fund. From the time of his appointment as professor, Porter took a leading part in the work of the church courts, and in 1875 he was elected moderator of the general assembly. During his tenure of this office he initiated a fund which provided manses for many congregations. 
In 1878 Porter was appointed by the government as one of the two assistant commissioners of the newly established board of intermediate education for Ireland. He thereupon resigned his professorship, and moved to Dublin to help to organize the new scheme. In 1879 he was nominated president of Queen's College, Belfast. In virtue of his office he became a member of the senate of the newly created Royal University of Ireland, which in 1881 conferred on him the degree of DLitt, and he took a leading part in formulating its plans. 
Porter published several works in addition to those mentioned, including 'The Pentateuch and the Gospels' (1864), 'The Giant Cities of Bashan and Syria's Holy Places' (1865), and 'Jerusalem, Bethlehem, and Bethany' (1887). He wrote extensively for Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible', Kitto's 'Pictorial Bible', and the 'Bibliotheca sacra'. Porter died in the Queen's College, Belfast, on 16 March 1889, and was buried in Malone cemetery, near Belfast. After his death his widow was granted a civil-list pension of $50. 


@@@@@


doc= 22575


Porter, Mary (d. 1765), actress, was probably the daughter of Samuel Porter and his wife, the daughter of Nicolaus Kaufmann Mercator. The little information we have about Mary's early life comes from a friend, 'P. M.', and is included in Thomas Betterton's 'History of the English Stage' (1741). Having been initially in the care of her uncle David Mercator, a clerk at the Tower of London, she was put by her mother: 'into Bartholomew Fair; where, the very first time of her Appearance, in Acting the Part of the Fairy Queen, Mrs Barry and Mrs Bracegirdle took so great a liking to her, that, upon their Representation of her Performance, Mr Betterton admitted her into the Theatre... Our young Fairy Queen was boarded with Mrs Smith, Sister to the Treasurer of the Playhouse. (Betterton, 60)' In Thomas Davies's version it is Betterton himself who 'saw her act, when a child, the Genius of Britain, in a Lord Mayor's Pageant' (Davies, 3.276). Her first recorded appearance on the Lincoln's Inn Fields stage was to speak the epilogue to Mary Pix's 'Queen Catherine' in June 1698. The following season she took the parts of Orythia in Charles Hopkins's 'Friendship Improved' and Philadelphia in Betterton's 'The Amorous Widow'. The patchy records for the period indicate that for the season 1703-4 Porter spoke prologues and epilogues, acted in both comedy and tragedy, and received a salary of $35-40 as a middle-ranking player. When John Vanbrugh's new Queen's Theatre opened in 1705 she transferred and played two seasons there, concentrating on such comic roles as Araminta in Vanbrugh's 'The Confederacy', Lady Graveairs in Colley Cibber's 'The Careless Husband', Doralice in John Dryden's 'Marriage a la mode', Eugenia in Edward Ravenscroft's 'The London Cuckolds', and Fainlove in Richard Steele's 'The Tender Husband'. Under Owen Swiny's management at the Queen's in late 1706 she was earning 40's'. per week. 
In 1707 Porter was not engaged by the Queen's company and she complained to the lord chamberlain that, although she had been on the stage almost 12 years, 'she was postponed in her Benefit Play... till the 2d of May last when the Town was almost empty' and that 'a Gentlewoman was taken in over her head, which will still be a means to take away those Parts from her by which she hop'd to advance herself' (TNA: PRO, LC 7/3, fols. 102-3). Matters changed in January 1708, when a united troupe was drawn up to act at Drury Lane. Porter was one of several dissenting players who petitioned the lord chamberlain for permission to act with the new company (Milhous and Hume, 'Vice Chamberlain Coke's Theatrical Papers', 51). During the next two seasons at Drury Lane, Porter added many new roles to her repertory, including Zaida in Charles Goring's 'Irene', Emilia in George Etherege's 'The Man of Mode', Roxana in Nathaniel Lee's 'The Rival Queens', and Dorothea in William Mountfort's 'The Successful Strangers'. However, in 1709 Porter was tempted back to Swiny at the Queen's Theatre by a salary of $80 per season, with no obligation for summer performances, plus a solo benefit less $40 house charges. She studied only a few new parts that season, among them Lady Macduff, Leonora in John Crowne's 'Sir Courtly Nice', and the Queen in Dryden's 'The Spanish Fryar'. 
The theatrical landscape changed once more in 1710, when Cibber, Thomas Doggett, and Robert Wilks took over the management of Drury Lane and won over leading performers such as Porter. Porter remained at Drury Lane for more than twenty years, taking on many of the roles of Elizabeth Barry and earning herself a reputation as the 'capital Actress in tragedy' (Victor, 2.57). Roles in which critics found her particularly noteworthy were Hermione in Ambrose Philips's 'The Distrest Mother', Alicia in Nicholas Rowe's 'Jane Shore', and Lady Macbeth, where Chetwood thought 'her just Action, Eloquence of Look and Gesture, mov'd Astonishment' (Chetwood, 29). As Octavia in Dryden's 'All for Love' she 'drew not only respect, but the more affecting approbation of tears from the audience' (Davies, 2.241). As Katherine in 'Henry VIII', Davies thought her 'dignity and grace' unmatched: 'Her first speech to the King after kneeling to him, was uttered with such intelligence and sensibility, that she commanded the applause, as well as the attention of the audience. The words were simple, and, seemingly, unimportant; but she understood her author well, and in delivering them, conveyed the prime duties of kingly office with energy. (Davies, 1.206)' Porter was popular in both comedy and tragedy. By the 1720s she was receiving the very considerable salary of $266 1's'. per season and a benefit clear of house charges. The leading roles she had hoped for in her younger days were now hers, including Selima in Rowe's 'Tamerlane', Belvidera in Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd' and Monimia in his 'The Orphan', Lucia in Joseph Addison's 'Cato', Artemisa in Rowe's 'The Ambitious Step-Mother', the title roles in Charles Johnson's 'Medea' and in Richard West's 'Hecuba', and Queen Elizabeth in John Banks's 'The Albion Queens'. By the 1720s she was adding only a couple of new roles each season to her formidable repertory. 
There are no reliable likenesses of Porter, but Davies described her as 'tall and well-shaped; of a fair complexion, but not handsome; her voice was harsh and unpleasing' (Davies, 3.279), and Victor agreed that she had 'a plain Person and a bad Voice' (Victor, 2.57). However, Porter had overcome these difficulties and had strengthened her voice 'by Labour and Practice into sufficient Force to fill the Theatre' (ibid.). She had several tricks for producing affecting performances. Hill reported that 'the chief secret of Mrs Porter in tragical attitudes' was to extend her arms and to move with 'freedom and openness of action' ('Works', 1.203-4). Chetwood recalled that he 'heard her declare she left the Action to the Possession of the Sentiments in the Part she perform'd' (Chetwood, 29). Several commentators note that 'she enters most into her character' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'), tackling tragic parts with particular enthusiasm and producing 'a spirited Propriety in all Characters of Rage; but when Grief and Tenderness possessed her, she subsided into the most affecting softness' (Victor, 2.58). 
Porter's income allowed her to maintain a home in Highwood Hill, Hendon, and, from 1722 to 1733, a house in James Street, Covent Garden. Davies paints a romantic picture of her driving back to Hendon in a chaise with only a book and a brace of pistols. In 1731 she had a serious accident in the chaise, having seen off a would-be highwayman, and dislocated her thigh. For some time she was incapacitated or required the aid of a cane. She returned to Drury Lane in 1733 and played a couple of her most popular roles, as she did during the following two seasons. Thereafter she gave occasional performances at both houses, earning the large sum of $20 per performance, and was still able to draw an audience. Davies thought she integrated her cane into her performance in 'The Albion Queens' with aplomb, and he considered her Clytemnestra in James Thomson's 'Agamemnon' of 1738 remarkable, despite her limited range of motion. 
Porter's last appearance was her own benefit night and a command performance of 'The Albion Queens' at Covent Garden on 14 February 1743. After this time her financial situation worsened, as an annuity she had relied upon came to an end. She made some money through the patronage of Henry Hyde, Viscount Cornbury, who allowed her to print a subscription edition of his comedy 'The Mistakes'. In her old age she lived with Frances, the widow of Colonel Cotterell, a friend of Dr Johnson. Porter died on 24 February 1765 and was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 27 February. She does not appear to have married. In her will she left $10 to her cousin Nicholas Mercator and her lands, house, money, plate, furniture, and the rest of her estate to Frances Cotterell, for her care and friendship. 


@@@@@


doc= 22576


Porter, Robert (1623/4-1690), clergyman and ejected minister, was born in Nottingham, the son of William Porter of Nottingham, a musician. After attending school at Nottingham under Mr Leake he was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, on 1 July 1639 aged fifteen; he graduated BA in 1643. His activities in the next years are not known, but in a later aside he remarked that Derbyshire was 'the country where I began and ended my publicke ministry' (Porter, 49). He was a minister at Pentrich by 1650, but he also preached at other places. On 27 August 1651 Henry Newcome, rector of Gawsworth, and John Machin, curate of Great Budworth, both in Cheshire, 'went to Audley to have heard Mr Porter; and when we came there we found he was not come, and so were forced both of us to preach, and the Lord did enable us exceedingly' ('Autobiography', 1.32). Porter was moderator of the Wirksworth classis on 16 December 1651 and attended most of its subsequent meetings in the period covered by the extant minutes up to 17 November 1658, giving several ordination sermons and acting as moderator on nine occasions. 
The name of Porter's wife and the date of their marriage are unknown, but three children were born to them at Pentrich -- Hannah in 1652, Richard in 1654, and Elizabeth in 1658. In 1656 Porter's wife was ill, or lost a baby. On 29 July 1656 Newcome 'called at Pentridge to see Mr Porter (whose wife was that day just brought in bed) and we came late to Hopton to Mr Gell's' ('Autobiography', 60). 'Mr Gell' was John Gell (1613-1689) of Hopton House near Wirksworth, then MP for Derbyshire, future protector of ejected ministers, married to Katherine Packer of Donnington Castle near Newbury. Katherine wrote to Richard Baxter that Robert Porter was her only other spiritual adviser, to whom she had confided her fear of the dark. In response Porter 'advised me to avoid the occasion of the temptation and goe to prayer while it was light' (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.273); Porter's wife survived the illness or childbirth to which Newcome referred but not long afterwards the minister himself was seriously ill, for on 17 July 1660 Newcome was at an inn near Nottingham, and 'found Mr Porter there, whom I was glad to see alive and so well as there I found him, whom I had prayed for and begged that he might live' ('Autobiography', 1.125). 
Porter was ejected from Pentrich in 1662 (his farewell sermon was among those published in 'England's Remembrancer', 1663) and his successor was instituted on 2 February the following year. The record (20 April 1672) of his acknowledgement of receipt of a general licence, to preach in any licensed meeting-place, gives Porter as of Mansfield, the town where he and his wife had baptized their fourth known child, Faith, in 1666. On 2 and 3 May Porter was licensed as a presbyterian preacher at 'Mr John Walker's house of the town and county of Nottingham', and at the house of Robert Vincent (Turner, 1.297). Robert Porter died on 22 January 1690 at Mansfield where he was buried two days later. 
Porter's account of several of his ministerial colleagues, 'The life of Mr John Hieron, with the characters and memorials of ten other worthy ministers of Jesus Christ' was published the year after his death. However, a suggestion for a biography of Porter was turned down by his fellow Nottinghamshire nonconformist John Whitlock on the grounds that Porter's sermons were 'written in so small an hand that there are not many can make any thing of them' ('Calamy rev.', 527). 


@@@@@


doc= 22577


Porter, Sir Robert Ker (1777-1842), painter, writer, and diplomat, was born in Durham on 26 April 1777, one of the five children of William Porter (1735-1779), who was buried at St Oswald's, Durham, in 1779 after twenty-three years' service as surgeon to the 6th Inniskilling dragoons. He was descended from an old Irish family, whose ancestors included Sir William Porter, who fought at Agincourt, and the royalist Endymion Porter. His mother was Jane (1745-1831), daughter of Robert Blenkinsop of Durham. She died at Esher, Surrey, aged eighty-six. Robert's brothers, both older than him, were William Ogilvie Porter, a naval surgeon, who after his retirement from the navy practised over forty years in Bristol and died there on 15 August 1850 aged seventy-six, and Colonel John Porter, who died in the Isle of Man, aged thirty-eight, in 1810. His sisters, both novelists, were Jane Porter (bap. 1776, d. 1850) and Anna Maria Porter (1778-1832). Robert spent his boyhood in Edinburgh, where his mother had moved in 1780; she was very poor, and depended largely on the support of her husband's patrons in the army. In Edinburgh, Robert attracted the notice of Flora Macdonald, and, in consequence of his admiration for a battle piece in her possession depicting some action in the fighting of 1745, he determined to become a painter of military subjects. In 1790 his mother took him to Benjamin West, who was so impressed by the vigour and spirit of some of his sketches that he procured his admission as a Royal Academy student at Somerset House. He entered the Royal Academy Schools on 18 February 1791, aged thirteen. 
Porter's progress was remarkably rapid. In 1792 he received a silver palette from the Society of Arts for a biblical drawing, 'The Witch of Endor'. In 1793 he was commissioned to paint an altarpiece for Shoreditch church; in 1794 he painted 'Christ Allaying the Storm' for the Roman Catholic chapel at Portsea; and in 1798 'St John Preaching' for St John's College, Cambridge. In 1799, when he was living in London with his sisters Jane and Anna Maria, at 16 Great Newport Street, Leicester Square (formerly the house of Sir Joshua Reynolds), he became a member of a small club of young artists, known as the Brothers, founded by Louis Francia for the cultivation of Romantic landscape painting. Girtin, who then lived in the immediate neighbourhood, was also a member. The artistic precocity of Bob Porter, as he was known, and the skill with which he wielded the 'big brush' were already fully recognized, and in 1800 he obtained congenial work as a scene-painter of Othello's 'antres vast and desarts idle' at the Lyceum exhibition room in the Strand, on the site of what was to become the Lyceum Theatre; but in 1800 he astonished the public by his 'Storming of Seringapatam', an impressive panorama, 120 feet in length, with 700 life-size figures and stated on the good authority of Jane Porter to have been painted in six weeks. This huge picture covering 2550 square feet of canvas was supported on rollers and, extending to three-quarters of a circle, was one of the first of such works which subsequently became extremely popular, especially in France; it was also lucrative, according to account books in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. After its exhibition at the Lyceum it was rolled up, but was later destroyed by fire; yet the original sketches and engravings of it by Giovanni Vendramini preserve some evidence of its merits. Other successful comparable works were 'The Battle of Lodi' (1803), also exhibited at the Lyceum, and the 'Defeat of the French at Devil's Bridge, Mont St Gothard, by Suwarrow' in 1804; to accompany these explanatory handbooks were issued. Other battle pieces, in which Porter displayed qualities of vigour, though bordering sometimes on the crude, and a daring compared by some to that of Salvator Rosa, were 'Agincourt' (executed for the City of London), the 'Battle of Alexandria', the 'Siege of Acre', and the 'Death of Sir Ralph Abercrombie', all of which were painted about the same time. Porter also worked on easel-pictures, and in 1801 he exhibited at the Royal Academy a successful portrait of Mr and Mrs Harry Johnston as Hamlet and Ophelia. In all, between 1792 and 1832 he exhibited thirty-eight pictures, the majority being either historical pieces or landscapes. In 1797 he founded, with the aid of his sisters and with some support from Thomas Frognall Dibdin, a periodical called 'The Quiz'; it had a very brief existence. His own contributions appeared under the pseudonym Reynold Steinkirk. 
In 1803 Porter was appointed captain of the Westminster militia, but his family's urgent solicitations deterred him from becoming a regular soldier, a career which attracted him more strongly than any other. In 1805, however, his restless and energetic nature was encouraged by an invitation from Tsar Alexander I of Russia to paint some vast historical murals for the admiralty in St Petersburg, and he immediately started for the Russian capital. While in St Petersburg he won the affections of a Russian princess, Mary, daughter of Prince Theodor de Scherbatoff. The courtship was postponed after the tsar had signed the treaty of Tilsit with Napoleon Bonaparte in 1807, thus aligning Russia with the enemy of Great Britain. In view of this, and mindful of his own safety, Porter crossed into Finland on 10 December 1807, and from there he entered Sweden where, for reasons unknown, he had in 1806 been knighted by the eccentric King Gustavus IV. He then visited several of the German courts, was in 1807 created a knight of St Joachim of Wurttemberg, and subsequently accompanied Sir John Moore (whom he had met and captivated while in Sweden) to Spain. He was with Moore's expedition throughout, was at Corunna, and was present at the death of the general. He returned home with many sketches of the campaign. In the mean time, in 1809, there appeared his 'Travelling Sketches in Russia and Sweden during the Years 1805-1808', in two sumptuous quarto volumes, elaborately illustrated by Porter himself; yet this work showed neither outstanding literary ability nor any special gift of observation. It was followed after a brief interval by 'Letters from Portugal and Spain, Written during the March of the Troops under Sir John Moore' (1809). 
In 1811 on the tsar's invitation, Porter returned to Russia, where on 7 February 1812 he at last was able to marry his Russian princess. He was subsequently accepted in Russian military and diplomatic circles and became well acquainted with the Russian version of the events of 1812-13, of which he gave a graphic account in his 'Narrative of the Campaign in Russia during 1812'; it was printed seven times. He had returned to England before his book appeared, and was on 2 April 1813 knighted by the prince regent, two months before the birth of his daughter Mary (Mashinka) on 8 June. He was soon back in Russia, and in August 1817 he started from St Petersburg on an extended course of travel, proceeding through the Caucasus to Tehran, thence southwards by Esfahan to the site of ancient Persepolis, where he made many valuable drawings and transcribed a number of cuneiform inscriptions. After a sojourn at Shiraz he retraced his steps to Esfahan, and proceeded to Ecbatana and Baghdad; and then, following the course of Xenophon's Katabasis, to Scutari. He published the records of his long journey in his 'Travels in Georgia, Persia, Armenia, Ancient Babylonia, 1817-1820' (2 vols., 1821). This huge book, which is full of interest and a great advance upon his previous books of travel, was illustrated by bold drawings of mountain scenery, of works of art, and of antiquities. A large number of Porter's original sketches are preserved in the British Museum, to which they were presented by his sister, Jane. At Tehran, Porter had an audience with the Persian monarch Futteh Ali Shah, whose portrait he drew, and from whose hands, in 1819, he received the insignia of the order of the Lion and of the Sun. After a brief return to England he left again for Russia, but was in 1825 appointed British consul in Venezuela. During the fifteen years in which he held that position, he resided at Caracas, where he kept up an extensive hospitality, and became well known and generally popular. He continued to draw, and painted several large sacred subjects, including 'Christ Instituting the Eucharist', 'Christ Healing a Little Child', 'Ecce homo', and 'St John Writing the Apocalypse'. He also painted a portrait of Simon Bolivar, hero of South American independence and founder of the republic of Colombia. In 1836 he advised the Venezuelan congressional commission on the design of the republic's coat of arms. 
During his years as consul Porter did much to reconcile strong local Catholic intolerance towards non-Catholic foreigners living in the country. For example, before his time, protestants had to bury their dead in their own gardens or plantations, as they were barred from Catholic cemeteries. Porter, with some financial support from the British government, and to some extent at his own cost, succeeded in establishing a protestant burial-ground in Caracas. In recognition of the many benefits he had obtained for the protestant community in Venezuela, he was created in 1832 a knight commander of the order of Hanover. He returned to England in 1841. His wife had died at St Petersburg, of typhus, on 27 September 1826, but their only daughter was still living in the Russian capital, having in 1837 become the wife of Pierre de Kikine, a captain in the imperial guard. After a short stay with his brother, Dr William Ogilvie Porter, at Bristol, he left in company with his sister Jane on a visit to Mme Kikine. On 3 May 1842 he wrote from St Petersburg to tell his brother that he was on the eve of sailing for England; but he died suddenly of apoplexy on the following day as he was alighting from his coach, after returning from a farewell visit to Tsar Nicholas I. He was buried in St Petersburg. A marble tablet was placed in the cloisters of Bristol Cathedral commemorating several members of the Porter family, Sir Robert among them. 
Owing to his large expenditure, Porter's affairs were left in some disorder, but his estate was finally wound up in August 1844 by his executor, Jane Porter, who spoke of him with great affection as her 'beloved and protecting brother'. His books, engravings, and antiquities were sold at Christies on 30 March 1843. His drawings included twenty-six illustrations to the odes of Anacreon (engraved by Vendramini, and published in 1805 by John P. Thompson), a large panoramic view of Caracas, and a very interesting sketchbook (forty-two drawings) of Sir John Moore's campaigns, which was presented by his sister to the British Museum. 
A man of the most varied attainments, Porter has been justly described as 'a distinguished British gentleman and diplomat, and artist' (Porter, cviii), but is probably now best remembered as an artist. He was a splendid horseman, excelled in field sports, and possessed the gift of finding acceptance by people of every rank. 


@@@@@


doc= 22578


Porter, Sarah Ricardo (1790-1862), writer on education, was born in London on 22 December 1790, the fifteenth child and sixth daughter of Abraham Ricardo and Abigail Delvalle Ricardo, and sister of David Ricardo. She married a schoolfriend of her brothers, the statistician George Richardson Porter (1792-1852), with whom she shared a talent for mathematics and a concern for education. Her writing was influenced by her experience with her own children. She died at West Hill, Wandsworth, London, on 13 September 1862. 
Sarah Porter published her first book, 'Alfred Dudley, or, The Australian Settlers', in 1830: in its preface, as 'the Author well knows that young people do not read Prefaces', she assured 'judicious parents' that the information presented through the fiction was drawn from a reputable source, Robert Dawson's 'The Present State of Australia' (1830). The name Dudley reappeared as the fictional family's name in her next and more noteworthy book, 'Conversations on Arithmetic' (1835). The book drew heavily upon her own practice to benefit mothers and others with limited mathematical experience; influenced by Locke, it was intended 'not so much to make [children] mathematicians as to make them reasonable creatures'. Thus, Porter resisted the temptation to lay down rules, at least until the principles underlying particular problems had been explored and explained. When she published a revision of 'Conversations' as 'Rational Arithmetic' in 1852, she replaced the exploratory and often amusing dialogue with 'direct teaching and rules' as more suitable for its intended use in schools as well as in private instruction. 
Like at least four of her brothers, Porter was a member of the Central Society of Education, an association founded in 1836 as a corrective, in part, to the older societies dedicated to the education of the people, the British and Foreign School Society and the Anglican National Society. The Central Society differed from these in promoting the educational theories and practices of such continental authorities as Fellenberg, rather than the monitorial system and rote learning which had been the norm, and in arguing for a secular rather than a religious system of schools and instruction. Much of the Central Society's energies were dedicated to the collection, classification, and diffusion of information concerning the education of all classes 'in order to learn by what means individuals may be best fitted in health, in mind, and in morals to fill the stations which they are destined to occupy in society'. Its chief means to this end was to bring a 'scientific character' to the theory of education, in part through the statistical work of George Porter, who also served on the society's committee of management. 
Sarah Porter's essay 'On infant schools for the upper and middle classes', published in the society's second collection of papers (1838), argues that what is good for working-class children is good for upper- and middle-class children: her recommendations owe much to Locke, but she acknowledges that it is the teacher, not the system, that is crucial to the success of early childhood education. This theme is worked out in more detail in her essay published by the society as one of five in 'The Educator: Prize Essays on the Expediency and Means of Elevating the Profession of the Educator in Society' (1839); it echoes her mathematics books in its call for 'reflecting' teachers who act from principles, rather than unreflecting ones who only follow the rules of a system. In line with the generally liberal aims of the Central Society of Education, Porter expresses the hope that education will be a power for good -- an individual as well as a social good -- though she fears it may be 'romantic to suppose that the whole can be made a thinking people', which was the purpose of both her theoretical and her practical writing on education. 


@@@@@


doc= 22579


Porter, Thomas (1636-1680), playwright, was born in the Strand, London, the fourth of the five surviving sons (there were two daughters) of Endymion Porter (1587-1649) and Olivia (died 1663), daughter of Sir John Boteler of Bramfield and Elizabeth Villiers, sister to the first duke of Buckingham. The Porters were an affluent family who had built up a network of political and artistic connections at the courts of James I and Charles I. Part of Thomas's early education may have been entrusted to private tutors. From late in 1638 both 'sweet Tom' (Townshend, 200) and his brother James were put under the care of a Porter relative at Woodhall, the family estate. 
During the civil wars Porter shared his parents' life of peregrinations -- at Oxford, Paris, Brussels, and Antwerp. By the spring of 1649 the impoverished family were back in London, where Endymion compounded for his possessions. In February 1655 Thomas abducted his cousin Lady Anne from the house of her father, Mountjoy Blount, earl of Newport. By order of the earl, Porter was arrested and imprisoned, but was released shortly afterwards. The parties were reconciled, a marriage took place, and Anne gave birth to a son, George Porter (c.1659-1728). Thomas evidently shared the irascible temper of his elder brothers George Porter (bap. 1621, d. 1683) and Philip (1628-1655). In March 1655, in a duel fought in Covent Garden, Porter killed his opponent, Thomas Salkeld. He pleaded guilty to manslaughter but 'being allowed the benefit of clergy was burned in the hand' (Summers, 231). Shortly after Anne's death, possibly in 1659, Porter married Roberta Anne Colepeper. In February 1660 he was taken into custody and imprisoned at Lambeth House, having taken part in an armed riot in London. It was possibly in recognition of their father's services in the Stuart cause that Thomas and his brother James in November 1662 were both given the captaincy of a troop of horse in Sir Charles Gerard's regiment. But Thomas apparently wished to gain greater financial security. In 1662 he acquired from Henry Killigrew an annuity for life of $4 a week, a sum that had been conveyed to Killigrew out of his father, Thomas's, shares in the Theatre Royal. Porter towards the end of 1666 sold the stipend for $600 to Sir John and Lady Katherine Sayers. Lady Sayers later complained that Porter had gone off to Tangier 'without giving her up the old deed' ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 225), worth $115. She requested that Samuel Pepys, the treasurer for Tangier, 'stop' the $115 out of Porter's pay -- an indication that the latter was in the employ of the Tangier committee. Porter had come to Pepys's notice as early as 15 May 1663, when the diarist reported a 'ridiculous falling out' at an entertainment at Lord Oxford's, involving the lords Albemarle and Bellasis and 'two of the Porters' (Pepys, 4.136). A similar quarrel took a tragic turn four years later, for on 29 July 1667 Pepys recorded that Sir Henry Bellasis, son of the governor of Tangier, and Thomas Porter, 'the greatest friends in the world' (ibid., 8.363), had fought a duel, apparently for the silliest of reasons. On 8 August Pepys learned that Bellasis had succumbed to his wounds. Porter fled to France; the coroner later found that Bellasis had died from unknown causes. 
Porter was the author of two plays, 'The Villain' (1663) and 'The Carnival' (1664). First performed by the Duke's Company at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 18 October 1662, 'The Villain' ran ten days consecutively and remained a favourite until the end of the century. Its initial cast included Thomas Betterton, Henry Harris, and Joseph Price, 'that inimitable sprightly actor' (Downes, 23). As much as the tragic design, obviously inspired by 'Othello', the 'incomparable' performance (Langbaine, 407) of Samuel Sandford as the Iago-like villain Malignii accounted for the play's tremendous success. Pepys, however, said that he 'was never less pleased with a play in my life' (Pepys, 3.230). Alluding to Porter's reputation for fieriness, Sir William Davenant in his epilogue to 'The Villain' advised critics of the play to 'take heed': the dramatist might '
not challenge any one to fight; 

But which is worse, does threaten all that write. 
(Davenant, 340)' In its locale, characters, and plot, 'The Carnival', probably performed by the King's Company in 1664, testifies to the impact of the Spanish comedia on the early Restoration stage. In the writing of both plays Porter may have been assisted by Davenant, his father's lifelong protege. On the tenuous evidence of the initials 'T. P.' on the title-pages, two other plays have been ascribed to the author: 'A Witty Combat', published in 1663 but possibly never performed, and 'The French Conjurer' (printed 1678), probably produced at Dorset Gardens in June 1677. Later research suggests that the attribution is unwarranted. 
In his will dated 22 August 1680 Porter appointed his son George as his sole executor, entrusting to his care his 'dear' (third) wife, probably Anne Canning, of Foxcote. Porter died between 22 August 1680 and 7 December 1680, when a grant was issued to George, making him the trustee of all possessions formerly belonging to Roberta Anne, who had died in or about July 1661. 


@@@@@


doc= 22580


Porter, Walter (c.1587-1659), composer and church musician, was, according to Anthony Wood, the son of Henry Porter, who graduated BMus from Christ Church, Oxford, in 1600. The year of his birth is uncertain, for although he signed a petition to the governors of Westminster School (probably in 1658) in which he described himself as 'being 70:tie and odd yeeres of age his strength and faculties decayed', he may be the Walter Porter for whom there is a marriage licence dated 1630, in which case he was born in 1594 or 1595. 
As a chorister of Westminster Abbey, Porter sang at the funeral of Queen Elizabeth in 1603, and, after his voice broke, as a tenor in George Chapman's Middle Temple and Lincoln's Inn masque (1613). He was promised the next tenor vacancy in the Chapel Royal on 5 January 1617, and the following year was duly sworn in (1 February). Already he may have travelled to Italy to study under 'my good Friend and Maestro 'Monteverde'' (as he stated in the preface to his 'Mottets'), for his madrigal on the death of Lady Arabella Stuart (died 1615), 'Wake sorrow, wake', shows signs of a new approach to madrigal writing which he would have experienced in Italy. 
Porter was granted a licence to travel abroad for three years on 12 March 1622, but this was probably in connection with the earl of Bristol's embassy to Madrid to arrange the 'Spanish match'. In gratitude 'for all your rare goodnesse in my attendance in 'Spaine'' Porter dedicated his 'Madrigales and Ayres' (1632) to the earl. As a member of the Chapel Royal, Porter went to Scotland for the coronation of Charles I in 1633, and in February 1634 took part in Shirley's masque 'The Triumph of Peace', as both a singer and a theorbo player. In 1639 he was appointed master of the choristers of Westminster Abbey. 
With the disbandment of musical services at both the Chapel Royal and the abbey during and following the civil war, Porter lived in the household of Sir Edward Spencer between 1644 and 1656. His 'Mottets of Two Voyces' were published in 1657. 
Porter wrote anthems, madrigals, and two-part settings of metrical psalms. Only one of the anthems survives complete -- the verse anthem 'O praise the Lord', with which the book of madrigals opens. It includes florid solo writing and reflects Italian influences, albeit applied to English words. The madrigals, too, borrow 'concertato' techniques, mixing solo, duet, and dialogue textures. They include passages of quasi-recitative and virtuoso solo writing embellished with the Italian 'trillo'. The 'continued base' (in effect, basso continuo) is copiously figured and intended for realization on 'Harpesechord, Lutes, Theorbos'. Full passages are doubled by instruments -- two violins and bass -- which also play introductory sinfonias, ritornellos, and 'toccatos', the last being sectional pieces that are virtually trio sonatas. Madrigals for two or three voices are in the Italian chamber style, while there are some airs or partsongs that are more traditional and tuneful. The 'Mottets' are less interesting musically, and set metrical psalms by George Sandys in a rather dry declamatory style intended for domestic performance. 
Porter's last years were spent in poverty, hence the petition already mentioned, in which he offered 'to sett up a meeting for Musick once a fortnight and to traine up two or three boyes in the Art of Musick... out of Westmr Schoole'. He was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 30 November 1659. 


@@@@@


doc= 22581


Porter, Whitworth (1827-1892), army officer, second son of Henry Porter of Winslade House, near Exeter, was born at Winslade on 25 September 1827. His mother was Rose Aylmer, youngest daughter of Sir Henry Russell, bt (1751-1836), judge of the supreme court of India. Porter entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, on 14 November 1842, was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 18 December 1845, and was promoted first lieutenant on 1 April 1846. After a course of instruction at Chatham, he embarked for Dominica in the West Indies on 13 December 1847, having married in the preceding October. He returned home in March 1850, and was stationed at Limerick. He was promoted second captain on 3 January 1855. On 20 December 1853 he embarked for Malta, and in February 1855 was sent to the Crimea. He served in the trenches at the siege of Sevastopol until June. He received the Mejidiye (fifth class), and on 2 November 1855 was promoted brevet major. After serving at home for eighteen months, during which time he published 'Life in the Trenches before Sebastopol' (1856), he returned to Malta in December 1856. There he studied Maltese history, and especially the knights of Malta, and subsequently published 'A History of the Knights of Malta' (2 vols., 1858). On 2 April 1859 he was promoted first captain in the Royal Engineers, and returned to England. 
Porter was employed at the War Office under the inspector-general of fortifications from April 1859 until September 1862 in connection with the defence of the United Kingdom. He served on the jury for the military division of the 1862 London international exhibition. He was instructor in fortification at Sandhurst from 1862 to 1868, was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 23 August 1866, and regimental lieutenant-colonel on 14 December 1868. 
In March 1870 Porter was again sent to Malta, where, as executive officer under the commanding Royal Engineers, he supervised the construction of the defences of the new dockyard. While at Malta he was employed in connection with the expedition to Sicily to observe the eclipse in 1872, and he designed and erected observatories at Catania and Syracuse. He was promoted brevet colonel on 14 December 1873. 
In February 1874 Porter was appointed commanding royal engineer at Barbados. He remained there two years, returning to England in April 1876, and was stationed for a time at Chatham. He was commanding royal engineer of the western district, and stationed at Plymouth from 1877 until 1 October 1881, when he retired on a pension, with the honorary rank of major-general. 
After his retirement Porter interested himself in various charitable works connected with the order of St John of Jerusalem. He was chairman of the metropolitan district of the St John Ambulance Association, and also revised his 'History of the Knights of Malta' (1883). The main work of his later years was the extensive 'History of the Corps of Royal Engineers' (2 vols., 1889); he presented the copyright of this work to the corps. 
Porter married in London, on 25 October 1847, Annie Shirley da Costa, and they had two children: Catherine, who married Captain Crosse, and Reginald da Costa, to whose memory Porter erected a handsome reredos at St Michael's Church, York Town, Surrey. The son, who became a lieutenant in the Royal Engineers in 1871, won the gold medal of the Royal Engineers' Institute for a prize essay, 'Warfare against uncivilised races'. He saw service in South Africa, and having passed first into the staff college in 1880, was on his way out to Egypt, where he had volunteered for service, when he was killed by a falling spar during a gale in 1882. 
Porter died at Plymleigh, Nightingale Road, Guildford, on 27 May 1892, and was buried at St Michael's Church, York Town, of which he had been churchwarden for many years. He had contributed liberally towards its enlargement, and had himself carved the ornamental foliage on the chancel screen. 


@@@@@


doc= 22582


William Porter (1805-1880), younger brother of John Scott Porter, was born at Artikelly near Newtownlimavady on 15 September 1805 and was also educated locally and in the classical school in Artillery Lane in Londonderry. Apprenticed to the iron and timber business of John Classon, brother of his father's second wife, Eliza 'nee' Classon (died 1852), he showed little aptitude for business but was helped to study for the Irish bar by John Classon. Called to the bar in 1831, he practised in the north-east circuit before being appointed in 1839 to the office of attorney-general in the recently established Cape Colony. He owed his appointment by Melbourne's whig government to influential liberal friends who had replaced the old tory establishment as dispensers of patronage. He brought to Cape Colony his 'heart-fixed hatred of injustice' (McCracken, 43) and as attorney-general he insisted on equal justice for all, irrespective of colour or class. He used his 'ex officio' role in the executive and legislative councils and as legal adviser to the government to promote liberal values, and in 1854 drew up a constitution providing for a parliament elected by black and white voters on equal terms. 


@@@@@


doc= 22583


Porter, William Henry (1791-1861), surgeon, was born in Dublin on 5 March 1791, the son of a bookseller, William Porter (1757-1841), of Willmount, Rathfarnham, and his wife, Susanna Bacon (died 1828). From Porterstown School, Portarlington, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 1 July 1805; he was awarded a scholarship in 1808, and took his BA degree in 1810. Meanwhile he was indentured to Sir Philip Crampton and studied at the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland (RCSI) and at the Meath Hospital, Dublin. He obtained the letters testimonial of the RCSI on 13 September 1814 and was elected a member of the college (equivalent to the later fellowship) on 10 November 1817, but did not take the MD of Trinity College until 1842. Porter married Jane (died 1858), daughter of Cuthbert Hornidge of Russelstown, Blessington, co. Wicklow, in 1816, and they lived at 21 Kildare Street. They had two sons and five daughters. Their son George Hornidge Porter followed his father's profession with distinction. One of their daughters married Canon Leeper DD; another became the wife of Dr Robert Johns; a third married Robert Cooper. 
In 1819 Porter was appointed surgeon to the Meath Hospital, then situated in the Coombe but scheduled to transfer to a new building half a mile away at Long Lane and Heytesbury Street. When the move eventually took place, on Christmas eve 1822, Porter and a colleague played an active part in the moving of patients, who were wrapped in blankets and carried in baskets specially made for the transfer. Their logistics were upset by a violent storm, and as the surgeons returned to the Coombe they found the empty baskets were useful to protect their heads from falling slates. 
Porter earned a reputation as a courageous operator. He performed a caesarean section in 1835 (neither infant nor mother survived), was particularly skilled in the ligature of arteries, and removed a subdural haematoma with spectacular success, though he described trepanation in the conscious patient as a dreadful ordeal 'and fearful to behold' ('Dublin Medical Press', 3, 1839, 301). He spoke against indiscriminate blood-letting, and said bluntly: 'I fear many a man has been bled once too often' (Doolin, 104). 
A well-trained anatomist, Porter was one of a group who established the Park Street medical school (one of Dublin's many private schools), where he taught anatomy and surgery. He contributed numerous articles on general surgery, tracheotomy, fracture of the neck of the femur, hydrocele, and syphilis to the 'Dublin Journal of Medical Science', of which he was a co-editor. He published two books: 'Observations on the Surgical Pathology of the Larynx and Trachea' (1826), and 'Observations on the Surgical Pathology and Treatment of Aneurysm' (1840). 
Porter was consulting surgeon to the City of Dublin Hospital; he also held a chair of surgery at the RCSI from 1836 to 1847 and was president of the college in 1838. He was an eloquent lecturer. We learn from a contemporary that 'he was no 'dry as dust' teacher. His hearers were supplied from no ancient eroded cistern or stagnant pool, for he had that power, possessed by so few, of being able to strike the rock from which came the living water. (Ormsby, 197)' He represented the college on the General Medical Council. 
Porter was found dead in his bed on 28 April 1861. His sudden death was attributed to a ruptured thoracic aneurysm, though it may have been cardiac. An obituarist in the 'Dublin Quarterly Journal of Medical Science' proclaimed his virtues: 'Classical as a writer; brilliant as a lecturer; earnest as a worker; and excellent as a man'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22584


Porteus, Beilby (1731-1809), bishop of London, born at York on 8 May 1731, was youngest but one of the nineteen children of Robert Porteus (died 1758/9), planter, and his wife, Sarah Jennings. His parents were natives of the American colony of Virginia and had lived on their own estate, which grew chiefly tobacco. His mother was the daughter of Colonel Jennings, superintendent of Indian affairs in Virginia, and is said to have been related to Sarah Jennings, duchess of Marlborough. Ill health and a wish to procure a better education for his children drove Porteus's father to return to England in 1720, and the family settled at York. Beilby Porteus was educated first at York, then at Mr Hyde's school, Ripon. At the age of seventeen he was admitted, through his brother's influence, as sizar at Christ's College, Cambridge. He was made a scholar on 19 November 1748 and he graduated BA in 1752, as tenth wrangler; he also won the second chancellor's medal for classics. He was subsequently elected a fellow of his college, which led to a period that he described as one of the happiest of his life. He accepted the office of esquire bedel, not because he felt himself especially suited to it but to ease financial pressure on his father. To further assist this end he took private pupils, who included Thomas Robinson, later second Baron Grantham and secretary of state under Shelburne. In 1757 he was ordained deacon, and in the same year he was ordained priest by Archbishop Hutton of York. In 1759 he won the Seatonian prize for an English poem, 'Death', inspired perhaps by the recent death of his father. Though, in the opinion of his biographer, 'as a juvenile performance there are none finer' his elegy on the death of George II earned a lampoon in Thackeray's 'The Four Georges': 'Here was one who had neither dignity, learning, morals nor wit -- who tainted a great Society by bad example; who in youth, manhood, old age was gross, low and sensual; and Mr Porteus, the divine who wept these tears over George the Second's memory wore George the Third's lawn. I don't know whether people still admire his poetry or his sermons. (W. M. Thackeray, 'The first four Georges: sketches of manners, morals, court and town life', 'Cornhill Magazine', 2, 1860, 191)' Porteus did at least win notice for his sermons in the 1760s, and his university sermon, in 1761, on the character of King David (a reply to a pamphlet by the deist Peter Annet, 'The History of the Man after God's Own Heart') may have helped his appointment in 1762 as chaplain to the archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Secker. He moved to Lambeth. He was appointed by Secker to two livings in Kent, Rucking and Wittersham, but soon afterwards took instead Hunton, another Kent rectorship. He was made a prebend of Peterborough in 1764 and rector of Lambeth in 1767. Porteus did not neglect his domestic life, and on 13 May 1765 he married Margaret, daughter of Bryan Hodgson, landlord of The George inn, Stamford. He proceeded DD at Cambridge, where his sermon on the necessity of instructing youth in the principles of revealed religion influenced John Norris (died 1777) to found the Norrisian professorship of divinity. He was appointed chaplain to the king in 1769 and master of St Cross Hospital in Winchester in 1773. In 1776 he was promoted to the bishopric of Chester. He resigned Lambeth but kept the valuable living of Hunton; it was thought praiseworthy that he had not kept both. 
Porteus was a very energetic bishop of Chester, a post which he held for eleven years. He encouraged the rising evangelical school; he instituted a fund for the relief of poorer clergy in the diocese; he warmly encouraged the foundation of Sunday schools in every parish. He was also soon to show that activity in the House of Lords which would also mark his later period as bishop of London. In 1777, acting for the incapacitated bishop of London, Dr Lowth, he piloted through the Lords a measure to stop incumbents giving general bonds of resignation (bonds to resign whenever the patrons required them) and for many years -- with ultimate success in 1800 -- he fought a campaign to stop a species of simony in the form of purchase of advowson of a living. He was also to show an early interest in the campaign against the slave trade that would mark his later career by writing a pamphlet (1784) that called upon the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel to set an example for slave owners by the management of its own estates in Barbados. 
Porteus gained quite a reputation for his sermons in the 1770s. A contemporary, Job Orton, described them as 'super-excellent' (Ippel, 46). He earned less favourable comment from Horace Walpole for his sermon preached for the general fast in 1776: 'The Fast Sermon of Dr Porteus let loose all the zeal of the clergy and contributed to raise the infatuation of England against America'. This seems a little unfair; the main theme of Porteus's address was opposition to the licentious and luxurious habits of the English themselves, a topic to which he was perhaps improbably to return in the euphoniously entitled 'Letter to the inhabitants of Manchester, Macclesfield and the adjacent places on the occasion of the recent earthquake' (1777). 
In 1787 Porteus succeeded Lowth as bishop of London. He was from the first a warm supporter of evangelicals, though he did not himself identify with all their views -- he was decidedly anti-Calvinistic. He was a staunch supporter of Hannah More for many years. He threw himself eagerly into the work of the newly formed Society for Enforcing the King's Proclamation against Immorality and Idleness, known as the Proclamation Society. Given his support for George III's moral crusade, it was appropriate that Porteus, as bishop of London, preached the sermon at the service of thanksgiving for the king's recovery held at St Paul's on 23 April 1789. He made full use of his position to further the interest of the campaign to abolish the slave trade; he tried, but failed, to see Sir William Dolben's 'Slave Carrying Bill' through the Lords (1788). He successfully transferred a bequest of Robert Boyle, made in 1691 and intended for missionary work in America, to his own Society for the Conversion and Religious Instruction of the Negroes of the West Indies. He was an early patron of the Church Missionary Society and vice-president of the British and Foreign Bible Society, having recommended John Shore, first Baron Teignmouth, as its first president. 
Though sometimes called a Methodist, Porteus was strict at all times in enforcing the discipline and doctrine of the church. He excluded from the parishes in his diocese Dr Draper, sometime president of a college in the Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion, and incurred no little odium for so doing. In 1779 he had approved relief of Catholics from the penal law but he was no supporter of Catholic emancipation, especially the abortive bill of 1805. Porteus took a great interest in securing the due observance of religious holidays. He wrote a letter on the neglect of Good Friday to his Lambeth parishioners in 1776, which resulted in stricter observance of the day throughout London; the letter was later published by the SPCK. In 1780 he had campaigned to put down two London practices, Sunday debates and Sunday promenades. In 1787, newly as bishop, he produced a 'Letter to the Clergy of London on the Profanation of the Lord's Day'. In 1794 he stopped building work on the new Theatre Royal, Covent Garden, going forward on a Sunday, and in 1795 he persuaded the king to abandon Sunday card parties. Not long before his death in 1809 he was petitioning Prince George to change the meeting day of a club that he frequented on Sundays. In 1805 the manager of the King's Theatre had to end a production in order to avoid threatened prosecution by Porteus if the show should continue past midnight and hence into Sunday. Porteus was indifferent to the criticism that this particular campaign brought him. 
Porteus's tenure of the diocese of London -- which then contained vast areas beyond the metropolitan area -- coincided with the French Revolution and the French Revolutionary Wars. He vigorously resisted the spread of French revolutionary principles, which he regarded with alarm. He was particularly exercised over the influence of the work of Thomas Paine, whose 'Age of Reason' had, he said, 'rendered irreligion easy to the meanest capacity' ('Works', 6.276-7); he reported that he had heard cases of coalminers selling their bibles in order to buy copies of the work. It was specifically to counter the influence of 'one Paine, an American', as Porteus referred to him, that he commissioned Hannah More's 'Village Politics', 1793 (Porteus, diary, 30 March 1791, MS 2100, fol. 25). In his charge to the clergy of his diocese for 1794 (he was commenting on the lately published posthumous works of Frederick II) he laid the blame for such developments with the continental 'philosophes' of the European Enlightenment: 'These philosophers reject all idea of Providence and of a moral governor of the world. They ascribe every event to fortune, or to necessity, or to choice: They decried the existence of the soul distinct from the body; they conceived man to be nothing more than a piece of clockwork, which when the wheels refuse to act, stands still and loses all power of motion for ever. ('Works', 6.266-7)' In 1795, with Paine himself beyond its reach, Porteus's Proclamation Society prosecuted the printer of Paine's 'Age of Reason', Thomas Williams. By a nice irony they retained Thomas Erskine, a prominent radical lawyer, for the task. The whig 'Morning Chronicle' deprecated the zeal in the matter of the 'Reverend Prosecutors' (26 February 1798). 
To counteract the spread of infidelity and the 'growing relaxation of public manners' ('Works', 4.vi) Porteus delivered, in St James's, Piccadilly, a series of lectures on Fridays in Lent in four successive years, beginning in 1798. Crowds attended them and they caused formidable queues of carriages in Piccadilly -- whether full of sceptical coalminers history does not relate. Unlike the 'philosophes' Porteus himself had a keen sense of the workings of Providence. In particular he thought it necessary to earn the benevolence of Providence -- and hence success in the war -- through redress of offences. High among these he would put the slave trade; it has already been mentioned how he had involved himself in this issue since the early 1780s. From the 1790s until 1807 Porteus was a leading figure in the effort to get abolition through both houses of parliament. It was difficult for detractors of such a campaign to label it Jacobinical -- though they tried -- with a figure such as Porteus in the lists in favour of it. It was commented upon by Horace Walpole and others that the bishops formed a party of the crown in the Lords and, though in the main this might have been true, Porteus and his brethren voted consistently against three royal dukes on the slave trade issue. There was an early success with a bill to limit the trade to southern equatorial Africa in 1799; throughout 1806 and 1807 Porteus attended and voted in the Lords for abolition. He was, however, quick to dissociate himself from a campaign, as early as 1808, to proceed to the abolition of the institution of slavery itself. An effort was made to recruit his energies for a campaign to take action against the prevalence of prostitution in London in 1808 but by then he was fading. He died at Fulham Palace on 14 May 1809 and was buried at Sundridge, Kent. His wife survived him. 
Porteus had ample means and made liberal use of them. He was generous to poorer clergy and attempted to raise the stipends and status of assistant curates. He endowed his former college, Christ's, Cambridge, with $1200 for three medals: for a Latin dissertation on the evidences for Christianity, for an English essay on some precept of the gospel, and for reading the lessons in the college chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 22585


Portlock, Joseph Ellison (1794-1864), surveyor, army officer, and geologist, the only son of Captain Nathaniel Portlock (d. 1817), was born at Gosport, Hampshire, on 30 September 1794. After passing through the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, he was commissioned second lieutenant, Royal Engineers, on 20 July 1813. He served briefly at Portsmouth and Chatham, and was promoted first lieutenant on 13 December 1813. In 1814 he joined the army in Canada. He took part in the siege of Fort Erie (August 1814), and for the greater part of it was the only engineer officer in the trenches. When the army retired he constructed the lines and bridgehead of Chippewa at which Lieutenant-General Sir Gordon Drummond made his successful stand and saved Upper Canada. He afterwards took part in numerous exploratory expeditions and Portlock harbour in Lake Huron was named after him by Drummond. 
When Portlock returned to England in October 1822 the Ordnance Survey was about to be extended to Ireland and enlarged in scope to include cadastral as well as topographical surveying, and in 1824 he was chosen by Colonel Thomas Colby for employment there. In the organization of the Irish survey Portlock was the confidential assistant and companion of Colby, an important account of whose life and work he published in 1869. He worked with Colby in the Tower of London until, in 1825, they both went to Ireland, where Portlock was attached to the trigonometrical branch of the work, of which he soon became the senior, and ultimately the sole, officer. In 1825 he made observations at Slievedonard, co. Down, 2800 feet above the sea, a very exposed station where the camp was frequently blown down and the instruments preserved only with difficulty. Portlock had to undertake a system of vertical observations and calculations for altitudes as well as those for the horizontal triangulation. He carried a line of levelling from the coast of co. Down to the coast of Donegal, and caused similar lines to be observed in other places, crossing Ireland in every direction and terminating at stations on the coast where tidal observations were simultaneously made. These operations greatly improved the accuracy of measurements of altitude and also furnished the material for a valuable paper on tides, by the astronomer royal, published in the 'Papers of the Royal Society of London' in 1845. 
On 24 February 1831 Portlock married, at Kilmaine, co. Mayo, Julia Browne. In 1832 it was arranged to compile a descriptive memoir of the survey and Portlock, having completed the work to connect the Irish triangulation to the points already fixed in Britain, undertook the sections on geology and productive economy, since he greatly favoured the extension of the survey work to the production of such memoirs. He began to collect information on geology, zoology, and soils. Unfortunately, for financial reasons, the preparation of the memoir was suspended in 1838, and finally abandoned, so the volume 'Geology of Londonderry, Tyrone, and Fermanagh, with Portions of Adjacent Counties' (1843) is the only product of his work. While employed on the Irish survey Portlock helped various scientific institutions in Ireland, notably the Geological and Zoological societies. He was one of the early presidents of both, and an enthusiastic contributor to the Geological Society. In 1835 the British Association met in Dublin, and he gave valuable help, particularly with the work on geology and geography. He was president of the geological section at Belfast in 1852 and he contributed geological and ornithological papers to several learned journals. 
Portlock was promoted first captain in September 1839. In 1843 his work on the Irish survey ended, and he returned to the ordinary duties of the corps of Royal Engineers, embarking in May for Corfu, where he helped to remodel the fortress and continued his geological and zoological observations. He returned to England in 1847, and while stationed at Portsmouth continued his research, particularly on marine biology. In 1849 he was appointed commanding royal engineer at Cork, where the employment of convicts on military public works was begun. Under Portlock's charge some started work on the unfinished Fort Westmoreland on Spike Island -- an experiment which helped to prompt the adoption of the system. While in Cork he married, on 11 December 1849, Fanny, daughter of Major-General Charles Turner, commander of the Cork district. 
In 1851 Portlock was appointed inspector of studies at the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. He was an ardent advocate of education in the army, especially in the scientific corps, and he instituted many valuable reforms in the system at Woolwich. In 1856 he resigned his position, receiving a commendation for his services, and in November was appointed commanding royal engineer of the south-eastern district, stationed at Dover. In May 1857 he joined the newly formed council of military education, of which he proved an ardent advocate. He insisted that public appointments should be made after open competition and that social rank should be immaterial in selection. In this he agreed with Sir Thomas Larcom, who had also seen this principle in action in the Irish survey. Portlock was also insistent that officers be well educated, and was instrumental in extending the teaching of science at Sandhurst and at the Staff College. He retired from active service on 25 November 1857 with the honorary rank of major-general, but remained until 1862 a member of the council of military education. In 1857 and 1858 he was president of the Geological Society of London. Contemporaries were impressed with his energy and zeal as well as with his scientific integrity and his ability to lead by example. In 1857 he received from Trinity College, Dublin, the honorary degree of doctor of laws. He was a fellow of the Royal Society, and a member of the Royal Irish Academy and of numerous other learned societies. In 1862 he settled at Blackrock, near Dublin, where he died on 14 February 1864. He left no children from either of his marriages. 
Throughout his life Portlock published geological and zoological papers based on observations made at his various stations, as well as papers on military engineering and fortification, including some for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22586


Portlock, Nathaniel (b. in or before 1747, d. 1817), naval officer and fur trader, was probably born at or near Norfolk, Virginia, possibly the son of Charles Portlock (died after 15 February 1750) and his wife, Lydia, 'nee' Ridley (died after 1756). According to the catalogue of pictures formerly in the Painted Hall, Greenwich, Portlock was impressed into the British navy when second mate of his brother's merchant ship. He entered the navy in 1772 as an able seaman on board the 'St Albans', with Captain Charles Douglas, who recognized his experience and placed him on the quarterdeck as a midshipman. He afterwards served in the 'Ardent' and in the 'Ramillies', guardships in the Medway, and in 1776 was entered on board the 'Discovery', where he was rated as master's mate by Captain Charles Clerke. He continued in her during James Cook's celebrated voyage of circumnavigation until, in August 1779, he was moved into the 'Resolution'. On returning to England he passed his lieutenant's examination on 7 September 1780, when he was officially stated on his passing certificate to be 'more than 32'. On 14 September 1780 he was promoted to be lieutenant of the 'Firebrand', attached to the Channel Fleet. On 18 December 1781, at St Mary Aldermary, London, he married Elizabeth Gilmour. 
In May 1785 Portlock was appointed by the King George's Sound Company (headed by Richard Cadman Etches) to command the 'King George', a vessel of 320 tons, and an expedition to the north-west coast of North America. She sailed from Gravesend on 29 August 1785, in company with the smaller ship 'Queen Charlotte', commanded by George Dixon. On 19 July 1786 they arrived at Cook Inlet and, after some stay there, ranged along the coast, sighted Mount St Elias, and on 29 September sailed for the Sandwich (Hawaiian) Islands. There they wintered, and returned to the north-west coast of North America in March 1787. When winter approached they again sought the Sandwich Islands, and, after having refitted there and refreshed the men, both ships sailed separately for Macau where they arrived in November 1787. In February of the following year they made for England, the 'King George' reaching Dover on 24 August 1788. With Dixon, Portlock published 'A Voyage Round the World, but More Particularly to the North-West Coast of America' in 1789. Though rich in geographical results, the voyage was primarily intended to advance the fur trade, in which object it was fully successful. 
In 1791 Portlock was appointed with Captain William Bligh to command the 'Assistant' brig, going out as tender to the 'Providence', which had been ordered to the Pacific to bring breadfruit plants to the West Indies. During this second breadfruit voyage Portlock made many discoveries in company with Bligh during the passage through the south Pacific Ocean, especially Fiji. The ships returned to England in August 1793, and on 4 November Portlock was promoted to the rank of commander. In 1799 he commanded the 'Arrow' sloop, with the tremendous armament of twenty-eight 32-pounder carronades, and on 9 September captured the Dutch ship 'Draak', at anchor in the narrow passage between Vlie and Harlingen. On 28 September Portlock was advanced to post rank, but he does not seem to have had any further service afloat. Instead he took command of the fencibles on the south coast. He was based at Poole and later moved to the Dartmouth area. There, on 20 January 1805, he directed the fencibles who saved the Danish vessel 'Den Lille Catherina' from being wrecked in Bigbury Bay. The owners rewarded him with an inscribed silver goblet, later given by Portlock's son to the Royal Marines, in whose mess at Lympstone it remained in 1999. In later life he suffered greatly from ill health, and in 1816 he was admitted to the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, being appointed one of the four captains of the hospital. He died there on 12 September 1817, and was buried in the officers' vault in the hospital burial-ground. His son, Joseph Ellison Portlock, achieved recognition as a geologist and surveyor. 


@@@@@


doc= 22587


Portman, Edward Berkeley, first Viscount Portman (1799-1888), politician, born at Bryanston, Dorset, on 9 July 1799, was the son of Edward Berkeley Portman (died 1823) of Bryanston and Orchard Portman, Somerset, and his first wife, Lucy, elder daughter of the Revd Thomas Whitby of Cresswell Hall, Staffordshire. He was educated at Eton College ('c'.1811-1814), and at Christ Church, Oxford, graduating BA with first class honours in 1821 and MA in 1826. 
A moderate Liberal, Portman sat for Dorset from 1823 to 1832, and for Marylebone, Middlesex, from 12 December 1832 to March 1833. On 27 January 1837 he was created Baron Portman of Orchard Portman, and raised to be Viscount Portman of Bryanston on 28 March 1873. For some time he was a prominent speaker in the House of Lords. He was lord lieutenant of Somerset from 22 May 1839 to June 1864. He was appointed a commissioner and councillor of the duchy of Cornwall on 19 August 1840, and a councillor of the duchy of Lancaster on 13 February 1847, and was lord warden of the stannaries and high steward of the duchy of Cornwall from 20 January 1865 to his death. He was an active supporter of the Royal Agricultural Society from its foundation in 1838, and served as president in 1846, 1856, and 1862. He was a noted breeder of Devon and Alderney cattle. 
Portman married, on 16 June 1827, Lady Emma Lascelles, third daughter of Henry Lascelles, second earl of Harewood, and his wife, Henrietta. A lady of the bedchamber from 1837 to 1851, Lady Portman died on 8 February 1865, leaving two daughters and three sons, of whom William Henry succeeded to the title, and Maurice Berkeley (1833-1888) became a member of the Canadian parliament. Portman died at Bryanston on 19 November 1888, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 22588


Portman, Sir William (1497/8-1557), judge, was the eldest son of John Portman (died 1521) of Orchard Portman, near Taunton, Somerset, and Alice, daughter of William Knoyle of Sandford Orcas in the same county. At his father's death Portman was aged twenty-three. His father was a bencher of the Middle Temple when William was admitted as a student in 1517. As early as 1532 Portman became a justice of the peace for Somerset, and by the 1530s he was chief steward both to the dean and chapter of Wells and to Glastonbury Abbey. He served in parliament in 1529 as member for Taunton, and probably in 1536. In the autumn of 1532 he gave his first reading in the Middle Temple, and in 1540, before his second reading, was nominated as a serjeant-at-law. He gave a second reading, as serjeant-elect, shortly before the creation in June. On 23 November 1540 he was appointed one of the king's serjeants, and on 14 May 1546 a justice of the king's bench, with a knighthood on the accession of Edward VI in 1547. His wife, Elizabeth, who predeceased him, was the daughter and heir of John Gilbert, a prominent Somerset landowner, and the widow of Giles Brent. They had one son (Sir Henry, of the Middle Temple, died 1590) and a daughter (Mary Stowell). 
From 1542 until his death Portman was an assize judge on the Oxford circuit. He adjusted well to the Marian regime, persuading his colleague Sir James Hales to abjure protestantism in 1554, and was promoted to be chief justice of England on 11 June 1555. He presided over the king's bench until his death on 5 February 1557. On 10 February he was buried with all legal pomp in St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, London, opposite the Temple, where his epitaph, armorial tabard, and penons were still to be seen in the next century. He had retained the family seat at Orchard; and his other property, whether by descent, marriage, or purchase, was mostly situated in the same county. 


@@@@@


doc= 22589


Portman, Sir William, sixth baronet (1643-1690), politician, was born on 5 September 1643, the only son of Sir William Portman (died 1645) of Orchard Portman, Somerset, the fifth baronet, and Anna Colles of Barton, Pitminster, Somerset. The family was strongly royalist, his father being expelled from parliament in 1644. Taken prisoner at Naseby, his father had died in the Tower of London. By the Restoration the family's losses were calculated at $30,000, over and above a delinquency fine of $7000 paid by the elder Portman's executors. 
Portman inherited the title on his father's death in August 1645. He matriculated from All Souls College, Oxford, in 1659, was made a knight of the Bath in April 1661, and took his father's old seat of Taunton in the same month. He held it until his death in 1690, with interludes in the October 1679 and 1681 parliaments when he sat as one of Somerset's two knights of the shire. The family fortunes were repaired, enabling him to become one of the most influential gentry in the south-west: partly by the financial retrenchment allowed by his long minority, partly by three lucrative marriages. His marriage on 14 November 1661 to Elizabeth Cutler, daughter and coheir of Sir John Cutler of Westminster, brought with it a marriage portion of $30,000. After her death in 1673 he married, on 23 October 1674, Elizabeth Southcote (died 1680), daughter of Sir Thomas Southcote of Buckland All Saints, Devon, heir to her brother George. Finally, on 19 April 1682 he married, with a portion of $10,000, Mary Holman, the daughter and coheir of Sir John Holman of Banbury; she too seems to have died before him. Portman was able to add to his Somerset property the estate of Bryanston in east Dorset. He became an early fellow of the Royal Society in 1664, though nothing is known of his scientific interests. 
Portman's family seat at Orchard Portman lay just to the south of Taunton, and despite the town's reputation for faction and disloyalty during (and after) the civil war he did his duty as its MP, working energetically in the bitter struggle for the restoration of its charter, lost at the Restoration. When depression struck the town's cloth trade hundreds of workers and their families marched out to Portman's house to claim relief. In 1679 he was a loyal and respected figure both locally and nationally, a deputy lieutenant for both Somerset and Dorset, and colonel of a regiment of the latter county's militia. By then, however, Titus Oates's allegations of a popish plot to kill Charles II and place on the throne his Catholic brother James, duke of York, had gained widespread credence, and Portman was one of the many moderate royalist gentry who for some time believed in the plot. He spoke against the duke of York in the House of Commons, associated with whig radicals in Somerset, and was expected to entertain the duke of Monmouth during the latter's tour of the west in 1680. His support for action over the plot and for the exclusion of the duke of York was, however, always qualified by his basic royalism. In the March election of 1679 he was 'not Fanatic enough' for many voters, just scraping in ahead of John Trenchard, while a friend warned radicals in the same year that though Portman was 'against Popery and the Duke of York, yet he is firm to King and Church' ('CSP dom.', '1679-80', 77, 514). This firmness grew as the exclusion crisis deepened, and by 1681 Portman had begun to drink the health of the duke of York and repented of his Commons' speech against him. Government investigations into the Rye House plot of 1683 gave him the opportunity to prove his loyalty, and none was more zealous in examining suspects, searching houses, checking the books of local gunsmiths, and scrutinizing the loads of local waggoners. He earned frequent and warm praise from the secretary of state, but uncovered no real conspiracy in the west. 
On 3 June 1685 Portman received an anonymous letter warning of the duke of Monmouth's intention to invade, and reacted with characteristic vigour, searching coaches and mails throughout Somerset. During the rebellion he displayed judgement and ability, and his Dorset troops were the only militia to emerge with credit from the campaign. He captured Monmouth and his associate Ford, Lord Grey, near Ringwood in the New Forest three days after the battle of Sedgemoor, and personally escorted them to London. He disapproved, however, of James II's subsequent Catholicizing campaign and withdrew from public life: he was dismissed as deputy lieutenant and JP when he replied in the negative to the canvass of support for the repeal of the 'Penal and Test Acts'. When William invaded in 1688 Portman was among the gentry who waited on him at Exeter and was busy in raising a loan for him. His early support for William served him well at the 1689 election: at Taunton he triumphed over John Trenchard, who had collaborated with James. Portman then destroyed his chance of office by opposing the motion to make William and Mary king and queen. By then, however, he was in poor health. He died suddenly in March 1690. 
The bequests in Portman's will locate him firmly within the networks of west country gentry: the list of his godchildren alone includes the names of Stawell, Erle, Wallop, Windham, and Speke, the last named the son of his cousin, the whig George Speke of White Lackington. Practically, he requested no funeral sermon, 'seing it will hinder my friends from returning to their homes in good time' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/401, fol. 253'r'). Bequests to his servants and his day labourers confirmed a reputation for paternalist charity. He laid down that he should be buried within the family vault at Orchard Portman within a fortnight of his death, if he died there, and within three weeks if he died at his other seat of Bryanston. Despite his three marriages he remained childless, bequeathing name, title, and estate (worth $8000 p.a.) to his nephew Edward Seymour, who died in 1728. 


