@@@@@


doc= 22590


Pory, John (1502/3-1570), college head, was born at Thompson, Norfolk. He entered Corpus Christi in 1520 and was thus an exact contemporary of Matthew Parker, whose friendship was influential in his subsequent career. Graduating as BA in 1524 and MA in 1527 and having taken priest's orders, both Pory and Parker qualified by October 1527 for admission to a college fellowship and a year later served jointly as keepers of the keys. After obtaining the degree of BTh in 1535 Pory made no attempt to proceed further; college affairs increasingly absorbed him. Here his conscientious discharge of duties, attention to detail, and a compliant attitude to higher authority secured him a valued and lasting place in the fellowship. When Parker returned to Corpus as master in 1544 Pory was already president and actively assisted him in reforms of administration and accounting. Pory was also a fellow of the college of St John the Baptist, Stoke by Clare, Suffolk, of which Parker was dean. 
Pory retained his fellowship during Mary's reign and in December 1557 succeeded to the mastership. Widely seen as acceptable to all parties, he was elected vice-chancellor of the university in December 1558 for a short tenure which saw the arrival of William Cecil as chancellor and of the Elizabethan commissioners. To grace his office he was awarded the degree of DTh. On the visit of Queen Elizabeth to Cambridge in August 1564 Pory was chosen as one of the four doctors holding the canopy at her entry to King's College chapel and also to speak in the (Latin) theology debate next day. He subsequently attended the queen on a similar visit to Oxford in 1566 and was there incorporated as DTh. Preferments accrued to him: the Norfolk benefices of Bunwell (1555-64), St Stephen's, Norwich (1556-61), and Pulham St Mary (1560-63); and the rectories of Landbeach, Cambridgeshire (1558-69), and of Lambeth (1563-70). Parker procured for him a prebend at Ely (December 1559), exchanged for one at Canterbury (1564), and this for one at Westminster (1569). 
In Corpus, Pory restored reformed accounting and tackled shortage of space, made more acute by the archbishop's foundation of scholarships. Building work included contriving habitable attic rooms on the west side of the court and constructing a new library above the kitchen, fitted to house the library left by Peter Nobys on the south side, with equivalent space on the north reserved for the archbishop's anticipated donations. However, by 1569 it was clear that with failing health Pory was unequal to his work. He was frequently absent from college and his personal authority was openly flouted by younger dissidents. Private pressure followed by official proceedings instigated by Parker finally induced a reluctant Pory to resign the mastership on 1 February 1570 and relinquish his cherished preferments. With 'his joy gone' and 'but a poor man' ('Correspondence of Matthew Parker', 358-9), he made his will (7 May 1570) and died, aged sixty-seven, at Thompson, where he was buried on 25 June 1570. The John Pory who attended Parker's funeral on 6 August 1575 as a conductor yeoman was probably his nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 22591


Pory, John (bap. 1572, d. 1633), writer and colonial administrator, was baptized at Thompson, Norfolk, on 16 March 1572, the son of William Pory (died 1606?) and his wife, whose maiden name was probably Marsham. He entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1588, graduated BA in 1592, proceeded MA in 1595, and between 1595 and 1597 taught Greek at his college. He was married and had one daughter but further details of his family are unknown. 
Pory then became assistant to Richard Hakluyt, who called him his 'very honest, industrious, and learned friend' and for three years encouraged him in the study of cosmography, reckoning him of 'special skill and extraordinary hope to performe great matters in the same, and beneficial for the common wealth' (Hakluyt, vol. 3, dedication). At Hakluyt's instigation Pory published his translation, with notes of his own, of 'A Geographical Historie of Africa, Written in Arabicke and Italian by John Leo, a More' (1601). In 1602 Pory edited 'An Epitome of Ortelius his Theatre of the World', his reputation for learning and knowledge of modern languages gaining him on 18 April 1610 incorporation as MA at Oxford. 
Pory represented Bridgwater, Somerset, in parliament from 1605 to 1611; he had been elected on the day that the Gunpowder Plot had been discovered, and he took his seat in January 1606. In these years his patrons were Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, to whom he had dedicated his history of Africa, and, more particularly, Sir Walter Cope, whom John Chamberlain termed his 'great-master' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.279). By 1606 Pory had begun the letter-writing to friends which later provided him with a second career. Among his early correspondents were Sir Robert Cotton and Dudley Carleton, fellow MPs, and the diplomats Sir Ralph Winwood and Sir Thomas Edmondes. In 1609 he was named in the second charter of the Virginia Company. 
On 21 May 1611 Pory was authorized to travel for three years, though in reality he spent much of the next fourteen years overseas. In June he sought Carleton's support for a scheme to introduce silk-loom stocking weaving into England; he was in Ireland from July to September with George, Lord Carew, and at the end of the year accompanied him to Paris. There in January 1612 he delivered to Cardinal Du Perron a treatise written by Isaac Casaubon and Lancelot Andrewes, bishop of Ely, in answer to a letter from the cardinal to the king, and he handed De Thou, the historian, materials collected for his use by William Camden. In September he attended a disputation between Daniel Featley and Richard Smith, the future bishop of Chalcedon, an occasion of which he later wrote an account, 'The Summe and Substance of a Disputation' (1630). 
In 1613 Pory went from Paris, via Turin -- where he fell into debt and was said to be 'too much in love with the pot' (Neill, 135-6) -- Padua, and Messina, to Constantinople, where he served Sir Paul Pindar, the ambassador. While in the city Pory translated into Italian for the Venetian ambassador King James's 'Declaration... pour le droit des rois et independance de leurs couronnes, contre la harangue de l'illustrissime Cardinal Du Perron', first published in London in French in 1615. 
In the winter of 1616-17 Pory brought home dispatches from Constantinople and in 1617 and 1618 acted as a diplomatic courier to Italy and the Netherlands. In the autumn of 1618 Carleton offered Pory employment at The Hague but he declined, having already accepted as his patron Robert, Lord Rich, elder brother to Sir Henry Rich, who in 1612 had married Isobel Cope, Sir Walter's heir. In these years, but not thereafter, Pory's drinking was matter for comment, and it was probably at this time that Pory became a professional intelligencer. 
On 27 November 1618 the Virginia Company, on Lord Rich's recommendation, appointed Pory secretary in Virginia for three years, his recompense to be derived from fees and the assignment to him of company tenants. Sailing in January 1619 with the new governor, Sir George Yeardley, whose wife was Pory's cousin, he reached Virginia on 19 April. As the colony's secretary, Pory was a member of the council in Jamestown. He also acted as speaker of the 1619 session (30 July to 4 August) of the general assembly, the first meeting of an elected representative body in the English colonies. Pory also travelled the colony, establishing his tenants on the eastern shore, exploring the Potomac River to the north and, after his term as secretary had ended in November 1621, the Chowan River to the south. 
In 1622 Pory sailed for England, by way of Plymouth Colony in New England. In the Azores the vessel carrying him was wrecked. Arrested by Portuguese officials, he was accused of piracy and in danger of execution, but by August 1623 he was in London. Almost immediately he returned to Virginia as one of the commissioners investigating the state of the colony. After three months of not uncontroversial activity he left in late April 1624, reaching England with the commissioners' report early in June. As a reward in July he received $150 and appointment to the new commission for Virginia. 
In 1624 the reprinting of his 'Geographical Historie' by Samuel Purchas in part two of his 'Pilgrimes' gained Pory some celebrity. He resumed his career as a professional intelligencer, apparently working from the London print shop of Nathaniel Butter and Nicholas Bourne, the coranto publishers. Among his correspondents were Joseph Mead, Sir Thomas Puckering, Viscount Scudamore, Sir Thomas Lucy, and Lord Brooke; Lord Scudamore paid him $20 a year. His last known letter is dated 24 January 1633. He was buried at St Lawrence Jewry, London, on 26 July 1633. 


@@@@@


doc= 22592


Pory, Robert (1608?-1669), Church of England clergyman, was born in London, the son of Robert Pory, and attended St Paul's School, perhaps in the same cohort as John Milton. He was admitted as a pensioner to Christ's College, Cambridge, on 28 February 1625, just two weeks after the poet. Here he graduated BA in 1629 and proceeded MA in 1632; he acted as Burrell lecturer in rhetoric from 1634 to 1639, when he was admitted BD. On 24 September 1637 Pory was ordained priest in the diocese of Ely. On 21 September 1640 he was granted licence to marry Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Juxon and niece of William Juxon (bap. 1582, d. 1663), then bishop of London. Exactly one week later, on Bishop Juxon's presentation, he was instituted to the rectory of St Margaret's, New Fish Street Hill, in London. 
In November 1639 Pory acquired a second rectory, that of Thorley, Hertfordshire. By about November 1642 he appears to have abandoned London; on 23 March 1643 the House of Lords confirmed a Commons order admitting Thomas Froysell to St Margaret's, Pory having been sequestered on the basis of allegations that he had taught Arminian doctrines, and had refused to read parliamentary declarations before deserting his cure. It seems that there had been considerable friction with his parishioners, for the churchwardens recorded that $6 1's'. was 'paid in charges and expence in prosecuting the complaints' ('Walker rev.', 55) against Pory at Westminster. On 4 April 1643 John Halsiter was admitted to the rectory of Thorley on the failure of Pory to appear to answer the charges against him, and the Commons ordered the rents be sequestered for Halsiter's use. In 1650 the committee for the advance of money was informed that he was living at Little Compton, Gloucestershire, the residence of his uncle-in-law, William Juxon, and that he had been present with Charles at Oxford and acted as a chaplain to the late king. Like Juxon, for the next ten years nothing is heard of him. 
Pory did not return to New Fish Street Hill, but was restored at Thorley in 1660. After the Restoration he also became prebendary of Mardon in Chichester Cathedral; having originally acquired the bishop's mandate for installation on 13 December 1657 he was collated again on 21 July 1660. By the time of his installation at Chichester on 18 August Pory had acquired other livings: he was collated as archdeacon of Middlesex on 20 July, instituted as rector of St Botolph without Bishopsgate on 10 August, and collated as prebendary of Willesden in St Paul's Cathedral on the 16th of the same month. On 7 May 1661 Pory was installed as president of the puritan stronghold of Sion College. Also in 1661 he was awarded the degree of DD at Cambridge on the king's motion, 'for his particular sufferings for ourself and the church' (McDonnell, 145). At an unknown date after 29 November that year he married Jane, daughter of William Fuller (1579/80-1659) and widow of Brian Walton (1600-1661), the late bishop of Chester. 
Henry Oxinden, in his efforts to find a living, tried repeatedly to win Pory's favour. His diary makes clear that Pory was highly influential in the allocation of benefices, a fact which Oxinden understood to be connected to the elevation of Juxon to Canterbury, for Pory was 'a kinsman and favourite of the Archbishop'. On Friday 10 October he 'went again to Dr Porie's house in Warwick court and asked him what he could object against me'; it seems that Pory feared his suitor's illness would give rise to the need to employ a curate (Gardiner, 273, 280). Pory himself did not wait at the back of the queue for livings. On 18 February 1662 he was instituted to the rectory of Hollingbourne, Kent, and in the same year added those of Much Hadham, Hertfordshire, and of Lambeth. Wood reports that this profusion of benefices 'being look'd on as too many for one person, was an almanack published this year (1663) by 'Poor Robin', in the title of which was an imprimatur pretended to be set by Robert Pory DD' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.267). Whether it was the scale of his pluralism or the punning opportunity afforded by his name which won him this notoriety is unclear. Pory died on 20 November 1669 and was buried at St James's, Clerkenwell. When he made his will he had two sons and four daughters living; each of the latter was given $1000. Among his bequests the most notable was that of $100 towards the rebuilding of St Paul's Cathedral, destroyed in the great fire of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 22593


Post, Jacob (1774-1855), religious writer, son of John and Rosamund Post, was born at Whitefriars, London, on 12 September 1774. He was educated at the Society of Friends' school, Ackworth, Yorkshire, from 1782 to 1787, and subsequently settled at Islington in London. He was one of the founders of the North London and Islington auxiliary of the Bible Society in 1812, and so revealed his alignment with the rising evangelical section in the Society of Friends. Post wrote extensively on the society for a general audience. His seven books on Quaker history and beliefs all show a strong reliance on the 'Bible' as the source of religious practice; 'The Bible: the Book for All' (1848) was reprinted twice. He also wrote two books for children on similar topics, and memoirs of George Fox and William Penn. Following the death of his son at the age of eighteen in 1837 he edited for private circulation 'Extracts from the Diary of Frederick James Post and other Manuscripts, with a Memoir' (1838). His wife, Elizabeth, died in 1844, aged sixty-three, and Post himself died at his home in Church Street, Islington, on 1 April 1855. He was buried at Winchmore Hill, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 22594


Poste, Beale (1793-1871), antiquary, of an ancient Kentish family, was the second son of William Post (1738-1806), one of the four common pleaders of the city of London. Born at Hayle Place, his father's seat near Maidstone, Kent, he was educated at Cheam School in Surrey and in 1811 matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, before migrating to Trinity Hall in July 1813. He then left the university to travel on the continent and in 1817 married Mary Jane (died 1869), daughter of John Cousens of Westbourne, Sussex. He returned to Cambridge to graduate LLB in 1819. He was ordained in 1820 and was for some years curate of High Halden, and then of Milstead, both in Kent. At Milstead he devoted himself to the study of archaeology. He was one of the earliest members of the Archaeological Association, and many papers from his pen appeared in the association's 'Journal'. 
Poste's chief works, which dealt mainly with early British history, were a 'History of the College of All Saints' (1847), 'The Coins of Cunobeline and of the Ancient Britons' (1853), 'Britannic Researches, or, New Facts and rectifications of Ancient British History' (1853), 'Britannia antiqua' (1857), and 'Celtic Inscriptions on Gaulish and British Coins' (1861). The Postes had three sons and four daughters. About 1851 they moved to Bydews Tovil, near Maidstone, where Poste died on 15 April 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 22595


Postgate, John (1820-1881), campaigner against adulteration of food, the son of a Scarborough builder, Thomas Postgate, and his wife, Jane Wade, was descended from an ancient Roman Catholic family of Yorkshire, of which a representative, Nicholas Postgate ('c'.1596-1679), was executed at York during the panic caused by the Popish Plot. Born at Scarborough on 21 October 1820, John Postgate started working as a grocer's boy at the age of eleven. In 1834 he became an assistant to a surgeon at the modest salary of 2's'. 6died a week. His leisure hours he devoted to self-improvement, and he worked hard at Latin, chemistry, and botany: at the age of seventeen he wrote and published in the 'Yorkshire Magazine' a paper on 'Rare plants and their properties'. He subsequently attended lectures at the Leeds school of medicine; in July 1847 he qualified at Apothecaries' Hall, and earned the means to continue his education by acting as assistant to a firm in the east end of London. He attended the London Hospital, and satisfied the Royal College of Surgeons in 1848. Postgate married, in May 1850, Mary Ann (1815-1898), daughter of Joshua Horwood of Driffield, Yorkshire. In May 1851 he moved to Birmingham, where he soon acquired a position of influence. Three years later he was elected a fellow of the College of Surgeons, and began his lifelong crusade against the adulteration of food substances, into the secrets of which his experience as a grocer's boy had given him a grim insight. 
Postgate succeeded in interesting the Birmingham MPs William Scholefield and George Frederick Muntz in the subject, and on 26 June 1855 Scholefield moved for a select committee of inquiry in the House of Commons. Postgate was frequently examined, and by means of circulars and letters he maintained public interest in the question. Meetings were held in the large towns of the north, and samples of such commodities as bread, flour, ground coffee, mustard, vinegar, pepper, wine, beer, and drugs, as adulterated by the local retailers, were publicly exhibited and analysed. 
The local appointment of public analysts, coupled with the bestowal of powers of summary jurisdiction upon the magistracy, was the principal means by which Postgate proposed to repress such frauds, and his suggestions were substantially embodied in the recommendations of the select committee. Altogether, no fewer than nine bills dealing with adulteration were introduced into the House of Commons by the members for Birmingham under Postgate's influence. However, their efforts met with strenuous opposition from retailers. Eventually, in 1860, a comparatively gentle measure, giving local authorities the option of appointing public analysts, with powers to prosecute offending tradesmen, became law. It was to remedy the manifest defects of this permissive and largely inoperative measure that Muntz, at Postgate's instance, subsequently introduced the 'Amendment Act', which included medicines and eventually became law in 1872. However, the measure still lacked teeth and other suggestions of Postgate's (including the establishment of statutory public analysts and a network of monitors) were embodied only in the landmark 'Sale of Food and Drugs Act' of 1875. This legislation, the basis of modern statutes, was followed by similar measures in the British colonies. Postgate obtained no public recognition of any kind for his services, and he spent a huge proportion of his own income in pursuing the question of adulteration, thereby earning the animosity of members of his own family, who suffered severe privation as a consequence. His grandson, Raymond Postgate, learned from his own father that John 'was so devoted to the cause of preventing adulteration that he used to steal from grandmother's purse the money which he had given to her already for house-keeping, in order to spend it on pamphlets' (Postgate, 33). 
Postgate took an active part in the inauguration in Birmingham of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science in 1857. Two papers by him on adulteration were published in the 'Transactions' for 1857 and 1868 respectively. On 7 May 1860 he was appointed professor of medical jurisprudence and toxicology at Queen's College, Birmingham. He died from stomach cancer on 26 September 1881 at the London Hospital in Whitechapel, having been taken ill at Neuenahr, near Bonn. He was buried in the new cemetery at Birmingham. His epitaph records that, for 'twenty-five years of his life, without reward, and under heavy discouragement, he laboured to protect the health and to purify the commerce of this people'. He left a son, John Percival Postgate, and two daughters, Isabella Jane Postgate and Agnes Foord Postgate. His grandson Raymond William Postgate founded 'The Good Food Guide'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22596


Postlethwaite, Thomas (1730/31-1798), college head, was the son of Richard Postlethwaite of Crooklands, Lancashire. He was educated under Mr Fisher at St Bees School, Cumberland, and entered at Trinity College, Cambridge, as a subsizar on 19 June 1749, aged eighteen. He was elected scholar on 24 April 1752, sizars at that time not being allowed to sit for scholarships until their third year. He graduated BA in 1753, when he was placed third in the mathematical tripos with the reputation, which he retained throughout his life, of being one of the best mathematicians in the university. He proceeded MA (1756), BD (1768), and DD (by royal mandate) in 1789. He was elected fellow in 1755, held various college lectureships and offices, and from 1763 to 1776 was tutor. He had been ordained deacon at Lincoln on 13 June 1756, and in 1774 was presented to the rectory of Hamerton, Huntingdonshire, which he retained until his death. He published only one sermon, on the subject of prophecy, which he preached before the university on Christmas eve 1780. 
Postlethwaite, who was made senior fellow in 1782, was recommended by Richard Farmer, master of Emmanuel College, to succeed John Hinchcliffe as master of Trinity in 1789. When recommending him to the prime minister, Farmer told Pitt, 'If you wish to oblige the society, appoint Postlethwaite'. Postlethwaite certainly took a relaxed attitude towards his duties as head of house. Mindful of the disruption caused by some of his predecessors, such as Richard Bentley, he 'soon discovered that, if he was alert, he and the Seniors should be at variance, according to antient usage' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 6.738). The principal reforms carried out during his mastership -- the establishment of public examinations for fellowships and for first- and second-year undergraduates -- do not appear to have been due to his initiative. He incurred considerable embarrassment in 1792 when he broke his promise to appoint the most outstanding classicist of the day, Richard Porson, to a vacant lay fellowship at Trinity. He quickly made amends by nominating Porson for the regius professorship of Greek, to which Porson was elected unanimously. 
Postlethwaite never married, and one of his nieces kept house for him. He died at Bath on 4 May 1798, and was buried in the abbey church, where there is a monument to his memory in the north aisle. 


@@@@@


doc= 22597


Postlethwayt, James (1711-1761), writer on finance and demography, was born on 29 April 1711 and baptized on 20 May at St Dunstan's, Stepney, Middlesex, the second son of John Postlethwayt (1671-1729), victualler of Limehouse, and his wife, Rebecca, 'nee' Blundell ('b'. 1678). His elder brother was the noted economist and publicist Malachy Postlethwayt (1707-1767). He was educated at St Paul's School, London ('c'.1721-9), and was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, on 25 June 1729. He left the university in 1732 without having graduated and entered the Middle Temple on 7 October 1734. By the mid-1750s he appears to have been acting as a personal clerk or secretary to the lord chancellor, Philip Yorke, first earl of Hardwicke, and as a trusted adviser to the duke of Newcastle, the future prime minister. It was probably through one of these connections that Postlethwayt was appointed one of the four chief clerks of the Treasury in July 1755, a post he retained until his death. On 9 September 1752 at St James's, Friern Barnet, Middlesex, he married Ann Escutt. 
In 1759 he published 'The history of the public revenue from the revolution in 1688 to Christmas 1753, with an appendix completing the same to Christmas 1758'. This work gained a considerable reputation during the second half of the eighteenth century as an authority for writers on the subject, containing as it did detailed summaries of annual supply, grants, and sinking fund accounts, together with short statements on 'the historical state of the Bank of England' and 'of the South-Sea Company'. It appears to have been extensively used by Sir James Steuart in 'Principles of Political Economy' (1767; bk 4, pt 4, chap. 5) and by Adam Smith in 'The Wealth of Nations' (1776; bk 5, chap. 3) and it remains one of the more valuable sources on the financial history of Great Britain for the period which it covers. 
Also in 1759 Postlethwayt published 'A comparable view of the diseases and ages, and a table of the probabilities of life, for the last thirty years', which appeared as part 2 of 'A Collection of the Yearly Bills of Mortality from 1657 to 1758, Inclusive' edited by Thomas Birch, then secretary of the Royal Society. Alongside other pieces, by John Graunt and Sir William Petty, Postlethwayt's study made a notable actuarial and demographic contribution to this work. Birch, together with George Bell, another writer on population, was one of those to elect Postlethwayt FRS on 7 February 1754; it is probable, therefore, that Postlethwayt was a contributor to this important collection at the invitation of Birch. Postlethwayt died on 6 September 1761 at Hatton Garden, London, where he had resided for at least the previous decade. He was buried on 11 September at St Andrew's, Holborn, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 22598


Postlethwayt, John (1650-1713), headmaster and orientalist, was born on 8 October 1650, the fourth son of Matthew Postlethwayt (died 1682) and his wife, Margaret Hunton. The family had long been settled at Bankside in Millom, Cumberland. After attending the neighbouring school of Whicham, John went to Merton College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 7 April 1671, graduating BA on 19 January 1675 and proceeding MA in 1678. When in 1688 the future Archbishop Tenison established the school later known by his name (and originally in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, of which he was then rector) Postlethwayt was appointed the first master. On 3 September 1697 Postlethwayt was appointed high master of St Paul's, in succession to Thomas Gale, having received testimonials from, among others, John Evelyn, Richard Bentley, and William Wake, as well as Tenison himself, who commended his learning, adding that his scholars were 'in awe of him... but he doth not terrify them' (Stow, 1.168). 
Postlethwayt was renowned as an orientalist, introducing Arabic in addition to Hebrew at St Paul's. He helped to secure William III's patronage for the foundation of the lord almoner's lectureships in Arabic at Oxford and Cambridge, and two of his pupils (John Wallis and Benjamin Marshall) were the students first supported by this benefaction in 1699. His health failed in the last year of his life, but he continued to teach from his sickroom. 
Postlethwayt died unmarried at St Paul's School on 26 September 1713, and was buried in St Augustine, Watling Street, London, on 30 September. In his funeral sermon John Hancock, rector of St Margaret, Lothbury, recalled Postlethwayt's skill in the learned languages and his delight in 'ingenious conversation' (Wilford, 511). By his will, dated 5 September 1713, he bequeathed the advowson of Denton rectory, Norfolk (which he had bought from the duke of Norfolk), to Merton College; he also left $200 for the repair of the chancel at Denton, and a similar sum to augment the vicarage of his native Millom. 


Meanwhile Postlethwayt had become curate of Whicham, Cumberland, in 1703, and of Needham, Norfolk, in 1704. In the latter year he married Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Rogerson, rector of Denton. On 22 December 1706 he was ordained priest in the diocese of Norwich. In 1708 he became vicar of Shottesham, Norfolk, and in 1714 succeeded his father-in-law in the rectory of Denton, on the presentation of a family friend, Robert Herne, according to the will of Postlethwayt's uncle, John. Thereafter John Postlethwayt left the perpetual advowson to the archbishops of Canterbury, who were to judge fellows or former fellows of Merton College (CCC Cam., MS 587, fol. 326A'r'). In 1718 he rebuilt the rectory and, in execution of his uncle's other legacy, restored the chancel. During this period Postlethwayt published two sermons, 'The Necessity of Understanding the Grounds and Principles of Religion' (1715) and 'The moral impossibility of protestant subjects preserving their religious or civil liberties under popish princes' (1719). 
In 1730 Elizabeth Postlethwayt died, leaving three children, John, Barbara, and Elizabeth. In the following year Postlethwayt married her cousin Matilda Gooch. On 13 July 1742 Matilda's brother Sir Thomas Gooch, bishop of Norwich, collated his brother-in-law to the archdeaconry of Norwich (which he resigned by 11 October 1744) and later in the same year to the rectory of Redenhall cum Harlston, Norfolk. Postlethwayt died at Denton rectory on 27 June 1745 and was buried at Denton; the inscription on his monument was written by his son-in-law Thomas Kerrich. His wife survived him until 1760. 


@@@@@


doc= 22599


Postlethwayt, Malachy (1707-1767), writer on economics and publicist, was born on 5 May 1707 and baptized on 25 May at St Dunstan's, Stepney, Middlesex, the eldest son of John Postlethwayt (1671-1729), victualler of Limehouse, and his wife, Rebecca, 'nee' Blundell ('b'. 1678). His younger brother was the writer on finance and demography James Postlethwayt (1711-1761). Details of his education are unclear, though like his brother he may have attended St Paul's School, London, for the period 'c'.1717 to 1721. On 9 December of this year he was apprenticed to the prominent London writing-master Charles Snell, who may have introduced Postlethwayt to the Society of Antiquaries, to which he was elected a fellow in March 1735. 
By this date Postlethwayt had been for several years employed by the prime minister, Robert Walpole, as a writer and government publicist. From the early 1730s he was principally engaged in writing pamphlets in support of the introduction of excise taxes, and later claimed twelve years' service with Walpole. In 1743 he secured a position with the Royal Africa Company and was elected a member of the company's court of assistants in January 1745. His first publication, 'The African Trade, the Great Pillar and Supporter of the British Plantation Trade in America', appeared in the same year. In 1749 he outlined proposals for a commercial treaty with Spain, allied to a merger of the African and South Sea companies. 
His term at the Royal Africa Company having ended in 1746, Postlethwayt embarked on several unsuccessful ventures, including a patent for casting iron (1748) and involvement in a lead smelting business in northern England. As he explained in the entry for 'Chemistry' from his 'Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce' (1751-5), the latter enterprise saw him tricked by unscrupulous 'chemical jugglers' and 'pretenders' (Postlethwayt, 1.487) and deceived because of his ignorance of smelting and refining. The experience resolved Postlethwayt 'to make chemistry in theory and practice' (ibid.) an area for his studies, the success of which can be tested from his 1747 publication on the possibility of 'the making of Bar Iron with Pitt, or Sea Coal Fire'. His later writings reveal his continuing fascination with matters chemical. 
In addition to his government work Postlethwayt devoted much of the 1740s and 1750s to the preparation of his major work, 'The Universal Dictionary', which appeared in instalments between 1751 and 1755 and subsequently as a two-volume work (1757; 4th edn, 1774). This has been described as an amplified and Anglicized version of the 'Dictionnaire universal de commerce' (written largely by Jacques Savary des Brulons), the extent of the departures reflecting Postlethwayt's 'greater interest in political problems; his more intense economic nationalism; and his exuberant belief in the economic usefulness of experimental philosophy' (Johnson, 187-8, 402). More specifically, the penultimate sentence of the dictionary's introduction conveyed Postlethwayt's intentions concisely: 'This work is designed throughout to raise the spirit of universal art and industry in this nation, that the labour and ingenuity of our people, being inferior to those of no other state and empire, the kingdom may not dwindle into poverty and ignominy; and from being the greatest nation in the world, we may not become the least and the most contemptible. (Postlethwayt, l.x)' It therefore contained many practical articles on inventions and improvements, as well as on commercial practice such as banking, commercial bills, and customs house business, hence catering for the considerable interest in compendia of knowledge of the mid-eighteenth century. This last enthusiasm was also evident in Postlethwayt's proposal for a remodelled Royal Society to enable it to collect information useful to British trade as well as to recommend new manufactures and new avenues of trade for official encouragement and support. 
Improvement of British commerce formed the inspiration for Postlethwayt's final major works, 'Britain's Commercial Interests Explained and Improv'd' and 'Great Britain's True System', both published in 1757. The former, though not a very innovative work, was especially strong on advocating expansion of the Union by including Ireland and encouraging agricultural improvement to cheapen the necessities of life, permitting lower wages and increased competitiveness in foreign markets. They were also designed to secure his own self-improvement through patronage, a strategy which was apparently unsuccessful. Together with the dictionary, these books contained the economic contributions for which Postlethwayt has been largely noted in the literature on the history of economic ideas. Their lengthy quotations from Richard Cantillon's 'Essay on the Nature of Trade in General' (written in the 1730s but not published until 1755) were used in the late nineteenth century to write off Postlethwayt's work as pure plagiarism, but this accusation has been greatly exaggerated. A notable theme in Postlethwayt's three principal works was the relative superiority of French over British commercial institutions for the regulation and promotion of business interests. Key to these was France's network of local chambers of commerce, established from 1701, of which he became an early and important British advocate. The content of Postlethwayt's work on the African slave trade also provided Eric Williams with compelling evidence for his thesis in 'Capitalism and Slavery' (1944). Postlethwayt returned to government service under the premiership of Henry Pelham, and was again engaged in pamphleteering on behalf of the ministry. However, relations worsened when Postlethwayt requested government documents for the compilation of his 'Universal Dictionary'. From 1751, and with the brief exception of the Rockingham administration (1765-6), he appears to have had little involvement with politics, in contrast to the rising fortunes of his brother James as an adviser and intermediary. Outstanding payments and, from 1756, disputes with the 'Dictionary''s printers worsened his financial situation. 
Postlethwayt died 'suddenly --, as he had often wished' ('GM') on 13 September 1767, unmarried, and in relative poverty. He was buried in Old Street churchyard, Clerkenwell, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 22600


Matthew Postlethwayt (1679-1745), Church of England clergyman, was eldest son of George Postlethwayt (1639-1710) (elder brother of the preceding) and his wife, Elizabeth. He was at St Paul's School under his uncle, proceeding to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he matriculated on 3 April 1699, and on 23 June was admitted scholar on Spencer's foundation. On 28 December 1702 he migrated to St John's, graduating BA from that college in 1703 and proceeding MA in 1706. 


@@@@@


doc= 22601


Pote, Joseph (1704-1787), bookseller and printer, was born in the parish of St Clement Danes, London, the son of Joseph Pote (died 1716), staymaker, and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Booden or Bowden), and was baptized in that parish in March 1704. Joseph was apprenticed to Daniel Brown, bookseller, on 4 August 1718 and almost as soon as he was out of his apprenticeship on 7 December 1725, he opened his own bookshop 'at the Golden Door, over against Suffolk House, Charing Cross' (Plomer, 201). 
In 1729 Pote moved to premises at Isaac Newton's Head, 'the corner of Suffolk Street near Charing Cross' (Plomer, 201). At about the same time, however, he became involved with the bookselling business previously owned by Thomas Bartlet at Eton. Bartlet had died in 1727 and it appears that Pote then helped Bartlet's widow to run the business. At some point Pote married Bartlet's daughter, Ann (died 1771), and their son Joseph was baptized on 1 February 1730 at St Martin's-in-the-Fields in London. It is not clear when Pote moved permanently to Eton. 
Pote published several schoolbooks and classical texts throughout his career but there were also scholarly works aimed at a wider public than the boys at Eton College. Remarkably soon after his arrival in Eton he published 'Catalogus almunorum... de Etona' (1730) and later, a revised edition of William Cave's 'Historia literaria' (1735), and there were a few popular works -- 'The Foreigner's Guide to London' (1728) and the 'History and Antiquities of Windsor Castle' (1749). A new venture began in 1745 when he started a twice-weekly newspaper, the 'Eton Journal, or, Early Intelligencer', with the chief purpose of providing information about the Jacobite rising. The title was changed in 1746 to the 'Windsor and Eton Journal' and after the battle of Culloden the paper became a weekly. 
Publications apart, Pote's main business was bookselling to the scholars at Eton and he soon became well known to members of the college. They used to chant: '
Jos[eph] Pote of Eton, a man of great renown, 

Buys a book for sixpence, and sells it for a crown. 
(Lyte, 309)' He also dealt in stationery (particularly to supply the needs of the college), wallpaper, and patent medicines; and, never one to miss a business opportunity, he ran a small boarding-house for boys.Pote had four sons (Joseph, Thomas, John, and Edward Ephraim) and four daughters (Ann, Catherine, Elizabeth, and Mary). His wife died in 1771 and he married Martha Belk in 1778. His son Joseph became a fellow of King's College, Cambridge, while Thomas (who was freed as a member of the Stationers' Company by his father in 1754) helped in the business. In 1769 Pote assigned most of the business to Thomas to devote more time to publishing. Pote died at Eton on 11 March 1787, leaving the business to Thomas, but because of their 'unnatural behaviour' to their mother and family, Joseph and Ann were cut off with 5's'. each (will, fol. 194'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 22602


Potenger, John (1647-1733), legal official and writer, was born on 21 July 1647 in Winchester, the son of John Potenger DD (died 1659), headmaster of Winchester College from 1 August 1642 to 1652, and Anne Withers. He was admitted to Winchester College in 1658, matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 26 May 1664, where he obtained a Hampshire scholarship, and graduated BA on 1 February 1668. He was admitted to the Inner Temple and called to the bar on 28 November 1675. 
By the favour of Sir John Ernley, then chancellor of the exchequer, Potenger purchased at the price of $1700 the comptrollership of the pipe, and was sworn in in Hilary term 1676. Subsequently he obtained the post of master in chancery, but sold it again for $700. In 1685 he was appointed secretary to the chancellor of the exchequer. In the reign of James II he was removed from the commission of the peace for Middlesex for refusing to support the king's religious policy, but was restored again by William III. He married Philadelphia ('c'.1654-1692), second daughter of Sir John Ernley, on 2 July 1678. Their only daughter Philadelphia (1678-1757) married Richard Bingham (1666-1735) of Melcombe Bingham, Dorset, in 1695. 
Potenger was the author of 'A Pastoral Reflection on Death' (1691) and of many unpublished poems and translations from Latin authors (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. poet. d. 161). His 'Life of Agricola' was published in 1698, while translations from poetry appeared anonymously, from Statius, 'Silvae', 5.4 in Nahum Tate's miscellany (N. Tate, 'Poems by Several Hands', 1685), and Horace, 'Odes', ii.14 in the Dryden-Tonson second miscellany ('Sylvae', 1685). The latter was included by John Nichols in his 'Select Collection of Miscellaneous Poems' along with two letters from Dr South praising his compositions; both translations appear in 'The Oxford Book of Classical Verse in Translation' (ed. A. Poole and J. Maule, 1995). His memoirs were edited with the title 'The Private Memoirs of John Potenger, Esq.' (1841) by his descendant Charles William Bingham, vicar of Sydling St Nicholas, Dorset, and contain interesting information on the state of education at Winchester and Oxford during the seventeenth century. As early as 1893 the book was rare (Fowler, 234, n. 1), but extracts concerning the University of Oxford are reproduced by Quiller-Couch and Feingold. Potenger died on 18 December 1733 and was buried with his wife in Blunsden church, Highworth, Wiltshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 22603


Pott, Joseph Holden (1758-1847), Church of England clergyman, was born on 27 October 1758 in Smithfield, London, the third son of Percivall Pott (1714-1788), an eminent surgeon, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Robert Crittenden. He was educated at Eton College from 1767, becoming a scholar in 1776. About that year he entered St John's College, Cambridge, where he secured Sir William Browne's medal, graduated with first-class classical honours in 1780, and proceeded MA in 1783. By 1786 he had published 'Poems' (1779), 'Elegies, with Selmane, a Tragedy' (1782), 'Essay on Landscape Painting' (1782), and 'The Tour of Valentine' (1786). He was ordained deacon by the bishop of Peterborough in 1781 and priest by the bishop of Lincoln in 1782. He was appointed rector of Beesby in the Marsh, Lincolnshire, in 1783, and of Bratoft in 1784, and chaplain to Lord Chancellor Thurlow in 1784. Bishop Thurlow of Lincoln collated him to the prebendal stall of Welton Brinkhall in Lincoln Cathedral in 1785. He resigned Bratoft for St Olave Jewry and St Martin Pomeroy, Ironmonger Lane, in London in 1787. In 1789 Bishop Porteus of London appointed him archdeacon of St Albans, and he resigned Beesby in 1790. In 1797 Porteus appointed him rector of Little Burstead in Essex, and he resigned his City parishes. In 1806 he accepted the vicarage of Northall in Middlesex, and resigned Little Burstead. In 1812 Bishop Randolph appointed him vicar of St Martin-in-the-Fields. In 1813 he exchanged the archdeaconry of St Albans for that of London, and in 1814 resigned his prebendal stall at Lincoln. In 1822 Bishop Howley appointed him a prebendary of St Paul's, and he resigned the vicarage of Northall; in 1824 he accepted the vicarage of Kensington, and resigned St Martin-in-the-Fields. In 1826 Archbishop Manners-Sutton appointed him a prebendary and chancellor of Exeter Cathedral. He resigned as vicar of Kensington and archdeacon of London in 1842. 
Pott was regarded as an exceptionally efficient administrator and a good preacher. He was a member of the Hackney Phalanx, and was associated with many of their reforming projects. As archdeacon of St Albans he was much concerned with education and the role of the clergy. Contemporaries regarded him as an exemplary archdeacon. As a governor of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge he was associated with Joshua Watson, William Van Mildert, and Christopher Wordsworth in establishing district committees of clergy and laity in each diocese to broaden the membership of the society, and to increase its income and influence. He was subsequently treasurer of the society and attempted to organize parliamentary support for missionary work in India, but was opposed by Bishop Randolph of London. He was one of the initiators of the Incorporated Church Building Society, launched in 1818 to assist in providing grants for building churches in newly developing urban areas, and he was appointed a member of the commission established by Lord Liverpool's government to administer the $1 million grant to build new churches and to establish new parishes. Pott was a key member of the commission, serving on its most important committees. His relations with Bishop Blomfield from 1828 were frosty. He was regarded as the last survivor of the Hackney Phalanx. He was an active residentiary at Exeter, where he was involved in the dispute between Bishop Phillpotts and the dean and chapter over the interpretation of the 'Book of Common Prayer' ornaments rubric during the Exeter 'Surplice riots' in 1842. 
Pott had a reputation as a theologian, publishing 'Remarks on Two Particulars in a Refutation of Calvinism' in 1811, in response to Sir George Pretyman-Tomline's 'Refutation of Calvinism', and 'The Testimony of St Paul Concerning Justification' in 1846, in addition to at least seven collections of sermons. He died, unmarried, aged eighty-eight, in his house in Woburn Place, Holborn, on 16 February 1847, and was buried in St Mary Aldermary, with his parents. He left estate valued at $20,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 22604


Pott, Percivall (1714-1788), surgeon, only son of Percivall Pott (1681-1717), a notary and scrivener of London, was born on 6 January 1714 in Threadneedle Street, City of London, now the site of the Bank of England. The house was probably destroyed when the east and west wings of the bank were built between 1766 and 1788. Members of the Pott family, originally from Cheshire, settled in London in the late seventeenth century as grocers and vintners. In 1712 Pott's father had married Elizabeth (died 1745), daughter of William Symonds, a vintner, and widow of Benjamin, son of Sir John Houblon, the first governor of the Bank of England. Benjamin Houblon, an army officer, died in Lisbon in 1708, leaving his widow and a daughter, also named Elizabeth. The early death of Pott's father in 1717 left his mother a widow for the second time and, it is believed, her young family in straitened financial circumstances. 
Fortunately, Elizabeth Pott and her two children were assisted by a distant relative, Dr Wilcox, bishop of Rochester, and, at the age of seven, Percivall was sent to a private school at Darenth in Kent. Sir James Earle, Pott's son-in-law and former apprentice, stated in a short biography preceding the 1790 edition of Pott's collected works that Pott formed an early taste for classical knowledge and was recommended to enter the church where his prospects of preferment were considerable. This he declined for a compelling interest in surgery and, aged fifteen years in 1729, he was bound apprentice to Edward Nourse for a premium of 200 guineas. Nourse was then assistant surgeon to St Bartholomew's Hospital and, unlike most of his colleagues, gave lectures on anatomy and surgery, delivering them at London House in Aldersgate Street where it was Pott's duty to prepare dissections for demonstration. These early anatomical studies combined with wide reading, daily exposure to clinical problems, and practical surgery, allied to an excellent memory, soon gained Pott professional respect. Earle reports that during his later apprenticeship, Pott being 'confident in the fair prospect of industry, hired a house of considerable rent in Fenchurch Street, and took with him his mother and her daughter by her first husband' (Earle, x). When Pott presented himself to the court of examiners of the Barber-Surgeons' Company in 1736, it was recorded, 'not having waited on all the Governors and Examiners to desire the favour of their presence at his examination, and it appearing to the Court that Mr. Pott had been sent for out of town to attend Sir Robert Goodesall's lady, where he was detained so long as not to be able to return within the time limited... It was resolved that the Court would proceed to the examination of the said Mr. Pott notwithstanding his default in attending the Examiners: But this is not to be taken as a precedent... to any other person. (Dobson, 55)' This confirmed an established reputation, for he received not only his freedom of the company but, on the same day, 7 September 1736, passed the difficult grand diploma. At this time he was still in Fenchurch Street, but when he took the livery of the company in 1739 he had moved to Bow Lane. With growing expertise and practice he applied for a post as assistant surgeon at St Bartholomew's Hospital and, after an initial failure, was successful in 1745. That same year was important for the breakup of the Barber-Surgeons' Company and the formation of the Company of Surgeons, later the Royal College of Surgeons. In 1753 Pott and William Hunter were elected the first lecturers in anatomy to the new company; Pott became a member of the court of examiners in 1763, and master of the company in 1765. 
At St Bartholomew's Hospital Pott saw many patients and acquired the profound clinical experience so evident in his later written work. After moving to Watling Street he began informal classes for private pupils in anatomy and surgery. Initially lecturing with hesitation and reserve, according to Earle, he later developed confidence, eloquence, and a manner which 'gave importance to every subject, and impressed his audience with the idea, that the art which he taught was worthy of their highest ambition' (Earle, xxiii). Appointment to full surgeon at St Bartholomew's in 1749 enabled him to challenge long established and painful therapeutic measures, in particular to restrict the use of hot iron cauteries, of caustic applications, and of dangerous mechanical equipment employed to reduce major joint dislocations. 
On a cold January day in 1756 Pott sustained an injury which proved a turning point in his career and a stimulus to the original contributions associated with his name. In the words of Earle: 'As he was riding in Kent-street, Southwark, he was thrown from his horse, and suffered a compound fracture of the leg, the bone being forced through the integuments. Conscious of the dangers attendant on fractures of this nature, and thoroughly aware how much they may be increased by rough treatment, or improper position, he would not suffer himself to be moved until he had made the necessary dispositions. He sent to Westminster, then the nearest place, for two chairmen, to bring their poles; and patiently lay on the cold pavement,... In this situation he purchased a door, to which he made them nail their poles. When all was ready he caused himself to be laid on it, and was carried through Southwark, over London-bridge, to Watling-street, near St Paul's [over a mile],... At a consultation of surgeons, the case was thought to be so desperate as to require immediate amputation. Mr Pott, convinced that no one could be a proper judge in his own case, submitted to their opinion; and the instruments were actually got ready, when Mr. Nourse, who had been prevented from coming sooner, fortunately entered the room. After examining the limb, he conceived there was a possibility of preserving it; an attempt to save it was acquiesced in, and succeeded. (Earle, xiv-xv)' Commenting on compound long bone fracture in 'Fractures and Dislocations' (1768) Pott stated that it 'either unites or heals as it were by the first intention, which is the case of some lucky few (as was my own) or it is attended with high inflammation'. This statement and Earle's words suggest that the fracture sustained was not, as often alleged, a Pott's fracture, or fracture-dislocation of the ankle as meticulously analysed in his writings -- a Pott's fracture is not a fracture of the leg, meaning the shin in eighteenth century parlance. It is of interest that three well-known surgeons, Ambroise Pare, Richard Wiseman, and Pott avoided amputation after compound tibial fractures at a time when dismemberment was commonly advised. 
Necessarily confined to bed and home for three months or so Pott started to write an essay on hernias, published in late 1756 as 'A Treatise on Ruptures'. Prior to this, his only communication was a short paper in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', in 1741, entitled 'An account of tumours which rendered the bones soft'. The book's immediate success generated a series of monographs during the succeeding twenty-eight years which analysed ophthalmic, neurological, genito-urinary, orthopaedic, and traumatological subjects. Fortuitously, the enforced rest of his fracture revealed a talent for writing which otherwise might not have flourished. 
In 1764 Pott's second paper, 'An account of a hernia of the urinary bladder, including a stone', was published by the Royal Society, which elected him a fellow. Succeeding Nourse as senior surgeon at St Bartholomew's Hospital in 1765 enabled Pott to give his course of surgical lectures publicly to large audiences; these became celebrated and, coupled with his writings, disseminated his views and methods widely. 
With a growing private practice Pott moved house to Lincoln's Inn Fields in 1769 and finally to Princes Street, Hanover Square, in 1777. Among important patients he saw David Garrick, Samuel Johnson, and Thomas Gainsborough. He confirmed, with William Cruikshank, that Johnson had a solid tumour (sarcocoele) of the testis and not a simple hydrocele and, with John Hunter, that Gainsborough had inoperable cancer involving the neck. Earle stated that Pott's evenings were often occupied answering letters of consultation on cases in Europe, Russia, Turkey, and India. In 1786 the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh made him an honorary fellow, the first such fellowship to be awarded, and in 1787 the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland made him an honorary member. At the age of seventy-three he resigned from St Bartholomew's Hospital, having walked its wards for fifty-eight years. He was made a hospital governor and continued in private practice until his death. John Hunter and Henry Park were both pupils of Pott. 
In 1746 Pott married Sarah, daughter of Robert Cruttenden, and they produced five sons, including Joseph Holden Pott, archdeacon of London, and four daughters. According to Earle: 'The labours of the greatest part of his life were without relaxation; an increasing family requiring his utmost exertion: of late years he had a villa at Neasden; and in the autumn usually passed a month at Bath, or at the sea-side. (Earle, xliv)' And: 'The person of Mr Pott was elegant, though lower than middle size: his countenance animated and expressive; his manners and deportment were graceful' (Earle, xliii). His kindness of heart was proverbial, and he is said to have had at one time three needy surgeons living in his house. His high character and blameless life helped to raise the surgeon's social standing in this country. 
Pott was an experienced and proficient lecturer and doubtless his lecture notes were the source of later publications. This is borne out in copies of Pott's lectures which survive in the manuscript hand of students, deposited in the Royal College of Surgeons of England, St Bartholomew's Hospital, and the Royal Society of Medicine; similarities between these notes and his publications are often close. One student recorded Pott's humane approach to patients thus: 'in performing an operation, always remember you have a diseased body, endowed with the greatest degree of sensibility and feeling; give therefore the least possible pain imaginable, be not too quick to strive to show your dexterity, by doing which you may cut parts which ought not to be cut, but be calm and moderate, and let this be a general rule with you. If it is well done, it is soon done. ('Surgical lectures')' Pott's conception of surgery demanded continuous improvement, towards which he contributed by objective analysis of hard gained experience. He challenged colleagues who accepted, automatically, earlier authors with most of whom Pott was familiar, due to his command of Latin and French. In the preface to 'A Treatise on Fistula in ano' (1765) Pott wrote: 'The honour of our art and the moral character of its professors suffer, whenever we pay blind deference to anyone, as prevents us from using our own judgement, and from declaring freely the results of our enquiries or experiments. Truth, as Lord Bacon has said, is not the child of authority but of time. And were we to allow ourselves to suppose (let the subject be what it may) that nothing more, or new, could be taught, it is pretty clear that nothing more, or new, would be learnt.' And he added in the preface to 'Chirurgical Observations' (1775): '[It is by] careful attention to the cases of individuals, and from an observation of diseases... that true and extensive judgement can be acquired'. 
In the preface to 'A Treatise on Ruptures' (1756) Pott remarked: 'The ancient surgery was coarse, and loaded with a farrago of external applications, some of which were horribly, and yet unnecessarily painful, and others altogether useless; whilst the operative part of the art was encumbered with a multitude of awkward unmanageable instruments, and pieces of machinery. The practitioners of the present time have brought the practice into a much narrower compass... by a sedulous application to anatomy, by the frequent examination of dead morbid bodies, by making such experiments on the living, as they had just reason to think would prove beneficial... and not persisting in tormenting their fellow-creatures merely for gain.' Pott's style of writing frequently won him praise. However, in the preface to 'Hydrocele, or, Watry Rupture' (1767) Pott claimed: 'The character of an elegant writer I make no pretension to: that of a skilful surgeon... I should be extremely glad to deserve.... When... information is intended to be conveyed to many people of different capacities, it may be necessary to set the same object in several different lights; and to repeat the same thoughts many times in different words: to those who have not been much conversant with the thing treated of, a studied brevity would become a perplexing obscurity; however satisfied such readers might be with the stile of the writer, they would not be sufficiently acquainted with the subject; they might be pleased but they would not be informed.' In further advice to the profession given in his preface to 'Observations on... Fistula lachrymalis' (1758) Pott emphasized: 'The operative part of surgery is far from being the whole of it: and I cannot help thinking, that by attending a little more to what is called common or practical surgery [that is, venesection, catheterization, and so on], our art might still be considerably improved, practitioners rendered expert, and mankind much benefitted.... It is a false idea which the bystanders at an operation generally have of chirurgic 'dexterity'; to which word they annex no other idea than that of quickness. This had produced a most absurd custom of measuring the motion of a surgeon's hand, as jockeys do that of the feet of a horse, viz. by a stop watch.' Ever sensitive to the sufferings of patients and anxious to diminish the pain of operative procedures, Pott criticized the management of 'fistula in ano' in his preface to 'A Treatise on Fistula in ano' (1765), writing: 'The term Cutting for a Fistula, conveys to a patient a terrible idea; this terror is not a little increased by his incapacity to see the part diseased. The majority of writers have greatly increased, rather than lessened, this dread: and as the operation is (under their direction) sometimes performed, it is, indeed, a very severe one:... A more serious reflection... would lead us to a more rational method of treating it, and to a more easy and expeditious cure.' 

Pott spurned publication of a systematic surgical textbook in favour of single subject studies which, he maintained, promoted greater attention to detail. Further, these relatively short books appeared at prices appealing to students: 1's'. 6died has been quoted. Each monograph debated a burning topic of the day and their popularity is evident from the numerous editions, translations into German, French, Dutch, and Italian, and several issues of collected works, lastly in 1819. 
If Pott's 'Treatise on Ruptures' (1756) first drew attention to his ability as a surgical author, it lacked the detailed references of later works and the individual clinical case observations of several others. None the less, Pott's vigorous challenge to old ideas and methods, his concern for patients mishandled by ignorant practitioners, and his overall lucidity set a pattern repeated in later monographs. Pott's advocacy of early operation for strangulated inguinal hernia must have saved numerous lives yet, after reduction of the hernia, he did not repair the defect. If indicated, gangrenous bowel was sutured to the wound margin, a dressing was applied, and the patient was kept horizontal until the wound healed. Rarely the scarring repaired the hernia naturally; most patients needed a steel truss permanently. Unhappily, repair sutures left at depth, prior to antiseptic techniques, usually festered, with uncertain results. 
Pott's 'Account of a Particular Kind of Rupture Frequently Attendant upon New-Born Children' (1757) is a short work on congenital hernias; it contains no references and was criticized harshly by William Hunter, who claimed that Pott failed to acknowledge Hunter's prior description at student lectures given in 1756. He wrote: 'It was what any of my pupils might have written... it bore strong marks of second-hand observations, and of time-serving hurry in the composition' (Hunter, 70). Hunter later apologized for any unintended offence, accepting Pott's probity in the matter. In the event, both deferred to an earlier suggestion of Samuel Sharp and the work of Albrecht von Haller who coined the term hernia congenita in 'Opuscula pathologica' (1755). 
Pott's next publication was 'Observations on that Disorder of the Corner of the Eye, Commonly called Fistula lachrymalis' (1758). This was followed by 'Observations on the Nature and Consequences of Wounds and Contusions of the Head and Fractures of the Skull Concussion of the Brain, etc' (1760). This has a preface but no case observations or plates, unlike a revised publication on the same subject published eight years later. The 1760 works is of interest for a long preface debating Pott's wider surgical tenets and views on head injury. He wrote: 'The symptoms brought on by the pressure of a piece broken off from the inner table of the skull, are scarcely distinguishable from those produced by blood or lymph pressing on the brain, each of which is certainly a very different cause of mischief. These combinations of causes and symptoms, and the uncertainty... make this a very disagreeable part of surgery: but merely lamenting, will never mend it; and as the inconvenience which we feel is great, our attempts to get information ought to be in proportion.' 
'Practical remarks on the hydrocele or watry rupture, and some other diseases of the testicle, its coats and vessels, etc' (1762) is a long treatise that defines swellings of the scrotum and their treatment. Well referenced, it is amplified by thirty-six detailed case observations, increased to fifty-one in later editions. Here, as in other treatises, Pott provides excellent anatomico-pathological descriptions based on accurate clinical records enhanced by careful post-mortem studies. He limited the false or spurious rupture either to fluid swellings around the testis or to solid testicular swellings known as sarcoceles. To discharge hydrocele fluid Pott favoured a trocar and cannula, in preference to uncertain lancet puncture. For radical cure he introduced a seton of fine lint to excite local inflammation and obliterative scarring of the hydrocele cavity; in 1771 he wrote 'An account of the method of obtaining a perfect or radical cure of the hydrocele... by means of a seton', which illustrated improved instrumentation for inserting silk threads. When diagnosed early, sarcocele due to a scirrhus (tuberculosis) or cancer was treated by orchidectomy to avoid a miserable demise; he deplored local applications of caustic and uncertain ulcerative mortification. Pott's manuscript of the second edition (1766) was deposited in the Royal College of Surgeons. 
Pott's 'Remarks on the Disease Commonly called Fistula in ano' (1765) referred particularly to contemporaneous French authors but without case observations. In the preface, he said: 'I have, on this occasion, carefully perused almost every writer of character on the subject; and think, that I may venture to say, that they are all either defective, or erroneous: they either pass the disease over slightly... or subject it to a method of cure, which is operose, painful, tedious, and unnecessarily productive of future evil.' Pott said that many surgeons believed, erroneously, that every perineal sinus was fistulous and hence operated precipitately. If surgery was necessary he opposed the blind use of probe scissors inside the anal canal and recommended a curved probe pointed knife; later he devised a more sophisticated probe blade with movable guard. Benjamin Bell considered Pott's monograph the first to treat the subject with precision. 

'Observations on the Nature and Consequences of those Injuries to which the Head is Liable from External Violence' (1768) is one of Pott's longest and most important treatises, incorporating his preliminary study of 1760 but enlarged with forty-three case observations, references, and illustrations. Acknowledging the work of Henry-Francois Le Dran, Pott emphasized that brain injury and not skull damage dictated outcomes. Recommending early skull decompression, he was criticized for operating prophylactically by contemporaries such as William Dease in 'Observations on Wounds of the Head' (1776). Comparison of his twenty-five observations with Pott's forty-three shows that most of Dease's patients had been assaulted while Pott's had been victims of a wider range of injuries including animal kicks and falls from horses, vehicles, scaffolding, and ladders, and two boys struck accidentally with cricket bats. Pott's cases were probably more severe; most deaths were subjected to post-mortem examination. Curiously 44 per cent of Dease's and 42 per cent of Pott's patients recovered, yet Dease trephined 80 per cent and Pott only 63 per cent, although several of Pott's patients had repeated procedures. Of those trephined, only 30 per cent of Dease's compared to 63 per cent of Pott's patients recovered; of those trephined early (within 24 hours), four of five of Dease's patients and two of six of Pott's died. Perhaps Pott's technique of trephining was more accurate and less inclined to infection. Others reporting detailed histories, including John Hunter, did not achieve Pott's success with the trephine. Pott noted that undisplaced closed fractures often formed epidural collections which suppurated to form a swelling, described as 'a puffy, circumscribed, indolent tumour of the scalp, and a spontaneous separation of the pericranium from the skull under such tumour' (P. Pott, 'Observations on the Nature and Consequences of those Injuries to which the Head is Liable from External Violence', 1768, 53). 'Pott's puffy tumour' was considered a bad sign requiring early surgery. 
In 'Some Few General Remarks on Fractures and Dislocations' (1768) Pott wrote: 'it is by no means my intention to write a regular treatise on fractures... I only mean to throw out a few hints' (8). However, this monograph of 126 pages is considered by many to be his most important contribution, for two reasons. First, he argued that long bone fractures subjected to powerful extension developed deforming muscle tension and were better managed without extension by relaxing the limb in flexion. As an example he drew attention to fractures of the humerus which healed routinely with the elbow flexed in a sling. His drawing shows that femoral and tibial fractures were positioned on their side with the knee and foot flexed before final splinting. This method introduced a need to splint joints both above and below tibial fractures, a fundamental concept which persisted. His scheme, popular in Britain and France, proved less so in America. At the end of the twentieth century conservative fracture management combined extension and the physiological doctrine of Pott: thus for the lower limb plaster was applied and traction apparatus was designed to permit partial knee flexion, although the foot was held in neutral. 
Second, Pott drew attention to a particular fracture of the lower fibula combined with disruption of the inner ankle ligaments and dislocation of the tibia from the joint. Rarely, the lower tibia protruded through skin and gangrene was possible; if recovery followed conventional treatment, flat foot deformity, a permanent iron support, and disabling lameness were probable. Pott believed that a side posture on pillows with the knee flexed promoted reduction of the dislocation and a corrected stable result. This is Pott's fracture, a term used daily in every accident department in Britain to encompass almost all fractures at ankle level; very few recall the specificity of Pott's original description. 

'Chirurgical observations relative to the cataract, the polypus of the nose, the cancer of the scrotum, the different kinds of ruptures, and the mortifications of the toes and feet' appeared in 1775. For cataract Pott counselled long established lens couching or depression instead of a recently introduced lens extraction procedure. Suffering himself from nasal polypi he counselled care in assessing their suitability for extraction; he employed a polypus forceps. Pott's pioneering account of scrotal cancer brought attention to an occupational disease caused by chimney soot. Cure was possible if early excision of the ulcerated scrotal sore was performed before testicular involvement. On ruptures he described twenty-four further case observations. For gangrene of the toes and feet he recommended opium by mouth twice daily which alleviated pain and often produced a local healing reaction. This regime persisted, in Britain at least, for more than a century. 

'Remarks on that kind of palsy of the lower limbs which is frequently found to accompany a curvature of the spine' (1779) was followed in 1782 by his 'Farther remarks on the useless state of the lower limbs in consequence of a curvature of the spine: being a supplement to a former treatise on that subject'. These two tracts generated the eponymous description, Pott's disease of the spine, 'le mal vertebral de Pott' of the French, despite a similar description given by J. -P. David in his 'Dissertation sur les effets du mouvement et du repos dans les maladies chirurgicales' in 1779; this work was overlooked until much later. Pott associated changes in the spine with a strumous or scrophulous disposition, combined with local abcesses in the loin, groin, and thigh, and his treatment included the formation of issues, made by caustic, to discharge adjacent to the vertebral angulation; this involved rest in bed which doubtless contributed to healing; at the same time he discouraged the use of splints and apparatus. The 1782 publication, illustrated with plates of spinal pathology, included healed vertebrae from a patient, after Pott's issue therapy, who died from other reasons. St Bartholomew's Hospital museum displays carious spinal specimens either prepared by Pott or taken from patients under his care. Pott described the spastic nature of the palsy and lamented many victims of the disease in infancy and childhood, observing: 'a malady which, when an infant becomes its victim, renders all the care and tears, all the tenderness and anxiety of the fondest parent absolutely unavailing' ('Farther remarks on the useless state of the lower limbs', 3). He claimed that issues encouraged cure and, in children, perhaps paravertebral abcesses were drained; on recovery they were mobilized in his 'go-cart', a form of baby-walker which kept the child upright. Once criticized for a neglect of splintage, his direct drainage technique was revised later, under antibiotic cover, as a method of choice in the twentieth century. 
Pott's remarks on amputation were a response to doubts raised throughout Europe by Johann Ulrich Bilguer's book (1764) on the inutility of amputation. Pott accepted the terrible nature of amputation through sound flesh but concluded that it was 'in certain circumstances, absolutely and indispensably necessary' ('Remarks on... Palsy of the Lower Limbs', 16). Careful selection and early operation were emphasized. Unlike John Hunter he experienced poor results after ligature of lower limb aneurysms and recommended amputation. For scrophulous (tuberculous) joints, amputation was generally accepted, for Henry Park's pioneering joint excisions were not reported until 1783, curiously enough in a letter specifically addressed to Pott, entitled 'An account of a new method of treating diseases of the joints of the knee and elbow'. 
In severe weather on 11 December 1788 Pott visited a patient 20 miles from London and came back with a cold. On developing a fever he curtailed further visits but matters worsened and he died at his house in Hanover Square on 22 December, probably of pneumonia; his burial took place on 7 January 1789 at St Mary Aldermary, where a commemorative tablet was erected. He was survived by his wife. Remarkably, no full-length biography of Pott has been published. T. J. Horder commented in 1894: 'Our knowledge of Pott's life is by no means extensive. It does not seem to have been of that kind which invites the pen of the biographer' (Horder, 165). If Pott's personal life is sketchy, his surgical activities are documented in detail and remain a basis for further studies. 
Pott introduced a wholesome scepticism into surgical practice, placing emphasis on personal observations described with clarity and accuracy, illuminated by a mastery of macroscopic anatomy and diligent post-mortem dissection. Unlike many contemporaries he recorded success and failure alike, believing more was gleaned from an unfavourable than a favourable case. Over fifty years of practice Pott's workload was prodigious, his opinion eagerly sought, and his teaching at the bedside and at lectures widely acclaimed. He devised and simplified many instruments. Without antiseptic wound care his operative results were often remarkable. Before statistical methods evolved he judged the probability of events by attentive comparison of similar cases. He promoted ethical standards, stating that surgeons had a duty to inform relatives fully of their motives and conduct. 
Critics suggest that Pott's surgery had no scientific basis, comparing him unfavourably to immediate British successors, including John Hunter, Benjamin Bell, John Abernethy, and Astley Cooper. However, their improvements and Pott's were of the same mould; indeed they were students of Pott's and built on his foundations. If they all achieved renown, for different reasons, Pott at least equalled them clinically and excelled them in his mastery of previous authors, and in the quality of his written work. Over two centuries later Pott's fracture and Pott's disease persist in everyday surgical language. His publications achieved a refreshing impact on contemporary practice and remain a rich source central to our understanding of eighteenth-century surgical progress. 


@@@@@


doc= 22605


Potter, Barnaby (bap. 1577, d. 1642), bishop of Carlisle, son of Thomas Potter, mercer and alderman of Kendal, Westmorland, was baptized on 11 August 1577. After schooling at Kendal with Mr Maxwell, 'a Puritane' (Lloyd, 153), on 3 May 1594 he matriculated at Oxford from the Queen's College. He graduated BA on 24 April 1599, proceeded MA on 30 June 1602, and was elected fellow on 1 March 1604. 
For some years Potter lived at Bowden, in Totnes, Devon, in the house of Sir Edward Giles, MP for the town. There he became a preacher 'much followed by the precise party' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', iii.22). Early in 1610 he declined the principalship of St Edmund Hall, Oxford. Potter proceeded BD on 5 July 1610, but continued to live mostly in Devon. In 1613 he published a funeral sermon, 'The Baronets Buriall', with a dedication to Sir Edward and Lady Mary Giles, in which he commented that 'the more learned are the more loath to leave any thing in print to the view of the world'. This may explain his failure to publish systematic series of sermons on scripture attributed to him by Lloyd (Lloyd, 156). 
The year 1615 was critical in Potter's life. On 29 May he was presented by James I to the rectory of Diptford, Devon. He proceeded DD on 27 June. On 21 August he married at Dean Prior, Devon, Elizabeth (died 1673), daughter of Walter Northcote of Crediton, a clothier, and widow of Edward Yard of Churston Ferrers. Sir Edward Giles, connected by marriage with the Yards, had moved to Dean Prior, and on 4 October 1615 he presented Potter to the vicarage there. The Potters had one son, who died in 1623, and six daughters, almost all baptized at Dean Prior between 1616 and 1625, of whom Grace and Amye were celebrated by Robert Herrick, Potter's successor, in his poem 'Hesperides'. 
On 14 October 1616 Potter was elected provost by the fellows of Queen's, who rejected Archbishop Abbot's recommendation of Dr Pilkington. Over ten years he saw through repairs and material improvements, but kept his family in Devon. He became chaplain to King James and continued in that position initially under Charles I, becoming known as the 'Penetential Preacher' (Lloyd, 154). 
Thomas Crosfield of Queen's College remarked in early June 1626 on Potter's influence at court (Queen's College, MS 390, fol. 18'v'). It may have been in expectation of preferment as well as for personal reasons that he resigned the headship of Queen's on 17 June 1626, having secured the succession of his nephew, Christopher Potter, chaplain to Lord Keeper Coventry. He was appointed chief almoner to Charles I on 4 July 1628. The king seems to have held Potter, despite his consistent Calvinism, in some regard, although Laud claimed credit at his trial for his appointment as bishop of Carlisle. At Potter's consecration on 15 March 1629, Christopher Potter preached. 
The new bishop was financially embarrassed and borrowed $100 from his college. He was reputed the 'Puritanical Bishop', and it was said that 'the noise of an Organ would blow him out the Church' despite a personal love of music (Lloyd, 153). His visitation articles of 1629 were published. Enjoying good relations even with Catholic recusants, he was reputed 'indulgent to tender consciences' among protestants (ibid., 154-5). Reporting on his diocese in January 1636 he blamed churchwardens and justices of the peace for failure to achieve due attendance at services, and dropped a broad hint that he wanted a better diocese. Charles I's marginal comments suggest dissatisfaction with Potter's performance. When his diocese was stricken by plague that year the bishop was in Devon and the king had to insist in August that he return to the north. 
Potter was one of the bishops who recommended acceptance of Strafford's attainder to the king in 1641. He died in January 1642 at Covent Garden lodgings and was buried on 6 January in the churchyard of St Paul's, Covent Garden. He was to be held up as an exemplary prelate by Bishop Joseph Hall in 1644. 


@@@@@


doc= 22606


Charles Potter (1634-1663), courtier, eldest son of Christopher Potter and his wife, Elizabeth Sunnybanke, was born at Queen's College and admitted there in summer 1646, shortly after his father's death. Chosen student of Christ Church in 1647, he graduated BA on 27 June 1649, and proceeded MA on 15 July 1650. His 'Theses quadragesimales', defending in exercises Pythagorean positions, much commended at the time but according to Wood really the work of his tutor, Thomas Severne of Christ Church, was published at Oxford in 1651 and dedicated to his stepfather, Gerard Langbaine. 


@@@@@


doc= 22607


Potter, Christopher (1590/91-1646), college head and dean of Worcester, nephew of Barnaby Potter (bap. 1577, d. 1642), was born at Kendal, Westmorland. After schooling at nearby Appleby he entered Queen's College, Oxford, in early 1606, obtained a 'poor boy's' scholarship on 29 October 1609, and graduated BA on 30 April 1610. Ordained deacon in May 1613, he became a college chaplain on 5 July and proceeded MA on 8 July. He was elected a fellow on 22 March 1615 and ordained priest the following June. 
Potter was much influenced by the thoroughly Calvinist provost of Queen's College, Henry Airay. In 1618 he published Airay's 'Lectures upon the Whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Philippians', with a dedication to Archbishop George Abbot evincing a characteristic dislike of polemic. Foreshadowing his own later defence of clerical property, Potter published in 1621 the late provost's 'Just and necessary apology touching his suit in law for the rectory of Charlton on Otmore in Oxfordshire'. Potter meanwhile became a zealous and popular lecturer at Abingdon in Berkshire. In December 1616 he was nominated by Matthew Sutcliffe to his college at Chelsea for controversies against Catholics and sectaries. 
Potter obtained his BD degree and a university preaching licence on 9 March 1621. In 1623, with permission from Queen's, he travelled to France and the Low Countries, visiting Antwerp and probably Paris. He became familiar with the Dutch Remonstrant position and with controversies in the Catholic church. The experience possibly initiated his rejection of extreme predestinarianism and adoption of eirenic approaches to religious differences. 
On 17 June 1626 Barnaby Potter resigned as provost of Queen's, having canvassed for Christopher to succeed him. As a chaplain to Lord Keeper Coventry and a potential channel of ecclesiastical patronage, the nephew was duly elected. Within a few months, aided by Coventry, the earl of Carlisle, and Sir George Goring, and exploiting his knowledge of French to write to the queen, he obtained from Charles I through Henrietta Maria the advowsons of three rectories and three vicarages in Hampshire for the college; he himself became rector of Stratfield Saye. Three of Coventry's sons were later entrusted to Queen's, and Potter became by his influence chaplain to Charles I. The provost regularly received intelligence from Coventry and other friends at court in the years ahead. Potter's 'The History of the Quarrels of Pope Paul V. with the State of Venice' (1626), a translation of Paolo Sarpi, was dedicated gratefully to Coventry. 
On 17 February 1627 Potter obtained his DD degree, but received from John Prideaux, regius professor of divinity, slights on doctrinal grounds which he later often recalled as unjust and unchristian. At an unknown date between his election as provost and July 1628 he married Elizabeth (died 1692), daughter of Charles Sunnybanke, canon of Windsor. The couple had three sons, Charles ['see below'], Christopher, and Edward, and one daughter, Anne. 
Queen's became a magnet for young men of promise, as Provost Potter improved academic discipline, promoted study of Hebrew, Arabic, and Greek, and insisted on regular preaching by turns in the chapel. He also proved a judicious administrator: his memorandum book shows concern to collect debts and maximize income from property. 
In 1631 Potter succeeded his brother as rector of Binfield, Berkshire, but significantly exchanged it after a few weeks for a prebend of Chichester Cathedral with the approval of Bishop Richard Montagu, a bugbear of committed protestants. Anthony Wood's assertion that Potter was a creature of Bishop William Laud, and thus regarded as an Arminian (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.180), muddies a complex relationship and Potter's religious position. Thomas Crosfield believed Laud had prevented Potter obtaining a prebend at Ely in 1626, while Potter preferred Coventry as university chancellor in 1630. When Laud obtained that office there was friction when in 1631 Queen's elected a new principal of St Edmund Hall with what Laud saw as indecent haste to pre-empt his interference. However, while Potter made some objections to Laud's university statutes of 1634 and 1636, in 1635 he wrote him a shrewd letter praising his projected metropolitical visitation of Oxford and simultaneously seeking to shield Queen's behind the archbishop of York's peculiar visitatorial jurisdiction. 
Despite ongoing frictions, 1631 probably saw the turning point in the relationship. Potter had felt himself under siege for abandoning the shibboleth of Calvinist orthodoxy since at least December 1628. He published his sermon at the episcopal consecration of his uncle in March 1629, widely regarded as Arminian, to reassure the fathers of Queen's men, but in July he felt obliged to write a vindication (later printed in J. Plaifere, 'Appello evangelium', 1650) to an old friend and Queen's man Mr Vicars, who suspected he had turned Arminian for mercenary motives. Potter denied he was an Arminian; though he also stated, 'I love 'Calvin' very well, and, I must tell you I cannot hate 'Arminius'' ('Appello evangelium', 413). In June 1630 he privately recommended to the college non-polemical debate of the eternal decree of reprobation and of free will. Reported outside, this provoked bitter attacks by Oxford Calvinists, especially at the Act that summer. On 25 August he produced a manuscript apologia rejecting the absolute decree of reprobation as 'repugnant to... Scripture,... contrary to the... mercy of... God,... contrary to the constant judgm[en]t of antiquity, of many reformed Churches, and of plaine reason' (MS Rawl. C. 167, 227'r'). In the same month he criticized the proceedings of the Synod of Dort (Queen's College, MS 390, 51'v'). He shared the enthusiasm for Grotius of Lord Falkland's Great Tew circle, in which Coventry's sons were involved, and encouraged Thomas Crosfield and Francis Coventry during 1631 to translate that author's 'True Religion Explained', which was published anonymously the next year. In 1631 he himself published anonymously a new edition of the 'Stratagemata Satanae' of Jacobus Acontius, a humanistic and heterodox Italian protestant who held that there were very few essential articles of faith, and that those were to be found only in scripture, and who advocated general tolerance. Much of Oxford would have known Potter was behind this. 
Events came to a head in summer 1631 when Giles Thorne traduced Potter as a Pelagian in a Latin university sermon. When Thorne and others were tried before Charles I at Woodstock on 22 August, Potter insisted he had directed Queen's men to Augustine and other anti-Pelagian writers of antiquity. His case was accepted and the hearing seems to have produced greater trust between him and Laud, who approvingly entered into his account of his chancellorship the improvements to Queen's chapel between 1630 and 1636. In September 1632 Laud entrusted his godson, William Chillingworth, to Potter for resolution of doubts preparatory to reception back into the Church of England. In 1633 he was prepared to help Potter obtain a Windsor canonry, even against his protege, Peter Heylyn, although the expected vacancy did not occur. Potter published in that year 'Want of Charity' in answer to 'Charity Mistaken' by the Jesuit Edward Knott (Matthew Wilson). Undertaken 'in obedience to your Ma[jes]ties particular commandement', it was dedicated to the king, and expressed too ecumenical and inclusive an attitude to non-Jesuitical Catholics for many protestants. For a second edition in 1634 Potter sought and used Laud's criticisms, a point not lost on William Prynne at the archbishop's trial. A response to Knott's reply was left to Chillingworth in his 'Religion of Protestants', which Laud had Potter examine in 1637. While, however, Potter subscribed to a form of 'rational theology' akin to that of Chillingworth, they by no means agreed on everything. 
Meanwhile, Potter pursued, and received abuse for, his individualist theological stance. In September 1632 he was named in satirical verses, 'The academicall army of epidemicall Arminians', scattered around the university, while in November he contrasted favourably in college the doctrinal latitude allowed by the Church of England with the narrowness of the Irish and French protestant churches. A 1636 Oxford squib claimed that at Queen's, 'Dr. Potter is converted and they preach much of the salvation of the Heathens' (U. Nott. L., MS C1. c, 84b). Gerard Langbaine, in dedicating his 'A Review of the Councell of Trent' (1638) to the provost, indicated that this translation of Gallican Guillaume Ranchin was at Potter's suggestion. It needed a preface disclaiming Catholic doctrinal content. 
Potter concurred with Laud on academic discipline, exhorting his college in August 1634 to obey the chancellor's new statutes and promoting conformity to dress codes. His suggestion of the usefulness of portable statutes for students possibly inspired the broadsheet printed 'Synopsis' of 1635, and Potter certainly had Crosfield prepare for publication in early 1638 on Laud's behalf a volume entitled 'Statuta selecta' for student use. Moreover, in 1634 he encouraged bowing at the name of Jesus, praised the beautifying of churches, and guided discussion on defence of church property which led to outspoken attacks on the sacrilegious behaviour of Henry VIII and Elizabeth I. 
With Laud's backing Potter was presented by the king to the deanery of Worcester on 31 December 1635. In 1637 he was chosen a JP for Oxford. Having declined Laud's offer of the vice-chancellorship in 1638 on the grounds of ill health, Potter finally accepted in 1640 only to face a troubled tenure answerable to a critical parliament. However, he refined procedure in public examinations for the BA degree, finished improvements to the Convocation House, and vindicated university control over Oxford markets against a hostile city. On 30 April 1641 Potter presented the university's petition in support of episcopacy and cathedral establishments to the king at Whitehall and received a supportive response. Finally the beleaguered Laud timed his own resignation as chancellor for the end of Potter's mandate so as to save him from the tender mercies of his certain successor, the earl of Pembroke. 
Potter proved a firm royalist. He was one of seven heads who subscribed to the 1642 protestation only with reservations. In July 1642 he personally lent $400 to the king and ensured his college provided $800 by making up a deficiency himself. It appears from a repayment made to his son in 1662 that he lent at least another $1000 on security. Potter's arrest was ordered by parliament on 12 July 1642. That year he resigned the college rectory of Bletchingdon, Oxfordshire, which he had held since 1632, and became rector of his father-in-law's old parish of Great Haseley. 
According to Hearne, Potter later preached at Uxbridge before the treaty commissioners. In April 1645 he was one of those commissioned by the governor of Oxford to take an oath of loyalty from academics. His Worcestershire property was sequestered by parliament for delinquency. He was nominated dean of Durham by the king in January 1646, but he died at Queen's College on 3 March of that year prior to installation, and was buried in the college chapel. 
David Lloyd described Potter as 'a strict Puritan... when preacher at 'Abingdon', in his doctrine, and always one in his life' (Lloyd, 544). By his will of 21 February 1646 Potter declared that he died 'abhorring all secte, sideinge and tyranny in Religion and holding Communion with all holy Christians through the world that love the same Lord Jesus in sincerity,... Agreeing with all such in things that are necessary... (which I take to bee but fewe and cleerely revealed in the 'New Testam[en]t'). (Oxford University Archives, arch. wills OP, 84)' After small benefactions to his college, the poor, and relatives, the residue of goods and lands went to his wife, three sons, and daughter. His widow soon married his successor as provost, Gerard Langbaine. 


Potter travelled abroad, joining the exiled court of Charles II and the household of James Crofts, later duke of Monmouth. Correspondence received by Joseph Williamson in France suggests that his stepfather and others were very worried about his living extravagantly there and mortgaging property to support his lifestyle during 1657 and 1658. He became a Roman Catholic, and at the Restoration was made usher to the queen mother, Henrietta Maria. In early 1662 he was repaid money lent by his father to Charles I and awarded another sum for faithful service, amounting to $2000. He died at lodgings in Duke Street, the Strand, London, in December 1663, and was buried in St Paul's, Covent Garden, near his great-uncle, Barnaby Potter. 


@@@@@


doc= 22608


Potter, Christopher (c.1751-1817), ceramic manufacturer and contractor, was probably the son of George Potter of Bethnal Green, London. He was the owner in 1777 of the estate of New Barns, near Ely, Cambridgeshire, devoted to the culture of woad. At first his property was cultivated by itinerant woadmen, but afterwards by his own agricultural labourers -- in his view, an innovation. He also manufactured orchel dyes at Bethnal Green. During the American War of Independence he was one of the principal victualling contractors for the British army. In 1780 he unsuccessfully contested the parliamentary representation of Cambridge. In 1781 he was returned for Colchester, but on petition was unseated for corrupt practices. In 1784 he was again returned, but was again unseated, on the grounds of having been declared bankrupt, and of possessing no property qualification. On a new writ being issued he was candidate for a third time, but was defeated. His candidature seems to have led to the passing of the act disqualifying government contractors. 
Potter settled in Paris, where in 1789 he established potteries, including the Manufacture du prince de Galles, in the rue de Crussol; he may also have been involved in potteries at Forges-les-Eaux and Montereau. He assumed or received credit for the invention of printing on porcelain and glass, though this had been practised at Worcester and Liverpool as early as 1756-7. Backed by the Academy of Sciences and by Jean Sylvain Bailly, the mayor of Paris, in 1791 he petitioned the national assembly for a seven years' patent, promising to give a quarter of the profits to the poor, and to teach his process to French apprentices. No action was taken on his petition, but he enjoyed for years a virtual monopoly. In 1792 Potter reopened the Chantilly potteries, closed through the emigration of the Conde family at the beginning of the French Revolution. Here he employed 500 men and reputedly produced 9000 dozen plates a month, for which he is said to have earned $6000 a year ('Annual Biography and Obituary', 1818, vol. 2, p. 352). In 1793, when the English in France were arrested as hostages in response to the British support for the royalist uprising at Toulon, he was imprisoned at Beauvais and Chantilly. In 1796 he was the bearer to Lord Malmesbury at Paris of an offer from Jean-Nicolas-Paul-Francois de Barras to conclude peace for a bribe of 500,000 livres. 
At the industrial exhibition of 1798 on the Champ de Mars, the first held in Paris, Potter was awarded one of twelve chief prizes for white pottery -- the composition, shape, and varnish being highly commended. In 1802 he was one of twenty-five gold medallists who dined with Bonaparte. Very few specimens of his ware survive, but at the Musee National de la Ceramique, Sevres, there is a cup, ornamented with designs of flowers and butterflies, which bears his initials, surmounted by prince of Wales's feathers. 
In 1811 Potter advocated the culture of woad in France, citing his Cambridgeshire experience, and between 1794 and 1812 he took out five patents for agricultural and manufacturing processes, some of them in association with his son, Thomas Mille Potter. (No details of a marriage have been established.) By all accounts Potter appears to have been an agreeable man. Lord North described him in 1778 as 'a gentleman of business and of very fair character in the City... a good friend to Government upon all occasions' (HoP, 'Commons, 1754-90', 3.309). William Cole, the Cambridge antiquary, noted in 1780 that he was a man 'eloquent to a great degree, of a most captivating conversation and behaviour' (ibid.). He died, apparently in London, on 18 November 1817. His obituary described him as a person 'whose opportunities and abilities should have fixed him at the summit of wealth', but who was 'too eccentric and speculative to hoard a fortune' ('GM'). 


@@@@@


doc= 22609


Potter, Francis (1594-1678), Church of England clergyman, instrument maker, and experimentalist, was the second son of the Revd Richard Potter (died 1628), prebendary of Worcester, and his wife, who belonged to the Horsey family of Clifton, Dorset. He was born at Mere vicarage, Wiltshire, on 29 May (Trinity Sunday) 1594, and educated at the King's School, Worcester. In 1609, he went up as a commoner to Trinity College, Oxford, where his elder brother, Hannibal Potter (1592-1664), was a scholar; Francis graduated BA in 1613 and MA in 1616. In 1625 he proceeded BD. He succeeded his father as rector of Kilmington, which was then in Somerset, though there is some confusion regarding the exact date. Archives in Trinity College, Oxford, give Richard Potter's death as 1628 ('Blakiston's register', ref. 73), though a list of rectors in Kilmington church, compiled in the early twentieth century, with no sources cited, gives Francis Potter's induction date into the parish as 4 November 1626. Wood (2.612), however, gives the date as 1637, which is almost certainly incorrect. But it is known that Potter did not make his home at Kilmington for some time after becoming rector. He continued to reside in Trinity College, and to pay his annual 40 shillings 'caution money' until 1631. 
Potter escaped sequestration during the civil war and interregnum. He had been sickly, especially when younger, but his health improved with age, though he subsequently became blind. He did not marry. His friend John Aubrey provides in 'Brief Lives' the most detailed and intimate portrait of Potter, whom he greatly admired. Aubrey describes him as 'like a monk', and as 'pretty long visagd, and pale cleare skin, gray eie'. In old age, Potter preferred to be looked after by his servants who 'were kind to him' rather than by his kinsfolk who 'did begrudge what he spent'. 
Potter was a practical mechanician and inventor, and admired Dr John Wilkins. He made quadrants, and invented a beam compass which could divide an inch into a thousand parts. The compass was later given to Aubrey. He experimented with blood transfusion in the 1640s, and Aubrey sent him a surgical lancet for this work. Potter hoped to use transfusion to cure diseases, and later communicated his results to the Royal Society via John Aubrey. He was proposed for fellowship of the Royal Society on 18 March 1663, and admitted on 11 November of that year. He probably made the fine dial (probably seen in Loggan's view in 'Oxonia illustrata') on the north side of the original quadrangle of Trinity College, Oxford. He also drew and painted; the copy of the founder's portrait in Trinity College hall is his work, and Aubrey said that he devised an instrument for drawing in perspective, which was afterwards reinvented by Wren. He was fond of chess, which he played with a contemporary at Trinity, Colonel Bishop, who was accounted by Aubrey 'the best in England'. Potter also cultivated and experimented with bees; he and Aubrey examined them under the microscope. 
Potter was interested in computing the number of the beast, connecting 25, the 'appropinque' square root of 666, with various institutions in the Roman Catholic church. His ideas were elaborated in a manuscript which was read in 1637 by Joseph Mede, and commended as a wonderful discovery, the 'happiest that ever yet came into the world', and as calculated to 'make some of your German speculatives half wild' (Mede to S. Hartlib, 29 Jan 1638, Mede, 1077). It was published as 'An Interpretation of the Number 666', by Leonard Lichfield of Oxford in 1642, with a symbolical frontispiece, an opinion by Mede prefixed, and a preface date from Kilmington. Wood (2.612) wrote that it was translated into French, Dutch, and Latin, printed in a small octavo at Amsterdam in 1677, and attributed to Thomas Gilbert (1613-1694) of St Edmund Hall, Oxford. Potter's work on the number of the beast was read in November 1666 by Pepys, who considered it to be 'mighty ingenious'. It continued to be influential and was reprinted in Worcester as late as 1808. 
Potter lived through fast-moving political and intellectual times, and his interests in science, medicine, and biblical eschatology spanned some of the deepest concerns of the age. He died in April 1678, and was buried in the same month in the chancel of Kilmington church. 


@@@@@


doc= 22610


Potter, George (1832-1893), trade unionist and journalist, was born in Kenilworth, Warwickshire, the son of Edmund William Potter, a carpenter, and his wife, Anne. As one of seven children, he had to leave the local endowed school after only a few years to find paid work, before following his father into the woodworking trade through an apprenticeship with a joiner in Coventry. He left for London in 1853, found well-paid employment, and in 1857 married the daughter of a Warwick shoemaker. He settled in Pimlico, and soon became a leading member of the small Progressive Society of Carpenters and Joiners which met at the Rose and Crown in Tottenham Court Road. While serving as this society's chairman, Potter helped to initiate a movement for the nine-hour day among the London building trades, and became its chief spokesman during the widely publicized lock-out which followed in the winter of 1859-60, ending in an honourable compromise. The combination of an intellectual appearance and restrained oratory with militant views and effective actions made Potter an instant celebrity and allowed him to launch a national trade union newspaper, 'The Bee-Hive', which from 1861 to 1878 provided him with an unusually prominent platform. 
At first 'The Bee-Hive' served as the organ of the London Trades Council, but in the mid-1860s Potter's principle of supporting local strikes brought him into increasing conflict with the more strategic approach of the leaders of the new amalgamated craft societies, who emphasized instead national discipline and a more responsible public image. This difference of opinion raised the question of Potter's claim to leadership as he was no longer an elected union official and, following a particularly serious disagreement over the conduct of a Staffordshire ironworkers' strike in 1865, the London Trades Council announced that 'The Bee-Hive' no longer represented its views. Potter responded by setting up the London Working Men's Association in 1866, mainly to give 'The Bee-Hive' the appearance of representing a significant organization though it did receive some support from among the smaller craft societies. Paradoxically this widening of ambition from largely industrial matters to wider political questions began to blur the distinction between the rival groups of leaders. For example, it was Potter who initiated the unification of franchise campaigners into the Reform League, even though it soon became dominated by the London Trades Council leaders. Similarly, it was Potter who effectively secured the appointment of a commissioner friendly to the unions on the 1867 royal commission on trade unions, even though his own appearances before it were soon overshadowed by the more carefully planned presentations of the secretaries of the amalgamated societies. 
Later historians looking for an alternative to the new style of responsible leadership in the middle of the nineteenth century were therefore misguided in elevating Potter to that position. First he did not represent any permanently organized body of workers, and second his policies were not in general very unusual: the conflicts were ones of personal ambition within a movement going in a broadly agreed direction. Indeed, realizing that his own bid for leadership had failed, Potter soon moved towards an accommodation with the mainstream, through co-operation with the radical manufacturer Samuel Morley and participation in the campaigns of the Reform League and the middle-class Reform Union. This paved the way for an explicit reconciliation during and after the general election of 1868 when Potter supported Gladstonian Liberalism, allowed the London Working Men's Association to lapse, and re-established 'The Bee-Hive' as the organ of the Labour Representation League and the parliamentary committee of the TUC: the one substantial shift in position being the abandonment of support for local strikes in favour of the strategy of the leaders of the amalgamated societies. 
This turned 'The Bee-Hive' into an important national forum, drawing established labour leaders and middle-class sympathizers into debates characterized by a high level of intellectual argument, with an unprecedented influence on the educated working men of the day. Potter himself took his place within the official leadership of the movement, as president of the TUC in 1871 and chairman of its parliamentary committee for the following year, and as one of the group of Labour candidates in the 1874 general election, in which he was unsuccessful. However he was elected to the Westminster school board on his second attempt in 1873, having declared himself a Congregationalist, and held his seat until 1882 promoting nonconformist educational policies. After 'The Bee-Hive' (by then named the 'Industrial Review') was forced to close in 1878 he devoted himself to commercial publishing and ceased to play a prominent role in national labour politics, such appearances as he did make, for example as a candidate for Preston in the 1886 election, being as an official Gladstonian Liberal. 
Potter played an important role as a newspaper proprietor and editor in the trade union cause, and thus left an invaluable legacy for later historians. He was a thin, pale, intense-looking man, able to speak and write forcefully but without any great intellectual originality. After the death of his wife in 1886, he moved to live with his married daughter in Clapham, where he died at home, at 21 Marney Road, Lavender Hill, on 3 June 1893. 


@@@@@


doc= 22611


Potter, Hannibal (1592-1664), college head, was born at Mere vicarage, Wiltshire, the eldest son of Richard Potter ('c'.1557-1637), prebendary of Worcester. In 1607 he was sent to Trinity College, Oxford, where his father had held a fellowship from 1579 to 1585. Two years later he was elected to a scholarship, while his younger brother Francis Potter (1594-1678) entered as a commoner. Potter was elected to a fellowship in 1613; the simple monasticism of the life suited him well. He and Francis shared a room until the latter succeeded to their father's living in 1637. A man of great piety Hannibal Potter took his BD in 1621 and his DD in 1630, and was unfailingly conscientious in his religious duties. He was appointed rector of Over Worton in Oxfordshire in 1624 and of Wootton, Northamptonshire, in the following year; in 1635 he preached at Gray's Inn. 
When the president of Trinity, Ralph Kettell, died in 1643, Potter had been senior fellow for twelve years and was thus an obvious candidate to succeed. Contemporary gossip had it that the fellows' vote had been in favour of the more dynamic William Chillingworth, but Potter was the choice of the visitor, Walter Curll, whom he had previously served as chaplain. As a fellow, Potter came before parliamentary questioners several times, and showed skill in picking his path carefully. To be head of house in the civil war was far from easy, and the ever-timorous Potter approached the daily difficulties of the role with a mixture of heroic endurance and nervous cat-and-mouse resistance. It was a surprisingly effective combination. By nature reluctant to get involved in controversy, sometimes his will to resist needed bolstering by men such as Richard Baylie of St John's -- for example, when he spoke against the visitors' contempt for learning and was ordered to submit a copy of his speech to Westminster. As pro-vice-chancellor during the imprisonment of Dr Fell he often found himself in the limelight. In October 1647 he urged convocation to show Christian patience and inoffensive behaviour. When ordered into custody in January 1648, he could not be found. A week later he appeared before the commissioners in London and was found guilty of high contempt, a verdict of which he was in turn contemptuous. On 13 April 1648 he reduced a violent ejection from his lodgings to a mere formality by the expedient of fleeing in advance, and the puritan Robert Harris was imposed on the college in his place. 
Potter endured twelve painful years as an exile from Oxford. He automatically lost the presidential living of Garsington. One Captain Coleford obtained for him the curacy of Broomfield, Somerset, but he was soon removed, either for using the liturgy or for 'insufficiency' (Neal, 315). At times he despaired. He was in debt, unable to study, and felt futile and worthless. But at the same time his strong faith and devotion to duty never wavered; and he found time and energy to follow with increasing concern his brother's growing reputation as an eccentric scientist, and to rebuke him for neglecting his vocation and the souls of his flock. 
On 3 August 1660 Potter was reinstated to the presidency of Trinity College, the appointment again sealed by an old friend -- on this occasion Robert Skinner, bishop of Oxford, who had been a contemporary of Potter's as scholar and fellow. It was quietly done, and the last years of his life were tranquil. Trinity's finances were consolidated, the work ably assisted by Ralph Bathurst, fellow and patently the president-in-waiting. Potter died on 1 September 1664 and was buried in the college chapel. A dirge composed by Samuel Dugard gives the impression of a man much loved in the frailty of his old age. His will was simple, leaving everything to his brother-in-law Thomas Taylor of Worcester. Francis was not mentioned. 


@@@@@


doc= 22612


Potter, John (1673/4-1747), archbishop of Canterbury, was born in what was subsequently called Black Rock House, in Market Place, Wakefield, Yorkshire, the son of Thomas Potter, a linen draper of that town. There he was educated at the Queen Elizabeth Grammar School. The non-juror Thomas Hearne claimed that Potter's father was a 'rank Presbyterian and a continual frequenter of their meetings' ('Remarks', 2.5); it has also been claimed that Potter was brought up a dissenter and was perhaps even destined for the presbyterian ministry. Despite his nonconformist background, in 1688 Potter entered University College, Oxford, as a servitor, aged fourteen, and on 18 May he matriculated. He must therefore have subscribed to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', and while at Oxford, he wrote to his father telling him of his decision to conform to the Church of England. As the letter is not dated it is unclear when this took place but it was possibly about mid-1690. Similarly it is unclear whether his conversion to Anglicanism was recent or whether he had made the decision earlier but had concealed the fact from his family. It is probable that through the influence of the Anglican clergyman Edward Clarke, who had been his tutor at school, he had secretly decided to conform before he left Wakefield in 1688; his decision to do so, however, caused a serious rift with his father, which may have left him in financial difficulties. He had matriculated without paying the standard fee, since he was considered a 'pauper', and following his announcement to his father financial support from his family may have been withdrawn, thus forcing him to become the tutor of Gilbert Jackson of Forest Hill. 
Potter went on to gain his BA on 23 January 1692 and his MA in 1694. On 2 May of that year he was elected Yorkshire fellow of Lincoln College, a position which he held until 23 June 1706. While at Oxford he was a pupil of two other natives of Wakefield, Thomas Bateman (died 1690) and Joseph Bingham. It was perhaps due to Bingham that Potter, who had become skilled in Greek from an early age, developed his interest in classical history and patristics. These studies led him to write his 'Variantes lections at Notoe and Plutarchi librum de audiendis poetis', which he published in 1694 on the advice of Arthur Charlett, master of University College, Oxford. Charlett also paid for the publication costs and gave copies as new year gifts to his students and friends. During his lifetime Potter also published a number of other classical works, including his 'Archaeologia Graeca' in 1697 and 1698, and his 'Klementos Alexandros ta Euriskomena' in 1715. 
In 1697 Potter was made rector of Greens Norton, Northamptonshire, where he remained until 1700; at the same time he gained the vicarage of Coleby, Lincolnshire, which he held until 1709. In 1698 he was made deacon, and a year later he was ordained priest by John Hough, bishop of Coventry, to whom he was chaplain. On 8 July 1704 he gained his BD and moved to Lambeth to be chaplain to the archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Tenison. His career advanced quickly under Tenison's patronage, and two years later he gained his DD, on 18 April 1706, and became chaplain-in-ordinary to Queen Anne. Also in 1706 he resigned his fellowship at Lincoln College and was made rector of Mongeham, Kent; on 17 February the following year he was moved to the rectory of Monks Risborough, Buckinghamshire. 
Potter was a high-churchman. He had an elevated role of the clerical estate, upheld the independent rights of the church, and was committed to the authority of the ancient fathers and the example of the primitive church. These views were expressed most notably in 1707, when he published 'The Discourse on Church Government', a work which, according to Stephen Taylor, prompted Potter's dissenting father to start writing a refutation, although he never completed the work. Despite his high-church outlook in religious matters Potter was a committed whig in political affairs. It is probably for this reason that Thomas Hearne called him a 'famous Low Church Man' ('Remarks', 2.79) and frequently criticized him. During the reigns of George I and George II whig ministers were keen to promote a close relationship between the political administration and the Church of England, and Potter's political affiliation ensured that he enjoyed the patronage of a number of leading whigs, of whom his principal clerical supporter, Tenison, was one. He also enjoyed the influential patronage of John Churchill, duke of Marlborough. In January 1707 Robert Harley, speaker of the House of Commons, to whom Potter had dedicated the first volume of his 'Archaeologia Graeca', offered him the regius chair of Greek, a position which he refused as he was by that time more interested in divinity than in classics. Due to the influence of the duke of Marlborough he was made regius professor of divinity, on 8 January 1708, and a few weeks later, on 29 January, he was installed as canon of Christ Church. At the same time he was appointed rector of Newington, Oxfordshire, a position which he held until his elevation to the primacy in 1737. 
While at Christ Church, Potter married a Miss Venner, with whom, according to Hearne, he had ten children, of whom six or seven survived ('Remarks', 9.238). However, only four outlived their father, two daughters and two sons. Potter's first son, John (died 1770), entered the church and was advanced considerably by his father, attaining the archdeaconry of Oxford in 1741. However, John lost his father's goodwill and patronage when he married a domestic servant from Lambeth, a marriage which Potter considered unsuitable. Potter bestowed similar patronage on his son-in-law Jeremiah Milles, who later became vicar of Merstham in Surrey as well as of West Tarring in Sussex, and dean of Exeter. Potter's second son, Thomas Potter (1718?-1759), became a barrister of the Inner Temple, registrar of the province of Canterbury, recorder of Bath, and a member of parliament for St Germans, Aylesbury, and also Okehampton. 
It was again through the influence of the duke of Marlborough that Potter was made bishop of Oxford; installed on 9 May 1715, he moved to Cuddesdon. On 1 August 1715 he was asked to preach before the House of Lords on the first anniversary of George I's accession to the throne. His whig principles, which expressed themselves on this occasion in his firm commitment to the Hanoverian succession and the new administration, ensured that he became a regular preacher at court and at Westminster. He was later to preach at the coronation of George II and Queen Caroline on 11 October 1727. A chance for further advancement came in September 1719, when the dean of Christ Church, George Smalridge, died and many people, including William Wake and Francis Atterbury and those within the ministry, urged Potter to take over the position, despite his already being bishop. However, Potter appeared reluctant, due to ill health and poor eyesight, which had plagued him throughout his life, and the king disposed of the position to Hugh Boulter. Similarly in 1727 he was offered the bishopric of Bath and Wells and again he declined. According to Hearne, Potter was already hoping for the archbishopric of Canterbury, but Hearne's assessment may be unreliable. 
During his time at Oxford, Potter became embroiled in the Bangorian controversy. Despite his prominence and his learning he had tended to remain aloof from public controversies in religious matters, particularly those between the high and low church, preferring to concern himself with his pastoral duties. But, following the publication of Benjamin Hoadly's infamous sermon on the nature of the kingdom of Christ, delivered on 31 March 1717, and the protracted dispute that ensued, Potter became involved. At his triennial visitation to the clergy of his diocese in 1719 he delivered a charge in which he indirectly condemned Hoadly's arguments and denounced Arianism, which he believed was threatening the Church of England. He was reluctant to be drawn further into the controversy but agreed to publish his charge when urged to do so by his clergy. However, when Hoadly printed a condemnation of Potter's views the bishop of Oxford was moved to write a defence of his charge, which he published in the same year. 
In 1734 the bishopric of Winchester became vacant and, according to Lord Hervey, Potter hoped to be given that position, primarily because of the great cathedral library there. His hopes were not to be fulfilled, since the government decided to appoint Benjamin Hoadly, in return for his service to the whigs. In 1737 the archbishop of Canterbury, William Wake, died and the ministry had to find a successor; there were a number of candidates. Lord Hervey recommended Potter for the position, telling Walpole that 'Potter is a great man of undoubted learning' who was committed to the Hanoverian succession; he went on to say: 'his Character will support you in sending him to Lambeth, and his capacity is not so good, nor his temper so bad as to make you apprehend any great danger in his being there' (Barnard, 89). L. W. Barnard believes that 'Potter may have appeared as a mild, cautious, scholarly, almost a non-political choice' (ibid.) and that Hervey believed that he would be a compliant archbishop. He was also a great favourite of Queen Caroline, which may have been influential. He was installed as archbishop on 28 February 1737 at St Mary-Le-Bow and returned to Lambeth House. 
As archbishop Potter opposed church reform. In March 1738 he resisted calls for the reform of the liturgy along the lines of the 1689 proposals, and throughout the 1740s he was opposed to pressure for convocation to initiate reform. He did not always receive a sympathetic or flattering assessment from contemporaries. Thomas Hearne was a regular critic, calling him 'an ambitious, conceited, proud man' ('Remarks', 2.107) who had been elevated within the church in order to promote the interests of the whigs but who was 'far from being a truly great man upon any account' (ibid., 9.367). The Arian William Whiston wrote in his memoirs that when asked by Queen Caroline about Potter's suitability for the newly vacated archbishopric he had praised him, claiming that he was a man 'of great 'Piety', 'Learning', and 'Moderation'; and an excellent pastor of a parish' and so had recommended him for the position (Whiston). Whiston went on to say that the new position had made Potter 'high and pontifical' and he criticized him for not taking action against the rise of Athanasianism (ibid., 300-01). While bishop Potter had attempted to remain aloof from the politics of London, despite his prominent position within the church and his political support for the whig ministry, for which he was rewarded. Instead he preferred where possible to remain in his diocese and attend to ecclesiastical matters there. As he wrote to William Wake, then archbishop, on 20 October 1723, he did not spend as much time at court and parliament as many of his brethren, since 'for several years past I have found I could be altogether as serviceable both to the church and state whilst I remained here in the Country as in town' (Barnard, 62). His nineteenth-century biographer Robert Anderson claimed that Potter 'took care not to involve himself too much in secular matters, but devoted his chief attention to the affairs of the church' (Anderson, ix). This lack of involvement in secular matters continued during his years as primate and led to criticism from his peers, particularly during the period of danger from French invasion in 1743 and during the Jacobite rising of 1745 -- when contemporaries such as the bishop of London, Edmund Gibson, condemned his lack of involvement and leadership. However, as both bishop and archbishop Potter appears to have fulfilled his spiritual duties diligently, while being committed to raising the pastoral quality of the clergy. 
Towards the end of his career Potter became isolated at court, much to his frustration. It may have been for this reason that he was involved in the Leicester House opposition to the ministry in 1747. Both Thomas Gooch, bishop of Ely, and Thomas Herring, archbishop of York, mentioned this involvement in their private correspondence. Gooch claimed that the withdrawal of Frederick, prince of Wales, from the election for the chancellorship at the University of Cambridge in 1747 was a personal defeat for Potter. It may have been Potter's involvement in this political struggle that prompted the duke of Richmond, on Potter's death later that year, to write to the duke of Newcastle, saying that the archbishop had 'died in good time, because he was growing an old Rogue' (BL, Add. MS 32713, fols. 277-8). 
Potter died suddenly, of an apoplectic fit, at Lambeth House on 10 October 1747, his wife having predeceased him. He was buried in the chancel of Croydon parish church; a simple white plaque, inscribed with his name and life dates, was placed over his grave but it was destroyed, probably in a fire of 1870. He left a sizeable fortune on his death, of between $70,000 and $90,000. He bequeathed $100 to his old school at Wakefield and left the majority of the rest to his second son, Thomas, thus disinheriting his elder son, John. His will later became the subject of a legal trial when one of his chaplains, John Chapman, attempted to use his position as executor to promote himself by using the archbishop's options, although he failed when Potter's family won their legal case against him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22613


Potter, John (b. 1734?, d. after 1813?), writer and composer, born in London, was probably the son of the John Potter from Kent who was vicar of Cloford, Somerset, and author of works on mathematics and theology. He was probably also related to the family of John Potter (1673/4-1747), archbishop of Canterbury. Potter is said to have received a good classical education; he 'studied mathematics and physic principally with his father, and afterwards made some progress in the science of music' (Baker, Reed, and Jones, 1.578). Baker claims that he published some poems at the age of twenty in 1754. About two years later he settled in the west country, and at Exeter in 1756 established a weekly paper, the 'Devonshire Inspector'. When he returned to London he read the music lecture at Gresham College in the Easter and Trinity terms of 1761. He was not appointed to a professorship but the substance of the lectures was published in Potter's 'Observations on the present state of music and musicians...; to which is added a scheme for erecting and supporting a musical academy in this kingdom' (1762). His advocacy of the professional training of musicians, one of the earliest proposals of its kind, attracted favourable comment from the 'Critical Review'. 
Potter wrote the music for the pantomime 'The Rites of Hecate' (Drury Lane, December 1763) and probably contributed music to 'Hymen', written to celebrate the marriage of Princess Augusta to the prince of Brunswick (Drury Lane, January 1764). He was also responsible for the text of 'The Choice of Apollo', a serenata, with music by William Yates (Haymarket, March 1765). At this period he became acquainted with David Garrick and this connection with the theatre led to his writing a number of dramatic prologues and epilogues. Through Garrick's patronage, Potter was introduced to Jonathan Tyers, the proprietor of Vauxhall Gardens. For the entertainments there Potter wrote 'several hundreds of songs, ballads, cantatas, &c' (Baker, Reed, and Jones, 1.578). Collections of these Vauxhall songs were published annually between 1765 and 1774 (with the possible exception of 1770). Potter's connection with Vauxhall lasted until some conflict with Tyers's successors led to his resignation in 1777. 
Potter also quarrelled rather more publicly. In November 1766, as theatrical critic of the 'Public Ledger', he attacked Garrick's managerial style in an anonymous piece entitled 'The Rosciad, or, A Theatrical Register'. Garrick found out and an angry correspondence ensued, in which Potter threatened to publish a statement on the subject and claimed that Garrick had slandered him to his employer Tyers as 'a 'Bad & Dangerous' Man'. Garrick denied all allegations and reminded his former protege: 'I had a Regard for you and always Shew'd it when in my power. You best know if You have return'd it in a proper manner' ('Letters', 2.550). Potter did not allow matters to rest and outlined his side of the case in 'The Hobby Horse' (1766), cast in Hudibrastic verse. Another victim of Potter's published satire was J. A. Fisher, who, after a quarrel over the music to the latter's oratorio 'Providence' (1777), duly appeared as the main target in 'Music in Mourning, or, Fiddlestick in the Suds' (1780). 
Potter's theatrical criticisms for 1771-2 were collected and published under the title 'The Theatrical Review, or, A New Companion to the Playhouse' (2 vols., 1772). These pieces, ostensibly written by 'a Society of Gentlemen Independent of Managerial influence' (but actually by Potter himself), constitute a valuable, because almost complete, record of the performances at Drury Lane and Covent Garden that season. Other works which Potter published at this period include 'The Words of the Wise' (1768); a modernized and expurgated version (1768) of Edmund Gayton's venerable 'Festivous Notes on Don Quixote'; and the first examples of his comic novels, 'The History and Adventure of Arthur O'Bradley' (1769) and 'The Curate of Coventry' (1771). 
Potter went to Europe about 1780, possibly for financial reasons, at about the time that his membership of the Royal Society of Musicians (of which he had been a member since 1771) lapsed through non-payment of his annual fees. Baker asserts that while away Potter was retained as a government spy. On his return to Britain three more novels were published: 'The Virtuous Villagers' (1784), 'The Favourites of Felicity' (1785), and 'Frederic, or, The Libertine' (1790). Potter's life at this time is uncertain but at this stage he seems to have made a radical career change by studying medicine and to have graduated MD at Edinburgh. (A short thesis, apparently his, entitled 'Dissertatio medica inauguralis, quaedam de sedentariae vitae malis, amplectens', Edinburgh, 1784, is listed in the 'Eighteenth-Century Short-Title Catalogue'.) He was admitted subsequently as a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, London, on 30 September 1785, when he was described as a native of Oxfordshire. He is said to have practised at Enniscorthy, Ireland. Potter left about the time of the 1798 uprising and returned to London, where he is perhaps to be identified with the John Potter of 47 Albemarle Street, author of 'Thoughts Respecting the Origin of Treasonable Conspiracies, &c' (1803). A final novel, published as by John Potter MD, was 'Olivia, or, The Nymph of the Valley' (1813). 
Potter's biographer in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' confessed that aspects of his life were 'contradictory and confusing'. He remains something of a puzzle, especially after 1780, and the possibility that he has been muddled with at least one other John Potter who published in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries cannot be dismissed. Modern bibliographies and library catalogues tend to list him under two or three different headings: as musician, physician (or surgeon), and by his Albemarle Street address. According to Reuss, Potter was author of 'A Journal of a Tour through Parts of Germany, Holland, and France' and 'A Treatise on Pulmonary Inflammation' (both undated). Potter was evidently an industrious updater of several standard reference works, including Thomas Salmon's 'The Modern Gazetteer' (9th edn, 1773) and Ogilby's and Morgan's important seventeenth-century survey of roads which he published as 'The Traveller's Pocket-Book' (17th edn, 1775; with several further editions, up to at least 1780). Some of Potter's songs, mostly pastoral in character, appeared in 'The Spinnet, or, Musical Miscellany' (1750), occasionally in the 'Universal' and 'London' magazines, the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (between 1767 and 1770), and in 'Polyhymnia, or, The Complete Song Book' (1769). He died probably some time after 1813. 


@@@@@


doc= 22614


Potter, John Phillips (1818-1847), anatomist, the only son of the Revd John Phillips Potter (1793-1861), was born on 28 April 1818 at Southrop, Gloucestershire, while his father was acting as curate there. He was educated partly by Dr Morris at Brentford, and partly at the Kensington proprietary school of the Revd J. T. Evans. He entered University College, London, as a student in 1831, and in his first year he attained a high position in the class of experimental and natural philosophy. He was awarded the gold medal in chemistry for the year 1834/5, and in the following year he was a private pupil of Richard Quain (1800-1887), professor of anatomy. He obtained the highest honours in the session of 1836/7, spent three years in the wards of the hospital, and became house surgeon to Robert Liston. In 1841 he took the degree of bachelor of medicine with the highest honours at the University of London and became MRCS. Potter was appointed junior demonstrator of anatomy for 1843/4 and became FRCS in August 1845. On 3 May 1847 he was appointed assistant surgeon to University College Hospital. Unfortunately Potter received a wound while dissecting for Liston the body of the dwarf Harvey Leach, and he died of pyaemia on 17 May 1847. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 22 May 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 22615


Potter, (Philip) Cipriani Hambley (1792-1871), composer and pianist, was born in London on 3 October 1792, the fifth child (and third son) of the seven children of the flautist, violinist, and teacher Richard Huddleston Potter (1755-1821), and his wife, Charlotte, 'nee' Baumgarten (1757-1837); his paternal grandfather was the flute maker Richard Potter (1726-1806). The name Cipriani, by which he was generally known, came from his godmother, said to have been a sister of the artist Giovanni Baptista Cipriani (1727-1785); he was familiarly known as Chip or Little Chip because of his small stature. He was one of the leading composers and pianists of the 1820s and 1830s. 
At the age of seven Potter began to study music under his father. He later had lessons from Thomas Attwood and William Crotch, and studied for a five-year period from 1805 with Joseph Wolfl (1773-1812), his most influential teacher; he may also have had lessons with John Wall Callcott. On attaining his majority in 1813 he became an associate of the recently founded Philharmonic Society, and he was elected to full membership on 29 May 1815. His overture in E minor, a society commission, was performed at the concert of 11 March 1816; seven weeks later, on 29 April 1816, he made his debut as a pianist in a performance of his own sextet for piano, flute, and strings, op. 11, another society commission. 
At the end of 1817 Potter left England to study composition abroad. His first destination was Vienna, where he met Beethoven, who commented favourably on him in a letter of 5 March 1818 to Ferdinand Ries. At Beethoven's suggestion he studied counterpoint with Aloys Forster. After about eight months in Vienna and other Austrian and German cities he moved on to Italy, returning to London in the spring of 1819. He married Emily Caroline Thomson (1802-1867) on 4 October 1822; they had eight children. 
In 1820 Potter resumed his involvement with the Philharmonic Society. He played a Mozart concerto on 20 March 1820, and appeared frequently as a soloist at the society's concerts until around 1836, giving the English premieres of many Mozart piano concertos and of the first, third, and fourth concertos of Beethoven. Many of his major orchestral works were performed at Philharmonic Concerts, and he also frequently appeared as a conductor. 
As a composer, Potter's most active period was between his return to Britain and 1837, when he virtually gave up composition. In 1855, when Wagner conducted his symphony in G minor at a Philharmonic Society concert, Potter struck him merely as a 'rather old-fashioned but very amiable composer' with an almost pathetic desire to please (Wagner, 521). His published works, consisting largely of piano music, give a misleading impression of his output. His most significant compositions are his nine extant symphonies, all unpublished in their original form in his lifetime. These show many effective touches of orchestration and a good deal of counterpoint and imitation. His other works include three overtures on Shakespearian themes; a cantata, 'Medora e Corrado', to a libretto by his friend Gabriele Rossetti (1783-1854); some chamber music; and a substantial amount of piano music in a variety of genres. The manuscripts of his unpublished music are mostly in the British Library and the Royal Academy of Music. 
Potter was also active as an arranger and editor and as an occasional writer on music. In 1831 he arranged and provided additional accompaniments for a staged production of Handel's 'Acis and Galatea' at the Queen's Theatre. As his own creativity as a composer waned, he turned his attention to editing the works of others. His collected edition of Mozart's piano music, which began to appear in 1836, was his most significant achievement in this area; he also prepared editions of keyboard music by Beethoven, Handel, and J. S. Bach. In 1836 and 1837 he contributed articles on Beethoven and the orchestra to early issues of the 'Musical World'. 
Potter is also remembered as an influential teacher and for his long association with the Royal Academy of Music, which he served for thirty-six years from its foundation in 1823. Initially appointed principal piano teacher to the male students, he became director of orchestral practice on the dismissal of Nicholas Charles Bochsa in 1827, and succeeded Crotch as principal on his resignation in 1832. He remained principal until 1859. Among his many pupils were William Sterndale Bennett (1816-1875) and G. A. McFarren (1813-1887), each in his turn later to be principal of the academy. He resigned in 1859, at the age of sixty-six. A man of kindness, ready wit, charm, and modesty, he was respected and loved by colleagues and pupils alike. 
Potter spent the remaining years of his life in quiet retirement. On 10 July 1871, less than three months before his death, he participated in the first performance in England of Brahms's 'Requiem', at the home of Kate Loder (Lady Thomson), when he and his hostess played the orchestral part in an arrangement for piano duet. Potter was elected a member of the Royal Society of Musicians in 1817. He was a member of the Society of British Musicians from its foundation in 1834 and of the Bach Society from its foundation in 1849; from 1854 to his death he was the musical director of the Madrigal Society. He died on 26 September 1871 at his home, 3 Craven Hill, Hyde Park, London, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery, on 2 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 22616


Richard Potter (1778-1842). Under Thomas's direction, this firm became by repute Manchester's largest mercantile business by the early 1840s, dominating the home trade and gradually moving into the foreign trade. 


@@@@@


doc= 22617


Potter, Richard (1799-1886), natural philosopher, was born in Manchester on 2 January 1799, the son of Richard Potter, from Westmorland, a corn merchant and afterwards a brewer in Manchester. He attended Manchester grammar school from 1811 to 1815, and later worked in a Manchester warehouse, but his business ventures were not particularly successful. However, in his leisure time he studied optics and chemistry, becoming a student of John Dalton. In the early 1830s he wrote several scientific papers, three of which he presented at the first meeting of the British Association in 1831. The interest generated by these contributions encouraged him to apply to Queens' College, Cambridge, which admitted him in 1834 and granted him a scholarship. In 1838 he graduated BA as sixth wrangler, and in January 1839 he was elected a foundation fellow of his college and obtained the medical scholarship, with the intention of studying medicine. He proceeded MA in 1841, being then a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, but did not practise medicine. Instead, in October of that year, he was appointed to the chair of natural philosophy and astronomy at University College, London. On 11 April 1843, at St Pancras Church, London, he married Mary Ann (died 1871), daughter of Major Pilkington of Urney, King's county, Ireland. They had no children. 
In the same year the college senate granted him leave to study mathematics in order to cope with the increasingly mathematized branches of physics. Having accepted a position at King's College, Toronto, he emigrated to Canada but returned to University College in 1844 due to an improved financial arrangement. He retained his professorship until 1865, but he was generally viewed as an incompetent teacher who could not control his students. Much of his research was on optics, but his work was often criticized by contemporaries who adopted the mathematically demanding wave theory of light and did not share his enthusiasm for the corpuscular theory. He published four books and over sixty papers, but made no significant contributions to science. Following his retirement in 1865 he moved to Cambridge where he died at his house, 10 Trumpington Road, on 6 June 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 22618


Potter, Robert (1721-1804), translator and Church of England clergyman, was born in 1721 in Podimore, Somerset, the third son of John Potter ('fl'. 1676-1723), prebendary of Wells. His mother was descended from the Liversedge and Newborough families of Somerset. According to Potter's own account he was educated by his father, and at Sherborne, before proceeding to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in July 1737. However, Venn lists Scarning School, Norfolk (where he later worked as a schoolmaster). Potter took his degree in 1740, and graduated BA in 1742. He was ordained by Bishop Wynne of Bath and Wells, and served briefly as 'Chaplain to a colony of colliers at Ashwick on Mendip' (NL Wales, MS 12502). In 1742 his friend Richard Hurd was made fellow of Emmanuel College, and offered his curacy of Reymerston, Norfolk, to Potter. Hurd also used his influence to secure for him the vicarage of Melton Parva, one of the poorest college livings, giving a combined annual income of less than $50. 
Potter married Elizabeth Colman (died 1786), daughter of a neighbouring clergyman, and the couple had nine children, several of whom survived into adulthood. Much of their life was spent in attempts to curry favour with the rich and powerful to secure a better living to support the ever-growing family. They were only partially successful, obtaining a succession of poverty-stricken livings and falling deeper into debt. It was not until 1788, two years after Elizabeth's death, that Robert secured financial independence. 
In 1754 Potter was presented to the rectory of Crostwight, and in June 1761 became the master of the Scarning Free School, increasing his income to $90. Potter's appointment caused a riot by the local populace who favoured another candidate, but in time he achieved considerable local respect. The following year he was also appointed curate of this parish, but had to resign Reymerston. He likewise held two livings in Somerset, but claimed they cost him more than they brought in. 
Potter gained a literary reputation among the Norfolk gentry and their patronage to publish his poetry, including 'Retirement: an Epistle' (1748), 'A Farewell Hymne to the Country' (1749 and 1750), 'Holkham' (1758), 'Kymber' (1759), and his 'Collected Poems' (1773). He also ventured into religious controversy with his sermon 'On the Pretended Inspiration of the Methodists' (1758), which attracted sufficient attention to elicit rejoinders by John Wesley and Cornelius Cayley. These he answered in 'An Appendix' to his sermon, but such controversy was not to his taste. He likewise dabbled in politics and took an active part in the unsuccessful election campaign of Sir Armine Wodehouse during 1768. He wrote 'A Letter to John Buxton', one of the many anonymous pamphlets published in Norwich at that time, and various election squibs, which attracted acrimonious responses. However in later years he made no mention of such publications, and tried to play down his political activities. In 1775 Potter became involved in a campaign to establish a workhouse in Launditch hundred, and published a graphic account of the plight of the rural poor, which, according to the 'Norwich Mercury', caused an inquiry to be made into the existing Suffolk and Norfolk houses of industry. 
Potter however achieved fame through his blank-verse translations of the Greek tragedians. His edition of Aeschylus was published to great acclaim in 1777 and brought him to the notice of London literary society. Elizabeth Montagu befriended the poor curate, and encouraged and financed him to produce a commentary on the plays which was presented to subscribers, and then included within a second edition in 1779. He then embarked upon Euripides, but this project was interrupted in 1779 to assist Hans Stanley with a translation of Pindar's 'Odes', in the hopes that in return Stanley might secure him a more prosperous living. Their collaboration was a success, and the task was completed, but Potter's hopes were dashed by Stanley's suicide in a fit of depression. 
The delayed translation of Euripides, published in two volumes during 1781 and 1782, had to compete with Michael Wodhull's version. Potter's edition was not as well reviewed as his Aeschylus, although it is considered superior to that of Wodhull. As a result the work was not a financial success, and despite promises, no preferments were forthcoming from his literary friends. He decided to abandon Greek tragedy, and rather translate one of the Pindaric odes with an accompanying essay on contemporary lyric poetry. Under Mrs Montagu's influence this work was transformed into one of the chorus of pamphlets attacking Johnson's 'Lives of the Poets' published during 1783, although it was the most thoughtful and well argued of these. (Potter's mixed views of Johnson's work were later elaborated in his 'The Art of Criticism', 1789.) In 1785 he translated two odes from the book of 'Isaiah', but it was not long before encouragement was forthcoming for him to complete a new translation of Sophocles. This was published early in 1788 and was moderately well received. 
Shortly afterwards Potter received the offer from Lord Thurlow of a prebend's stall at Norwich, with a stipend twice his existing income. He retired from his offices of schoolmaster and curate, and his other livings, and graduated as MA. In June 1789 Bishop Bagot also presented him with the extremely valuable vicarage of Lowestoft, where he moved in 1790. His old age was spent in comfort and prosperity. He published two further commemoration sermons, in 1793 and 1802, the first of which attacked Thomas Paine's 'Rights of Man', and died quietly at the vicarage on 9 August 1804. 
According to the antiquary Craven Ord, Potter was 'rather an entertaining and well behaved gentleman with some singularities of thinking' (BL, Add. MS 14823, fol. 137); his correspondence shows him to have been witty, kind, and thoughtful. Yet his considerable abilities were for many years unrecognized by his contemporaries and his wish to ingratiate himself with the rich and famous sometimes excited their contempt. There are several surviving anecdotes of his having been snubbed or otherwise humiliated by, among others, Dr Johnson and Lord Thurlow. He was however well loved by his parishioners at Lowestoft who subscribed for a mural monument to his memory, placed in the churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 22619


Potter, Thomas (1718?-1759), wit and politician, was born at Cuddesdon, Oxfordshire, probably in 1718, the second son of John Potter (1673/4-1747), bishop of Oxford and later archbishop of Canterbury, and his wife, the granddaughter of Thomas Venner. His older brother was disinherited after making an unsuitable marriage, and Thomas inherited all his father's wealth, estimated to have been between $70,000 and $100,000. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 18 November 1731, aged thirteen, graduated BA in 1735 and MA in 1738, was admitted to the Middle Temple on 27 February 1735, and was called to the bar on 8 November 1740. Later he held the recordership of Bath. On 17 February 1740 Potter married unwillingly, at his father's behest, Anne ('bap'. 1716, died 1744), the daughter of Thomas Manningham, rector of Slinfold, Sussex, and his wife, Mary. He wrote 'I am... unhappy, miserable beyond remedy. In short I am married -- and married to a woman I despise and detest.' It was said that he treated her with calculated brutality, though he claimed on her death on 4 January 1744 that he had been 'deprived of what was most dear to [me] in the world'. They had one son, Thomas (died 1801), who was educated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and became a judge. On 14 July 1747 Potter married Anne, the daughter of Francis Lowe of Brightwell, Oxfordshire, who brought with her a fortune of $50,000; they had two daughters. 
Potter used his inheritance, and his post of principal register to the province of Canterbury, to embark upon a career in politics. He was initially an adherent of the prince of Wales, and after the prince's death of the Grenville faction. Between 1747 and 1754 he sat for the borough of St Germans in Cornwall, through the patronage of the Eliot family, and from 1748 until the prince's death in 1751 was secretary to the prince of Wales. Potter made an immediate impact in parliament in his first session by attacking the conduct of the duke of Newcastle, who was accused of having exercised undue influence in the 1747 election at Seaford in Sussex. Lady Hervey commented on the incident: 'Mr Potter the lawyer is a second Pitt for fluency of words. He spoke well and bitterly, but with so perfect an assurance, so unconcerned, so much master of himself, though the first sessions of his being in parliament and first time of opening his mouth there, that it disgusted more than it pleased. ('Letters of Mary Lepel', 110-11)' The speech was widely published and elicited an anonymous response from Horace Walpole in the form of 'A Letter to a Certain Distinguished Patriot, and most Applauded Orator' (1748). 
Potter's second noteworthy contribution in parliament was over the proposed bill for removing the assizes from Aylesbury to Buckingham, a result of the contest between Lord Chief Justice Edward Willes and the Grenville faction. In 1751 Potter himself proposed an additional duty of 2's'. on spirits, and in the session 1753-4 he introduced a 'Census Bill' which, though it passed the Commons, was thrown out by the Lords. The scheme was not successfully revived until 1801. In 1757 he criticized the ill-fated expedition against the port of Rochefort, which led to a pamphlet war with Henry Seymour Conway. From 1754 to 1757 Potter sat for the borough of Aylesbury, and he soon allied himself with Pitt the elder. He was on Pitt's list of candidates for high office, but was initially barred by the king. In 1756, however, he was re-elected at Aylesbury and appointed paymaster-general of the land forces. The following year he was appointed joint vice-treasurer of Ireland, a post he held until his death. 
It is, however, chiefly for his behaviour outside parliament for which Potter is particularly remembered. Though in poor health, he was thought extremely good-looking and witty. According to John Nichols, he is believed to be the handsome candidate depicted in Hogarth's election series. In the early 1750s he was one of George Bubb Dodington's constant guests at La Trappe and was 'among the more vicious of Bubb's intimates' (Fuller, 114). He was also a member of the bizarre fraternity established by Sir Francis Dashwood known as the Medmenham Monks, or Franciscans. This set was a secret society which met in the ruins of St Mary's Abbey, Medmenham, and held obscene and blasphemous orgies parodying the Roman Catholic mass. Other members included the earl of Sandwich, Lord Orford, and John Wilkes. 
Potter was one of the most enthusiastic members of this club, and was frequently held responsible for the moral and financial ruin of his close associate Wilkes. Potter, described as Wilkes's 'evil genius' (Thomas, 4), has been seen as the instigator of Wilkes's early excesses, for 'richer, looser, and more a man of the world, he initiated him [Wilkes] into a circle which scandalized even the eighteenth century... It is clear... that it was he and not Wilkes who was the leader' (Postgate, 23). Even Potter's best friends remonstrated with him at his behaviour, but his response to such pleadings was typical: 'It is injudicious to tell a Sinner that he must imitate a Saint. The impossibility makes him too desperate even to begin the attempt' (Fuller, 116). Potter was not responsible for writing the scurrilous 'Essay on Woman', for which Wilkes was prosecuted for obscenity in 1763. The 'Essay' had been written by Wilkes in 1754 and met with Potter's approval; he wrote to Wilkes on 27 October that year: 'I have read your parody, for the ninety-ninth time, and have laughed as heartily as I did at the first' (Thomas, 4). 
As well as introducing Wilkes to the Franciscans and the Grenville faction, Potter was involved with the triangular deal that established him in parliament. In July 1757 a vacant seat at Bath was occupied by Pitt, leaving Pitt's seat at Okehampton free for Potter, which opened Aylesbury to Wilkes. The arrangement cost Wilkes some $7000, and to pay for it Potter introduced him to the Jewish financiers, who later contributed to his financial ruin. 
Potter died 'of a long Decay' at Ridgmont, near Woburn, on 17 June 1759, 'unrepentant to the end' (Fuller, 168). According to his wishes, his body was dissected, and his lungs and liver were found to be much decayed. He was buried on 25 June in the churchyard at Ridgmont 'at the west end of the belfry, in a place where no one was used to be buried'. He was borne by six labourers, representing three counties, and his body was interred in three coffins, one of which was lead. His estate passed to his daughter Mariana and her husband, Malcolm Macqueen (died 1829), a physician. 


@@@@@


doc= 22620


Sir Thomas Potter (1774-1845), merchant and first mayor of Manchester, and his second wife, Esther, the daughter of Thomas Bayley of Booth Hall, Blackley, near Manchester. The Potters originated from Tadcaster, Yorkshire, where Thomas Potter senior had managed his father's farm until 1802, when, endowed with capital of some $7000 from his father, he moved to Manchester to set up a textile warehouse with his brothers William (who soon left the partnership) and 


@@@@@


doc= 22621


Potter, Thomas Bayley (1817-1898), politician, was born on 29 November 1817 at Manchester, the younger son of 
Both Thomas and Richard also played a leading part in the town's civic affairs, at the centre of the radical dissenting nucleus which contested the power of Manchester's entrenched tory-Anglican elite. They took a prominent part in the campaigns for religious equality, free trade, and municipal and parliamentary reform in Manchester, while also helping to found both the 'Manchester Guardian' and what became the 'Manchester Examiner and Times'. Richard, who married Mary Seddon on 25 September 1815 and was the grandfather of Beatrice Webb, in particular devoted himself to politics, and having become involved in the attempt to reform the constituency of Wigan in 1830, he was elected as its MP in 1832. In the house he proved a stalwart supporter of civil and religious liberty, free trade, the cotton industry, and national education but resigned on account of ill health in March 1839, before dying at Penzance from a brain tumour on 13 July 1842. Sir Thomas Potter, with Richard Cobden and others, played a leading part in the bitter struggle for the incorporation of Manchester and in 1838 became the first mayor elected under the 'Municipal Corporations Act' of 1835; he was knighted by Queen Victoria in 1840. Despite the growing moderation of his political views, he played a key role in the anti-corn law movement in Manchester, and generously contributed to Anti-Corn Law League funds before his death at Buile Hill, Salford, where he lived, on 20 March 1845. He was buried at Ardwick cemetery, Manchester. His elder son, Sir John Potter (1815-1858), took over many of his civic and business interests, served as mayor in 1848-51, and was knighted on the occasion of Queen Victoria's visit to Manchester in 1851. Sir John Potter's readiness to engage in the outward display of office exposed him to charges of snobbery from some of his former radical allies; his growing separation from the 'Manchester school' was accentuated by the Crimean War and culminated in his famously defeating John Bright in the Manchester election of 1857. Ironically, however, Sir John's younger brother Thomas Bayley 'Principles' Potter, although at this time a firm supporter of Sir John against 'league tyranny', was later to become Cobden's closest political heir and 'the personification of the Manchester School' ('Economic Journal', 8, 1898, 590). 
Thomas Bayley Potter was first educated at Mr John's school, George Street, Manchester, before joining several more Mancunian Unitarians at Dr Lant Carpenter's school at Bristol (1827-31). He went on to attend Rugby School (1831-2) and University College, London (1833). He was soon actively engaged in Manchester's radical politics, especially the universal suffrage movement, while also serving his apprenticeship in the family firm. He became its principal partner on the death of his brother in 1858, but he seems increasingly to have depended upon Francis Taylor (1818-1872) for its day-to-day management. Shortly after the latter's death, and in the light of unfavourable business conditions, Potter gave up his part in the firm in favour of his political interests. From the late 1850s Potter had been anxious to heal the breach between himself and the Manchester school, and his vigorous support of the Northern cause in the American Civil War, as president of the Union and Emancipation Society, revived his friendship with Cobden and Bright as well as bringing him to national prominence. He also supported European 'friends of liberty' and visited Garibaldi at Caprera (which he had helped to purchase) in 1864. Residual rivalries in Manchester politics deterred him from standing for Salford in 1865, but later that year he succeeded Cobden as MP for Rochdale, a seat he would hold until 1895. Potter, friendly with J. S. Mill, was now a keen 'out of doors' advocate of an extensive parliamentary reform bill. Within parliament, while neither orator nor debater, Potter proved a popular and attentive MP, and his girth marked him out (like one of his late twentieth-century Liberal successors at Rochdale, Cyril Smith) as the Commons' 'greatest' figure. He was active among the radical advocates of religious equality and land law reform, firmly backed Gladstone's leadership of the party, and in 1886, despite earlier reservations, supported home rule. 
Potter's real political influence, however, lay outside the house and above all through the organization of theCobden Club, formed in honour of its hero in 1866. Potter, 'its author and its soul' (Bright to Potter, 3 April 1874, Potter letters), envisaged the club as an equivalent political organization to the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science. It proved an important focus for Liberal MPs and their political allies, a forcing-house on important policy issues such as land and fiscal reform, on which it published an influential series of weighty tomes. It also funded a notable set of university prizes, designed to stimulate the study of political economy. But above all the club became the bastion for the defence of free trade in Britain, and for its advocacy in Europe, the British empire, and America. Under Potter's energetic guidance, it did much to repel the challenge of fair trade in the late 1870s and 1880s, with its popular propagandist activities aimed especially at the newly enlarged rural electorate in the 1885 general election. Potter's own concern for the state of British agriculture was a constant thread in his political career. The club's most obvious public profile came through its regular political dinners, which provided the opportunity for morale-boosting speeches and for the cultivation of international links. But such 'mere annual orgie[s]' (Mallet to Morier, 16 Jan 1866[7], Morier MSS, Oxford, Balliol College) also provided the opportunity for poking fun at Potter, the florid-faced gourmand hoping to win the world to free trade through its stomach. Potter also proved an indefatigable (if often illegible) correspondent, and kept up a wide array of contacts and occasionally exerted some influence on government policy. He travelled extensively in Europe, especially in France and Italy, and in 1879 visited the United States, although his and the Cobden Club's advocacy of free trade proved largely counter-productive in the face of a growing Anglophobic economic nationalism. 
Potter remained the linchpin of the Cobden Club until his death, but the club's later years were marked by growing intellectual and policy rifts, especially between the individualistic free-traders such as Sir Louis Mallet and Potter's more pragmatic and radical associates. The club's dinners were less frequent by the late 1880s, but on issues such as the sugar bounties it still achieved considerable public prominence. Potter himself, while often derided, held the club together in a way a less single-minded and more subtle politician might not have done. Suitably in 1890 the club honoured him with a commemorative address presented by Gladstone, who had been a keen supporter of the club's work. 
In February 1846 Potter had married Mary ('b'. 'c'.1820), the daughter of Samuel Ashton, cotton master, of Pole Bank, Gee Cross, Hyde, Cheshire, and the brother of Thomas Ashton, memories of whose murder at the time of a strike in 1831, the family resentfully felt, had been deliberately revived in Mrs Gaskell's 'Mary Barton' (1847). The lives of their children proved largely unremarkable, although one of the four sons journeyed to the north pole. Believing that 'Manchester was no place for a man out of business' (Potter to Carnarvon, 15 Jan 1877, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/6/21), Potter moved to London. He sold the family home at Buile Hill, Pendleton (an impressive Greek revival villa built for his father by Sir Charles Barry in 1828, and later home of the Salford School of Mining), having already disposed of his Scottish hunting-lodge at Pitnacree, where between 1862 and 1874 he had entertained Cobden, Bright, and other political friends. Following Mary's death at Cannes in 1885, Potter married on 10 March 1887 Helena, the daughter of John Hick, of Bodmin, Cornwall. They later combined living in London with a rural retreat, The Hurst, Midhurst (close to Cobden's old Sussex home), where Potter died on 6 November 1898, following a paralytic stroke the previous June. He was buried at Heyshott parish church on 10 November, his wish to rest near Cobden at West Lavington having been refused by its vicar. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22622


Potter, Thomas Joseph (1828-1873), poet and novelist, born on 9 June 1828 at Scarborough, Yorkshire, was the son of George Potter and his wife, Amelia Hunt. His parents intended him to take orders in the Church of England, but, on 24 February 1847, he was received into the Roman Catholic church at Stockeld Park, Beverley, East Riding of Yorkshire, and joined Stonyhurst College. On 24 October 1854 he entered All Hallows' College, Dublin, and was ordained a priest on 28 June 1857. He was appointed professor of 'belles-lettres' and sacred eloquence, and later director of All Hallows' College. 
While on the staff of All Hallows', Potter began to contribute religious verses to 'The Lamp' and other Catholic periodicals, and in 1860, his first novel, 'The Two Victories', appeared. It was followed a year later by 'The Rector's Daughter, or, Love and Duty', a didactic romance, and 'Legends, Lyrics, and Hymns', a collection of short stories and hymns, was published in 1862. The publication of two of Potter's collections of religious poetry, 'Light and Shade' and 'The Panegyrick of St Patrick', followed in 1864. Potter's first real literary success, however, came with 'Percy Grange, or, The Dream of Life', published in 1865 with subsequent posthumous editions in 1876 and 1884. This success was followed by 'Sir Humphrey's Trial, or, The Lesson of Life' (1870), a collection of poems and short stories based upon biblical and Irish legends which ran to four editions by 1884. 
In 1868 Potter wrote a guidebook drawing upon his professional experience at All Hallows', 'Sacred Eloquence, or, The Theory of Preaching', which became a standard text for trainee priests and was reissued three times by 1870. He provided a companion volume in 'The Spoken Word, or, The Art of Extempore Preaching' (1872). He died at All Hallows' on 31 August 1873. 'Rupert Aubrey of Aubrey Chase', a historical novel set in 1681, was published posthumously in Dublin in 1874, with a second edition in 1876. After his death, some of his poems were set to music and sung as hymns: in New York, in 1971, Virgil T. Ford published a musical score together with Potter's poetry, called 'Jesus, Lord and Master'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22623


Potter, Thomas Rossell (1799-1873), antiquary and journalist, son of John Potter ('c'.1773-1827), a farmer, of West Hallam, Derbyshire, and his wife, Mary Rossell ('c'.1772-1840), was born at West Hallam on 7 January 1799. He was educated at the grammar schools at Risley and Wirksworth. When he was fifteen his parents moved to Wymeswold in Leicestershire, where Potter lived for the rest of his life. He married, on 14 January 1836, Frances Sarah (1807-1896), daughter of Leonard Fosbrooke of Shardlow Hall, Derbyshire, and Ravenstone Hall, Leicestershire. They had five sons and four daughters; two of their children died in infancy. 
Potter's intention of taking holy orders was frustrated by his father's death in 1827. Instead, he started a school at Wymeswold, which proved successful, and, with the exception of a few years devoted entirely to literary work, he spent the remainder of his days as a schoolmaster and a newspaper editor. From his schooldays he had developed literary tastes and was much interested in antiquities and geology. In 1842, owing to an outbreak of fever, he temporarily moved his school from Wymeswold to a house in Charnwood Forest. While living here he collected notes on the history, antiquities, natural history, and geology of that district for his book 'The History and Antiquities of Charnwood Forest' (1842). This, his largest work, shows considerable depth of research. Encouraged by its reception, Potter planned a new edition of John Nichols's 'History and Antiquities of Leicestershire' (1790), revised and brought up to date, but his effort proved abortive; only 'The Physical Geography and Geology of Leicestershire' (1866), written by D. T. Ansted as part of the project, was ever published. 
Potter was fond of field sports and regularly rode with the Quorn hunt. He contributed papers and poems to the 'Sporting Magazine' from 1827 until 1840, under the pseudonym of Old Grey. Afterwards he wrote for the 'Sporting Review'. One of the best of his sporting pieces was a poem entitled 'The Meltonians' (1835). Potter was also editor of the 'Leicester Advertiser' from 1849, of the 'Ilkeston Pioneer' from 1856, and of the 'Leicester Guardian' from 1858. In 1865 he was editor of the 'Loughborough Monitor', which, on amalgamation with another paper, became the 'Loughborough Monitor and News'. Some lyrical ballads by Potter, in which local legends were incorporated, were collected in a volume of 'Poems' after his death by his son Charles Neville Potter in 1881. His other works included 'Walks Round Loughborough' (1840), 'The Genius of Nottinghamshire' (1849), and 'Rambles Round Loughborough', reprinted from the 'Loughborough News' (1868). 
Potter died on 19 April 1873, at The Hermitage, Wymeswold, and was buried in Wymeswold on 23 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 22624


Potter, William (fl. 1650-1651), advocate of paper currency in England, whose origins are unknown, was one of several writers on trade and money during the Commonwealth. He contributed to the widespread debate on banking and finance in the Tudor and Stuart period. Given his interest in monetary matters, it is possible that this may be the same William Potter who, prior to 1656, had been appointed registrar of debentures for the sale of the late Charles I's lands, and who was in that year appointed to assist a commission for discovering fraud regarding the debentures. However, there is no evidence to show that these two William Potters are one and the same. Nothing else is known of his life. 
Potter explained his scheme at greatest length, but least clarity, in his pamphlet 'The Key of Wealth, or, A New Way for Improving of Trade', published in London in September 1650. He believed that the nation's wealth could be increased by reviving trade, which was languishing. The key to this, he argued, was to improve the speed of trade and, crucially, to increase the number of transactions by providing a greater supply of money or credit. The heart of his plan was that groups of merchants should undertake to issue bills of a fixed value -- say $10 -- payable to the bearer, so that they could circulate freely. He thus anticipated by over forty years certain essential characteristics of the first notes issued by the Bank of England on its foundation in 1694. 
Much of Potter's reasoning was naive; none the less, he addressed ideas which became central to later economic theory, for example in his discussions of the mechanisms of supply and demand, or the use of trade to stimulate employment. He also implicitly recognized the risk of inflation, and argued that increasing the money supply, circulation, and the number of transactions would lead to a rise in the number of goods for sale, thus preventing price rises. This foreshadowed the quantity theory of money as expressed by Fisher in 1920, which attempted to explain the relation between the supply of money, the velocity of circulation, and the level of prices. 
Potter's scheme did not necessarily require banks, but he acknowledged that if his plan for issuing bills spread beyond London to the main towns of England, this would effectively result in the creation of banks. Here he once again anticipated future events, for in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries small private banks did open up across England, many started by merchants. But he had reservations -- also prophetic -- about such a system, warning that bankers were 'lyable to 'hazard'... whereby thousands are in danger of 'ruin' at once' ('The Key of Wealth', bk 4, p. 71). 
As 'The Key of Wealth' was intended not only for parliament but for the general public, Potter elaborated his ideas with much repetition, parable, and biblical justification. He presented his economic arguments much more succinctly in two further pamphlets. Published in London in October 1650, 'The trades-man's jewel, or, A safe, easie, speedy and effectual means for the incredible advancement of trade, and multiplication of riches' was a condensed version of 'The Key of Wealth'. In 'Humble Proposalls to the Honorable Councell for Trade', published the following year, he was somewhat more positive about the advantages of banks throughout the country, but again emphasized that these were not essential for the issue of the bills, which were the central feature of his plan. 
Potter wrote at a time of much concern over improving the finances of the Commonwealth. In 'The Key of Wealth' he referred to the ideas of Henry Robinson, who published several tracts on this theme, while Potter's own work inspired Samuel Hartlib's 'Essay upon Master W. Potter's design: concerning a bank of lands to be erected throughout this Commonwealth' (reprinted in Hartlib's 'Discoverie for Division or Setting out of Land', London, 1653). Potter himself did not promote the notion of a land bank, only mentioning in passing in 'The Key of Wealth' the possibility of backing bills by the value of land. 


@@@@@


doc= 22625


Pottinger, Eldred (1811-1843), army officer in the East India Company and diplomatist, was born in Ireland on 12 August 1811, the eldest son of Thomas Pottinger of Mount Pottinger, co. Down, and his first wife, Charlotte (died 1813), only daughter of James Hamilton Moore. He was educated at Addiscombe College from 1826 to 1827, and entered the Bombay artillery in 1827. 
After some regimental service Pottinger was appointed to the political department and became assistant to his uncle Colonel Henry Pottinger, then resident at Cutch. In 1837 the latter granted his request to travel in Afghanistan. Disguised as a horse dealer, with a few companions he travelled via Peshawar to Kabul and Herat. Soon after his arrival at Herat in September 1837 the city was besieged by a Persian army, which was accompanied by Russian officers. Pottinger then made himself known to Yar Mahammad Khan, the wazir and commander of the forces under Shah Kamran, ruler of Herat, and offered his services for the city's defence. These were accepted, and, largely through Pottinger's energy, a stubborn resistance was organized. At the same time a British-Indian naval demonstration was made in the Persian Gulf, and the siege was ended by the Persians in September 1838. Pottinger's services were highly appreciated, and Lord Auckland, the governor-general, thanked him as one 'who, under circumstances of peculiar danger and difficulty, has by his fortitude, ability, and judgment honourably sustained the reputation and interests of his country' (Pottinger, 62). Though only a subaltern, Pottinger received a brevet majority and was created CB; he was appointed political agent at Herat, but left the city in 1839, being replaced by Major D'Arcy Todd. 
In 1841 Pottinger was sent back to Afghanistan as political officer in Kohistan, a district north of Kabul. On 2 November the uprising against the British protege Shah Shuja and the British broke out at Kabul. The same day insurgents attacked Pottinger's residence at Laghman, and he fled to Charikar, the neighbouring town, which was occupied by the 4th Gurkhas, part of Shah Shuja's force and commanded by Christopher Codrington. There they were besieged. Codrington was killed on 6 November and succeeded by John Colpoys Haughton; Pottinger was wounded in the leg. On the 14th the Gurkhas evacuated the town, and despite great difficulties Pottinger and Haughton, both severely wounded, escaped to Kabul, arriving on the 15th. There, on 23 December 1841, the British envoy Sir William Macnaghten was murdered by Akbar Khan, and Pottinger succeeded to Macnaghten's dangerous post. Supplies were short and demoralization was widespread; the British-Indian garrison, under General Elphinstone, was helplessly inactive, and against his better judgement and advice Pottinger negotiated the British-Indian withdrawal from Kabul. On 6 January 1842 the retreat began towards Jalalabad, but Akbar detained Pottinger as one of three hostages. He thus escaped the massacre in which the retreating army was destroyed. He was kept prisoner at Kabul until Major-General Pollock's army arrived there on 17 September 1842, and returned with it to India in October. His services received scant recognition from the new governor-general, Lord Ellenborough, who was hostile to those involved in the Afghanistan disaster. However, the court of inquiry exonerated Pottinger and praised his character and conduct. 
With no worthwhile employment in sight Pottinger visited his uncle Sir Henry Pottinger at Hong Kong. There he died, after a brief illness, on 15 November 1843. He was buried at Hong Kong. Sir Henry Lawrence wrote of him: 'India, fertile in heroes, has shown since the days of Clive, 'no man of greater and earlier promise' than Eldred Pottinger. Yet, hero as he was, you might have sat for weeks beside him at table and not have discovered that he had seen a shot fired. (Macrory, 270)' 



@@@@@


doc= 22626


Pottinger, Sir Henry, first baronet (1789-1856), army officer in the East India Company and colonial governor, was born at Mount Pottinger, co. Down, Ireland, on 3 October 1789, the fifth son of Eldred Curwen Pottinger, a descendant of the Pottingers of Berkshire, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Robert Gordon of Florida Manor, co. Down. He was educated at Belfast Academy, which he left when twelve years old, and went to sea. In 1803 he travelled to India to join the marine service there, but friends persuaded Lord Castlereagh in 1804 to substitute a cadetship in the East India Company's army. Meanwhile he studied in Bombay, and acquired a knowledge of Indian languages. He worked well, became an assistant teacher, and on 18 September 1806 was made an ensign, and promoted lieutenant on 16 July 1809. 
In 1808 Pottinger was sent on a mission to Sind under Nicholas Hankey Smith, the British political agent at Bushehr. In 1809, when Sir John Malcolm's mission to Persia was postponed, Pottinger and a friend, Captain Charles Christie, offered to explore the area between India and Persia in order to acquire information lacking to the government, which accepted the offer. The travellers, disguised as Indians, and accompanied by a local horse dealer and two servants, left Bombay on 2 January 1810, journeying by sea to Sind, and from there by land to Kalat. They were immediately recognized as Europeans, and even as having belonged to the embassy at Sind, but safely reached Nushki, near the boundary between Afghanistan and Baluchistan; here Christie diverged northwards to Herat, and proceeded thence by Yazd to Esfahan, while Pottinger, keeping in a westerly direction, travelled through Kerman to Shiraz, and joined Christie at Esfahan. Christie was directed to remain there, and was killed in a Russian attack on the Persians in 1812. Pottinger, returning via Baghdad and Basrah, reached Bombay in February 1811. He reported the results of his journey, published as 'Travels in Beloochistan and Sinde' (1816). Pottinger married, in 1820, Susanna Maria (1800-1886), daughter of Captain Richard Cooke of Dublin, whose family was a branch of the Cookes of Cookesborough, co. Westmeath. They had a daughter and three sons; the eldest son died in infancy. 
Pottinger was next appointed to the staff of Sir Evan Nepean, governor of Bombay, by whom he was sent as assistant to Mountstuart Elphinstone, the British resident at Poona. On 15 October 1821 he was made captain. He served during the Anglo-Maratha War, and at its close became collector of Ahmednagar. He was promoted major on 1 May 1825, and in the same year was made resident in Cutch. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 17 March 1829, and brevet colonel on 23 January 1834. While resident in Cutch he conducted a mission to Sind in 1831, successfully negotiating a commercial treaty. He conducted further missions in 1833-4 and 1836-7, being appointed political agent there in 1836, negotiating the treaty of 1839 which achieved domination of Sind. Out of sympathy with what he saw as Auckland's excessively coercive approach, Pottinger left India in 1840, ill health being given as the reason for his return. He was created a baronet on 27 April 1840. 
Pottinger accepted Lord Palmerston's offer of the post of envoy and plenipotentiary in China and superintendent of British trade, thus superseding Captain Charles Elliot. The First Opium War had begun in January 1840. After Elliot, the British representative, had seized the forts by Canton (Guangzhou), a preliminary treaty had been drawn up in January 1841, but it was disavowed by both governments. Palmerston directed Pottinger to replace this treaty by one which would open China to British trade, but before he reached China hostilities had recommenced. Major-General Sir Hugh Gough arrived in March 1841 to command the expeditionary force from India. Gough took the four forts defending Canton in May 1841, and while he was preparing to attack the town itself, Pottinger reached Macau (9 August). He deemed it essential to the success of his mission to make a further display of force, and he co-operated with Gough and Admiral Sir William Parker (1781-1866) in the capture of Amoy (Xiamen), Chushan, Chintu (Chengdu), and Ningpo (Ningbo). On 13 June 1842 Pottinger, with Parker, entered the Yangtze (Yangzi) River with the object of taking Nanking (Nanjing). After many successes by the way, an assault on that city was imminent in July, when Pottinger announced that the Chinese were ready to treat for peace on a satisfactory basis. The Chinese diplomatists had already found that Pottinger could not be trifled with: an intercepted letter from the chief Chinese negotiator to his government stated that 'to all his representations the barbarian, Pottinger, only knit his brows and said 'No''. Eventually peace was signed on 29 August 1842 on board HMS 'Cornwallis' before Nanking. By this treaty of Nanking, China agreed to pay an indemnity of $21 million, Hong Kong was ceded to England, and the five 'treaty ports' -- Canton, Amoy, Foochow (Fuzhou), Ningpo, and Shanghai -- were opened to British traders, and were to receive British consuls. In recognition of his successful conduct of negotiations Pottinger was made GCB (2 December 1842), and on 5 April 1843 was appointed the first British governor of Hong Kong. 
Pottinger returned to Britain in the spring of 1844, and was much honoured: he was sworn of the privy council (23 May 1844), was presented with the freedom of many cities, and in June 1845 the House of Commons voted him $1500 a year for life. On 28 September 1846 he succeeded Sir Peregrine Maitland as governor of Cape Colony. He stayed there less than six months, and apparently without reputation or distinction in the view of G. M. Theal, according to whom Pottinger left the colony 'without the esteem of a single colonist' (Lehmann, 279). In 1848 he returned once more to India as governor of Madras and attained the rank of lieutenant-general in 1851. He held the post until 1854, when he returned to Britain in broken health. His government of Madras had not been a success. He was resistant to change and had become dilatory in the discharge of public business, failing to recognize the need for essential improvements. He was better fitted to deal with a crisis than with ordinary administration. He died at Malta on 18 March 1856, and was buried at Valletta. His two surviving sons successively succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 22627


Pottinger, Israel (fl. 1759-1761), playwright, of whose early life nothing is known, was first an apprentice to a bookseller named Worral. He then set up for himself in Paternoster Row, London, and planned a variety of periodicals. One of them, the 'Busy Body', was published three times a week for 2died at the Dunciad, Paternoster Row. Oliver Goldsmith contributed to it in 1759. Not meeting with much success, Pottinger then opened a circulating library near Great Turnstile, Holborn, and at Islington performed for a time George Alexander Stevens's popular 'Lecture on Heads'. He subsequently suffered from a mental disorder, but supported himself in his lucid intervals through his writing. In 1761 he published an unacted comedy called 'The Methodist', which he described as 'a continuation or completion of the plan of [Samuel] Foote's 'Minor''. It was a scurrilous attack on George Whitefield. A third edition appeared within the year. In the same year a farce by Pottinger, entitled 'The Humorous Quarrel, or, The Battle of the Greybeards', was performed at Southwark fair, and subsequently published. 'The Duenna', a comic opera in three acts, a parody on R. B. Sheridan's play, published in 1776 and 'acted by his majesty's servants', is supposed to have been by Pottinger. A new edition appeared within the year. He was probably also the author of 'The Critic' (1780), a political burlesque of Sheridan's play of the same name. 


@@@@@


doc= 22628


Potts, Laurence Holker (1789-1850), surgeon and inventor of a process for sinking foundations, the son of Cuthbert Potts, surgeon, and Ethelinda Margaret Thorpe, daughter of John Thorpe (1715/16-1792), was born in Pall Mall, London, on 18 April 1789. He was educated at Westminster School and at a school in Northamptonshire before being apprenticed in 1805 to Mr Birch, surgeon, of Warwick. In 1810 he became a house pupil of Sir Benjamin Brodie at St George's Hospital, London; William Frederick Chambers and Charles Locock were house pupils at the same time. Potts was admitted to the Royal College of Surgeons in 1812, and he graduated MD at King's College, Aberdeen, in 1825. 
In 1812 Potts was appointed surgeon to the Royal Devon and Cornwall Miners' militia, then quartered in Ireland. The regiment returned to Truro in 1814 and was subsequently disbanded, and Potts started in practice in the town. He had always taken a great interest in scientific pursuits, and in 1818 he took an active part in founding the Royal Institution of Cornwall. He gave several courses of lectures there and made a habit of gratuitously analysing minerals for the miners. 
In 1820 Potts married Anne Wright, of Lambessow, Cornwall; they had four daughters and two sons who survived him. In 1828 he became superintendent and physician of the Cornwall County Lunatic Asylum at Bodmin. He resigned in 1837, and moved in the following year to Vanbrugh Castle, Blackheath, near London, where he established an institution for the treatment of spinal diseases. Here he established a workshop for the manufacture of various appliances and apparatus, of which he devised many new forms. He had at the same time a London town house, 9 Buckingham Street, Strand, to which a workshop was attached. His increasing interest in his inventions diverted his attention from his patients, and Vanbrugh Castle was eventually given up. 
Potts's minor inventions included his patent no. 9642 of 1843 for a suspended railway, velocipede, and manual paddle boat. But the invention for which his name is generally remembered is a method of sinking foundations under water, for which he obtained a patent in 1843 (no. 9975). This involved the sinking of hollow piles of iron, open at the lower end and closed at the top by a cap. A partial vacuum being then formed within the tube by means of a pump, the coastal or river-bed materials such as shingle and sand were caused to flow up through the pile by the pressure of the atmosphere, the rush of water from below breaking up the soil and undermining the lower edges of the pile. The pile descended by its own gravity, assisted by atmospheric pressure on its closed end, and, when filled, its contents were discharged by a pump. As the tube descended the cap was removed and a fresh length attached. The tubes could be of large size, forming an alternative to cofferdams in constructing foundations. Potts claimed to have first considered the idea while in Cornwall, and may have developed it from observing the sinking of wrought iron tubes for mine shafts through sand off the coast of Cornwall, a practice which was introduced about 1801. 
Potts's invention was well received, and at first it promised to be a great success. Potts gave evidence on 10 June 1844 before the commission on harbours of refuge, and James Walker, president of the Institution of Civil Engineers and a member of the commission, was impressed by the ingenuity of the idea, though he remained uncertain about its practical application. The matter was taken up by Trinity House, to which Walker was consultant, and on 16 July 1845 an experimental tube 2 feet 6 inches in diameter was driven into the Goodwin Sands, to a depth of 22 feet, in two or three hours. A cluster of such piles was used to form the foundation of a beacon, which was completed on 26 August 1847. Several small beacons were erected on sands lying near the mouth of the River Thames in 1845-6. Sir John Burgoyne also took an interest in the invention, and a trial cylinder 4 feet in diameter was sunk at the Goodwin Sands as a possible foundation for a fortification. 
Although Potts may originally have had maritime applications in mind, others saw alternative uses for his idea. In 1845 Potts became acquainted with Charles Fox of the firm of Fox and Henderson. The firm invested heavily in developing the device and attempted to use it wherever there was an opportunity. Undoubtedly the hope was that it would provide a cheaper alternative to the expensive temporary construction of cofferdams generally used for bridge foundations. The first large work upon which it was employed was the viaduct carrying the Chester and Holyhead Railway across Malltraeth Bay in the Isle of Anglesey. Nineteen tubes, 1 foot in diameter and 16 feet long, were successfully sunk in the sand during the summer of 1847. Potts's method was also employed successfully for sinking the piers for a railway bridge over the River Ouse at Huntingdon. Ground conditions were evidently favourable in both locations, but the system failed at the bridge over the River Nene at Peterborough: here there were boulders in the clay forming the river bed. The foundations for the south-western railway bridge over the Thames between Datchet and Windsor were laid by the same process, but on 12 August 1849, when the line was ready to be opened, one of the tubes suddenly sank, causing a fracture in the girder resting upon it. G. W. Hemans tried the operation with cylinders 10 feet in diameter in 1850, during the construction of a bridge over the River Shannon at Athlone, on the Midland Great Western Railway of Ireland, but it proved very expensive because of the cost of pumping out the air. Trouble was again caused by boulders, which the trial borings had failed to indicate. These later examples all involved cylinders of much larger diameter. 
Potts read a paper on his method before the Society of Arts on 10 May 1848, for which he received the Isis gold medal. He devoted the last years of his life and a considerable fortune almost exclusively to the perfecting of his invention. Unhappily it was not a financial success, and experience soon proved that its application was very limited. It had, however, one very important result, as it incidentally gave rise to the system of sinking foundations by compressed air, an invention of great importance. It was intended to employ Potts's method to sink the piers of Rochester Bridge (commenced about 1849), but it was found that the river bed was encumbered with the remains of a very ancient bridge, and that the cylinders could not be forced through the obstructions. It then occurred to John D'Urban Hughes (1807-1874), Fox and Henderson's engineer in charge of the work, to reverse the process, and to pump air into the cylinders to force the water out, so that the men could work at the bottom of the cylinders, as in a diving bell. As the material was excavated from the space covered by the cylinders they sank by their own weight. An 'air-lock' provided the means of access to and from the cylinders. Although Hughes first developed the idea independently, compressed air had already been used to sink mine shafts in France by J. Triger (1801-1867) in 1838, and Hughes became aware of this through Andrew Ure's 'Dictionary' and was able to make use of this information in applying the invention to bridge foundations. Hughes went on to become an acknowledged expert in the application of compressed air to foundations. 
Through his links with Fox, Potts was able to send his sons John Thorpe and Benjamin Langford Forster (1839-1910) to Fox and Henderson for training as engineers. B. L. F. Potts worked closely with E. A. Cowper of this firm for many years. Potts died at 9 Buckingham Street, Strand, London, on 23 March 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 22629


Potts, Robert (1802x4-1885), mathematician, was born at Lambeth, the son of Robert Potts, and grandson of the head of a textile firm specializing in Irish linen. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on 27 June 1827 as a sizar, and graduated BA as twenty-sixth wrangler in 1832, proceeding MA in 1835. Potts was married soon after taking his degree; his wife's name was Jeannetta. They lived near Parker's Piece, Cambridge, and he became a successful private tutor in the university. A strenuous advocate of attempts to open up the university to groups previously excluded, he actively supported most of the university reforms that were carried out in his time. He acquired a wide reputation as the editor of Euclid's 'Elements', which he brought out in a large edition in 1845, followed in 1847 by an appendix. His school edition appeared in 1846, and was republished a number of times in the following years. The book had an immense circulation in the British colonies and in America, and the William and Mary College of Virginia conferred the honorary degree of LLD upon Potts 'in appreciation of the excellence of his mathematical works'. The merits of his edition of Euclid consisted in the clear arrangement and division of the component parts of the propositions, and in the admirable collection of notes. He also published 'Elementary Arithmetic' (1876) and 'Elementary Algebra' (1879), both with brief historical notes. His non-mathematical publications can be divided into two categories: those concerning the University of Cambridge and those on theology. Of the former, 'Liber Cantabrigiensis' appeared in two parts between 1855 and 1863, followed in 1866 by 'A brief account of the scholarships and exhibitions open to competition in the University of Cambridge'. In the latter category he edited the 1543 edition of William Turner's 'Huntyng and Fyndyng out of the Romish Fox' (1851), 'King Edward VI on the Supremacy... with his Discourse on the Reformation of Abuses' (1874), and other theological works, including an edition of William Paley's 'View of the Evidences of Christianity' and the 'Horae Paulinae', which he published together in 1850 with some specimens of Cambridge exam papers. 
Potts had long campaigned for university recognition of residence hostels. In 1884 he received a royal charter to open a hostel, to be called St Paul's Hostel, to house students who were 'natives of India', but did not live to implement his plan. He died at his home, Park Terrace, Parker's Piece, Cambridge, on 4 August 1885 in his eighty-second year. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 22630


Thomas Potts (fl. 1610-1614). He was brought up in the household of Sir Thomas Knyvett, later Baron Knyvett of Escrick. He served as clerk of the peace for the East Riding about 1610-11, and served as associate clerk on the northern assize circuit in the summer of 1612 (when the Pendle witches were tried) and in the summer of 1614. At the time he was writing the 'Discoverie' he was in lodging in Chancery Lane, London. He published it at the instigation of the two assize judges, Sir Edward Bromley and Sir James Altham; the former revised and corrected the text. 
The immediate events which led to the trials began on 18 March 1612, when Alizon Device asked a pedlar to sell her some pins and was refused. He accused her of bewitching him so that he was paralysed on one side. At the end of March the JP Roger Nowell questioned Alizon and her family on suspicion of witchcraft, and subsequently sent her for trial at the Lancaster assizes with her mother, her grandmother Elizabeth Sowthernes, alias Demdike, and Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, and Whittle's daughter Anne Redfearn. While they were there their children and friends held the meeting at Malkin Tower on Good Friday, where they plotted to release the prisoners, blow up the castle, and kill the gaoler. The accompanying feast of beef, bacon, and stolen roast mutton, at which (according to Jennet Device) only two men were present, was readily interpreted as a witches' sabbat. The plot prompted further interrogations (and the flight of a number of people to evade arrest), and at the end of April a series of examinations was obtained implicating the main members of the Device and Whittle families and several others, and telling of meetings with the devil, relations with familiars, charms that combined vernacular prayer and spells, and witchcraft worked on enemies. 
Elizabeth Sowthernes confessed to having made a pact with the devil twenty years before, on her way home from begging, by which she promised him her soul in exchange for anything she wanted. After this she was visited regularly by a spirit named Tibb, who sucked her blood. With the aid of clay images she had used witchcraft to harm her enemies, including a local man who had refused to let her on his land. Sowthernes's widowed daughter Elizabeth Device was apparently marked out as a witch by having one eye lower than the other with a strange squint. She confessed to having a spirit named Ball, in the shape of a brown dog, which she had baptized. She was indicted for killing three men by witchcraft, one of whom, Henry Mitton, had allegedly refused her a penny. Elizabeth Device's son James Device, a labourer, confessed that although he had first resisted the persuasions of a hare-shaped spirit sent to him by his grandmother, he gave in when a spirit in the form of a dog showed him a way to revenge himself on a woman with whom he had fallen out. He bewitched her to death using a clay image and had the spirit, which he called Dandy, kill another man who refused him the gift of an old shirt. James's unmarried sister Alizon Device, with whom the trials had begun, confessed that she had been persuaded by her grandmother to allow a 'devil or familiar' in the shape of a black dog to come and suck on her breast, and that she had been present at many of her grandmother's acts of malice; her brother accused her of bewitching a child. Asked in court whether she could restore the pedlar she had stricken to health, she answered that only her grandmother, Elizabeth Sowthernes, could; but by then Sowthernes had died in prison. Elizabeth Sowthernes's son and daughter-in-law, Christopher and Elizabeth Howgate, were also accused of involvement in the Malkin Tower meeting. The key witness in these allegations was Elizabeth Device's nine-year-old daughter Jennet Device, who testified against her siblings, mother, and grandmother with 'modesty, government and understanding'; she claimed to have learned charms from her grandmother and to have seen the others plotting with their spirits ('Potts's Discovery of Witches', sig. I). Confronted with her daughter's testimony her mother cursed and threatened her, but made a full confession. 
The other principal accused, Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, was said to be an old enemy of Elizabeth Sowthernes. According to Alizon Device, about eleven years earlier Whittle had stolen clothes and oatmeal from them, and her daughter was seen wearing the clothes. She was also said to have threatened Alizon's father, Elizabeth Device's husband, into paying her a yearly dole of meal as protection from her witchcraft; when he failed to pay it he died. Whittle, too, was an elderly widow, living by carding wool and begging. Potts's description of her is particularly evocative of the contemporary misogyny that fuelled stereotypes of witches: 'a very old withered spent and decreped creature... Her lippes ever chattering and walking: but no man knew what' ('Potts's Discovery of Witches', sig. D2). Anne Whittle said that she had been introduced to the devil about fourteen years earlier by Elizabeth Sowthernes. She allowed him to suck on her ribs and participated in a spirits' banquet, in which, as was customary, 'although they did eate, they were never the fuller, nor better for the same' ('Potts's Discovery of Witches', sig. B4'v'). Her familiar appeared to her as 'Fancie'. He helped her drive cows mad and kill them but, she said, he had taken away most of her sight and he sometimes harassed and assaulted her. Like the Devices, Anne Whittle knew charms and spells, and was accused of bewitching adults and children to death, using clay images; firm evidence was furnished by James Device, who dug up from his grandmother's house a set of teeth that Whittle had taken from skulls at a funeral twelve years earlier, and shared with Elizabeth Sowthernes. 
Also central to the trials were the Nutter family, minor gentry in Pendle. Robert Nutter the elder owned the land the Whittles lived on. His son Christopher was said to have died of witchcraft about eighteen years before the trial. His grandson Robert was also said to have been bewitched to death about the same time: Anne Whittle confessed that she had been asked to kill him by his grandmother, so that two female cousins could inherit the land; she also said that his death was revenge for his threat to stop her daughter Anne Redfearn living on his property because Redfearn had refused his sexual propositions. A withered clay image of Anne Nutter was among the evidence produced by James Device from his grandmother's house. Another member of the Nutter family, Alice, was herself convicted of witchcraft on the grounds of conspiring with the Devices. While the Devices and Whittles were represented as bearing out contemporary beliefs that witches were most likely to be either poor and therefore easily tempted by the devil, or malicious and vengeful, Alice Nutter was elderly but married, the wife of Richard Nutter, wealthy and of good reputation locally, and she declared her innocence throughout. Nevertheless the evidence of Jennet Device and her siblings was enough to convict her of joining with Elizabeth Device in killing Henry Mitton for refusing Elizabeth a penny, and of conspiring with the rest at the Malkin Tower. 
In 1634 the Device and Nutter families appeared again in a fresh series of trials which followed the fabrications of Edmund Robinson. Jennet Device was found to have two witches' marks and was convicted of killing Isabel Nutter by witchcraft. She was not executed but, despite the discrediting of Robinson's story, she still lay a prisoner in Lancaster Castle in August 1636. Robinson was not born until ten years after the original Pendle trials, but in his account of a witches' feast drew on local memory of the Malkin Tower meeting. Among those he named as being present were Jennet's uncle, Christopher Howgate (Elizabeth Sowthernes's son) and his wife, Elizabeth, and Jennet Hargraves, all three of whom had been accused of attending the Malkin Tower feast. 
Robinson's accusations formed the basis for Thomas Heywood's and Richard Brome's 'The Late Lancashire Witches' (1634), which also included other echoes of the 1612 case, as did Thomas Shadwell's 'The Lancashire Witches' (1681), which drew on both the 1612 and 1634 trials. The modern notoriety of the 1612 trials dates back to the 1840s, when the Manchester antiquary James Crossley published his edition of Potts's book, and then encouraged his friend William Harrison Ainsworth to write his best-selling historical romance 'The Lancashire Witches' (1848) around the case, the first of several fictional accounts of the events of 1612. 


@@@@@


doc= 22631


Potts, Thomas (1778-1842), compiler of reference works, was the son of Edward Potts (1721-1819) of Glanton, near Alnwick, Northumberland. Thomas Potts was a solicitor, and at one time was connected with Skinners' Hall. In 1803 he lived in Camden Town, and he later lived at Chiswick and other places, and had chambers in Serjeants' Inn. 
Potts published 'A compendious law dictionary... intended for the use of country gentlemen, the merchant, and the professional man' in 1803; it was reissued in 1814 and in 1815 a new edition was enlarged by Thomas Hartwell Horne. His next work, 'The British Farmers' Cyclopaedia, or, Complete Agricultural Dictionary' (1806), with forty-two engravings, was judged to be an advance on preceding works and ran to two editions. His 'Gazetteer of England and Wales... with Maps' followed in 1810. 
Potts died at Upper Clapton, London, on 8 November 1842 and was described then as 'of Haydon Square, Minories' ('GM', 1842, 672). 


@@@@@


doc= 22632


Poulett, John, first Baron Poulett (1586-1649), local politician and royalist army officer, was the eldest son and heir of Sir Anthony Poulett 
(or Paulet; 1561/2-1600)
of Hinton St George, Somerset, governor of Jersey from 1588 until his death, and his wife, Catherine (died 1602), daughter of Henry Norris, first Baron Norris of Rycote. Poulett's paternal grandfather was Sir Amias Paulet, the gaoler of Mary, queen of Scots, and Elizabethan privy councillor. While in wardship following his father's death on 22 July 1600 John matriculated at University College, Oxford, in 1601, aged fifteen, and travelled abroad in 1603. Already established in Somerset county society with a colonelcy of militia cavalry in 1608, he was admitted specially at the Middle Temple in January 1611. By 1613 he was a justice of the peace, and in 1616 sheriff of Somerset. He was a deputy lieutenant at least from 1624. His social position was reinforced by his financially advantageous marriage, about 1614, to Elizabeth (1593?-1663?), daughter of Christopher Ken or Kenn, of Kenn Court, Somerset, with whom he had five daughters and three sons. 
Poulett sat for Somerset in the last six weeks of the 1610 session of parliament and appears not to have spoken in debate. He was returned, again for the county, to the parliament of 1614. It was a brutal election, in which he was returned instead of Sir Robert Phelips, whom he had promised not to oppose. Phelips was forced to sit for Saltash. The election ruptured the slight friendship that had existed between Poulett and Phelips, and began a rivalry which dominated Somerset for two decades. Poulett's parliamentary service in 1614 was no more than being named to the committee for the oath 'ex officio' and speaking once on the last day, while Phelips's parliamentary career began in earnest. In 1621 Phelips sat for Bath and Poulett sat for Lyme Regis. While Phelips achieved prominence in 1621 Poulett figured not at all in debate. He did not again attend a parliament until he took his seat in the Lords in 1628, and was there no more voluble than he had been in the lower house. 
Both Poulett and Phelips aspired to political power in Somerset, the former by assiduous and often obsequious cultivation of contacts at court, the latter by bold and exaggerated defence of the 'country's' interests. Phelips's appeal was broader and more populist; Poulett's more narrowly focused on the county's numerous and prosperous gentry. There was little ideological distinction between them. Poulett was not involved in the sedition of Edmond Peacham, vicar of Hinton St George, among whose papers was found a sermon he had written foretelling the king's death as a divine judgment. Peacham had been presented to the living by Poulett's grandfather Sir Amias a quarter-century earlier, and Poulett's examinations by the privy council in 1614-15 were merely an exercise of its routine prudence. Poulett was no more a 'popular man' in 1640 than the rest of the aristocracy who realized the regime could not stop the Scots without a parliament. In their rivalry for local power Poulett and Phelips divided the county's magnates along lines of kinship and affinity and of office. Poulett, as the principal deputy lieutenant to a non-resident lord lieutenant, controlled the lieutenancy; Phelips regularly carried a majority of the magistrates with him. But they made no appeals to higher loyalty or to sectarian principles. By the same token both were substantially indifferent to the larger issues which were in train towards revolution. 
Poulett's advancement was sudden and considerable. Charles I visited him at Hinton in 1625, and at the king's request Poulett entertained the exiled Huguenot military commander Benjamin de Rohan, seigneur de Soubise, at Hinton from October 1625 to September 1626. Soubise, agitating for a major expedition to relieve La Rochelle, was an embarrassment to the king, and his rustication removed him from court. One of Poulett's opponents remarked that the king had 'committed Monsieur de Soubize to Mr Poulettes custodie, because hee knewe him to bee a good gaoler' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/40/58). So he was, for Poulett kept Whitehall informed of his guest's restlessness, and when Soubise finally bolted, Poulett despaired. However, largely for his painful service, Poulett was created first Baron Poulett on 23 June 1627. 
Peerage gave Poulett extraordinary standing in a county with only one other resident peer, one who took no active part in county politics or administration. But it did not save his hunting when the disafforestation of Neroche Forest ended his office as warden there, and his uncharacteristic complicity in popular opposition to the project very nearly brought his disgrace at court in 1631. His command, from May to September 1635, of the king's ship 'Constant Reformation' in the earl of Lindsay's ship money fleet in the channel was gratifying. But the round of personally expensive on-board entertainment and short sallies to force Dutch merchantmen to strike their colours ended with his illness, the accolade of knighthood for himself and his eldest son, John ['see below'], in 1635 being slight consolation. Poulett's choleric temperament repeatedly caused him to overreact to Phelips's challenges. Even with the court's favour, in virtually every confrontation with Phelips -- over the payment of the muster-master, pressing of Phelips's adherents as soldiers, sacking a friend of Poulett as a militia officer, deputy lieutenants' warrants, churchales, disafforestation -- Poulett lost, both in the county and at the council table. 
In the first civil war Poulett achieved something of an apotheosis. With the militia ordinance of 1642 he withdrew from the Lords, signed the York manifesto in June, and joined the marquess of Hertford at Wells in executing the commission of array. As the roundheads slowly reduced Somerset, Poulett fortified Hinton St George in September and put up a stiff fight before retreating with two cannon to Sherborne. In March 1643 parliament impeached him for treason while he was in Wales and the marches with Hertford. The earl of Essex captured Poulett in October in Shropshire. After escaping he served under Sir Ralph Hopton, recruiting a sizeable force around Oxford which invaded Dorset, besieging Lyme Regis with Prince Maurice. After Essex raised the siege in June 1644 Poulett retreated to Exeter and was commissioner there until the city's fall in April 1646, when he was taken prisoner. Thanks to the good offices of Sir Thomas Fairfax, Poulett was treated leniently by parliament, being ordered to pay a $2742 fine, $1500 compensation for destroying Lady Drake's house in Dorset, and an annuity of $200 to Lyme Regis. He was allowed to retire to Hinton, where he died on 20 March 1649. He was buried in Hinton, and his memorial is the chapel dedicated to his memory in the parish church. 
All three of Poulett's sons -- John, Francis, and Amias -- were solid royalists. His youngest daughter, Elizabeth, married the eldest son of John Ashburnham, who having married Poulett's relict in 1649 was both father-in-law and stepfather of Elizabeth. 


Having succeeded to the barony in 1649 Poulett remained a stalwart, though circumspect royalist: he was imprisoned in 1655 in Major-General Disbrowe's sweep of Somerset royalists, and again in 1658 though under more lenient conditions. A deputy lieutenant after the Restoration, he died on 15 September 1665 at his house at Court de Wick in the parish of Yatton, Somerset, and was buried on 24 October at Hinton St George. John Poulett, his eldest son with Catherine, succeeded as third baron, and was the father of John Poulett, first Earl Poulett. 
The Pouletts were very wealthy. In 1638 the estate was worth $2100 per annum clear. The second baron's properties in Somerset, Dorset, Berkshire, and Essex were settled on him during his father's life, and were valued at $1500 per annum. Besides the great house at Hinton St George and the commodious house of Court de Wick (or Courtaweek), the house and lands in Chiswick, Middlesex, served for the London season. The first baron made generous provision for his daughters and two younger sons. He made his son and heir both executor and residual legatee of all other chattels, real and personal, demonstrating a deep affection and trust forged in the comradeship of arms. 


@@@@@


doc= 22633


John Poulett, second Baron Poulett (c.1615-1665), royalist army officer, matriculated at Oxford from Exeter College in 1632, without apparently graduating; in March 1643 he was awarded an honorary MD degree at Oxford. He was knighted with his father in 1635 and took no active part in Somerset affairs until he was returned for the county in the Long Parliament. But he had travelled on the continent, and in February 1640 was with Lord Conway's army in the north. He figured only slightly in the Commons, and withdrew with his father to do battle in Somerset in the summer of 1642, being impeached in September. Appointed to the council of Munster, he commanded a regiment against the Catholic confederate insurgents which was sent to Bristol after the 1643 armistice. He and his younger brother Amias served valiantly in the battles of 1644 in Somerset. John was in the Winchester Castle garrison that surrendered to Cromwell in October 1645. He joined his father at Exeter, and with its fall in April 1646 was barely allowed composition under the articles of capitulation. But it was his marriage to Sir Thomas Fairfax's sister-in-law, Catherine (1612/13-1648x53), daughter of Sir Horace Vere and widow of Oliver St John, which had taken place in March 1641 (by marriage licence dated 6 March 1641) that moved Fairfax's several interventions to save the Poulett fortunes. John and Catherine had two sons and three daughters. She was alive in March 1648 but had died by 30 January 1653 when he married Anne ('b'. 1635, died in or before 1711), the second daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Browne. 


@@@@@


doc= 22634


Poulett, John, fourth Baron and first Earl Poulett (c.1668-1743), politician, was the only son of John, third Baron Poulett (died 1679), and his second wife, Susan, the daughter of Philip Herbert ['see under 'Herbert, Philip, first earl of Montgomery and fourth earl of Pembroke (1584-1650)]. He succeeded to the barony in 1680, but only took his seat in the Lords on 24 November 1696, when under threat of committal for non-attendance. He was a tory, and a friend and supporter of Robert Harley (afterwards earl of Oxford). By licence dated 23 April 1702 he married Bridget, the only daughter and coheir of Peregrine Bertie of Waldershare, Kent, with whom he had four sons and four daughters. 
On the accession of Queen Anne Poulett was appointed lord lieutenant of Devon, and on 10 December 1702 was sworn of the privy council. He was described by Macky in 1705 as 'certainly one of the hopefullest Gentlemen in England; is very learned, virtuous, and a Man of Honour; much esteemed in the Country', although 'a mean Figure in his Person' and 'not handsome' (GEC, 'Peerage', 10.620). On 2 April 1706 he was elected FRS, and on 10 April he was appointed one of the commissioners to negotiate the treaty of union with Scotland. He was created Viscount Hinton St George and Earl Poulett on 24 December. From 8 August 1710 to 30 May 1711 he was first lord of the Treasury in Harley's administration, and from June 1711 to August 1714 he served as lord steward of the household. On 25 October 1712 he was elected, and on 4 August 1713 he was installed, KG. 
Poulett seldom spoke in parliament, although he worked hard and enthusiastically as a manager between the houses, whipping up good attendances on special occasions. On 11 January 1711 he raised the issue of the reverse at Almanza, which formed the subject of the second debate on the progress of the war in Spain, and on 27 May of the following year he defended the duke of Ormond while accusing Marlborough of squandering the lives of his officers for personal gain. Marlborough challenged him to a duel, which caused him some agitation. His wife communicated the circumstance to Lord Dartmouth, who prevented the meeting by placing Poulett temporarily under arrest. He lost his places on the accession of George I, during whose reign he hardly spoke in parliament except to oppose the 'Septennial Bill' on 14 April 1716 and the bill of pains and penalties against Atterbury on 15 May 1723. However, while Oxford was in the Tower following his impeachment, Poulett was instrumental in persuading certain peers to vote for his friend's acquittal. 
During the reign of George II, Poulett lived the life of a country gentleman, but was rallied to the court party by the gift of a lord of the bedchamber's place to his eldest son, John, who entered the Lords as baron of Hinton St George on 17 January 1734. On 10 December 1742 Poulett spoke in support of the proposal to take Hanoverian troops into British pay. He died on 28 May 1743 and was buried on 3 June at Hinton St George, Somerset. 


@@@@@


doc= 22635


Poulson, George (1783-1858), topographer, produced his first publication, the copiously illustrated 'Beverlac, or, The antiquities and history of the town of Beverley... and the collegiate establishment of St. John's', in 1829, with the assistance of Charles Frost (1781/2-1862). This was followed by his principal work, 'The history and antiquities of the seigniory of Holderness, in the East Riding of the county of York, including the abbies of Meaux and Swine, with the priories of Nunkeeling and Burstall' (1840-41). This was based on original records and the unpublished manuscripts of the Revd William Dade (1740-1790) in the library of Burton Constable, and it contains valuable, if not always accurately transcribed, material which is now lost. Poulson also edited Henry William Ball's 'Social History and Antiquities of Barton-upon-Humber' (1856). He died at Barton upon Humber on 12 January 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 22636


Pouncy, Benjamin Thomas (d. 1799), draughtsman and engraver, may have studied engraving with his father, Edward Pouncy. He was certainly a pupil of William Woollett, and is said (in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of 1799) to have been his brother-in-law; his wife's name was Ann. Pouncy's place and date of birth are unknown but the evidence of his work and a portrait of him by Henry Edridge in the British Museum indicate a birth date of about 1750. He was one of a group of London-based artists with Kentish associations which included Woollett, Thomas Hearne, William Alexander, and Edridge. 
Pouncy has been described as 'a feeble draughtsman' (Grant, 163), but his topographical watercolours are of a high quality. Among a number of Kentish views shown by him at the Society of Artists and Royal Academy exhibitions between 1772 and 1789 was 'The Gate of Dandelion, Near Margate' (exh. RA, 1788), a subject also drawn by Alexander, Edridge, and the young Turner. Pouncy's picture is most probably the watercolour exhibited as 'A Haycart Approaching a Castle Gateway' in London in 1978 at Agnew's annual exhibition of watercolours and drawings. A group of watercolours by him is in the collection of the Kent Archaeological Society, and there are good examples in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, the Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester, and the Victoria and Albert Museum. A large 'View of Margate Harbour' in the British Museum shows him to have been a highly accomplished master of the gentle pencil, pen, and watercolour wash technique so popular with topographical artists towards the end of the eighteenth century. 
As a printmaker Pouncy produced large reproductive plates imitative of the style of Woollett, plates to illustrate a number of antiquarian and travel books, and some etchings and engravings after his own designs. The large plates are of classical, landscape, and seascape themes after such artists as Richard Wilson, Solomon Delane, and Robert Cleveley. His technique of overlaying line engraving on an etched design is identical to Woollett's, and several plates, such as an 'Apollo and the Seasons' (1777), after Wilson and John Hamilton Mortimer (held in the British Museum), are collaborative enterprises, Pouncy having engraved the landscape and Woollett the figures. In the 1770s Pouncy formed a link with Lambeth and provided architectural and archaeological illustrations for the historian Andrew Coltee Ducarel, the librarian at Lambeth Palace. One of his earliest Lambeth works is his illustration of the 'Monument of John Tradescant' in St Mary's churchyard, dated 1773, for John Nichols's 'Bibliotheca Topographica Britannica' (1782-8). After this date he worked regularly for Ducarel, although he did not live in Lambeth until 1780 and it is not clear whether he was ever employed as a member of staff at Lambeth Palace Library. 
Pouncy's steady hand and keen eye for detail were also well employed in the production of facsimile illustrations -- some of his copies of medieval manuscripts for Thomas Astle's 'The Origin and Progress of Writing' (1784) being of exceptional quality. Towards the end of his life he engraved some of the finest plates to Sir George Staunton's 'An Authentic Account of an Embassy from the King of Great Britain to the Emperor of China' (1797), after drawings by William Alexander. The engraver and watercolourist Joseph Powell ('fl'. 1796-1833) gave his address 'At Mr Pouncey's, Pratt Street, Lambeth' in 1797, and may therefore have been a pupil of the artist. Pouncy died at this address on 22 August 1799 and was buried in the churchyard of St Mary's, Lambeth. Witnesses to his will were Joseph Powell and Elizabeth Woollett. 


@@@@@


doc= 22637


Pound, James (1669-1724), astronomer, was baptized on 2 March 1669 at Bishop's Canning, Wiltshire, the son of James Pound and his wife, Mary. He matriculated at St Mary Hall, Oxford, on 16 March 1687, graduated BA from Hart Hall on 27 February 1694 and MA from Gloucester Hall in the same year, and obtained a medical diploma and MB on 21 October 1697. He practised medicine only briefly, but, perhaps in consequence, enjoyed the courtesy title of Dr Pound; he took holy orders and entered the service of the East India Company as chaplain to the merchants of Fort George, Madras. From India he was sent to Chushan Dao, an island south of Shanghai, where he arrived in 1700. 
During his voyages Pound made what simple astronomical observations he could and noted the changing magnetic variation. He corresponded with John Flamsteed, the astronomer royal, who hoped that Pound would be able to provide observations of the southern stars, and for this purpose oversaw the construction of a fine 3 foot quadrant in the workshops of Thomas Tuttle. It was shipped to Pound in 1700, but its arrival was delayed by the vagaries of weather, and it reached him, sadly corroded, only in 1704. 
In 1702 Pound joined a group of merchants who built a fort and settlement on Pulo Condore, one of a group of islands now known as Con Son, off the Mekong delta. He possessed an 18 inch quadrant and a clock, and was able to send observations to Flamsteed as well as specimens of plants and animals to Dr Charlett of Oxford University. But on 3 March 1705 the native troops attacked the settlement, setting fire to the buildings. Pound was one of eleven Europeans who escaped, having lost all their possessions, and fled the island in the sloop 'Rose', making for Malacca and eventually Batavia. He reached England in July 1706. The year after his return Pound was presented to the rectory of Wanstead, Essex. When Flamsteed died in 1720 he vacated it, and Lord Chancellor Parker presented him to Flamsteed's former living of Burstow, Surrey. He married on 14 February 1710 Sarah (died 1715), the widow of Edward Farmer. Their firstborn son died at birth; a daughter, Sarah, died unmarried at Greenwich on 19 October 1747. 
Pound had been elected fellow of the Royal Society on 20 December 1699, so that his admission was delayed until 30 July 1713, by which time he possessed a 15 foot telescope and had sufficient reputation as an astronomer to be invited on to the board of visitors for the Royal Greenwich Observatory. Edmond Halley presented Pound's observations of the total solar eclipse of 3 May 1715 to the Royal Society, the first of three reports from Pound to be published in 'Philosophical Transactions' that year; the others dealt with the occultation of a star by Jupiter and an eclipse of the moon on 30 October. In 1716 and 1717 he made various planetary observations. In 1717 the Royal Society lent Pound the 123 foot focal length lens which Huygens had made; he mounted this in Wanstead Park as the objective of an aerial telescope (one with no tube), supporting it on the maypole lately removed from the Strand, in Westminster, and procured for the purpose by Isaac Newton. Such ungainly apparatus was inconvenient to use, but Pound managed to master it to the extent that his observations of the five known satellites of Saturn enabled Halley to correct his own calculations. Newton employed Pound's micrometrical measurements of Jupiter's disc, of Saturn's disc and ring, and of the elongations of their satellites, in the third edition of his 'Principia' (1726), and obtained from him data for correcting the places of the comet of 1680. Pound recorded two payments of 50 guineas from Newton in 1719 and 1720 for these or other services. The French astronomer Laplace also employed Pound's observations of Jupiter's satellites in determining the planet's mass, and Pound himself compiled in 1719 a set of tables for the first satellite, introducing an equation for the transmission of light. 
Pound's second marriage, in October 1722, was to Elizabeth (1673-1740), the daughter of Matthew Wymondesold; she possessed her own estate of $10,000, while her brother, Matthew Wymondesold, was a successful speculator in South Sea stock and the proprietor of the Wanstead estate. There were no children of this marriage. Pound was responsible for encouraging a love of astronomy in his nephew James Bradley (bap. 1692, d. 1762). He had paid for Bradley's education, and nursed him through smallpox; many of their observations were made together at Wanstead, among them those of the opposition of Mars in 1719 and of the transit of Mercury on 29 October 1723. Their measurement of gamma Virginis in 1718, the first made of the components of a double star, was part of their search for solar parallax; Pound may have aided in planning the observations of gamma Draconis which led Bradley to his discovery of the aberration of light. He was a frequent visitor of Samuel Molyneux (1689-1728), promoter of reflecting telescopes, at Kew. He was commissioned by the Royal Society in July 1723 to test John Hadley's reflecting telescope, and reported favourably on its performance. Pound died at Wanstead on 16 November 1724. His widow resided with Bradley at Oxford from 1732 to 1737; she died on 10 September 1740 and was buried at Wanstead. 


@@@@@


doc= 22638


Pounds, John (1766-1839), cobbler and ragged-school teacher, was born in St Mary Street, Portsmouth, on 17 June 1766, the son of a naval dockyard sawyer. With little education, Pounds was apprenticed at the age of twelve to a shipwright. The turning point in his life came in 1781 when he was permanently injured by a fall into a dry dock. Left permanently disabled, Pounds resorted to the more sedentary occupation of shoe-mending. From 1803 he lived and worked in a small weatherboarded shop in St Mary Street, one of the poorest parts of Portsmouth, which became famous as one of the first ragged schools. It was estimated that between 1818 and 1839 Pounds provided free schooling for approximately 500 street children. 
Pounds's philanthropy was recounted in a long obituary and afterwards inspired anecdotal memoirs and eulogies in Britain and America. In particular, the Scottish philanthropist Thomas Guthrie acknowledged the inspiration of Pounds in his 'Pleas for Ragged Schools' in 1847, 1849, and 1860. Charles Dickens's portrayal of the schoolmaster in 'The Old Curiosity Shop' may have been based upon Pounds. 
Pounds began his charitable work for outcast children of Portsmouth in 1818, teaching his disabled nephew and a friend to read. While continuing to trade as a cobbler, he possibly taught as many as forty pupils at a time, accepting only the poorest and most ragged. Pounds used an interrogative approach to teach simple 'Bible' study, morality, reading, writing, arithmetic, and nature study. He taught cookery to the girls and shoe-mending to the boys, and fed and cared for them when they were ill. Pounds's own poverty was illustrated by his use of discarded books, scraps of newspapers, and handbills as teaching aids, although he later accepted books from the local Unitarian High Street Chapel. A Unitarian himself, Pounds encouraged children to attend services and Sunday school at the chapel. 
An idealistic oil painting by the journeyman shoemaker H. S. Sheaf, widely distributed in a lithograph engraved by W. S. Charpentier, depicted Pounds with black hair and strong unlined features, surrounded by industrious children. However, Hawkes's memoir probably gives a more accurate picture of Pounds as self-neglected, lame, thin, dirty, and grey haired, with a heavily lined face and a harsh, strident voice. He never married. 
Pounds died suddenly on 1 January 1839 at the Portsmouth home of his friend Edward Carter. He was buried in the High Street Chapel graveyard, on 5 January. His fame drew hundreds to his funeral. An inscribed plaque in the chapel and monument on his grave were paid for by subscriptions from Britain and abroad. Portsmouth subsequently established a number of ragged schools in his name. 
Pounds was not the founder of ragged schools but was one of a number of working-class pioneers in the early history of the movement. He cared for the bodies, minds, and souls of his pupils, and some aspects of his work can be seen in the later development of the Ragged School Union. 


@@@@@


doc= 22639


Povey, Charles (bap. 1651?, d. 1743), writer and entrepreneur, may have been the Charles Povey, son of John and Elizabeth Povey, baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 27 July 1651. Povey himself was ambiguous about his ancestry, claiming only that his birth was neither noble nor ignoble. His brother, Josiah (died 1727), was a clergyman at Telscombe, Sussex. Povey was married -- his wife's name was Anne -- but had no children. His first published works were political tracts directed against James II. For these writings he was gaoled in the 1680s but he continued to write about Jacobitism in 'A Challenge to All Jacobites' (1689) and 'A Challenge in Vindication of the Revolution' (1690). 
More is known about Povey from the late 1690s when he turned to economic subjects. He published 'Proposals for Raising one Thousand Pounds' (1699) and entered Britain's thriving coal trade as a wholesaler in 1700. Povey was harassed by coal-dealers in Wapping, where he was living. He had designed a hoist, which supplanted lightermen, for the job of unloading ships at his wharf at Execution Dock, enabling Povey to sell coal priced below the going rate. After being convicted for selling false measure in May 1700, Povey maintained the charges had arisen only because he would neither pay bribes to officials nor price like his competitors. He defended his discount pricing in 'A discovery of indirect practices in the coal-trade, or, A detection of the pernicious maxims and unfair dealings of a certain combination of men, who affirm, it is a cheat to be just, and just to cheat' (1700); but he traded coal no more. In 1701 he published 'The Unhappiness of England as to its Trade by Sea and Land', a work lamenting the impact of monopolistic practices on shipowners and their crews. Povey increasingly came to believe that government regulation was needed to avoid unfair practices in the British coal trade. His next two publications were on religious topics: 'Meditations of a Divine Soul' (1703) and 'Holy Thoughts on a God-Made Man' (1704). The latter of these also illustrates Povey's lifelong interest in astronomy, a topic to which he would return in 'The Opinions of Ancient Philosophers about the Substance and Nature of the Sun' and 'An Enquiry into the Nature... of the Heavenly Bodies'. 
By 1705 Povey was at Hatton Garden, near Holborn, in a rented building he called the Traders' Exchange House. There Povey matched lenders with debtors, connected those wishing to sell properties with those wishing to buy them, and generally operated as a middleman. In conjunction with that business Povey edited a single-sheet newspaper, the 'General Remark on Trade' (containing mostly advertisements), the first number of which appeared on 23 October 1705. It continued under that title through to issue number 213 of 7 July 1707 and as 'General Remark on Trade: with an Extract of Foreign News and Observations on Publick Affairs', and similar titles with expanded contents, until at least 22 December 1708. Advertisements became secondary to tables of currency exchange, stock valuations, commodity prices, export and import figures, lists of ships 'Arriv'd at, and Departed from several Ports of England', foreign news from papers such as the 'Paris Gazette', lists of 'Christenings and Burials', columns of miscellany, brief descriptions of various English towns, counties, and of the universities at Oxford and Cambridge, and running essays on topics such as the trade of England and Scotland. All of that was pitched with Povey's characteristic twist of charitable concern: 'Favour our Undertaking... because out of the Profits arising by the sale of it, 20 Poor Boys, most Orphans... are Cloathed, kept to School, allowed 2s. 6d. a Week each, and at Two Years End, Five Pounds a piece given, to put them out Apprentices to Trades, and Twenty others taken in their Room.' These same boys comprised Povey's delivery team. Povey relied, as well, on the labour of others for some of the paper's content, which he admitted was reprinted from 'the Old Athenian Mercuries'. 
Povey's scheming mind would not be contained and he became caught up in the excitement over insurance companies. In May 1706 Povey floated his own life-insurance scheme, proposing that it would 'bring 'The Traders Exchange-House' into far greater Credit and Business than ever' and also make the 'General Remark on Trade' 'sell all over England, more than any other'. It would also fulfil a philanthropic role by 'increasing the Store of the Rich, bettering the Circumstances of Persons in a middle Station, and maintaining many who are reduced to want, by Losses, Oppression, or Wrong'. From the quarterly premiums collected from 4000 subscribers, Povey proposed to pay claims on a quarterly basis and also to use profits to construct 'a Structure in or some where about 'London', containing 100 Rooms of $1,000 Value; and the said Structure is to bear the Name of the TRADERS EXCHANGE-HOUSE-COLLEGE', that would house 100 of the most needy policy-holders and their families. 
In 1708 Povey began a new project that would insure 'Moveables, Goods, Merchandizes and Wares from Loss by Fire'. The Exchange House Fire Office long outlived Povey's involvement. Povey organized a group of 'Exchange House Men' who, 'able Bodied' and chosen 'out of different Parishes, in the Cities and Suburbs of London and Westminster', would 'be ready at Hand, to give immediate Assistance, where-ever a FIRE shall break forth, in Removing and Securing the Moveable Goods, Merchandizes and Wares, of all... Subscribers'. Subscribers' homes were identified by 'a Mark representing the SUN, nailed up against their Houses'. In 1709 Povey gave up part ownership of the Exchange House Fire Office, or the Sun Fire House as it was popularly known, to raise capital for yet another enterprise. 
On 4 October 1709 Povey started his Half-penny Carriage of Letters, a business that infringed upon the monopoly of the royal post. Povey's service delivered letters and parcels between depots in London, Southwark, and Westminster, where patrons identified Povey's mail carriers by their ringing bells. Accused in late 1709 by the Post Office authorities of infringing on their monopoly, a number of letters were exchanged in the 'London Gazette' between Povey and his accusers. Povey's halfpenny post continued to operate for a number of months during this clamour, but eventually was stopped. 
On 21 August 1710 Povey had printed the first number of 'The Visions of Sir Heister Ryley, with Other Entertainments'. Described by Povey himself as an imitator of Richard Steele's 'The Tatler', 'The Visions' was published thrice weekly in two quarto leaves and continued for eighty numbers until 21 February 1711. In the preface to the first number Povey explained that he thought 'it adviseable to steer a middle Course, between the Rocks of Padantick Elocution, and the Shallows of a mean Utterance; so as to adapt his Compositions to the Genius of every Capacity'. His design was 'to instill into the Mind of the Reader sound Principles of Morality, under the Vail of a pleasing Vision, an apposite Allegory, or a lively Emblem'. 
In 1714 Povey published, anonymously, his 'An Inquiry into the Miscarriages of the Four Last Years Reign' (1714), in which he summarized his long-standing literary goal to supplant vice for virtue: 'I have writ Five large 'Quarto' and 'Octavo' volumes, with many other treatises to recommend Vertue, Loyalty, Wit, Honour, Truth, and Moderation, and to extinguish Vice, Rebellion, Bribery, Pride and Ambition; and yet I see Men of Figure and Fortune still more degenerate in their Morals.' That work was followed by others, such as 'A Memorial of the Proceedings of the Late Ministry' (1714), one of the most widely circulated pro-whig works of the year, and 'The English Parliament Represented in a Vision' (1715). Thereafter in 'The Subject's Representation' (1717), 'English Inquisition' (1718), and 'Britain's scheme to make a new coin of gold and silver to give in exchange for paper money and South Sea stock' (1720), Povey turned against the ruling whigs. 
Povey continued to contrive and market devices of various sorts well into his old age. In 1723 he designed a 'fire-annihilator', essentially a water bomb, for extinguishing fires. Almost twenty years later he invented a self-playing organ, a device that was announced in the 'Daily Advertiser' on 23 November 1742. He also had begun to look back at his earlier years, publishing a number of books that made reference to his past deeds and tribulations, such as 'The Secret History of the Sun Fire Office' (1733), 'England's Memorial to Obtain Right and Property' (1737), and 'The Torments after Death, upon Atheism and Charity' (1740), a book that commented on his various charitable projects. 
Povey's last major publication was 'The Virgin in Eden' (1741), a book written against Samuel Richardson's popular epistolary novel 'Pamela'. Povey considered Richardson's to be far from a moral tale, writing in his preface: ''Good God! what can Youths and Virgins learn from' Pamela's 'Letters, more than Lessons to tempt their Chastity; those Epistles are only Scenes of Immodesty, painted in Images of Virtue; Disguises in Masquerade, as I shall prove.'' Povey's book concluded with a catalogue listing forty of his works. Another short section, headed 'Universal Charity imitates the Saviour of the World', is informative of the mind behind his writings. Povey declared his ruling belief that: 'no Man can be a Christian in Life and Doctrine, that judges or censures any Speech or Language in Points of Religion, or Principles of Faith. Neither can we be perfect, unless we are invested with a Spirit of Mercy and Pity to all living Creatures in Distress and Pain.' It is in that spirit that: 'the Author most humbly petitions the Publick in Christ's Name, to make one Act of Charity universal in this Island. That as often as any Housekeeper, or other Person, boils any Butcher's Meat, and makes no Use of the Liquor in their own Families, that they would be so good to engage their Servants not to waste or fling the same away as usual, but give it to poor Families.' Povey died on 4 May 1743 in Little Alie Street, Goodman's Fields, London. His will, dated 13 January 1742, was published, by his request, in the 'London Daily Post', where it appeared on the front page on 1 and 8 July 1743. Povey left his self-playing organ to the parish of St Mary, Newington, Surrey, and money for the parish charity school, for the poor of Whitechapel, and for his executors, Elizabeth Smith, his niece, and Margaret Stringer, a widow. For 100 poor tradesmen's and ministers' widows, Povey left money and a copy each of 'The Virgin in Eden' and 'Torments after Death'. Povey was buried beside his wife on 8 May at St Mary's, Newington. 


@@@@@


doc= 22640


Povey, Thomas (b. 1613/14, d. in or before 1705), colonial entrepreneur and administrator, was the son of Justinian Povey (died 'c'.1652), auditor of the queen's revenue and auditor of the exchequer, and his second wife, Anne Keterick (died 1657). One of a family of at least nine children, he seems originally to have been destined for the law and entered Gray's Inn in 1633. Believing the civil war to be unjustifiable, he had at first taken up a non-partisan stance, expounding his views in a pamphlet, 'The Moderator, Expecting Sudden Peace or Certaine Ruine' (1643), which elicited three hostile responses, the last entitled 'Neutrality is Malignancy, by J.M.' (1648). Povey was elected an MP for Liskeard in March 1647, only to be secluded at Pride's Purge in December 1648. As the English revolution progressed, moderation became ever more suspect; Povey was thought to be disloyal to the council of state and in 1650 a warrant was issued for his arrest. Trade now seemed a safer and more profitable pursuit than politics, particularly since Povey possessed, so he avowed, a fortune hardly sufficient to support him. There was a family connection with the colonies; his father had been appointed a commissioner of the Caribbee Islands in 1637. 
In 1654 Povey helped to fit out the 'western design' fleet, working closely with the London merchant-capitalist Martin Noell, principal banker to the government and, as Povey noted, a man in 'extraordinary favor' with Cromwell (Andrews, 50). Two of Povey's brothers accompanied the fleet, and although this expedition was, in many respects, an ill-organized fiasco, the debacle did not hurt the Poveys. Richard and William Povey acquired minor offices in Jamaica and Barbados respectively and Thomas himself soon became a recognized expert on matters colonial. He was to remain at the centre of colonial affairs for the next decade. 
A whole series of papers concerning the proper governance and commercial exploitation of England's colonies flowed from Povey's pen. It was probably he who first proposed a council of trade, to which he was duly appointed in 1655, and he became the chairman, secretary, and most active member of the council for America (1657). Throughout the vicissitudes of protectorate, restored Commonwealth, and restored monarchy, Povey kept his nerve, built up his contacts and tailored his 'overtures' and 'propositions' to suit the situation. He maintained an extensive correspondence with governors and other colonial officials and acted as a minor patronage broker, although he modestly disclaimed to be anything but a 'Journeyman', with 'little power' but 'greater industrie' (Bliss, 261). 
Povey continued to invest in colonial trading schemes with Noell and others, some profitable, some not (the Nova Scotia Company was probably among the latter). His fortune grew; he had found that the marriage market could offer as much as the colonial in the disordered days of the late 1650s and in 1657 he married Mary, daughter of John Adderly, widow of John Agard of King's Bromley, Staffordshire, 'a handsome old woman that brought him money' (Pepys, 4.297). An elegant house next door to the residence of the earl of Northampton was built for the Poveys on Arch Row, the most fashionable part of Lincoln's Inn Fields. A daughter, Frances, married Giles Bland, executed in 1677 for his role in the Virginia rebellion. 
In February 1659 Povey was elected to Richard Cromwell's parliament as an MP for Bossiney. A year later he was among the MPs secluded in 1648 who took their seats in the reassembled Long Parliament. To the moderate-minded Povey, the Restoration was both pleasing and profitable. In 1661 he was granted the receiver-generalship for the rents and revenues in Africa and America, the office 'being framed by him and he much versed in plantation affairs' ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 94; '1663-4', 408). His colonial expertise was also recognized by an appointment to the council of trade (1660) and the secretaryship of the committee for foreign plantations (1661). In 1660 he became treasurer of the duke of York's household, and in 1662 treasurer of Tangier and surveyor-general of its victualling department. In 1662 also he was made a master of requests extraordinary, with the promise of the next ordinary vacancy. 
Such prodigious pluralism took its toll, however. Povey was clearly overextended and in 1665 he resigned the treasurership of Tangier to Pepys: they were to share the profits equally. In 1666 he lost his place as the duke of York's treasurer, being replaced by Sir Allan Apsley. According to Pepys (a not entirely disinterested observer), Povey had neglected all his business and committed it to unfit hands (Pepys, 7.191-2) and it is clear that his accounts were in substantial disarray. Not surprisingly, Pepys found Povey 'mightily discontented... about his disappointments at Court' in this period (Pepys, 7.228). His career never recovered. As recorder of Thetford, he botched the management of the Thetford election in 1669; Sir Joseph Williamson, client of the powerful Arlington, had to look elsewhere for assistance. Understandably, an application in 1673 to discuss the transference of Williamson's council clerkship to Povey upon the former's elevation to a secretaryship of state was unsuccessful; there was a petulant tone to Povey's letter as he bewailed the fact that the good will and power of his friends had not as yet recommended him to some advantageous station (Christie, 2.5-6). It was becoming clear in this period that he could gain patronage and office only for his talented nephew, William Blathwayt, and not for himself. On James II's accession (1685) he lost his mastership of requests, although he remained a member of the queen dowager's council. 
There was much more to Povey than his offices, however. Pepys found him 'most excellent in anything but business' (Pepys, 6.215). He was a gentleman of fashion and a 'nice contriver of all elegancies' (Evelyn, 4.84). The house in Lincoln's Inn Fields was a marvel: its cabinet work, wine cellar, stables, and pictures, especially the 'trompe-l'oeil' perspectives, all gained universal admiration. Povey was a generous, if garrulous, host, always ready to retail the latest court gossip and to offer advice on social niceties. He was a connoisseur and collector (he donated thirty-eight rare volumes to the College of Arms) and an original member of the Royal Society, serving on its council in 1663, 1679, and 1691 ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. Fascinated by things mechanical, in 1669 he applied with John Prichard for a patent for an engine for raising water and he perfectly conforms to the definition of the 'virtuoso': intensely curious, interested, as were Evelyn and Pepys, in the 'rare' and the 'wonderful', a man of taste and discrimination and possessed of the funds to indulge them. In 1701 the financier Sir Stephen Fox congratulated Povey on his memory and his letter writing: 'No man in England of 87 years' could compare (Glos. RO, MS D1799/C9). His last appearance in the Royal Society's membership lists is 1702. Administration of his estate was granted to his nephew, William Blathwayt, in July 1705. 


@@@@@


doc= 22641


Powell, Jane (c.1761-1831), actress, was born about 1761. Conflicting stories in contemporary biographies describe her birth in Cranbrook, Kent, and her early life as a series of amorous adventures. Whatever the truth of these she made her first appearance at the Haymarket as Alicia in Nicholas Rowe's 'Jane Shore', on 29 August 1788. The following day's 'Public Advertiser' identified her as Mrs Farmer, while the 'Morning Chronicle' gave her name as Miss Palmer. From the Haymarket she went to Drury Lane in the autumn of 1788. Appearing there as Mrs Farmer, she played Anne Bullen to the Queen Katharine of Sarah Siddons, Virgilia in 'Coriolanus', and Leonora in Edward Young's 'The Revenge'. 
During the summer of 1789 she performed in Liverpool, where she married William Powell (1762-1812), a prompter there and at Drury Lane; the two returned to London, where Jane Powell retained her engagement with the Drury Lane company until 1811. As the primary support for Sarah Siddons, her forte lay in heavy and intense tragedy. Among many others, her roles included Andromache in 'The Distrest Mother', Mrs Haller in 'The Stranger', and Almeria in 'The Mourning Bride'. When Siddons refused to play Edmunda in Ireland's Shakespearian counterfeit 'Vortigern', Powell took the part (2 April 1796). That season she performed Hamlet for her benefit to Dorothy Jordan's Ophelia, and garnered some praise. In addition, she created Matilda in 'The Curfew' and the title role in 'Adelgitha'. In the 'Dramatic Mirror', Thomas Gilliland described her as 'majestically beautiful', with 'a full mellow-toned voice'. He further complimented her brilliant conversation and engaging manner, and mentioned that she had a country house at Norwood. A critic for the 'Thespian Dictionary' (1805) and other commentators noted her usefulness to the theatre and her tall and elegant figure. 
Some time before 1808, Jane Powell separated amicably from her husband. Following his death in 1812, she married John James Renaud (died 1834), a provincial actor, on 31 January 1813 at St George's, Bloomsbury. They were soon separated, but she continued to perform using his name after 1814. 
After travelling for two years in the provinces, Jane Renaud settled in 1818 in Edinburgh, where she had previously acted in the summer of 1802. The parts for which she was chiefly cast were the same intense roles she had made her own in the capital: Meg Merrilies in 'Guy Mannering', Lady Macbeth, Gertrude in 'Hamlet', and Belvidera in 'Venice Preserv'd'. The parts she created in Edinburgh included Helen Macgregor in 'Rob Roy', the Queen in 'The Heart of Midlothian', Elspat in 'The Antiquary', Lady Douglas in 'Mary Stuart', and Janet in 'The Twa Drovers'. She was credited with providing splendid support to Edmund Kean and other great London tragedians who made starring visits to the Scottish capital. 
Jane Renaud displayed in her old age a rare dignity of bearing, correct elocution, and a telling voice, although she became increasingly incapacitated. She appeared for the last time on 30 September 1829, when she acted Gertrude to Kean's Hamlet. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' reported that her Edinburgh manager continued to pay her 2 guineas a week until her death, which occurred in London, on 31 December 1831, when she was 'aged about 70'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22642


Powell, Baden (1796-1860), physicist and theologian, was born at Stamford Hill, Hackney, Middlesex, on 22 August 1796, the eldest son of Baden Powell (1767-1841), wine merchant and, in 1831, high sheriff of Kent, and his first cousin Hester Powell (1776-1848). The Powell family circle included leading representatives of the Hackney Phalanx, the group of conservative high-churchmen of considerable influence on church politics in the early nineteenth century. Thomas Sikes, Joshua Watson, and Henry Handely Norris were Powell's relatives. Powell entered Oriel College, Oxford, in the spring of 1814, and started residence in January 1815. William Van Mildert, bishop of Llandaff and a family friend, recommended him to the provost, Edward Copleston, and to Richard Whately, at the time firm allies of the conservative Phalanx. Powell became Whately's pupil and lifelong friend. Having graduated in 1817 with first-class honours in mathematics he proceeded MA and was ordained in 1821. He had started his clerical career in December 1820 as curate of Midhurst, Sussex, then in 1821 took the vicarage of Plumstead, Kent, a living to which he was presented by his family. There he conducted experiments on radiant heat and wrote his early contributions to conservative journals financed by the Hackney Phalanx. He married, on 17 July 1821, Eliza Rivaz, but the poor health of his wife forced him to leave Plumstead in 1824, and take residence in Clapton, London. 
Powell's early experimental work concentrated on radiant heat and the wave theory of light. In papers published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' and elsewhere he argued that radiant heat could be intercepted by a glass screen, whereas the light emitted by hot bodies, being capable of passing through the screen, increased the heating effect of the source. His work on heat attracted little attention and almost no support, whereas his experiments on the dispersion of light carried on in the early 1830s as exemplification of Cauchy's wave theory of light met with qualified approval. However, he was unable to keep pace with the increasing mathematical sophistication of contemporary physics; his papers submitted to the Royal Society in the late 1830s contained serious mathematical flaws. 'Several times under similar circumstances I have felt determined... never again to meddle with science,' he wrote to Lubbock in February 1839, acknowledging his 'want of command of analysis' (Royal Society, Lubbock MSS, fols. 301, 294). Nevertheless, he published 137 scientific papers between 1822 and 1860 in numerous journals, eleven with the Royal Astronomical Society (RAS). 
A fellow of the Royal Society since 1824 (vice-president in 1853), upon being elected Savilian professor of geometry at Oxford in 1827 Powell resigned his living. He was an active member of metropolitan scientific bodies such as the Geological and Astronomical societies and was a leading participant in the 1850 royal commission for the reform of British universities. He contributed widely to the British Association for the Advancement of Science with surveys of current research on heat, or on issues fashionable in the mid-century such as the fall of meteorites. He served the association as a local secretary at Oxford in 1832, and was a council member in 1837, vice-president, and president of section A in 1847. From the early 1840s Powell increasingly chose for himself the gentlemanly role of commentator on philosophical, scientific, and theological issues, and on the way they impinged upon the social and political condition of England. 
Powell's fame rested on his role as commentator on theological issues. He was a fierce critic of the Tractarian movement, and to the dismay of high-church relatives such as Edward Churton he gained the controversial reputation of being an early proponent of what was to become known as broad church theology. Yet his early sermons, his anonymous contributions to the 'British Critic' and the 'Christian Remembrancer' of the 1820s, and the essay 'Rational Religion Examined' (1826) fully reflected the conservative stand of the Hackney Phalanx as interpreted by the Oriel school. On the one hand Powell affirmed that scriptural prophecies and miracles attested to the truth of the gospels; he therefore argued that it was impious to submit their content to the test of fallible human reason, as atheists and Unitarians were doing. On the other hand, natural theology was at best a pious exercise; at worst, a concession to unbelievers. While accepting that true rational Christians had no other consistent choice but to submit to the literal wording of the scriptures, following Dugald Stewart, Powell maintained that necessary truths were attained only by deduction from mathematical definitions. Thus he held that knowledge of the natural world was inevitably contingent, since man's definitions of phenomena were bound to be limited; hence, no result of scientific endeavour could be construed as contradicting the scriptural narrative. 
These theological debates were further complicated by social pressures which spilled over into the pulpit. The 'Catholic Emancipation Bill' of 1829 broke the alliance between Oriel College -- by and large favourable to the measure -- and the Hackney Phalanx. Powell became convinced that his family circle did not understand the need to adapt to the climate of change pervading the country. In a sermon preached in 1833, 'Revelation and Science', he forcefully expressed the view that the social and theological leadership of the Anglican church could not be defended by repressive measures, but only through a well considered reform of Christian apologetics centred on the authority of scientific progress. This view reflected his engagement in the early 1830s in the reform movement at Oxford University, where he pleaded for scientific subjects to be given higher curricular consideration. Powell was public examiner in 1828 and 1831, effectively the only representative of mathematics, and, beside Charles Daubeny and Richard Walker, of physical science in the university. Quiet in manner, an excellent and popular lecturer, he was outspoken in his views. Once all hopes for reforming the curriculum were crushed, Powell took advantage of the 1832 British Association meeting at Oxford to appeal to the intelligentsia of the country. This infuriated conservative dons. Moreover his opposition to the mounting wave of the Tractarian movement also contributed to his increased isolation at Oxford. Powell's personal ties to Richard Whately were reinforced by marriage. His first wife having died on 13 March 1836, on 27 September 1837 he married Charlotte Pope, the younger sister of Whately's wife, Elizabeth; they had one son, Thomas Baden Henry ('b'. 1841), later judge of the chief court, Lahore, and three daughters. 
Powell articulated his philosophy of science and of Christian apologetics which had evolved from an epistemology based on deduction from axiomatic like premises and his initial opposition to the argument from design, to a natural theology founded on induction, therefore accessible to all rational beings including the intellectual industrial elites and also the leaders of the emerging working-class movement. He argued that the progress of discovery bespoke of a God operating through natural laws and that developments in the physical, the natural, and the social sciences all showed the ultimate beneficial results of an arrangement that men had the duty to understand. Therefore, to Powell a belief in miracles increasingly became the symptom of primitive ignorance -- to him embedded in the 'Old Testament' -- of the natural causes at the bases of ordinary or extraordinary phenomena. 
During the late 1830s and the 1840s, frequent visits to London and Dublin made up for his loss of influence in Oxford. Family tragedy, remarriages, and his intellectual life prolonged his stay in the capital, to where he finally moved in 1854, while retaining his chair. His second wife had died on 14 October 1844 leaving him four infants. From at least 1829 Powell had been a visitor to John Lee's Hartwell House, had there befriended the family of Captain William Henry Smyth RN (1788-1865), and was a regular attender and council member with Lee and Smyth at the RAS, of which Powell was vice-president from 1856 to 1857, and its dining club. On 10 March 1846, at the age of fifty, Powell married Henrietta Grace (1824-1914), whom he had watched grow up as the accomplished sixth of nine children (including the astronomer Charles Piazzi Smyth) of Captain Smyth and his wife, Annarella (1799-1873). Of seven sons and three daughters born of this marriage, two and one respectively died in infancy. Among the survivors were Sir George Smyth Baden-Powell and Robert Stephenson Smyth Baden-Powell (1857-1941), first Baron Baden-Powell of Gilwell (Henrietta adopted the name Baden-Powell about ten years after her husband's death); Robert became founder of the Boy Scouts. Powell preached regularly at Trinity Church, Paddington, and on several occasions at Kensington Palace, at Prince Albert's invitation. 
In the political and social climate of the late 1840s and the 1850s Powell felt reassured that Britain was not going to fall victim to the revolutions and extreme working-class movements proliferating in continental Europe. Together with new friends like William Benjamin Carpenter, Robert Chambers, Francis Newman, William Rathbone Greg, or the 'Westminster Review' group, he felt that the intellectual conservatism of his former high-church allies represented a serious obstacle to the reforming strategy aimed at making timely concessions to avoid political upheavals. He was convinced that innovations in science, such as the evolution theory propounded by Chambers in his 1845 'Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation', or in Charles Darwin's 'Origin of Species' (1859), had to be embraced by the elites because they constituted further evidence that nature, as well as society, was governed by iron laws and not by capricious will. He could neither understand nor tolerate Adam Sedgwick's and William Whewell's charge of atheism against Chambers and evolutionism. In the 'Order of Nature' (1859) Powell spoke of a society where religion expressed itself following the levels of intellectual and moral development of its members. It was therefore acceptable that the masses should believe in miracles and in paternal providence, whereas the well-educated rulers wisely believed in the religion of a natural order created by a benevolent rational being. 
A series of essays published in the 1850s, and especially the 'Essay on the spirit of inductive philosophy, the unity of worlds and the philosophy of creation', made Powell a well-known figure at London intellectual soirees and at court; he mixed with literary lions such as Charles Dickens, George Eliot, and George Henry Lewes, Baron von Bunsen and Thomas Henry Buckle, and famous scientists such as Charles Babbage, John Frederick Herschel, Charles Lyell, and Roderick Impey Murchison. Powell's outspoken denial of miracles, and his enthusiastic comments on Darwin's theory in 'On the study of the evidences of Christianity' which he contributed to the famous 1860 issue of 'Essays and Reviews', marked the breaking up of relations with Whately, and made Edward Bouverie Pusey doubt that Powell was still a Christian. His death prevented his involvement in the prosecution brought against several contributors to 'Essays and Reviews', as well as his intention to take part, a week later, in the Oxford meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, where he would most certainly have defended Darwin's theories against Bishop Wilberforce's strictures. On 9 March 1860 he presided at his last dinner as president of the RAS Club. He died of bronchitis followed by heart failure on 11 June at his home, 6 Stanhope Street, Hyde Park Gardens, London, three weeks after the birth of his youngest son. He was buried at Kensal Green, London. Contemporaries described him as a kind-hearted person, 'happy as a child' when discussing his favourite theological or scientific ideas, though younger naturalists such as Joseph Dalton Hooker and later generations unfairly looked upon him as a typical example of a cleric meddling with scientific theories which he was ill-equipped to judge. 


@@@@@


doc= 22643


Powel, David (1549x52-1598), Church of England clergyman and historian, was the son of Hywel ap Dafydd ap Gruffudd of Denbighshire (his father's family possessed a pedigree stretching back to beyond 1073) and of Katherine, the daughter of Gruffudd ab Ievan ap Dafydd. At the age of sixteen, some time between 1566 and 1568, David Powel went to study at Oxford University although his initial college membership is not known. He migrated to Jesus College upon its foundation in 1571 and is thought to be its first graduate, receiving the degree of BA on 3 March 1573 and that of MA on 6 July 1576. In the meantime Powel married Elizabeth, the daughter of Cynwrig of Marchwiail before 1570. The couple had at least three sons -- Daniel, the eldest and a layperson, and two clerics, Samuel (1570-1600) and Gabriel (1576-1611). Powel's scholarly talents were considerable enough to attract the support of the church. Even before his graduation he was named vicar of Ruabon in Denbighshire in 1570, and the rectory of Llanfyllin in Montgomeryshire followed in 1571. In 1579 he exchanged Llanfyllin for the vicarage of Meifod, and he also held two prebends in St Asaph Cathedral. Such support allowed Powel to pursue further studies in theology so that in 1583 he earned the degree of BTh from Oxford on 19 February and proceeded DTh on 11 April. Between about 1584 and 1586 Powel was at Ludlow, serving as private chaplain to Sir Henry Sidney, president of the council in the marches of Wales. 
Although Powel did not enjoy a long life, he contributed significantly to the development and preservation of Welsh culture and helped to plant the seeds of protestantism in Wales. As both a staunch Welsh patriot and a committed protestant Powel engaged in many activities and projects to forward those interests. In particular, he supported efforts to translate the entire 'Bible' into Welsh, a project that was finally completed in 1587. Its translator William Morgan gratefully acknowledged Powel's assistance. During 1588 he was mentioned as one of three preachers working in the diocese of St Asaph and for years he kept the privy council informed about illegal and possibly treasonous books, libels, and prophecies that circulated among Welsh Roman Catholics. 
Powel was also a respected scholar and early on became associated with the group of geographers that included John Dee and Richard Hakluyt. He may be the 'D. P.' who wrote the elementary tract 'Brief Rules of Geography for the Understanding of Maps and Charts' (1573). When John Dee left England in September 1573, Powel inherited the project of preparing for publication a manuscript in the possession of Sir Henry Sidney. It was the English translation by the antiquary Humphrey Llwyd of some medieval Welsh chronicles. With the help of William Cecil, Lord Burghley, who provided him with access to important documents, Powel went further and greatly expanded Llwyd's work in both depth of detail and in chronological coverage. In doing so he was careful to make his additions typographically distinct. The result was Powel's 'magnum opus', 'The Historie of Cambria, now called Wales' (1584), the first printed history of Wales. It remained a major and popular source for medieval Welsh history until the early nineteenth century. In it Powel showed his ardent support of the Tudor dynasty. 'The Historie of Cambria' also popularized the legend of the discovery of America by the Welsh prince Madoc about 1170. Powel, along with Dee, personally supported the authenticity of the Madoc story which served to justify English encroachments on Spanish America as Hakluyt showed in his 'Discourse on Western Planting' (1584). It also for centuries spawned countless tales of encounters with Welsh Indians on the American frontier. 
The next year, 1585, saw Powel publish an omnibus volume containing editions of Ponticus Virunnius's 'Historia Britannica'; Gerald of Wales's 'Itinerarium Cambriae' and 'Descriptio Cambriae' (omitting its negative comments about the Welsh); and the letter entitled 'De Britannica historia recte intelligenda'. This volume he dedicated to Sir Henry Sidney, who now employed him as his personal chaplain. According to his son Daniel and the Welsh lexicographer Dr John Davies, Powel also worked on a Welsh dictionary throughout his life which was never published. He died early in 1598 at Ruabon and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 22644


Powell, Edward (c.1478-1540), Roman Catholic priest and martyr, was born in Wales and was educated at Oxford University, where he graduated MA, became a fellow of Oriel College by 1495, and proceeded DTh on 26 June 1506. In 1501 he had been granted leave to study in Paris, where he began his theological course. He also held several administrative posts at Oriel, including those of collector of rents (1494-5), junior treasurer (1499-1500), chaplain (1499-1501), and dean (1500-01), and was made commissary to the chancellor of the university on 8 June 1508. He was ordained priest in 1499. Powell was involved in two university scandals, although neither proved damaging to his career: in 1510 he was implicated in an embezzlement scheme involving the university proctors and the keepers of the university chests, while in 1522 he was the object of a writ of 'praemunire' obtained in a secular court by a scholar called Roger Cruge, leading Archbishop Warham to defend his jurisdiction as chancellor over all civil cases in the university. 
After resigning as college chaplain Powell became rector of Bleadon, Somerset, in 1503, and in that same year was made a canon of Lincoln, where he held several prebendaries in the years that followed. In June 1507 he was made a canon of Salisbury, where he also held several prebendaries as well as being provost of St Edmund's College, Salisbury, from 1509 to 1534. His other livings included the vicarage of Powerstock, Dorset, 1522-6, the vicarage of Melksham, Wiltshire, 1526-34, and the rectorship of Radipole, Dorset, from 1526 to an unknown date. To allow for all his simultaneous livings Powell was granted a papal dispensation in November 1514 to hold three incompatible benefices. 
After Henry VIII's accession in 1509 Powell became a frequent preacher at court, but his real fame began in the 1520s as an early leader in the English fight against Lutheranism. In 1521 he was commissioned to write a treatise against Luther, and in 1522 he sent Cardinal Wolsey the first instalment of his manuscript entitled 'De immunitate ecclesiae'. This work won high praise, being offered to Henry VIII by the university as the best work of its kind to be written there, and it was expanded and published in 1523 as 'Propugnaculum summi sacerdotii evangelici... adversus Martinum Lutherum', a three-part dialogue between Powell and Luther defending the holiness of the pope and the seven sacraments. The book also included a lengthy list of past heresies adopted by Luther, an anti-Lutheran epigram by the Cambridge scholar William Dynham, and a preface by the prominent humanist Sir Thomas Elyot. 
Powell's reputation for theological conservatism, while helpful in the 1520s, made him extremely controversial in the 1530s. He became one of Katherine of Aragon's theological counsellors during the king's divorce proceedings, and in 1533 he was one of the few English theologians who gave an unfavourable opinion of the king's divorce case. In that same year, when Hugh Latimer preached fiery protestant sermons at Bristol, Powell, William Hubberdyne, and Nicholas Wilson were hired by local conservatives to preach against him. In one of his sermons Powell allegedly condemned civil rulers who 'corrupteth and infecteth the people with open sinning and ill example of living, as he that doeth put away his first wife and taketh another without assent or dispensation of the Church'. In another sermon, he argued that by virtue of the sacrament of holy orders, 'princes are subject to priests and prelates' (TNA: PRO, SP 6/3, fol. 57'r'). In 1534 he preached again in Bristol, in defence of pilgrimages. 
Powell refused to take the oath of succession, and was thus deprived of all his benefices and committed to the Tower of London on 10 June 1534. He was attainted of treason on 3 November 1534. He was shortly thereafter moved to Dorchester gaol, where he lived in appalling conditions, set in stocks and without a bed to lie on. He was moved back to the Tower in 1535, probably as a result of his plaintive letter to Sir Thomas Arundell dated 12 April. In the Tower his conditions improved, but his gilt chalice and richly finished pax were stolen from him, allegedly by an agent of Thomas Cromwell. Powell passed the remainder of his life there, resolutely refusing to acknowledge the royal supremacy or the validity of the king's remarriage. He was executed for treason at Smithfield on 30 July 1540 as part of the king's symbolic, simultaneous execution of three protestants for heresy and three papalists for treason. Powell was brought from the Tower to Smithfield tied together with the protestant Robert Barnes, leading to the anonymous publication, soon after their deaths, of a satirical pamphlet, 'The Metynge of Doctor Barons and Doctor Powell at Paradise Gate' (1540). Powell was beatified by the Roman Catholic church in 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 22645


Powell, Foster (bap. 1734, d. 1793), pedestrian, was baptized at Horseforth, near Leeds, West Riding of Yorkshire, on 12 December 1734, the son of William Powell ('b'. 1706?). Details of his education are unknown. In 1762 he travelled to London where he worked as a clerk to an attorney in the Temple before moving to live with his uncle at New Inn. Later that decade he began his career as a pedestrian, walking 50 miles along the London to Bath road in 7 hours. In November 1773 he made the first of four timed walks from London to York and back, completing the journey in 5 days and 18 hours; five years later he is recorded as having run 2 miles in 10 minutes. The high point of Powell's career came in the late 1780s. In 1786 he walked 100 miles on the Bath road in 23 hours, 15 minutes; in 1787 he covered the 122 miles between London Bridge and Canterbury (and back) in 24 hours; in 1788 he improved his time for 100 miles to 21 hours 35 minutes, and completed his second London to York expedition, the same journey being undertaken once more in 1790. His best performance for this latter walk was made on his final attempt in 1792 when he walked from Shoreditch church to York Minster in a time of 5 days, 15 hours, and 15 minutes. On longer walks Powell, described as 'tall and thin, very strong downward [and] well-calculated for walking', fortified himself with five hours sleep a night, 'light food', and brandy (Wilson, 3.275). 
Powell does not appear to have profited greatly from his walks, despite considerable popular interest in his athleticism. His final journey to York brought him $10, said to be the largest sum he ever received. Other wagers, such as that for a second walk to Canterbury in 1792, were lost when on the return to London he took the wrong road at Blackheath. On this occasion donations from sympathetic friends exceeded the original bet. However, such gifts proved insufficient to keep him from poverty, 'his constant companion in his travels... to the hour of death'. He died at New Inn on 15 April 1793 at the age of fifty-nine. His funeral procession on 22 April 1793 'was characteristically a 'walking' one from New-inn, through Fleet-Street, and up Ludgate Hill' to his place of burial at St Faith's Church in St Paul's Churchyard ('GM'). 


@@@@@


doc= 22646


Powell, Gabriel (bap. 1576, d. 1611), Church of England clergyman and polemicist, was born at Ruabon, Denbighshire, and baptized on 13 January 1576, the son of David Powell (1549x52-1598) ['see 'Powel, David], vicar of Meifod, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Cynwrig ap Robert ap Hywel. He entered Jesus College, Oxford, in Lent term 1592, and graduated BA on 13 February 1596. He then spent some time in foreign universities, and probably, from 1601, at his sinecure rectory of Llansanffraid-ym-Mechain, Montgomeryshire, which he held until 1607, and which his father had also held. On 2 March 1605 he supplicated for a BD degree from St Mary Hall, Oxford, but it is not known whether he obtained it. 
That year Powell became domestic chaplain to Richard Vaughan, bishop of London, and in 1606 rector of Chellesworth, Suffolk, a crown living. He was collated on 14 October 1609 to the prebend of Portpool in St Paul's, by Bishop Thomas Ravis of London, and on 15 October 1610 he was admitted vicar of Northolt, Middlesex, by Bishop George Abbot of London. 
Powell was highly regarded by most contemporaries for his learned and virulently anti-papal polemics. He opposed any toleration of 'Romanism' as an idolatrous and even heathenish religion. His 'Consideration of the Papists' (1604) predicted dire consequences for England should Prince Henry marry a Catholic. The following year he labelled the Roman church the 'synagogue of Antichrist' and declared himself 'as certain that the pope is Antichrist as that Jesus Christ is the son of God and redeemer of the world' ('Disputationum... de Antichristo et eius ecclesia', dedicatory epistle). This treatise won the admiration of Matthew Sutcliffe and Thomas Holland, and was sent to Venice when that city appeared on the verge of converting to protestantism. Forty years later Archbishop Laud would denounce Powell's 'peremptoriness', quoting with distaste his equation of the pope with Antichrist as an example of 'foul language in controversies' which he doubted 'did ever yet convert an understanding papist' ('Works', ed. W. Scott and J. Bliss, 1847-60, 4.309). Certainly Powell never minced words; to his own generation, however, he was simply enunciating orthodoxy. 
Theologically a staunch Calvinist, Powell defended particular election, reprobation, and assurance of salvation. Taken together, the zeal of his antipopery, Laud's denunciation, and his authorship of a popular treatise of practical piety, 'The Resolved Christian' (1600), written to 'recall the worldling' from a 'voluptuous, foolish, prodigal, passionate' life ('Resolved Christian', 7) and in its seventh edition by 1617, may explain why some nineteenth-century historians (following Benjamin Brook, 'Lives of the Puritans', 1813) mistook him for a puritan. In fact, Powell directed his polemical ire against protestant nonconformists as well as Catholics, and has been more aptly placed 'at the centre of the ecclesiastical establishment', a 'government apologist' for the state church and its ceremonies (Milton, 56, 111). In 'De adiaphora' (1607), one of three treatises directed against the puritan William Bradshaw, he condemned the 'seeds of discord' sown by 'factious and giddie brains' who scrupled at the surplice, sign of the cross, and kneeling at communion ('De adiaphora', 13.60). These are things indifferent, resisted only by 'factious frequenters of private conventicles' ('A Rejoynder unto the Mild Defence... of the Silenced Ministers', 1607, 100). In the interests of unity and order Powell defended the 'absolute power and authority' given by God to the church to establish ceremonies and rites ('De adiaphora', 9). Underlying much of his anti-Catholic writing was his message to nonconformists that ceremonies and liturgy did not make the Church of England less than thoroughly protestant; he was himself a living emblem of the English church's tradition of denouncing popish superstition while maintaining liturgical order. The theme he hammered home in his exchanges with Bradshaw was that nonconformists undermined the battle against the true enemy, the Roman Antichrist, by creating dissension in the protestant camp and paving the way to separatism. 
Powell always made it clear, however, that popery was the greater threat. He stressed both the common theological ground between puritans and conformists and their common devotion to the king. Puritans were merely 'factious brethren', while papists were 'bloody traitors' faithful only 'unto the pope and the devil' ('Consideration of the Deprived and Silenced Ministers', 1606, 10-11). Powell died in 1611. The exact date is unknown, but his successor was admitted to the Northolt living on 18 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 22647


Powell, George (1668?-1714), actor and playwright, was apparently the son of Martin Powell (died 'c'.1698), an actor in the King's Company. His date of birth is uncertain, but he is identified most plausibly as the George Powell who was born on 17 January 1668 and baptized in St Giles-in-the-Fields five days later, ten months after a Martin Powell had married Elizabeth Heath at St Clement Danes. About the time that he began his acting career George Powell married Mary (died in or after 1723), who became a reliable actress for Christopher Rich's company, beginning in the 1695-6 season. Her first known part was as Gammer Grime in Aphra Behn's 'The Luckey Chance' in April 1686, and she may have left the stage or played small parts for the next nine years. Almost nothing is known about her. 
Powell began acting in the 1686-7 season and may have appeared in a few plays before his first recorded performance as Don Cinthio in Behn's 'Emperor of the Moon' (March 1687). Hannah Lee, a Bartholomew fair booth manager, claimed that he began acting there for her mother. He acted a large number of parts for the United Company and began to be given numerous prologues to speak, a sure sign of popularity and stardom. Tall, handsome, and with a fine voice and body, Powell was well suited for the stage and for heroic parts. In his early years he played such parts as Friendly in 'The Widow Ranter', Cassander in 'The Rival Queens', and the title roles in 'Valentinian' and 'Edward III'. 
When his friend William Mountfort was murdered by a rival for Anne Bracegirdle's attention in 1692 Powell was given many of his parts. He was then often cast opposite Susanna Mountfort in an attempt to make them the new leading couple (Holland, 152). Among the roles Powell took over were Granger in Dryden's 'Marriage a-la-mode', the rake Bellmour in William Congreve's 'The Old Batchelor', and male leads such as Clerimont in Thomas D'Urfey's 'Love for Money'. 
When he chose to stay with Christopher Rich at the time of the secession of Thomas Betterton and the majority of the most experienced players in the United Company in 1695, Powell was given many of Betterton's parts. Rich and his partner Sir Thomas Skipwith rewarded his loyalty with additional money as well as the parts and put him in charge of rehearsals. Among Powell's skills was 'taking off' Betterton. Soon after the division of the companies he acted Heartwell in Congreve's 'The Old Batchelor', mimicking Betterton throughout; the intention, which succeeded, was to draw an audience away from the newly formed company at Lincoln's Inn Fields. Cibber, who acted Fondlewife as Thomas Doggett, wrote that Powell 'was allow'd to have burlesqu'd [Betterton] very well'. Powell also acted Falstaff as Betterton. In a prologue in 1698, allegedly in retaliation for a 'scurrilous' prologue spoken against him at 'Betterton's Booth', he mocked the ageing Betterton's taking the parts of heroic lovers: '
As when a nauseous Vizor in the Pit, 

Grossly abuses, without Sense or Wit, 

All justifie her merited disgrace, 

If they unvail the grievance of the place, 

And shew the drab in her own ugly face. 

If in Return of a dam'd dull Abuse, 

We pluck the Vizor off from t' other house: 

And let you see their natural Grimmaces 

Affecting Youth with pale Autumnal Faces. 

Wou'd it not any Ladies Anger move 

To see a Child of sixty-five make Love (Grunting like B). 
('Fatal Discovery', late February 1698; Danchin, 3.481)' In this, his mid-career, Powell was playing Montezuma in 'The Indian Queen', Aboan in 'Oroonoko', Worthy in 'The Relapse', Cornavo in 'The Fatal Discovery', Jaffeir in 'Venice Preserv'd', and the title roles in 'Caligula', 'Macbeth', and 'Achilles'. His parts tended to be those of the second man, not the lead, perhaps because of his rather unruly personality. Typical parts were Cassio in 'Othello' and Lothario in 'The Fair Penitent'. He was a virtuoso actor, however, and the newspapers often mentioned his appearances in new, successful plays. Steele once wrote tellingly of one of his benefits: 'this Day the haughty 'George Powell' hopes all the Good-natured Part of the Town, will favour him whome they Applauded in 'Alexander', 'Timon', 'Lear' and 'Orestes', with their Company this Night, when he hazards all his Heroic Glory for their Approbation in the humbler Condition of honest 'Jack Falstaff'. (R. Steele, 'The Spectator', 7 April 1712)' Both Addison and Steele wrote about Powell's frequent appearances as Alexander in various plays, and once included him in a fantasy performance in which he was to ride a 'Dromedary, which nevertheless Mr. 'Powell'' was to call 'Bucephalus' to fight the comedian William Pinkethman as King Porus mounted on an elephant ('The Spectator', 5 April 1711). In spite of his irregular life, he continued to add roles until the end of his career. Among these were Portius in 'Cato' and Cassius in 'The Albion Queens'. 
The irrepressible Powell seems to have alternated theatrical triumphs with scrapes with the law. In spite of his immense talent and considerable ambition and competitiveness, he drank heavily and by 1696 occasionally even appeared drunk on stage. In that year he played himself in 'The Female Wits', was cast as the actor the women fought over, but was depicted as drinking in the early morning and unashamed of regarding 'neither Times nor Seasons in Drinking' (act I, scene xiii). Powell spent a great deal of his time at the bar of the Rose tavern. Thomas Davies wrote that he: 'often toasted to intoxication, his mistress, with bumpers of Nantz-brandy; he came sometimes so warm, with that noble spirit, to the theatre, that he courted the ladies, so furiously on stage, that, in the opinion of Sir John Vanbrugh, they were almost in danger of being conquered on the spot. (Davies, 3.416)' Vanbrugh described Powell as having begun drinking at six in the morning and 'wadling' on stage; he made a joke of the warmth of Powell's lovemaking when under the influence of alcohol: 'I confess I once gave 'Amanda' [played by Jane Rogers] for gone, and am since (with all due Respect to Mrs. 'Rogers') very sorry she scap't; for I am confident a certain Lady... who highly blames the Play, for the barrenness of the conclusion, wou'd then have allowed it, a very natural Close. (J. Vanbrugh, preface to 'The Relapse')' It is impossible to give a complete list of Powell's legal difficulties. As one of the king's servants, as all actors at the patent theatres were, he was subject to arrest and punishment by the lord chamberlain and the House of Lords alone, and that fact probably saved him from gaol on several occasions. For example, two people were ordered to be apprehended on 23 April 1690 for arresting Powell without the lord chamberlain's permission. Some of his problems stemmed from debt. In the early 1690s the journalist Abel Roper took him to court for $10, and Daniel and Elizabeth Tofield carried on a three-year campaign to recover $10 that he owed them for a purchase, and another man claimed $30. About 1703 he was in a dispute with Christopher Rich over his pay and was not allowed to leave the company until he had paid his debts to it. Cibber said he was 'so hunted, by the sheriffs officers, for debt, that he usually walked the streets with his sword in his hand (sheathed)', and sometimes they would yell to him as he menaced them, 'We do not want you 'now', Master Powell' (Davies, 3.453). 
Powell was a witness to the murder of William Mountfort, and he himself had a propensity for violence. He was arrested on 1 May 1698 for assaulting one of William Davenant's sons, probably Ralph, the treasurer of the company, or, less likely, Thomas, the nominal manager, 'with the intention, as [it] seem'd, to kill him', and then drawing his sword on Lieutenant-Colonel Stanhope, who tried to intervene (Milhous and Hume, 1.329-30). For this offence, he was confined briefly in the Gatehouse, and the bond was set at a rather high $200 for himself and $100 each for two friends who would swear for his good behaviour. Ralph was murdered by would-be robbers on 18 May 1698, and that may have ended the case. Powell was one of the actors ordered suspended for assaulting Aaron Hill on 2 June 1710. Hill had been made manager of William Collier's company, and the actors reacted with violence to Hill's style. Hill's complaint read, 'Powell had shortened his sword to stab me in the Back & had cut a Gentlemans hand through who prevented the thrust' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 12.113). The lord chamberlain noted in his order to discharge Powell from 'her Majesty's Company' that he had been 'formerly guilty of the like offenses' (ibid.). For both of these assaults Powell was suspended from acting for several months. Once when Drury Lane employed him before the suspension had expired the lord chamberlain shut the theatre down. In 1698 his actions contributed to Lord Monmouth moving in the House of Lords that actors should not be allowed to wear swords. 
Like many actors of his generation, Powell was occasionally in legal trouble for trying to change companies without permission or for giving a performance or two at a small theatre. He was confined to the Porter's Lodge, a place often used to gaol minor offenders against the crown, privy council, or parliament, for leaving Lincoln's Inn Fields in June 1704, and was arrested in November 1705 for refusing to act at the Queen's Theatre. The annotation with this apprehension suggests his unusually violent temper; it charges him with attempting to incite a riot in the company, and ten days later, on 24 November, the companies were ordered not to employ him because he 'behav'd himself with great insolence'. Cibber described him as one of the company with 'contempt of all discipline' when Wilks became manager. Wilks 'was reduced to the necessity of challenging and fighting several amongst the ring-leaders', including Powell, who refused to fight (Davies, 3.452). He was, however, indisputably an excellent, desirable actor. Congreve and Vanbrugh were complained against for trying to hire Powell in December 1705, and in 1707 Drury Lane was silenced once again for letting him perform before his suspension was up. 
Powell wrote 'The Treacherous Brothers' (1689), 'Alphonso, King of Naples' (1690), 'A Very Good Wife' (1693), 'Bonduca' (1695), and 'The Imposture Defeated' (1697). Both 'The Treacherous Brothers' and 'Alphonso' are violent tragedies with big doses of the time's popular rant and pathos. 'The Treacherous Brothers' includes romantic love, a poisoning, and a scene of Menaphon impaled on spikes. 'Alphonso' features rival lovers killing each other and then an emotional scene for the heroine, who stabs herself and speaks her last lines 'bleeding, her hair hanging loose'. Powell used music well in his plays, and in 1696 he and John Verbruggen rewrote Nahum Tate's 'Brutus of Alba' into an opera. The piece shows their canny business and theatrical sense, for they used popular elements from Tate's and other plays, got Daniel Purcell to write some of the songs, and used four sets from Dryden's 'Albion and Albanius', two from Shadwell's 'Psyche', one from Settle's 'Fairy Queen', and pieces of sets from other lavish productions. The stunning machinery came from 'Albion' and 'The Fairy Queen' (Holland, 45). 

'A Very Good Wife', a play Powell whipped up to take advantage of the demand for new satiric comedies in the 1692-3 season, is composed of chunks of Richard Brome's 'The City Wit' and 'The Court Beggar' and James Shirley's 'Hide Park'. Brome's Crasy becomes Courtwit, 'A Gentleman, who by his Generous Temper, has wasted his Fortunes, and put to his shifts', a premier part for Powell (Holland, 159). Mary Pix accused him of plagiarizing most of 'Imposture Defeated' from her 'The Deceiver Deceived' while it was still in manuscript. Pix had offered her play to Drury Lane when Powell had the power to reject it, and his 'Imposture Defeated' was produced in September 1697. Her play was performed at Lincoln's Inn Fields in late November. In his preface 'To the reader' Powell writes that the play was 'only a slight piece of Scribble, purely designed for the Introduction of a little Musick, being no more than a short weeks work'. He avers he never read her play, although he did as she requested and asked the company to consider it before 'she very mannerly carry'd the Play to the other House'. In the part of Bondi, by whatever means conceived, he created another virtuoso role for himself. He insisted that both he and Pix got the plot from an unnamed novel, and Laura Rosenthal has pointed out that no playwright in that time feared any legal action for plagiarism (Rosenthal, 181-2). The prologue at Lincoln's Inn Fields begins: '
Our Authoress, like true Women, shew'd her Play 

To some, who, like true Wits, stole't half away, 

' and this may be the 'abuse' that Powell was answering in the prologue that mocked Betterton. Pix, known for her unattractive face and figure, may be the 'nauseous Vizor' who 'merited disgrace'. Unlike Pix's play, Powell's play emphasizes farcical debauchery and drunkenness rather than her intrigue comedy plot about arranged marriages. It also depends upon music for much of its entertainment and includes 'Endimion... a Masque' (act V, scene i). 
Powell's career was marked by irascible, erratic behaviour, and, after the actors' secession, he changed theatres often. In the winter of 1701 he moved from Drury Lane to Lincoln's Inn Fields, returned to Drury Lane in June 1704, then in April 1705 went to the Queen's Theatre, and, after a suspension, back to Rich's Drury Lane in February 1707, where he spent the rest of his career except for brief appearances such as those at Pinkethman's Greenwich Theatre. Powell died on 14 December 1714 and was buried four days later at St Clement Danes. His funeral was paid for by the Drury Lane Theatre and the expenses included 5 quarts of white port, 5 quarts of red, and 4 quarts of sack. Obituaries ranked him in talent with Betterton and Charles Hart; Joseph Addison declared him 'excellently form'd for a Tragedian, and, when he pleases, deserves the Admiration of the best Judges' (J. Addison, 'The Spectator', 16 April 1711), and Thomas Davies summed him up as 'an actor of genius' (Davies, 3.453). His wife acted at least until the year of Powell's death and survived him by a number of years. 


@@@@@


doc= 22648


Powell, Sir George Smyth Baden- (1847-1898), politician and author, born at Oxford on 24 December 1847, was the third son of Professor Baden Powell (1796-1860) and his third wife, Henrietta Grace (1824-1914), daughter of Admiral William Henry Smyth. Major-General Robert Stephenson Smyth Baden-Powell, founder of the Boy Scouts, was his younger brother. The Powells were a large family whose wealth was earned by Sir George's great-grandfather David Powell (1725-1810), a London merchant who left $300,000 and fathered fourteen children. George was admitted to St Paul's School on 17 September 1858, and to Marlborough College in April 1864. Owing to a burst blood vessel suffered through strenuous sporting activity, he was obliged to leave school at midsummer 1866. He travelled abroad for three years, visiting India, Australasia, South Africa, and Spain, Portugal, Norway, and Germany. In 1872, at the age of twenty-five, he published his observations on Australia and New Zealand under the title 'New Homes for the Old Country', notable for its information on natural history. On 18 October 1871 he matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford, graduating BA in 1875 and MA in 1878. In 1876 he obtained the chancellor's prize for an English essay on the subject of 'The Political and Social Results of the Absorption of Small Races by Large'. In the same year he entered the Inner Temple as a student; but in 1877 he became private secretary to Sir George Fergusson Bowen, governor of Victoria. A convinced free-trader, in 1879 he published 'Protection and bad times with special reference to the political economy of English colonisation', in which he attacked the notion that while free trade was good for a manufacturing country like England, it was unsuited to newer communities. In 1880 Baden-Powell was appointed as commissioner to inquire into the effect of the sugar bounties on West India trade, visiting the West Indies in 1880-81. One outcome was his book 'State Aid and State Interference' (1882), a strong protest against protection, which made use of his observations on the West Indies. In November 1882 he was appointed joint commissioner (with Colonel Sir William Crossman) to inquire into the administration, revenue, and expenditure of the West India colonies. The commission's report, completed by Easter 1884, was published in five blue books, and for his services Baden-Powell was created a KCMG in 1888. In January 1885 he went to South Africa to assist Sir Charles Warren in the pacification of Bechuanaland, afterwards making a tour of investigation of Basutoland and Zululand. 
At the general election of November 1885 Baden-Powell was elected as a Conservative for the Kirkdale division of Liverpool, a heavily nonconformist seat created in the redistribution of 1885. He successfully held the seat at the three subsequent general elections, until his death three years after that of 1895. As a parliamentarian he was a popular local member, overcoming initial discomfort among constituents towards a 'carpetbagger' who had no previous connections with Liverpool. His position as a strong proponent of free trade was well regarded locally, as were his imperial links and what obituary tributes described as his 'staunch support of the Protestant Church'. 
In 1886 Baden-Powell travelled to Canada to assist in the establishment of a line of steamers between Vancouver and Yokohama. He worked vigorously for this scheme, which was subsidized by the government and reduced the length of a journey to Japan from forty-two to twenty-two days. In 1887 he was appointed (with Sir George Bowen) special commissioner to arrange the details of the new Maltese constitution; all the recommendations of the commissioners were adopted and they received the thanks of the government. 
During his visit to the Pacific coast of Canada in 1886 Baden-Powell had become interested in Britain and Canada's dispute with the American government over the Bering Sea fisheries, and had visited Washington on his way back to England to call attention to the question. In June 1891, when the controversy became acute, Lord Salisbury appointed him and a representative of the Canadian government to proceed to the Bering Sea to investigate the subject. The British claims were founded on their reports, and in December 1892 Baden-Powell was appointed British member of the joint commission in Washington; in the spring of 1893 he was chosen to advise those preparing the British case before arbitrators in Paris. For these services he received the thanks of parliament; and in 1892 he was made honorary LLD of Toronto University. 
On 8 April 1893 Baden-Powell married, at Cheltenham, Frances Annie (died Oct 1913), the only child of Charles Wilson of Glendowan, Cheltenham; they had a son and a daughter. Wilson had been a wealthy Australian pastoralist prior to returning to England, and was the brother of Sir Samuel Wilson, one of the richest men in Australia. An enthusiastic yachtsman, in 1896 Baden-Powell took a party of astronomers to Novaya Zemlya on his steam yacht, the 'Ontario', to observe the total eclipse of the sun on 9 August. He was also a prolific writer -- apart from the books already noted, he was the author of over forty articles in the leading journals of the day, such as the 'Quarterly', 'Westminster', 'Fortnightly', and 'National' reviews, dealing chiefly with imperial topics. In 'Postal universities', published in 'Temple Bar' in November 1872, he advocated a correspondence university for colonists in remote parts of the empire. He also edited 'The Truth about Home Rule' (1888), a collection of essays attacking Irish nationalism, and was a frequent writer for 'The Times' and other journals. Baden-Powell died of a kidney malignancy, at the age of only fifty-one, at his residence, 114 Eaton Square, London, on 20 November 1898, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 22649


Powell, Griffith (1560/61-1620), college head, was the third of four sons of John ap Hywel of Prysg Melyn, Llansawel, Carmarthenshire, and his wife, Annes, daughter of Gruffydd ap Henry. He matriculated at Jesus College, Oxford, on 24 November 1581, graduated BA on 28 February 1584, and proceeded MA on 21 June 1589, BCL on 12 July 1593, and DCL on 23 July 1599. From the time he entered Jesus College, of which he became a fellow in 1589 or 1590, his life was spent at Oxford. Under Francis Bevans (1586-1602) and John Williams (1602-13) he played a large part in the running of the college. He was 'an energetic and capable tutor' and a 'noted philosopher', writing two important works on Aristotle, 'Analysis analyticorum posteriorum' and 'De sophisticis elenchis', published respectively in 1594 and 1598. He also showed himself 'very diligent, industrious and careful' for the good estate of the college. Powell succeeded Williams as principal in 1613. His careful management of legacies and endowments made it possible to establish more resident fellowships and scholarships, and Jesus College became popular particularly with students from south Wales in Powell's time. His appeal to the Welsh clergy and gentry raised $764 5's'. 6died, which was used to build the hall, buttery, and kitchens, and the outer quadrangle of the college, with the chapel, was completed within a year of Powell's death. He died, unmarried, at Oxford on 28 June 1620, and was buried in St Michael's Church, Oxford. By a nuncupative will made on the day of his death, and proved on 15 June 1621, he left his estate of $648 17's'. 2died to the college; it was used to buy land in Flintshire to maintain a fellowship at the college. 


@@@@@


doc= 22650


Powell, Humphrey (d. in or after 1566), printer, of whose parentage nothing is known, was working near Holborn conduit, Middlesex, in 1547-9, from where he published 'An Holesome Antidotus' and 'Certayne Litel Treatises' (both 1548), and 'Oecolampadius's Sermon' and 'Barclay's Eclogues' (both undated). Soon afterwards Powell moved to Dublin, as printer to the king. In July 1550 a warrant was issued giving him $20 towards setting up, and he established the first printing press in Ireland, residing first in the great tower by the crane (probably Crane Lane). The only book to emerge from this press, in 1551, was a verbal reprint of the English common prayer of 1549. Powell's work probably consisted mainly of broadsides, for nothing is known before a broadside of 1561 against Shane O'Neill and another in 1564 against the O'Connors. In 1566, giving his address as St Nicholas Street, Powell issued an eight-leaf tract, 'A Brefe Declaration of Certein Articles of Religion', namely the eleven articles of 1559. 
It is not known if Powell was related to William and Thomas Powell, printers in London, but he was certainly a business associate of William and in 1553 they were joint defendants in an action brought in the court of common pleas concerning a printing house. Powell was also named as an original member of the Stationers' Company in its charter of 1556. He died, presumably in Dublin, in or after 1566. 


@@@@@


doc= 22651


Powell, Sir John (1632/3-1696), judge, was the son of John Powell of Pentre Meurig, Llanwrda, Carmarthenshire. As a boy Powell was taught by Jeremy Taylor at a school at Newton Hall, whence he entered Gray's Inn on 12 November 1650, and also probably matriculated at Jesus College, Oxford, on 7 December 1650. He graduated BA on 29 March 1653, and MA in 1654 from King's College, Cambridge. He was called to the bar on 13 November 1657, becoming an ancient in 1676. 
Nothing is known of Powell's legal practice, but in James II's reign he was marked out for rapid promotion. In April 1686 he was made a serjeant-at-law, appointed a judge of common pleas on the 24th, and knighted the next day. In the following Trinity term, in company with the other judges, he was asked his opinion of the dispensing power in the case of 'Godden v. Hales'. At first he reserved judgment, but then he concurred with the majority opinion. On 13 April 1687 he was transferred to king's bench. In that capacity he was among the judges who sentenced the earl of Devonshire to a fine of $30,000 for his assault on Colepeper, and presided over the trial of the seven bishops for seditious libel. On the latter occasion he showed himself hostile to the notion of a suspending power in ecclesiastical matters as set out in the declaration of indulgence because 'if this be once allowed of, there will need no parliament; all the legislature will be in the King' ('State trials', 11.427). As regards the bishops, 'if the King hath no such power (as clearly he hath not in my judgement), the natural consequence will be, that this petition is no diminution of the King's regal power, and so not seditious or libellous' (Keeton, 443). Several altercations with other judges followed from this, and as one of the Verneys' correspondents wrote, 'Powell spoke so much that some asked if he were Advocate for the Bishops' (Verney, 1.458). Not surprisingly, Powell received his quietus on 2 July 1688, soon after the trial ended. 
The revolution revived Powell's fortunes and on 18 March 1689 he was appointed a judge of common pleas. He faced some difficult moments when called before the House of Lords on 6 May 1689 to explain his decision to fine Devonshire, which was voted a violation of the privilege of the peerage, against 'Magna Carta', and the fundamental laws of the nation. However, he begged the house's pardon, claiming that 'he was misguided by some books, which he looked on as authorities' ('State trials', 11.1369). On 14 June 1689 he was called before the Commons to explain why he had been turned out of office by James II, to which he supposed 'it was about my opinion of the dispensing power', and 'upon giving my judgement about several 'quo warrantos' where the borough chose members of parliament by prescription' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 5.311). 
Powell died at Exeter of the stone, on 7 September 1696, aged sixty-three, and was buried on the 26th at Broadway, near Laugharne, Carmarthenshire, where his epitaph made mention of the offer of the great seal should he have changed his course. He left his estate to his son, Thomas (died 1720), created a baronet in 1698, 'the better enabling him to discharge the estate of Llaugharne purchased by him of Sir William Russell' (will). 


@@@@@


doc= 22652


Powell, Sir John (1645-1713), judge and politician, was born on 26 May 1645 in Gloucester, the eldest son of John Powell (died 1666) of Dewsall, Herefordshire, and also Gloucester, and his wife, Bridget (died in or after 1666). Powell's father was mayor of Gloucester in 1663 after the corporation had been purged. Powell was possibly the man admitted to Brasenose College, Oxford, on 21 May 1664, and he definitely entered the Inner Temple in 1664 and was called to the bar in 1671. He had succeeded his father in 1666. He was elected a common councilman of Gloucester in 1672, under the new charter, and was town clerk from 1674 to 1685. Powell was elected to the 1685 parliament by the freemen of Gloucester in defiance of the duke of Beaufort. Beaufort had him removed from the town clerkship in September 1685, but Powell took legal action and regained his place in 1687. Beaufort believed that Powell supported James II's religious policies and he was probably the John Powell who agreed to all three of James II's 'three questions', and who was nominated as a commissioner of inquiry into recusant fines in Herefordshire and Shropshire in December 1687. He was also recommended as a court candidate for the abortive parliament of 1688. 
Powell was created a serjeant-at-law in May 1689. He ceased to be Gloucester's town clerk on his appointment as a baron of the exchequer on 31 October 1691, and he was knighted on 4 November 1691. Originally he had been intended as a judge of common pleas, but the master of the rolls, Sir John Trevor, had objected. Powell was transferred to common pleas on 26 October 1695 and following the accession of Queen Anne he was promoted to queen's bench. As a judge he thus took part in the 'Ashby v. White' case over the franchise at Aylesbury, the Tutchin case over the publication of 'The Observator', and the prosecution of the Sacheverell rioters. Swift described him to Stella in July 1711 as 'an old fellow with grey hairs, who was the merriest old gentleman I ever saw, spoke pleasing things and chuckled till he cried again' ('DNB'). On 4 March 1712 he presided at the trial of Jane Wenham, the last person to be convicted of witchcraft in England. Though Wenham was found guilty and sentenced to death, Powell -- who had expressed doubts over the evidence -- first ensured that the sentence was reprieved and later secured her a royal pardon. The trial was also noteworthy for Powell's alleged comment, following a claim that Wenham could fly, that 'There is no law against flying' (Guskin, 53). On 2 June 1713 Powell was discharged from his duties, presumably on account of his age and ill health because he died a few days later on 14 June at his house in Gloucester after returning from Bath. 
Powell's will revealed that most of his estate had been settled on the marriage earlier in 1713 of John Snell MP with his 'niece' Anna Maria, the daughter of Robert Huntindon, bishop of Raphoe. Powell was buried in Gloucester Cathedral and a monument was erected by Snell to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 22653


Powell, John (fl. 1769-1785), portrait painter, of whose parents nothing is known, entered the Royal Academy Schools in November 1769. He was a pupil and assistant of Sir Joshua Reynolds, and painted reduced-size copies of Reynolds's portraits which he occasionally exhibited at the Royal Academy. The portrait of the duke of Cumberland in the National Portrait Gallery, after Reynolds, was once stated to be the work of Powell, although the reason for this assertion is now obscure. 
Powell copied Reynolds's family group of the duke and duchess of Marlborough with their children, now at Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire. The original, while in Powell's charge, was seized by his creditors, and narrowly escaped being cut up to pay his debts. According to Northcote, Reynolds, on seeing Powell's copy, perceived some important errors in his own composition which he subsequently corrected. 
A portrait in the National Gallery of Ireland, of the fifth earl of Harrington, is attributed to Powell. 


@@@@@


doc= 22654


Powell, Joseph (1780-1834), watercolour painter and printmaker, may possibly have been a son of the Joseph Powell and Mary March who married at St Marylebone in September 1776, and it is likely that he had family connections with Herefordshire and Worcestershire. He often painted there, and his sketchbook in the Victoria and Albert Museum is signed 'J. Powell, Salop, Bridgnorth'. Despite having been Powell's pupil, Samuel Redgrave misnamed him John in his 'Dictionary of Artists' and confused him with an enamel painter, J. Powell. The incorrect forename was repeated in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. When Powell first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1796 and 1797, he was living in the Lambeth house of Benjamin Thomas Pouncy (died 1799), the engraver and topographer, whose pupil he probably was. He was also connected with the watercolour painter Michael 'Angelo' Rooker, publishing an engraving after Rooker's drawing of Netley Abbey in 1800. He also etched after such old masters as Domenichino, Salvator Rosa, and Gaspar Poussin, and about 1810 made a series of soft-ground etchings of Egyptian scenes. There is, however, no other intimation that he ever travelled abroad. It is likely that some of his oil paintings and watercolours have been credited to more prestigious names, but his known watercolours are often both impressive and poetic. He was a very accomplished sketcher. By 1800 Powell had moved to Old Cavendish Street, and after living in John Street and Great Poland Street in 1819 he settled at 14 Allsop's Buildings, between Baker Street and Regent's Park. This remained his London address. Family tradition had it that a quarrel with William Turner of Oxford led to Powell's being blackballed at the Society of Painters in Water Colours. There is no record of this in the Old Watercolour Society's archives, but he aspired to membership of the Associated Artists (1808-11) and was the first president of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours set up in 1831 to combat what he and his fellows regarded as the selfish monopoly of the older body. He exhibited with them until 1834, and appears to have died towards the end of that year. His wife's first name was Harriet, and their eight children were baptized at St Marylebone. They were Charlotte Harriet ('bap'. 1820), Richard Foulkefs ['sic'] (1822), Joseph Rubens (1823-1896), Emma Roslin (1825), Clara (1827), Louisa Caroline (1828), Agnes (1830), and Adelaide (1832). Joseph Rubens Powell studied at the Royal Academy Schools from 1844, exhibited precociously from 1835 to 1871, and worked for the most part in oil. He died at Canterbury on 26 January 1896, leaving his effects to his spinster daughters and son John Christopher Powell, a machine manufacturer. The British Museum and Victoria and Albert Museum, London, Brighton Art Gallery, and Manchester City Galleries hold examples of Joseph Powell's work. 


@@@@@


doc= 22655


Powell, John Joseph (bap. 1753, d. 1801), legal writer, was baptized on 9 April 1753 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, the only son of James Powell of Queen Street, Westminster, and his wife, Ann. Admitted to the Middle Temple on 25 April 1775 he became a pupil of the conveyancer Charles Fearne, and was called to the bar on 5 May 1780. While in practice as a conveyancer Powell became one of the most prolific writers of legal treatises at a time when, following the publication of Sir William Blackstone's 'Commentaries', a number of writers were attempting to portray the common law as a science based on reason and principle. Powell wrote several works on aspects of property law, including 'A Treatise upon the Law of Mortgages' (1785), 'An Essay on the Learning Respecting the Creation and Execution of Powers' (1787), and 'An Essay upon the Learning of Devises' (1788). In addition he brought out new editions of Edward Wood's 'A Complete Body of Conveyancing' (1790-93) and of Fearne's 'An Essay on the Learning of Contingent Remainders' (1795). 
Powell's most important work was his 'Essay upon the Law of Contracts and Agreements' (1790), which was the first comprehensive treatise on its subject. Beginning with the premise that 'all reasoning must be founded on first principles' ('Essay upon the Law of Contracts', iii), Powell defined his notion of contract, laying particular stress on the importance of agreement, and then structured his book in such a way as to analyse the component parts of his definition. Although Powell used civilian sources for his work, and was influenced by the work of the French jurist R. J. Pothier, he limited his citations in general to English case law. He took the view that the fundamental principles of English law should be regarded with a 'sacred veneration' (ibid., vii), and held that the good administration of private law was essential for the preservation of the constitution. At the same time he felt free to criticize the decisions in cited cases where he felt the judges had erred in their principles. For instance, he attacked Lord Mansfield's decision in 'Corbett v. Poelnitz' (1785), in which it was held that a 'feme covert' who lived separately from her husband and had her separate maintenance could be sued on a contract made by her. Powell strongly criticized the judgment, dismissing Mansfield's notion that modern times required new developments, and concluded that it 'would be endless to pursue this idea through all its legal ABSURDITIES' ('Essay upon the Law of Contracts', 98). The case was overruled in 1800. 
Although Powell believed that legal rules could be modelled and adapted by the process of construction, he was very hostile to the blending of legal and equitable rights, which he associated especially with Mansfield. Commenting on Mansfield's decision in 'Corbett', he wrote, 'when a court of equity furnishes ample relief, there seems no 'reason' why a court of law should 'extend' its power, by overthrowing both the 'soundest principles' and 'clearest precedents', merely because the parties have mistaken the remedy' ('Essay upon the Law of Contracts', 108). Powell's work on contract was popular on both sides of the Atlantic, and reached a sixth edition in America in 1825. However, despite its early importance the work was too rooted in eighteenth-century property law, and devoted too little attention to modern commercial transactions, to have an enduring success, and it was superseded in the early nineteenth century by the work of others, notably Joseph Chitty the younger and Charles Greenstreet Addison. 
Powell died on 21 June 1801 at his home in Guildford Place, St Pancras, London, and was survived by his wife, Mary. She was a beneficiary of his will, but no more is known about her. 


@@@@@


doc= 22656


Powell, Martin (d. in or before 1725), puppet-showman, came to notice early in the eighteenth century. He had established a theatre in Bath by 1709, which apparently attracted a fashionable audience and was alluded to in the pages of 'The Tatler'. In 1710 he gave a season in London, and in 1711 he opened Punch's Theatre in the Little Piazza at Covent Garden, probably at no. 20 in the south-east corner. Here the sexton at St Paul's Church was assumed by Steele to have written a letter to 'The Spectator' complaining that the congregation at the church took the warning of his bell morning and evening as notice that Powell was about to perform. This was clearly a joke, but it hints at the popularity of the show with a middle-class and aristocratic public. 
Powell performed in London only for three seasons of six months each, but during this time he produced twenty plays. Some of these were based on legendary tales from ballads and chapbooks, such as 'The History of Sir Richard Whittington' or 'King Bladud, the Founder of the Bath', which were the staple fare of puppet shows everywhere. These traditional stories were, however, alternated with more sophisticated satires of contemporary society, such as 'Poor Robin's Dream, or, The Vices of the Age Exposed', based on a ballad of the day, in which the gallants, the whores, and the quacks were miraculously reformed, and poets had guineas in their pockets. And then there was a series of operatic burlesques such as 'The False Triumph, or, The Siege of Troy', in which Signor Punchanella appeared in the role of Jupiter, descended from the clouds in a chariot drawn by eagles, and sang an aria in Punch's squeaky voice to Paris; or a dig at a recent production of 'Hydaspes', in which Nicolini had fought a lion on the stage, with a scene in which Punch danced a minuet with a live pig. Powell was, indeed, a master of satire, and Lord Chesterfield recalled how: 'there was a great number of fanatics, who said they had, and very possibly actually thought they had, the gift of prophecy... The then ministry... were however wise enough not to disturb these madmen, and only ordered one Powell, who was the master of a famous puppet-show, to make Punch turn prophet, which he did so well, that it soon put an end to the prophets and their prophecies. ('Miscellaneous Works', 2.528)' A contemporary complained that 'Mr. Powell, by subscriptions and full house, has gathered such wealth as is ten times sufficient to buy all the poets in England, and that he seldom goes out without his chair' ('Les soupirs de la Grande Bretagne'), but his fourth Covent Garden season closed early, and almost nothing is known of his later career. He had died by 1725, and his son succeeded him, but only at the fairgrounds. 
In 1714 Thomas Burnet and George Duckett published 'A Second Tale of a Tub, or, The History of Robert Powel the Puppet-Show-Man'. This was really a political satire aimed at Robert Harley, but it incorporated a few apparently true references to the real Powell. By the time it appeared Powell was no longer performing in London, but he may be said to have founded a tradition of puppet satire which was continued during the eighteenth century by Charlotte Charke, the daughter of Colley Cibber; by Henry Fielding, using the 'nom de theatre' of Madame de la Nash; and by Samuel Foote and Charles Dibdin. He also helped to develop the character of Punch, which had been introduced to England in 1662, and which reached its climax in the Punch and Judy show of the next century. 


@@@@@


doc= 22657


Powle, Nathaniel (d. 1622), colonist in America, was apparently the son of Thomas Powle of Holton St Mary, Suffolk. The parish register does not record his baptism but does include between 1593 and 1609 the baptisms of Thomas and five other children of Thomas Powle, and between 1627 and 1635 names four Nathaniels in the family. Details about his early life are unknown. He arrived in Virginia in 1607, being described as a gentleman. 
In Virginia, Powle was busily employed. In February 1608 he attended Christopher Newport when the latter met Powhatan, leader of the neighbouring American Indians. Later in the year (July-September) he accompanied Captain John Smith on his second exploration of Chesapeake Bay, and at the very end of the year he went with Smith to the Pamunkey Indians on the occasion when Smith outfaced Powhatan's military chief, Opechancanough. During this expedition he was sent to the Mangoaco in search of Sir Walter Ralegh's lost colony, but could only report that they were all dead. When Smith came to compose his account of these events, he made use of Powle's records. 
As we know from his own report, Powle took part in 1616 in a punitive campaign against the Chickahomini Indians. On 20 October 1617 he was appointed sergeant-major-general in Virginia, and, commenting on his death, Smith later described him as 'a valiant Souldier' (Barbour, 2.295). 
When Argall, the acting governor, left for England in early April 1619, he appointed Powle as his temporary replacement. Sir George Yeardley, the new governor, arrived within a fortnight and at once added Powle to his council, an appointment that the company confirmed when they issued instructions on 24 July 1621 to Sir Francis Wyatt, Yeardley's successor. 
About this time Powle married Joyce Tracy (died 1622), the daughter of another councillor, William Tracy, who had come to the colony with her parents in January 1621. In March 1622, when the Powhatan Indians launched their attack on the colony, Nathaniel and Joyce were living at Powle-brooke, his 600 acre estate at Bikers Point in Charles City county. Along with ten others at the settlement, both Powle and his pregnant wife were killed on 22 March. The attack ultimately saw the destruction of about one-sixth of the colony's population. 
When the news reached England, Powle's brothers and sisters petitioned the company for his estate. Referring to him as 'a man of extraordinary merritt' and to his siblings' poverty, the company's court instructed the council in Jamestown to take special care in the matter (Kingsbury, 2.107), but clearly nothing was done at that time, for on 21 July 1626 Nathaniel's brother Thomas for himself and his 'poor distressed' brothers and sisters asked the privy council for an order to the governor and council for the recovery of their brother's estate ('CSP col.', 1.81). It was then said to be in the hands of Mr Blany, who had married the widow of a William Powell, who was no kin to them. Ultimately they were successful: the Virginia land books record that on 12 February 1639 William Barker, mariner, and his associates bought from John Taylor, citizen and girdler of London, the estate in Virginia which Taylor had earlier bought from 'Thomas Powell, yeoman', of 'Howlton' in Suffolk (Nugent, 70, 100). 


@@@@@


doc= 22658


Powell, Richard (1766-1834), physician, was born at the end of 1766 and baptized on 11 May 1767, the son of Joseph Powell, gentleman, of Thame, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Francis, formerly Smith. He was educated at Thame grammar school and proceeded in 1781 to Winchester College. He matriculated at Pembroke College, Oxford, on 19 January 1785, and in the same year he migrated to Merton College, where he graduated BA on 23 October 1788, MA on 31 October 1791, BM on 12 July 1792, and DM on 20 January 1795. He went on to study medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, having spent some time at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary; at Barts he was one of the founders of the Medical and Philosophical Society, afterwards named the Abernethian Society, which existed until about 1986. 
Powell was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1796, and in 1799 he delivered the Goulstonian lectures. They were published in 1800, under the title of 'Observations on the Bile and its Diseases, and on the Oeconomy of the Liver', and show careful observation and sound judgement. The method of clinical examination of the liver which he proposed was excellent; and he was the first English medical writer who demonstrated that gallstones may remain fixed in the neck of the gall bladder, or even obliterate its cavity, without well-marked symptoms or serious injury to the patient. Powell lectured at St Bartholomew's from 1796 and on the resignation of Dr Richard Budd he was, on 14 August 1801, elected physician to the hospital, an office which he retained until 1824. He was a censor at the Royal College of Physicians in 1798, 1807, 1820, and 1823; was Lumleian lecturer from 1811 to 1822; and delivered the Harveian oration in 1808. In the same year he was appointed secretary to the commission for regulating madhouses. 
Powell had considerable chemical knowledge and published 'Heads of Lectures on Chemistry' in 1796. He was one of the revisers of the 'Pharmacopoeia Londinensis' in 1809, and he published a translation from Latin to English of that edition. On 13 April 1810 he read, at the Royal College of Physicians, 'Observations upon the Comparative Prevalence of Insanity at Different Periods', afterwards published in the sixth volume of 'Medical Transactions of the Royal College of Physicians of London'. In the same volume he published 'Observations on the Internal Use of Nitrate of Silver', in which he recommended its use in chorea and in epilepsy, an opinion which he modified in a subsequent paper on further cases of the same diseases, read on 17 April 1815. On 20 December 1813 he had read 'Observations upon some Cases of Paralytic Affection' ('Medical Transactions', vol. 5), in which simple facial palsy was described for the first time. Sir Charles Bell, in the course of his researches on the nervous system, afterwards redescribed and explained this affliction, but the credit of its first clinical description belongs to Powell, who also initiated a method of treatment by warm applications which was often efficacious. On 2 December 1814 Powell read 'Some cases illustrative of the pathology of the brain', a description of thirteen cases of interest, including that of one patient with tuberculous meningitis and of another with a pituitary tumour. 
A fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, Powell gave some attention to the study of the history of St Bartholomew's Hospital; and on 27 November 1817 a communication by him was read to the society describing the most ancient charter preserved in the hospital (a grant from Rahere in 1137), and its seal. The whole text of this charter was printed in the nineteenth volume of 'Archaeologia'. Powell lived in London in Bedford Place for some years, and, after he retired from practice in 1824, in York Terrace, Regent's Park, where he died on 18 August 1834. 


@@@@@


doc= 22659


Powell, Robert (fl. 1609-1642), lawyer and legal writer, styled himself, in 1634, an attorney of Wells (Somerset) who had been practising for twenty-five years and who was also a member of New Inn, one of the inns of chancery in London. But apart from what can be learned from his published works little is known about his education or life. 
Powell published three short books, a feat that was unusual, but not unique, among members of his branch of the legal profession at the time. Composed in the early to mid-1630s they combine the perspective of a country lawyer, sometimes aiming at a 'vulgar' audience, with a more metropolitan interest in pre-conquest British history and conceptions of the state. Inspired by the work of Sir Thomas Skene, Powell frequently quoted Bracton, parliamentary statutes, and the popular classical authors Cicero and Seneca, as well as more recent historians including Camden and Bacon. He did not often refer to court records or law reports, but his first book, 'The Life of Alfred' (1634), combined a narrative based on Asser's contemporary works with an appreciation of Anglo-Saxon laws as translated by the Elizabethan William Lambarde. Dedicated to Walter Curll, the bishop of Winchester, the work stresses the depredations of war while depicting Alfred as an enlightened monarch who founded University College, Oxford, and who eventually reduced the confused 'kingdom to the subordinate rule of orderly government' (Powell, 'Alfred', 70) by instituting national laws and dividing the country into its most ancient units of local government: shires, hundreds, and tithings. In a final section, moreover, Powell attempted to draw detailed parallels between the reign of Charles I and that of Alfred, asking in his conclusion 'where there are such glorious Soveraignes, would it not well become their people to be gracious subjects' (ibid., 153). 
The next of Powell's works to be published, 'Depopulation Arraigned, Convicted and Condemned by the Lawes of God and Man' (1636), which was dedicated to Attorney-General Sir John Bankes, was an unsolicited apology for the Caroline policy of issuing commissions to investigate enclosures and rural depopulation. Less interesting as a factual account of the contemporary problem than for its approach to political economy, the book pointed to historical examples from the ancient Greeks onwards of attempts by states to protect agriculture. In Powell's view, when people lost their homes and means of making a living it ultimately caused them to become 'aliens and strangers to their nationall government, and the kingdome by that means is in a manner dispeopled and desolated' (Powell, 'Depopulation', 7). He also argued that no claim based on the sanctity of private property rights could stand in the way of using measures such as the royal commissions to find a solution to the problem. 
Powell's third book, 'A Treatise of the Antiquity, Authority, Uses and Jurisdiction of the Ancient Courts of Leet', was composed at roughly the same time as the 'Life of Alfred', but various delays prevented it from being published until 1642. Although similar in many respects to previous treatises on leet jurisdiction Powell's historical introduction developed the importance of Alfred as a founder of legal institutions and traced the history of the leet from his time down to the present. The publication also reflects a shift in Powell's political opinions since it includes a lengthy 'Explanation of The old Oath of Legeance', which develops at some length the theory that the subject's duty of obedience was directly related to the sovereign's obligation to protect civil and religious liberties. Castigating the illegality of ship money Powell provided a number of historical examples of clashes between monarch and people over such issues, but his conclusion expressed the hope that King Charles's decision to call parliament would lead to a period of reform and reconciliation. 


@@@@@


doc= 22660


Powell, Thomas (d. c.1635), lawyer and writer, of Welsh parentage, came from the same family as Sir Edward Powell, who became master of requests in 1622. Thomas Powell was described as 'Londino-Cambrensis' on a number of his works and, when he entered Gray's Inn in London on 30 January 1593, his home was given as Diserth, Radnorshire. Nothing is known of his early life and education. 
Powell published his first work, a long poem, 'Loves Leprosie', in 1598, dedicating the work to Sir Robert Sidney. The poem tells the story of the death of Achilles, treacherously slain by Paris, after he had arranged to meet Polyxena in the temple of Apollo. Achilles' death was in revenge for his killing of Hector, who, in turn, had prevented the marriage of Achilles and Polyxena. A second long poem, 'The Passionate Poet, with a Description of the Thracian Ismarus' (1601), was dedicated to Lady Frances, countess of Kildare (who is later mentioned in 'Vertues Due', and so may have been one of Powell's early patrons). It is another work inspired by classical settings and consists mainly of a series of descriptions of the variety of trees -- including vine, olive, myrtle, oak, bay -- found near Athens. 
Powell's verse has not fared well at the hands of the few critics who have read his work, and he is generally considered to be incompetent and obscure as a writer (though this may be because he tried to imitate the harsh rhythms and style fashionable among young writers in London in the 1590s). He wrote little more separately published poetry -- though his later published works are interspersed with a number of poems -- probably because his legal career started to take off. His first prose work was 'A Welch Bayte to Spare Provender, or, A Looking Back at the Times' (1603), dedicated to Henry Wriothesley, earl of Southampton, a warning of the dangers to the state from both Catholics and dissenters; Powell praised Elizabeth's moderate religious policy, warned of the impending dangers of the succession, and looked forward to James's plans to unite the people of England and Scotland. The book, containing poems to Lady Elizabeth Brydges, Sir Thomas Knevet, and Sir Edward Dyer, was called in and the publisher, Valentine Simms, was ordered to pay a fine of 13's'. 6died for printing it without a licence. The entry in the Stationers' register also refers to a collection of ballads printed by Simms, which probably indicates that Powell had infringed others' rights to the material rather than incurred any official objection to the work. In the same year Powell published 'Vertues Due, or, A True Modell of the Life of the Right Honourable Katherine Howard' -- dedicated to her widower, Charles Howard, earl of Nottingham, the lord high admiral. This lament for Katherine Howard's death was written in sestets and emphasized her chastity, comparing her to Diana and Astrea. A Latin dedicatory poem by 'T. P.', prefaced to John Ford's 'Fames Memoriall, or, The Earle of Devonshire Deceased' (1606) may also be by Powell. 
Powell was appointed solicitor-general in the Welsh marches on 13 November 1613, a position he held until 5 August 1622. He appears to have been searching assiduously through the legal records in the chancery, the Tower of London, and the exchequer in this period -- research which was to form the basis of his most important works. In 1622 he published 'Direction for the Search of Records Remaining in the Chancerie, Tower, Exchequer, &', prefaced with dedicatory poems to James, Prince Charles, William Noy, reader at Lincoln's Inn, Sir James Ley, lord chief justice, Sir Edward Powell, master of his majesty's requests, James, Viscount Doncaster, and Sir Thomas Coventry. In the address to the reader Powell refers to his twenty years' work in these archives in order to help lawyers prepare for court cases. 
In 1623 Powell published 'The Attourneys Academy, or, The Manner of Proceding upon any Suite', 'The first printed treatise on common-law proceedure' (Baker, 96). This work was again dedicated to the king and others such as Sir James Ley and Francis, Lord Verulam, Viscount St Albans, and was reprinted three times in the next seven years. It listed and described all the procedures to be followed in English courts, giving details of the requisite fees and locations, in order to benefit all the king's subjects. There was an extensive table appended for ease of use. He also published 'Wheresoever you See mee, Trust unto your Selfe, or, The Mysterie of Lending and Borrowing', a survey of all the types of creditor and debtor, dedicated to 'the two famous universities, the seminaries of so many desperate debtors, Ram Ally and Milford Lane'. This may have been satirical in intent, but it provides a wealth of information about credit practices in the early 1600s. 
On 14 September 1623 Powell petitioned James to request the co-operation of judges and court officers to give him all the necessary information on court fees and other details so that his manuscript, 'Direction for the search of records', a work that Powell claimed would be more useful than the 'Domesday Book', could be completed. James granted the request and 'The Reperterie of Records at Westminster' (1631), an extensive catalogue of the records in the chancery, the Tower, and the exchequer, was the result (though it is clear that not all the work is by Powell). 
In 1627 Powell published 'The Attornies Almanacke', a list of courts designed to help those who have to move 'any person, cause, or Record, from an inferior Court to any of the higher Courts at Westminster'. In the same year he is mentioned in a letter from the mayor of Monmouth to the privy council dated 7 September, indicating that he had not paid his share of the loan money assessed on the town. 'Tom of All Trades, or, The Plain Pathway to Preferment' was published in 1631, a dialogue between the author's fictional persona and a gentleman from Northampton dealing with the way to bring up children, provide for their education, and prepare them for a trade or profession. It contains significant information on English education, schools, and the expectations of the minor gentry in Caroline England, and was reprinted in 1635 as 'The Art of Thriving, or, The Plaine Way to Preferment' (together with 'The Mysterie of Lending and Borrowing'). Powell died probably about 1635, leaving 'The Breath of an Unfeed Lawyer, or, Beggers Round' in manuscript (Cambridge University Library). 


@@@@@


doc= 22661


Powell, Thomas (1776-c.1863), composer and instrumentalist, was born in London. He studied composition and the cello, and in 1799 was elected a professional member of the Royal Society of Musicians. In 1811 he married, and settled for a time in Dublin as a teacher of music, his pupils including the duke of Leinster and a son of Lord Leitrim. He then spent some time in Edinburgh and Glasgow before eventually returning to London in 1826. It is reported that he performed his own cello concerto at the Haymarket Theatre and, on one occasion, stood in at the last minute for the celebrated Robert Lindley there. 
Powell's compositions are numerous, and include arrangements of popular and classical airs for piano, violin, and harp, as well as for the cello. Other, more substantial, works include an overture for full orchestra, an 'Introduction and Fugue for the Organ as Performed at the Cathedrals of Christchurch and St Patrick at Dublin' (1825), 'Three Grand Sonatas for Pianoforte, with Obbligato Accompaniment for Violoncello', op. 15 ('c'.1825), duets and trios for combinations of violins and cellos, and fifteen violin concertos. Powell was apparently a very proficient artist on several instruments and also possessed a bass voice with a wide range. His style of cello playing was likened at the time to that of the prominent B. H. Romberg. He died in Edinburgh in or about 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 22662


Powell, Vavasor (1617-1670), Independent minister, was born at Cnwclas (Knucklas) in the parish of Heyope, near Knighton in Radnorshire, the son of Richard Powell (died before 1630?), a freeholder. Penelope Powell, Vavasor's mother, was the daughter of William Vavasor of Newtown, Montgomeryshire: her grandfather had been sheriff of the county in 1564, and was the first of his name to settle in Wales, having moved from Yorkshire. Others of Vavasor Powell's ancestral family had been sheriffs, stewards, and educated clergy, although his later detractors persisted in alleging he came from the common people. He was probably educated at Christ College, Brecon, and may possibly have attended Jesus College, Oxford, although there is no written record of his having done so. He was never ordained in any of the orders of the Church of England, but probably worked as a schoolmaster in Clun, no more than 10 miles from Cnwclas, under the auspices of his great-uncle, Erasmus Powell, puritan vicar of Clun until 1637. During his time in Clun he was converted, making a conscious acceptance of God's grace after an acute sense of his own sinfulness. He had been greatly influenced by the works of Richard Sibbes and by the preaching of Walter Cradock, who had established a congregation at nearby Llanfair Waterdine. Powell had begun preaching by 1640 and in that year was arrested with fifty or sixty hearers for causing a disturbance through preaching. 
On 2 February 1642 Powell married Joan Quarrell, widow of a Presteigne merchant and Hereford freeman, Paul Quarrell. In 1642 he appeared at Presteigne great sessions charged with nonconformity, but was found not guilty. He must have left shortly afterwards for London, and was there by August 1642, ahead of the refugees from the Llanfaches congregation of Monmouthshire, the first Independent church in Wales. Once there, he signed articles accusing his persecutors in Radnor of anti-parliamentarian activities. He preached in the parish of St Anne and St Agnes, Aldersgate, and in Crooked Lane, in the City, before moving to Dartford, in Kent, where he was vicar between mid-1643 and January 1646. As his sympathies were with Independent varieties of protestantism, this could only have been a temporary haven. If he had not already met Morgan Llwyd, the Welsh Independent minister and writer, he probably did so in 1644, as the latter sailed that year from Kent as part of the parliamentarian force relieving Pembrokeshire. 
In 1646 Powell left Dartford to join the New Model Army forces besieging Oxford, having resigned from his living, but on 11 September he received a certificate of approval from the Westminster assembly as to his fitness for the ministry in Wales and his ability to preach in Welsh. Already, however, Thomas Edwards in 'Gangraena' had noted 'many erroneous things' in his theology and reported Powell's harsh way with his opponents (Edwards, 3.97). That Powell could at this point accept presbyterian authority, and that the assembly felt able to endorse him despite the attacks on him in 'Gangraena', indicate that he was willing to present himself as orthodox. In June 1648 he, Ambrose Mostyn, and Llwyd were awarded maintenance from the tithes of six Montgomeryshire parishes to preach in the north Wales counties, shortly after he had signed a declaration by Montgomeryshire gentry, freeholders, and ministers to adhere to parliament and suppress the revolt which had broken out in May. He attached himself to the army of Thomas Mytton, and was injured at the siege of Beaumaris in October 1648. In the heat of the action he heard a voice telling him that he was chosen to preach the gospel; he later attributed his survival to divine intervention on account of his calling. 
Powell was in London in the winter of 1649-50 and preached before the lord mayor on 2 December 1649; his sermon called upon the city fathers to inaugurate the godly commonwealth. About this time he was invited by some parishioners to the living of Clyro, Radnor, but he declined it on learning that the incumbent had received his appointment from the committee for plundered ministers in London. On 22 February 1650 Powell was named twenty-third in the list of approvers under the 'Act for the Propagation of the Gospel in Wales', and six days later preached before the House of Commons. He remained a wholehearted enthusiast for the Commonwealth, and with Walter Cradock went to the north of England with a troop of horse to defend the new state against the forces of Charles Stuart. The Welsh propagation experiment allowed Powell's Independency to develop unchallenged, and like that of other leading figures in that dispensation, his outlook was deeply millenarian. In the petitioning against the propagators, which began as a complaint to parliament in 1652 and then fanned out to become a campaign in print against them, the name of Vavasor Powell was prominent. He was the target specifically of Alexander Griffith, a displaced Anglican clergyman, who alleged that Powell disregarded the common law, had made a huge fortune from trading in church lands and tithes, taught heresy, employed unseemly and obscene language in the pulpit, and (after December 1653) spoke disloyally of the protector. The last point in this litany of offences hit harder than most of the others, and was given force by Powell's undoubted and scarcely concealed distaste for the protectorate of Oliver Cromwell, which encouraged his enemies in mid-Wales to resort more frequently to the printing press. 
The other charges levelled at Powell were informed by Griffith's bitter personal animosity. There was no question of Powell's immediacy as a preacher, at least part of which owed much to his capacity to employ to good effect the popular idiom, both in Welsh and English. Colonel John Jones, a commissioner of parliament in Dublin, hoped in vain that Powell would undertake a preaching mission to Ireland, and that he would grow weary of theological disputations. The title 'metropolitan of the itinerants' ('Strena Vavasoriensis', 1654, title-page) bestowed upon him by his enemies, was not undeserved. He was said to preach often in two or three places a day in his counties of Brecon, Radnor, and Montgomery. As for his giving short shrift to the ways of the law, he was associated during this period with controversial figures such as Colonel Philip Jones, the dominant force in south Wales politics (although they had little in common in their religious outlook), and certainly had a regard for military-backed solutions to local difficulties of authority, even when the problem was to extract rent from his own tenant. After 1660 he admitted buying confiscated property, but his own gloss that his purchases were modest is borne out by evidence that they were confined to parcels of crown land in Old Radnor, which he bought in 1651 for $252, and which yielded him $70 a year. From a perspective of several centuries later, his attitude to tithes was ambivalent. He refused the living of Penstrowed, Montgomeryshire, in 1647 on the grounds that he was unable to accept a maintenance by tithes, but was an enthusiast for the propagation commission, which deployed confiscated tithes to fund an itinerant ministry. Powell never directly received tithes, nor a settled salary, but received an annually fluctuating award for his labours from a fund of pooled tithe income. The attitude of William Erbery, who, after accepting an award from the commissioners, in 1652 came to deplore the use of all tithes for religious purposes, seems more consistent. 
Powell looked forward with eager anticipation to what might be achieved by the nominated assembly of 1653, viewing it as a progressive development after the shortcomings of the Commonwealth government, and worked with Thomas Harrison and others to compile a slate of millenarian sympathizers to serve for Wales at Westminster. All Powell's choices were successful, and he was thus an important influence on the radical element in this parliament. His fury at the termination of the assembly by its moderate elements, and at the dawn of the protectorate of Oliver Cromwell, was immediate. Three days after Cromwell had been installed as lord protector Powell and other millenarian preachers, including Christopher Feake, met at Blackfriars in London to denounce the new regime. Powell deployed the book of 'Daniel' to vilify Cromwell as the 'vile person' ('CSP dom.', '1653-4', 305) mentioned in that portion of scripture and urged his hearers to ask God whether he would 'have Oliver Cromwell or Jesus Christ to reign over us?' (ibid., 306). He was arrested on 21 December, and was released on the twenty-fourth. He made his way back to Wales on 10 January 1654 and began a programme of preaching in mid-Wales which entrenched his opposition to the new government. His enemies sent ample evidence of his hostility and customary vehemence of language, but noted also the element of respect he commanded among the magistrates of mid-Wales. By March 1654 he had devised a petition against the government, and he and ten sympathizers were summoned before Montgomery great sessions for this activity against the protectorate. There was no prospect of his joining any alliance with royalists, however, for all his dislike of the new regime. In the spring of 1655 he was again in arms against insurgent royalists, accompanied by men of Wrexham: he was wounded in a skirmish. 
After the scheme of the superintendent major-generals had been established, as a direct result of royalist unrest, Powell's movements were monitored by James Berry, major-general for the Welsh counties. Berry's judgement on the preacher's attitude to the government must have been coloured by Powell's readiness, despite everything, to fight for it, and it led him to underestimate his capacity still to make trouble. Information that Powell was busy in three mid-Wales counties fomenting an armed rising was implausible, but he could still wield the pen to damaging effect. Berry interviewed Powell at Worcester late in November 1655, and was assured that a petition in the making from Wales was simply a matter of conscience. Powell preached four sermons in the city that day, and Berry continued to take a relaxed attitude to Powell even after the petition, 'A Word for God', was published. It turned out to be a bitter denunciation of the protectorate, in which the theme of betrayal of the godly was dominant. It undoubtedly had more impact in London than in Wales, but its text and the furore it provoked exposed Berry's insouciance. Powell was its principal draughtsman and chief promoter, and the petition drove a wedge between former clerical colleagues of Powell's, such as Cradock and Llwyd, who could accommodate themselves to a tithe-supported ministry, and Powell himself. 'A Word for God' also stimulated a print debate, in which Henry Vane the younger and William Sedgwick were notable contributors, on the legitimacy and authority of the government. 
In the last years of the interregnum Powell lived at Goetre, in the parish of Ceri, Montgomeryshire, and continued to travel Wales and England to preach and dispute. His first encounter with a Quaker, Richard Hubberthorne, came on 14 November 1653 at Chirk, and it began a series of well-documented disputations with Friends, especially between 1656 and 1658. Powell emphasized the need for repentance for sin on these occasions, and thus on matters of doctrine remained resolutely orthodox, unlike Llwyd, who evinced sympathy for the spiritual insights of the Quakers. Llwyd was also more willing than Powell to think the best of the lord protector, and relations between the two men cooled a little, even if they never chilled, in the late 1650s. Powell's targets in the pulpit were not only the Quakers: in Oxford in July 1657 he preached against the universities, as had William Erbery in the same place nearly ten years previously. On this occasion, Powell denounced Henry Hickman, fellow of Magdalen College, for admitting that the Church of Rome was a true church. Later, Anthony Wood's account attributed to Powell the view that only Independents and Roman Catholics 'had religion' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.918) -- probably a garbling of the 1657 incident. 
Powell may have held fast to Calvinist orthodoxy longer than did either Erbery or Llwyd, but his own ecclesiology, at least, developed in new directions from the Independency he had promoted during the propagation and earlier. By this time he had on the question of church membership moved towards Baptist principles. Unlike John Miles, who restricted access to the ordinance of communion to those who had been baptized as adults by total immersion, Powell taught that adult baptism was a rite that every believer should undergo, but that it was neither necessary for salvation nor a condition of admission to the Lord's supper. This placed him in an intermediate position between the Independents, who held with infant baptism, and the Strict Baptists of Miles. Nevertheless, he was still considered enough of an Independent to be invited in 1658 to the assembly to devise a declaration of faith. His response, on 26 August, was a guarded willingness to convey the invitation to churches where he had influence, but he warned against the dangers of the churches becoming too close to the government: 'If you go upon political and worldly accounts or by a humane spirit, to work, you may expect God to blast the work' (Peck, 2.13.25-6). His suspicion that this letter would be intercepted because it travelled near Cromwell's court suggests that his distrust of the protector's establishment was more that of a 'country' critic than of one, like William Erbery, with a principled distaste for state power. 
The restoration of Charles II was a personal disaster for Powell, who may have been arrested as early as February 1660, and was certainly detained by 23 April that year. The new government feared his influence and rounded up a number of his followers at Bala. After a period of imprisonment at Shrewsbury, Powell resumed his preaching in June 1660, and when rearrested refused to take the oaths of supremacy and allegiance at Shrewsbury assizes. Despite the clearest signals that he was 'persona non grata' to the restored monarchy he published a repudiation of the authority of bishops and 'Book of Common Prayer'. He was moved to the Fleet prison and wrote there 'The Bird in the Cage Chirping', an apologia for the propagation era. It vindicated his former colleagues and honestly analysed the difficulties they had encountered in making the experiment work. It also explained the Restoration in terms of a squandering by the godly of divine mercies: 'We have been stomach-ful, sick and surfeited with the sweet and fat things of God's house... we trampled and trod under foot the good pastures' ('The Bird in the Cage Chirping', 1662, 8-9). On 30 September 1662 he was moved to Southsea Castle by yacht, and remained there for five years, unrepentant and still inclined to a millenarian analysis of events. He believed himself to be incarcerated 'for foretelling calamities in 1666' ('CSP dom.', '1665-6', 191). The downfall of Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, seems to have provided a reason for freeing long-term prisoners of conscience like Powell, and in November 1667 the preacher at last walked free. 
Even this long period in prison had failed to daunt Powell, and in March 1668 he was reported to have preached to a congregation of Fifth Monarchists at Blue Anchor Alley, Old Lane, London. In September, returning from a sojourn in Bath, where he was taking the waters for health reasons, Powell preached to gatherings at Newport, Monmouthshire, and Merthyr Tudful. At the instigation of the incumbent of Merthyr, Powell was arrested there, and on 17 October was examined by deputy lieutenants meeting at Cowbridge, in the Vale of Glamorgan. Before these former cavaliers Powell defended himself against charges of unlawful preaching with some verve, and was re-examined on 8 November 1668 and 13 January 1669. Powell managed to impose on these examinations something of the character of a religious disputation. He resisted taking the oaths of supremacy and allegiance on the grounds that he had taken them before and that they had been tendered to him by an officer without lawful authority. He also took exception to the practice of laying a hand on the 'Bible' to swear an oath. The examinations, or 'conventions' ('Life', 182-8) as Powell called them, had one inevitable outcome, and he returned to prison at Cardiff. A writ of 'habeas corpus' procured by a friend of his provided the authority necessary to move Powell from Glamorgan to London, where it was evidently thought he stood a better chance of a permanent acquittal. It was not to be, however, and Powell was committed to the Fleet on 24 May 1669. He continued to correspond with friends, and may have exercised the liberty of daily parole to frequent old haunts, and even to preach a little. By December 1668 he had married again after the death of his first wife. His second wife was Katherine Gerard ('bap'. 1638), fifth daughter of Gilbert Gerard, parliamentarian governor of Chester, who was twenty-one years younger than Powell. There were no children from either of his marriages. His last sermons were preached in London on 25 September 1670, by which time he was seriously ill. He died in London on 27 October, of a disease of the alimentary canal involving haemorrhaging and thrush. He was buried at Bunhill Fields, where a marble gravestone once recorded the fact, quoting 'Revelation' 6: 10: '
Christ him released, and now he's joyned among 

The martyred Souls, with whom he cries, How long? 
('Proceedings... Bunhill Fields Burial-Ground', 83)' Although a Welsh speaker, Powell only published in English, and his fifteen works consisted of polemical pieces, sermons before civil authorities, and orthodox evangelical tracts. Some unpublished English verse thought, if not known, to be by him, certainly follows his style in elevating the 'saints' in combative terms, and setting them in the political context of the period. He preferred to invest his energies in preaching and disputation rather than authorship, holding that he 'would not neglect for the printing of a thousand books, the preaching of one sermon' (V. Powell, 'Christ and Moses Excellency', 1650, sig. A2). Some at least of this preference derived from his temperament, described by friends and foes alike as fiery and impetuous. He may have helped Walter Cradock prepare a Welsh version of the 'New Testament' in 1647, although there is no direct evidence that he did, and he had in preparation a concordance to the 'Bible', which others completed after his death. His closeness to civil authority before December 1653 may have contributed to his adherence in general to theological orthodoxy while others of the Welsh 'saints' moved towards antinomian positions: he was a regular preacher at assizes and civic occasions. But his strong belief in the value of the godly magistrate and soldier was balanced by an unshakeable conviction that the purpose of godly secular authority was to protect and nurture the people of God, a minority in the nation. When from December 1653 it seemed to him that secular power was no longer being deployed in the interests of the godly, he withdrew his consent to the government, and moved into permanent opposition, which could only intensify after 1660. An anonymous contemporary described Powell as: 'a man indefatigably industrious, unweariedly laborious in his studies, and in his ministerial performances: for a long time of great strength of body, and equal vigour of mind, both of which, while out of prison, he restlessly employed in the service of God. ('A Winding-Sheet for Mr. Baxter's Dead', 1685, 10)' He was said to have been short in physical stature. His personal seal was 'a skeleton or figure of death, holding in the right hand a dart, in the left an hourglass; sitting upon the tree of life' (Peck, 2.13.26). 


@@@@@


doc= 22663


Powell, William (1735/6-1769), actor and theatre manager, was born in 1735 or 1736 in Hereford, the son of William Powell (1704-1784), who died at Charlotte Street, Rathborne Place, London, on 31 July 1784. It is uncertain whether or not his mother was the Theodosia Brand (died 1784) referred to in Powell senior's will, dated 16 April 1784, as 'now Theodosia Powell my lawful wife' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). The actor was educated at Hereford grammar school and at Christ's Hospital, London. He was then employed in a City counting-house by Sir Robert Ladbrooke, who was president of Christ's Hospital. He worked for Sir Robert for ten years and was 'so clever in business that his master would have taken him in partner' ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 5.379). The young Powell, however, was a keen participant in amateur theatricals and gained both the friends and the experience, through the spouting clubs he attended, to make his sudden and meteoric change of career in 1763 a possibility. In 1759, while still working for Ladbrooke, he had married Elizabeth Branson (or Branston); by 1761 he had two daughters, Elizabeth Mary and Anne, as well as his wife to support from his secure City employment. Two years later he turned his back on the counting-house and ventured on a career as a professional actor. 
Charles Holland, a friend from the spouting clubs who had become established at Drury Lane Theatre, introduced Powell to David Garrick, who at that time was looking for a young player to tutor in some of his leading roles. Garrick himself wanted to make a tour of the continent and needed someone to fill in for him while he was gone. He was impressed by Powell and coached him during the summer of 1763 before leaving for Paris. Powell's debut as the eponymous hero in Colman's adaptation of Beaumont and Fletcher's 'Philaster' was a sensation. As William Hopkins, the Drury Lane prompter, observed in his diary: 'A greater reception was never shown to anybody.' It is clear that from the outset Powell's appeal was as an emotive and dynamic actor: '
For young Philaster 'feels' his Part, 

And follows Nature more than art. 
('Public Advertiser', 11 March 1766)' He performed Philaster thirteen times during October and November, including a royal command performance on 20 October. During his first season he took on sixteen further roles, notably that of Othello, the role he chose for his first benefit at Drury Lane, on 31 March 1764. In spite of criticisms of wildness, of overstraining, and of feelings and tears choking his articulation, his power to draw and hold audiences was immense. Theatre receipts relating to his appearances were consistently high (first-night receipts for ten of his major roles ranged from $231 19's'. to $268 11's'.), and during the course of the season Powell's salary was raised from $3 to $8 per week. At his benefit there was, according to William Hopkins, 'one of the greatest overflows that ever was known'. Among the roles he performed during this first season, those which were especially praised for their 'great feeling', 'tenderness', 'pathos', and 'strong emotions' included Posthumus in 'Cymbeline', Lusignan in Aaron Hill's 'Zara', the King in '2 Henry IV', Castalio in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan', and Shore in Nicholas Rowe's 'Jane Shore'. However, it was as Jaffier in Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd' that he seems to have caught the audience's imagination most consistently: 'his Distraction on hearing his Friend was to die -- his Prayer for Belvidera -- his Execution at the tolling of the Bell -- his last parting from his Wife, I think were the most masterly strokes of Acting I ever beheld; and indeed the Audience seemed full as sensible of it; for profound Silence and Attention filled the House, while the big Drops rolled down from almost every Eye. ('Public Advertiser', 31 Jan 1764)' This was one of the roles that was to stay in Powell's repertory throughout his brief career. He performed it eight times during his first season at Drury Lane and sixteen times during ensuing seasons, often 'by Particular Desire'. It was the role he chose, when he became involved in the management of Covent Garden, for his first acting appearance there in 1767. It also featured regularly in his summer seasons at Bristol, and in 1769 was the last role he ever performed on the stage. 
Between the close of his first season and the opening of his second season at Drury Lane, Powell acted at the Jacob's Wells Theatre in the Hotwells district of Bristol. It was the beginning of an important five-year relationship with the city. For his benefit there on 13 August 1764 he played King Lear, a role he was to add to his London repertory five months later. Lear's curse near the end of act I and his reconciliation with Cordelia towards the end of the play were highlights of his portrayal, and featured prominently in accounts of the time. It was in the mad scenes, however, that he clearly excelled: '
With such Variety! such Strength! such Taste! 

That in quick Whirlwinds more and more increas'd; 

Till Reason like a shatter'd Vessel tost, 

Amid the Mind's mad Hurricanes was lost. 
('Felix Farley's Bristol Journal', 15 Aug 1767)' Many of the roles Powell performed during his second season at Drury Lane (1764-5) seem to have been chosen to exploit, or build upon, his ability to delineate extreme states of mind or feeling: Lothario in Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent', Orestes in Ambrose Philips's 'The Distrest Mother', Herod in Elijah Ferton's 'Mariamne', Leontes in 'The Winter's Tale', and, on 2 January 1765, King Lear. In contrast, towards the end of January Powell appeared in a new comedy, Elizabeth Griffith's 'The Platonic Wife', playing Lord Frankland, which was his first original role. On the opening night the play 'was not well received' (Victor, 3.60), but after some revision it ran for five further performances. 
After a second summer at the Jacob's Wells Theatre, Powell returned to Drury Lane for a third season (1765-6), his first alongside, and under the gaze of, David Garrick. His roles in the early months of the season, after Garrick's return, were Castalio, Jaffier, Lusignan, and Lear. He did not add any roles to his repertory until 11 November (Moneses in Rowe's 'Tamerlane') and 26 November (Alcanor in James Miller's 'Mahomet'). On 23 January 1766 Garrick retrieved the part of Lusignan from Powell for a royal command performance, where the presence of Jean Jacques Rousseau in Garrick's box 'fronting his Majesty' caused a stir ('GM', 1st ser., 36, 1766). However, Powell was playing the role again at Drury Lane by 19 April. In Colman and Garrick's 'The Clandestine Marriage', which had a continuous run at Drury Lane from 20 February to 13 March, Powell was the original Lovewell. On 20 March he played the title role in 'King John', and on 22 March Antony in Dryden's 'All for Love'. 
In Bristol, Powell became involved, together with Matthew Clarke and John Arthur, in the management of the newly built Theatre Royal, which opened on 30 May 1766. After a quarrelsome summer Arthur was replaced by Powell's friend Charles Holland. Over the next two years the new management established this theatre as an important and fashionable centre in Bristol. Powell's interest in management extended to London in 1767, when, at the end of his last season at Drury Lane, he bought a quarter share in the patent and property of Covent Garden. This second venture as a theatre manager -- in partnership with George Colman, Thomas Harris, and John Rutherford -- proved even more acrimonious, fuelled by Harris's desire to advance his mistress's career, and eventually led to litigation by Harris and Rutherford against Colman (whom Powell supported). The case was settled in Colman's favour in 1770, a year after Powell had died. As Kathleen Barker has observed, Powell's 'educational and business background needs to be borne in mind and weighed against the rather derisive remarks made by Garrick and some of his biographers about Powell's lack of culture and qualifications for theatre management' (Barker, 73). 
Powell was the leading actor at Covent Garden under the new management. He delivered an inaugural prologue at the opening on 14 September 1767, played Jaffier on 16 September, and then over the next four months appeared in twenty-two different roles, including Honeywood in the premiere of Oliver Goldsmith's 'The Good-Natured Man'. From 1768 onwards he was often ill, and during the summer at Bristol he was unable to perform at all for two weeks. During his second season at Covent Garden (1768-9) he added eight new roles to his repertory, among them two originals -- Cyrus in John Hoole's play of the same name and Courtney in Charlotte Lennox's 'The Sister'. But in Bristol the following summer he acted only twice at the Theatre Royal, his last appearance being in 'Venice Preserv'd'. On 3 July 1769, after a month's illness, he died in lodgings in King Street, Bristol, from pneumonia, at the age of thirty-three or thirty-four. On 6 July his hearse was carried in procession, preceded by a choir, from College Green to his burial-place, Bristol Cathedral, where the dean conducted the funeral service. 'The spectators were too numerous to observe silence and decorum' and were impatient 'to take a final look at him, to whom they had been indebted for so many hours of elegant entertainment' ('Sarah Farley's Bristol Journal', 8 July 1769). 
Powell left no will. His widow, Elizabeth, erected a monument to her husband in 1771, in the north aisle of Bristol Cathedral, on which is inscribed an epitaph composed by 'a faithful friend', George Colman. 


@@@@@


doc= 22664


Powell, William Samuel (1717-1775), college head, was born at Colchester on 27 September 1717, the elder son of the Revd Francis Powell and his wife, Susan, the daughter of Samuel Reynolds (died 1694), MP for Colchester, and widow of George Jolland. He was educated at Colchester grammar school, under the Revd Palmer Smythies, and admitted pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge, on 7 July 1734. In November 1735 he was elected a foundation scholar, and he held exhibitions from his college in November 1735, 1736, and 1738. He graduated BA (1739), MA (1742), BD (1749), and DD (1757). He was admitted as a fellow of St John's on 25 March 1740. 
In 1741 Powell became private tutor to Charles Townshend (second son of Viscount Townshend), who later became chancellor of the exchequer. At the end of that year he was ordained deacon and priest, and was presented to the rectory of Colkirk in Norfolk on 13 January 1742 by Lord Townshend. In 1742 he returned to college life, and was assistant tutor for two years, becoming principal tutor in 1744; in 1745 he acted as senior taxor of the university. His closest Cambridge friends were Thomas Balguy and Richard Hurd; he tutored at St John's the poet William Mason, who later became an important figure in the Hurd circle. On 3 November 1760 he became a senior fellow of the college; he resigned his fellowship in 1763, having left Cambridge for a house in London in 1761, when he inherited the property of a cousin. This inheritance later provoked comment when Powell himself died, leaving some $30,000 in his will. The inheritance came through his mother's eldest brother's marriage to Frances, daughter of Charles Pelham of Brocklesby, Lincolnshire, a member of the duke of Newcastle's family. On the death of their son, Charles Reynolds of Peldon Hall, Essex, that estate, along with other Essex property in Little Bentley and Wix, came to Powell. 
On 25 January 1765, backed by the influence of the duke of Newcastle, Powell was unanimously elected master of St John's College, where, following his inheritance, he lived for the rest of his life in some style. Powell had been admitted a fellow of the Royal Society on 15 March 1764; in November 1765 he succeeded to the vice-chancellorship of Cambridge. In December 1766 he was appointed to the archdeaconry of Colchester by the crown. In 1768 he somewhat controversially claimed for himself the rich college rectory of Freshwater on the Isle of Wight (worth $500 a year), which was in the master's option, resigning the benefice of Colkirk in the process. Freshwater was naturally a living coveted by the fellows, and Powell's tactless action was defended by a later biographer, Thomas Hughes, as necessary in guaranteeing that his successor as master could afford to entertain on a scale commensurate with his standing. The consequent ill feeling in the college was mitigated by Powell's personal gift of some $500 to rebuild the first court and to lay out the college grounds under the care of Capability Brown. A strict disciplinarian and a careful steward of the college's revenues, he secured the first place in the university for St John's College. In his first year as master he established college examinations, for which he drew up the papers, and which he always made sure to attend in person. This encouraged applications to a college which was thus seen to be committed to improving academic standards, and it was jealousy of the position thereby achieved that led Powell vigorously to oppose John Jebb's proposal for annual examinations for all students of the university in general subjects. Powell published anonymously in 1774 'An Observation on the Design of Establishing Annual Examinations at Cambridge', to which Mrs Jebb replied in 'A Letter to the Author'. Powell, a firmly committed Johnian, helped out several of his students financially, enabling them to complete their studies. He also bestowed college prizes at his own expense. All students, whatever their year might be, had to pass an examination in one of the gospels or the 'Acts of the Apostles'. He attended chapel throughout the year, at six o'clock in the morning. He was a man of rigid and unbending manners. 
In addition to the engagement with the Jebbs, Powell provoked two serious controversies at Cambridge, the first of which inadvertently initiated the major controversy concerning undergraduate and clerical subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' which led to the Feathers tavern petition in 1772 ['see also 'Feathers tavern petitioners]. This was effected through a sermon preached before the university on Commencement Sunday in 1757, and which was published that year as 'A Defence of the Subscriptions Required in the Church of England'; it was reprinted in 1758, 1759, and 1772. He argued that the articles were studiedly general and indeterminate, providing a means of reading the scriptures which conformed to 'the general voice of learned men through the nation'. Powell argued that latitude in the expression of the articles allowed for those improvements in theology which required latitude in their turn. Orthodox critics disliked Powell's latitudinarian position on the matter, while Francis Blackburne, an ultra-latitudinarian and Powell's chief critic, denounced his arguments as being casuistical in the extreme, acting as the denial of religious and moral freedom. In 'Remarks' on the sermon which he published in 1758 Blackburne questioned the wisdom of Powell's choice of theme for a commencement sermon, since it revived a controversy which did little credit to the Church of England. 
The second controversy was of an altogether more personal, indeed collegiate character (it became increasingly difficult to separate the two interests during Powell's years as a fellow and then as master). The Lucasian professorship of mathematics had become vacant in 1760, and among the candidates were Edward Waring of Magdalene College and William Ludlam of St John's College. Waring distributed a portion of his 'Miscellanea analytica' in support of his candidature, which Powell anonymously attacked in order to serve the interests of Ludlam, a fellow Johnian, in 'Observations on the First Chapter of a Book called 'Miscellanea analytica'' (1760). Waring replied to the piece, to which Powell retorted, again anonymously, in his 'Defence of the Observations', which Waring answered in a 'Letter'. Waring had much the better of the debate. 
Powell had a stroke of apoplexy in 1770, and died in his chair from paralysis on 19 January 1775. He was buried in the college chapel on 25 January, the anniversary of his election as master, and a flat blue stone, with an epitaph by Balguy, was placed over his vault. He was unmarried and left his property to his niece, Miss Jolland, who had lived with him. An annuity of $150 was left to his sister, Susanna Powell, a matron of the Chelsea Hospital, from whom he was early distanced: they were too alike in character to get on. He also left $1000 to Dr Balguy, and a sum to be equally divided between six fellows and four members of the college who had been his contemporaries. These collegiate legacies were the subject of some disapproving comment at the time. Jeremiah Markland, the classical scholar, a notably charitable fellow of Peterhouse, thought that an unmarried divine leaving such a sum in his will looked decidedly ''unscriptural'' ('GM', 1785). Powell's books were left to four of the college's fellows. 
Besides the works mentioned above Powell wrote two others. 'The Heads of a Course of Lectures on Experimental Philosophy', published anonymously in 1746 and 1753, demonstrated a particular interest in optics, and was the result of the still comparatively rare practice of providing intercollegiate lectures at Cambridge. A posthumous work, 'Discourses on Various Subjects', (1776), was edited by Dr Balguy, who provided an outline of Powell's life and work by way of an introduction. Powell's controversial commencement sermon was included in the collection. They were reprinted, together with the discourses of the Revd James Fawcett, by Thomas Hughes in 1832, who also provided a somewhat defensive account of Powell's career by way of introduction. 


@@@@@


doc= 22665


Power, Henry (c.1626-1668), natural philosopher and physician, was born in Annesley, Nottinghamshire, the eldest son of John Power (died 1638) of Halifax, cloth merchant and landlord, and his wife, Jane ('nee' Jennings). After attending school in Halifax, Power matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, on 15 December 1641 when his age was given as fifteen. He graduated BA in 1644 and MA in 1648. At Cambridge the physician and author Thomas Browne, a friend of his father, advised him to pursue medicine, and Power complied, declaring his intention to 'review the whole body of Philosophy, especially Naturall' ('Works', 256-7), as he did so. Browne recommended that his protege read works by Harvey, but also by Paracelsians such as Croll and Hartmann. As a result, even as Power pursued his medical studies he became fascinated by the intricate wonders revealed by practical anatomy, chemical philosophy, and botany. Such interests were being fostered by a number of Cambridge virtuosi, especially the physician Francis Glisson, who had become the focus of a medical and natural philosophical circle in which Power now participated to the full. He came increasingly to feel that the key to appreciating Creation was to be sought in a synthesis of Cartesian and Paracelsian approaches. This was hardly Browne's view; but Power did inherit something of Browne's rich prose style, and his eagerness to draw elaborate imaginative analogies across the natural order. 
Power graduated MD in 1655, and settled in Halifax. He married, at a date unknown, Margaret, daughter of Anthony Foxcroft. His interests in natural philosophy and natural history were furthered by friendship with another gentleman impressed by the Cartesian philosophy, Richard Towneley of Towneley Hall, near Burnley. The Towneleys were a Catholic family that had pursued such interests since before the civil war. Now they and Power co-operated in natural philosophy, procuring expensive equipment from London to facilitate their investigations. By 1661, Power said, they had '4 as rare telescopes (as England affordes)' (Webster, 158). In the 1650s they conducted experiments on the atmosphere, inspired by Jean Pecquet's 'Experimenta nova anatomica' (Paris, 1651), a primarily medical work that also included an account of Pascal's Puy de Dome trial. Their investigations may have led to the issuing of a report in the autumn of 1661 entitled 'Mercurial Experiments Made at Towneley Hall in the Years 1660, and 1661'; no copies survive, but the report later became part of Power's 'Experimental Philosophy'. 
The nascent Royal Society in London was in need of men such as Power and Towneley. John Tillotson informed the society of their activities; Croune, the society's register, was forthwith ordered to open a correspondence with Power. The latter responded by forwarding some of his by now extensive experimental researches, which were read at the society. The experiments on air were of especial interest, since they arrived at a moment of international controversy over Robert Boyle's researches on the subject. The society immediately recruited Power as a helper in its experimental and natural historical work, and he was elected a fellow on 1 July 1663 (having been proposed as early as May 1661). 
Power visited the society in June 1663, and demonstrated his microscopical observations before the virtuosi. During his London stay he arranged for publication of these and other observations by the society's new 'printers' (strictly speaking, booksellers), John Martyn and James Allestry. The result was Power's only surviving publication, the book on which his reputation is founded: 'Experimental Philosophy' (1664 [1663]). This work incorporated material dating back over the previous decade. Its three books dealt respectively with microscopy, the air, and magnetism. Its reputation, then and since, has chiefly rested on the first of these, which was the first book in English about microscopy, and included a number of pioneering descriptions of microscopic observations. 
However, Power's descriptions were soon eclipsed by the splendidly illustrated pages of Robert Hooke's 'Micrographia', which meant that the source of 'Experimental Philosophy''s initial fame was also the cause of its later obscurity. Readers inevitably tended to assume that both books were aiming at the same ends, and that Hooke's was 'an aggrandized version of the 'Experimental Philosophy'' (Webster, 161). Yet Power's elaborate descriptions were really more akin to the literary conceits of Browne than the visual world of Hooke (Samuel Butler used Power's style as a vehicle for satirizing the experimental enterprise in general). Power's descriptions were perhaps intended as aids to a kind of rhapsodic reflection while readers peered through microscopes, rather than as substitutes for such observing. When Samuel Pepys read Power, for example, he did so with a new microscope to hand, as he and his wife struggled together to master 'the manner of seeing anything' through it ('Diary', ed. R. Latham and W. Mathews, 1970-83, 5.241); this experience does not seem to have been the case when he read Hooke. Moreover, in Power's eyes the sections on the air and magnetism were also important. Each illustrated a central element of his peculiar Cartesian/Helmontian philosophy: infinite divisibility, the elasticity of air (and the absurdity of a vacuum), and the use of electricity and magnetism to refute a geostatic cosmology such as that of Jacques Grandami. 
The publication of his research marked the peak of Power's involvement with the London experimental community. In 1664 he transferred his medical practice to Wakefield, and contacts with both the Towneleys and the Royal Society diminished. In relative seclusion, Power synthesized his earlier work on anatomy and chemical physiology into a general treatise, which he entitled 'Historia physico-anatomica'. Dedicated to Lord Delamere, it was never published, and was preserved only in manuscript. Its explanations were couched in terms of the kind of circulating system beloved of mid-seventeenth-century thinkers. Power envisaged 'Animal Spirits' that were subtle enough to bridge the divide between the corporeal and the incorporeal. These spirits were a central unifying theme of the 'Experimental Philosophy'. Simultaneously both physical and chemical, Power believed that they had been the first products of Creation. They permeated the universe, circulated within the bodies of all living creatures, and were 'the main (though invisible) Agent in all Natures three Kingdoms Mineral, Vegetal, and Animal' (Power, 61). 
Power died in December 1668, and was buried on 23 December at the church of All Saints, Wakefield. His work shows both the variety of opinions among the first generation of experimental philosophers and the vitality of natural philosophy beyond London and the Royal Society. Power's philosophy was a creative appropriation of both Paracelsian and Cartesian principles, inspired by what may always have been his prime interest, medicine. 


@@@@@


doc= 22666


Power, Joseph (1798-1868), librarian, was the fifth son of John Power MD, of Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, where he was born on 5 October 1798. He entered Clare College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in 1817, and in 1821 he graduated as tenth wrangler. In 1823 he was elected a fellow of his college. On 13 June 1824 he was ordained deacon at Norwich. But as there was no teaching post available at Clare, in 1829 he removed to Trinity Hall, a society then dominated by the study of civil law. There he taught mathematics, and acted as one of two tutors, until he was able to return to a vacancy in his first college in 1844. 
In 1845, on the resignation of John Lodge, the university librarian, on account of ill health, Power was put forward to succeed him. In an unusually hard-fought election, in which his ultimate opponent was J. J. Smith of Gonville and Caius College, a prominent figure in local antiquarian circles and well known for his industry as well as for his outspokenness, wits spoke of a choice between work without power and power without work. Power was elected, and remained in office until he resigned in 1864. Lodge had transformed the library, overseeing the erection of the new Cockerell building and a great increase in the numbers of books acquired. Power, more relaxed, left a reputation that suffered further at the tongues and pens of his successors J. E. B. Mayor and Henry Bradshaw. Nevertheless, under his eye (albeit at a time when the library was run more by the university than by the librarian) the staff was increased; arrangements were made, with the advice of Antonio Panizzi, for the more efficient gathering of copyright deposit books under the 'Copyright Act' of 1842; reforms in the library's management pre-empted the recommendations of the Cambridge University commissioners' report of 1852; the first volume of a printed catalogue of manuscripts appeared in 1856; an extension was erected, to the designs of George Gilbert Scott; and, not least importantly, Henry Bradshaw was appointed to care for the manuscripts and early printed books. 
Corpulent and sociable, Power preferred Cambridge society to travel. His published work consisted mainly of various mathematical papers contributed to the Cambridge Philosophical Society. In 1856 he was presented to the Clare College living of Litlington, Cambridgeshire, which he held until 1866, when the college presented him to the richer living (of which it had bought the advowson in 1836) of Birdbrook, Essex. He remained rector until his death there, after prolonged illness, on 7 June 1868. He never married, and was buried at Birdbrook. 


@@@@@


doc= 22667


Power, Lionel (c.1375x80-1445), composer, is of unknown origins, and his early training and professional experience are also unrecorded. By September 1418 he was a lay singing man and master of the choristers of the household chapel of Thomas, duke of Clarence. He may have been recruited to this chapel at its inception in 1411-13; his service until its disbandment on 29 September 1421, following the duke's death, included a spell in northern France (October 1419 to spring 1421). His employment immediately after 1421 remains unidentified; in all probability he moved to other aristocratic service at a comparable level, quite probably in the household chapel of John, duke of Bedford. In 1438 he became the first master of the newly inaugurated lady chapel choir at Canterbury Cathedral (eight boys, with a few appropriately skilled monks), and in this semi-retirement post he stayed until his death. The fact that Canterbury sources style him esquire and gentleman indicates that he remained a layman. 
Power's output exhibits mastery of many of the styles cultivated over a lengthy period of about fifty years. He became, with John Dunstaple, a leading contributor to the emergence and development of a body of English compositional practice which from 'c'.1420 to 'c'.1450, in terms of both style and content, was received in continental Europe not only with admiration, but also with emulation by contemporaries; English manuscripts were extensively copied. 
Between thirty-five and forty surviving works are attributable to Power, of which some twenty-two occur in the English Old Hall manuscript (BL, Add. MS 57950, 'c'.1418, additions 'c'.1421-5). As well as Marian votive antiphons written in a relatively direct and simple descant style incorporating the plainsong they include movements from the ordinary of the mass composed to exploit the ample resources offered by Clarence's chapel: isorhythmic pieces based on mathematically complex dispositions of the 'cantus firmus'; richly scored items for four or even five voices; and pieces modelled in style on the contemporary French secular chanson, some involving the elaborate syncopations and intricate proportional notations of the 'ars subtilior'. 
Few of Power's early works were known outside England; by contrast, virtually all of his later pieces survive only in continental sources (especially north Italian). Such transmission may have been facilitated by lengthy sojourns between 1419 and 1438 with aristocratic employers in the conquered regions of France; however it was plainly triggered by Power's role in the contemporary application of a sweetly consonant harmonic style to a novel homogeneity and grandeur of musical conception, which together constituted the much admired 'contenance angloise'. Already by 'c'.1419 he was composing paired movements of the ordinary of the mass, and within another few years he and his contemporaries had developed the unified mass cycle, of which Power's mass 'Alma redemptoris mater' is possibly the earliest surviving example. This was the first multi-movement polyphonic form in music history; by lifting composition from the realm of the miniaturist to that of the formulator of broad plans and grand designs, it provided the foundation on which European emulators, particularly Guillaume Dufay and Johannes Ockeghem, were to develop the continental Renaissance style later in the fifteenth century. 
From the last years of Power's career came four or five late Marian votive antiphons appropriate to performance in Canterbury Cathedral lady chapel, and also a vernacular treatise prescribing a course of instruction for teaching singing boys the skills of improvising at sight a counterpoint to plainsong. Power died at Canterbury on 5 June 1445 in one of the cathedral's guest lodgings, and was buried the following day in the lay cemetery within the precinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 22668


Power, Sir Manley (1773-1826), army officer, was born at Hill Court, near Ross, Herefordshire, the son of Thomas Bolton Power (1735-1801), captain in the 20th regiment, of Hill Court, and his wife, Ann Corney, daughter of Captain Corney. His great-grandparents were John Power (died 1712) and Mercy Manley, daughter of Thomas Manley, of Erbistock, Denbighshire. Manley's first commission as ensign in the 20th foot was dated 27 August 1783, when apparently he was between nine and ten years old. He was promoted lieutenant in 1789 and captain of an independent company in 1793. After his transfer to the 20th foot on 16 January 1794, he was promoted major in 1799 and lieutenant-colonel in 1801. 
Power saw much active service. After two years (1795-7) in Halifax, Nova Scotia, he served with the unsuccessful expedition to the Netherlands in 1799 and went to Minorca in 1800. In 1801 his regiment joined the force in Egypt commanded by Sir Ralph Abercromby. He was present at the siege and French surrender (31 August 1801) at Alexandria. On 25 October 1802 he was placed on half pay but from 1803 to 1805 he acted as assistant adjutant-general at the Horse Guards, London. On 6 June 1805 he was made lieutenant-colonel of the 32nd foot, and became colonel in the army in 1810. He took part in the Peninsular War, serving with the duke of Wellington's army in Spain. He was ordered to return for assignment in England, but owing to his experience in commanding Portuguese troops, he was re-assigned to a Portuguese brigade under Lieutenant-General William Carr Beresford. He commanded such a brigade at Salamanca and later at Vittoria, Nivelle, and Orthes. In June 1813 he was promoted major-general. He was awarded a cross and clasp and was made knight-commander of the Portuguese order of the Tower and Sword and made KCB (2 January 1815). Later he served on the staff in Canada and was lieutenant-governor of Malta. 
On 5 June 1802 Power married Sarah, daughter of J. Coulson, and they had three daughters and a son, Manley (1803-1857), who became a lieutenant-colonel commanding the 85th regiment. In 1818 he married, second, Anne, daughter of Kingsmill Evans, colonel in the Grenadier Guards, of Lydiart House, Monmouthshire, and they had two sons. Their eldest son, Kingsmill Manley Power (1819-1881), was captain in the 9th and 16th lancers and served with distinction in the Gwalior and Sutlej campaigns. He was promoted lieutenant-general in May 1825. Power died at Bern, Switzerland, on 7 July 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 22669


Power, Marguerite Agnes (1815?-1867), writer, was a daughter of Colonel Robert Power ('b'. 'c'.1792), and his wife, Agnes Brooke, and niece of Marguerite Gardiner, countess of Blessington (1789-1849). Little is known about her childhood, which was probably spent in Ireland. Her mother was the daughter of Thomas Brooke, first member of council at St Helena. Her father had an army career, and afterwards became agent for the Blessington estates in co. Tyrone. He was later given a posting in Canada by Lord Durham. In 1839 Marguerite Power and her sister Ellen moved to London to live permanently with Lady Blessington at Gore House. As a result of her aunt's extensive literary connections, Marguerite Power became a friend of many of the most influential people of the day, including Walter Savage Landor, Charles Dickens, William Thackeray, Prince Louis Napoleon, and Benjamin Disraeli. During the 1840s she was a regular contributor to the annuals, particularly 'The Keepsake' and Heath's 'Book of Beauty'. After the breakup at Gore House in April 1849, Marguerite Power and her sister accompanied their aunt to Paris. Marguerite Power wrote a memoir of Lady Blessington, prefixed to Lady Blessington's novel 'Country Quarters' (1850) and reprinted in the 'Journal of the Conversations of Lord Byron with the Countess of Blessington' (1893). 
After Lady Blessington's death in June 1849, Marguerite Power remained in Paris, supporting herself as a journalist and novelist. From 1851 to 1857 she edited 'The Keepsake', to which Dickens contributed 'To be Read at Dusk' in 1852. The annual's folding came as a great financial blow and, despite an extensive literary output, she struggled financially for the rest of her life. She continued to write for periodicals and annuals, including four stories and a poem for 'Household Words', and miscellaneous pieces for 'Once a Week', the 'Forget-me-Not', the 'Irish Metropolitan Magazine', and 'All the Year Round'. In 1853, at Thackeray's recommendation, she was given the job as Paris correspondent for the 'Illustrated London News'. According to Charles Mackay, this was something of a sympathy posting, but he noted that she distinguished herself well in the position, becoming the first journalist to announce the engagement of Louis Napoleon (Mackay, 2.296). 
Marguerite Power published her first novel, 'Evelyn Forester', in 1856; it was favourably compared to the works of Lady Blessington. This was followed by 'The Foresters' (1858), the pseudonymous 'Letters of a Betrothed' (1858, signed Honoria), 'Nelly Carew' (1859), and 'Sweethearts and Wives' (1861). 
In 1857 Dickens, Thackeray, and John Forster raised a subscription of $200 for her from among the old friends of Lady Blessington ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 8.497). Later, Dickens helped secure a publisher for her final book. In 1860 she published a poem, 'Virginia's Hand', dedicated to John Forster. It was evidently written under the influence of Mrs Browning's 'Aurora Leigh'. Landor highly praised her poetical efforts, especially a poem written by her in Heath's 'Book of Beauty'. Her last publication was an account of a winter's residence in Egypt, entitled 'Arabian Days and Nights, or, Rays from the East' (1863). It is dedicated to Janet and Henry Ross, with whom she stayed at Alexandria. A fall from a horse caused a severe spinal injury from which she never fully recovered. She died at Bushey Heath, Bushey, Hertfordshire, on 1 July 1867 after a long battle with cancer. 
In its obituary notice, the 'Gentleman's Magazine' faults Marguerite Power's writing for a lack of 'literary individuality or merit' ('GM', 266). However, by the accounts of her contemporaries and friends, she was respected as a writer and editor. Camilla Toulmin Crosland defends her against the charge that she was responsible for the folding of 'The Keepsake' (C. T. Crosland, 121), and Dickens published her contributions in his periodicals. It was no doubt her extended financial hardships that gave her a 'pensive and taciturn' quality noticed by her friends (N. Crosland, 181). She lacked 'hopeful eagerness' and 'buoyancy of youth', and was 'calm, earnest, and dignified, even in her girlhood' (C. T. Crosland, 100). She was praised by all her friends especially for her intelligence, sense of humour, warmth, tact, and unfailing generosity. 


@@@@@


doc= 22670


Power, Richard, first earl of Tyrone (1629/30-1690), nobleman, was the eldest son of John Power, fifth Baron le Power and Coroghmore (died 1665), of Curraghmore, co. Waterford, and his wife, Ruth (died 1641), daughter of John Pypho of St Mary's Abbey, Dublin, and his wife, Kinbrough Valentine; he was said to be twelve in a document dated 17 June 1642. About the time of his birth his father became a lunatic and in December 1641, shortly after the outbreak of the Irish rising, his pregnant mother died of shock when a party of rebels burst into Curraghmore. The dominant influence on Richard's upbringing was therefore his grandmother Kinbrough Pypho. During the turbulent years of the rising and Commonwealth, it was the lunacy of Lord Power that saved the Curraghmore estate from confiscation: he was placed under the protection of the lords justices in 1642, and was exempted from transplantation by order of the lord protector in 1654. 
The allegiance of the Powers, as Catholic landowners, would naturally have been to the Irish Catholic confederation. Richard, however, was too young to take part in the rising and after the victory of the parliamentary army he 'demeaned himself inoffensively to the English, [and hath] slain (with the assistance of his father's tenants) divers tories [rebels] and brought others prisoners to the English garrisons where they have been executed' ('In the House of Lords', no. 16). He appears to have taken his religious loyalties as lightly as his political ones, for in 1654 he contracted a very favourable marriage with Dorothy, eldest daughter of Arthur Annesley, the future earl of Anglesey, an alliance which placed him firmly among the new Anglo-Irish protestant establishment. There were four children of this marriage: Arthur (died in Waterford), Dorothy (died in London), John, and James. 
The Restoration brought prosperity to Curraghmore. In 1661 Power was appointed governor of the city and county of Waterford and elected MP for the county. He succeeded his father as Baron le Power in 1665. A letter at Curraghmore from Lord Anglesey to his daughter, dated 1 May 1666, shows how Anglicized the family had become: 'I am glad to find by your husband that you have chosen an English nurse for the child you go with. He writes me word that he is upon making his house English.... I wish you had a good chaplain and then I doubt not God would bless all the rest. (cited in Girouard, 257-8)' Power's sister Catherine married in 1658 John FitzGerald of Dromana, proprietor of the vast estate of Decies in the western half of the county. They had one child, a daughter Catherine. Upon the deaths of her mother in 1660 and her father in 1664, guardianship of the little heiress passed to her uncle Richard. In May 1673 Richard made a bold stroke to unite the Curraghmore and Dromana estates by marrying his ward and niece to his eldest surviving son, John. Catherine was about twelve and her cousin a mere seven, but Archbishop Sheldon allowed a marriage ceremony to be performed before him in Lambeth Chapel. In October Power was created earl of Tyrone and Viscount Decies (the title formerly borne by the FitzGeralds and now given by courtesy to the child-bridegroom). 
In May 1675 Catherine appeared again before Sheldon and repudiated the contract. She was then kept under house arrest by Lord Anglesey, but on Easter eve 1677 she escaped from his house and was married the same day to Edward Villiers, eldest son of the third Viscount Grandison. Chancery proceedings followed, and Tyrone was forced to give up the title-deeds of the Dromana estate, and his family to vacate the Decies title. The case formed an important precedent in cases regarding the validity of child marriages. 
Tyrone's skill in walking the religious tightrope turned against him in 1679 when he was accused of involvement in the Popish Plot. He was indicted at Waterford in August 1679 and again in March 1680, and taken to England, where his impeachment was decided on by the House of Commons and he was imprisoned in the gatehouse at Westminster. He remained there until the beginning of 1684 when he was released on bail. Public reaction against the plot, and the king's death, saved him from further trouble on that score. 
Tyrone's protestantism did not survive the accession of James II. He became colonel of a regiment of foot, was made a privy councillor in May 1686, and was lieutenant of the county and city of Waterford. He sat as a peer in the Irish parliament of May 1689, at which most of the protestant landowners were attainted. With his regiment he took part in the battle of the Boyne and the siege of Waterford in July 1690. On the approach of King William's army Tyrone's son and heir John Power fled to the royal camp at Carrick-on-Suir, where he obtained from the king a letter confirming that he was and had always been a protestant, and had been 'extremely oppressed' by his father on account of his religion. The king's support undoubtedly saved Curraghmore once again from confiscation. 
Upon the surrender of Waterford the Jacobite force there joined the defenders of Cork, where they soon found themselves under siege from John Churchill, later duke of Marlborough. The defence of Cork, brave as it was, proved to be a rash mistake, and in order to prevent an all-out Williamite assault Tyrone and Lord Rycault negotiated terms of surrender. They were harsh: the entire garrison of about 4000 men became prisoners of war on 28 September and were shipped off to England. Prison conditions for the ordinary soldiers were grim and many members of Tyrone's regiment died of malnutrition and disease. The senior officers were lodged in the Tower of London, where Tyrone died on 14 October 1690. He was buried on 3 November at Farnborough in the Annesley vault. 
Tyrone was succeeded by his elder son John, second earl (hero of the celebrated 'Beresford ghost story'), who died unmarried in 1693. Tyrone's younger son, James, now succeeded as third earl, but died without a male heir in 1704. The earldom of Tyrone then became extinct, while the barony of le Power passed to a different branch. Curraghmore was inherited by James's daughter Catherine, who in 1717 married Sir Marcus Beresford; their descendants, the marquesses of Waterford, still occupy Curraghmore. By his energy and resourcefulness -- and opportunism -- Tyrone restored the ailing fortunes of his family and preserved them through turbulent times. To this end he was apparently prepared to sacrifice religion, principles, and the happiness of his children. However, in the final phase of his public life -- his role in the defence of Cork and the negotiations for its surrender -- he displayed courage and nobility. 


@@@@@


doc= 22671


Power, (William Grattan) Tyrone (1797-1841), actor, was born near Kilmacthomas, co. Waterford, Ireland, on 2 November 1797. His father was a member of a well-to-do Waterford family, and died in America before Tyrone was a year old. His mother, Marie, the daughter of a Colonel Maxwell, who fell in the American War of Independence, settled, on her husband's death, in Cardiff, where she had a distant relative named Bird, a printer and bookseller. On the voyage from Dublin she and her son were wrecked off the Welsh coast, and narrowly escaped drowning. Power may have served an apprenticeship to Bird's business in Cardiff. Bird was printer to the local theatre, and seems to have introduced Power to the company of strolling players which, to the great grief of his mother, he joined in his fourteenth year. He was handsome and well made, and creditably filled the role of a 'walking gentleman'. 
In 1815 Power visited Newport, Isle of Wight, where he made his debut as Alonzo in Sheridan's 'Pizarro', and where he also became engaged to Anne Gilbert (1798-1876), the third daughter of John Gilbert of that town. He married her in 1817 when he was nineteen and she was a year younger. After appearing in various minor characters he undertook in 1818 at Margate the part of a comic Irishman, Looney Mactwoler, in Colman's 'The Review'. His first attempt in the role, in which he was destined to make a great reputation, was a complete failure. Want of success as an actor led him at the end of the year, when his wife succeeded to a small fortune, to quit the stage. He sailed for the Cape of Good Hope in 1820 and spent twelve months ineffectively in South Africa, but returned to England and the stage in 1821. He made his first appearance at the English Opera House, London, in 1822, as Charles Austencourt in 'Man and Wife'. In the same year he performed at the Olympic, of which he also became stage-manager for a while. He continued to obtain small engagements in the London theatres, and in 1824 made a second and somewhat successful attempt in Irish farce as Larry Hoolagan, a drunken scheming servant, in 'The Irish Valet'. In 1826, while filling small roles at Covent Garden, his opportunity came. Charles Connor, the leading Irish comedian on the London stage, died suddenly of apoplexy in St James's Park on 7 October 1826. At the time he was fulfilling an engagement at Covent Garden. Power was allotted Connor's parts as Serjeant Milligan in 'Returned Killed' and O'Shaughnessy in 'The One Hundred Pound Note'. His success was immediate. Henceforth he confined himself to the delineation of Irish characters, such as Sir Lucius O'Trigger in Sheridan's 'The Rivals', Dr O'Toole in 'The Irish Tutor', and Dennis Brulgruddery in Colman's 'John Bull', in which he is said by contemporary critics to have been superior to Connor, and at least the equal of John Henry Johnstone. He appeared at the Haymarket, Adelphi, and Covent Garden theatres, fulfilling long engagements at $100 and $120 a week, and he paid annual visits to the Theatre Royal, Dublin, where he was always received with boundless enthusiasm. Between 1833 and 1835 he made a tour of the principal American towns and cities, and repeated the visit in 1837 and 1838. 
On his return to London after his first tour of America, Power published 'Impressions of America' (2 vols., 1836). He had previously published three romances -- 'The Lost Heir' (1830), 'The Gipsy of Abruzzo' (1831), and 'The King's Secret' (1831). He also wrote the Irish drama 'St Patrick's Eve, or, The Orders of the Day' (1832); a comedy entitled 'Married Lovers'; and the Irish farces 'Born to Good Luck, or, The Irishman's Fortune', 'How to Pay the Rent', 'Paddy Carey, the Boy of Clogheen' (1833), and 'O'Flannigan and the Fairies' (1836), all of which he produced himself. 
Power's last appearance on the London stage was at the Haymarket on the evening of Saturday 1 August 1840, when he filled the roles of Captain O'Cutter in Colman's 'The Jealous Wife', Sir Patrick O'Plenipo ADC in Kenney's 'The Irish Ambassador', and Tim More (a travelling tailor) in 'The Irish Lion'. He then paid a fourth visit to America, in order to look after some property he had purchased in Texas and $3000 he had invested in the United States Bank, which had stopped payment. His performance at the Park Theatre, New York, on 9 March 1841, as Gerald Pepper and Morgan Rattler, was to be his last appearance on stage. On 11 March 1841 he left New York on the return voyage in the 'President', the largest steamer then afloat. There were 123 persons on board. The steamer was accompanied by the packet ship 'Orpheus', also bound for Liverpool. On the night of 12 March a storm rose and raged during the whole of Saturday the 13th. Before the break of dawn on Sunday the 14th the 'President' disappeared, and no vestige of her was afterwards recovered. Power was forty-three years old at the date of the disaster. He left a widow and four sons and three daughters. His eldest son, Sir William Tyrone Power KCB, became for some time agent-general for New Zealand and was the author of various books of travel. His second son, Maurice, went on the stage, and died suddenly in 1849. 
Tyrone Power was about 5 feet 8 inches in height; his form was light and agile, with a very animated and expressive face, light complexion, blue eyes, and brown hair. He was best in representations of blundering, good-natured, and eccentric Irish characters; but his exuberant, rollicking humour and his inexhaustible good spirits he infused into every comedy and farce, however indifferent, in which he acted. 


@@@@@


doc= 22672


Powis, William Henry (1808-1836), wood-engraver, was born in London. He learned his craft from George Wilmot Bonner and soon became established as 'one of the best wood-engravers of his time' (Chatto and Jackson, 544). Linton, who worked alongside him for a year, observed that 'most noticeable in Powis's work is... that everything has been cut at once. In this he differed notably from [John Orrin] Smith, who depended on after-toning' (Linton, 194). With Bonner, Powis produced some facsimile engravings after Hans Holbein's work for Francis Douce's 'The Dance of Death', printed at the Chiswick Press in 1833; contemporaries deemed his contributions to be of 'remarkable excellence' (Linton, 193). 
After leaving Bonner, Powis undertook work for John Jackson, who, according to Linton, often signed Powis's engravings. He produced many engravings of animals for Jackson, including several in James Northcote's 'Fables' (1833), such as 'Elephant' and 'Wolf', and in Edward Turner Bennett's 'The Gardens and Menageries of the Zoological Society Delineated' (1830-31), for instance, 'Palm Squirrel' and 'Barn Owl'. Powis was probably best known for his topographical views, many of them biblical scenes. A number adorned Richard Westall and John Martin's 'Illustrations of the Bible' (1833). Linton thought such landscapes 'perhaps the best... for their size up to that time engraved in wood' (Linton, 194). Certainly the publishers regarded Powis's work as excellent, paying him, according to Chatto and Jackson, 15 guineas instead of the more usual fee of 12, for his engraving of 'The Deluge', after Martin. Later, Powis engraved William Harvey's illustration to accompany the poem 'Vesuvius: Across the Bay' in Charles Latrobe's 'The Solace of Song' (1837). His contemporaries thought him less gifted in his figure subjects, and Linton considered them 'weakly drawn' (Linton, 194). 
Throughout his working life Powis was established in London. The London trade directories record him working from 94 St John Street Road (1832-4) and later from 59 St John Street Road (1836). Although many early sources, including Samuel Redgrave, suggest that Powis's early death at the age of twenty-eight in 1836 was caused by overwork, Linton claimed that he had always been unhealthy and probably died of consumption. There are proof impressions of the engraver's work in the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; these are characteristically signed either 'W. H. POWIS, Sc' or 'W. POWIS, Sc.' 


@@@@@


doc= 22673


Powle, George (fl. 1764-1771), etcher and miniature painter, was a pupil of Thomas Worlidge (1700-1766). Powle imitated his tutor's delicate and highly finished Rembrandtesque style of etching. Worlidge's series of plates from antique gems, issued in 1768, was to a large extent the work of Powle. Although he worked in London, Powle was resident initially in Hereford and later Worcester. He designed views of both cities that were engraved by James Ross in 1778. While in Worcester, Powle was commissioned in 1771 to etch portraits of both John Berkeley of Spetchley, described as the only 'true' likeness that he produced (Anderton catalogues, 5, no. 1165), and the judge Sir Robert Berkeley. It was John Berkeley, in his letters to James Granger, who spoke highly of Powle's character and skill. Among Powle's drawings are portraits of Lady Pakington, Sir Edwin Sandys, and Sir John Perrot, which were engraved by Valentine Green. Powle's plates (most of which are in the British Museum) are not numerous but include portraits of Thomas Popplewelt and Thomas Belasyse, Lord Fauconberg; 'Mademoiselle d'Hamilton, the Comtesse de Grammont', after Lely, and 'Old Parr', after Rubens; two candlelight subjects, after Schalken; and a plate in Dr Hunter's 'Anatomy of the Gravid Uterus'. Two anonymous plates in T. R. Nash's 'History of Worcestershire' (1781) are also ascribed to him. His only known mezzotint (British Museum) is a portrait of Mrs Elizabeth Worlidge, his tutor's third wife. Powle exhibited portrait miniatures with the Society of Artists in 1769 and 1770, and with the Free Society in 1764, 1766, and 1768. 


@@@@@


doc= 22674


Powle, Henry (bap. 1630, d. 1692), politician, was baptized on 18 October 1630 at Shottesbrooke, Berkshire, the second son of Henry Powle (died 1646), landowner, of Shottesbrooke and his wife, Katherine (died 1659), daughter of Matthew Herbert of Monmouth. Sir Richard Powle MP was his elder brother. Powle matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 16 December 1646 and was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 11 May 1647, being called to the bar on 31 May 1654. 
In 1657 Powle succeeded his uncle, William Powle, at Quenington, Gloucestershire, and that same year he purchased the manor of Williamstrip from his brother Richard. In 1659 he married the Hon. Elizabeth Newport (1627-1672), daughter of Richard Newport, first Baron Newport. They had one daughter, Katherine, who married Henry Ireton, son of the regicide. Powle's two Gloucestershire manors gave him an interest in the parliamentary borough of Cirencester for which he was returned in the Convention of 1660. His only speech of note occurred on 9 July when he opposed the established religion according to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', an early indicator of his sympathy for a broader church. Powle was elected FRS, probably in 1663 (he was expelled in 1685). He was not returned in the 1661 election. In 1667 he had the reputation of a gambler and a rake, and in 1670 he was removed from the Gloucestershire bench, probably because of his reluctance to enforce the 'Conventicle Acts', although he was reinstated the following year. 
Powle was returned to parliament again at a by-election for Cirencester on 3 January 1671. He made at least one speech during the session, on 22 March 1671, over the fining of juries, and acted as a teller and chair of several select committees. Powle really began to make his mark as an opposition speaker during the 1673 session, peppering his speeches with a detailed knowledge of parliamentary precedents. As Bishop Burnet put it, 'Powle was very learned in precedents, and parliament journals, which goes a great way in their debates' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 2.84). In 1673 Powle particularly opposed the king's declaration of indulgence, favouring a temporary parliamentary indulgence for protestant dissenters, and arguing on 10 February 'that the king could not dispense, much less suspend, the laws in being' ('Diary of Sir Edward Dering', 115). On a related matter, Powle was a keen supporter of the bill preventing the growth of popery (the 'Test Act'), even suggesting on 21 March 1673 that supply legislation be delayed so that this bill could be completed. 
Parliament was summoned to meet again on 20 October 1673, and on the eve of the session Sir William Temple thought Powle a leader of a moderate group of MPs whose aims were to safeguard religion and end the war with the Netherlands. Powle thwarted the court's plan for an immediate prorogation on the 20th and proceeded to move for an address that the duke of York's marriage with Mary of Modena might not be consummated. Parliament was prorogued later that day for a week, and when the new session began on the 27th Powle was again at the forefront of the opposition. On 30 October he opined that 'when money is given, or any good thing done, still popery spoils all' (Grey, 2.195-6). He continued to stress the danger from popery and the grievance of the standing army before parliament was again prorogued on 4 November 1673. 
When parliament reconvened in January 1674, Powle was again at the head of the attack on the court, and especially the conduct of the dukes of Buckingham and Lauderdale. On 13 January he spoke of 'a pernicious design to alter the government... these councillors having brought us to the brink of destruction' (Grey, 2.239-40), and moved for an address that Lauderdale be removed from the king's presence for ever. On the 14th he supported moves to have Buckingham stripped of all the offices he held during royal pleasure. He was less forward in promoting the case against the earl of Arlington, arguing that what was done should be 'just and regular' (ibid., 2.323-4). He described the war against the Dutch as hanging 'over our heads like a comet' (ibid., 2.334-5). He supported a general test bill to distinguish between protestants and papists and a habeas corpus bill, but described the Lords' bill for regulating the trial of peers as likely to set them up as kings should it pass. 
The parliamentary session which began in April 1675 saw Powle return to the attack on ministers, especially Lauderdale. Despite claiming 'an unwillingness to accuse great men' (Grey, 3.41-2), on 26 April, he nevertheless supported the impeachment of Lord Treasurer Danby. Other targets for Powle included the danger from France, pensioners, and Lauderdale again (who remained in power). Powle was critical of the king's advisers, believing that there was a design to rule without parliament, and that there were those whose 'boundless ambition makes them hate parliaments' (ibid., 3.132). 
Powle continued his opposition in the next session. On 20 October 1675 he supported a bill for the royal children to be educated as protestants. On the 21st he made the point about royal finances: 'it seems prodigy to him, that having no war, and such a revenue, there should be such debts' (Grey, 3.318). On the need for a supply for a shipbuilding programme, he thought money should not be voted for all the ships requested because then there would be no need to summon parliament, and 'the prospect of the coming of a parliament keeps things in order' (ibid., 3.331). 
In 1677 the earl of Shaftesbury thought Powle 'doubly worthy', but Powle did not endorse Shaftesbury's contention that the fifteen-month prorogation of parliament to February 1677 constituted a dissolution. He was not, however, willing to support the grant of a supply until grievances had been redressed. He was perturbed by the misuse of previous grants of supply, complaining on 21 February that money was 'not laid out for the purpose it was given' (Grey, 4.126-7), and on 26 March argued for the need to formulate a system of alliances which would secure 'the reduction of the French power to an equality with their neighbours' (ibid., 4.310-11). 
When parliament sat again in January 1678, Powle's speech on the 29th encapsulated the case for a restrictive grant of supply: 'whilst we give small sums, there will be still recourse to parliaments for more, but giving of great sums will make parliaments useless' (Grey, 5.23-5). He then argued for redress of grievances before money was granted for the king's foreign policy. On 4 February he defended the right of the Commons to advise the king on foreign policy, and in March consistently pressed for more information on the king's foreign policy and for a war with France. Following a short adjournment in May 1678 he continued to resist a grant of supply without redress of grievances, arguing on 1 June, 'I think it can never be suitable to our trust to give money and leave men's minds unquiet as to the growth of popery' (ibid., 6.48-51). On 8 June he summed up the frustration of the Commons with Charles II's foreign policy: 'we desired a war, and we have a peace. We desired to lessen the power of the French king, and we make peace to greaten him' (ibid., 6.76-7). 
In the last session of the Cavalier Parliament Powle was one of a number of MPs associated with Lord Arlington and Prince Rupert who were encouraged to attack Lord Treasurer Danby, probably in Powle's case because of his ambition to secure a place on the Treasury commission. Initially he was sceptical of the Popish Plot, noting on 6 November 1678 his belief that 'this plot has come in by the connivance of the government' (Grey, 6.154). However, he was soon supporting a whole raft of opposition policies for safeguarding the state and the protestant religion, including the 'Test Act' depriving Catholics of their parliamentary seats, and raising the militia as an alternative to a standing army, which he hoped to see disbanded. He defended the former courtier and now MP Ralph Montagu on 19 December, perhaps partly to protect his own contacts with the French ambassador, Paul Barillon, which had been begun via Montagu and which subsequently led to him receiving $500 from Barillon for his opposition to the court. He then helped to promote Danby's impeachment. 
On 11 February 1679 Powle was re-elected to parliament for Cirencester, and three days later he was defeated at East Grinstead where he stood on that part of the Sackville interest espoused by the dowager countess of Dorset. Following Charles II's initial refusal to accept Edward Seymour as speaker, Powle was actually nominated, though not chosen, as an alternative on 8 March. On 19 March he wanted the journals inspected and a report on the events of the previous session laid before the house for the benefit of new MPs. On 1 April he opposed an investigation into the army, wishing to see the troops disbanded quietly, and the punishment of those that counselled raising them. On 7 April he was seated on petition at East Grinstead, but did not choose between his two seats before the end of the parliament. In the middle of the session, on 21 April 1679, Powle was one of a group of former members of the opposition who were admitted to the privy council. The duke of York was encouraged by this move regarding Powle 'as a man of honour' ('Dartmouth MSS', 1.31). The new privy councillors, however, were now placed in the position of being royal spokesmen in the Commons, but without the full support of the king. Powle thus faced a difficult time being heard in the house, particularly when arguing for a supply to be granted to the king. In the debate on excluding the Roman Catholic duke of York from the throne on 11 May 1679, he argued for limitations to be placed on a royal successor, not for exclusion, which he voted against. 
Powle's first wife having died on 28 July 1672, following the end of the parliamentary session he married, by a licence of 28 June 1679, Frances (died 1687), daughter of Lionel Cranfield, first earl of Middlesex, and the widow of Richard Sackville, fifth earl of Dorset. They had no children. The king dissolved parliament in July 1679, and on 19 August Powle was re-elected for Cirencester. Despite being married to a Sackville, he came bottom of the poll at East Grinstead. In December 1679 Barillon thought him 'a man fit to fill one of the first posts in England; he is very eloquent and able' (Dalrymple, 1.338). Charles II's refusal to allow the new parliament to meet led to Powle's resignation from the privy council on 31 January 1680. When parliament eventually met in October 1680 he was again an unsuccessful candidate for the speakership. He was probably a moderate exclusionist, being appointed to draw up the second 'Exclusion Bill', but not speaking for it. He was a manager of the impeachment of Lord Stafford in December 1680, summing up on the 4th 'in a vehement oration' on the 'Jesuitical doctrine of holding it not only lawful but meritorious to murder an heretic king' (Evelyn, 3.229-30). He also supported the 'Comprehension Bill' and the impeachment of Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, but he appeared to be losing his influence to the more ardent exclusionists. 
Elected for both Cirencester and East Grinstead in February 1681, in the week-long Oxford parliament Powle spoke on 24 March 1681 in favour of 'expedients' over exclusion. After the accession of James II, Powle stood at Cirencester in March 1685, and was easily defeated. He retained his seat on the Gloucestershire bench, but was absent from the county when the 'three questions' were asked concerning the repeal of the 'Test Act' and penal laws. In September 1688, however, the earl of Sunderland recommended Powle as a court candidate for New Windsor. 
Powle had been in contact with The Hague before the invasion of William of Orange in November 1688. Together with Sir Robert Howard he travelled to the prince's camp at Windsor on 16 December 1688, and after a long audience carried a letter back from the prince to the common council of London, which disapproved of James II's return to the capital and ensured that the authorities took precautions to secure the city for William. Powle took the chair of the meeting summoned by William of all the members of Charles II's parliaments on 26 December 1688 in order to find a method of calling a 'free parliament'. Powle clearly impressed in this role, the Dutch ambassador, Van Citters, describing him as a 'man of excellent understanding and probity' (Schwoerer, 136). 
Powle was elected to the Convention Parliament for New Windsor on 11 January 1689, and was chosen speaker on the 22nd. There was an attempt to have him removed from the speakership by overturning his election for New Windsor, but it was confirmed by the house without a division on 2 May. Powle was appointed on 14 February 1689 to the privy council, was named master of the rolls on 13 March, and reappointed on 14 June. He had been made a bencher of Lincoln's Inn on 13 May of the same year. As well as presiding over the succession debates, Powle presented the 'Bill of Rights' to William and Mary on 16 December 1689. 
In the 1690 election Powle was returned for Cirencester, but despite support among some whig back-benchers he was not re-elected to the chair. On 26 April he supported the 'Abjuration Bill' because it was aimed only at those people employed in the government, and 'they who are to act ought to be zealous in it' (Grey, 2.85-6). Unseated on petition on 25 November 1690, Powle died on 21 November 1692, after a few days' illness, and was buried at Quenington. His great collection of precedents, parliamentary journals, and manuscripts on English history was split up, eventually part of it finding its way into the Lansdowne collection, and part to the Bodleian Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 22675


Pownall, Robert (1520-1571), Church of England clergyman and translator, was born in Dorset, not Somerset as formerly believed -- a detail furnished by his signature on the list of English exiles at Aarau. Little is known of his life and career before the reign of Mary. He fled abroad as a student, but soon achieved a certain prominence through his activities in several exile centres. On reaching the continent he settled first in Calais: in 1557 he penned to his former fellow citizens 'An Admonition to the Town of Calais' ('STC, 1475-1640' 19078) threatening them with plagues such as had afflicted Israel in the time of Jezebel: 'When as I call to remembrance how many wayes God hath sought to induce thee to repentance,... and on the other side thine indurate rebellion in following in the footsteps of thy mother England, I cannot but with tears lament thyne emynent destruction. (sig. A1'r')' But Calais, at this time still under English rule, was hardly a safe haven, and by 1556 Pownall had moved on to Wesel, a small German Rhineland town which had already earned a reputation as a hospitable place of safety for religious exiles. Now a considerable colony of English gathered in the city, and the young Pownall soon found himself raised to a leadership role. The first ministers of the church were Miles Coverdale and William Barlow, both former bishops, but this notwithstanding the Wesel church adopted a church order modelled not on the Edwardian prayer book but on John a Lasco's 'Forma ac ratio', the church order of the Edwardian London stranger churches. Barlow as minister was assisted by two 'adiutors' or under-ministers, seven elders, and two deacons; Pownall was named among the elders. 
Alongside his duties in the management of the congregation, Pownall's most signal service during his time in Wesel came in the form of his writings and translations. During these years a concerted effort was made to make Wesel, alongside Emden, one of the two centres of production for vernacular protestant propaganda aimed at those left behind in England. Its strategic location on Europe's principal artery of trade in one respect made it well suited for this task, although, like Emden, there was no previous tradition of printing within the city. Unlike Emden, the exile community did not number among its members veterans of the London printing trade, and were therefore forced to rely on local men with little previous experience of English-language work. These Wesel editions tend to be of a more rudimentary appearance than the accomplished Emden work; nevertheless, the exiles managed to bring some twenty editions to the market during the course of little over two years. To this Pownall contributed four significant works: the 'Admonition to Calais' and three translations from the French. Of these, the most substantial was an edition (1555) of Wolfgang Musculus's famous work, 'The Temporiser', first translated into French from the original Latin by Valerand Poullain, minister of the French church in Frankfurt and a fellow refugee from England. This was a work entirely typical of this phase of the exile, an admonition to those true Christians who had remained behind in England to abandon their temporizing or 'Nicodemism' and join the exodus abroad. In an introductory epistle Pownall attempted to fathom what had brought about such a transformation in England, 'where worthy Magistrates, nobility and rulers turned into faint hearted persons... and thy infinite number of gospellers and faithful Christians, into dissembling hypocrites and hollow-hearted persons' (sig. A4). In his perplexity Pownall spoke for many of the exiles, but he had little to propose but admonition to rejoin the right path: 'Wo worth those oxen, that farme, that wife, or any other worldly pleasure, that shall stay us from coming to that celestial supper' (sig. A7). 
Pownall also translated from the French two further works in the same vein: 'A most Pithy and Excellent Epistle to Animate All Trew Christians unto the Cross of Christ' (1556) and the 'Little Dialogue of the Consolator' of Pierre du Val, minister of the French church in Emden. Where Pownall learned his French is unknown, possibly even in his short stay in Calais (in the 'Admonition' he refers to Calais as 'thow towne of myne education'), but there was also a sizeable French exile congregation in Wesel. The fact that Pownall chose for translation works of du Val and Poullain, ministers of the French churches in Emden and Frankfurt respectively, is an indication of the close communication between the various exile groups. 
Wesel proved ultimately an unhappy refuge for the English and French exile congregations. The Lutheran town council soon appeared to regret the privileges they had extended and, as relations deteriorated, members of the congregation began to look for a new place of refuge. In the summer of 1557 the bulk of the congregation migrated in a body to Aarau, in the Swiss confederation. Here Pownall was appointed one of the ministers of the church under Thomas Lever, whom he had earlier accompanied on a visit to the English community in Geneva. He had by this time married and had three children, one of whom died in Aarau. On 5 October 1557 Pownall and seven of his companions wrote to Heinrich Bullinger, thanking him for the dedication of a volume of his writings to the dispersed English congregations. On 16 January 1559, after the death of Mary, he again joined his companions in a letter to the English church of Geneva accepting their proposition that all English exiles should adopt a uniform attitude on disputed ceremonies. 
After the accession of Elizabeth, Pownall returned to England, and was ordained priest by Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, on 1 May 1560. Perhaps surprisingly in view of his distinguished service in exile, Pownall's name never features among those discussed for high office in the new church, notwithstanding his willing conformity. On 31 January 1563 he subscribed the newly prepared 'Thirty-Nine Articles', and from 1562 until his death he was rector of Harbledown in the Kentish hundred of Westgate. In 1570 he was one of the six preachers of the cathedral church of Canterbury. He died in the following year, having asked in his will for burial in the cathedral, next to the vehemently protestant antiquary John Bale, another of the six preachers, who had died in 1563. Pownall's widow was given a life pension by the cathedral authorities. 


@@@@@


doc= 22676


Pownall, Thomas (1722-1805), colonial governor and politician, was born on 4 September 1722 in St Mary Magdalen's parish, Lincoln, eldest son of William Pownall (1692-1735), an army officer, and his second wife, Sarah (died 1762), daughter of John Burniston, deputy governor of Bombay. From Pownall's paternal grandfather, Thomas Pownall (1650-1706), who overcame imprisonment for Jacobitism to serve in the armies of William III and Anne, his family inherited modest lands at Saltfleetsby and Dally in Lincolnshire; however, poor management and the untimely death of Pownall's father led to a decline in fortunes. Despite his family's penury -- or perhaps because of it -- Pownall grew up with a boundless ambition that was made the more conspicuous by his average stature and rotund girth. After attending Lincoln grammar school, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1740 as a pensioner, and graduated BA in 1743. 
Following a brief, frustrating attempt at restoring the family estate in Lincolnshire, Pownall sought out wider horizons in London, obtaining a clerkship at the Board of Trade, where his younger brother John Pownall (1724-1796) was secretary. Pownall quickly gained the confidence of the board's president, George Montagu Dunk, second earl of Halifax, and in 1753 became private secretary to Halifax's brother-in-law, Sir Danvers Osborne, the newly appointed governor of New York. Coming on the brink of the Seven Years' War (1756-63) -- Britain's final, decisive struggle with France for control of North America -- Pownall arrived at a propitious moment, but Osborne's suicide, days after their New York landfall on 6 October 1753, created even greater opportunities. Pownall used his freedom from official duties to the full, visiting the principal cities on the American seaboard, attending the Albany congress of 1754, and forming lasting friendships with influential colonists, including Benjamin Franklin and Lewis Evans. During the autumn of 1755 he also became embroiled in the quarrel between Sir William Johnson, British superintendent for Indian affairs, and William Shirley, governor of Massachusetts and commander of the British forces in North America, over the management of Indian affairs. Although Shirley had extended him a warm welcome in 1754, Pownall sided with his rival, using his connections at the Board of Trade to question Shirley's military judgement and hasten the governor's dismissal as British commander in February 1756. 
Partly as a result of his own expanding connections in America, and partly through the continued support of his brother at the Board of Trade, Pownall was named lieutenant-governor of New Jersey in May 1755. In February 1756 he returned to England where, after declining the governorship of Pennsylvania, he was made 'secretary extraordinary' to the new British commander in America, John Campbell, earl of Loudoun. Although Loudoun's high-handed policies occasioned hostility in the colonies and criticism at home, Pownall used the position to enhance his own reputation, making another trip to London in August 1756, gaining the confidence of the new prime minister, William Pitt, and establishing himself as an expert in colonial affairs. With Loudoun's blessing, he also pursued his campaign to discredit Shirley, who had been recalled to England in September 1756. Pownall's repeated attacks, which included giving testimony in the House of Commons, contributed to an unsavoury reputation for 'artful and insinuating' behaviour (Schutz, 'Thomas Pownall', 71); however, such accusations were not enough to prevent his being named to succeed Shirley as Massachusetts governor in February 1757. As it happened, Pownall's appointment as governor came close on the heels of his paternal grandmother's death in January 1757, an event that made him sole proprietor of his late grandfather's modest holdings in Lincolnshire. He thus returned to America not only as a man who seemed destined for great things as an 'imperial politician' but as one who could claim -- if only just -- the coveted status of 'landed gentleman'. 
Pownall's three years as Massachusetts governor (1757-9) were dominated by the strains of war. Like most colonial governors Pownall enjoyed broad powers in theory but few other resources beyond what the Massachusetts legislature was willing to give him. As a result he had to steer a careful course between satisfying the demands of his superiors at home and avoiding policies that might unnecessarily jeopardize his relations with the colony's leaders. Towards that end Pownall worked assiduously to soften the burdens of Britain's war with France, limiting the navy's impressment of local seamen, reducing military penalties for Massachusetts soldiers, and securing British subsidies to help pay the costs of the colony's own campaigns. Shortly after his appointment he also successfully defused a confrontation with Lord Loudoun caused by the British commander's threat to occupy Massachusetts if the provincial legislature refused to provide housing for the army's recruiting parties. In exchange Pownall was able to secure the assembly's support for large annual supplies and levies of troops. During the summer of 1759 he also organized and led a provincial expedition to the Penobscot River in Maine, despite the colony's refusal to appropriate the necessary funds. In each instance he demonstrated a keen awareness of the precariousness of his own position, along with a willingness to accommodate colonial fears over any policy that could be construed as an abuse of power or a stretch of the governor's prerogative. 
Despite a reputation for personal vanity Pownall was aided in his executive duties by a tendency towards informality in conducting public business. Less helpfully, he gained a name as a womanizer and giver of lavish parties -- 'that fribble', in the words of one hostile New Englander (Sawtelle, 235). True to his liberal Anglican principles, however, Pownall also distinguished himself with his assiduous cultivation of the province's established Congregational clergy. Although he attempted to stand apart from the factionalism of Massachusetts politics, Pownall was inevitably drawn into the struggle between the province's 'court' and 'popular' parties. At first he sought the good will of the former group, many of whom had supported Governor Shirley, and even gave his consent for the court leader Thomas Hutchinson to be appointed lieutenant-governor. None the less, lingering resentment over Shirley's dismissal, along with the need to secure legislative support for the war with France, gradually forced him into an alliance with the court's opponents, especially the merchant Thomas Hancock, with whom the governor formed a close friendship. His willingness to co-operate with the popular party was not greeted with universal approval at the Board of Trade; nor was Pownall himself entirely comfortable with having to choose sides in a struggle that threatened to weaken the already fragile basis of British authority in America. Years later John Adams described him as 'the most constitutional and national Governor' ever to represent the crown in Massachusetts ('Works of John Adams', 10.243), but Pownall's experience also showed him the inadequacy of Britain's colonial administration and the pressing need for reform. 
Following the conquest of Quebec, Pownall began seeking a new position and, in November 1759, was appointed governor of South Carolina. However, convinced that his best prospects for advancement lay at home, he chose to return to England and resign the South Carolina governorship in favour of a lucrative post as commissary for the British forces in Germany, to which he was appointed on 29 June 1760. The wealth Pownall derived from his two years with the army was sufficient to draw charges of mismanagement from John Wilkes's 'North Briton', no. 40 (5 March 1763), but a Treasury inquiry cleared him of all wrong doing. On 25 August 1765 Pownall consolidated his personal fortune by marrying Harriet, 'nee' Churchill (1726-1777), widow of the wealthy diplomat Sir Everard Fawkener and mother of four children. Not only did his marriage to Lady Fawkener -- as she continued to be known -- enable him to lease a house in London's fashionable Albemarle Street, where Horace Walpole, Thomas Almon, and Benjamin Franklin were regular guests, but it also gained him an introduction to many of the leading families of England. Probably with the assistance of his friend Hugh Boscawen, second Viscount Falmouth, a shrewd electioneer, Pownall entered parliament as the member for Tregony, Cornwall, where he won a by-election on 4 February 1767. He was defeated during the general election of 1774 but, through the efforts of Lord North -- who may have engineered his defeat at Tregony in order to gain his support for the government's colonial policies -- he won another by-election later that same year at Minehead in Somerset, which he represented until his retirement in 1780. 
Despite his improved finances and election to parliament, Pownall never realized the expectations fostered by his term as Massachusetts governor. Indeed, as he found himself thwarted in his quest for preferment in England, he came to regret his decision to leave the colonial service where, he believed, greater opportunities existed for ambitious men of modest means. None the less, he remained an acknowledged expert on Britain's colonial affairs in general, especially the American colonies that declared independence in 1776. Pownall's most influential statement in this respect was his 'Administration of the Colonies', first published in 1764 and subsequently enlarged in five revised editions (1765, 1766, 1768, 1774, and 1777). As in his later speeches to parliament, Pownall consciously sought in this work to identify himself as a supporter of American liberty. Although he feared that Britain was losing control of its colonies, he wrote that the Americans were entitled to the same rights of representative government as their fellow subjects in England, Scotland, and Wales. At the same time, Pownall insisted that the military protection that the colonists received from Britain created equally extensive obligations to help pay for some of the cost. He was also convinced of the need for a strong, central legislature capable of making common policies that would be binding for every member of the British empire, including the fractious provinces in North America. Pownall eventually decided that the only solution lay in creating an imperial parliament with representatives from both Britain and the colonies (Pownall, 'Administration of the Colonies', 4th edn, 1768, 174). Although he was not the only British commentator to embrace the idea of an imperial parliament, most Americans found it anathema, so much so that John Dickinson singled out his centralized plan of legislative reform for particular criticism in his influential 'Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania' (1768). 
Throughout this period Pownall searched for possible solutions to the crisis in America. In the House of Commons, where his first speech was on the dangers of forcing New York to quarter British troops, he established a reputation as a staunch pro-American. He also remained in close contact with many colonists, including New Englanders on both sides of the looming divide, as well as Franklin, who was a colonial agent in London. In addition, although the allegation has never been proved, Pownall may have had a part in writing the Junius letters, which attacked successive ministries during the later 1760s and early 1770s, and in publishing the incriminating correspondence that contributed to Thomas Hutchinson's departure as governor of Massachusetts in 1774. As the situation in the colonies deteriorated, Pownall supported some of Lord North's policies, including the 'Boston Port Act' (1774) -- though not the rest of the ''Intolerable Acts'' -- and the conciliatory plan of early 1775. He also aspired to lead a mission to negotiate a reunion with the rebellious colonies, an honour that instead went to Frederick Howard, fifth earl of Carlisle. In December 1777 Pownall finally broke with Lord North and demanded a liberal treaty recognizing American independence. 
Somewhat surprisingly, in view of his literary reputation, Pownall was a notoriously difficult author to read. While he was still governor of Massachusetts, one Boston satirist claimed that his convoluted style seemed calculated to produce a 'most excruciating head-ach' (Schutz, 'Thomas Pownall', 177); twenty years later John Adams went so far as to 'translate' one of his pamphlets on the American War of Independence ('A Translation of the Memorial to the Sovereigns of Europe', 1781). If Pownall's prose was not always easy to understand, however, he produced a great deal of it, on topics ranging far beyond the crisis in America. In 1773 he published a pamphlet on the East India Company, in which he called for the crown to be given administrative responsibility for Bengal and the other Mughal provinces under British rule. Starting in the early 1770s he sought ways to reduce the high price of grain in England, co-authoring with Edmund Burke a new regulatory law (1773) and embracing the cause of free trade during the mid-1790s. He was likewise an early, if somewhat critical, admirer of Adam Smith's 'Wealth of Nations' (1776). Following his own acceptance of American independence, Pownall turned his attention to the conflict's implications for Europe and the Americas, predicting, among other developments, the emergence of independence movements in Latin America and the formation of a new Atlantic community based on commerce and treaties among equal, sovereign states (Schutz, 'Thomas Pownall's proposed Atlantic federation', 264-8). At various points Pownall also wrote on geography and antiquarianism, with works on North American topography, Atlantic Ocean currents, and Roman antiquities. In addition he was an amateur artist, and Paul Sandby acknowledged his drawings as the basis for several engravings in a folio of views of North America and the West Indies, which appeared in 1761 ('DNB'). 
Pownall's first wife, Lady Fawkener, died in 1777 and was buried at Lincoln Cathedral, complete with a sarcophagus for which Pownall wrote a lavish inscription. On 2 August 1784 he married Hannah, 'nee' Kennett (died 1807), widow of Richard Astell, a prosperous landowner with property in Huntingdonshire and Bedfordshire, and two manors, Everton Mosbury and Everton Biggin. The Pownalls made Everton House in Bedfordshire their country home. They also travelled widely, living in France between 1785 and 1787. Pownall continued to maintain a large circle of friends and acquaintances, including Franklin and Francisco de Miranda, the Latin American revolutionary. His final years were marked by gout and rheumatism, which led him to spend progressively longer stays at Bath. It was during one such visit that he died, on 25 February 1805. Following his own wishes he was buried at St Michael's Church, Walcot, Bath. Neither of Pownall's marriages produced children. He left a life interest on his estate to his widow; upon her death two years later, it passed to his brother John's elder son, Sir George Pownall. 


@@@@@


doc= 22677


Powys, Horatio (1805-1877), bishop of Sodor and Man, born on 28 November 1805, was the third son of Thomas Powys, second Baron Lilford (1775-1825), and Henrietta Maria, eldest daughter of Robert Vernon Atherton of Atherton Hall, Lancashire. He was educated at Harrow School and at St John's College, Cambridge, matriculating in 1824 and graduating MA in 1826; he was created DD in 1854. His father presented him to the family living of Warrington, Lancashire, in 1831, and he was for some time rural dean of Cheshire. Strongly impressed with the necessity for improved education, he succeeded in establishing a training college at Chester and an institution for the education of the daughters of the clergy at Warrington. On 5 July 1854 he was nominated to the bishopric of Sodor and Man. A plan for its amalgamation with the diocese of Carlisle had been dropped in 1836, but the future of the see remained insecure. Powys successfully maintained its independence and involved himself in much litigation. He supported the revival of a convocation for the north of England. He printed two charges, 'A Pastoral Letter to the Congregation at Warrington' (1848), and two sermons. 
Powys married, on 21 February 1833, Percy Gore, eldest daughter of William Currie of East Horsley Park, Surrey; they had three sons -- Horace (died 1857); Percy William, rector of Thorpe-Achurch, Northamptonshire; Henry Lyttleton, lieutenant-colonel of the Oxfordshire light infantry -- and five daughters. Powys died at Bewsey House, Bournemouth, on 31 May 1877, and was buried at Warrington on 5 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 22678


Powys, Sir Littleton (1647-1732), judge, was the eldest son of Thomas Powys (1618/19-1672) of Henley, Shropshire, serjeant-at-law, and his first wife, Anne ('c'.1622-1655), daughter of Sir Adam Littleton, first baronet, of Stoke St Milborough, Shropshire. He matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 25 November 1663, aged fifteen, was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 12 May 1664, and was called to the bar on 16 May 1671. On 3 December 1674 in the Temple Church he married Agnes Carter ('c'.1656-1720) of St Dunstan-in-the-West, the sister of John Carter, grocer, of London. 
Little is known about Powys before the revolution of 1688, in which he took an active part, reading the prince of Orange's declaration at Shrewsbury. His reward was an appointment on 22 July 1689 as second justice of Chester. He was created a serjeant-at-law in April 1692, and knighted later that year on 4 December. On 28 October 1695 he was appointed a baron of the exchequer and, despite rumours in September 1697 that he would be transferred to common pleas, he remained there until raised to king's bench on 26 January 1701. He was reappointed following Queen Anne's accession, and took part in most of the controversies before king's bench during the reign, most notably the Aylesbury case. He was reappointed on 20 November 1714 following the accession of George I, Lord Cowper advising that he should be kept on and his younger brother Sir Thomas Powys discarded: 'Sir Littleton, the elder brother, is a man of less abilities and consequence, but blameless' (Holmes and Speck, 64), whereas Thomas was more culpable in the actions of the previous tory ministry. Others were also unimpressed by Littleton's abilities, notably Dudley Ryder, who confided to his diary a distaste for Powys's methods. Powys was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1724. He surrendered his office on 26 October 1726, although he continued to draw his salary. He made his will, in his eighty-fifth year, in April 1731, when in pretty good health, 'gout excepted' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/651/116). He died between 13 and 16 March 1732 at Bitterley and was buried in Bitterley church, near to his country home at Henley Hall, Shropshire. He died childless, having invested most of his personal estate in the Bank of England and South Sea companies, at one point owning $15,000 worth of bank stock. 


@@@@@


doc= 22679


Powys, Sir Thomas (1649-1719), judge and politician, was born at Lilford, Northamptonshire, the second son of Thomas Powys, serjeant-at-law, of Henley, Shropshire, and Anne ('c'.1622-1655), daughter of Sir Adam Littleton, chief justice of north Wales, and younger brother of Sir Littleton Powys. He was educated at Shrewsbury School, matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 20 May 1664, and was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 19 February 1666. He was called to the bar on 24 April 1673, elected a bencher of his inn on 27 April 1686, and served as treasurer during 1687, the year in which he was appointed attorney-general to James II. He had been appointed solicitor-general and knighted on 23 April 1686. He was created serjeant-at-law in 1702 and held the office of queen's serjeant from 1702 to 1713. In 1710 he wrote to Robert Harley expressing his desire to be appointed attorney-general if Sir Simon Harcourt should be appointed lord chancellor. In recommending himself to his patron, Powys told Harley that the office was a 'place [he] could make easy, by wholly applying [himself] to the execution of [the] office' (Powys to Harley, 16 Oct 1710, 'Portland MSS', 4.614-15). Powys never became a law officer under Queen Anne but on 8 June 1713 he was appointed a judge of the queen's bench, an office he held only until George I's accession, being removed on 14 October 1714 on Lord Chancellor Cowper's advice. However, a series of letters of appeal to the lord chancellor led to his appointment as king's serjeant on 28 October 1714 (Powys to Cowper, 21, 23, and 25 Oct 1714, Panshanger MSS, D/EP F149/12-16). The reason for his removal from the bench seems to have been that he had held the office of attorney-general to James II until the abdication and during that period had been 'zealously instrumental in most of the steps which ruined that prince and brought... great dangers on the kingdom'. From 1717 he held the office of prime serjeant. He became a freeman of Ludlow in 1677 and of Portsmouth in 1700. He was appointed recorder of Ludlow in 1707. 
During the reign of James II Powys was active in promoting the king's policies, a role which may justify Burnet's writing of him as 'a compliant young aspiring lawyer' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.97). He appeared for the crown in 'Godden v. Hales', a test case in which the king sought to establish the legality of the dispensing power. In this instance Sir Edward Hales, a Roman Catholic officer, was prosecuted for holding office contrary to law but invoked in his defence the king's dispensing power. As an officer of his inn, Powys encouraged his fellow benchers in sponsoring the call of Roman Catholics to the bar. As attorney-general he prosecuted in June 1688 for seditious libel the seven bishops who, on the ground that it was an exercise of the disputed dispensing power, had opposed the reading in churches of the declaration of indulgence extending religious toleration to dissenters. The unpopularity of the proceedings and the acquittal of the defendants were no reflection upon Powys, for he was said to have 'acted his part in this trial as fairly as his post could admit of' (ibid., 3.234). Powys's practice at the bar mirrored the loyalty he had displayed towards James II. During the reign of William III he built up his practice by defending state prisoners, among them Sir John Fenwick, the author of the Jacobite plot of 1696, and his practice developed such that in the last years of Queen Anne's reign Powys's fees were said to amount to nearly $4000 a year. That sum was augmented by investment in the financial markets when he held no legal office. 
Powys stood for parliament for the first time in January 1701 and was returned at the top of the poll as member for Ludlow after a three-cornered contest with two tories, one of whom had questioned his loyalty to the government. He was nominated for Truro at the general election of 1702 as his fate in his native Shropshire seemed uncertain (BL, Add. MS 28055, fols. 3-4). He was, however, returned at both Truro and Ludlow but chose to serve for the latter. Powys's prominence and his legal ability were reflected in his activities in parliament so that many of his numerous committee appointments were to committees of address and to drafting committees. Powys supported the ministry after its reorganization in 1704, was listed as a placeman in 1705, and was re-elected in that year for Ludlow. His attitude to the speakership vote on 25 October 1705 was neutral such that he would vote neither for the court candidate nor for the tory, withdrawing from the house before the question was put. On the resignation of Harley and his supporters in February 1708, Powys reverted to opposition and spoke on 9 March against the bishop of Carlisle's 'Cathedrals Bill', which was widely regarded as a party cause. Powys's restoration to the rank of king's serjeant in 1714 marked the end of his parliamentary career as he returned to his practice at the bar and did not stand again. 
Historians have disagreed sharply about Powys. Macaulay, in a passage in which his whig sympathies are all too apparent, describes him as 'an obscure barrister, who had no qualification for high employment except servility' (Macaulay, 2.736), a judgement not qualified by Burnet's comment on his lack of ill nature ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.97). A modern historian on the other hand speaks of him as '[a barrister] in the very highest flight' (Holmes, 'Augustan England', 125). Less contrasting are the estimates of Powys's abilities supplied by two of his near-contemporaries. Arthur Onslow as a young man heard Powys when in December 1711 he appeared as counsel with Serjeant Pratt for the duke of Hamilton in the House of Lords. Powys and Pratt were instructed by Hamilton to advance the legal argument which preceded the debate on whether the English title of duke of Brandon conferred on him by the queen in September 1711 entitled him to sit in the House of Lords: the vote went against the duke but Onslow recorded that Powys's speech 'was deemed a great performance. He exerted all his strength and left very little for Pratt to say although one of the most able advocates of that time' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 6.86n.). Peter Wentworth was less impressed, saying that 'they both [Powys and Pratt] seem'd as if they lay under difficulty, that they had no lawyers to answer, but was to suppose what objections were to be made' (Cartwright, 226-7). That observation may perhaps have been more a comment upon the constraints under which counsel were labouring than an estimate of their oratorical powers. 
Powys married twice: on 4 June 1685 he married Sarah, daughter of Ambrose Holbech of Mollington, Warwickshire, who died in March 1694; on 2 October 1698 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Philip Meadows, of Chattisham, Suffolk. He had three sons and three daughters with his first wife and two sons with his second. He died on 3 or 4 April 1719 and was buried at Lilford. His tomb, which bears an effigy in robes and an inscription by Matthew Prior, was moved to St John Baptist Church, Thorpe Achurch, also in Northamptonshire, in 1778. 


@@@@@


doc= 22680


Powys, Thomas Littleton, fourth Baron Lilford (1833-1896), ornithologist, was born on 18 March 1833 at 14 Great Stanhope Street, Mayfair, Westminster, the eldest son of Thomas Atherton Powys, third Baron Lilford (1801-1861), and his wife, Mary Elizabeth (1806-1891), daughter of Henry Richard Fox, third Baron Holland, and Elizabeth Vassall, his wife. He was educated at Dr Bickmore's school, Berkswell, Warwickshire, from 1843 to 1848, and at Harrow School until midsummer 1850, when he went to reside with a tutor at Lausanne, Switzerland. He then matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 12 June 1851, but left the university without taking a degree. 
At an early age Powys manifested a love for animals; at Harrow he kept a small menagerie, and also began contributing to 'The Zoologist'. He kept a larger menagerie at Oxford, and all his spare time, during vacations and subsequently through life, as far as his health would permit, was devoted to travel for the purpose of studying animals, especially birds. In 1853 he visited the Isles of Scilly, Wales, and Ireland, and becoming acquainted with Edward Clough Newcome, the best falconer of his day, shortly afterwards took up falconry himself. His aviaries at Lilford Park in Northamptonshire were the envy of field ornithologists, and especially noted for the collection of birds of prey. 
In 1854, on the embodiment of the militia, Powys joined that of his county and served at Dublin and Devonport, giving up his commission at the end of 1855. From 1856 to 1858, accompanied by the Hon. Hercules Rowley, he made an extended yachting cruise in the Mediterranean. He returned to England in the following year, and married, on 14 June 1859, Emma Elizabeth (died 1884), youngest daughter of Robert William Brandling, of Low Gosforth, Northumberland. He succeeded his father as fourth Baron Lilford on 15 March 1861. 
Between 1864 and 1882 Lilford paid frequent visits to Spain and the Mediterranean, rediscovering the rare gull 'Larus audouini'. Together with his friend Leonard Howard Loyd Irby, he was a pioneer in Spanish ornithology. The death in 1882 of his eldest son, Thomas Atherton, and in 1884 of his wife, greatly distressed him, and his lifelong malady, gout, subsequently rendered him a permanent invalid. His affliction was somewhat relieved by the devoted attention of his second wife, Clementina Georgiana (1839-1929), daughter of Ker Baillie Hamilton CB, whom Lilford married on 21 July 1885. 
Lilford had been elected a fellow of the Zoological Society in 1852, and of the Linnean Society in March 1862. He was one of the founders of the British Ornithologists' Union in 1858, and its president from March 1867. He was also a liberal supporter and first president of the Northamptonshire Natural History Society, founded in 1876, and a prominent member of the 'Old Hawking Club'. 
Lilford's zeal for his favourite science never flagged. In addition to some two dozen papers on ornithological subjects, contributed to the 'Ibis' (of which he was a generous supporter), the 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society', and other scientific journals, he was author of: 'Coloured Figures of the Birds of the British Islands', in seven volumes (1885-97) -- which was completed by Osbert Salvin and included a biography by the zoologist Alfred Newton -- and 'Notes on the Birds of Northamptonshire and Neighbourhood' (1895). He died at Lilford Hall on 17 June 1896, and was buried three days later at Achurch, near Lilford. He was succeeded by his son, the Hon. John Powys. 


@@@@@


doc= 22681


Poyer, John (d. 1649), merchant and army officer, was a Welshman from near Narberth in Pembrokeshire. About 1640 he was both a wealthy merchant regularly trading with Bristol and an industrial entrepreneur who claimed to employ 'more poor... in making cloth than any other man in those parts' (Leach, 44). Having become mayor of Pembroke in 1641-2, he effectively continued in office for another six years, usurping the position of his successor. Aided by what some of his local enemies described as 'a loose rabble of the meaner sort', he also took possession of Pembroke Castle ('A Declaration of Divers Gentlemen...', April 1648, BL, E436/7, 2). 
In 1642 Poyer was prominent in staying ships and arresting Catholics bound to and from Ireland. He was once detained for staying two ships bound for Galway, but was quickly released on 27 June by order of the House of Commons. Under Poyer's rule Pembroke survived several royalist sieges and blockades during the first civil war. In 1643 he lost one of his own ships in a vain attempt to acquaint the lord admiral the earl of Warwick with Pembroke's plight. However, he did at least frustrate the threat of the earl of Carbery's soldiers to roll him into Milford Haven in a barrel of nails, and in March 1644 he succeeded in capturing Carew Castle. This apparent triumph was later to occasion charges from his local enemies that he had illegally appropriated to himself some revenues of its demesne. Carew Castle was to be retaken by the royalists in May 1645 as part of a spectacular campaign by Sir Charles Gerrard which was again to put Pembroke at risk. Poyer was later to maintain that he had impoverished himself by personally financing the defence of Pembroke Castle though his critics averred that this had been done out of the sale of confiscated ships and goods and other exactions. Be this as it may, Poyer's petition for reimbursement was sympathetically received in February 1647 by the House of Lords and recommended -- apparently unavailingly -- to the attentions of the lower house. For all his grievances, Poyer played no part in the insurgency in south Wales in the summer of 1647 and it was not until the following year that the resentment which he shared with Major-General Rowland Laugharne, exacerbated by the projected disbandment of the parliamentary forces in south Wales, boiled over into active revolt. 
In February 1648 Sir Thomas Fairfax's suspicions about Poyer's intentions impelled him to send down Colonel Fleming to replace him as governor of Pembroke Castle. Poyer's refusal to co-operate unless paid what he claimed to be due to him and his soldiers produced an ultimatum at the beginning of March that he hand over the castle within twelve hours on pain of being declared a traitor. Poyer's response was decisive; sallying forth from the castle he routed Fleming's force, some of whom he captured along with artillery pieces brought to subdue the castle. Having raised more men at a muster on 9 April, Poyer now moved to Carmarthen to join forces temporarily with Colonel Rice Powell. Their combined force was estimated at between 3000 and 4000 men, many of them, if Poyer's opponents are to be believed, reluctant and ill-armed conscripts. Poyer's and Powell's increasingly pro-royalist stance is evidenced by their appeal to the prince of Wales ('Powells and Poyers Letter to the Prince of Wales', April 1648, BL, E436/14). But while this produced a favourable response from the prince, it seems to have cut little ice with the Welsh royalist elite who despised Poyer in particular as a plundering social upstart. As a letter of early April puts it, 'not many Gentlemen of note or Men of Estates... come in to Poyer or... give him any visible Countenance' (Rushworth, 7.1051). To such gentlemen the aims of these roundhead renegades amounted to no more than 'the advancement of their owne wretched & mechanick ambitions' ('The Declaration... of Col. John Poyer', May 1648, BL, E441/6, 3), a view not notably different from that of a parliamentary news sheet of mid-January which describes Poyer as standing 'neither for the king, parliament or army, but his own interest and free booting' ('Heads of Chiefe Passages in Parliament', no. 2, 12-19 Jan 1648, BL, E423/11, 12). In pursuit of these ends he regularly dispatched his so-called 'bullies' to plunder the cattle and property 'of any Gentlemen he bore a spleen to' ('A Declaration of Divers Gentlemen...', BL, E436/7, 3). 
As for his religion, Poyer was described as 'a stiffe maintainer of the 'Booke of Common Prayer'', which he and Powell declared to be 'the sole comfort of the People here' in south Wales ('Heads of Chiefe Passages in Parliament', no. 2, 12-19 Jan 1648, BL, E423/11, 11; 'The Declaration of Col. Poyer and Col. Powel', April 1648, BL, E435/9, 4-5, 6). A hostile account tells a more cynical story, albeit one which confirms Poyer's anti-puritan credentials. After challenging a gentleman as to whether he was an Independent or a Presbyterian, he heard the latter reply, 'Neither, for he was a Protestant'. 'Why, so am I, quoth Poyer, therefore let us be Merry. So in they went, and drunk so hard that neither was able to stir in Four and twenty Hours after' (Rushworth, 7.1033). 
At the beginning of May, with Cromwell already 'en route' to quell the various insurgents in south Wales, Poyer reportedly boasted that he would be 'the first that shall charge against Ironsides (viz. Cromwell), saying that if he had a back of steel and a breast of iron, he durst and will encounter with him' ('The Declaration... of Col. John Poyer', May 1648, BL, E441/6, 6). He was soon to be joined in Pembroke Castle by Laugharne, whose force had been smashed at St Fagans by Colonel Horton on 8 May. They were an ill-assorted couple. Poyer was described by his critics as at best a protean character: 'a man of two Dispositions every Day... in the Morning Sober and Penitent, but in the Afternoon, Drunk and full of Plots' (Rushworth, 7.1033). Laugharne, on the other hand, had a distinguished record as a parliamentary major-general, even if he was also subject to fits of something approaching paranoia in face of real or imagined slights. Rumour soon had it that, in the course of one dispute, he had run Poyer through with his sword. Nevertheless, while Powell capitulated at Tenby on 7 June, Pembroke held out for more than a month longer, Poyer striving to encourage the garrison through the vain hope of relief from Sir Marmaduke Langdale's northern royalists. On 14 June Cromwell assured Speaker Lenthall that the garrison would be starved out within a fortnight. Deserters predicted that Poyer's throat would soon be cut and the danger of mutiny appeared to be confirmed by the cry heard from within the walls: 'Shall we be ruined for two or three men's pleasure? Better it were we should throw them over the walls' (Carlyle, 1.269-70). On 10 July Cromwell sent his final summons to surrender and Poyer yielded on the following day. 
Poyer, Laugharne, and Powell were placed at parliament's mercy and on 13 August the prince of Wales requested Fairfax to intervene to the end that 'such moderation may be used towards them as becomes souldgers to one another'. But the lord general replied that he was powerless to act since they had 'betrayed the trust... reposed in them to the ingaging the Kingdom againe in War & Blood' (BL, Add. MS 19399, fols. 58, 60; Rushworth, 7.1233). After many delays a court martial condemned them to death on 10 April 1649, but it was ruled that only one should die, and that lots should be drawn to decide who this should be. This was done on 21 April when the fatal lot fell to Poyer who, following the rejection of his wife Elizabeth's appeal for his life, 'was shot to death in 'Covent-Garden' and died very penitently' on 25 April (Whitelock, 384'b'). In June 1661 his impoverished widow petitioned Charles II, claiming that her late husband had lost $8000 in the royal service. On 25 August 1663 she was granted $100 and soon after a further $3000 to be paid in ten annual instalments. 


@@@@@


doc= 22682


Poynder, John (1779/80-1849), lawyer and evangelical activist, was the eldest son of a City of London tradesman and his evangelical wife. He was educated briefly at the Newington Butts school of Joseph Forsyth, where he imbibed a lasting love of literature. As a young man he hoped to become an Anglican clergyman but he was persuaded by family pressures to become a solicitor instead, and for nearly forty years he served as clerk and solicitor to the royal hospitals of Bridewell and Bethlem. On 15 September 1807 he married Elizabeth Brown of Clapham, Surrey, the daughter of low-church parents. 
Poynder was one of the earliest members of the Church Missionary Society in the days when it met in London in the Revd William Goode's rectory at St Ann Blackfriars. Poynder first came to public attention in 1803 with the publication of 'A Serious Address to the Public on the Present Times', an attack on the proposed admission of Roman Catholics to political office and on the East India Company's toleration of idolatry in India. These remained abiding concerns throughout his life, so much so that on his death the Revd William Jay of Bath, a friend for over fifty years, observed fondly that 'Never was there a more determined enemy to Popery, and its half-sister, Puseyism' ('Autobiography of... William Jay', 447). Jay was a whig and a dissenter whereas Poynder was a tory and a devout churchman, but nevertheless it was one of Jay's sermons which prompted Poynder to take up the cudgels against the East India Company's policy of religious toleration in India. A sermon by Claudius Buchanan, the most fiery of the company's 'pious chaplains', also spurred him on. Poynder wrote numerous articles attacking the company's refusal to prohibit the rite of suttee (widow immolation), its collection of pilgrim taxes from Hindu shrines, and its requirement that civilian and military employees occasionally put on a show of respect at certain Hindu temples. In 1813, when the company's charter was due for renewal, Poynder set out his arguments in a series of letters to 'The Times' under the name Laicus (published separately as 'Christianity in India' in 1813). Over the next thirty-five years he pressed the court of directors with petitions and appeals on the subject of idolatry, and he was highly influential in the court's decision of 1827 to outlaw suttee and its dispatch of 1833 ordering the abandonment of pilgrim taxes. After these victories Poynder continued to agitate against the company's lingering connections with the Jagannath temple at Puri in Orissa. He also served on the committees of the Lord's Day Observance Society, the Reformation Society, and the Protestant Association. 
Poynder was for three years under-sheriff of London and Middlesex, a post which often took him to Newgate prison and provided him with a vast store of anecdotes on London's social and moral climate. These interests were reflected in his three-volume 'Literary Extracts from English and other Works' (1844, 1847), a miscellany of quotations, sermons, and aphorisms which had appealed to him in the course of his life. His other publications included works of religious controversy. His wife, Elizabeth, died, aged sixty, on 22 September 1845, after which Poynder rarely left his house. He loved her dearly and in an autobiographical fragment written after her death paid moving tribute to her companionship and affection during their thirty-eight years of marriage. After many years of suffering from bronchitis and other ailments, Poynder died at his home, Montpelier House, South Lambeth, Surrey, on 10 March 1849. He was survived by several children, including two sons who became clerics: Frederick, chaplain of Bridewell Hospital from 1849 to 1858 and second master of Charterhouse School from 1858 to 1872; and Leopold (1818-1896), chaplain in India from 1847 to 1866. 
The extent of Poynder's eclectic literary tastes was revealed in January 1850 when Sothebys took three days to sell his remarkable library. The collection included first editions of Shakespeare and many volumes with autograph letters and memoranda, including an edition of the 'Phaenomena et diosemeia' of Aratus Solensis, autographed and annotated by Milton. 


@@@@@


doc= 22683


Poynings, Sir Edward (1459-1521), administrator, soldier, and diplomat, was born in the autumn of 1459, probably at his father's house in Southwark. 
Poynings was the only son of Robert Poynings (c.1419-1461) ['see under 'Poynings, Michael] and his wife, Elizabeth Paston (1429?-1487/8), who married in 1458. His father, who had been carver and sword-bearer to Jack Cade, was killed at the second battle of St Albans in February 1461, after which his estates in Kent and Sussex were seized by his cousin Eleanor, countess of Northumberland, who retained many of them until her death in 1484. Poynings was brought up by his mother, who in 1466 married Sir George Brown of Betchworth, Surrey. She later appointed him her executor. In October 1483 he was prominent in the rising against Richard III in Kent, probably being drawn in by his stepfather. He was attainted in the parliament of January 1484, but escaped abroad, and joined Henry Tudor in Brittany. He led the English party in Vannes in October 1484 when Henry fled into France. 
Poynings's later reputation as an outstanding administrator and experienced military commander grew out of his trusted position in Henry Tudor's court in exile. He landed with Henry at Milford Haven in August 1485, where he was knighted. Thereafter he combined membership of the king's council with household office. His attainder was reversed by parliament in November. He also recovered his father's estates, and in 1488 secured a life interest in six manors of Sir Guy Brian's inheritance. These twelve manors, mainly in Kent and Sussex, were worth $427 a year, but in September the king also rewarded him, as knight of the body, with a lavish grant of seven manors in the midlands forfeited by Humphrey Stafford, and in 1491 Poynings was created knight of the Garter. He was commissioned to inspect the ordnance at Calais, Guines, and Hammes in August 1488, and in 1492 he had command of 12 ships and 1500 troops sent to the Netherlands to aid Maximilian against a French-instigated revolt. After clearing the sea of pirates preying on English commerce from the rebel base at Sluys, Poynings laid siege to Sluys in August, while the duke of Saxony blockaded it by land. After hard fighting the two castles defending the town were surrendered to Poynings, who then negotiated the rebels' submission to Maximilian. Poynings then joined Henry VII before Boulogne, but in November the treaty of Etaples ended the French War. Poynings was appointed deputy lieutenant of Calais, the scene of Yorkist plotting, and in July 1493, he was sent with William Warham on embassy to Flanders in a vain attempt to expose Perkin Warbeck, who was harboured there by Marguerite of Burgundy, and to procure his expulsion from the Netherlands. Archduke Philip would only promise not to support Warbeck but disclaimed any power to intervene in Marguerite's affairs. 
In Ireland, however, the situation was even more problematic, with continued Yorkist plotting and the recrudescence of an old feud between the lordship's leading families, the Butlers and Geraldines. Warbeck had already made one descent on this traditional Yorkist stronghold in a bid to improve on Lambert Simnel's unsuccessful invasion of England in 1487, and since then successive attempts to strengthen royal control over the English lordship of Ireland and to restore order had all failed. Thus by the summer of 1494 Henry felt that sterner measures were needed. It was to be for his service in Ireland that Poynings was chiefly remembered and where his skills as a soldier-administrator were most effectively deployed. In September he was appointed deputy to the king's son, Henry, the nominal lieutenant of Ireland. At the request of the prelates, magnates, and other notables of Ireland -- so Henry informed Charles VIII of France -- he was to lead an expedition to impose order among the wild Irish, establishing there the same justice and good rule as in England. Yet his retinue of 427 men was very small for this purpose, even when reinforced by 226 soldiers already in Ireland. In reality Poynings had instructions to reduce the lordship to royal control and to destroy the king's enemies and rebels there. He was also accompanied by a handful of skilled administrators to reform the Dublin administration. Indeed, with the appointment of three experienced lawyers, headed by Henry Deane, bishop of Bangor, as chancellor and chief justices, and of Sir Hugh Conway as treasurer, the Irish council was dominated by English outsiders. 
Poynings landed at Howth on 13 October 1494 and almost immediately summoned a parliament to meet at Drogheda on 1 December. Initially affairs ran smoothly. Leading lords, English and Gaelic, came in to the deputy and chiefs surrendered pledges for peace, but in November the deputy led a hosting into Ulster, where O hAnluain and Mag Aonghusa remained aloof and O Domhnaill was intriguing with James IV of Scotland. Accompanied by the earl of Kildare, Gerald Fitzgerald (died 1513), and Sir James Ormond, Poynings invaded the country of O hAnluain, who eventually submitted, as did Mag Aonghusa shortly afterwards. Yet the deputy then learned of communications between Kildare and the chiefs immediately before their submission and, in view of Kildare's previous record, suspected treachery. This breach with Kildare ended any real hopes that Poynings's more ambitious military objectives might be realized. 
Later generations remembered Poynings best for an act (10 Henry VII c. 9) of the parliament he convened, known as Poynings' law. This provided that in future no parliament could be held in Ireland without the king's prior consent signified under the great seal of England, and that only bills similarly approved by the council in England could be considered. Its obscure wording may simply reproduce verbatim the king's instructions to Poynings about this before he left for Ireland, and the elaborate operational procedure for Poynings' law was worked out only later. Yet its purpose was to prevent parliament's unauthorized use by governors like Kildare to further private interests, in particular to prevent Warbeck from using parliament, as Simnel had, to legitimize a 'coup d'etat'. Subsequently the local community came to see Poynings' law as a bulwark against arbitrary rule by English governors, and still later as a restraint on parliament's legislative freedom, but no one anticipated that Poynings' law would survive, with modifications, until 1782. Another statute (10 Henry VII c. 39), sometimes also called Poynings' law, likewise had a long history, though its original purpose is unclear. It ordained that all statutes for the common weal of late made in England should apply in Ireland. Possibly a particular application to Ireland was intended of recent English legislation curbing magnate retaining (also regulated by other statutes of Poynings's parliament), but the act was later used to justify a more general application of English statutes passed before 1494. Otherwise, the forty-nine acts of Poynings's parliament had a shorter lifespan, although much of the legislation was politically important and of official origin. One act enjoined obedience to the king's commands under his English seals, and repealed a statute of the Yorkist parliament of 1460 to the contrary. The chief judges and financial officers were to hold office during pleasure, not for life. It was made treason to incite the Irish to levy war against the governor. Custody of the chief royal castles was restricted to those born in England. Finally, many statutes re-enacted, with slight modifications, previous legislation for fostering the use of English law, customs, and weapons and proscribing Gaelic practices, notably by confirming the 'Statutes of Kilkenny' of 1366. Overall, the legislation strengthened the king's control over the lordship and the Dublin administration. 
By spring 1495, however, Poynings was increasingly preoccupied with the worsening military situation, and Bishop Deane as chancellor presided over the later sessions of parliament, which was dissolved in April. Kildare was eventually arrested in late February, and shipped to England. Within days his brother, Sir James Fitzgerald, had seized Carlow Castle and Poynings and Ormond besieged it throughout the spring, eventually retaking it in July. The terms of Kildare's attainder for treason highlighted the growing danger from Warbeck: he was accused of plotting the deputy's murder, holding communications with the king's enemies, and conspiring with the king of Scots and the earl of Desmond for an army of Scots to invade Ireland and overthrow the deputy and the king's true subjects. During the spring Desmond and Lord Barry were organizing a rising in Munster on Warbeck's behalf, and Gaelic chiefs throughout the west and north were also restive; but without reinforcements, Poynings could do no more than defend the pale. In late June, Desmond besieged Waterford, just as Warbeck sailed from Flanders. Warbeck's eventual arrival with a fleet on 23 July intensified the city's blockade and the king, responding to renewed appeals from Poynings, promised reinforcements. Yet in the crisis the deputy was forced to call out levies from the pale and Gaelic troops from Leinster as he marched south to confront the rebels. He broke the siege on 3 August, dispersing the blockading forces with his artillery and capturing three of Warbeck's ships. Warbeck retreated westwards and then retired to Scotland, while Poynings conducted mopping-up operations until his recall in December. In military terms Poynings's main achievement in Ireland was undoubtedly the crushing of the Yorkists. Yet an unsuspected legacy of his deputyship was probably the concept of 'the English pale', meaning the closely delineated and defended area of 'the four obedient shires' around Dublin. The first reference to the Calais pale dates from 1494, during Poynings's deputyship there; and following his transfer to Ireland, a statute of Poynings's parliament for 'diches to be made aboute the Inglishe pale' marks the first recorded reference to a pale in Ireland. 
Concurrently with the military crisis Poynings's administration was attempting to meet the king's demands for financial and administrative reform. The foundations for this had been laid in parliament, with an act of resumption, and the grant of a double subsidy based on a revised extent which yielded Ir$1500 per annum over five years. Yet, since the king spent $12,000 on Irish affairs between August 1494 and December 1495, chiefly on the army, efforts to raise more money in Ireland were intensified, notably in April 1495 when the offices of under-treasurer and treasurer-at-war were revived for two associates of Poynings, William Hatteclyffe and John Pympe. As peace was restored during the autumn, military expenditure was curtailed, the value of crown lands recovered, and reform of the customs also swelled revenue from that source. Thus for the year 1495-6 the Irish revenues yielded Ir$3056, or about double its usual value. Yet even this substantial increase was not sufficient, and those captains and officials remaining after Poynings's departure were now needed for the defence of the English north against Warbeck and James IV. 
Leaving from Ireland in December 1495 Poynings returned to his native Kent, where he had earlier been appointed lieutenant of Dover Castle, close by Warbeck's attempted landing at Deal in early July 1495. He had been on the Kent peace commission since Henry's accession, was promoted constable of Dover in September 1504, and became deputy warden of the Cinque Ports in 1505; but, in the king's last decade, he also attended the council more regularly. In 1500 he was present at Henry VII's interview with Archduke Philip at Calais, and in October 1501 was among those who conducted Katherine of Aragon to London. In 1508 he likewise conducted the Flemish ambassadors who came to conclude the projected marriage of Henry's daughter Mary to Prince Charles of Castile. Some time before the king's death, he became comptroller of the household and was one of the trusty councillors recommended by Henry in his will to his son. 
Poynings attended Henry VIII's coronation as comptroller of the household. He was also promoted lord warden of the Cinque Ports, but soon emerged as a leading diplomat. He witnessed the renewal of the treaty with Scotland on 29 August 1509. In June 1511 he had command of the ships and 1500 soldiers dispatched to the Low Countries to assist Maximilian in suppressing revolt in Guelderland. His expedition embarked at Sandwich on 18 July, and enjoyed some success, reducing several towns and castles. Poynings returned to England in the autumn. He sat in the parliament of 1512-14, probably as knight of the shire for Kent, and led the Commons delegation which announced its choice of speaker to the chancellor in the Lords. From May to November 1512 he was travelling in the Netherlands as one of four commissioners negotiating a league against France. He returned there early in 1513, with Sir Richard Wingfield, to conclude negotiations for Maximilian's inclusion on 5 April in the Holy League. With a retinue of 500 men he was present at the capture of Therouanne on 22 August, and on 24 September of Tournai, of which he was appointed lieutenant with a garrison of 5000 men. For most of 1514 he was engaged in diplomatic work in the Netherlands. He resided chiefly in Tournai, where he uncovered a plot to betray the city to the French. His duties there precluded his attendance at the third session of parliament, where he secured an act (5 Henry VIII c. 18) annulling all suits prejudicial to his landed possessions determined in his absence. 
In February 1515 Poynings finally returned to England, having been replaced as governor of Tournai by Lord Mountjoy. He requested leave to go on a pilgrimage to Rome, but on 7 May he was appointed ambassador, with Dr William Knight, to renew the league of 1505 with Prince Charles. They arrived in Bruges on 23 May, but returned to England after four months' unsuccessful negotiation. Almost immediately, however, the French victory at Marignano once more cemented the league of her enemies, and Poynings, recommissioned ambassador to Charles (now king of Spain) on 21 February 1516, succeeded in concluding a treaty with him on 19 April. Charles also granted him a pension of 1000 livres. 
This was the last of Poynings's important negotiations. Thereafter he spent most of his time in the Cinque Ports or at his manor of Westenhanger, Kent, where he rebuilt the castle. In 1517 he became chancellor of the Order of the Garter, and in June he was at Calais deciding disputes between English and French merchants and dealing with violations of the treaty. In 1518 he was treating for the surrender of Tournai. Poynings was promoted treasurer of the household in 1519, and Henry considered raising him to the peerage, but he never became Lord Poynings, although he was occasionally so styled. As warden he supplied ships to transport Henry VIII to Calais in 1520 and attended him at the Field of Cloth of Gold. He was also present at Henry's meeting with Charles V at Gravelines. He died at Westenhanger on 22 October 1521. 
Poynings had married, before 1485, Isabella (Elizabeth), daughter of Sir John Scott ['see under 'Scott family], comptroller of the household, and sister of Sir William Scott, warden of the Cinque Ports; she died on 15 August 1528, and was buried in Brabourne church, where she is commemorated by a brass. They had one child, John, who predeceased Poynings childless, but Poynings left seven illegitimate children -- three sons, including Sir Adrian Poynings, and four daughters. He provided for them in his will of 27 July 1521, leaving Westenhanger to his eldest son, Thomas, to whom the king also regranted some lands; but most of Poynings's estates reverted to Henry Percy, fifth earl of Northumberland. Thomas Poynings was in 1545 created Lord Poynings and appointed lieutenant of Boulogne. His two brothers also served as captains there. Of Poynings's daughters, Jane married Thomas, eighth Lord Clinton (died 1517), and Poynings paid $135 for the wardship of his grandson, Edward, ninth Lord Clinton. 


@@@@@


doc= 22684


Poynings, Michael, first Lord Poynings (c.1318-1369), soldier, of Poynings and Slaugham, Sussex, was the eldest son of Sir Thomas Poynings and his wife, Agnes, daughter and coheir of Richard Rokesley of Preston and Ruxley, Kent. Michael Poynings served in Flanders from 1338 to 1340. Thomas Poynings having died at the siege of Honnecourt in the Vermandois on 10 October 1339, the king gave Michael his marriage and livery of his lands, although he was still under age, in consideration of his father's good service. Poynings was summoned to campaign in Scotland in December 1341, and to attend council meetings in February 1342, July 1352, July 1353, and June 1358. He went on the expedition to Brittany of 1342, and on the Crecy-Calais campaign of 1346-7, where he served with forty-five men, including his uncle Michael Poynings. From August 1347 to September 1351 he had the keeping of the property of Margery, widow of Nicholas Beche, forfeited by her husband, Sir John Dalton, following their unlicensed marriage. The Daltons had abducted Margery from a manor house near Reading in March 1347, in the process slaying Michael, the uncle of Lord Poynings; a number of the latter's men were charged with the killing until he personally vouched for them. 
From November 1348 Poynings was summoned to parliament as Lord Poynings. By the end of that year he had married Joan, 'nee' Ruxley (died 1369), the childless widow of John Moleyns; she brought with her properties in Wiltshire and Buckinghamshire. Their eldest son, Thomas ['see below'], was born at Slaugham in the following year. A frequent commissioner in Sussex, Kent, and the Cinque Ports from 1351, in that and the following year Poynings was a guardian of the Sussex coast. He campaigned in France in 1355 and 1356, fighting at Poitiers, and with his brothers Richard and Luke among his company, took part in Edward III's invasion of France of 1359-60. He was a signatory to the treaty with Castile in June 1362. In the last seven years of his life Poynings made preparations for the future: in November 1362 his plans to found a chantry at Mottenden, Kent, laid as far back as 1347, at last came to fruition. In February 1366 he paid $1000 to Queen Philippa for the wardship of William, son and heir of Lord Bardolf, in order to marry him to his daughter Agnes. Poynings died on 7 March 1369 and was buried in Poynings church, having left 200 marks in his will to finance its rebuilding. He had acquired considerable property in Norfolk, Sussex, and Kent. 
Michael Poynings's nineteen-year-old son 
Richard's son and heir 


@@@@@


doc= 22685


Robert Poynings, fourth Baron Poynings (1382-1446), was summoned to parliament in 1404, and is several times recorded as attending council meetings under Henry IV. He served regularly in France, taking custody of the duke of Bourbon in 1420, and fighting at Cravant in 1420, and at the recovery of Crotoy and the battle of Verneuil in 1424. He married twice. With his first wife, whose name is unknown, he had two sons, Richard, who was killed in France in 1429, and 


@@@@@


doc= 22686


Poynings, Thomas, first Baron Poynings (1512?-1545), soldier and courtier, was one of the three illegitimate sons of Sir Edward Poynings (1459-1521) of Westenhanger, Kent. Sir Adrian Poynings was his brother. His mother could have been Rose Whetehill of Calais, who was left an annuity of 40 marks in Sir Edward's will of 1521. The two may have met during Sir Edward's time in Calais in the late 1480s and early 1490s. Thomas was probably born in 1512, as Sir Edward provided in his will that the revenues of the manor of Westenhanger should be enjoyed by his servant Edward Thwaytes for twelve years until Thomas came of age. This also corresponds to Thomas's first appearance at court. 
Poynings served at the coronation of Anne Boleyn in June 1533 and was made a knight of the Bath during the coronation celebrations. His listing as a sewer-extraordinary in a document dated by the editors of 'Letters and Papers, Foreign and Domestic, of the Reign of... Henry VIII' to 1516 is a mistake: the document has subsequently been redated to 1535. Poynings continued his father's close links with Kent and its gentry families. He was on the sheriff roll for the county in 1533 and chosen in the following year. During the northern rising of 1536 he contributed 150 men for the royal army, serving alongside other leading Kentish members of the royal affinity. His links with Sir Thomas Wyatt were especially close; while Wyatt was abroad as ambassador at the imperial court during 1537-9, Poynings acted as his agent, petitioning Cromwell for the payment of Wyatt's annuity. Indeed, there is evidence that he may have served with Wyatt abroad, receiving a diet as an ambassador between 19 March 1537 and 2 June 1539. He continued to have close contacts with the court throughout the late 1530s, being present at both the christening of the future Edward VI and the funeral of Jane Seymour in 1537, and jousting in a tournament in May 1540. Some time before 1539 he married Katherine, daughter and coheir of John, second Lord Marney, and widow of George Ratcliffe. 
In 1540 it appears that the king decided to establish Poynings as a power in the west country, possibly based around the Marney lands in Dorset and Somerset which had descended to his wife. In August of that year he exchanged Westenhanger for a grant of monastic land in Dorset. He also acquired lands in Wiltshire, Cornwall, and Somerset. Within weeks, however, it was decided that he could best serve the king abroad: in October he was dispatched to Calais as marshall. Presumably, he had demonstrated both the military prowess, probably during the suppression of the Pilgrimage of Grace, and diplomatic skills, perhaps while serving with Wyatt, that the position at Calais demanded. In December 1540 he took temporary charge of the important castle at Guines on the death of William, Lord Sandys. He remained at Guines until 1544, frequently taking part in border skirmishes with the French. During the invasion of France in 1544 he led a contingent from Dorset. It was during this campaign that his martial reputation was firmly established: he was involved in heavy fighting around Montreuil in July, and was responsible for the tactics of the assault on Boulogne which captured that town on 13 September. 
On 30 January 1545 Poynings was raised to the peerage as Baron Poynings, in preparation for his appointment as lieutenant of Boulogne 'as the most experienced in wars with the Frenchmen upon the frontiers and as speaking their language' ('LP Henry VIII', 20/1, no. 121). He continued to serve in the front line while lieutenant: in July his horse was shot from under him during one attack. That year he was nominated for the Garter by the dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk and the earls of Arundel, Hertford, Essex, and Surrey. But he was not elected, and his career was cut short when he contracted dysentery and died, still at Boulogne, on 17 August 1545. His only child, a son christened in March 1539, probably died in infancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 22687


Poynter, Ambrose (1796-1886), architect, was born on 16 May 1796 in London, the second son of Ambrose Lyon Poynter and Thomasine Anne Peck. The family was of Huguenot origin, his father's great-great-grandfather Thomas Pointier of St Quentin in France having settled in England in 1685. Poynter's architectural education was thorough: pupillage between 1814 and 1818 in the office of John Nash, then foreign travel in 1819-21, in Italy, Sicily, and the Ionian Islands. In 1821 he attended out of courtesy the funeral in Rome of Keats, whom he did not know. A few years after returning to Britain, Poynter set up in practice at 1 Poet's Corner, Westminster. In 1830-32 he lived in Paris, where his associates included Richard Parkes Bonington, Baron Denon, the engraver Boucher-Desnoyers, and others. From about 1846 his London house and office were at 12 Park Street (later 1 Queen Anne's Gate). He married, in 1832 at the British embassy chapel in Paris, Emma (1800-1848), daughter of the Revd E. Forster and Lavinia, the only child of the sculptor Thomas Banks. With her he had one son, Sir Edward John Poynter, president of the Royal Academy, and three daughters, of whom Clara, wife of Robert Courtenay Bell, attained distinction as a translator ['see 'Bell, Clara]. Emma died in 1848, and in 1850 Poynter married Louisa Noble (died 1874), the daughter of General Robert Bell, with whom he had a daughter. 
Poynter was closely involved in the development of the architectural profession. One of the founder members of the Institute of British Architects in 1834, he was an early member of its council, and in 1840, 1841, and 1844 served as its secretary. He read markedly diverse papers at its meetings, and in 1842 his anonymous essay 'On the general introduction of iron in buildings' won the institute's silver medal; despite this interest, however, Poynter's numerous buildings demonstrate no particular precocity or adventurousness in the use of iron. He also contributed papers to the proceedings of the Archaeological Institute, of which he was an original member. He was frequently employed on arbitration cases, notably in 1844-55 as one of three official referees appointed under the 'Metropolitan Building Act'. Deteriorating eyesight from 1858 compelled him to retire by 1860; several commissions then in hand were completed by William Burges. 
Poynter was chiefly an architect of churches and country houses. His best-known London work is the Tudor Gothic-style hospital and chapel of St Katharine in Regent's Park (1827); other London churches, Christ Church, Westminster (1841), and the French protestant church in Bloomsbury Street (1845), have been demolished. Elsewhere the greatest concentrations of his work are in Cambridge and Flintshire in north-east Wales. In Cambridge he is said to have built early in his career an observatory for his friend the mathematical 'coach' William Hopkins (1793-1866). Between 1837 and 1843 he built three Cambridge churches, St Paul's, Christ Church, and St Andrew the Great, and in 1835 he competed unsuccessfully for the building of the Fitzwilliam Museum. In Flintshire he built churches, schools, and houses, many of them, including Mostyn Hall (1846-7), for the first Lord Mostyn. Of other country houses his work at Pynes House, Devon (1849, for Sir Stafford Northcote), is significant; restorations or additions to Warwick Castle (1830-31) and Crewe Hall were destroyed by fire during Poynter's lifetime. His other restoration schemes include Waltham Abbey, Essex (1851- 'c'.1855), and the Maison Dieu, Dover (begun 1858). In his later career he was architect to the National Provincial Bank of England, for which he designed several premises. Poynter's buildings are competent but rarely inspired essays in the conventional Renaissance and (especially) English medieval idioms of the day, in which he was content to follow rather than lead; his Cambridge churches fell foul of the fashion for more accurate imitation of medieval forms, however, for which he was ridiculed by 'The Ecclesiologist' (2, 1843, 137). 
Poynter's architectural draughtsmanship was exceptionally fine, and he was also an accomplished watercolourist, having studied under Thomas Shotter Boys. His papers include extensive notes and fine drawings of English medieval architecture, made in the later 1820s, apparently with a view to publication. However, his most widely read writings were articles on literature, science, and art in Charles Knight's mass-market 'Pictorial History of England' (1837-44); he also provided illustrations for the work, and for Knight's edition of Shakespeare (1838-41). He was an original member of the Arundel Society and the Graphic Society, and an amateur of heraldry. 
Poynter was also involved with the government schools of design. In 1845-8 he served as a somewhat undistinguished inspector of the provincial schools, then run as satellites of the main school in Somerset House, London. His chief shortcoming was the failure effectively to modernize their curricula to accommodate the claims of commercial design. For this and for his contradictory official reports he was accused in 1849 of slackness and duplicity in the 'Journal of Design', a mouthpiece of the reformer Henry Cole (2, 1849, 142-5). Although Poynter served on successive reforming committees in 1848-51, it was Cole who effectively reorganized the schools thereafter. Poynter died at his home, 3 Marine Place, Dover, on 20 November 1886, and is presumed to have been buried at Kensal Green, London, where he had bought a plot. 


@@@@@


doc= 22688


Poynter, William (1762-1827), Roman Catholic bishop and vicar apostolic of the London district, was born at Petersfield, Hampshire, on 20 May 1762, the son of John Poynter, a coachmaker and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Todd; he was baptized a Catholic on 24 May. Educated initially at Petersfield grammar school, he entered the English College at Douai on 3 August 1775. He was ordained a priest in 1786 and took the degree of DD, becoming prefect of studies at the college. In 1793 he and the other seminarians were moved by the French revolutionary authorities to the castle of Dourlens, and then held prisoner in the Irish College at Douai. These adventures were afterwards recounted by Poynter in the 'Catholic Magazine and Review' (1831). On 25 February 1795 the seminarians were sent to England, where they landed on 2 March. 
Upon his return to England, Poynter was nominated by Bishop Douglass to be vice-president of Old Hall Green College, near Ware in Hertfordshire. When Dr Gregory Stapleton was made vicar apostolic of the midland district, Poynter became president of Old Hall Green College (March 1801) and afterwards served as Stapleton's vicar-general. On 3 March 1803 he was appointed coadjutor to Dr John Douglass, vicar apostolic of the London district, by a papal brief; he was consecrated bishop of Halia 'in partibus' at Old Hall Green College on 29 May. When Douglass died, on 8 May 1812, Poynter also succeeded to the vicariate 'per coadjutoriam'. 
Poynter's fluency in French, knowledge of Italian, training in theology and canon law, and love of scholastic disputation well prepared him for the theological and political debates then plaguing the English Catholic community. A 'man of polished manners, and proverbial coolness and moderation' (Ward, 'Eve of Catholic Emancipation', 1.28), his refined style and subtle distinctions contrasted sharply with the rancorous activities and quick judgements of the vicar apostolic of the midland district, Bishop John Milner. The two clashed repeatedly when Poynter counselled Douglass to take a moderate and canonically precise approach to the London-exiled French clergy who criticized the papacy's 1801 concordat with Napoleon. 
Poynter consistently tried to mediate between the leading Catholic laymen, who were willing to grant some political securities to the government in exchange for Catholic emancipation, and Milner and the Irish bishops, who would accept no compromises. His struggle to interpret the political and theological issues of the day in an orthodox yet open manner may be seen in his published controversy with the Irish radical priest Charles O'Conor ('A Theological Examination of the Doctrine of Columbanus', 1811) and the large collection of unpublished letters and comments on parliamentary petitions held in the archives of the archbishop of Westminster. When Milner accused him of schismatic tendencies and publicly attacked the other vicars apostolic, Poynter composed his 'Apologetical epistle' to Cardinal Litta, prefect of the propaganda, dated 15 March 1815. The document was not intended to be made public, but was translated and printed, without his knowledge, by Charles Butler, who published it in 1820 as part of his 'Historical Memoirs of the English Catholics' (vol. 4, appx, n. 1). In addition to his annual publications in the 'Laity's Directory' (1813-28) and numerous pastoral addresses, from 1813 Poynter worked actively with the leading laity in the Catholic Bible Society to publish a popular stereotyped edition of the 'New Testament', for which he wrote a preface in 1815. Although Milner vigorously objected, this work was never condemned in Rome. 
In 1823 the Holy See appointed Dr James Yorke Bramston as Poynter's coadjutor, 'cum jure successionis'. Along with other English and Scottish Catholic prelates, Poynter issued the famous 'Declaration of the Catholic Bishops, the Vicars Apostolic, and their Coadjutors in Great Britain' (1826). He died in Castle Street, Holborn, London, on 26 November 1827, and was buried first (on 11 December 1827) in the church of St Mary Moorfields, London, where a monument was erected to his memory, and then at Old Hall Green, near Ware (1903). His funeral sermon, which was preached by the Revd Lewis Havard, was printed. In addition to Poynter's occasional contributions to Catholic magazines, he was also responsible for putting together 'The Catholic Soldier's and Sailor's Prayer Book' (repr. 1858). 


@@@@@


doc= 22689


Poyntz, Sir Anthony (c.1480-1532/3), naval commander, was the eldest son of Sir Robert Poyntz (b. late 1440s, d. 1520) and Margaret, the illegitimate daughter of Anthony Woodville, second Earl Rivers. He was descended from a cadet branch of the family based at Iron Acton in Gloucestershire since the early fourteenth century. Poyntz served Henry VIII as a naval officer and played a minor part in Wolsey's ceremonial diplomacy between 1518 and 1521. In 1513 he commissioned and led a small flotilla of ships from Bristol as part of the fleet in Edward Howard's ill-fortuned expedition against Brittany. He was knighted the same year. Nine years later, as captain of the 'Santa Maria', he joined the force led by Howard's brother, the earl of Surrey, on another raid against the Breton coast and participated in the small but bloody battle of Morlaix. In 1523 he was given the 'ad hoc' title of vice-admiral, and between April and September was entrusted with the task of intercepting the duke of Albany should he attempt to bring French support to Scotland. That Albany succeeded in transporting 5000 soldiers via the Irish Channel was largely the responsibility of the admiral, Sir William Fitzwilliam, who denuded the western seas by leading a fruitless raid against Treport. 
Poyntz's diplomatic duties were purely ceremonial. He took part in the festivities arranged to celebrate the treaty of London in November 1518, although he was not included in the embassy subsequently dispatched to France. He was also among Henry's entourage at his meetings with Francois I at the Field of Cloth of Gold and the emperor Charles V at Gravelines, both held in July 1520. The few records remaining that detail Poyntz's administrative and judicial activities are no doubt a poor reflection of the responsibilities that as a leading member of the gentry he almost certainly undertook. In May 1521 he sat on the jury at Bristol that indicted the duke of Buckingham. He was appointed sheriff of Gloucestershire in 1527 and in 1530 was part of the commission appointed to inquire into Wolsey's possessions. He married twice: first, before 1510, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William Huddesfield of Shillingford, Devon, with whom he had a son and heir, Nicholas; and second, by April 1527, Joan, widow of Sir Richard Guildford. He died between September 1532 and February 1533. 


