@@@@@


doc= 22690


Sir Francis Poyntz (c.1487-1528), diplomat, was Sir Robert Poyntz's third son. He followed his father to court, where by 1516 he was an esquire of the body to Henry VIII, rising in 1521 to be a carver. In 1526 the king granted him the manor of Holborn, Middlesex, during the minority of Edward Stanley, third earl of Derby, and some lands formerly in the possession of Edward Stafford, third duke of Buckingham. Like his oldest brother, Sir Anthony Poyntz, he was also employed in diplomacy. In 1527 the king sent him to Charles V with instructions to negotiate peace between France and the empire. As a mark of the trust shown in him, Henry knighted him. He had an audience with the emperor on 2 July, and although authorized to threaten war if Charles was unresponsive, he failed to persuade him of the reasonableness of his mission. Travelling back from Madrid he met Francois in Paris. He died of the plague in London on 26 January 1528, leaving as widow Joan, who was the sister of his brother John Poyntz's wife, Elizabeth: his marriage clearly had formed one of a series linking his family to the Guildfords. There were no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 22691


Poyntz, John (1629/30-1712), naval officer, travelled 'in the greatest part of the Caribee Islands and most parts of the Continent of America, and almost all his majesty's foreign plantations' (Poyntz, 'Prospect', sig. A2'v') and was especially involved in proposals to settle the island of Tobago. Several men named John Poyntz were active in the Caribbean in the later seventeenth century, but this John Poyntz was probably the third son of Sydenham Poyntz's youngest brother, Newdigate ('bap'. 1608, died 1643), a royalist killed at Gainsborough, and his first wife, Sarah, daughter of Francis Foxley, of Harringworth, Northamptonshire (died 1636). If so, he was baptized at nearby Benefield on 3 January 1630 and married Alice (died 1712), 'nee' Brown, of Dartford, Kent, probably died at Dartford, and was buried there on 12 August 1712. His wife has been buried three weeks earlier. Maclean, in his exhaustive history of the various branches of the Poyntz family (1886), makes no mention of any connection with Tobago, but the relevant calendars of colonial state papers were published only later (1898-1912). 
In 1666 four English ships commanded by a Captain John Poyntz captured a Dutch settlement on Tobago. They left behind a small garrison, which was forced to surrender to a French party from Grenada, who then abandoned the island. In a much later memorial to the council of trade and plantations (17 November 1699) Poyntz claimed that he had made eleven voyages to Tobago (many from Barbados) up to 1680, on one of which (1678-9) the local 'emperor' (of Trinidad) had named his only son after him. On 20 September 1681 Poyntz, on behalf of a group of London merchants, signed a treaty with the agent in England of the duke of Courland, to whom Charles II had granted Tobago, for 120,000 acres on the island, on which liberty of conscience would be given to all save Catholics. 
In 1683 Poyntz published 'The Present Prospect of the Famous and Fertile Island of Tobago' (2nd edn, 1695), a very well informed survey of the climate, flora, fauna, and timber of the island, which included a recommendation for barracuda, with a helpful warning to beware of its teeth, and prospects for growing cocoa, sugar-cane, and tobacco. On 26 February he petitioned the king about the colours and standards he should use there. Poyntz later alleged that his grant had aroused the hostility of the duke of York, so that an order of the commissioners of the admiralty (15 December) stopped his ship, the 'Fountain', from sailing to Tobago from Gravesend; but it might have been held up pending negotiations for the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1684). Several hundred settlers from Barbados had already moved to Tobago before the king blocked Poyntz's project; they were returned to Barbados. On 2 February 1686 Poyntz granted 1000 acres on Tobago to the antiquary John Aubrey as a reward for services he had done for Poyntz with the earls of Pembroke and Abingdon; among Aubrey's papers is a note that under William III Abingdon was to buy Poyntz's claim to Tobago. 
The crown questioned the duke of Courland's claim to Tobago, given the many changes of possession and occupation it had seen. In answer to a further petition from Poyntz, the privy council declared (1686) that the king's grant of Tobago to the duke of Courland was void; a memorial from the Courland envoy in London (12 April 1687) also rejected the contract made with Poyntz. In his 1699 petition (2 May), which attempted to revive the scheme, Poyntz said he had considerably developed the planting and settling of Tobago, despite heavy losses during the recent war with France. Among the benefits he claimed would arise from his activities would be added security to the neighbouring English plantations in wartime, an increase in crown revenue and in the endowment of the recently constructed naval hospital at Greenwich. His settlement would also employ the poor and provide refuge for dispossessed French Huguenots. 
Poyntz aimed to gain possession of the whole island and grant it to a charitable foundation for converting the Indians to Christianity and, in England, suppressing vice and debauchery, augmenting the salaries of indigent clergy and endowing a hospital in London for the blind poor. But the privy council declared that a free-port in Tobago would be prejudicial to the English colonies, especially Barbados, a line taken by the council of trade and plantations as early as 1686. In 1702 Poyntz made his final petition, but his claim to Tobago was conclusively rejected. In 1692-3 a Captain John Poyntz filed three patents: no. 320 of 1693 for the invention of engines to remove bars, sandbanks, mud, and other obstructions that stop up ports and harbours; no. 297 of 1692 for taking up ships sunk at sea; and no. 327 of 1693 for raising water to perform mill-work. 
Another 
After the Restoration William Coventry damned Poyntz as 'an enemy and plunderer' (Coventry MS 98, fol. 69) and he was dropped from the service. In the Second Anglo-Dutch War Poyntz was hired by the navy as captain of the merchant ship 'Maryland' and wrote to Pepys (14 November 1664) asking for $18 expenses he had incurred in pressing 140 men into the 'Maryland'. But Coventry described him as 'naught' (Coventry MS 99, fol. 92) and another captain was commanding the 'Maryland' in 1665. He may have been the John Poyntz who wrote to Pepys from Dartmouth (8 February 1668), in a very assured style, undertaking to build a lighthouse and a castle on the Goodwin Sands, at his own expense, in return for ownership of the island and a levy on each ship to help maintain the light. There is a draft of a letter on this to the navy commissioners, in Pepys' shorthand, but no more seems to have been heard of the proposal. 


@@@@@


doc= 22692


Poyntz, Robert (b. c.1535, d. in or after 1568), Roman Catholic theologian, son of John Poyntz (c.1485-1544) ['see under 'Poyntz, Sir Robert] and his second wife, Margaret Saunders (died 1563/4), was born at Alderley, Gloucestershire. He was educated at Winchester College and was admitted to New College, Oxford, as a perpetual fellow on 21 August 1554, graduating BA on 5 June 1556 and MA on 27 May 1560. A devout Roman Catholic, he left the country soon afterwards and settled at Louvain. There in 1566 he published his 'Testimonies for the real presence of Christ's body and blood in the blessed sacrament of the altar', a work that formed part of a concerted Catholic response to the sermon at Paul's Cross in 1559 in which John Jewel challenged his Catholic adversaries to produce evidence of the antiquity of the doctrine of transubstantiation. Poyntz's work consisted of relevant passages translated from the Latin fathers. In April 1568 Poyntz was preparing to go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem in the company of the Oxford doctor Richard Smith, the uncle of Richard Smith, later bishop of Chalcedon. In his will of 14 April 1568 Smith named Poyntz as his 'particular friend'. The date of Poyntz's death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 22693


Poyntz, Sir Robert (bap. 1588, d. 1665), royalist writer, was born at Iron Acton, Gloucestershire, and baptized there on 26 October 1588, the first son and heir of Sir John Poyntz ('c'.1560-1633), later MP for Gloucestershire, and his second wife, Elizabeth Sydenham (died 1595). On 14 June 1604 he married Frances Gibbons (died 1638), and he matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, on 15 March 1605. In February 1626 he received the Order of the Bath at Charles I's coronation, and he was returned for Gloucestershire to the 1626 parliament. The following year he refused to pay the forced loan or to serve as a commissioner and was imprisoned, first in the Fleet in London, and then in Northamptonshire. He was released in time to sit once again for Gloucestershire in the parliament of 1628-9. He was not an active member, although he did draw the Commons' attention to one of Roger Manwaring's sermons in favour of the forced loan, and was appointed to a committee to draw up charges against him. 
During the 1630s Poyntz became involved in a protracted chancery suit over his wife's inheritance and in May 1637 he was briefly imprisoned in the Fleet after insulting one of the judges, Sir Richard Hutton. Later that year he was appointed sheriff for Gloucestershire, but warned that opposition to ship money was such that if he had to 'committ all the refusers, and distraine all their chattell... there will not be found either prisons or pinfoldes enow in the country to receive them' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/386/88). Poyntz did not sit in either the Short or Long parliaments: in 1642 he became a royalist and was summoned before the Commons for refusing to act as a parliamentarian deputy lieutenant. He was at Bristol for part of the civil war, and in the spring of 1649 he compounded for $723 under the Bristol articles. His first wife had been buried on 12 March 1638, and by 1645 Poyntz had married his second wife, Cicely Smith (died 1678). 
In 1661, Poyntz published 'A vindication of monarchy and the government long established in the church and kingdome of England'. This tract warned of 'the danger that cometh by the abuse of Parliaments' (p. 35) and argued that 'the best limited power... is regulated by the soundest, most perfect and equal lawes between the Prince and the people' (p. 143). He regarded 'unity in religion' as 'the chiefest pillar that upholdeth the joynt obedience of the subjects to their soveraign, and to the lawes' (p. 8). He insisted that 'no pretences whatsoever can be just ground of a Civil War or Rebellion' (p. 153), and argued that 'by innovations... the peace of the Church and Common-wealth [is] indangered, if not destroyed' (p. 4). Poyntz was buried at Iron Acton on 10 November 1665. 


@@@@@


doc= 22694


Poyntz, Stephen (bap. 1685, d. 1750), diplomatist and courtier, was born in Cornhill, London, and baptized in November 1685, the second son of William Poyntz, an upholsterer, and his second wife, Jane, the daughter of Stephen Monteage, a merchant of London and Buckingham. He was educated at Eton College and at King's College, Cambridge (1703-6). He served as a diplomat only between 1724 and 1730, yet his correspondence shows both judgement and ability and he enjoyed connections and respect without ever having great employments. Poyntz entered diplomacy through his early connection with Lord Townshend, first as tutor to Townshend's sons, from 1709, and then as his patron's private secretary. In 1712 he wrote, anonymously, a very long, informed, and closely reasoned book, 'The Barrier-Treaty Vindicated', strongly advocating strategic defence against France, popery, and the Pretender. In July 1716 he was made commissary to James, first Earl Stanhope, then secretary of state, while remaining in correspondence with Horace Walpole and Townshend. After the fall of John Carteret in April 1724, Townshend had the direction of British foreign policy, and employed Poyntz to avert Russian attempts to control Sweden. In July of that year the post of envoy-extraordinary and plenipotentiary to Sweden was given to Poyntz, who complained: 'The variety of cares which this disagreeable employment brings upon me putts me almost beside myself' (Weston MSS, 1). 
During his exile in Stockholm Poyntz endured the usual deprivations of the expatriate, badgering his correspondents for news and books. The diplomat Thomas Robinson arranged a shipment of wine for him, professing a high value for his acquaintance. From November 1725 he spent eighteen months defending the reputation of Admiral Sir John Norris against a calumny by the new Russian envoy in Sweden, Count Golowitz, 'a most noted Jacobite' (BL, Add. MS 28156, fol. 143). The charge related to 1719, when the navy of Peter the Great of Russia was terrorizing the Swedish coast near Stockholm, and Norris's squadron lay at Copenhagen. There was Swedish discontent that the British navy had failed to prevent the raids, and Golowitz fostered this with the story that the tsar had bribed Norris with money and jewels to stay in port. Poyntz was ordered by George I to clear Norris's honour, conduct, and reputation. He appears to have had considerable success in managing the affair, which even came before the Swedish senate in February 1726, a battle in the war between Britain and Russia to win hearts and minds in Sweden. Immersing himself in Swedish concerns, and spending British government money freely to secure support, Poyntz gained the approval of both Townshend and George I. Poyntz's mission was over in June 1727 and he was already awaiting recall when he heard of the death of George I. In July 1727 he arranged to set out for London, in a frigate provided by a grateful Norris, who had finally arrived in Sweden. Poyntz declared himself 'at present able to form no guess what my lott is to be' (BL, Add. MS 28156, fol. 227), and in the event he was retained at Stockholm until the end of September. 
In June 1728 Poyntz was sent as one of the plenipotentiaries to the Congress of Soissons, which lasted until July 1729, though the more significant discussions were taking place with Cardinal Fleury in Paris. He never presented formal credentials to the French court. None the less, along with his fellow commissioner William Stanhope, he claimed to be out of pocket by several thousand pounds on the 'Vast Expence we have been at in order to make the same Appearance here as the Ministers of other Powers' (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32757, fol. 516). Poyntz showed himself to be adept in the detailed etiquette and protocol of the conference. He was also successful in promoting the two chief British interests of the negotiations after the formal business at Soissons was over. One was to get the French to demolish the fortifications of Dunkirk, as promised in the 1717 treaty of the triple alliance, and the other, following the November 1729 treaty of Seville, was to support Spain against Austria in Italy, if necessary by attacking Austria there. A delighted duke of Newcastle congratulated Poyntz on securing 'so expeditiously and seasonably' a French order to demolish the Dunkirk fortifications, a tactical triumph in Westminster politics. 'You cannot imagine', Newcastle told him, 'what a Victory it has given us over our Enemies, and how their Batteries, which were with some Skill and Success, raised against us, have now turned upon themselves' (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32766, fol. 50). Stanhope, now first Earl Harrington, was persuaded by regard for Poyntz to rejoin him in Soissons in February, and together they canvassed an attack upon the Austrian forces in Sicily, with the approval of George II. On 9 June 1730 Harrington left for England, replaced by Walpole, with whom Poyntz braved the browbeatings of Germain-Louis de Chauvelin, the anti-British foreign minister. 
After his return to England in August 1730, Poyntz was not employed again in formal diplomacy. At midsummer 1731, when the household of the ten-year-old duke of Cumberland was established, Poyntz was made its governor and steward, beginning a long and close connection. As late as May 1745, on the sensitive issue of reinforcements for the army of the duke in Flanders, the draft instructions were sent for approval to the king and also to Poyntz. His governorship put him on friendly terms with Queen Caroline, and in February 1733 he married a maid of honour to the queen, Anna Maria Mordaunt (died 1771), the daughter of Brigadier-General Lewis Mordaunt. She was a beauty, who inspired Samuel Croxall's poem 'The Fair Circassian', dedicated to her in extravagant terms. Poyntz's rooms in St James's gave the couple the benefit of society and preserved their intimacy with the crown. Two sons, including Charles Poyntz were born in the first two years of marriage, both of whom had royal godparents, which meant that noble ladies and gentlemen had to be found to act as proxies at the actual ceremony. After the second birth, Poyntz jokingly wrote: 'I have threatened Mrs. P. to have no more children if there must be all this stately fuss about making them Christians' (Stephen Poyntz to Thomas Townshend, 8 July 1735, James Marshall and Marie Louise Osborn Collection, Beinecke Library, Yale University). In 1734, when the king was not in full agreement with his ministers over the current war, Poyntz was employed to carry private messages between George II and Caroline and the Austrian envoy Count Kinsky. In 1735 he was sworn of the privy council and given the lucrative post of receiver-general and cashier of excise. Poyntz was a frequent visitor to Bath on account of his own bad health and his wife's recurrent bouts of the stone. He was keen to retire from the city: 'A very good house and Garden, with gravell wood and water and a small Estate of $200 or $300 a year about, if within 30 miles of London, would I think make the remainder of my days happy, as well as help to prolong them' (Stephen Poyntz to Thomas Townshend, 4 Feb 1736, James Marshall and Marie Louise Osborn Collection, Beinecke Library, Yale University). He was baulked in his attempt to purchase Tetcham, by competition from the duke and duchess of Cleveland, but soon after purchased his estate at Midgham, near Newbury. A daughter, Margaret, was born in 1737 ['see 'Spencer, (Margaret) Georgiana, Countess Spencer (1737-1814)]. In November 1740 Mrs Poyntz was delivered of their fifth child, a third son, and Poyntz, then in his mid-fifties, commented: 'my own age and infirmity admonish me to look on this as almost a posthumous child' (ibid., Stephen Poyntz to Thomas Townshend, 23 Nov 1740). 
Walpole, reporting his death, ten years later, said that Poyntz was: 'ruined in his circumstances by a devout brother, whom he trusted, and by a simple wife, who had a devotion of marrying dozens of her poor cousins at his expense... Mr. Poyntz was called a very great man, but few knew anything of his talents, for he was timorous to childishness. The duke has done greatly for his family and secured his places for his children, and sends his two sons abroad, allowing them $800 a year. (Walpole, 20.208)' A more positive panegyric was pronounced by a friend who had great obligations to Poyntz: 'he was endowed with every Quality, and adorn'd with every Virtue, that could render the Patriot esteemed, the Parent respected, the Friend beloved, and the whole Man, in every Station of Life, truly amiable' ('Epistle to Poyntz', 5). Poyntz certainly remained to the end of his life an ardent patriot. In 1747 he celebrated the news, sent to him by an agent of the duke of Newcastle, of Vice-Admiral George Anson's victory off Cape Finisterre: 'I have spread the News this morning, and have sett the Bells ringing Six Miles round me' (Newcastle MSS, BL, Add. MS 32711, fol. 69). In 1748 he sent reports of disaffection in the Scottish lowlands and other political information to Lord Hardwicke, despite what he referred to in November as 'my late affliction' (BL, Add. MS 35590, fols. 56, 194). He died at his home, Midgham, on 17 December 1750. 


@@@@@


doc= 22695


Poyntz, Sydenham (bap. 1607), parliamentarian army officer, was baptized on 3 November 1607, the fourth son of John Poynts of Reigate, Surrey, and his wife, Anne Skinner. His own spelling of his name was Sednham Poynts. Although he was of an established family little wealth remained and Poyntz was apprenticed to a London tradesman. This became the subject of chancery proceedings in light of a report that he had died at Rotterdam in July 1625. The proceedings suggest that Poyntz arrived in the Netherlands to escape either ill-treatment or prosecution for theft. Whatever the truth of his apprenticeship experience Poyntz was to record his military service on the continent between 1625 and 1636 in his fitfully accurate 'Relation'. The report that he had died might have stemmed from a period of captivity which Poyntz, in his 'Relation', said occurred between 1626 and 1632. 
During his military service Poyntz rose through the ranks and, according to his 'Vindication' of 1646, was eventually knighted on the battlefield. In his 'Relation' Poyntz claimed to have served first in English regiments in the Netherlands, entering Lord Vaux's regiment as a private soldier under a Captain Reysby, and soon after that the earl of Essex's regiment under Captain William Baillie. He went on to join the army of Count Mansfeld in Germany and Hungary, and it was following the break up of the army that, he later claimed, he became a prisoner of the Turks. Poyntz was present at the battle of Breitenfeld in 1631 alongside the forces of John George of Saxony, but some time afterwards he changed sides and entered the service of the imperial army, appearing as one of Wallenstein's captains at Lutzen in 1632. Such was the ferocity of that clash with the Swedes that Poyntz recorded that he had only three officers left out of twelve. Poyntz accompanied Wallenstein during his 1633 campaign in Silesia and was also present at Nordlingen in 1634. Although he left Germany after the peace of Prague in 1636 it is probable that at some point thereafter Poyntz returned to the continental wars. 
While fighting on the continent Poyntz recorded his first two marriages. The first, to a rich German merchant's daughter about 1633, ended with her death in childbirth. In 1635 Poyntz married another German, whose name John Aubrey rendered as 'Anne Eleanora de Court Stephanus de Cary in Wurtemberg' (Aubrey, 4.212-13). Poyntz, though not naming her, recalled she was 'rich in Land and mony, but of a higher birth and spirit, and therefore would live at a higher rate than our meanes would well afford' (Goodrick, 14.125). However, she and their child were killed by French troops returning from Italy through the estates which Poyntz had bought, probably in the vicinity of Schorndorf. It is possible that he married his third wife, Elizabeth, during his time on the continent for she was to describe herself in a letter to Speaker Lenthall in 1647 as a 'stranger in your kingdom' (Cary, 1.300-01). 
In 1636, after the death of his second wife, Poyntz went back to England and wrote his 'Relation' in the house of the recusant Sir Lewis Tresham, brother of the gunpowder plotter Francis Tresham. The 'Relation' indeed makes much of Poyntz's conversion to Roman Catholicism after his escape from captivity: 'that holy Church... wherein by Gods grace I mean to dy' (Goodrick, 54). Ten years later in his 'Vindication' Poyntz was to deny charges that he was a papist, declaring that 'my constant Profession... from my first years, according to the Instructions of this my native Countrey have been in the Reformed Protestant Religion, and accordingly [I] have for many years been an elder of the Dutch church as is very well known' (ibid., 145). But Poyntz's stay in England seems to have been brief: the 'Relation' ends with Poyntz, unable to find employment as a soldier in England, bidding 'a Longum Vale to my Country' (ibid., 130), and he almost certainly returned to his old career on the continent. 
It is unclear when Poyntz returned to England again. The fact that he was voted $200 by the Commons on 22 May 1645 for arrears suggests, however, that he had returned at the latest by some point in 1644. On 27 May 1645 the Commons ordered Poyntz to have command of regiments of horse and foot in the northern association. This was followed by his appointment as commander-in-chief of that army with the title of colonel-general. On 19 August 1645 Poyntz was nominated governor of York. However, despite their being more regularly paid than they had ever been under Lord Fairfax it was only under Poyntz's command that the troops mutinied. 
Following Naseby Poyntz was ordered to follow the king, and he eventually forced an engagement with the royalists at Rowton Heath, Chester. In his letter of 25 September to Lenthall Poyntz explained how they had discovered the enemy within 3 miles of Chester. As he advanced towards them Poyntz encountered a part of the enemy force which he routed. The main engagement resulted in the destruction of the royalist force: the earl of Lichfield was killed and those captured included Sir Thomas Glenham, Sir Thomas Dacre, and Sir Philip Musgrave. In gratitude the Commons voted Poyntz $500 -- a payment which Lenthall confirmed by letter of 30 September 1645. 
The day before Poyntz had outlined to the committee for war at York the general military situation, including his worries about the discontent among his Nottinghamshire regiment, the king's expectation of 5000 'rebels' from Ireland, and rumours of the approach of a royalist force from Newark. However, on the advice of Colonel Hutchinson Poyntz proceeded to Shelford House. Finding his summons returned in a scornful manner by the governor, Colonel Phillip Stanhope, and meeting stiff early resistance, Poyntz declared that no quarter would be given. Amid general slaughter Shelford was taken. The next day Wiverton House in Nottinghamshire, fearing similar treatment, yielded upon terms. Writing to Lenthall on 9 November 1645 Poyntz related that the strength of the garrison had meant that he gave them fair quarter. Having stressed his concern that no foot had arrived from the eastern garrisons Poyntz also expressed his dissatisfaction that he was more than $400 out of purse. Poyntz moved on to lay siege to Newark. On 5 May 1646, while still undertaking that enterprise, Poyntz reported to Lenthall that the king had taken refuge with the Scots. 
In February 1646 Poyntz published a 'Vindication' to counter charges of ambition, debauchery, oppression of the country, and, in particular, about his religion. Denounced by some as a papist, Poyntz was accused by others of being neither religious himself, nor respecting it in others. Such claims were linked to the efforts of the 'presbyterian' leaders in the Commons to include Poyntz's troops in their plans to dismantle or crush the New Model Army. In March 1647 the Commons declared that Poyntz's horse regiment was to be one of the four retained in England. The Commons had also voted Poyntz $300 p.a. However, the 'presbyterian' leaders had made the mistake of judging the troops by their commander. 
In communication with the New Model, and aware of the increasing rift between the parliament and their southern comrades, the northern troops took the initiative. Although crucially aided by men from outside their ranks, such as Major Henry Lilburne, younger brother of the Leveller John, it is clear that the northern troops were also led by their own militants. A leading figure in the rebellion against Poyntz was Captain John Hodgson of Lionel Copley's regiment, the surgeon (and later Quaker) who was a close confidant of Colonel John Lambert. Lambert had originally been a leading officer in the northern army; he was now taking a leading role in the political action of the New Model. Poyntz informed Lenthall on 17 June that 'a surgeon of colonel Copley's regiment marched with the aforesaid colonel's own troop through Leeds to a rendezvous... the chirurgeon drew some papers out, and read to the soldiers, and told them, that the army in the south desired they should join with them' (Cary, 1.233-5). At a second rendezvous the next day agitators were chosen. 
The northern troops later justified their action by recounting how Poyntz had acted in concert with the Yorkshire presbyterian MP Philip Stapleton. They particularly focused on his removal of Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Fairfax, the kinsman of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and John Lambert, as governor of Clifford's Tower garrison in York who had been replaced with an ally, the lord mayor of York, Thomas Dickenson. Their action was also prompted by Poyntz's abuse of the New Model and of Fairfax, his recruiting of a reformado company (that is, a company of unemployed former soldiers) and his harsh treatment of soldiers whose political allegiance he suspected. 
At the end of June 1647 Poyntz complained, to both Lenthall and Fairfax, that agitators from the New Model had stirred up his own troops: 'the soldiers are misinformed and deluded by such as are come out of the South, And some of our inferior officers in these parts' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 58, fol. 272). He informed Fairfax that he had orders from parliament to apprehend them. On 28 June Poyntz told his officers of Lilburne and Hodgson's attempt to 'putt this Army into confusion and distraction, pretending they were sent with authoritie from Sir Thomas Fairfax' (Firth, 1891, 143). However, Poyntz's complaint to Fairfax did not receive a sympathetic response. What particularly infuriated Poyntz, as he related it to Lionel Copley, was that the militants in his forces were preparing to present their grievances to Fairfax who had failed to denounce their actions, probably in the knowledge of Poyntz's willingness to turn on the New Model. 
On 8 July 1647 Poyntz was seized at his York headquarters, and his wife, Elizabeth, was left to complain to Fairfax of how her husband had been 'carried away in his slippers' (Cary, 1.300-01). Poyntz was taken to Fairfax at Reading and charged with having 'endeavoured to reimbroyle this Kingdom in a 2d warr... to justify the 11 accused Members and kept correspondency with them' (Firth, 1891, 168-9). Having been released by Fairfax, Poyntz submitted his resignation in a letter to Lenthall. John Lambert was appointed, in his place, as commander of the northern association. 
Poyntz arrived in London and with Edward Massey and Sir William Waller played a prominent role in the attempted counter-revolution. On 2 August entering the Guildhall yard Poyntz and the reformadoes under his control attacked a crowd of Independent-minded citizens who had come to present a petition for peace to the common council. Although one pamphlet claimed that Poyntz had acted in self defence against what was a 'rude rabble of Anabaptists' others claimed that Poyntz and his troops 'in a cruel manner with their Swords hacked and hewed' the crowd ('The Army Anatomized', 24; Rushworth, 7.741). 
Unable to resist the New Model and abandoned by their City allies, Poyntz and Massey, before fleeing, expressed their bitterness in their 'declaration' of 9 August 1647. In a last plea from Amsterdam in May 1648 Poyntz claimed 'it would almost make a man desperate to see how I am slighted in place of the great rewards which the honourable houses were pleased to promise me' (Cary, 1.418). He played no role in the second civil war. Following his flight to the Netherlands, Poyntz was recorded as accompanying Lord Willoughby to the West Indies in 1650. There he became governor of the Leeward Islands, establishing himself at St Kitts. With the arrival of Sir George Ayscue's fleet and Willoughby's consequent surrender of Barbados, Poyntz, facing military defeat, supposedly fled to Virginia. However, the generous articles granted by Ayscue gave Poyntz the option of returning to Antigua with any others who had estates there. It is not clear whether he took advantage of these articles and though Poyntz is mentioned as governor of Antigua between 1661 and 1663 there is little evidence to support the conjecture that he filled this role. Indeed Poyntz effectively disappears from the historical record after his flight in the face of Ayscue. 


@@@@@


doc= 22696


Praed, Winthrop Mackworth (1802-1839), poet and politician, was born on 26 June 1802 at 35 John Street, Bedford Row, London, the fourth of the five children of William Mackworth Praed (1756-1835), serjeant-at-law and long-time chairman of the Audit Office, and his wife, Elizabeth (1767-1810), daughter of Benjamin Winthrop, merchant and governor of the Bank of England. Praed was the product of an old family with roots in Rutland and Cornwall. His father was wealthy enough to afford a fashionable address in London as well as Bitton House, an 18 acre estate in Teignmouth, Devon. Praed was a remarkably precocious but delicate child. In 1810 he started at Langley Broom School, near Colnbrook, where he quickly distinguished himself. He went to Eton College in March 1814, and remained there until July 1821. Praed was a legendary Etonian, who left as indelible a mark on his schoolmates there as George Canning had done a generation earlier. In 1820 he founded a manuscript journal, the 'Apis Matina', and accounted for at least half of the contributions to its six numbers. Later the same year, he started 'The Etonian', a more ambitious journal which Charles Knight agreed to publish, and once again he dominated its pages, contributing some thirty-five articles and a dozen poems. Knight later described Praed the Etonian as: 'natural and unaffected in his ordinary talk; neither shy nor presuming; proud, without a tinge of vanity; somewhat reserved, but ever courteous; giving few indications of the susceptibility of the poet, but ample evidence of the laughing satirist; a pale and slight youth, who had looked upon the aspects of society with the keen perception of a clever manhood. (Knight, 1.282-3)' Praed followed up his Eton career with an equally brilliant one at Cambridge. Breaking with family tradition, he chose Trinity College over St John's, and there he read classics alongside Macaulay. He won four medals for Greek odes and epigrams and two more for English parody, as well as a declamation prize. He narrowly missed winning the university scholarship, and in 1825 was bracketed third in the classical tripos. An active member of the Cambridge Union Society, Praed was widely praised for his witty and offhand manner in debate. While he lacked the physical stamina to match Macaulay's soaring eloquence, he could argue his case tenaciously when provoked into doing so, and he often took the radical side on political issues. Praed's good looks undoubtedly contributed to his popularity at Cambridge. 'In person he was of spare habit', according to his sister Susan: 'complexion pale, features strongly marked, symmetrical, but thin and somewhat sharply cut. His forehead was clear and well built; finished above by an uncommon beauty: his eyes large, and very expressive; face almost pointed, from the unusual prolongation of the lower outline. (Hudson, 66)' His singular features, his self-confidence, and the ease with which he seemed to master any subject that interested him all combined to make him a legend. He 'was to the University what Byron was to the world', Bulwer Lytton recalled. '[T]here was a fascination in the very name of this young man which eclipsed the repute of his contemporaries' (ibid., 67-9). 
After leaving Cambridge in March 1825, Praed served as tutor to Lord Ernest Bruce, second son of the marquess of Ailesbury, and eventually accompanied his charge to Eton. During this interval Praed contributed several political squibs to the whig 'Morning Chronicle'. He also began a long relationship with the 'New Monthly Magazine', where many of his poems first appeared, and composed verse for Alaric Watts's 'Literary Souvenir', the most popular of the illustrated annuals. Praed also made time to read for a Trinity fellowship, to which he was elected in 1827. After leaving Eton late in 1827, Praed went to London, where he began work as a pupil of John Bayley, a Middle Temple barrister. He had little patience with the drudgery of legal work, but persevered in his studies and was called to the bar in May 1829. Praed decided to go the Norfolk circuit, and, like most new barristers, started off with few briefs and considerable time on his hands. 
Praed's flirtation with political radicalism had ended by the time he left Cambridge. He was an enthusiastic supporter of Catholic emancipation, but by the late 1820s had become convinced that wholesale parliamentary reform could only lead to social chaos. An admirer of Canning, Praed lauded him in verse after he suddenly died shortly after reaching the premiership in 1827. Praed essentially remained a Canningite for the rest of his short life by subsequently professing his devotion to Sir Robert Peel. Like his two heroes, he was committed to practical improvements while deploring what he considered the dangerous constitutional tinkering of the whigs and their radical associates. The tories were aware of Praed's debating skills, and, thinking that he would provide a counterweight on the Commons floor to the likes of his old schoolfriend Macaulay, in December 1830 they offered him the use of the pocket borough of St Germans for two years in exchange for $1000. He accepted the offer, and thus became one of very few promising young men who took a seat opposite the new Grey ministry. Praed lost little time in making himself useful to the tory cause. In a series of verse satires published in 'The Alfred' and 'The Albion' he established his anti-reform credentials: '
We're sick of this distressing state 

Of order and repose; 

We have not had enough of late 

Of blunder, or of blows; 

We can't endure to pass our life 

In such a humdrum way; 

We want a little pleasant strife -- 

The Whigs are in to-day! 

... 

It's time for us to see the things 

Which other folk have seen; 

It's time we should cashier our kings, 

And build our guillotine; 

We'll abrogate Police and Peers, 

And vote the Church away; 

We'll hang the parish overseer -- 

The Whigs are in to-day! 
('The New Order of Things', 1830, stanzas 1 and 4, reprinted in Praed, 'Political and Occasional Poems', 123-4)' On 14 February 1831 Praed delivered a celebrated maiden speech on the cotton duties, supporting his argument against the government's plans for altering them with an impressive array of statistics. But his chief preoccupation at this time was the 'Reform Bill'. Resentful that his borough had been slated for extinction under schedule A, he fought vigorously against the main provisions of the bill, and tried but failed to narrow their scope through amendment. After the disfranchisement of St Germans, Praed stood for the borough of St Ives, but lost to the incumbent, James Halse, in a bitter contest. While he was out of parliament he remained deeply involved in partisan politics, frequently contributing anti-whig satires to the 'Morning Post' and serving as the 'Post's' chief leader writer from early 1833 until late 1834. By this time his political celebrity had greatly enhanced the value of his legal practice; his barrister's income trebled the year after he entered the Commons, and it continued to grow thereafter. Praed returned to the Commons as MP for Great Yarmouth in 1834, and served as secretary to the Board of Control in Peel's short-lived ministry of 1834-5. After retiring from this constituency in 1837, he was subsequently returned for Aylesbury, conveniently taking over the seat previously held by his cousin James. Already plagued by symptoms of consumption, Praed refused to slow down the hectic pace of his life; he still possessed sufficient energy to attack the Melbourne government's Canada policy and to champion the National Society's working-class education schemes. 
What little spare time Praed allowed himself he devoted to raising a family. On 7 July 1835 he married Helen Bogle, a wealthy young beauty whose sugar merchant father, George, had retired to Effingham, Surrey. Two daughters were born to them over the next next three years, Helen Adeline and Elizabeth Lilian. In order to accommodate his growing family, Praed purchased a spacious house in south-west London, 64 Chester Square. His health was already rapidly deteriorating when they moved in, but he insisted on carrying on his legal and political duties as best he could, and was still attending Commons debates only a few weeks before his death. He died on 15 July 1839 at his Chester Square residence. 
Praed is best remembered for what he might have become had he not died young; indeed, he came to be seen as a tragic archetype -- the young man of promise cut down before his prime. He carried his schoolboy reputation with him into parliament, and managed to preserve it there through occasional flashes of brilliance. Had he lived, he might well have risen to a commanding position within Peel's Conservative ministry in the early 1840s. As it happened, at the time of his death he was best known for his poetry. Although he often dismissed himself as a mere versifier, Praed sketched the manners and mores of the polite society he knew so well with a graceful nonchalance. While his poetry is now virtually unknown, it was popular enough in the Victorian era to merit the publication of several collections on both sides of the Atlantic. American collections appeared in 1844, 1850, and 1859. Praed's close friend Derwent Coleridge was responsible for the first British edition in 1864, and his nephew Sir George Young edited 'Political and Occasional Poems' in 1888. It is altogether appropriate that Praed, a boy wonder whom fate would not permit to grow old, left behind him some of the most vivid paeans to the golden youth of the early nineteenth-century leisured classes: '
I wish that I could run away 

From House, and court, and levee, 

Where bearded men appear to-day, 

Just Eton boys, grown heavy; 

That I could bask in childhood's sun, 

And dance o'er childhood's roses; 

And find huge wealth in one pound one, 

Vast wit in broken noses; 

And play Sir Giles at Datchet Lane, 

And call the milk-maids Houris; -- 

That I could be a boy again, 

A happy boy, at Drury's! 
('School and schoolfellows', 1829, 11.77-89)' 



@@@@@


doc= 22697


Prance, Miles (fl. 1678-1688), perjurer, was born in Eastwood in the Isle of Ely. His father was Simon Prance, gentleman, a Roman Catholic convert of royalist sympathies. In his youth Miles Prance was apprenticed to a gold- and silversmith and in the early 1670s he was a servant-in-ordinary to Queen Catherine of Braganza. By the late 1670s he was living in Prince's Street, Covent Garden, with a wife and family. 
As a Catholic himself, and having referred to Jesuits as 'honest fellows' (Boys, 10), news of the death of the magistrate Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey in October 1678 made Prance an object of suspicion. Many people believed that the murder was part of a plot by the papists. Prance was arrested on 21 December 1678 after inquiries at his home, where his lodger, John Wren (who owed Prance money), maliciously revealed that his landlord had been absent at the time of the murder. Prance's problems were further compounded when the opportunistic fabricator of Romanist conspiracies William Bedloe accused him of being one of the men he had seen about the body of Godfrey as it lay in Somerset House. After a short examination, in which Prance denied being a party to any murder, he was committed to Newgate and there harshly treated. He subsequently confessed his involvement in the crime, only to recant this confession. While still in Newgate he claimed that the clergymen William Boys, Gilbert Burnet, and William Lloyd had visited him, and on 12 January 1679 Prance once more confessed, later claiming that 'It was purely the fear of Death, and the misery of my condition, that wrought upon me to foreswear myself, without any thought of reward' (L'Estrange, 3.128). 
In his new confession Prance maintained that the design against Godfrey came to his notice through two Irish priests: Girald, or Fitz-girald, and Kelly. Also brought into the business were Henry Berry, porter to the queen at Somerset House, Robert Green, an Irishman employed in the Queen's Chapel, and Lawrence Hill. Prance said that the group had followed Godfrey as he went about his business in the week of his death. Finally, while Prance kept watch, Godfrey had been strangled on the evening of Saturday 12 October in a yard at Somerset House. The body was then hidden in the palace until it could be placed in a manner so that whenever it should be found it might be supposed that Godfrey had committed suicide and so discredit him and any evidence against Catholics. Prance claimed that this had been done on the following Wednesday, when they had laid the corpse in a ditch near Primrose Hill and put Godfrey's own sword through his body. 
Prance now became responsible for the arrest and deaths of Berry, Green, and Hill. He gave evidence against them at their trial on 5 February 1679 and also shared with Bedloe the reward given for the discovery of the murderers. Thereafter Prance informed on a number of Catholics under the influence of Bedloe and Titus Oates, the principal instigator of the Popish Plot. On 13 June 1679 he gave evidence against two Jesuits, Harcourt and Fenwick, in support of Bedloe and Stephen Dugdale, the Popish Plot witness, and on 10 January 1680 he obtained a pension of $50 from the crown. In September 1679 he helped Sir William Waller to election victory at Westminster and later assisted Oates in trying to discredit Sir Roger L'Estrange. Prance published a number of pamphlets defending his evidence against the accusations of Elizabeth Cellier and purporting to explain its contradictions, but with the ebbing of the Popish Plot he faded from view. 
Retribution followed in the next reign. On 15 June 1686 Prance was found guilty of perjury and sentenced to be fined $100, pilloried, and whipped. He stood in the pillory at Westminster on 21 June 1686, but the last part of his sentence was not carried out because the 'Queen dowager hath beg'd of the king the remission of the last punishment... [as she was persuaded that Prance had]... return'd to the church of Rome' (Clark, 3.189), having previously converted to the Church of England. In December 1688 Prance tried to escape abroad, but was arrested in the company of some other Catholics in a ship off Gravesend. Interrogated by the House of Lords, he was subsequently released and seems to have fled to the continent, where he died in obscurity. 
As Prance 'had not the brand upon him of an infamous Course of Life, to blast his Evidence as his Fellow-witnesses had', he was more readily believed by the authorities (L'Estrange, 3.126). While his story of the Godfrey murder was startling in its detail and provided an easy solution to the mystery, it also caused the deaths of the innocent Berry, Green, and Hill. It is highly unlikely that his claims were genuine. Prance's evidence had been gained under extreme pressure. While he knew something of the particulars of Godfrey's death, he appears to have gained much circumstantial evidence by being a member of the club at the White House, close to Primrose Hill, where the body of the magistrate was discovered and where the inquest had been held. Moreover his version of Godfrey's death, particularly the timing of the disposal of the body, contains a number of improbabilities. Despite his perjury Prance's apparently unconditional return to the Catholic church has led some historians to claim he was a Catholic agent throughout the events in which he was entangled. It is far more likely that Prance was merely yet another unfortunate caught up in circumstances not of his own making and used by those more powerful than himself. In this respect his return to the Catholic church, sanctioned by Queen Catherine herself, was an act of forgiveness rather than anything sinister. 


@@@@@


doc= 22698


Pratt, Anne (1806-1893), botanist, born on 5 December 1806 in Strood, Kent, the second of three daughters of Robert Pratt (1777-1819), a wholesale grocer of that town, and his wife, Sarah Bundock (1780-1845), of Huguenot descent. Her childhood and youth were passed at Chatham and she was educated by a Mrs Roffey at the Eastgate House School, Rochester. Her delicate health -- 'a stiff knee' -- rendered her unfit for active pursuits and she devoted herself to literary study. A Scottish friend, Dr Dods, undertook to teach her botany and she soon became an ardent student. Aided by her elder sister, who collected plants for her, she formed an extensive herbarium and supplemented her collection by making sketches of the specimens. The drawings afterwards formed illustrations for her books. 
Anne Pratt left Chatham in 1846 and went to live with friends at Brixton and other places, but subsequently settled at Dover in 1849. There she wrote her principal work, 'The Flowering Plants and Ferns of Great Britain'. Other changes of residence followed. On 4 December 1866 she married John Pearless (1809-1893), a rentier, of East Grinstead, Sussex. They lived at East Grinstead for two and a half years, after which they settled for some years at Redhill, Surrey. Anne died on 27 July 1893 at Rylett Road, Shepherd's Bush, London. 
Anne Pratt's works were written in popular style but were said to be accurate. They were also instrumental in spreading a knowledge and love of botany, and were at one time acknowledged by a grant from the civil list. Her first, 'The Field, the Garden, and the Woodland', was published in 1838 and reached a third edition in less than ten years. Perhaps her most popular, especially among children, 'Wild Flowers' (2 vols., 1852), was also issued in sheets for hanging up in schoolrooms. 'The Flowering Plants and Ferns of Great Britain', published in five volumes from 1855, was widely regarded as the best popular botanical work of her time. 


@@@@@


doc= 22699


Pratt, Charles, first Earl Camden (1714-1794), lawyer and politician, was born in Kensington, London, and baptized there on 21 March 1714, the third son of Sir John Pratt (1657-1725), MP and later lord chief justice of king's bench, and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1728), daughter of the Revd Hugh Wilson, vicar of Trefeglwys and a canon of Bangor Cathedral. He was educated at Eton College (1725-31) and King's College, Cambridge (BA, 1736; MA, 1740), and developed an early interest in the constitution as a safeguard of liberty which was to characterize his life. Always destined for the law, in accordance with his father's wishes, he was entered at the Inner Temple in 1728 and was called to the bar in 1738. He so failed to prosper at king's bench and on the western circuit that he despaired of his profession and thought of the church, until in the mid-1740s his career was given a much-needed boost by a friendly senior counsel, Robert Henley, later as Lord Northington his predecessor as lord chancellor. Once established in his profession Pratt made an advantageous marriage on 4 October 1749 to Elizabeth (died 1779), daughter of Nicholas Jeffreys and eventually heir of Brecon Priory, an estate that commanded a leading political interest in Brecknockshire: they had a son, the politician John Jeffreys Pratt, and four daughters. 
By the 1750s Pratt was involved in cases of political import before the House of Commons and at Westminster Hall, notably the prosecution in 1752 of Alexander Murray for libel, when he first argued, successfully for the defence, that the jury rather than the judge should assess the intent of a libel and not merely the fact of publication, a legal contention he helped to bring to a triumphant conclusion forty years later. Appointed a king's counsel in 1755, Pratt was drawn into politics by William Pitt, a friend at Eton who often consulted him on legal and constitutional issues. Pitt's connection with the opposition Leicester House court of the young prince of Wales led in 1756 to Pratt's appointment as attorney-general to the prince, in preference to a judgeship offered him by the duke of Newcastle, the prime minister. In July 1757 Pitt, when forming his famous wartime coalition with Newcastle, insisted on the appointment of Pratt as attorney-general over the head of the solicitor-general, Charles Yorke, son of Newcastle's ally Lord Hardwicke, the former lord chancellor, who earlier had hindered the career of Yorke's perceived rival. 
The two men perforce had to work together in the routine legal business of government, and the Pratt-Yorke judgment of 24 December 1757 was a landmark in imperial history. The crown's law officers distinguished between territories acquired by conquest, where the property as well as the dominion was vested in the crown, and those acquired by private treaty, where the crown enjoyed only sovereignty: this opinion, which related to the East India Company, was subsequently applied elsewhere in the British empire. 
Pratt was brought into the House of Commons as MP for the burgage borough of Downton, but was rarely called upon to defend the successful war ministry in parliamentary debate. He sponsored the 'Habeas Corpus Amendment Bill' of 1758, designed to extend that measure to cover civil and political as well as criminal cases. It was favoured by Pitt but rejected by the House of Lords. In the same year Pratt as attorney-general successfully prosecuted both Florence Hensey, an Irishman who was a French spy, and the libeller John Shebbeare when, though not defence counsel, he still maintained that the decision be taken by the jury. In 1760 Pratt led the famous prosecution of Lord Ferrers, a peer convicted and hanged for murdering a servant, to the astonishment of European high society. But Pratt's chief activity in these years was the development of a flourishing practice in the court of chancery which gave him financial security, and about this time he bought the estate of Camden Place in Kent. 
The time of quiet prosperity and growing reputation ended in 1761. Pratt's political predicament when his mentor, Pitt, left the ministry in October proved to be brief, for the death on 15 December of the lord chief justice of common pleas opened a vacancy to which he could retreat from the political scene. Resigning his parliamentary seat, accepting the concomitant honours of a knighthood on 28 December, and being sworn of the privy council, Pratt took the judicial post in January 1762. The court of common pleas, by contrast with that of king's bench, seldom dealt with cases of political import, and Pratt may well have thought his brief political career to be over. But when John Wilkes was arrested on 30 April 1763 under a general warrant for an alleged seditious libel in the forty-fifth number of the 'North Briton', it was to the obviously sympathetic judge at common pleas that application was made for his release. Judge Pratt freed Wilkes, declaring him immune as an MP from arrest on such a charge. The popularity Pratt thereby acquired with the London mob went to his head, encouraging him during the summer of 1763 to incite juries into awarding excessive damages, quite disproportionate to any inconvenience suffered, to printers mistakenly arrested in the same case. On 6 December, Pratt followed up this behaviour by condemning the use of general warrants for the search of houses and other buildings, Wilkes being awarded $1000 in damages by the jury. The contemporary press celebrated this victory for liberty. 'By this important decision, every Englishman has the satisfaction of seeing that his home is his castle' ('St James's Chronicle', 8 Dec 1763). Two years later he confirmed and strengthened this ruling by his judgment in the landmark 'Entinck v. Carrington' case. This arose not, as is often stated, out of the 'North Briton' affair, but from a ministerial attempt in 1762 to prosecute the weekly periodical 'Monitor'. On 27 November 1765 he condemned as 'contrary to law' the use of a general warrant to search for and seize papers in charges of seditious libel. Of greater significance even than the verdict was the reason for his decision. He refuted 'the argument for state necessity' by declaring that 'the common law does not understand that kind of reasoning', thereby confirming the common law as the best defence against arbitrary government (Holdsworth, 'Eng. law', 670). 
By then Pratt had re-entered parliament, being created Baron Camden on 17 July 1765. His peerage was one of the measures by which the incoming ministry of Lord Rockingham vainly sought to win the support of William Pitt. Camden declined to speak in the first Lords debate on the American 'Stamp Act' crisis, but attended the Commons debate of 14 January 1766 to ascertain Pitt's line. The subsequent speeches of the two men on 3 February were so similar that contemporaries thought they had been prepared together. In his maiden Lords speech that day Camden argued that taxation was founded on consent, and therefore depended on representation. He was one of the minority of five peers who then voted against the ministerial resolution asserting what was the generally accepted right of parliament to tax all British territories. But Camden logically supported the administration in the Lords debate of 11 March over repeal of the 'Stamp Act', when he claimed that the colonial resistance had been aroused by hardship caused by that taxation, an unconvincing contention in the light even of contemporary knowledge. 
It was from Camden that George III in May 1766 ascertained that Pitt was willing to form a ministry, but Camden was absent on the midland circuit when the change of administration took place in July. It was generally assumed that Pitt, now to become earl of Chatham, would make Camden his lord chancellor, and he accepted the office when he returned to London, stipulating an additional allowance of $1500 and the reversion of a lucrative exchequer tellership for his elder son John Jeffreys Pratt, to whom the office reverted in May 1780. Camden became lord chancellor on 30 July 1766. It was a post that, as well as sitting on the woolsack as 'de facto' speaker of the House of Lords, involved several discrete legal functions. He presided over the court of chancery, and although his speciality was common law, his judgments in the equity cases that now came before him have been deemed sound, if not innovative. As head of the law lords Camden also presided over appeals and other legal cases referred to the House of Lords. In 1767 he secured unanimous approval for the opinion of Lord Mansfield that the City of London should not fine dissenters for refusing to serve as corporate officials when they were disqualified by the 'Corporation Act', a reinforcement of religious liberty. Camden's political impartiality was demonstrated when in 1768 a complaint of John Wilkes about serving two prison sentences as consecutive and not concurrent was dismissed. In 1769 he overrode both public opinion and evidential probability when finding for the mother in his judgment on the notorious Douglas legitimacy case. Camden continued to play a leading role in such cases even after leaving the woolsack. Of long-term significance was his decisive 1774 opinion that authors had no perpetual literary copyright, since that would handicap the advance of knowledge, and he played a part in rejecting a 'Copyright Bill' of the same year. 
As a politician the new lord chancellor was soon exposed to criticism that questioned his role as a champion of liberty against state power. A parliamentary ban on the export of corn expired on 26 August 1766, and the combination of a poor harvest and the resumption of exports provoked widespread disorder through fears of high prices and of possible starvation. The Chatham ministry, acting through the privy council and with the support of Lord Chancellor Camden, decided upon a royal proclamation of 26 September prohibiting corn exports until after parliament met on 11 November. But this action breached the 1689 'Bill of Rights' provision that forbade the crown to suspend laws, and the matter was promptly raised in both houses of parliament. Camden found Chatham and himself accused of tyrannical behaviour. The plea of necessity, so contrary to Camden's own famous legal opinion of the previous year, did not allay parliamentary resentment, especially when Camden unwisely claimed that it had been only 'a forty days tyranny', and the ministry had to pacify criticism by the humiliation of an act of indemnity. 
Camden's reputation as a champion of liberty was soon further weakened over the American problem. Although the Chatham group ['see 'Chathamites] had opposed the 1766 'Declaratory Act' they now accepted it as the law, and sundry acts of colonial defiance hardened Chatham's attitude to America. Camden as usual followed his lead, his Lords speeches of 1767 urging a firm but prudent stance. On the key issue of colonial taxation the lord chancellor was a member of the cabinet that endorsed Charles Townshend's 1767 scheme of taxation by port duties, as meeting the supposed American distinction of internal and external taxes. Edmund Burke later recalled that 'Lord Camden... contended that these were external' and so acceptable to the colonies ('Correspondence', 1.280n.). Yet when in 1768 the American challenge to all parliamentary taxation showed that claim to have been a delusion, Camden promptly adopted the view that colonial taxation was 'inexpedient'. A letter of 4 October 1768 to the acting prime minister the duke of Grafton reeked of indecision: 'I do not know what to advise... I submit to the declaratory law, and have thought it my duty, upon that ground, as a minister, to exert my constitutional power to carry out the duty act into execution. But as a member of the legislature I cannot bring myself to advise violent measures.' The American crisis coincided with the final end of the Chatham ministry, and Camden promptly transferred his allegiance. 'You are my Pole Star, Lord Chatham being eclipsed. I had rather see your Grace at the head of government than any other man in the kingdom' ('Autobiography... of Grafton', 215-17). Since Chatham gave ill health as the reason for his resignation in October 1768, Camden and others of his followers could continue in office under the Grafton ministry without embarrassment. The reshuffled cabinet was finely balanced on America between advocates of coercion and conciliation. Camden was foremost among the latter, opposing hardline proposals of the American secretary, Hillsborough, and playing an important role in devising the tax concessions decided upon by the cabinet on 1 May 1769. He was deemed personally responsible for the public promise that no future taxes would be levied on the colonies, and he voted in the cabinet minority that vainly sought to include the tea duty with the other Townshend duties to be repealed. Those concessions sufficed to allay the colonial discontent in 1770, but the tea tax remained a hostage to fortune. 
By that time America had long been eclipsed as a political issue by the second Wilkes case of the Middlesex election. The return of John Wilkes for Middlesex on 28 March 1768 was a shock to the ministry. Camden, absent in Bath, commented to Grafton that 'the event is disagreeable, and unforeseen'. He was as aghast as his colleagues that 'a convict and an outlaw' could be elected. Although Camden stated that expulsion might be according to precedent he feared the consequences if Wilkes should then be re-elected, and advised that the best tactic would be to ignore him ('Autobiography... of Grafton', 199-200). When the ministry decided on expulsion Camden, whether through timidity, love of popularity, or knowledge of Chatham's opinion, parted company with Grafton on the issue, writing on 9 January 1769: 'Your Grace and I have unfortunately differed... I had rather pardon Wilkes than punish him. This is a political opinion independent of the case' (ibid., 201). Camden thereafter distanced himself from his colleagues on the matter, seemingly being absent from cabinet and silent in parliament. 
In July 1769 Camden's political allegiance reverted to Chatham, whose return then to health was marked by denunciation of ministerial policies on Wilkes and America. Only royal pressure kept Camden in office until the end of 1769, with the lord chancellor generally being considered as in open opposition. When the new parliamentary session began on 9 January 1770 Chatham moved in the Lords an opposition amendment to the address. The lord chancellor thereupon left the woolsack to break his self-imposed silence: 'I have often drooped and hung down my head in Council, and disapproved by my looks those steps which I knew my avowed opposition could not prevent... I now proclaim to the world, that I entirely coincide in the opinion expressed by my noble friend... respecting this unconstitutional and illegal vote of the House of Commons. (Cobbett, 'Parl. Hist.', 16.644)' Camden, on the advice of his friends, did not resign, but George III was scandalized that a lord chancellor should oppose the king's government, and insisted upon his dismissal, on 17 January 1770. 
Camden may well have expected a prompt return to that office if, as expected, the combined opposition parties of Chatham, Rockingham, and Grenville brought down the king's ministry: but although Grafton resigned, Lord North successfully took over, and Camden began twelve years of opposition to his administration. Since after early 1770 Chatham seldom attended parliament for some years, and Camden's relationship with his deputy, Lord Shelburne, was on the cool side, Camden often found himself playing a lone hand. Much of the parliamentary session of 1770-71 was taken up by a dispute over the law of libel, highlighted by a personal controversy between Camden and an old legal adversary, Lord Chief Justice Mansfield of king's bench. The issue was again whether a jury should decide whether an alleged libel was criminal or innocent or, as Mansfield maintained, merely the fact of publication: but a much-anticipated Lords confrontation between the two lawyers never took place. During the next two sessions Camden adopted a low political profile, although in 1772 he did oppose the provision of the 'Royal Family Marriage Act' extending it to all descendants of George II, pointing out the future impracticability of the clause. 
The American crisis of 1774 brought Camden back into the forefront of politics. When the Lords debated the 'Boston Port Bill' on 28 March he criticized as mischievous the tea duty that had led to the defiance of the Boston Tea Party. Although this view was consistent with his cabinet opinion of 1769 he was continually reminded afterwards that he had been lord chancellor when the tax was first introduced. In reply he maintained that he had personally never consented to any American taxation, resorting in 1776 to the quibble that he had been absent from the relevant cabinet meeting of 1767. The Chathamite group at first supported the coercive legislation of 1774, and on 11 May Camden sided with the ministry over the 'Massachusetts Government Bill'. 'I am too much of an Englishman not to pray for the success of this country let her cause be good or bad' (Lord Camden's speech in the House of Lords, BL, Add. MS 35912, fols. 221-2). But Chathamite fears that the 'Massachusetts Justice Bill' would provoke colonial resistance led Camden into opposing that measure on 18 May. Thereafter the Chathamite group opposed ministerial policy on America, and Camden played a full part in parliamentary debates. His major speech on America, timed at ninety minutes, was on 16 February 1775 against the 'New England Trade and Fishery Bill', designed to coerce the northern colonies by crippling their economy. The speech was widely thought to have been concocted with Benjamin Franklin for American consumption. The former Massachusetts governor Thomas Hutchinson scornfully commented: 'I never heard a greater flow of words, but my knowledge of facts in this controversy caused his misrepresentations and glosses to appear in a very strong light.' Camden admitted that both parliament and public opinion were behind government policy, which he condemned as being not a trade bill but 'a bill of war; it draws the sword, and in its necessary consequences plunges the empire into civil and unnatural war'. He quoted John Locke's opinion that resistance to tyranny was justified, and declared the military conquest of America, a free people in a vast country, to be impossible: 'My lords, it is evident that England must one day lose the dominion of America. It is impossible that this petty island can continue in dependence that mighty continent... To protract the time of separation to a distant day is all that can be hoped. (Simmons and Thomas, 5.540-52)' Later in the session Camden, responding to a petition from a minority of British settlers, on 17 May 1775 moved the repeal of the 'Quebec Act' as incompatible with the religion and constitution of Britain: it is not known whether he had opposed its passage in 1774, for no reports of relevant Lords debates survive. Camden now gave vent to deep prejudices, claiming the secret purpose was to create a popish army in Canada to subdue the protestant British colonies, an accusation so absurd as to be deemed unworthy of a reply. The motion was defeated by eighty-eight votes to twenty-eight after proxies had been called for. 
The outbreak of the American War of Independence reduced the Chathamite group to despair, and Camden withdrew from parliament for a while. 'America is lost and the war afoot' he wrote on 24 January 1776 to Grafton, whose personal friendship he had retained since their political split in 1770 and who had now quit government for opposition ('Autobiography... of Grafton', 279). The Chathamite line during the war was to advocate conciliation, deploring equally the idea of American independence and the attempt to prevent it. Camden spoke often and at length in parliament on these themes, although less so from 1778 after the death of Chatham and French intervention in the conflict. He remained in the forefront of the political battle, and his speech on 27 November 1781 was rated excellent even by political opponents. But, nearing seventy, Camden did not claim his old post of lord chancellor when Lord North's fall in March 1782 was followed by a coalition ministry of the two former opposition factions led by Rockingham and Shelburne. He became lord president of the council, a cabinet post of high rank and little work. In Lords debates Camden supported both the programme of economical reform, designed to reduce government corruption of parliament, and the legislative independence of Ireland. But the ministry was an uneasy alliance, and Prime Minister Rockingham's death on 1 July merely precipitated its collapse. Camden continued in office, as Shelburne's new administration essentially had a Chathamite base; but after Commons defeats in February 1783 over the American peace terms Camden advised Shelburne to resign, emphasizing the point by doing so himself. Camden went into active opposition to the ensuing Fox-North coalition ministry and, denouncing the measure as a patronage job, played a leading role in the Lords debate of 9 December 1783 on Fox's 'India Bill' that resulted in its defeat and the dismissal of the ministry. Camden then waived his claim to office to facilitate the ministerial arrangements of the younger William Pitt, son of his old political mentor. But a year later he accepted once more the post of lord president, which he retained until his death nearly a decade later, being raised to Earl Camden on 13 May 1786, with an additional peerage of Viscount Bayham so that his son could enjoy that courtesy title. Camden favoured Pitt's 'Parliamentary Reform Bill' of 1785, and defended in Lords debates his Irish trade proposals of the same year. Then, as his parliamentary career was beginning to fade away, Camden was suddenly propelled to the forefront of the political scene by the prevarication of Lord Chancellor Thurlow in the Regency crisis, when George III in November 1788 suffered the illness then thought to be insanity and subsequently diagnosed as porphyria. As lord president he conducted the privy council examination of the king's doctors. It was then Camden who, because of Thurlow's behaviour, had to put forward in the House of Lords the ministerial contention that parliament should appoint the regent, as against the opposition's claim for the immediate right of the prince of Wales, their ally, so to act. Camden's resolution to that effect was carried in the Lords by ninety-nine votes to sixty-six on 23 December 1788; and on 22 January 1789 he carried by ninety-four to sixty-eight another that the prince should be appointed regent only under restrictions, so as to avoid inconvenience if the king should recover. George III did so the next month, obviating the need for that arrangement. 
Thereafter Camden took little part in parliamentary debate, with the notable exception of his support for Fox's 'Libel Act' of 1792, that established as law one of his own long-cherished opinions: that the jury, not the judges, should decide whether or not a publication was a libel. In the Lords debate of 16 May 1792 on the second reading Camden argued that the issue was intention, and a jury should decide that, as it did in murder cases. Moving from legal to political argument, he then said that the people of England, represented by a jury, must take care of the liberty of the press, not judges, who were possibly susceptible to government influence. Camden's speech was deemed instrumental in securing a Lords majority of fifty-seven to thirty-two, despite the unanimous opinion of the judges to the contrary. Camden maintained a regular attendance at cabinet, which was sometimes held at his own house to allow for the ill health that led him to move from Camden Place in Kent to his town house in Hill Street, Berkeley Square, London, where he died on 18 April 1794. He was buried at Seal, Kent, near the Pratt family home of The Wildernesse. 
Legal historians have acclaimed Lord Camden as a great lord chancellor, Lord Campbell perhaps because he allowed his whig and even radical prejudices to sway his judicial opinions. Sir William Holdsworth, in his magisterial 'History of English Law', rated Camden as 'a great constitutional lawyer, a great legal historian, and a great common lawyer -- a worthy successor, by virtue both of his learning and his principles, of such predecessors as Coke and Hale and Holt' (Holdsworth, 'Eng. law', 10.672). But a cynical view more recently propounded is that Camden's legal opinions were delivered to accord with Chatham's political views. Certainly in parliament he faithfully followed Chatham's views on Wilkes and America, and a town in Maine, USA, was named after him in 1791. His loyalty to Chatham, too, was tempered by a propensity, evinced in 1761 and 1768, to cling to office after Chatham had resigned. Altogether he served fifteen years in cabinet, under five different premiers. 
In appearance Camden was a small, well-made man, with a pleasant face. He eschewed the vices of lechery and gambling characteristic of his time, but had a reputation for physical laziness and gluttony. His modes of relaxation were music, the theatre, romantic fiction, conversation, and food: that he was an epicure is shown by his scathing criticism of French cuisine, after a visit to France in 1783, for the use of sauces to disguise the poor quality of the meat. Camden, a younger son of a second marriage, died a man of wealth, derived from his legal career and his wife's inheritance, which included the area of London later known as Camden Town. 


@@@@@


doc= 22700


Pratt, Sir Charles (1768-1838), army officer, was reportedly of an Irish family which may have been distantly connected with the earls of Camden. After becoming an ensign on 14 April 1794 he was promoted lieutenant, 5th foot (later Northumberland Fusiliers), on 3 September 1795, captain on 28 February 1798, major on 25 August 1804, lieutenant-colonel on 25 March 1808, colonel on 4 June 1814, major-general on 27 May 1825, and lieutenant-general and colonel of the 95th foot (later the Derbyshire regiment) on 23 December 1834. 
Pratt commanded the 1st battalion of the 5th foot which embarked at Cork in May 1812, and landed at Lisbon to join the army under Wellington in the Peninsula. He took a prominent part in a long series of brilliant engagements. Both battalions of the 5th shared in the honours and triumphs of Salamanca on 22 July 1812; and he and his men further distinguished themselves at Vitoria on 21 June 1813. In 1814 he was present in command of the 1st battalion at the battles of Nivelle and Orthez, and at the crowning victory of the war, the battle of Toulouse. Pratt was made a CB. He remained with his regiment, serving in the army of occupation in France until 1818. In 1819 the 5th embarked for St Vincent. Pratt returned home in May 1825. In 1830 he was made KCB but declined command of the troops in Jamaica. He died (childless) of an apoplectic fit at Brighton on 25 October 1838. 


@@@@@


doc= 22701


Pratt, Sir John (1657-1725), judge, was born in Oxford, the son of Richard Pratt (1629-1692) and his first wife, Elizabeth Skaye (died before 1662). The family had been adversely affected by adherence to the royalist cause in the civil wars, Pratt's grandfather John Pratt (died 1673) being forced to sell Carswell Priory in Devon. Pratt was educated at Oxford at Magdalen Hall (1673) and Wadham College (1674); he graduated BA in 1676, became a fellow of Wadham in 1678, and proceeded MA in 1679. While at Oxford he became associated with the whig cause, being reproved in a local coffee house for proposing a toast 'to the confusion of all popish princes' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 2.497-8) and when challenged specifically citing the duke of York. He entered the Inner Temple in 1675 and was called to the bar in 1682. Henceforth he pursued a legal career, first in London, until he reputedly fell foul of Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys, and then in Exeter. On 17 November 1683 he married Elizabeth (died 1705), daughter and coheir of Henry Gregory, rector of Middleton Stoney, Oxfordshire. They had five sons and four daughters. He later married Elizabeth (died 1728), daughter of Hugh Wilson, vicar of Trefeglwys, Monmouthshire, and canon of Bangor. They had four sons and four daughters. 
Following the revolution of 1688 Pratt made steady progress in his profession, and was chosen by the attorney-general, Sir Thomas Trevor, as one of the crown's counsel before the House of Lords during the trial for high treason of the Jacobite conspirator Sir John Fenwick. The leading whig lawyer, Lord Keeper Sir John Somers, approached Sir George Treby, chief justice of common pleas: 'I know your Lordship has a favour for him, and therefore I hope you will send for him and advise him what he is to say, and how he is to manage himself in that place' ('Fitzherbert MSS', 44). Pratt duly appeared before the Lords in December, although he may have found the experience somewhat daunting as in 1702 Bishop Nicolson recollected him 'swooning' during the trial. Thenceforth Pratt appeared intermittently as counsel before the Lords, most notably in June 1698 against the passage of the bill settling the trade to the East Indies, until 1704 when his appearances began to increase markedly. His legal talent was recognized on 1 October 1700 when he was made a serjeant-at-law. Pratt made his first significant land purchase, the estate at Wildernesse (formerly Stidulfe's Place), Kent, which was sold pursuant to a private act passed in 1704. By 1705 his reputation was such that he was grouped among the 'great counsel' ('Portland MSS', 4.176). On 3 December 1708 he appeared before the Commons as counsel for the petitioners in the case of the right of the eldest sons of Scottish representative peers to sit in the Commons. With an enhanced profile among the Scots in the following January he was counsel before the Lords over the objection made to the duke of Dover's (Queensberry) voting in the elections for Scottish representative peers. On 17 January 1710 the House of Lords approved Pratt's appointment as counsel for the outspoken tory cleric Dr Henry Sacheverell, who was being impeached by the Commons, but one week later Pratt withdrew from the case owing to Sacheverell's determination to milk the situation for the political advantage of the tories. Pratt's withdrawal may have hindered his chances of securing a seat at Marlborough in the general election held in the following autumn. 
In December 1711 Pratt was again embroiled as counsel in a matter of great significance for the Scots: the eligibility of the duke of Hamilton to sit in the Lords by virtue of his patent as duke of Brandon. Although Bishop Burnet described him as 'one of the most able advocates of that time', Pratt was content to play second fiddle to Sir Thomas Powys in arguing Hamilton's case. On 28 December 1711 Pratt was elected to parliament in a by-election for Midhurst, a seat he owed to the whiggish duke of Somerset. Pratt's career in the Commons was low key, although in January 1712 he exerted himself in defence of the duke of Marlborough who was under attack for corruption. Indeed, in April it was rumoured that should Marlborough be prosecuted through the courts then Pratt would be one of his counsel. Pratt contributed to the whig cause outside the Commons in February 1713 when he joined an array of distinguished whig lawyers in the defence of the journalist George Ridpath for articles which appeared in the 'Flying Post'. Pratt added to his landed estates in 1714, as a result of a private act authorizing the sale of Bayham Priory on the Sussex-Kent border. 
The Hanoverian succession saw a resurgence in Pratt's fortunes. His knighthood (11 October 1714) was the precursor of his appointment as a justice of king's bench (20 November). In April-May 1718 he served for twenty-five days as a commissioner of the great seal in the hiatus following Lord Cowper's resignation, and following Parker's assumption of the chancellorship he succeeded him as lord chief justice (19 May 1718). He became a privy councillor on 9 October 1718. Pratt's first significant case concerned the claim by George I to control the education and marriage of members of the royal family. Pratt found that as the crown had an undoubted right in respect of marriage it 'is a natural and necessary consequence' that it also had the care of their education ('State trials', 15.1216). In 1721 Pratt stepped into the breach following the resignation of John Aislabie as chancellor of the exchequer following the South Sea Bubble crisis, and held the office for longer than the usual period of a few days. In November 1722 he presided over the trial for treason of Christopher Layer, acquiring a certain reputation for harshness in keeping the prisoner in chains. Indeed, upon sentencing Layer he thought the accused's crimes even more heinous because of his legal training, which ought to have brought him to a proper understanding of 'the excellency of our happy constitution and government' (ibid., 16.320). Pratt also presided over the cause between Richard Bentley and Cambridge University, which saw him resist pressure from the whig ministry to protect one of Bentley's whig antagonists, John Colbatch. Pratt died on 24 February 1725 at his house in Ormond Street, London, death depriving him of the chancellorship which Parker was soon to relinquish. His heir was John, the fourth son from his first marriage. Charles Pratt, his son from his second marriage, became lord chancellor and was created Lord Camden. Jane, his daughter from his second marriage, married Nicholas Hardinge, while Anna Maria, the third daughter of this marriage, married Thomas Barrett Lennard, sixteenth Lord Dacre. 


@@@@@


doc= 22702


Pratt, John (1772-1855), organist, the son of Jonas Pratt, a music-seller and teacher, was born at Cambridge. In 1780 he was admitted as chorister of King's College, Cambridge, and studied under John Randall, whom he succeeded as organist to the college in 1799. In the same year he was appointed organist to Cambridge University, and in 1813 he held the same post at St Peter's College, Cambridge. Pratt composed sacred music, including a morning and evening service, which he chose not to publish. He made compilations for the use of choirs in college chapels, and published in 1810 'A Selection of Ancient and Modern Psalm Tunes', which became widely known and generally used, principally in the form in which it was republished, about 1820, under the title 'Psalmodia Cantabrigiensis'. His other works included 'A collection of anthems in score selected from the works of Handel, Haydn, Mozart, Clari, Leo, and Carissimi', published about 1825, and 'Four double chants, the responses to the commandments as performed at King's College, Cambridge'. Pratt retired many years before he died, at Belmont Place, Cambridge, on 9 March 1855, in his eighty-fourth year. 


@@@@@


doc= 22703


Pratt, John Burnett (1799-1869), Scottish Episcopal clergyman and antiquary, born at Cairnbanno, New Deer, Aberdeenshire, was the son of a working tradesman. After graduating MA at Aberdeen University he took orders in the Scottish Episcopal church, and obtained a living at Stuartfield in 1821. In 1825 he was elected to St James's Church, Cruden, Aberdeenshire, where he remained until his death. He was also examining chaplain to the bishop of Aberdeen and domestic chaplain to the earl of Erroll. Aberdeen University conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD in 1865. Pratt edited 'The Communion Office for the Use of the Church of Scotland' (1866), and, in addition to a volume of sermons, published 'The Old Paths, where is the Good Way' (3rd edn, 1840), 'Buchan' (1858), which embodied the results of many years of antiquarian and topographical research in the district, and 'The Druids' (1861); his 'Letters on the Scandinavian Churches, their Doctrine, Worship, and Polity' (1865) reflected an unusual interest. Pratt died at the parsonage, Cruden, on 20 March 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 22704


Pratt, John Henry (bap. 1809, d. 1871), Church of England clergyman and mathematician, was baptized on 30 June 1809 at St Mary Woolnoth, London, one of two sons of Josiah Pratt (1768-1844), Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Elizabeth, formerly Jowett. He was educated at Oakham School, Rutland, and entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1829, graduating BA in 1833 as third wrangler. He was elected to a fellowship, and proceeded MA in 1836. After taking orders he was appointed through the influence of Daniel Wilson, bishop of Calcutta, a chaplain of the East India Company in 1838. He became Wilson's domestic chaplain and in 1850 archdeacon of Calcutta. He married at Christ Church, Bhagalpur, on 6 March 1850, Hannah Mariah Brown, daughter of G. F. Brown of the Bengal civil service. 
While at Cambridge Pratt had been concerned with the figure of the earth as an oblate spheroid; his 'Mathematical Principles of Mechanical Philosophy' was published in 1836 (and expanded in 1860 as 'A Treatise on Attractions, Laplace's Functions, and the Figure of the Earth'). Taking account of the Newtonian force of attraction, and local gravitation anomalies caused by irregularities in the crust, he had produced values for the equatorial and polar diameters of the earth which were close to those accepted today. In 1847 George Everest, head of the great Indian survey, published results of a measurement of a meridian arc in which he noted a discrepancy of 5.236 seconds of arc between the value given by astronomical methods and that derived from the triangulation surveys. Everest believed the discrepancy to arise from errors of measurement, but Pratt decided to investigate the matter, and in 1854 sent a long letter to the Royal Society outlining his ideas and the method he had followed to resolve the discrepancy. He began by considering that the plumb-bobs of the astronomical and geodetic instruments were deflected from the vertical by the gravitational attraction of the mass of the nearby Himalaya mountains, but that this would disturb the vertical astronomical observations more than the horizontal readings for the triangulation. He then calculated the mass of the Himalayas, assuming a density similar to that estimated in a similar investigation in 1772 on Mount Schiehallion in Scotland, and arrived at a figure of 15.885 seconds of arc -- a far larger discrepancy than the Indian survey had recorded. Even when he reduced his estimates for the density and mass of the Himalayas, Pratt could not reconcile his answers with Everest's figure, and he could only suppose that the Indian arc was in some way unusual. 
The problem was then taken up by George Biddell Airy, astronomer royal, who considered the relative densities of an earth whose thin crust overlay a denser fluid interior. He concluded that any mountainous mass would sink through such a crust, unless it was underlain by a balancing light mass, 'like a raft floating on water' (Greene, 241), and so proposed the 'roots of mountains' hypothesis, also known as 'Airy isostasy'. In 1859 Pratt published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' his own further thoughts on this subject, now known as the hypothesis of uniform depth of compensation, or 'Pratt isostasy'. He assumed a crust between 800 and 1000 miles thick, undergoing secular cooling, and overlaying a substratum of the same material which was less dense because it was hotter. He considered that the crust would be most depressed in the coolest regions, and that the uplands represented the warmer material. Pratt had no way of testing this hypothesis, but eventually he decided that the discrepancy was not caused by the Himalayas but by the plumb-bobs of the apparatus being deflected at coastal stations by anomalously high density under the adjacent oceans. There the matter rested for some years, being revived only after Pratt's death and broadly confirmed by advances in geophysical techniques. 
Pratt was a conscientious pastor, 'one of the ablest theologians and most devoted divines... that England ever sent to India... a quiet earnest worker, solitary in his habits... a wise counsellor... and an ardent, though undemonstrative contraversialist' according to his 'Times' obituarist. He was elected FRS in 1866. He died of cholera on 28 December 1871, while on a visitation to Ghazipur, where he was buried the following day. Although his paper of 1855 has been used to justify his reputation as 'the father of isostasy', this concept is not mentioned until 1859, following the hypothesis of Airy, who himself took no further interest in the subject. 


@@@@@


doc= 22705


Pratt, John Jeffreys, first Marquess Camden (1759-1840), politician, was born on 11 February 1759 at 34 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, and baptized on 13 March, the eldest child and only son of Charles Pratt, first Earl Camden (1714-1794), politician and judge, of Camden Place, Chislehurst, Kent, and Elizabeth (died 1779), daughter and heir of Nicholas Jeffreys of Brecon Priory, Brecknockshire. 
The Hon. John Pratt, as he was known after his father became Baron Camden in 1765, was educated by the Revd Thomas Powys, later dean of Canterbury, at Fawley, Buckinghamshire, and may also have attended Eton College about 1773. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on 11 November 1776 and graduated MA three years later. Among his university friends was William Pitt the younger, the second son of his father's closest political associate. In March 1779 Pratt became an ensign in the West Kent militia, and was promoted lieutenant in the following May, but he resigned his commission in June 1782. On 21 May 1780 he succeeded to one of the tellerships of the exchequer, a lucrative sinecure, the reversion to which had been secured for him fourteen years earlier by Camden on the latter's resignation as chief justice of common pleas. 
Pratt, who supported the aims of the association movement at the Kent county meeting on 22 April 1780 and joined Brooks's Club in May, was returned to parliament as MP for Bath, where his father had a substantial interest, at the general election later that year. A young man about town, he initially took little interest in politics and failed to live up to expectations in the Commons. However, on 12 June 1781 he spoke against the war with the American colonies, and on 6 May 1782 for economies in the management of the exchequer, despite his own vested interest. Having voted regularly with the opposition to Lord North's administration, in July 1782 he was appointed a lord of the Admiralty in Lord Shelburne's ministry, in which his father served as lord president. He voted with his colleagues in favour of the peace preliminaries on 17 February 1783 and left office with them on the accession of the Fox-North coalition. He voted for Pitt's parliamentary reform motion on 7 May and against Fox's 'India Bill' on 27 November 1783. Like Camden he resumed his former office on the appointment of Pitt as prime minister in December 1783. 
On 31 December 1785, at Lord Lucan's house in Charles Street, Berkeley Square, Westminster, he married Frances (1766-1829), daughter and heir of William Molesworth of Wembury, Devon, and Anne Elizabeth Smith. Owing his position mostly to his connection with Pitt, Viscount Bayham (as he was styled from 1786) remained a solid and popular, if undistinguished and almost entirely silent, junior minister. He left the Admiralty to be a lord of the Treasury in August 1789, and was sworn of the privy council on 21 June 1793 on being named a member of the Board of Trade. He succeeded his father as second Earl Camden on 18 April 1794 and inherited estates in Kent, including Wildernesse, near Sevenoaks, where he had lived since his marriage. No longer MP for Bath, he followed his father as recorder of the borough (until 1835) and for many years exercised the electoral patronage over one of its seats. He relinquished his position in the government but continued to give it his support and, having been introduced to the House of Lords on 13 May, he seconded the address of thanks there on 30 December 1794. 
Camden, whom Pitt had previously approached with a view to taking on the role, was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland on 11 March 1795. His tenure in Dublin was more significant for the events that immediately preceded and followed it than for the uninspired application during it of the twin policies of concession and repression, which as usual characterized British attitudes towards its nearest colony. Yet the period also witnessed developments of vital importance for the future of the sister kingdom. Aged just thirty-six and lacking appropriate experience for so demanding a position as viceroy, Camden nevertheless impressed the ascendancy with his character, being described by Lord Charlemont as 'a plain, unaffected, good humoured man, of pleasing conversation and conciliatory address' ('Charlemont MSS', 2.264). He displayed considerable assiduity in fulfilling his functions, as well as a good deal of personal bravery, not least during the riot that greeted his arrival in Ireland on 31 March, when he was admitted to the privy council there. But, taking over at a difficult time, his talents were insufficient for the task confronting him and he was ill served both by the largely distracted ministry in London and by the government, or 'Castle', interest in Dublin. 
During his short administration Camden's predecessor, Earl Fitzwilliam, who was drawn from the whig contingent of Pitt's wartime coalition, had raised hopeless expectations among opposition politicians and leading representatives of the majority Catholic population. As instructed by George III and Pitt, Camden reversed Fitzwilliam's ill-advised changes, reassuring the protestant elite by reinstating the so-called Irish cabinet of senior office-holders, upon whom he was thereafter largely dependent. As expected, and believing that the times made any such steps impracticable, he also crushed the attempt to enable Catholics to sit in parliament and to hold high office, Henry Grattan's motion being defeated in the Irish Commons by 155 votes to 84 on 5 May 1795. In line with the long-term policy of securing the loyalty of the Catholic priesthood, as well as in compensation for the defeat of Catholic emancipation, he oversaw the opening of St Patrick's College, Maynooth, later that year and laid the foundation stone of its new building on 20 April 1796. 
Yet rural violence continued, with the sectarian struggle reaching a new peak on 21 September 1795, when the battle of the Diamond, near Loughgall, in co. Armagh, between Catholic Defenders and protestant Peep o'Day Boys led to the formation of the Orange Order. The arming of the secret society of United Irishmen, which except in the north was mainly Catholic in composition, made it necessary to pass the 'Insurrection Act' (24 March 1796) and the 'Habeas Corpus Suspension Act' (26 October), the main legislative measures in an extensive programme of repression. In addition, despite his own reservations, Camden introduced late in that year a new system for raising county yeomanry corps; largely protestant in character, these were intended for civilian peacekeeping duties as well as national defence. The abortive attempt to land French forces, accompanied by the revolutionary Theobald Wolfe Tone, at Bantry Bay in December 1796 was the most significant invasion scare during Camden's time in Ireland. The delicate European situation and the fear of domestic unrest in Britain strengthened the hand of those demanding firm action, and in March 1797 he ordered the forcible disarming of the peasantry in Ulster. However, the general election passed off peacefully that summer and on 9 January 1798 he opened what proved to be the last Irish parliament until the early twentieth century. 
Alarmed at the extent of the outrages that swept Ireland at the start of 1798, Camden was hesitant to act on the basis of conflicting intelligence reports and before damning legal proof of treasonable activity could be ascertained. However, bowing to pressure from Dublin Castle he closed down the United Irishmen's newspaper, 'The Press', ordered the arrest of the leaders of its Leinster directory in Dublin on 12 March, and issued a proclamation declaring martial law on the 30th. Critical of the conduct of the Irish gentry and magistracy -- by turns timid and vindictive -- his sentiments coincided with the view of the commander of British forces in Ireland, Sir Ralph Abercromby: that firm but disciplined measures of pacification were preferable to acts of exemplary harshness. But he could not long protect Abercromby from the furore that greeted his condemnation of the Irish army's lack of discipline, and he ultimately had little control over the excesses subsequently meted out in the name of the king's government. 
In short Camden came across as irresolute in a crisis; in a remark that was typical of the criticisms voiced against him the southern magnate Lord Shannon wrote to his son on 11 April that 'Things look as bad as possible, and his Excellency very undecided, where vigour and decision are so necessary' ('Shannon's Letters', 81). Although the arrest on 19 May of Lord Edward Fitzgerald (whose family blamed Camden for his death shortly afterwards) crippled the attempted full-scale uprising, a limited one began in earnest on the night of 23-4 May. There followed one of the most unsavoury episodes in Irish history, in which sporadic fighting and bloodthirsty outrages on both sides marked an unpredictable contest between disorganized rebels and an almost equally disorderly force of loyalists and semi-professional soldiers. Bewildered and despondent, Camden applied urgently for reinforcements from England, and more than once offered to resign so as to enable General Cornwallis to become joint viceroy and commander-in-chief. On Camden's repeating his offer the king agreed to the recall of the 'too much agitated' lord lieutenant ('Later Correspondence of George III', 3.1755). Cornwallis's strong military grip and steady assertion of undivided political authority rapidly restored order after his succeeding Camden on 20 June 1798. 
Among Irish commentators there was some sympathy for Camden, who regretted that he had departed before his conduct could be vindicated by the ending of the uprising. As Sir Jonah Barrington recollected: 'Earl Camden was of a high mind, and of unblemished reputation: his principles were good, but his talent was not eminent; -- he always intended right, but was repeatedly led to do wrong; he wished to govern with moderation, but he was driven by his council into most violent proceedings. (Barrington, 2.244-5)' By contrast Anglo-Irish loyalist opinion was especially hostile in its judgement. The author of a popular pamphlet, 'Considerations of the Situation to which Ireland is Reduced', blamed him for tergiversation, observing that: 'though some men thought a system of 'coercion' more likely to succeed than a system of 'concession'; -- and some again gave a preference to the latter; yet, that there was one mode of proceeding which by all honest men of every party was equally condemned, and that was a system which, by 'weakly' attempting a mixture of both, became neither 'coercion' nor 'concession'. (p. 28)' In essence, however, Camden's role was that of a largely powerless agent faced with tumultuous political challenges, and his influence probably did little either to provoke or to contain the uprising. Indeed it could be argued that his most important legacy as lord lieutenant was in bringing to the fore -- first as private secretary and then as acting replacement chief secretary to the ailing Thomas Pelham -- his sister's brilliant young stepson, Viscount Castlereagh. Anxious not to appear a scapegoat for the Irish rising Camden, on his return to England, secured a seat in the cabinet (without portfolio) and the promise of a Garter (which he was awarded on 14 August 1799), while also letting it be known that he had refused a marquessate. Subject to vociferous criticisms in the British parliament he defended his record in the Lords on 19 March 1799, when he argued that he was not responsible for the murderous atrocities, many of which occurred after the end of his mandate. 
Camden was a firm supporter of the plan for legislative union between Britain and Ireland that Pitt had originated at the time of the uprising and praised it in parliament on 8 May 1800. Cautiously in favour of Catholic emancipation, he resigned from office with Pitt in the following February on George III's refusal to countenance such a policy, and privately blamed the outgoing prime minister for having failed to prepare the ground with the king well in advance of the union settlement. Following his chief's line of not opposing Henry Addington's administration outright he stated, in the Lords on 13 May 1802, that he approved the principle but not the details of the peace preliminaries. He returned to office with Pitt in May 1804 and was made secretary of state for war and the colonies, an office in which he was little more than a cipher, as the premier handled the most important matters. He moved the second reading of the 'Additional Forces Bill' on 24 June 1804 and, among other departmental interventions, commented on the state of the national defences on 15 February and 8 March 1805. On 10 May of that year he remarked that the times were not apposite for granting Catholic relief. 
Camden succeeded his uncle Thomas Pratt to the family estate of Bayham Abbey, on the Kent and Sussex border, in 1805, and this became his principal residence. Always declining to return to Ireland, he served from July 1805 to February 1806 in the largely decorative office of lord president of the council. Known as Lord Chuckle (Gray, 96), he was not reckoned among the chiefs of the remaining Pittites but opposed the Grenville ministry, defending the 'Additional Forces Act' on 20 May 1806. In March 1807 he resumed the lord presidency under the duke of Portland, and he continued occasionally to speak for the government in the House of Lords. He was named lord lieutenant and custos rotulorum of Kent in June 1808. An indefatigable intriguer, he was invariably privy to the negotiations that attended the rise and fall of statesmen and administrations, and among his papers can be found many of the memoranda and letters in which he provided self-justificatory accounts of his conduct on these occasions. 
The most disgraceful affair in which Camden was implicated was the proposed reshuffle that culminated in the duel of 1809 between Castlereagh and his ambitious rival, George Canning. With less excuse than his cabinet colleagues, given what had hitherto been his close connection with Castlereagh, he connived at the ministerial deceit practised upon his nephew, who was soon to be ousted. When the brouhaha became generally known it was to Camden that Canning addressed his public explanation in the form of 'A Letter', published in 'The Times' on 28 November 1809 and then in pamphlet form. The affair exposed Camden as a liability, and Canning, ever an opponent, in that year described him, along with Lord Westmorland, as 'useless lumber' in the ministry ('Diary and Correspondence', 2.180). However, Camden retained his post under Spencer Perceval from that time until April 1812, and was a minister without portfolio in Lord Liverpool's cabinet from then until the close of the year. He retired from high office with the consolation of a promotion in the peerage, being made Marquess Camden on 7 September 1812. 
Camden expressed himself cautiously in favour of granting Catholic emancipation on 1 July 1812. From that time onwards he spoke rarely in parliament but backed Liverpool's tory government, applauding the 'Habeas Corpus Suspension Bill' on 19 June 1817 and the 'Irish Insurrection Bill' on 9 February 1822. Reiterating his former views on the Catholic question he again supported it on 17 May 1825 and, having advocated concessions at the Kent county meeting on 24 October 1828, he spoke and voted for it in the house on 10 April 1829. He divided against the Grey ministry's parliamentary reform bills on 7 October 1831 and 13 April 1832, and thereafter continued to act with the duke of Wellington's Conservative opposition in parliament. On 14 August 1833 he was appointed one of the original members of the judicial committee of the privy council. Having received a doctorate of laws from Cambridge in 1832 he became chancellor of the university on 12 December 1834, and many of his later parliamentary interventions were on the subject of higher education. 
Camden's tellership had long been the object of radical condemnation, particularly because of its inflated wartime profits, which rose ten-fold from about $2500 in 1782 to about $24,000 in 1808. However, he had voluntarily contributed $7000 a year in taxes between 1798 and 1802 and had remitted a third of the revenues from 1812 until the end of the war in 1815. On 11 February 1817 Castlereagh told the Commons that his uncle had decided to renounce all the revenue paid to him except for a salary of $2500 a year, and this arrangement was given statutory form in Marquess Camden's 'Tellership Act' of 1819 (59 Geo. III c. 43). He was thanked by parliament on 21 May 1819 for this 'large sacrifice of public fortune to the service of his country' ('JHC') and received numerous public accolades for his munificent gesture. Because of the extraordinary size of his contribution, which amounted to just under $245,000 in 1834, he was exempted (by clause 30) from the abolition of the office under the 'Exchequer Receipt Act' of 1834 (4 and 5 Wm. IV c. 15), and his income from the now defunct office finally lapsed only on his death. 
Camden, who was elected FSA in 1802, held numerous minor and charitable offices. In 1805 he was chosen an elder brother of Trinity House, of which he was master three times (1809-16, 1828-9, and 1831-7). He was appointed a governor of Charterhouse in 1811, a director of Greenwich Hospital in 1815, and a trustee of the British Museum in 1826. As well as seeing service in various troops of the Kent yeomanry during the French revolutionary and Napoleonic wars he was colonel of the West Kent militia from 1827 to 1832. Remembered for his financial beneficence, Camden died at Wildernesse on 8 October 1840 and was buried in nearby Seal church on 17 October. In addition to a surviving daughter (two others predeceased him) he left an only son, George Charles Pratt (1799-1866), who inherited the marquessate and estates in Kent and elsewhere, as well as the bulk of personal wealth sworn under $40,000, but failed to fulfil his father's ambitions for him in national politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 22706


Pratt, John Tidd (1797-1870), barrister and civil servant, was born in London on 13 December 1797, the second son of John Pratt, surgeon, of Kensington. He was admitted a student at the Inner Temple in 1819 and called to the bar in 1824. He married on 20 May 1821 Anne, daughter of Major Thomas Campbell. 
In 1828 Tidd Pratt was appointed as consulting barrister to the national debt commissioners and an act of that year gave him the duty of certifying the rules of savings banks, which hitherto had simply been submitted to quarter sessions. The following year legislation added to his duties that of certifying the rules of friendly societies, along with the task of receiving their returns of sickness and mortality quinquennially. In subsequent years the certification of the rules of loan societies (1835), building societies (1836), and societies for the pursuit of literature, science, and the fine arts were also added to Tidd Pratt's responsibilities. Because of this widening of his duties, from 1846 he was remunerated by salary instead of through fees, and provision was made for the employment of clerks and the running of a permanent office. This enabled copies of registered rules, returns, and the like to be held centrally instead of being deposited only with local justices of the peace. By this time arrangements had to be made for the keeping of about 30,000 sets of rules and amendments. The scope of his duties continued to increase, the most important later addition being the registration of industrial and provident (or co-operative) societies from 1852. 
The enormous expansion of Tidd Pratt's official functions reflected growing national needs, but the way in which these were met -- essentially the shape and form of a new government department -- was largely due to the personality, vigour, and influence of the man himself. He wrote extensively on the need for good management of thrift organizations. An act of 1855 required the registrar of friendly societies to submit an annual report to parliament, and this set of reports served to provide not only a mass of official statistics but also a good deal of advice on the prudent conduct of friendly and other societies. The need for the collection, analysis, and understanding of the statistical basis for reliable sickness and life insurance among working people was often little understood among friendly society members. Tidd Pratt did much to encourage improvement and the greater reliability of clubs as insurers. He campaigned against such social habits as the payment of liquid rent for the hire of club rooms at public houses -- in other words a club's agreeing to buy a quantity of beer in return for the use of a private room. 
The conduct of burial societies, some of them very large, was a particular cause of concern to him, for, while they carried on their activities registered as friendly societies, they were often controlled by an 'irresponsible board over which the secretary usually reigns supreme'. Tidd Pratt believed that such organizations were designed for the benefit of the managers and collectors, not for the members, and that special legislation was needed to control them. The affiliated orders, the Oddfellows, Foresters, and the like, which grew rapidly from the middle of the nineteenth century, felt that they had no friend in Tidd Pratt. Legislation did not in his time permit the registration of affiliated orders as such but treated each local lodge or court as the object of registration. This led to problems which he did little to try to ease and certainly he did not seek to have the law amended. 
After Tidd Pratt's forty-one years of public service, his death in 1870 inevitably raised the question of the future shape and form of an office which had been so closely associated with one man's personality and attitudes. A royal commission was appointed which reported in 1874. Describing Tidd Pratt as 'minister of self-help to the whole of the industrious classes' (Royal Commission on Friendly Societies, 'Fourth Report', C 961, Appendix 1.22), it pointed out that by the middle years of the nineteenth century whether a man joined a savings bank, a friendly society, or a trade union, shopped at a co-operative store or bought his house through a building society, Tidd Pratt's certificate would follow him. The legislation based on the report built on and extended the work he had accomplished and formed the basis for the state's relationship with self-help organizations well into the twentieth century. 
Tidd Pratt was the author of numerous legal manuals, and published on the law relating to savings banks (1828), friendly societies (1829), the poor (1833), and highways (1835). Active in London's cultural life, he was one of the founders of the Reform Club, a trustee of the Soane Museum, and a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature and of the Society of Antiquaries. The Institute of Actuaries made him an honorary fellow. He died at his home, 29 Abingdon Street, Westminster, on 9 January 1870. His wife died on 25 November 1875. Their eldest son, William Tidd Pratt (1823-1867), a barrister, published on the law of friendly societies, building societies, and income tax. Another son, Charles Pallmer Tidd Pratt (1829-1886), vicar of Bracknell, gave evidence to the 1874 commission. A daughter, Maria, married the theologian M. F. Sadler. 


@@@@@


doc= 22707


Pratt, Josiah (1768-1844), Church of England clergyman, second son of Josiah Pratt, a Birmingham manufacturer, was born at Birmingham on 21 December 1768. His parents were pious evangelicals. With his two younger brothers, Isaac and Henry, Josiah was educated at Barr House School, 6 miles from Birmingham. When he was twelve years old his father took him into his business, but his religious impressions deepened, and at the age of seventeen he obtained his father's permission to enter holy orders. After some private tuition, he matriculated on 28 June 1789 from St Edmund Hall, Oxford, at that time the only stronghold of evangelicalism at the university. His college tutor was Isaac Crouch, a leading evangelical, with whom he formed a lifelong friendship. He graduated BA and was ordained deacon in 1792, and became assistant curate to William Jesse, rector of Dowles, near Bewdley on the borders of Shropshire and Worcestershire. He remained at Dowles until 1795, when, on receiving priest's orders, he became assistant minister under Richard Cecil, the evangelical minister of St John's Chapel, Bedford Row, London. 
On 7 September 1797 Pratt married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of John Jowett of Newington, and settled in London, at 22 Doughty Street. There he received pupils, among them being Daniel Wilson, afterwards bishop of Calcutta, with whom he maintained a close friendship. In 1799, at a meeting of the Eclectic Society, which met in the vestry of St John's Chapel, he argued that a periodical publication would signally serve the interests of religion. A pilot edition, the first number of the 'Christian Observer', appeared in January 1802 under his editorship. In about six weeks he resigned the editorship to Zachary Macaulay. 
Pratt had also taken part in those meetings of the Eclectic (18 March and 12 April 1799) at which the Church Missionary Society was formulated. On 8 December 1802 he was elected secretary of the missionary society in succession to Thomas Scott. He filled the office, which became the chief occupation of his life, for more than twenty-one years, and displayed a rare tact and business capacity in the performance of his duties. From 1813 to 1815 he travelled through England, successfully pleading the cause of the society. He also took a leading part in the establishment in London of the seminary at Islington for the training of missionaries, which was projected in 1822 and opened by him in 1825. At last, on 23 April 1824, he resigned his arduous post to Edward Bickersteth, the assistant secretary. Bickersteth was also an evangelical, and Pratt believed that the society should be kept in evangelical hands. Pratt devised, and for some time conducted, the 'Missionary Register', of which the first number appeared in January 1813. 
Pratt likewise helped to form the British and Foreign Bible Society in 1804; he was one of the original committee, and was its first Church of England secretary, but he soon retired in favour of John Owen (1766-1822). In 1811 he was elected a life-governor, and in 1812 he helped to frame the rules for the organization of auxiliary and branch societies, and of 'Bible' associations. 
In 1804 Pratt ceased to be assistant to Richard Cecil, and became a lecturer at St Mary Woolnoth, in Lombard Street. Here John Newton, another evangelical leader, whose health was failing, was rector. Next year he became Newton's regular assistant curate. In 1804 he also undertook two other lectureships: the evening lecture at Spitalfields church, and the Lady Campden lecture at St Lawrence Jewry. In 1810 he was made by Hastings Wheler, the proprietor, incumbent of the chapel of Sir George Wheler, or 'Wheler Chapel', in Spital Square, which had been shut up for some time. For sixteen years he enjoyed this humble preferment. He established in connection with it the Spitalfields Benevolent Society, and among his hearers were Samuel Hoare of Hampstead, friend of the Wordsworths, and Thomas Fowell Buxton. At Pratt's suggestion Buxton left the Society of Friends, and was baptized into the Church of England. 
Pratt's interest in church affairs abroad was always keen. He worked actively in promoting an ecclesiastical establishment in India, stimulating Dr Claudius Buchanan to renew his efforts and urging the Church Missionary Society to give practical aid when Dr Thomas Fanshaw Middleton was appointed bishop of Calcutta. At a time when there was considerable controversy over the powers of bishops in relation to the Colonial Missionary Society, Pratt defended episcopacy even though, unlike some of his fellow evangelicals, he did not believe that it was absolutely necessary. In 1820 Pratt corresponded with two American bishops (Dr Griswold and Dr White), and warmly welcomed Dr Philander Chase, bishop of Ohio, on his visit to England; and it was largely through his efforts that an American missionary society was established. He similarly took the warmest interest in the mission of his brother-in-law, William Jowett (1787-1855), to Malta and the Levant, and may be regarded as founder, in conjunction with Dr Buchanan, of the Malta mission. 
In 1826, when Pratt was fifty-eight, he at last became a beneficed clergyman. The parishioners of St Stephen's, Coleman Street, who had the privilege of electing their own vicar, had chosen him as early as 1823. But legal difficulties had arisen, and were not overcome for three years. Pratt retained his lectureship at St Mary Woolnoth until 1831. He established various Christian and benevolent institutions in St Stephen's parish, showed his opposition to the Oxford Movement, and took part in the formation of the Church Pastoral Aid Society. To the last Pratt remained a prominent leader of the evangelicals. Alexander Knox described a meeting with him at Hannah More's, and called him 'a serious, well-bred, well-informed gentleman, an intimate friend of Mrs. More's and Mr. Wilberforce's'. By the word 'serious' Knox disclaims meaning 'disconsolate or gloomy' ('Remains of Alexander Knox', 4.68). 
In spite of his many and varied occupations, Pratt found time for literary work. In 1797 he issued 'A Prospectus, with Specimens, of a New Polyglot Bible for the Use of English Students', a scheme for popularizing the labours of Brian Walton. The 'British Critic' attacked him for presuming to trespass on that scholar's province. Pratt published his 'Vindication'; but the scheme fell through. He edited the works of Bishop Hall (10 vols., 1808), of Bishop Hopkins (4 vols., 1809), Cecil's 'Remains' (1810), and Cecil's 'Works' (4 vols., 1811). He also published 'A Collection of Psalms and Hymns', 750 in number, for the use of his parishioners in public worship, of which no fewer than 52,000 copies were sold. 
Pratt died in London on 10 October 1844, and was buried in 'the vicars' vault' in the church of St Stephen, Coleman Street. He had two sons; Josiah was his successor at St Stephen's, and John Henry Pratt became a chaplain to the East India Company. 


@@@@@


doc= 22708


Pratt, Sir Roger (bap. 1620, d. 1685), architect, was baptized on 2 November 1620, at Marsworth, Buckinghamshire, the son of the lawyer Gregory Pratt (died 1640) and his wife, Theodosia West ('nee' Tyrell). He was the nephew of Francis, the holder of the family seat at Ryston, near Downham, Norfolk. He was educated at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 12 May 1637, and entered the Inner Temple in 1639. His father died in 1640, leaving him an estate which produced a small income which enabled him to travel from 1643 until 1649 in France, Italy (where he met John Evelyn, the diarist), Flanders, and the Netherlands, avoiding the civil war and to 'give myself some convenient education' (Gunther, 3). Although he matriculated in the faculty of law at Padua in 1645 and upon his return to Britain kept chambers at the Inner Temple until 1672, his travels laid the foundation not for a legal but for an architectural career, for which he was rewarded by a knighthood in 1668. 
Although Roger Pratt has been characterized as a gentleman architect, which suggests to the modern reader an element of the dilettante, his approach, in the early days of the development of the architectural profession, was analytical, practical, and systematic. His essays on architecture and building, drawing on both continental and English experience and unpublished in his own day, were written principally in 1660 and 1665, possibly with the intention of publication as a treatise. They show him taking pains to master all aspects of the design process and building practice, as well as advertising his own experience. He advises prospective builders first to 'resolve with yourself what house will be answerable to your purse and estate... then if you be not able to handsomely contrive it yourself, get some ingenious gentleman who has seen much of that kind abroad and been somewhat versed in the best authors of Architecture: viz. Palladio, Scamozzi, Serlio etc. to do it for you, and to give you a design of it in paper. (Gunther, 60)' Pratt's particular interest lay in planning and the organization of circulation. In his five known houses, built over a period of only fifteen years, he sought to effect a balance between large and small rooms, grand staircases and discreet backstairs, public display and private function, within an arrangement both symmetrical and hierarchical. Coleshill, Berkshire ('c'.1658-62; dem. 1952), astonishing in its assurance and repose as the first known work of the architect, represents the supreme example of the double-pile house, two ranges deep, a form which had been popular in England throughout the seventeenth century, which Pratt particularly recommended as convenient and economical since 'it seems of all others to be the most useful... for that we have there much room in a little compass... and there may be a great spare of walling' (Gunther, 24). But Coleshill was never an exemplar, and in a house of this size economy was a relative concept: this was a pre-eminent and inimitable work of art. Pratt did not invent features at Coleshill but brought together elements which were already part of the currency of European domestic architecture: the rooftop platform and cupola, dormered attics, half-sunk basement, astylar elevation, and symmetrically placed apartments. The house was the more remarkable for the beauty of its facade, the grandeur of its two-storey staircase hall and the provision of central corridors on all floors which enabled rapid and effective progress, separating suites of apartments from each other and avoiding the use of private rooms as through-rooms. 
Coleshill's answer to the problem of preventing accidental contact between family, visitors, and servants, a matter of some concern to architects of the later seventeenth century, was atypical: Pratt did not repeat his uncompromising corridors. His three principal later houses presented different planning solutions. Kingston Lacy, Dorset (1663-5; altered 1835-41), and Horseheath Hall, Cambridgeshire (1663-5; dem. 1792), had tripartite plans with a central two-storey hall, large stair compartments to each end, and self-contained apartments at the angles. At Horseheath the circulation was severely restricted by the inclusion of a chapel in one corner. Clarendon House, Piccadilly, London (1664-7; dem. 1683), built for Edward Hyde, was Pratt's greatest commission and his most influential and copyable design. This larger house represented a summation of the planning developments of the previous fifty years. Here Pratt combined aspects of his own earlier plans, a central double-pile with grand staircases at each end, and pavilions at each corner disposed in a manner premonitory of the grander houses of the later seventeenth century: Belton House, Lincolnshire, is the most notable of the Clarendon derivatives. John Evelyn, who referred to Pratt as 'my old acquaintance at Rome' ('Diary of John Evelyn', 360), expressed qualified approval, finding 'my L:Chancellors new Palace' (ibid., 488), when almost complete, 'a goodly pile to see... but had many defects as to the Architecture' (ibid., 503). Evelyn does not specify the problems, but one of them may have been the increase in size without a commensurate increase in scale. Clarendon, with a single-storey hall, was internally less inventive and spatially complex than the earlier houses in which Pratt had fitted single-storey rooms around a two-storey hall, and in adding the pavilions he risked monotony by increasing the frontage from nine to fifteen equally spaced bays. Clarendon was a handsome and important house, but its facade bore no comparison with the rhythms of Coleshill, and its plan offered few surprises. In the opinion of Roger North, it was 'without one large or good room, as one would expect in so great a fabrick' (Colvin and Newman, 77). 
While engaged in private practice, Pratt was involved in an official capacity in advising the commissioners for the repair of St Paul's Cathedral, shortly before the great fire of 1666. After the fire he was (with Sir Christopher Wren and Hugh May) one of the three commissioners appointed by the king to supervise the rebuilding of the City, in which capacity he urged the formation of wider streets. In 1668 he married Ann (1643-1706), daughter and coheir of Sir Edmund Monins bt, of Waldershare in Kent, and the following year began for himself the rebuilding of Ryston Hall, Norfolk, on the estate which he had inherited from his cousin Edward, who had died in 1664. This, his last recorded house (1669-72; remodelled 1787-8), built to a double-pile plan, was distinguished by a whimsical, segmentally pedimented centrepiece of French derivation, crowned by a small turret. 
Pratt's later years were spent in leading the life of a country gentleman. He died at Ryston on 20 February 1685 and was buried in the parish church. His three sons, Roger, Monins, and Theodore, all predeceased him and the estate passed to Edward Pratt, a descendant of Sir Roger's great-grandfather. His widow then married Sigismund Trafford of Lincolnshire, who erected a monument at Ryston to her memory upon her death in 1706. 
Pratt's portrait by Sir Peter Lely is preserved at Ryston along with his manuscript notebooks, not only on architecture, which were published by R. T. Gunther in 1928, but also on his later enthusiasms, farming and estate management. Although he did not leave a school of architecture behind him, Sir Roger Pratt has a significant place in English architectural history as the author of the notebooks which, together with those of Roger North, provide us with the most informed commentary on the domestic architecture of the period; as the designer of the short-lived but influential Clarendon House, a building of great typological significance in the development of the English country house; and as the architect of one unique masterpiece, Coleshill. 


@@@@@


doc= 22709


Pratt, Samuel (1658-1723), dean of Rochester, was born in London on 2 June 1658 and baptized on 10 June at St Gabriel Fenchurch, the third and youngest child of Daniel Pratt, painter, and his second wife, Jane. There were also, it appears, five children from his father's previous marriage. After attending Merchant Taylors' School from 1666 to 1677 Pratt probably studied at Cambridge. He married young: Samuel, the eldest child of Pratt and his wife, Anne, was born on 29 June 1680. They had six more children. 
Pratt was ordained deacon and priest (London) on 4 March 1683 and was inducted as rector of Kenardington, Kent, six days later. He resigned on becoming vicar of All Hallows, Tottenham, Middlesex, where he was instituted on 18 November 1693. He was listed as chaplain to two regiments of dragoons: in 1685 Colonel John Berkeley's and in 1687 the princess's. The Treasury paid for printing his contribution to the recoinage debate, 'The Regulating Silver Coin' (1696): Pratt supported William Lowndes's case for devaluation, which John Locke mistakenly persuaded the government to resist. On 25 February 1697 he was chosen minister of the Savoy, and by royal mandate, dated 20 April, was created DD at Cambridge from St Catharine's College. 
Pratt was one of Princess Anne's chaplains and tutor to her son, William Henry, duke of Gloucester. At Tunbridge Wells in summer 1697 Pratt 'studied Fortification very hard, and made a pentagon, with out-works, in a wood near the Wells, for the Duke's improvement and entertainment' (Lewis, 96-7). At Anne's request he was named canon of Windsor on 27 November 1697, and on 28 July 1698 he was made almoner to the duke of Gloucester. When his elder brother John, a lawyer, died in 1699 Pratt inherited his estate at Stratford Langhorne, Essex. 
Between 1697 and 1704 Pratt published five sermons. In 1706 Queen Anne presented him to the deanery of Rochester, where he was installed on 9 August, and made him clerk of the closet. Francis Atterbury, who became his bishop, appears to have disliked him: he recommended young Samuel Pratt to Jonathan Trelawny as being 'no ways like his father' (2 Nov 1717, in Atterbury, 3.339). He was vicar of Goudhurst, Kent, from 15 August 1709 until his resignation in 1713 and of Twickenham, Middlesex, from 21 January 1713 until his death. 
After many years' work Pratt's two-volume 'Grammatica Latina in usum principis juventis Britannicae' (which reprints the popular Latin grammar known as William Lily's, with extensive notes and conjectures) was published in 1722 and a compendium of it the following year. A rival, Solomon Lowe, attacked him in 'A Proposal for Perfecting a Latin Grammar' (1722). Pratt died on 14 November 1723 and was buried ten days later in St George's Chapel, Windsor, where a memorial to him was erected. His will, dated 4 October 1723, gave $50 to Christ's Hospital, London, as well as making bequests to his wife and family. 


@@@@@


doc= 22710


Pratt, Samuel Jackson (1749-1814), writer and actor, was born at St Ives, Huntingdonshire, on 25 December 1749. He was the son of a brewer in that town who twice served as high sheriff of his county, and apparently died in 1773. His mother was a niece of Sir Thomas Drury. He was educated in part at Felsted School in Essex, is said to have been for some time under the private tuition of Hawkesworth, and was ordained in the English church. His poem entitled 'Partridges, an Elegy', often included in popular collections of poetry, was printed in the 'Annual Register' for 1771 (p. 241) as by the 'Rev. Mr. Pratt of Peterborough' and he is described as 'an esteemed and popular preacher' (Britton and Brayley, 485). 
About 1772 Pratt eloped with a 'pretty boarding school miss, whose Christian name was Charlotte ('b'. 1749, died 1805 or 1823) and whose family name perhaps was Melmoth, the pseudonym Pratt was to adopt for his stage ventures and under which she also acted' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 10.181). His parents disapproved of the alliance, and the family property was much impaired by constant dissensions and litigation. Pratt soon abandoned his clerical profession, and in 1773 appeared, under the name of Courtney Melmoth, on the boards of the theatre in Smock Alley, Dublin, taking the part of Marc Antony in 'All for Love'. He 'cut a tall and genteel figure but lacked conviction in his acting' and his success was not great (ibid.). At the end of the season he took a company to Drogheda, but after three months' lack of success the theatre was closed. In 1774 and 1775 he assumed at Covent Garden Theatre the parts of Philaster and Hamlet, again without success, and he also appeared as a reciter. Courtney and Charlotte Melmoth often appeared as a duo: in November 1774 as Leontes and Hermione of 'The Winter's Tale', and in March 1776 as Jaffeir and Belvidera in 'Venice Preserv'd', at the Theatre Royal, Edinburgh. They performed also in Bath (1778-9), again in Edinburgh (1779), and probably again in Dublin, 'where Mrs. Melmoth was engaged regularly from 1780-81 and 1788-9' (ibid., 10.182). Courtney Melmoth's failure as an actor was perhaps due, says Taylor, to his walk, 'a kind of airy swing that rendered his acting at times rather ludicrous' (Taylor, 1.45-6; Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 10.182). Subsequently he and Mrs Melmoth travelled about the country telling fortunes, and they resorted to various other expedients to gain a livelihood. Some time after 1781, the couple, 'who no doubt had never been married by ceremony, separated', she emigrating to the United States in 1793, and he travelling to the continent 'to glean ideas for future literary efforts' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 10.182). They retained, however, feelings of 'cordial and confidential amity' (L'Estrange, 1.33-5). 
From 1774, when he published verses deploring the death of Goldsmith, Pratt depended largely on his pen for support. At first he generally wrote under his stage name. About 1776 he was at Bath, in partnership with a bookseller called Clinch, in the old established library, subsequently known as Godwin's library, at the north-west corner of Milsom Street. On Clinch's death Pratt's name remained as a nominal partner in the business under the style of Pratt and Marshall, but after a few years he left Bath for London. 
Pratt's voluminous works, well catalogued in the 'New Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature', assume many forms. Some works are tributes, such as 'The Tears of Genius, on the Death of Dr Goldsmith' (1774); 'Garrick's Looking-Glass' (1776); 'An Apology for the Life and Writings of Hume' (1777); and 'The Shadowe of Shakespeare' (1780?). His plays include 'Joseph Andrews' (1778), a two-act farce; 'The Fair Circassians' (1781); and 'The School for Vanity' (1783). One novel, entitled 'Emma Corbett, or, The Miseries of Civil War', appeared anonymously in 1780, was translated into French in 1783, and ran into many editions. Among his efforts at landscape poetry are 'Landscapes in Verse, Taken in Spring' (1785), 'Gleanings through Wales, Holland, and Westphalia' (1795-9); and 'Gleanings in England' (1801). 
One remarkable division of Pratt's diverse publications is that reflecting his humanitarian interests. Although Pratt was personally insupportable to many of his acquaintances, in print his persona could be gentle and caring. This streak in an already multi-faceted personality probably originated with 'Liberal Opinions on Animals, Man, and Providence', otherwise known as 'Liberal Opinions, or, The History of Benignus' (6 vols., 1775-7), which traced the adventures of Benignus, considered by many to be an autobiographical character. 'Sympathy, a Poem' (1788) was many times corrected and enlarged, and was marked by 'feeling, energy, and beauty' (Polwhele, 1.132). Also included in this group are: 'The Triumph of Benevolence' (1786); 'Humanity, or, The Rights of Nature' (1788); 'Bread, or, The Poor' (1801); and 'The Lower World' (1810). 
Pratt's contemporaries varied in their esteem for the man and his works. When his plays were produced at Drury Lane, he became intimately acquainted with Potter, the translator of Aeschylus, George Colman the elder, James Beattie, and John Wolcot. His popular poem, 'Sympathy', was first handed to Thomas Cadell, the publisher, by Gibbon. Pratt travelled at home and abroad; in 1802 he was at Birmingham, making detailed enquiry into its manufactures and the lives of its artisans. Pratt possessed considerable talents, but his necessities left him little time for reflection or revision. Some severe lines on his poetry and prose were in the original manuscript of Byron's 'English Bards and Scotch Reviewers', but they were omitted from publication. 
One twentieth-century commentator states that 'to know [Pratt], it seems, was most often to despise him, a fact to which Byron's letters... attest' and reveals that the actress Sarah Siddons and the poet Anna Seward loathed him, accusing him of abandoning a wife and child in Dublin in 1773 (London, 357). Byron made sarcastic allusions to Pratt's posthumous patronage of the poet Joseph Blacket in a letter to Mr Dallas of 21 August 1811 ('Works', 2.53-4). Charles Lamb condemned Pratt's 'Gleanings' as 'a wretched assortment of vapid feelings' and wrote sarcastically of the credibility of Pratt's benevolent involvement in the Humane Society in a letter to Southey of 28 November 1798 ('Letters of Charles and Mary Lamb', 1.151). To readers with less privileged information than Byron or Lamb, however, Pratt 'maintained a public reputation of a genial, kindly, and even sentimental presence' (London, 357). Robert Taylor thought well of him, opining that, 'if Pratt had been born to a fortune, a great part of it would have been devoted to benevolence', but even so, inevitably, Pratt 'injured his relationships by displays of rancour and viciousness, especially in his correspondence' which was too often earmarked by impetuous begging-letters (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 10.184). The public and the private Pratts, it would seem, were two different Pratts altogether. 
After a long, diverse, and prolific career in the arts, Pratt became ill after a fall from his horse in Birmingham in 1814. After a long decline, he died there at an address on Colmore Row, on 4 October 1814. 
There is much more room for speculation about the death date of Charlotte Melmoth, as Highfill traces her career until her death in 1823, and states that the 'Dictionary of National Biography' is simply incorrect in setting her death in 1805. This earlier date had been chosen because a letter from Pratt to Mr Mitford refers to the death of Mrs Pratt, whom Pratt had not seen for some twenty years, as occurring in 1805. Moreover, Pratt's will of 1806 uses the phrase 'my late wife, Mrs. Pratt'. One could surmise that there were two Mrs Pratts, or that Pratt used the phrase to keep her out of his estate, but no definite conclusions can be drawn. 


@@@@@


doc= 22711


Pratt, Sir Thomas Simson (1797-1879), army officer, was the son of Captain James Pratt and Anne, daughter of William Simson, and was educated at the University of St Andrews. He was gazetted an ensign in the 26th regiment on 2 February 1814, and served in the Southern Netherlands in the same year as a volunteer with the 56th regiment. He was present at the attack on Merxem on 2 February and the subsequent bombardment of Antwerp. He purchased his captaincy on 17 September 1825. Pratt married, in 1827, Frances Agnes, second daughter of John S. Cooper; they had two sons and one daughter. He was with the 26th regiment in the China expedition, and as brevet major commanded the land forces at the assault and capture of the forts of Chuenpe (Chuanbi) on 7 January 1841, and again at the capture of the Bogue (Humen) forts on 26 February. In the attacks on Canton (Guangzhou), from 24 May to 1 June, he was in command of his regiment, and was present also at the demonstration before Nanking (Nanjing), and at the signing of the treaty of peace on board HMS 'Cornwallis'. On 28 August 1841 he was gazetted lieutenant-colonel, and on 14 October 1841 was made a CB. From 5 September 1843 to 23 October 1855 he was deputy adjutant-general at Madras. 
In October 1858 Pratt was promoted major-general, and in 1859 appointed to command the troops in Australia and New Zealand. He reached Melbourne in January 1860. When, in early July, he learned of the serious reverses suffered by British troops in the Waitara district of Taranaki, New Zealand, he himself went, with reinforcements, to direct operations. His operations were cautious. Avoiding his predecessor's mistake of fighting in the open, he reduced the Maori 'pa' with minimum casualties by using earthworks to provide cover. This was slow, unspectacular, and successful. The New Zealand command was separated from that of Australia, and a new commander arrived early in 1861; by then the Taranaki revolt had been suppressed. Pratt returned to Australia in April, and continued to command there until 1863, when he returned to England and was appointed to the colonelcy of the 37th regiment. For services in New Zealand, he was made KCB on 16 July 1861. In the first ceremony of its kind in Australia, he was publicly invested on 15 April 1862 by Sir Henry Barkly, governor of Victoria, who in 1860 had married Pratt's daughter, Anne Maria. He was promoted general on 26 May 1873, and in October 1877 retired from active service. Pratt died at his residence, 13 Cavendish Place, Bath, on 2 February 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 22712


Pratten, Robert Sidney (1824-1868), flautist, was born on 23 January 1824 in Bristol, the second son of a professor of music who was for many years flautist at the Bristol theatre. His mother's maiden name was Sidney. He was considered a prodigy on the flute, and on 25 March 1835, at Clifton, made an early debut, playing Charles Nicholson's arrangement of 'O dolce concento'. When only twelve he performed at concerts in Bath and Bristol. After engagements as first flute at the Dublin Theatre Royal and with other musical societies in the city, he arrived in London in 1846. The duke of Cambridge and Lady Tonkin were interested in his talent, and he was sent to Germany to study composition. Pratten's popular piece for flute and piano accompaniment 'L'esperance' was published in Leipzig in 1847. Upon his return to London in 1848, he soon rose to the front rank of his art. He played first flute at the Royal Italian Opera, the English Opera, the Sacred Harmonic Society, the Philharmonic Society, and other concerts and musical festivals, including the Musical Society of London and Alfred Mellon's concerts. Contemporaries praised his powerful tone and brilliant execution. He also wrote instruction books for his instrument, among them special studies for Siccama's diatonic flute (1848) and for his own perfected flute (1856), as well as a 'Concertstuck' (1852) and many arrangements of operatic airs for flute in combination with other instruments. 
On 24 September 1854 Pratten married Catharina Josepha Pelzer, a guitarist born at Mulheim on the Rhine. She made her reputation as a child artist in Germany, and in her ninth year appeared at the King's Theatre, London, eventually settling in the capital as a teacher of the guitar, for which she composed a number of pieces and wrote instruction manuals. She died on 10 October 1895. 
Pratten died after a long illness on 10 February 1868 at 21 Paragon, Ramsgate. His younger brother Frederick was an eminent double bass player engaged in London's principal orchestras, who died in London on 3 March 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 22713


Prence, Thomas (c.1600-1673), colonial governor, was born about 1600, the son of Thomas Prence (died 'c'.1630), carriage maker, of Lechlade, Gloucestershire. The younger Thomas Prence emigrated to New Plymouth in 1621 aboard the 'Fortune' and resided in the colony towns of Plymouth, Duxbury, and Eastham. While the New World offered immigrants unusual opportunities for improving their lot, few rose as high from undistinguished origins as did Prence. Within six years of his arrival he was chosen as one of eight 'undertakers' responsible for discharging the colony's debt in exchange for exclusive rights to American Indian trade. He later joined William Bradford and others in a lucrative partnership in a trading post on Maine's Kennebec River. In 1632 he joined the colony's government through election as an assistant, and he served as either assistant or governor of the colony every year thereafter until his death. 
Undoubtedly Prence's marriages to daughters of leading settlers propelled his own rise to prominence. S. E. Morison declared that Prence showed a 'genius for marrying' well (Morison, 172). On 5 August 1624 he married Patience Brewster (died 1634), daughter of William Brewster, Plymouth's ruling elder and the most learned man in the colony. Thomas and Patience had four children, Rebecca, Thomas, Hannah, and Mercy. Patience died in 1634, and on 1 April 1635 he married Mary Collier (died in or before 1644), daughter of wealthy settler William Collier. Their children were Jane and Mary. There has been some confusion about his remaining marriages and children, but in 1904 Ella Florence Elliot determined that Prence had married not three but four times and that his last two wives were Apphia Quick, the divorced wife of Samuel Freeman, and Mary Howes (died 1695), the widow of Thomas Howes. It remains unclear whether Prence's youngest daughters, Judith, Elizabeth, and Sarah, were the children of his second or third marriages. 
No record exists of any formal education for Prence, a deficit he felt keenly. Cotton Mather declared that 'the want and worth of 'Acquired Parts' was a thing so sensible unto [Prence], that 'Plymouth' perhaps never had a greater 'Maecenas' of 'Learning' in it' (Mather, 2.2.209). Like his first father-in-law, he amassed a sizeable library, valued at over $214 at probate. In addition, he left funds to be used for grammar schools to teach 'humane learning, and good literature' (ibid., n.). 
As governor, an office he filled in 1634, 1638, and from 1657 to 1672, Prence tightened laws restricting Quaker worship and backed legislation mandating town financial support of Congregational ministers. These actions may account for the characterization of him as 'a terror to evil doers' by a contemporary (Morison, 172). He showed similar severity in dealing with a threatened Indian uprising in 1671. He ordered confiscation of all Indian arms and imposed a fine of $100 on the Wampanoag sachem Philip (Metacom), a humiliation and hardship that, some historians believe, contributed significantly to the sachem's instigation of King Philip's War four years later. In addition to his service as governor and assistant, he was a commissioner for the United Colonies of New England in 1645, 1650, 1653-8, 1661-3, and 1670-72. He died in New Plymouth on 29 March 1673, and was buried there on 8 April, leaving an estate of $422, in addition to over 300 acres of land throughout Plymouth Colony. 


@@@@@


doc= 22714


Prendergast, John Patrick (1808-1893), historian and barrister, was born on 7 March 1808 at 37 Dawson Street, Dublin. His parents were Francis Prendergast (1768-1846), registrar of the court of chancery, Ireland, and Esther (1773/4-1846), eldest daughter of John Patrick of 27 Palace Row, Dublin. He had two younger brothers, Francis and William, who were also lawyers, and three sisters about whom little is known except that on their parents' death they moved to Plymouth, where they lived for a time in reduced circumstances. He had also a half-brother, Jeffrey (died 1879), from his father's first marriage to Maria Reynolds, a sister of Thomas Reynolds the informer (of 1798). The Prendergasts traced their roots to Maurice de Prendergast, a companion of Richard de Clare, known as Strongbow, under Robert Fitzstephen; but the more immediate origins of the family's rise may be attributed to Thomas Prendergast, John Patrick's grandfather, who conformed to the established church in the eighteenth century and who had subsequently prospered in the legal profession. 
Prendergast was educated in Reading, England, under Dr Valpy (his mother had an antipathy towards Irish education) from about 1817 to 1821; he passed on to Trinity College, Dublin, graduated in 1825, and was called to the Irish bar in 1830. He spent many enjoyable years on the Leinster circuit, learning to overcome a natural shyness and becoming an effective public speaker. In later life he would regale his guests with amusing and sometimes scurrilous tales of the barristers and judges he had known. In 1836 he succeeded his father and grandfather in the agency of Lord Clifden's estates, which he administered for many years. The knowledge and experience gained in this practical work made him a firm advocate of tenant rights and a sympathizer with the schemes of the early land reformers in Ireland. He was particularly incensed by the notorious Derryveagh and Glenveagh evictions in co. Donegal in 1861, and he travelled there to hear the story at first hand. 
In 1840 Prendergast was commissioned to undertake some genealogical researches in the county of Tipperary and this led to a study of the settlement of Ireland at the restoration of Charles II, and also of the Cromwellian settlement. His researches culminated in the publication of 'The History of the Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland' in 1863 (2nd edn, 1875; reprint edn, 1996). This work was based on extensive original research in London and Dublin, and while its tone was undoubtedly polemical, it was a pioneering venture into the law of Irish real property, and remains a valuable contribution to the history of the Irish land question. 
In 1864 Prendergast was appointed by Lord Romilly, a historical manuscripts commissioner, to select official papers relating to Ireland for transcription from the voluminous Carte manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. Fearing allegations of partiality, Romilly -- to Prendergast's chagrin -- brought in as co-editor the Revd Dr Russell, president of the Catholic seminary St Patrick's College, Maynooth, co. Kildare. The relationship between Prendergast and Russell was never cordial: the former, convivial and outgoing, was repelled by what he regarded as the latter's primness; none the less, their collaboration proved a success. For five summers in the 1860s Prendergast travelled with his wife, Caroline, to the Bodleian Library where he selected the documents and she transcribed them. At the same time Dr Russell made his selection, and the report of the commissioners was published in 1871. Russell and Prendergast continued to calendar these state papers until 1877, when Russell died. Prendergast worked on at the task, though without realistic prospect of publication, until 1880. Meanwhile he had brought out for private circulation 'The Tory War in Ulster' (2 pts); and in 1881 he wrote some account of the life of his close friend Charles Halliday, the antiquary and book collector, which served as an introduction to the latter's 'Scandinavian Kingdom of Dublin'. In 1887 Prendergast published 'Ireland from the Restoration to the Revolution'. 
Although Prendergast's chief historical work was concerned with the seventeenth century he was also an authority on Irish genealogy and archaeology, and contributed numerous papers to the journal of the Kilkenny Archaeological Society. In addition he published a series of anonymous articles in the Dublin press (1884-90) concerning the old houses of Dublin. 
In politics Prendergast was a Liberal but with a strong tinge of O'Connellite nationalism. He contributed to 'The Nation' newspaper and in 1872-4 wrote a series of devastating reviews of the work on Irish history by J. A. Froude. So successful was he at combating Froude's anti-Irish and anti-Catholic slurs that a ballad ('to the air of the White Cockade') was published in his honour. Entitled 'Froude's Lies Refuted', it concluded: '
So here's to John P. Prendergast 

Who strikes for Ireland hard and fast 

Come friend as with trumpet blast 

Hurrah for John P. Prendergast. 

' His attack on Froude and his earlier work on the Cromwellian settlement had gained Prendergast, like his friend W. E. H. Lecky, whom he had assisted in his researches, the reputation of being a strong nationalist. But like Lecky he was never a home ruler, and from 1878 on he was a violent opponent of Parnell's general policy. An Irish parliament, he argued, would be fatal for both England and Ireland; he was a passionate defender of the Irish viceroyalty; and, curiously, he advocated the formation of a regiment of Irish guards, clad in 'rebel green', as a way of binding the two countries together. His letters (collected in six manuscript volumes) written to his friend Philip Henry Bagenal, in the last twenty years of his life, reflect his increasing and ultimately crushing disillusion with Irish and English politics. 
Prendergast was a brilliant talker, full of anecdote and reminiscence. His racy -- and unpublished -- autobiography gives a very full account of his experiences of the Irish bar. The flavour may be gained from such remarks of Prendergast as that 'I look upon every woman and first think what kind of bedfellow she would make. I then in imagination strip her naked', and by his reference to the Irish jurist Chief Justice Whiteside as 'Chief Justice Backside... for he was a bare-arsed foundling picked up by an old watchman from the gutters of St James Street'. However, his account of his life has also considerable historical interest, as he was an eyewitness to the Young Ireland rising of 1848 and he has much to say about the influx of Catholic barristers into the profession after Catholic emancipation in 1829. 
Prendergast married on 1 September 1838 Caroline (died 1875), second daughter of George Ensor of Ardress, Loughgall, co. Armagh. His bride was of Presbyterian stock and they had known one another from youth. Prendergast held off asking for her hand as 'I got a kind of fear of not making a wife happy': when he did get round to asking her to marry him she reproached him with 'Why didn't you marry me sooner?' She died on 5 February 1875. They had one son, Francis (1841-1897), who after completing an engineering degree at Trinity College, Dublin, emigrated to the United States, where he pursued a very successful career as a railroad engineer. He married Mary M. Childs in 1873 and they had seven children. 
After his wife's death Prendergast lived contentedly at 127 Strand Road, Sandymount, Dublin, where he enjoyed a wide circle of friends. Standish O'Grady arranged a meeting in the mid-1870s between Prendergast and Philip Henry Bagenal, who shared Prendergast's interests in tenant rights and Irish history, and there ensued a rich friendship which, despite the disparity in age -- Bagenal was many years his junior -- endured until Prendergast's death. It was at Bagenal's urging that Prendergast got his papers in order, and he compiled his autobiography 'for the purpose of enabling you [Bagenal] when I was gone to write a notice of me'. Following a fall down the steps of the King's Inn Library in 1892, Prendergast died at his home on 6 February 1893, and was buried beside his wife in Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin; his son was also later buried there. Bagenal wrote his obituary for 'The Times' (8 February 1894), acted as his literary executor, and sought to have Prendergast's 'life and times' published. In 1926 Bagenal learned from Blackwoods, the Edinburgh publishing house, that they would not 'with regret' be undertaking this project, and shortly afterwards Prendergast's papers and books were, in accordance with his instructions, given in to the King's Inn Library, where they remain a century later. 


@@@@@


doc= 22715


Prendergast, Sir Thomas, first baronet (c.1660-1709), army officer and Jacobite conspirator, was the third son of Thomas Prendergast (1614?-1725) and his wife, Eleanor (died in or before 1705), daughter of David Condon. He was possibly born at Croane, co. Tipperary, and had three brothers and at least three sisters. The Prendergasts, a prosperous Catholic family, had been based at Newcastle, co. Tipperary, but lost their property in the Cromwellian confiscations. Prendergast's father's elder brother Jeffery was transplanted to Connaught, and later emigrated to France with his Jacobite officer sons after the treaty of Limerick. Prendergast's father himself may have been the Thomas Prendergast who in 1665 occupied a one-hearth dwelling near the ruined family seat at Newcastle; the situation would have many Irish parallels. Jonathan Swift (who retrospectively hated Prendergast as a supposed false witness even before his anticlerical son offended him) described the elder Thomas Prendergast as a cottager narrowly saved from the gallows at Clonmel assizes for stealing cows by his protestant landlord Moore, and accused Prendergast himself of having worked as a shoeblack and footman. 
During the Irish war of 1689-91 Prendergast became a captain in the Jacobite cavalry. Many officers saw the war as furnishing a career, not a cause; military honour rather than Jacobitism or Catholicism provided their basic morality. A Captain Thomas Pendergrass was among 100 Jacobite officers who entered William's service after the final surrender of Limerick. By June 1693 it was intended to send them to fight for the Venetians in Greece, which would have practically amounted to perpetual banishment. At some point during the war, Prendergast was in France. A prisoner frantically seeking pardon in 1696 claimed that a 'Pendergrass' was involved in the plots to kidnap William in late 1693, but attributed to him another man's actions. In England Prendergast joined the Jacobite debauchee George Porter as a highwayman. They operated from a Jacobite safe house in Hampshire run by William O'Brian (whose wife became their mistress about 1695). Prendergast felt himself under the greatest obligation to Porter. 
In February 1696 Prendergast was called to London from Hampshire by Porter, who brought him into the assassination plot devised by Sir George Barclay. Prendergast was chosen for the party of eight men under Barclay who would attack William III's coach, and received a musketoon with which to fire repeatedly into it. 
Late on 14 February 1696, the eve of the attempt, Prendergast secretly went to Whitehall, where he broke the news of the plot to William's confidential adviser Hans Willem Bentinck, earl of Portland. He told him that William must be prevented from hunting next day, but that the same honour and conscience which made him, a Catholic Jacobite, give the warning prevented him from testifying against, or even naming, his fellow conspirators, particularly one of them (Porter). Portland had earlier disregarded a similar general warning, but believed Prendergast and, with difficulty, persuaded William to cancel his hunting. After learning from their spies at Kensington that no alarm had been raised, the plotters prepared to try again a week later. A double agent, Francis Delarue, confirmed Prendergast's story, and when Prendergast went to Kensington Palace late on 21 February to give another warning, he was brought to the king. William told him that unless he revealed more details of the plot, he himself would not be safe should the assassins change their method and timing. With a promise that he should not be a witness unless he chose, Prendergast was persuaded to name the conspirators. 
The next day, Prendergast was among them as they prepared to depart to ambush William at Turnham Green. When their Kensington agent brought them word that William's hunting was again cancelled, amid rumours of a plot, they agreed to disperse. Prendergast warned Portland of this, and retreated to Surrey with Porter and Porter's servant Thomas Keyes. As a cover, $1000 was offered for his capture in the government's proclamation. The three men were captured (without collusion) on 27 February at Leatherhead. Porter immediately offered to turn king's evidence, and on 28 February implicated his comrades, including Prendergast. The latter, now that his friend was safe (though both remained some weeks in Newgate), agreed to be a witness. However, a latecomer to the plot, he testified only at the first trial, that of Robert Charnock, Edward King, and Keyes on 11 March, and at that of the conspirators' quartermaster Charles Cranburne. He received a pardon on 28 April 1696. After William O'Brian carried off to France Cardell Goodman, a witness against Sir John Fenwick, Prendergast persuaded Mrs O'Brian in early 1697 to follow as a spy. 
William, with immense experience of informers, apparently believed that Prendergast's motives and scruples had been genuine, and distinguished him from the other witnesses. On 5 May 1696 he granted him $3000 and ordered the Irish government to find for him a forfeited Jacobite estate worth $500 a year. On 23 April 1697 Prendergast was finally granted one at Gort, co. Galway, where he supplanted not only the forfeited Jacobite owner, Roger O'Shaughnessy, but the Williamite Colonel Gustavus Hamilton (later Viscount Boyne), temporarily given it for services in the Irish war. As post-war depression had reduced the yearly value of the Gort estate by almost $200, Prendergast, after petitioning, was additionally granted on 18 July 1698 other forfeited properties in several counties, theoretically worth $334 a year. 
Prendergast married at Dublin, by licence of 10 August 1697, Penelope (died 1746), only daughter of the Dublin lawyer Henry Cadogan, of Liscarton, co. Meath, and sister of William Cadogan, later Earl Cadogan. He at some time converted to protestantism, and others of his close-knit family, whose fortunes he was restoring, apparently followed. He lived largely in Dublin. 
On 23 September 1697, the Irish House of Commons passed a resolution of thanks to Prendergast. On 15 July 1699 he was created a baronet. The 'Act of Resumption' of 1700 exempted his estates. In the Irish parliament of 1703 he became MP for Monaghan. He repurchased family properties, and began buying forfeited estates in various counties from the Hollow Sword Blade Company with loans it granted. 
By 1706 Prendergast was lieutenant-colonel of the earl of Orrery's new infantry regiment, where he was joined by relatives. He could be a harsh disciplinarian. On 24 February 1707 he became colonel of his regiment. It was ordered to Flanders in April 1708, and was subsequently quartered at Oudenarde. On 1 January 1709 Prendergast was promoted brigadier-general. He fought bravely in the battle of Malplaquet on 11 September 1709 NS, and was mortally wounded while leading his regiment against the French troops entrenched in the wood of Blaregnies; he was presumably buried near Malplaquet. A tradition, whose details vary, claimed that he had a strong premonition of his death, linked to the plot of 1696. Four of his six children reached adulthood, Thomas ['see below'] and three daughters who were later all married: Juliana (died 1758) to Chaworth Brabazon, sixth earl of Meath (a love match); Elizabeth first to Sir John Dickson Hamon, bt (died 1728) and second to Charles Smyth, MP for Limerick, with whom she had four children; and Anne to Samuel Hobson, of Muckridge. Among the provisions of his will was a $14 annuity to his elderly father. 
Swift in 1720 described Penelope, Lady Prendergast, as 'the greatest Widow Blacacre [obsessive litigant] now in Christendom' ('Correspondence', 2.341). She had little choice if she was to protect her son, as Earl Cadogan plundered his nephew's estate. It owed large sums to the Hollow Sword Blade Company. Roger O'Shaughnessy's rights in the Gort estate had been limited, and the family made repeated, though ultimately unsuccessful, legal attempts to reclaim it. Lady Prendergast died in Dublin between June and October 1746. Her will indicates fear that her son would embezzle her main bequest, to her faithful serving-maid, unless he thought it inconsiderable. 
Prendergast's son, 
the spawn of him who shamed our isle, 

the traitor, assassin, informer vile. 
('Complete Poems', 550)' On 11 January 1739, Prendergast married Anne (died 1770), daughter and heir of Sir Griffith Williams, sixth baronet, of Marle, Caernarvonshire (where he stood unsuccessfully in the 1747 election). In 1754 he at last became Irish postmaster-general. He was lieutenant-governor of co. Galway. He died childless at his home in Merrion Street, Dublin, on 23 September 1760, while his patent as Viscount Clonmell was being prepared. His nephew and heir, John Prendergast Smyth (1741-1817), the son of his sister Elizabeth, was created first Viscount Gort in 1816. 


@@@@@


doc= 22716


Prendergast, Thomas (1807/8-1886), East India Company servant and writer on language learning, was the son of Sir Jeffrey Prendergast (1769-1856) and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Hew Dalrymple of Nunraw, East Lothian; they married in 1804. His father was born at Clonmel, was in the service of the East India Company, and became colonel of the 39th native infantry in 1825. He served in the Anglo-Mysore War, was knighted in 1838, was promoted to be a general in 1854, and died in 1856. 
Thomas was nominated a writer in the East India Company's service on 23 June 1826, and became assistant to the collector of Tanjore, Madras presidency, in 1828. He was acting head assistant to the collector of Nellore on 16 January 1829, and head assistant on 9 February 1830. In 1830 he became acting sub-collector and joint magistrate of Nellore, in 1833 acting assistant judge at Guntur, and on 8 August 1834 assistant judge of Tinnevelly (or Tinnevelly), where he remained until 1838. His wife, Lucy Caroline, 'nee' Dalrymple, died in 1839, and their two sons, Hew and Harry, were sent to live with their grandfather Sir Jeffrey. He was afterwards for many years collector and magistrate at Rajahmundry until his retirement on the annuity fund in 1859. On his arrival in England he settled at Cheltenham, and about 1861 became totally blind. Despite this misfortune, he devoted himself to literary work, and invented what he called the mastery system of learning languages. This system is based upon the process pursued by children in learning to speak. They are impelled by instinct to imitate and repeat the chance sentences which they hear spoken around them, and afterwards to interchange and transpose the words so as to form new combinations. By frequently repeating conversational sentences Prendergast had himself acquired the Madras vernacular, Tamil, and Telugu. The system was to some extent a development of the Ollendorffian, but Prendergast elaborated its details on original lines. His success was considerable, and the various manuals in which he practically expounded his views went through numerous editions. 
Prendergast's key works are 'The Mastery of Languages, or, The Art of Speaking Foreign Tongues Idiomatically' (1864; 3rd edn, 1872) and 'Handbook to the Mastery Series' (1868; 5th edn, 1882). The 'Mastery Series' itself covered French (1868; 12th edn, 1879); Spanish (1869; 4th edn, 1875); German (1868; 8th edn, 1874); Hebrew (1871; 3rd edn, 1879); and Latin (1872; 5th edn, 1884). 
Prendergast died at Meldon Lodge, The Park, Cheltenham, on 14 November 1886, and was buried in the town's new cemetery on 18 November. His son, Sir Harry North Dalrymple Prendergast (1834-1913), GCB VC, was commander in Burma from 1883 to 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 22717


Prentice, Archibald (1792-1857), journalist and free-trader, was born on 17 November 1792 at Covington Mains, a farm in the Upper ward of Lanarkshire, Scotland. He was one of seven children born to the yeoman farmer Archibald Prentice and his second wife, Helen, daughter of John Stoddart of Carnwath. Prentice's religious upbringing was Presbyterian, with paternal ancestral roots stretching back to the Commonwealth period. There is no contemporary description of his appearance, but an autographed illustration of him in the frontispiece to his 'Tour of the United States' (1849) shows an earnest-looking man, bespectacled, with a broad forehead. 
Prentice served as apprentice to a baker (1804-5) and a woollen draper (1805-8), and, despite his rudimentary education, in 1808 he received a position in the Glasgow textile firm of Thomas Grahame. Rising steadily in the business, he oversaw its move to Manchester, where he became a partner in 1815. As he settled into life in Manchester he married Jane, daughter of James Thompson of Oatridge, near Linlithgow, Scotland, on 3 June 1819. Meanwhile, participation in the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society put him in contact with Edward Taylor, the first editor of the 'Manchester Guardian', and Absalom Watkin, both of whom were later associated with advanced reforms in Manchester. This contact with Taylor, who invited him to write for his paper, introduced Prentice to journalism and the importance of newspapers as shapers of public opinion. Prentice's editorials for the paper advanced the reforms of Jeremy Bentham, and especially the movement for free trade. 
Impatient with Taylor's cautious approach to reform, in 1824 Prentice established a rival journal, the 'Manchester Gazette', later renamed the 'Manchester Times'. Against the background of the Peterloo massacre of 1819, Prentice joined a growing number of editors of provincial weeklies who were attempting to mould popular thinking about economic distress and the need for parliamentary reform. Prentice, in particular, tried to merge the interests of both manufacturers and workers. In arguing against governmental waste, for example, he said that such inefficiencies simultaneously reduced the value of workers' wages and stifled the entrepreneurial efforts of the manufacturers. Similarly, he attacked the 1815 corn law because it raised the price of bread for the poor while inhibiting employment and industrial expansion. 
Prentice's ardent devotion to reform efforts, however, proved to be his undoing as a commercially successful newspaperman. Although his newspapers turned a profit in their early years, his single-minded use of them for reformist causes, to the exclusion of lighter and more attractive features, drove down circulation, and his propagandizing alienated many. This partly explains the 'Manchester Gazette''s failure in 1828 and the subsequent inability of the 'Manchester Times' to compete with John Bright's more moderate 'Manchester Examiner'. 
Although Prentice supported a variety of reforms, he made his reputation as a founder of the Anti-Corn Law League. In 1838 the free-trade campaign began in earnest in Manchester when Prentice joined six others to form the Anti-Corn Law Association (later League). Notwithstanding his identification with its work, questions have arisen about his true prominence in the organization (McCord, 34, 35). Certainly he was its leading publicist and later wrote the 'History of the Anti-Corn Law League'. However, he did not serve in any leadership capacity and was at odds with other members, especially Richard Cobden. In 1841, for example, when the tories assumed office, Cobden had to restrain Prentice from pressing greater demands on Robert Peel for tariff reform. Similarly, as league moderates strove to focus on repeal, Prentice and other extremists were accused of diverting the public's attention to other reform issues. 
Nevertheless, Prentice's contribution to the anti-corn law effort was well recognized by contemporaries. Cobden's view of him as an earnest, hard-working, and principled man did not, however, go far enough for Prentice's long-time friend, John Childs. Annoyed that Bright and others had set up the rival 'Manchester Examiner' in 1846 against Prentice's 'Times', Childs pointed out that Prentice had devoted his life to the league and wondered what Cobden and Bright would have done without him. 
As a reformer Prentice derived his inspiration from several sources. His dissenting background led him to favour religious toleration and to support Catholic emancipation and an end to the 'Test and Corporation Acts'. He encouraged temperance, even total abstinence, and was later treasurer of the Manchester Temperance League. He was also an early supporter of parliamentary reform and eventually joined Joseph Sturge's complete suffrage movement in 1841. However, as a hard-headed follower of Bentham's educational reform ideas he advocated a literacy test for voting. He sponsored mechanics' institutes for Manchester's workers as well as elementary education, although as a Presbyterian he opposed any curricula lacking religious instruction. 
Also consistent with Prentice's middle-class radicalism was his desire to reach out to the working class. This gesture was not reciprocated by the unenfranchised, who distrusted Prentice's intentions, believing that he was more committed to the manufacturers than to the operatives. In 1830, when Prentice helped form a shopkeeper-dominated political union favouring piecemeal parliamentary reform, the workers established their own union calling for universal suffrage, annual parliaments, and vote by ballot. Also, despite Prentice's pledge that corn law repeal would benefit both masters and men, Chartists viewed him with suspicion. 
It has been suggested that Prentice's estrangement from the workers was due, in part, to his inability to speak to them in a language they understood. Although he claimed to speak for the workers, he had the habit of addressing them in a condescending, even scolding, tone. William Cobbett described him and his friends as priggish, while Bentham had to admit that he was well intentioned but 'juggical' (Read, 60). Prentice's criticism of aspects of the new poor law and his sensitivity to the plight of the workers did not change the perception of him as cold and antiseptic. 
Unable to compete for readers with the 'Manchester Examiner', Prentice left 'The Times' in 1847. A brief tour of the United States in 1847 followed, which was later recounted in his 'A Tour of the United States', published in 1849. Upon his return from America, his impecunious state forced him to seek employment at the Manchester gas office, where he received an annual salary of $150. This income provided him the security to continue his writing, which took the form of 'Historical Sketches and Personal Recollections of Manchester from 1792 to 1832', published in 1851, and his 'History of the Anti-Corn Law League', which appeared in 1853. Although modern and more objective accounts have eclipsed Prentice's work, no other contemporary work has provided such a detailed record of the league's activities. 
In Prentice's later years he and his wife were supported by an annuity of $100 provided by friends and admirers. He died in Manchester on 22 December 1857 of what has been described as brain congestion ('DNB') and was buried at Rusholme Road cemetery, Manchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 22718


Prentis, Edward (bap. 1797, d. 1854), painter, was baptized on 19 August 1797 at Earl Street Presbyterian Church, Maidstone, Kent, the son of Walter Prentis and Anne Sweatman. He was the brother of Stephen Prentis (1800-1862), poet. He first exhibited two pictures at the Royal Academy in 1823, 'Girl with Matches' and 'Boy with Oranges'. He exhibited at the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists from 1826 until 1850, having been made a member of the society in 1827, and he remained a steady supporter of the society throughout his life. According to the society's catalogues he lived in Kensington, London, first at 5 Hornton Street (1826-33) and later at 9 Hornton Street (1833-45); the Royal Academy catalogue for 1823 gives his address as 2 Tavistock Row, Covent Garden, London. He painted genre scenes of domestic life, often with allegorical meaning, and his works were accompanied in the exhibition catalogues with quotations from literature. Among the pictures he exhibited at the Society of British Artists were 'The Nervous Miser' (1826), 'The Wife' and 'The Daughter' (1836), engraved as a pair by J. C. Bromley in 1837, and 'The Folly of Extravagance' (1850). His painting 'The Sick Bed' is in the Glasgow Art Gallery. Prentis also executed for the trustees of the British Museum a series of highly finished drawings of the ivory objects found at Nimrud, Turkish Mosul. These were engraved on wood by J. Thompson and published in A. H. Layard's 'Monuments of Nineveh' (1849). Prentis died in December 1854, leaving property to his wife, Sarah, with whom he had eleven children. 


@@@@@


doc= 22719


Prentis, Stephen (1800-1862), poet, son of Walter Prentis and Anne Sweatman, was born at Rochester, Kent, on 21 July 1800 and baptized there on 16 September 1800. He was educated at Greenwich and then admitted as a pensioner on 12 March 1819 (he matriculated at Easter 1820) to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he became a scholar in 1821 and graduated BA in 1824 and MA in 1830. On 2 May 1827 he married, at Ealing, Middlesex, Catharine, daughter of Joseph Knevett of Cold Hall, Little Ealing. He was living at Maidstone, Kent, in 1829, and for many years resided at Dinan in Brittany. He was the author of numerous short poems of considerable merit, which he printed for private circulation among his friends. 
Prentis's works, some of which were published in London but most privately in Dinan, are extremely scarce; they include 'An Apology for Lord Byron, with Miscellaneous Poems' (1836), 'Tintern, Stonehenge: 'Oh! think of me at times!'' (1843), 'The Wreck of the 'Roscommon'' (1844), 'A Tribute to May' (1849), 'Le grand bey' (1849), 'Winter Flowers' (1849), 'The Flight of the Swallow' (1851), 'The Revel of the Missel-Thrush' (1851), and 'The Prince and the Prayer-Book: an Episode in the Life of Napoleon III' (1858). In 1850 he edited a quarterly publication, the 'Dinan Magazine'; but it did not survive. He died at Dinan on 12 June 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 22720


Prescott, Sir Henry (1783-1874), naval officer, son of Admiral Isaac Prescott (1737-1830), who commanded the 'Queen' as flag-captain to Sir Robert Harland in the action off Ushant on 27 July 1778, and his wife, daughter of the Revd Richard Walter, editor of 'Anson's Voyage Round the World', was born at Kew, Surrey, on 4 May 1783. He entered the navy in February 1796 on board the 'Formidable', with Captain George Cranfield Berkeley. In 1798 he was moved to the 'Queen Charlotte', and in 1799 to the 'Penelope', with Captain Henry Blackwood; he was present at the capture of the 'Guillaume Tell' on 30 March 1800. In 1801, in the 'Foudroyant', he was present at the operations on the coast of Egypt, and on 17 February 1802 Lord Keith appointed him acting lieutenant of the brig 'Vincejo'. In April 1803 Prescott was appointed to the 'Unicorn', in the North Sea, and in December 1804 to the 'Aeolus', one of the squadron under Sir Richard John Strachan which, on 4 November 1805, captured the four French ships of the line that had escaped from Trafalgar. In 1806 he was moved to the 'Ajax', and then transferred to the 'Ocean', flagship of Lord Collingwood in the Mediterranean. On 4 February 1808 he was promoted to be commander of the brig 'Weasel', and for the next three years served on the west coast of Italy. On 25 July 1810, at Amantea, in company with the frigate 'Thames', and the 'Pilot', he commanded the boats of the squadron in the capture or destruction of thirty-two store-ships and seven gunboats. For his gallantry then Prescott was promoted captain, dated to the day of the action. From August 1811 to June 1813 he commanded the 'Fylla' (20 guns), on the Jersey station; and from 1813 to 1815 the 'Eridanus', in the Bay of Biscay. In 1815 he married Mary Anne Charlotte, eldest illegitimate daughter of his commander-in-chief, Vice-Admiral Philip d'Auvergne, prince de Bouillon, and they had several children. On 4 June 1815 he was nominated a CB. From 1821 to 1825, in command of the frigate 'Aurora', he was senior officer at Rio de Janeiro, or on the west coast of South America, under Sir Thomas Hardy. In 1822 he was chiefly responsible for the successful resistance of the British merchants to the imposition of a forced loan of $200,000 by the Peruvian congress. In October 1822 he was voted a testimonial of the value of $1500 by the British merchants at Lima, for his protection of British interests. From 1834 to 1841 he was governor of Newfoundland; a period of political quarrels and sectarian animosities which he was unable to allay. 
On 24 April 1847 Prescott was promoted rear-admiral, and in June was appointed a lord of the Admiralty, an office he resigned in December to become admiral-superintendent of the Portsmouth Dockyard, where he remained until 1852. Prescott was appointed to the board at a time when the whigs were unable to find a suitable whig flag-officer prepared to contest a seat in parliament on Sir Charles Adam's retirement. His move to Portsmouth was inevitable. However, when Lord Auckland replaced him with Alexander Milne, then only a captain, he began the process of breaking the link between a seat on the board and active political support for the government in the House of Commons. 
Prescott was promoted vice-admiral on 15 April 1854, was nominated a KCB on 4 February 1856, became admiral on 2 May 1860, and on 9 June following was retired with a pension. On 2 June 1869 he was made a GCB. He died in London, at his residence, 7 Leinster Gardens, Hyde Park, on 18 November 1874. 
Prescott was an able officer, well suited to the administrative demands of colonial government and dockyard management. He lacked the political or personal influence for an active command afloat, but his services were highly valued. His belated GCB was for his work of the 1840s. 


@@@@@


doc= 22721


Prescott, Robert (1726/7-1815), army officer and governor-in-chief of British North America, was born in Lancashire. His father is often given as Richard Prescott, a cavalry officer, but on what grounds is not clear. He is also sometimes described as the brother of Colonel William Prescott (1725-1795) but as this Prescott was from an American family it is unlikely. Robert joined the British army as ensign in the 15th foot on 22 June 1745 and was promoted lieutenant three years later and captain on 22 January 1755. During the Seven Years' War he participated in an expedition in 1757 against Rochefort, France, and the next year in the seizure of Louisbourg, Cape Breton Island (Ile Royale). In May 1759 he became aide-de-camp to Major-General Jeffrey Amherst, colonel of his regiment, whom he accompanied in 1760 on the advance to Montreal. On 22 March 1761 Prescott was gazetted major in the 95th foot, which was ordered to Martinique in 1762. That July he exchanged into the 27th and on 10 November he was promoted lieutenant-colonel in the 72nd. After the war ended he spent the following decade unattached to a regiment and probably in Britain. 
On the outbreak of the American War of Independence Prescott was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the 28th foot on 8 September 1775 and took part in engagements in New York: on Long Island, in Westchester county, and at Fort Washington. Promoted brevet colonel in August 1777, he joined the expedition against Philadelphia, fighting at the battle of Brandywine the following month, and remained with the army of occupation until it retreated in 1778. That November he led the 1st brigade in an assault on the French island of St Lucia and from August 1779 to spring 1780 he commanded British troops in the Leeward Islands. He became colonel of the 94th foot on 13 October 1780 and major-general in November 1782. With the coming of peace in 1783 and disbandment of his regiment, he returned to Britain and was placed on half pay. On 6 July 1789 he was gazetted colonel of the 28th foot. 
When war with revolutionary France broke out Prescott was promoted lieutenant-general in October 1793 and given command in Barbados. Joining the expeditionary force against the French West Indies in 1794, led by Lieutenant-General Sir Charles Grey and Vice-Admiral Sir John Jervis, Prescott participated in the capture of Martinique and was made the island's governor. Opinionated and irascible, he clashed with Grey over the scale of arrests and deportation of inhabitants deemed security risks, asserting his independent authority in outraged, insubordinate language. Despite this dispute Grey appointed him that September governor of Guadeloupe, captured the previous April. Soon engaged in fighting resurgent French republicans, a disheartened, sickly Prescott sought to return home. This sparked further acrimonious correspondence with Grey, until the British withdrawal from Guadeloupe in December and the departure of both men for London, where they continued their rancorous exchanges. 
On 21 January 1796 Prescott was appointed lieutenant-governor of Lower Canada and, by a revised commission of 15 December, both governor-in-chief and commander of British forces in North America. Promoted general in January 1798, he was deeply concerned about Quebec's security against external invasion and internal subversion by disaffected French Canadians. Co-operating with Chief Justice William Osgoode and other members of the Anglophone elite, he responded to rioting by summary arrests and the exemplary execution of David McLane, an American spy. Controversy with his councillors over a scheme to resolve the chaos in land granting led to Prescott's recall in April 1799, though he remained governor-in-chief until 1807 without returning to Canada. Resolute in action and forthright in opinion, Prescott had capabilities that were vitiated by a cantankerous temperament. 
George Thomas Landmann of the Royal Engineers, who met Prescott in Quebec, recalled 'a little man, not exceeding five feet four or five inches high, very slender and certainly not much under eighty years of age; he was nevertheless active, a good officer, but exceedingly peppery' (Landmann, 1.240). Married to Susanna (died 18 April 1817), with at least one daughter (who married a Captain Baldwin) and a son, he died in his eighty-ninth year on 21 December 1815 at Rose Green, near Battle, Sussex, and was buried at Winchelsea. 


@@@@@


doc= 22722


Preston, Sir Amyas (d. 1609), naval commander, was a member of the Preston family of Cricket, Somerset. No reference to his birth or education has been found and the earliest reference to him is his marriage on 4 June 1581 to Julian Burye (died 1614?), widow, of the city of London, at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney. In 1588 he took part in the operations against the Spanish Armada, commanding the flotilla of ships' boats sent by Lord Howard to attack the great galleass the 'San Lorenzo', stranded outside Calais. He is said to have been severely wounded in this fight, although he and his men made sure that the galleass could not take part in the battle again and recompensed themselves by taking anything moveable from the ship. On 23 June 1589, in accordance with regulations intended to prevent the export of iron guns, Preston entered into a bond of $60 to cover the arming of his ship the 'Julyan Goodspeed' with 2 sakers and 6 minions. These regulations were primarily aimed at merchant ships and their captains, some of whom had been accused of arming their ships and then selling the guns once they were in a foreign port. Preston's appearance in a list of captains who had not redeemed their bonds suggests that he may have armed a ship for foreign trade, or perhaps for privateering, on his own account. 
In 1595 he led a voyage to the Spanish main together with Sir George Somers. Not even the author of 'The Victorious Voyage of Captaine Amias Preston... and Captaine George Sommer to the West Indies' could make this expedition into anything more than a not very successful raiding party. Damage was done to some of the Spanish settlements and the town of Santiago de Leon, now known as Caracas, was burnt, but very little plunder was taken back to England after six months at sea. 
In 1596 Preston sailed as captain of the 'Ark' under Lord Howard in the Cadiz expedition, and was among the sixty-four men knighted by Howard and the earl of Essex in Cadiz. He is said to have taken part the following year in the attack on the Azores known as the Islands voyage, but the sources differ as to whether he commanded a ship. He seems however to have been associated with court factions surrounding the earl of Essex and the Howard family. About the time of Essex's rebellion, with Ralegh's cousin Sir Ferdinando Gorges, he became involved in a quarrel with Sir Walter Ralegh and allegedly challenged Ralegh to a duel, although no fight seems to have taken place. In 1601 he was vice-admiral under Sir Richard Leveson of the fleet which was commissioned to guard the channel, commanding the 'Adventure' and later the 'Dreadnought'. In the autumn he commanded the 'Garland' as part of the fleet which was detached to defend Kinsale in Ireland against the attempted Spanish invasion, again acting as vice-admiral under Leveson. In the spring of 1602 he succeeded Leveson as admiral in the Irish fleet, commanding the 'Swiftsure'. 
Preston was appointed storekeeper to the ordnance on 17 May 1603, but the office quarter books do not show him as being active or paid as a member of the board until the March 1604 quarter. He served until his death, the last payment of his allowances being for the September quarter of 1609. In May 1609 he was one of those who petitioned for the incorporation of the second Virginia Company, and he was appointed a member of the new management council. Between 12 and 15 July, however, 'being sick but of perfect mynde and memory', he made his oral will in the presence of one Holliland and Roger Knight, leaving all his property to his wife, but asking her to give his black rapier and dagger to his brother Edward Preston, his gilt rapier and dagger to his godson Amyas Preston and 'his gylt faulcheon or semiterie with a greene velvet Scaberd' to the son of his elder brother. Probate was granted to his wife on 15 September 1609. 


@@@@@


doc= 22723


Preston, George (1659?-1748), army officer, was the second son of George Preston (died 1679) of Valleyfield, who was descended from the Prestons of Craigmillar and was created a baronet of Nova Scotia on 31 March 1637. His mother was Marion Sempill, only child of Hugh Sempill, fifth Lord Sempill. He was captain in the service of the states general in 1688, and accompanied William, prince of Orange, in his expedition to England. Subsequently he served in the foreign wars of King William and Queen Anne, and at the battle of Ramillies he was severely wounded. In 1706 he was made colonel of the Cameronian or 26th regiment, and he retained that office until 1720. At the outbreak of the rebellion in 1715 he was sent from London to take command of the castle of Edinburgh, and was finally appointed deputy governor of the castle, 'with a salary of ten shillings per day'. He served for some years as commander-in-chief of the forces in Scotland. Despite his great age, Preston remained in his post at Edinburgh Castle as late as 1747. After the battle of Prestonpans in 1745 the victorious Jacobites laid siege to the castle. According to some accounts, the governor, General Joshua Guest, encouraged the siege as a way of delaying the rebels' advance into England. Other accounts claim that Guest was deterred from surrender only by his deputy's firmness. Indeed, Preston's robust conduct during the siege did much to ensure that the castle held out. By now in his eighties, he inspected the guards every two hours in a wheelchair propelled by a party of soldiers. More questionably, he responded to the blockade the highlanders threw around the castle by bombarding Edinburgh town with his guns. The damage, panic, and casualties that this caused did not deter Preston from repeating the ploy, until Charles Edward Stuart agreed to allow supplies to pass. Preston parried the rebels' threat to damage his Valleyfield estate in Fife by promising to have Wemyss Castle, the ancestral home of Lord Elcho, one of Charles's generals, razed by naval bombardment. 
Preston died at Valleyfield on 7 July 1748. He left no children. He had paid off the encumbrances on the estate of Valleyfield, and thus acquired the right of the entail of the property, which he duly executed in favour of the heirs, male and female, of his brother Sir William and his nephew Sir George. 


@@@@@


doc= 22724


Preston, Sir Gilbert of (b. in or before 1209, d. 1274), justice, came of a family which took its name from the village of Preston Deanery in Northamptonshire, and which was part of a holding of two knights' fees belonging to the honour of Huntingdon, which the Prestons had held since at least the mid-twelfth century. A holding of two knights' fees at Little Billing and Hulcote in the same county, which formed part of the honour of Chokes, had been held by the family since the time of the 'Domesday Book'. Gilbert of Preston was the son of the 
Gilbert of Preston began his career in the king's service by acting as one of the collectors of an aid in Northamptonshire in 1235/6, and in 1240 he received his first appointment as a royal justice. Between 1240 and 1254 he was employed almost continuously as one of the puisne justices on successive eyre circuits led by William of York, Roger of Thirkleby, and Henry of Bath, and in the common bench at Westminster; he also received a number of miscellaneous judicial and administrative commissions. In most years he received some payment from the king, but was not put on a regular salary (of $40 a year) until 1253. This was at a time when arrangements started being made for the regular payment of most royal justices. 
In the autumn of 1254 Preston became the senior justice of an eyre circuit for the first time, though he also continued, when not on eyre, to act as a puisne justice of the Westminster bench. It was not until Michaelmas term 1260 that he sat for the first time as senior justice of that court. Shortly before this (in February 1260) his salary had been raised to 100 marks a year. Between Michaelmas term 1261 and Michaelmas term 1267 Preston sat continuously as senior justice of the common bench, except when sessions of the court were suspended because of political disturbances, but between the beginning of 1268 and the end of 1272 he once again left Westminster to lead an eyre circuit. He returned to Westminster only when eyres were suspended on the death of Henry III. His final period as chief justice of the common bench was during 1273, the last year of his life. 
Preston's wife, Alice, was the daughter of Christine, the daughter and heir of Wischard Ledet, lord of the barony of Chipping Warden, and her first husband, Henry of Braybrooke (died 1234). They were married by 1239. There is no evidence that they had any children: there was a donor to the priory of St Andrew, Northampton, called Sybil, daughter of Gilbert of Preston, but she was probably the daughter of an earlier namesake belonging to the same family. The justice's heir was Laurence of Preston, the son of his (predeceased) younger brother, William. Gilbert of Preston also had a second brother, Michael, whose lands, forfeited for adherence to the Montfortians, were granted to him in 1265; Michael was subsequently admitted into the king's peace at the request of Roger Leyburn (in 1266). Gilbert of Preston probably died early in January 1274. He had made provision some years before his death for the welfare of his soul through a grant of land in Lincolnshire to the prior of Sempringham in return for the provision of a canon of the order to celebrate at Sempringham for the donor, his ancestors, and heirs, and also by a grant of property at Gretton in Northamptonshire to support a chantry in the parish church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 22725


Preston, John (d. 1434), justice, was the younger son of John (perhaps Sir John) Preston of Preston Patrick and Preston Richard, Westmorland. His father lived until some time between 1392 and 1395, and is often hard to distinguish from his namesake and son. Although the younger John became his father's heir when his elder brother, Richard, died in 1390, giving him northern prospects and interests which he did not neglect, this did not prevent his pursuing a career as a lawyer in the south of England; his first commission, to investigate the seizure of nets in the Thames, came in February 1391. He soon acquired powerful patrons and employers. In 1393 he became steward of the Sussex estates of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and by 1397, and probably earlier, he was steward of the archbishop of Canterbury's Kentish manors of Otford and South Malling. Preston also acted for the crown, on 19 July 1394 receiving $2 6's'. 8died for securing the conviction of a multiple killer, and such additional rewards as the wardship and marriage of the heir of Henry Michelgrove, a landowner in Kent and Sussex. Preston himself acquired estates in the latter county, at Ringmer, South Malling, and Framfield. He retained links with Westmorland and Yorkshire, in November 1398 securing a powerful commission to act against adversaries there who were allegedly conspiring against his life. But his interests in the south remained paramount. He was appointed to the Sussex bench in 1397, and his Lancastrian ties were doubtless responsible for his being elected to represent Sussex in the parliament of 1399 which saw Henry Bolingbroke become king as Henry IV. 
Preston's connections with Sussex were inevitably weakened in 1404, when he lost his position as steward of the duchy of Lancaster's estates in that county, presumably for reasons connected with his being arrested and taken to London for questioning shortly after his dismissal. Instead he became increasingly involved in the government of London, where he had been appointed the city's recorder by 9 July 1406. In 1407 or 1408 he was admitted to the livery of the Mercers' Company, and he also acquired London property, in the parish of St Botolph, Aldersgate. Preston remained recorder until August or September 1415, and was regularly appointed to Newgate gaol deliveries until January 1425. On 11 January 1414, immediately after Sir John Oldcastle's rising, he was one of the commissioners appointed to act against Lollardy in the city. By this time he was a serjeant-at-law, having been ordered to take up that position on 3 February 1412. Three years later, on 16 June 1415, he was appointed a justice of the common pleas (reappointed on 1 October 1422); he was subsequently summoned among the justices to every parliament for which records survive until July 1427. 
Following his appointment to the common bench, Preston was appointed to a large number of commissions in many counties, in a large number of which he also became a JP. As a justice of assize and gaol delivery he acted in the west midlands as well as in the northern counties. But although in May 1425 he acquired the manor of Farnborough and other estates in Kent, during the 1420s his interests became perceptibly more concentrated in the north, just as his activities as a justice of assize and gaol delivery, and as a commissioner, were increasingly confined to the northern counties. In 1424, for instance, he was appointed to investigate claims to Yorkshire lands forfeited in 1415 by Henry, Lord Scrope of Masham. In 1421 he was granted the custody of the Westmorland and Yorkshire estates of Sir John Lumley, during the minority of the heir, a trust he was later charged with abusing. On 28 January 1428 Preston was licensed to retire, in response to his own petition, which complained of age and infirmity. However, he lived until 29 September 1434; he probably died in Westmorland. It was almost certainly in the intervening period that he planned a chantry in the chapel of St George in Preston Richard, to be served by two priests and maintained from Preston's London property. However, nothing came of this plan. With an unknown wife Preston had three sons, Richard, who was probably the eldest, since he inherited his father's lands in Sussex and Westmorland, Robert, and John. 


@@@@@


doc= 22726


Preston, John, of Penicuik, Lord Fentonbarns (d. 1616), judge, was the son of John Preston ('fl'. 1533-1585), burgess and dean of guild of Edinburgh, and his wife, Marion Nicoll. He matriculated at St Leonard's College, St Andrews, in 1564, and graduated BA in 1566 and MA in 1568. Admitted advocate in 1575, his first judicial appointment was in 1580 to the commissary court of Edinburgh, which had jurisdiction in testamentary and consistorial causes. He was elected a senator of the college of justice on 8 March 1596 on James VI's nomination, and took his seat in the court of session on 12 March. He took his judicial title of Lord Fentonbarns from a property in East Lothian he had acquired in 1579, and continued to use it after his purchase of the barony of Penicuik, Midlothian, in 1604. Exceptionally he continued as one of the four commissaries until 1599. Appointed to the privy council in 1596, he became one of its most active members, serving on numerous commissions and committees. 
In 1598 Sir George Home of Wedderburn, the comptroller, had severe problems in financing the royal households. On 31 October he entered into a contract with Preston by which the latter agreed to take on Home's offices of collector-general of the thirds of benefices and treasurer of the new augmentation. Any surplus from the revenue, which derived from ecclesiastical benefices and temporalities, was to be applied towards furnishing the households. Preston may have owed his formal appointment a month later to the friendship of John Erskine, eighteenth earl of Mar. In February 1599 James was reportedly angered by the refusal of the treasurer, the comptroller, and the collector, all of them Mar's friends, to give surety for the price of diamonds purchased from George Heriot, goldsmith. In July 1600 he was again said to be angry with the treasurer and collector 'for that they give him not money enough' ('CSP Scot.', 1597-1603, 673). Nevertheless, Preston was nominated on 2 October 1601 as one of eight commissioners to assist the new treasurer, Sir George Home of Spot. 
Preston also had a supporting role in James's ecclesiastical policy, beginning with his appointment in March 1596 as one of the king's two commissioners to the general assembly. In December 1596 James empowered him to make overtures to the ministers of Edinburgh following the riot there, and on 6 January 1597 he was appointed to advise the magistrates on the trial of those involved. Over the next ten years he represented the king at various synods and provincial assemblies. In January 1606 he was an assessor at the trial of the ministers accused of convoking an illegal general assembly at Aberdeen, dissenting from two rulings by the justice-depute. At the convention of estates in December 1606 he made 'a large discourse of the paines and travells which his majestie had tane in the effaires of the kirk', ending 'with exhortatioun to give his Hienesse satisfactioun' (Calderwood, 6.605). He was appointed to the new courts of high commission in 1610. 
On 23 December 1607 the lords of session elected Preston to be vice-president in Lord President Balmerino's absence. He was an assessor at Balmerino's trial for treason in March 1609, and following his conviction the lords of session elected Preston as best qualified to succeed him, on 6 June 1609. By then Preston's financial offices were of diminished importance, owing partly to the restoration of temporalities to the bishops in 1606 and partly to substantial grants of former church lands and revenues. Preston himself had pensions amounting to $1087 10's'. Scots and 24 'bolls' of meal from various abbacies for his own and his eldest son's lifetimes. On 15 November 1610 George Home, earl of Dunbar, was appointed to the combined offices of treasurer, comptroller, collector, and treasurer of the new augmentation. Though requiring Preston to demit his offices, thereby ceasing to rank as an officer of state, James preserved his status by stipulating that he was to continue as a member of the privy council and its president in the lord chancellor's absence. Preston was also one of the seven assessors nominated to assist the treasurer-depute in Dunbar's absence. After Dunbar's death he was one of eight commissioners, known as the New Octavians, appointed in April 1611 to manage the royal finances. Later that year, when told that the king expected to have some surplus revenue from Scotland, Preston commented: 'I wald thai[r] wer money, but it must not go to England' (Laing, 1.282). The treasury commission terminated in December 1613, but Preston retained his presidencies of the court of session and privy council until his death on 14 June 1616. 
Preston had three wives, each the widow of an advocate. He married first, in 1583, Elizabeth Fawside, widow of Clement Little, who died in the same year after giving birth to his eldest son, John. About 1588 he married Lilias Gilbert, widow of Alexander Mauchan, who was the mother of his other children, Michael, George, James, and Catherine. She had died by 1609, when he married Margaret Collace, widow of Sir John Shairp of Houston, who survived him, dying on 25 September 1617. Margaret owned the estate of Muirtown, near Forres, Moray, which passed to the son of her first marriage to Walter Reid, commendator of Kinloss. Though Penicuik had been destined for Preston's second son, Michael, he had agreed with his elder brother in 1612 to exchange it for Fentonbarns. It thus passed to Sir John Preston of Airdrie, who sold it in 1647. He had acquired the estate of Airdrie in Fife by marrying Elizabeth Turnbull, the heiress, and was created a baronet in 1628. Sir Michael Preston of Fentonbarns married Marion, daughter of John Hay of Kennet, in 1616. Catherine, who married Robert Nairn, advocate, was the mother of Robert Nairn of Strathord, first Lord Nairne (died 1683). 


@@@@@


doc= 22727


Preston, John (1587-1628), Church of England clergyman, was born at Upper Heyford, Northamptonshire, in October 1587 and baptized at the parish church of Bugbrook on 27 October, the son of Thomas Preston, a farmer, and his wife, Alice, daughter of Lawrence Marsh of Northampton. His father died before Preston was thirteen, but his mother's rich uncle, Cresswell, who was childless, took a liking to him, and sent him to the free school in Northampton. 
After further tuition in Bedfordshire, Preston on 5 July 1604 matriculated as a sizar from King's College, Cambridge. There he also studied music with particular devotion to the lute. Unhappy in this, he moved in 1606 to Queens' College, where he studied natural philosophy and graduated BA early in 1608. A business venture, for which he had sold land inherited from Cresswell, came to nothing, and so he returned to Aristotelian philosophy. What became a characteristic strictness of life emerged early: his tutor reprimanded him for excessive studying to the neglect of his body. However, he was rewarded in 1609 with a fellowship of the college. 
In 1610 Preston was made a lay prebendary of Lincoln Cathedral, an office he held until his death. However, at this time he had no intention of seeking ecclesiastical preferment and, according to Thomas Ball, writing later as one of his devoted disciples, Preston 'thought it below him to be a minister, & held the study of Divinity to be a kind of honest silliness' (Ball, 7). Instead, he turned to the study of medicine and astrology. He proceeded MA in 1611. However, about 1611 or 1612 'as he was in the Caelestial contemplations', he was rudely awakened by the 'hotter sort of Protestant' (ibid., 16). When John Cotton preached a plain, evangelical university sermon in Great St Mary's, it met with widespread disapproval from an audience seeking more ostentatious rhetoric, and Cotton returned dejected to his fellow's accommodation in Emmanuel College. Suddenly, however, Preston 'knocks at his door, and coming in, acquaints him with his spiritual condition, and how it had pleased God to speak effectually unto his heart by that Sermon' (J. Norton, 'Abel being Dead yet Speaketh', 1658, 14). Not only did Preston and Cotton become lifelong friends, but Preston's view of the Christian ministry and the study of divinity was transformed, and soon he was immersing himself in the works of the schoolmen, delighted to find there so frequently quoted his old friend Aristotle. He was ordained deacon in the diocese of Peterborough on 19 June, and priest on 20 June 1614. 
Soon afterwards Preston began to attract notice outside Cambridge. Samuel Harsnett, master of Pembroke College and vice-chancellor of the university, prevailed upon him to engage in a public philosophical disputation at Cambridge before King James in March 1615. Preston excelled and gained the king's favour, debating the question as to 'whether Dogs could make syllogismes' (Ball, 23). However, when Preston was offered a place at court he declined. This indifference to the allurements of the court offended many, and a few suspected that 'some inclination to puritanisme' lay behind his reserve (ibid., 29), but at this point no tangible evidence seems to have been given in support of the charge, other than his opposition to one of his pupils appearing in a stage play as a woman. 
Five years later, however, Preston nearly lost his place at Queens' owing to accusations of being 'a Non-Conformist' and 'an enimy to formes of Prayer' (Ball, 45, 53). On 23 January 1620 he clashed with Robert Newcome, commissary of the archdeacon of Ely, and with Lancelot Andrewes, recently departed bishop of Ely, over his failure to use the 'Book of Common Prayer' at a lecture in St Botolph's Church, Cambridge, and his preaching a sermon when explicitly forbidden to do so by Newcome. Yet Preston reaffirmed his full allegiance to the prayer book at St Botolph's, in what was made to be seen as an enforced recantation sermon, and he signed a written apology to Newcome. He thereby evaded the moves by Andrewes to have him expelled from the university. As if to play to both galleries, Preston in this sermon endorsed set forms of prayer and extempore prayer as each being useful in its own place. Preaching before James I at Hinchingbrooke that year, as is clear from the more reliable 1644 edition of the sermon 'Plenitudo fontis', he delivered what was largely anti-Arminian polemic, but towards the end he obliged with a defence of liturgical prayer, and an exhortation to obey the commands of the church. Both aspects of the sermon pleased the king. 
John Hacket, later bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, claimed Preston was 'not well affected to the Church' and was 'zealous for a new Discipline, and given to Change'; he wanted the marquess of Buckingham to help him 'strenuously lop off from this half-reformed Church, the superfluous Branches of Romish Superstition, that much disfigured it' (Hacket, 'Scrinia reserata', 1693, 1.203). However, writing in the 1650s, Hacket cited no sources for this narrative, and its accuracy is impossible to assess. Preston was indeed close to Buckingham, and the effect of this and other contacts is evident from the fact that the St Botolph's incident did nothing to hinder his rapid promotion: Sir Fulke Greville, among others, became his patron, strategic contacts at court continued, and his reputation as a theologian grew. 
Later in 1620 Preston proceeded BD, and he soon became dean and catechist at Queens'. The longest item in Preston's manuscript legacy -- a system of theology as taught to his Cambridge pupils -- dates from about this time (Emmanuel College, Cambridge, MS 181). It has been suggested that Preston's anti-papal activities extended to writing, if only in a joint-authorship capacity, one of the most outspoken tracts against the Spanish match, possibly that known as 'Mr Alured's' letter against the Spanish match, numerous copies of which survive. On 9 May 1621 James Ussher, then vice-chancellor of Trinity College, Dublin, chose Preston as professor of theological controversies there but, having deliberated until 20 July, Preston declined. But he did not refuse another offer that same year to enter the court, and was made chaplain-in-ordinary to Prince Charles, thanks to his sermon before the king and his relationship with Buckingham. 
On 21 May 1622 Preston was elected to succeed John Donne as preacher to the Honourable Society of Lincoln's Inn, where he officiated regularly for the rest of his life. He exerted a considerable influence through this prestigious congregation, and even the newly rebuilt chapel was soon bursting at the seams. On 3 October, following a legal but hurried and secret election behind locked gates, Preston was also admitted master of Emmanuel College, Cambridge. His court connections gave Emmanuel the prestige it needed to offset its growing notoriety as a subversive 'puritan' institution. Yet Preston later fell out of favour with the fellows who had elected him, because he was so absorbed with court affairs that he had little time to bring in the reforms to the college statutes that the fellows were expecting. His predecessor, Laurence Chaderton, may have continued to discharge many of the master's functions. 
Meanwhile, Preston had caught the eye of Arthur, Lord Chichester, who in 1623 requested the king for the company of Preston on his proposed mission to Cologne to negotiate an end to war in the Palatinate. Chichester, Sir Edward Conway, and Buckingham then obtained for Preston, through a personal mandate of the king dated 15 July, a degree of DD, conferred on 17 July. It was thought improper for a master of a university college to be seen abroad without one. 
About this time Preston turned down an offer of the deanery of Westminster, seeing it as no use for the cause of 'the godly'. His desire to place a higher priority on preaching than on financial gain was very evident in 1624 when the lectureship at Holy Trinity Church, Cambridge, became vacant. By now suspicious of the use Preston would make of such a position, the king and bishops not only promised Paul Micklethwaite, fellow of Sidney Sussex, a reward if he would campaign for it, but also tried to deflect Preston with an offer of any bishopric or other preferment he desired. This ploy failed, not because of any stated unease on Preston's part with the episcopal office itself -- indeed, he maintained close and enduring friendships with numerous bishops -- but rather because he believed that God's cause was better served in other spheres. His heart was set on preaching, and he was finally confirmed lecturer at Trinity by Nicholas Felton, bishop of Ely, amid much controversy and opposition from the vice-chancellor. 
Preston's ministry there and elsewhere had a significant impact, including influencing ordinary people. Many attributed their spiritual awakening to his preaching, among them Thomas Shepard of New England fame. Furthermore, although Preston was never given a cure of souls, he was much sought after as a spiritual counsellor concerning the inward motions of the human heart. His most demanding service in this area was probably the infamous case of Joan Drake, who in the early 1620s was understood to be in the grip of Satan and suicidal until she was apparently delivered through the prolonged counselling of Preston, John Dod, Thomas Hooker, and James Ussher. Preston also had close and long-lasting friendships with those renowned for a more defiant stance towards their mother church. He may or may not have shared the nonconformist tenets of Cotton or Arthur Hildersam, but he was sufficiently behind them to negotiate their liberty to preach again after they had been silenced in the 1610s and 1620s. 
By the mid-1620s Preston had reached the peak of his career. It seems fair to say that theological concerns overrode his more natural inclinations to prolong this period of political favour. In April 1625 Joseph Mede could still describe Preston as 'a man in speciall favour with the king' (BL, Harley MS 389, fol. 428), and for a while Buckingham continued to seek his preferment. That year he nominated Preston for the newly vacant position of lord keeper, although Sir Thomas Coventry, formerly of Emmanuel College, finally received the post. However, Buckingham was quietly undergoing a change of allegiance in an anti-Calvinist direction. At the York House conference in February 1626 Preston played a leading if, to his supporters, disappointing role, but Richard Mountague, accused of popery and Arminianism, escaped the clutches of his would-be oppressors, and Buckingham's new agenda became clear to Preston. He committed to writing his new assessment of the duke and court politics in general but the letter fell into the hands of Sir Henry Spiller, who alerted the duke. A wedge was driven between him and Preston, and the latter's influence at court began to wane, so much so that he even considered escaping to Basel. But Preston remained in England and, although direct evidence is lacking, it is probable that he went on to become a key leader behind the formation in 1626 of the feoffees for impropriations, who aimed to gather endowments for the establishment of preaching ministries. 
Soon after this Preston's health began to fail. On 27 May 1628 Richard Sibbes, fellow feoffee and preacher at Gray's Inn, wrote to Ussher, now archbishop of Armagh, informing him that Preston was 'inclining to a consumption' (probably tuberculosis) and that his state was 'thought doubtful to the physicians' (J. Ussher, 'Works', 1864, 16.522). Preston spent his last months travelling to see friends, hoping that the country air would do him good. He finally returned to his home county of Northamptonshire and to his friend Sir Richard Knightley at Fawsley, enabling him to renew his fellowship with Dod, who prayed with him on his deathbed. He was also visited by Chaderton and Lord Saye and Sele. At five o'clock in the morning on 20 July, Preston died at Knightley's home in Fawsley -- a bachelor, and just short of his forty-first birthday. He was buried on 28 July in Fawsley parish church, intentionally without elaborate ceremony. Dod preached the funeral sermon, 'and a world of Godly people came together' (Ball, 175). Preston's will, made on 30 July 1618 and proved on 30 July 1628, was indicative both of that world and of his primary concerns. Beneficiaries included Chichester, Saye and Sele (his executor), Dod, Sibbes, Cotton, Hooker, and other 'godly preachers', with $50 going to Queens' College. A codicil left $200 to Emmanuel College to support two poor scholars. 
Undoubtedly Preston's greatest legacy was the subsequent flood of published editions of his sermons, through which he continued to have a great influence on 'the godly' in England and New England. His works, all published posthumously, comprise mainly sermonic as opposed to systematic material, and were critical in establishing a new spiritual genre of protestant devotional publications, through Dutch-language editions among others. When Lord Saye and Sele visited him on his deathbed, Preston chose four men as his editors, Sibbes and John Davenport for his Lincoln's Inn sermons, and Thomas Goodwin and Ball for all his other sermons. Collections of the former first appeared as 'The New Covenant' (1629); a treatise on prayer, 'The Saints Daily Exercise' (1629); 'The Breast-Plate of Faith and Love' (1630); and 'The Saints Qualification' (1633). The other authorized collections of sermons were 'The Golden Scepter' (1638); a series on indwelling sin, 'The Doctrine of the Saints Infirmities' (1636); an incomplete treatise on the divine attributes, 'Life Eternall' (1631); and an important collection of court sermons, 'Sermons Preached before his Majestie' (1630). To the dismay of the authorized editors, twice as many titles in Preston's name were to come from unauthorized editors, who included Preston's great admirer William Prynne. The unauthorized editions are not inherently or generally unreliable, however, although 'The Fulnesse of Christ for Us' (1639, 1640) was purged to make it appear that Preston had not preached against Arminianism before the king; the 1644 edition, 'Plenitudo fontis', corrects this. Other more important unauthorized publications include: a treatise on the sovereignty of grace, 'Irresistibilitate gratiae convertentis' (1639; English translation, 1654); 'Remaines' (1634); a thorough treatment of the mortification of sin, 'Sins Overthrow' (1633); and a collection of assorted sermons, 'Riches of Mercy' (1658), the last of Preston's works to be published in the seventeenth century. This brought the total number of editions of his material to over 100. 
In terms of theology he has often been misrepresented, but his printed legacy reveals that the mature Preston embraced the system of English hypothetical universalism. This was a modified and moderate form of Calvinism, which he had learned from Ussher and Bishop John Davenant in reaction to rigorous Elizabethan particularism (which he seems to have once held) and which arose from the perceived need for a Reformed and Lutheran consensus in the light of a rising Arminianism. He held that in one sense Christ died for all without exception, and that God desires to save all hearers in the preaching of the gospel. He was a self-conscious and influential covenant theologian, and promoted a greater emphasis on human responsibility in the covenant relationship. His evangelical impulse led him to attack the formalism he saw in the state church, and dominant themes in his preaching were preparation for salvation, the quest for full assurance of faith, and the need for thorough self-examination prior to partaking of the Lord's supper. 
Preston's relationship to the established church remains more elusive. He has been described as 'one of the more enigmatic figures in the history of religion, and of politics' (Bendall, Brooke, and Collinson, 215). In the historiography of dissent, by 1702 Preston was being heralded as 'one of the greatest Men in his Age' (C. Mather, 'Marginalia Christi Americana', 1702, 3.16); there was 'scarcely an eminent Puritan divine of fifty years after Preston's death who does not refer to him as one of the greatest authorities' (Hill, 244). He later became enshrined as a 'sufferer for nonconformity' (D. Neal, 'History of the Puritans', 1822, 2.128). Yet this was without evidence: Thomas Fuller gave no grounds for styling Preston as the 'Patriarch of the Presbyterian Party' (T. Fuller, 'The Church-History of Britain', 1655, pt 11, 131). Preston nowhere seems to have spoken against episcopacy, and neither does there appear to be any surviving evidence of his attitude to vestments or the signing of the cross in baptism. 
On the other hand, Preston shows himself to have been definitely the 'hotter sort of Protestant'. The zeal of his youth continued into his later preaching and Heylyn singled him out as a renowned sabbatarian. His plain-style preaching was on occasions militantly anti-papal and anti-Arminian, and his court sermons frequently addressed the contemporary political scene; Fuller thought him a 'perfect Politician' of the utmost cunning (Fuller, 'Worthies', 2.291). At the same time, his works are almost entirely consumed with matters of spiritual experience and practical piety. As an exemplary 'experimental predestinarian' and as a member of the spiritual brotherhood who pursued this approach to piety, Preston was indeed a puritan. In regard to outward conformity, or rather lack of it, he was a moderate or a fully conforming puritan. But this does not imply that he was complacent about the ecclesiastical 'status quo', for in that sense he was a conforming reformer. 


@@@@@


doc= 22728


Preston, Richard (1768-1850), writer, was born at Ashburton in Devon, the only son of John Preston, minister, of Okehampton, also in Devon. He began his career as an attorney, but attracted the notice of Sir Francis Buller by his first work, 'An Elementary Treatise on the Quantity of Estates' (1791). On Buller's advice he entered the Inner Temple, in 1793, where, after practising for some years as a certificated conveyancer, he was called to the bar on 20 May 1807, was elected a bencher in 1834, in which year he took silk, and was reader in 1844. 
Preston was MP for Ashburton in the parliament of 1812-18, and was one of the earliest and most robust advocates of the imposition of the corn duties. In 1815 he published an 'Address to the fundholder, the manufacturer, the mechanic, and the poor on the subject of the corn laws'. Other tracts on the same subject appeared in 'The Pamphleteer' between 1816 and 1818. In 1816 he made vigorous attacks in parliament on the government's financial mismanagement. But in the two following sessions his speeches became infrequent. He had invested a large fortune, derived from his conveyancing practice, in land in Devon. In law, as in politics, he was intensely conservative, and thought the 'Fines and Recoveries Act' a dangerous innovation; but his knowledge of the technique of real-property law was considerable and his works on conveyancing were lucid and well researched. He wrote several legal treatises, including 'A Treatise on Conveyancing' (1806-9) which ran into a third edition. He was for some time professor of law at King's College, London. He died on 20 June 1850 at his seat, Lee House, Chulmleigh, in north Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 22729


Preston, Sir Simon, of Preston and Craigmillar (d. in or before 1575), administrator and provost of Edinburgh, was the eldest son of George Preston of Preston and his wife, Isabel Hoppringle. His family had possessed the lands of Preston, Midlothian, since the reign of William the Lion, and the lands and castle of Craigmillar, just outside Edinburgh, since 1374. There was a long association between the Prestons and the burgh of Edinburgh. From 1434 members of the family frequently acted as sheriff and lord provost and were among the patrons of the burgh church of St Giles, which had a Preston aisle founded within it in 1455, next to the existing family tomb in the Lady Aisle. The precious relic of the arm bone of St Giles, centrepiece of the annual St Giles's day procession, was presented by the family about 1450. 
Simon Preston is mentioned as a bailie of Edinburgh on 24 August 1538. He served as lord provost between 1538 and 1543 and again in 1544-5. In 1538 he was one of the twelve who formed the official reception for Mary of Guise's arrival in Edinburgh. On 25 August 1540 he had a grant from the town of the office of common clerk for life, which was confirmed by a letter of privy seal two days later. On 5 June 1543 he and his second wife, Janet Beaton, a relative of Cardinal David Beaton, were granted the lands of Balgawy in Forfarshire and those of Craigmillar and Preston. In May 1544, when an English army under the earl of Hertford attacked Leith and Edinburgh, Craigmillar Castle was surrendered to the invaders, seemingly to avoid damage to it. The valuables placed in it by Edinburgh inhabitants for safe keeping were plundered, and Preston himself was taken to London as a prisoner. No details survive of his imprisonment and release, and little is known of his activities between then and the summer of 1560, when he travelled via London to France, in order, according to William Maitland of Lethington, who claimed to be a 'near relative', to recover debts owed to him by Mary of Guise ('Salisbury MSS', 1.250). In January 1561 he was appointed by Queen Mary as one of the four commissioners to convey the news of the death of her husband, Francois II, to the Scottish privy council. 
After her return to Scotland in August 1561 Mary was an occasional visitor to Craigmillar Castle, which lay barely 2 miles to the south of the royal palace of Holyroodhouse. The closeness of the link between her and Preston may be exaggerated: though he was perhaps in an inner circle of trusted friends of the queen, most of whom were minor lords or lairds, few of the royal visits to Craigmillar were of any length, and it was not until 1565 that Preston, now advanced in years, experienced direct royal patronage. On 23 August 1565, against the background of the failed rebellion by Moray, and after a series of brushes with hardline protestants in the capital the queen dismissed the provost, Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie, who had held office continuously since the Reformation crisis of 1559-60, and replaced him with Preston. At the time of the burgh's annual election five weeks later, the queen imposed a leet on the burgh. Knox's description of those on it as 'a number of papists, the rest not worthy' ('History of the Reformation', 2.171) was jaundiced and inaccurate. It did include some Roman Catholics, excluded from office since 1560, but it was made up mostly of substantial merchants who were moderate-minded protestants. The effect was that protestant activists were removed from office until after Mary was deposed in 1567. 
The role of Preston of Craigmillar in the leet and after was ambiguous. His religious stance is also hard to pin down. It is no surprise that the patron of the burgh's cult of St Giles before the Reformation should have been regarded with suspicion by Knox, who condemned him as a 'right epicurean' for his loyalty to the queen after the Riccio murder. In the earlier crisis which followed the Darnley marriage and Moray conspiracy of 1565, however, Knox admitted that Preston had 'showed himself most willing to set forward religion, to punish vice and to maintain the commonwealth' ('History of the Reformation', 2.113, 171). Yet Preston also had a number of Roman Catholic connections, and in April 1568 he conferred a free burgess-ship on his kinsman, David Hoppringle, even though two years earlier Hoppringle had fallen foul of the authorities for his marriage by Roman Catholic rites to the daughter of the royal macer Thomas Crichton. 
Preston was Catholic in sympathies but probably a nominal protestant, and his concerns, like those of the bulk of the merchant and legal establishment in the capital, were conservative, eirenic, and consensual. As such he served the burgh well, occasionally defending it against heavy-handed action by Mary's administration. Against a background of growing resentment among the burgh's merchants at the crown's spiralling fiscal demands, in September 1565 Preston negotiated the purchase of the superiority of Leith for the burgh, in return for a loan of 10,000 merks to the queen. This was a turning point for the capital in its long efforts to secure control of its port. When the town clerk, Alexander Guthrie, was forfeited for his involvement in the Riccio murder in March 1566, Preston, sensitive to the threat to burgh privilege, opposed his replacement by a royal nominee. His actions during the attempted take-over of the burgh by Moray on 31 August 1565, and again on the night of the Riccio murder on 9 March 1566, showed a concern for order and authority which appealed to the conservative-minded burgh establishment as well as to the queen. Although Preston understandably failed to raise the town to resist Moray's forces entering the burgh, the rebels found little support and retreated on hearing of the approach of the royal army. In 1566 his actions were more decisive: according to Knox, Preston led about five hundred townspeople 'in warlike manner' down the High Street to Holyrood to defend the queen, but retreated on the order of Darnley ('History of the Reformation', 2.180). 
The balancing act continued afterwards. Although Preston continued as provost in October 1566 by means of another royal leet, which was seen as a further example of undesirable interference by the crown in burgh affairs, Preston survived the crisis which brought about the deposing of the queen in July 1567. He remained provost almost to the end of the Moray regency, until replaced by the more overtly Marian figure of William Kirkcaldy of Grange in September 1569. In November 1567 he arranged the gift to the town of the collegiate church of Trinity College, which was intended as a hospital. In the meantime his crucial role in providing stability in the capital as its provost had not prevented his entering royal service. He was appointed to the privy council on 5 November 1565, one of the lesser or professional men who lay behind its reorganization in 1565-6; his attendance was fairly regular. This brought him into association with Bothwell. He was also made keeper of the royal castle at Dunbar, where much of the Royal Artillery was housed, and appointed to a commission to oversee the royal ordnance. 
It was during Mary's two-week stay at Craigmillar from 20 November 1566, recuperating from the sudden illness which had struck her at Jedburgh, that plans were discussed among key members of the privy council, including Lethington, Moray, and Argyll, for separating Darnley from the queen. Preston's role in the crisis which brought about the downfall of the queen in June 1567 was largely passive, though he was a party to the bond of 10 June seeking her deliverance from Bothwell. When she was brought into the capital by the confederate lords after Carberry, she was briefly lodged in his house on the north side of the High Street. Preston did not emerge into the open, either before or after Mary's forced imprisonment, as a queen's man. Six days after Mary's escape from Lochleven he entered into a bond with Kirkcaldy of Grange to maintain the cause of the infant king and the regent Moray. By the time Kirkcaldy took over the office of provost of Edinburgh from him in September 1569, Preston was ready to bow out of active politics. In June that year he had arranged formally to resign the lands and barony of Craigmillar to his heir apparent, David, the son of his first marriage, to Elizabeth, daughter of William Menteith of Kerse, Stirlingshire. By 12 June 1570 Preston was in Paris, from where he wrote to Sir William Cecil, informing him of a proposal made by Charles IX on behalf of Queen Mary. After that he fades from the record. He died some time before 8 March 1575. 


@@@@@


doc= 22730


Preston, Thomas (1537-1598), playwright and college head, was born at Simpson, Buckinghamshire, of a Lancashire family. He was educated at Eton College and at King's College, Cambridge, where he was elected scholar on 16 August 1553 and fellow on 18 September 1556. He graduated BA in 1557 and MA in 1561. He made a favourable impression on Elizabeth I when she visited Cambridge in 1564 for his performance in the tragedy of 'Dido'; for his 'gracefull gesture... and propernesse of person' as a disputant in a philosophy act -- despite having the difficult task of refuting the statement 'monarchia est optimus status reipublicae' ('monarchy is the best form for a state'); and for his oration upon her departure, at which Elizabeth dubbed him 'her scholar' and gave him the not inconsiderable pension of $20 a year (Fuller, 264; Cooper, 'Annals', 2.196). In 1565 he was a proctor in the university. He was directed by his college to study civil law in 1572, and subsequently proceeded to the degree of LLD, possibly in 1576. In 1581 he resigned his fellowship, perhaps in order to marry, since when he was appointed master of Trinity Hall he was the first married man to occupy the post. He was elected to this office by royal mandate in 1585, having been recommended as a man 'void of faction' (Crawley, 66), and on 17 May 1586 his name was entered in the subscription book of the College of Advocates, where, as master of Trinity Hall, he was entitled to lodge. In 1589-90 he served as the university's vice-chancellor. He was admitted an advocate in the court of arches on 17 June 1591. 
The best-known work attributed to Preston is the play 'Cambises', which, although licensed to John Allde in 1569-70, could have been written as early as 1560 when it may have been presented at court over Christmas. Comprising thirty-eight parts for eight players, this play is deemed to be innovative both in terms of its staging requirements and as a hybrid dramatic form which marked the transition from the morality play to the tragedies and history plays of Marlowe and Shakespeare. Despite its innovative qualities 'Cambises' has also been derogated for its 'gross bombast' and 'absurd ineptitudes' (Wilson, 144), and its plodding couplets in fourteeners, interwoven with unmetrical verse spoken by the character of the Vice. The play was ridiculed by contemporaries, and was notably parodied by Shakespeare in Bottom's play in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' and in '1 Henry IV', when Falstaff is made to 'speak in passion... in King Cambises' vein' (II.v) -- although such parody indirectly suggests the popularity of the play. Perhaps because of the work's more flamboyant qualities Preston's authorship has been questioned, and 'Cambises' -- together with an anti-Catholic ballad of 1570 entitled 'A Lamentation from Rome' (narrated from the perspective of a fly lodged in the pope's nose) which was also penned by a Thomas Preston -- is sometimes attributed to an itinerant actor-playwright rather than the master of Trinity Hall. Two other ballads bear Preston's name, and he was undisputedly the author of Latin verses compiled by the university on the restitution of Bucer and Fagius in 1560, and at the end of Carr's 'Demosthenis... orationes' (1571). 
Preston died intestate on 1 June 1598, and inventories amounting to more than $450 worth of goods left at his chambers in Doctors' Commons, his house in Barnwell, Cambridge, and in the master's lodging at Trinity Hall, suggest that he died a wealthy man. He was buried in Trinity Hall chapel, where a brass monument commissioned by his widow, Alice, still remains near the altar, commemorating him with an effigy and a Latin inscription. 


@@@@@


doc= 22731


Preston, Thomas, first Viscount Tara (b. in or after 1585, d. 1655), soldier, was the second son of Christopher Preston, fourth Viscount Gormanstown (1536/7-1600), and his second wife, Catherine Fitzwilliam (died 1602?), daughter of Sir Thomas Fitzwilliam of Baggotsrath, co. Dublin. Preston may have been the brother of the fifth viscount who was reported in December 1600 as receiving his education at the Irish house at Douai (Douai College) alongside other sons of Old English families. 
As a younger son of a Catholic family, albeit the leading family of the pale, Preston chose military service abroad because it was one of the relatively few careers open to him. In 1605 he recruited a company in Ireland and proceeded to the Spanish Netherlands (later the Southern Netherlands) where he was commissioned in Henry O'Neill's regiment. In 1608 he was pitched into a controversy between Old English captains and their colonel, the son of Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone. The rift over questions of allegiance and to the crown arose 'from a speech of Preston's upon Henry's discourse tending to make war and raise troubles within this kingdom [Ireland]; to which he answered, it was not lawful, neither would he ever bear arms against his sovereign' (Henry, 'The Irish Military Community', 142). Also in 1608 Preston served at the siege of Rheinberg on the German frontier. The regiment was scattered in garrison duties throughout most of the period of the truce with the Dutch (1609-21) apart from Spinola's Palatinate campaign of 1620. 
Preston married a daughter of Charles vander Eycken, from one of the most powerful and wealthy families in Brabant, shortly after 1612. They had two sons and a daughter; the sons -- Anthony and James, or Diego -- were to play an active part in the confederate armies and both fought at the battle of Rathconnell, co. Westmeath, in 1643. Their mother died on 28 October 1621, and Preston married Marguerite de Namur, a widow, about 1623. Though certainly alive two years before Preston's death, she was to predecease him. They had five daughters and a son. 
Preston fought with O'Neill's regiment in the initial stages of the siege of Breda (1624-5). By March 1625, three months before the end of the siege, he had left the regiment and recruited a company of Irish cuirassiers. Preston's departure from the Irish regiment probably resulted from tensions with Owen Roe O'Neill, the acting regimental commander. These tensions arose from the outbreak of hostilities between Spain and England in 1625 when English officials tried to persuade Preston and other Old English officers of the Irish regiment to leave the Spanish service. However, the company was disbanded in September 1625, just six months after its inception. Preston was subsequently maintained as an 'entretenido'. This status commonly referred to an officer without a command receiving an additional allowance while serving, in effect, as a rank and file soldier. In May 1629 Stadholder Frederick Henry besieged 's-Hertogenbosch, one of the four principal cities of Brabant. Preston served with the Spanish relief force which initially approached the besiegers but then swung eastwards to link up with imperial forces. The joint force then crossed the Ysel to launch a diversionary raid on the more vulnerable eastern flank of the United Provinces. The expedition overran the Veluwe in Gelderland and captured Amersfoort in Utrecht, thereby penetrating to the heart of the United Provinces. However, Frederick Henry was not to be distracted and 's-Hertogenbosch fell in September. 
The Anglo-Spanish 'rapprochement' of 1629-30 reopened the possibility of large scale recruiting in Ireland and, in January 1632, Preston was promoted major in a new regiment, Tyrconnel's, with instructions to recruit in Ireland. His encouragement to would-be captains to raise companies from the new regiment was the subject of complaints by the lords justices in Ireland who were, apparently, not supportive of the new pro-Spanish foreign policy. However, the arrival of Lord Deputy Wentworth smoothed Preston's path. Wentworth's partiality is evident from his praise of Preston as 'a faithful friend' and 'one of the civilest gentlemen of his nation' (Jennings, 574). In August 1634 Preston was commissioned to form another regiment on his own behalf comprising fifteen companies, each of 200 men. In the event he recruited 2400 men and was back in the Southern Netherlands by April 1635 in time for the long-threatened hostilities with France. The French invaded with an enormous field army of some 26,000 soldiers, their advance being in tandem with Dutch attacks in the north. Preston's regiment played a crucial part in repulsing the French incursion as one of four regiments which held Louvain for eleven days against vastly superior enemy forces. Preston was in charge of two of the city gates against which the French directed their attack and his regiment lost seventy men in counter-attacks. This was the start of a period of heavy attrition for the 7000 or more soldiers in the four Irish 'tercios'. The following year, 1636, saw the Cardinal Infante invade northern France and capture Corbie before being forced to withdraw. Preston's regiment probably took part in the invasion; at any rate in November 1636 it was disbanded because it was significantly under-strength and the individual soldiers were transferred to top up Tyrconnel's regiment. Once again Preston was an officer without a field command. In 1641 he was governor of Gennepp, a small city on the eastern borders of the United Provinces. He beat off a storming party after the walls were breached before surrendering in July 'upon honourable terms with no little glory to himself' (Carte, 1.367). 
Following the Irish rising of 1641 Preston and Owen Roe O'Neill were chosen to reinforce the insurgents with professional leadership and munitions. In December 1642 Preston was formally commissioned as general of the Leinster provincial army of the Catholic confederates. Preston doubtless owed his appointment partly to the fact that his nephew Nicholas, sixth Viscount Gormanstown, was then the political leader of the Leinster confederates. At any rate he was not picked entirely for his military qualities to judge from the character sketch penned by Hugh de Burgo, the Franciscan mainly responsible for organizing the expedition from the Southern Netherlands. Writing to Luke Wadding at Rome he described Preston as 'very brave, but not a man of much prudence; true it is that he is more popular than the other [O'Neill], but there is absolutely no comparison between the two talents' ('Franciscan MSS', 145). Traditionally Preston has suffered in comparisons between the two contemporaries and rivals. However, he has not been sufficiently credited for his skill in siege warfare. Admittedly he started inauspiciously after his landing in mid-September when he failed to prevent a relief force from resupplying Ballinakill, a strong protestant garrison a mere 8 miles from the confederate Catholic capital of Kilkenny. After building up his forces he captured Borris, Birr, and Fort Falkland near Banagher, between 30 December 1642 and 27 January 1643, thereby opening a direct route from Kilkenny towards Connaught. 
In March 1643 Ormond, the king's representative, marched from Dublin to capture New Ross in order to cut off Kilkenny, and confederate Ireland, from its major ports of Wexford and Waterford. Ormond failed to take New Ross and Preston tried to block his retreat northwards at Ballinvegga. Preston's handling of the battle of Ballinvegga, or Ross, could be faulted in that he deployed his cavalry to attack along a narrow 'boreen' lined with hedgerows and covered by enemy artillery. The results were predictably demoralizing. Critics who blamed Preston for not choosing a better blocking position further to the north-west ignored the fact that, had he done so Ormond would have been able to veer north-eastwards and retrace his original line of march. Preston's fault was not in his choice of terrain but his handling of the cavalry. Nor can he be especially blamed for the poor performance of the infantry, who were overwhelmingly poorly trained local militia. Preston redeemed himself by finally capturing Ballinakill in May with the aid of a newly acquired 24-pounder siege gun. He next mobilized a core of 2000 regulars and, supplemented by local militia, spent the early summer trying to eliminate the dense pocket of protestant garrisons -- Edenderry, Castlejordan, Portlester, and Athboy -- blocking the route from the west, through the midland bogs, towards Dublin. In mid-August, however, he was obliged to disband his army 'for want of means' (Gilbert, 1.48). 
The cessation of September 1643 with Ormond left, for the moment, no enemy forces in Leinster. Not until the garrison of Duncannon rejected the cessation and allied themselves with the parliamentarians in Munster did Preston see action again. His siege (20 January - 19 March 1645) of this promontory fort, dominating the approaches to Waterford and New Ross, showed Preston at his best. Duncannon was exceptionally well-fortified yet, despite the rigours of a mid-winter siege, Preston lost remarkably few men through sickness and sustained only 67 killed in action from an army of some 1300 soldiers. The capture involved the innovative use of parallel trenches connecting the saps (the first known parallels were dug by the French at the siege of Gravelines in 1644), plunging mortar fire, direct fire to deter enemy shipping, undermining, and a final assault by the infantry. Later in the campaigning season he was sent by the supreme council to Youghal to assist the earl of Castlehaven in capturing the town. Castlehaven saw Preston's arrival as an implied slight on his conduct of the siege and, moving camp away from the town, he declined to co-operate. Preston eventually abandoned the siege after an assault on the town was beaten back. 
The following summer Preston again campaigned outside Leinster. While half his army (by now expanded to 6000 regular infantry and 600 cavalry) was sent to besiege Bunratty in co. Clare he himself led the remainder into Connaught. The object of this campaign was to eliminate the protestant-held garrisons in co. Roscommon which had rejected the cessation. He was then to recapture Sligo, lost the previous year. Preston carried out his initial objectives and beat off a force which tried to relieve Roscommon Castle. However, he declined to move north from Boyle and cross the Curlew Mountains, pleading that the countryside towards Sligo was stripped bare of provisions. 
Meanwhile, the 'Ormond peace' was proclaimed at Kilkenny and Dublin (30 July - 3 August 1646). This treaty referred the repeal of the penal laws against Catholics 'to his Majestie's gracious favour', while the confederates agreed to dissolve their government before the actual granting of such concessions. It was, in short, 'a poor return on almost four years of war' (M. O Siochru, 'Confederate Ireland, 1642-1649: a Constitutional and Political Analysis', 1999, 111). Rinuccini, the papal nuncio, rejected the terms on the grounds that they were unfavourable to Catholic interests and threatened to excommunicate all who accepted them. The Leinster army occupied a pivotal role between a clericalist Ulster army and an Ormondist Munster army and Preston was persuaded by the nuncio to join with Owen Roe O'Neill and capture Dublin from Ormond. The importance of their mutual distrust has been exaggerated; at any rate it was not the sole reason why the operation failed. The Dublin hinterland had been stripped of foodstuffs by Ormond, bridges and mills destroyed, while heavy rains had reduced supplies from further afield to a trickle. In the circumstances, campaigning with the largest force ever mustered by the confederation (at least 20,000 soldiers and camp followers) posed insurmountable logistical difficulties. Preston's unauthorized agreement with the earl of Clanricarde, Ormond's intermediary, convinced O'Neill that Preston was plotting against him and a false report that parliamentarian troops had reinforced Dublin precipitated O'Neill's retreat from his camp at Leixlip. In late November Preston withdrew from his camp at Lucan to Naas, complaining that O'Neill's retreat had left him dangerously exposed. He continued to intrigue with Ormond, with the intention, perhaps, of launching a joint attack on the clericalists or sailing with most of his army for France. On the face of it, it seems improbable that he would have sided with France against Spain given his previous service. However, Sir Kenelm Digby later claimed that Preston had secured the agreement of most of the Leinster army while Ormond obtained permission from the parliament to embark the soldiers for France. Moreover Preston's son James, having recently recruited a regiment for the Spanish service, apparently connived at the interception of the troopships and the transfer of the regiment to the French service. 
To forestall more intrigues Rinuccini formally threatened Preston and his army with excommunication if the army did not disperse to its assigned winter quarters. Preston complied on 10 December, though even then he allegedly wrote to Ormond urging him to attack the Ulster army. Ormond evidently did not trust Preston because he was 'too much of a bigot in the point of religion and so wavering in his mind, so changeable in his resolutions' (Carte, 1.589). At any rate Clanricarde's agreement had served its main purpose: '... it had saved Dublin and divided the confederates' (ibid., 593). Ormond's army subsequently foraged in the confederate quarters of Westmeath and Cavan, thereby provoking a definitive breakdown in negotiations. Ormond himself handed over Dublin to the parliamentarians and left Ireland shortly afterwards, his army passing to the command of the new commander, Michael Jones. Preston's orders for the campaigning season of 1647 were to constrict Jones to Dublin, and to starve him out by burning the corn and driving off cattle. By late July Preston was encamped near Naas when Jones, with a much smaller army, attacked the camp. After some cannon shot the attackers retreated in some disorder. Preston hesitated about unleashing the cavalry to follow up this success, thereby giving Jones time to escape, conduct which Bellings criticized as 'supine remissness'. By the end of the month Preston had captured Maynooth, co. Kildare, and other outlying garrisons and was besieging Trim, co. Meath. Jones again marched from Dublin but this time hugged the coast until he joined with British forces from Ulster and the Drogheda garrison. With an army almost equal in size to Preston's he then marched to relieve Trim. 
'General Preston was much blamed for his conduct in losing that army, for had he stayed within Portlester-pass, as Mac Art [O'Neill] sent him advice... but he did not but thought to do the work himself but his fate was otherwise' (Hogan, 62). The 'British Officer's' criticisms go to the heart of the matter; Preston could have avoided battle. He was faced with an army which now enjoyed numerical parity, if only for the ten days Jones could afford to pay his auxiliaries. Moreover, Jones had the edge in the decisive cavalry arm, both quantitatively and qualitatively. Preston knew all this and could have remained within the impregnable bog-girt confines of Portlester. Instead he tried to steal a march on Jones by making a forced march on Dublin which was thinly garrisoned by a former royalist regiment of apparently doubtful loyalty. He stole away, leaving his tents and colours standing to deceive the enemy and marched some 12 miles to the south-east that day. This was not sufficient to outpace Jones and the following morning, 8 August 1647, he was overtaken. He deployed his forces on Dungan's Hill (about half-way between Trim and Maynooth) to receive the enemy. 
The commentator who exulted that Dungan's Hill was 'the greatest victory and most signal victory the English ever had in Ireland' (Borlase, 242) was hardly exaggerating. At least 3000 of the Leinster infantry were slain (out of about 5000 on the battlefield), mainly after the battle, as against the loss of a mere forty, or so, of their enemies. The scale of the slaughter together with the loss of transport, munitions, and arms destroyed what was, arguably, the best organized and equipped of the confederate armies. Defeat, if not annihilation, was predictable given Preston's relative weakness in cavalry. He compounded this by, as at Ross, deploying his best cavalry troops in a narrow lane where their mobility was fatally constricted. 
The long-term effects of the battle may be grasped from the fact that, a year later, Preston's own regiment consisted of a mere 200 soldiers and the Leinster army contained only four under-strength infantry regiments. In 1648, following a truce with Inchiquin, the internal power struggle erupted into open warfare between the clericalists and Ormondists. Preston played a role commensurate with the depleted size of his army, capturing minor garrisons of O'Neill in co. Kildare. When Ormond returned to Ireland to assume command of the new pan-royalist alliance Preston wrote (12 October) pointing out his services in keeping the Leinster army together for the king. In return Ormond, on 28 December 1648, promised him a peerage and a commensurate estate from lands to be forfeited from those opposing the king. 
Preston was not given command of a field army, however, and did not play a prominent part in the fighting after Cromwell landed in August 1649. In the spring of 1650 he was appointed governor of Waterford, which had held out against Cromwell the previous December. Increasingly the city was isolated as the royalists were pushed back towards the north and west. The isolation was complete after Hugh 'dubh' O'Neill abandoned Clonmel for want of ammunition in May 1650. Apart from his failure to resupply O'Neill, Preston's conduct of the defence cannot be faulted. When Ireton approached the city in June and offered terms Preston replied spiritedly that he had never been asked to surrender a city without a siege, nor had conditions ever been offered to him before he asked for them. He surrendered on good terms in August only on the advice of Ormond and at the insistence of the citizenry, by now suffering from famine and bubonic plague. 
During the siege Preston was created Viscount Tara and his next important appointment was as governor of Galway, the last city in Irish hands. Ireton, writing from Clare Castle in November 1651, demanded the surrender of the city and, if this were not forthcoming, threatened 'you may guess whose head shall pay for the trouble and mischief that shall follow' (Hardiman, 134). Preston dismissed Ireton's threats and added that 'such as hazard men's lives without a just cause will one day answer for their blood before God, the just judge, in which (when you reflect on your own actions) you will find yourself as guilty as others' (ibid.). 
This acrimonious correspondence was cut short by Ireton's death from the plague. The following month Charles Coote set about shutting off the landward approaches to Galway but made no attempt to storm the city defences, which had recently been strengthened with the addition of an outer curtain and bastions. Preston conducted an active defence, most notably in surprising and wiping out the parliamentarian detachment on Mutton Island. However, his attempts to run the naval blockade failed and civilian morale crumbled with the prospect of famine. The town surrendered on 5 April 1652 on terms as good as those originally offered by Ireton. 
Subsequently Preston was allowed by parliament to embark 4000 or 5000 soldiers for the Spanish service. However, by the autumn of 1653 he had moved to Paris where his offer to serve the exiled Charles II was declined. He then offered his services to the French, apparently to encourage Irish deserters from the Spanish. He died in Paris in October 1655, and was buried there on 21 October. 
Preston's skill in siege warfare was especially useful to the confederates in the early years of their war effort. He was, however, an incompetent battlefield commander. Preston's shortcomings may be attributed to inexperience of cavalry warfare and, more especially, of large-scale command. For most of his career, other than an eighteen-month period (1635-6) as regimental commander, he commanded nothing larger than an infantry company. Nor was he deft at political intrigue. He was 'very cholerick... and broke out, even in Councils of War, into rash expressions, of which he had frequently cause to repent' (Carte, 1.589). Moreover his vacillations between Rinuccini and Ormond were the result of genuine doubts about the religious concessions. Had he thrown his weight unreservedly behind either faction the power struggle might have had a decisive outcome. A definitive victory by either party would have been preferable to the perpetuation of debilitating factionalism. In particular a quick assault on Dublin in 1646 by the combined forces of the Ulster and Leinster armies might very well have taken Dublin from Ormond before he handed the city over to the parliamentarians. In large measure because of Preston's dithering the siege was protracted to the point that the armies used up available supplies and had to retreat. Had the confederates taken Dublin they would have denied Cromwell a convenient beachhead for his landing in 1649. Preston's ill-advised attempt to surprise Dublin the following year led to the destruction of his army at Dungan's Hill. This disaster, and the confederate defeat at Knocknanuss in Munster later in 1647, ultimately brought about the collapse of the Catholic confederates. For all his undoubted skill and courage in siege warfare, both in the Southern Netherlands and Ireland, Preston's record in Ireland is mainly characterized by political and military ineptitude. 


@@@@@


doc= 22732


Walter of Preston (d. 1230), who obtained a fee farm grant of the Northamptonshire royal demesne manor of Gretton in 1204, and was sheriff of Northamptonshire between 1206 and 1208; Walter rebelled against King John but procured the restoration of his lands in 1217, and was subsequently involved in other local administrative activities on behalf of the crown until his death, which had occurred by October 1230. 


@@@@@


doc= 22733


Preston, William (1750-1807), poet and playwright, was born in the parish of St Michan's, Dublin, the only son of William Preston, gentleman, who went to India when his son was two years old and was never heard of again. Preston obtained his early education at Dr Campbell's school in Dublin and was admitted a pensioner at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1765. He graduated BA in 1770 and MA in 1773. He entered the Middle Temple in 1775 and was called to the Irish bar in 1777. He assisted in the formation of the Royal Irish Academy, was elected its first secretary in 1786, and was a frequent contributor to its 'Transactions'. He wrote occasional verse for various periodicals but a collection of his verse in 1781 proved abortive when the printer went bankrupt. He turned his attention to drama about 1790, and in the space of four years he wrote six plays, predominantly in verse. His chief success in this field was his tragedy 'Democratic Rage' (founded on incidents in the French Revolution), which was produced at Dublin in 1793, and in printed form ran through three editions in as many weeks. 
In 1793 Preston published a two-volume collection of his verse and plays, with the exception of 'Democratic Rage', already published separately. A further posthumous collection of his verse was published by his widow in 1809. Although he had no small opinion of his abilities as a poet and dramatist, and fancied himself as something of a literary savant wasting his time among 'an unlettered people' ('Preface', 'Works', 1793), in the final analysis posterity has judged him a minor talent. 
During the late 1770s and the 1780s Preston was a supporter of Lord Charlemont and the volunteer movement. It was around this time too that he was initiated into the Monks of the Screw, a patriot club that endured until the mid-1790s. These political connections gained him early legal preferment when, in 1784, he was appointed a commissioner of appeals, but further advancement on the bench eluded him. In the 1790s he evinced some sympathy with the ideals of the United Irishmen, for he contributed verse to 'The Press', the journal of that organization, but without apparently becoming a member. He is also believed to have favoured Catholic emancipation. 
In 1789 Preston married Frances Dorothea Evans, a daughter of John Evans, who succeeded as the fifth Baron Carbery in 1804; they had seven children. Preston had another son, William, who could not have been the result of his marriage to Frances Evans, for he was killed, aged twenty, at the battle of Delhi in India in 1803. This William was either Preston's natural son or the issue of an earlier marriage, the details of which have not been uncovered. 
Preston died in Gloucester Street, Dublin, on 2 February 1807 of miliary fever said to have been brought on by sitting all day in court in wet clothes. He was buried in St Thomas's churchyard, Marlborough Street, Dublin, but during the 1920s a new street was built on the site of this graveyard and in the process Preston's remains were exhumed, with those of some 3500 others, and reinterred in Mount Jerome cemetery, Harold's Cross, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 22734


Preston, William (1742-1818), printer and writer, was born on 28 July 1742 in Edinburgh, the second son of William Preston (died 1751), writer to the signet, and Helena, 'nee' Cumming, of Edinburgh. He was educated in Edinburgh, first privately and then at the high school, and left the University of Edinburgh, presumably without a degree, in 1757. 
Preston then became assistant to the grammarian Thomas Ruddiman (1674-1757), during which time he compiled a catalogue of Ruddiman's books, 'Bibliotheca Romana' (1757). After Ruddiman's death in 1757 Preston spent a year as apprentice to Ruddiman's brother Walter ('fl'. 1753-1801), a printer in Edinburgh. 
In 1760 Preston went to London with a letter of recommendation to William Strahan (1715-1785), the king's printer. Strahan hired Preston as principal corrector to the press, and Preston was later made superintendent. Strahan's firm was one of the largest and most prosperous printing houses in eighteenth-century London. It printed Johnson's 'Dictionary', Gibbon, Hugh Blair, David Hume, Adam Smith, and other notable authors. As manager and chief corrector of the press, Preston was on friendly terms with these authors, and prospered with Strahan as the business grew. In 1773 Preston married Sarah Couchman Stamp, a widow with one son. 
In 1763 a group of Edinburgh men in London, including Preston, formed a masonic lodge (formally constituted as the Caledonian in 1772). His interest in masonic scholarship grew, and he began regularly to meet other masons to discuss masonic practice. This work culminated in an address to a masonic gala in 1772 which was attended by the most prominent freemasons in England. Later in that year Preston published a major work, 'Illustrations of Masonry', which included the text of his address along with descriptions of ceremonies, a historical account of freemasonry, and songs. 'Illustrations' was immediately successful and influential; it brought a standardization to masonic practice hitherto lacking. Preston continued to revise the text, seeing nine English, two American (1804, 1816), and three German (1776, 1780, 1786) editions published in his lifetime. It continued to be revised by others after his death, and also exists in several facsimile editions. 
After his first public address Preston continued to give numerous lectures on the masonic craft. He wrote for the 'Freemason's Calendar' and was a master of the lodge of Antiquity, no. 1, one of England's four oldest lodges. He served as assistant to the secretary of the grand lodge and was appointed official printer to the grand lodge. In 1779 Preston, among others, renounced allegiance to the grand lodge of England and established a rival lodge. The secession did not thrive, however, and Preston was restored to his grand lodge privileges in 1789. 
He was made a member of the Stationers' Company in 1794. On his death, William Strahan left Preston an annuity and the firm was inherited by Strahan's son Andrew, who made Preston chief reader and general superintendent, and eventually, a full partner in 1804. 
William Preston died after a long illness on 1 April 1818 at his home at Dean Street, Fetter Lane, London, and was buried on 10 April near St Paul's Churchyard. Part of his estate endowed a yearly Prestonian lecture which is administered by the grand lodge of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 22735


Prestwich, John (1745-1795), antiquary, was born on 29 or 30 January 1745, the only son of Elias Prestwich (died 1785), of Holme and Prestwich, Lancashire, and his wife, Catherine Lander. As a lineal descendant of Thomas Prestwich, who was created a baronet in 1644, he always claimed the title of baronet, though the claim was not officially allowed. In April 1776 he married Margaret, daughter of Joseph Hall, alderman, and Ruth Drew, in London. His published works were 'Dissertation on Mineral, Animal, and Vegetable Poisons' (1775) and a heraldic album entitled 'Prestwich's Respublica', inscribed to Lord Sydney and published in 1787. Illness prevented him from publishing a second volume of this work. He died at Dublin on 15 August 1795 following a long illness, during which he was cared for by his wife. He left unpublished an incomplete 'Historical Account of South Wales', and a 'History of Liverpool' which he had deliberately withheld when a similar work was announced by John Holt. 


@@@@@


doc= 22736


Prestwich, Sir Joseph (1812-1896), geologist, was born on 12 March 1812 at Pensbury, Clapham, the eldest surviving son of Joseph Prestwich, a wine merchant descended from a long line of Lancashire landowners, and his wife, Catherine ('bap'. 1785, died 1850), daughter of Edward Blakeway, one-time porcelain manufacturer at Coalport in Shropshire. The Prestwich family lived in Clapham and later South Lambeth when Joseph was a child, and he attended schools in Wandsworth, Forest Hill, and South Lambeth. In 1823 he was sent to Paris, presumably because of his father's connections with the wine trade in France. He remained at school in Montmartre for two years, becoming fluent in French. On his return to England he went to a school in South Norwood, and then to Richard Valpy's school in Reading, from where he went up to University College, London, in 1828, to study chemistry and natural philosophy. Prestwich became very keen on science, setting up a laboratory at home in Lambeth, and starting a collection of rocks and minerals. He studied oil painting and lithography and became familiar with the British Museum in London. In 1830, at the age of eighteen, he joined the family business in Mark Lane in the City of London. 
Geological research was now conducted in Prestwich's spare time; his first independent fieldwork was carried out during holidays with his grandparents at Broseley in the Coalbrookdale coalfield. There he mapped the surface rocks, worked underground in the pits, and collected fossils for later identification. He read accounts of his work to the Geological Society of London in 1834 and 1836, and his paper on the geology of Coalbrookdale was eventually published in the 'Transactions of the Geological Society' in 1840. Prestwich made extended visits to Scotland in 1834 and 1835, comparing his Coalbrookdale rocks with their Scottish equivalents, and he read papers on fossil fish from Gamrie and on the elevation of the Banffshire coast to the Geological Society of London which, once again, were published in 1840. 
Although Prestwich worked a full week in the wine trade, frequently travelling as the firm's representative, geology became a passion bordering on obsession. Solitary and withdrawn as a young man, he drove himself hard, filling long days with business, study, and self-improvement, while walking great distances on an empty stomach to save money. His health suffered, and throughout his long life Prestwich suffered from stress-related illnesses. It did not help that, in 1842, his business responsibilities were increased when he took control of the family firm, which had been run into difficulties by his father. 
In 1840 Prestwich began the systematic study of the Lower Tertiary strata, on which his reputation as a geologist chiefly rests. By meticulous mapping and collecting throughout the Tertiary outcrops of the Thames valley and Hampshire, Prestwich demonstrated that marine sands to the east of London, which he called the Thanet Sands, were the oldest of all the British Tertiaries; that the overlying marine Woolwich Beds were the same age as the terrestrial Reading Beds to the west; and that the London Clay was the same age as the Bognor Beds of Hampshire and therefore older than the Barton and Bracklesham Beds. These results, published in three substantial papers in the 'Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society' between 1850 and 1854, laid the foundations for all later studies of the British Tertiary succession. He followed them up in 1855 and 1857 with papers on the correlation of the British succession with strata in France and Belgium. Prestwich was awarded the Geological Society's Wollaston medal in 1849 for his Coalbrookdale and Tertiary researches. 
It was about this date that Prestwich first turned his attention to water supply, a subject on which he became recognized as an expert. He published 'A Geological Inquiry Respecting the Water-Bearing Strata of the Country around London' in 1851, and served on a royal commission on water supply in 1864. Much later, in the 1880s, Prestwich was instrumental in improving Oxford's water supply. Other practical matters that took his attention, and on which he published, were geological aspects of the proposed channel tunnel (1874) and the prospects for finding coal beneath south-east England (1871, 1872). 
At the same time as his Tertiary work Prestwich was also studying the more recent Crag deposits of East Anglia. Between 1845 and 1850 he paid many visits to this area, noting sections and collecting specimens. He published one short paper in 1849, but pressure of other work delayed completion until 1868, when he read three papers to the Geological Society of London. By the time they were published in its 'Quarterly Journal' in 1871, much of their novelty had been lost. 
Prestwich was a regular visitor to France throughout his life, combining business with geology whenever possible. His papers on the geology of Epernay and Rilly, in the heart of the Champagne region, underline the connection between these two parts of his life. Prestwich became a member of the Societe Geologique de France in 1838, and retained close links with French geologists until his death. 
In 1858 Prestwich became a member of the committee set up by the Geological Society to oversee the excavation of Brixham cave in south Devon, an untouched site which it was hoped might reveal new information on Pleistocene stratigraphy and on the antiquity of the human race. Although worked flints were found associated with the bones of extinct animals in the cave, Prestwich was not convinced until he and John Evans visited Boucher de Perthes in Abbeville, northern France, where he saw flint implements in bone-bearing gravels, and realized that humans had indeed coexisted with elephants and other Pleistocene mammals. These conclusions, which were accepted by Lyell and others, were published in 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' in 1861. Prestwich was awarded the royal medal of the Royal Society in 1865 in recognition of the importance of this work. Hugh Falconer, who had been Prestwich's companion throughout the Brixham and Abbeville work, died in 1856, and the task of writing up a report on the Brixham cave excavation devolved to Prestwich. He eventually completed it in 1872, and it was published by the Royal Society in 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1873. 
On 26 February 1870 Prestwich married Grace Anne McCall ('nee' Milne) (died 1899), the niece of his friend and co-worker Hugh Falconer. In the same year, he was elected president of the Geological Society of London, of which he had already served as secretary and treasurer. Two years later in 1872, at the age of sixty, he retired from his business life to devote himself to science. He and his sister Isabella Civil Prestwich had built a house high on the downs above the village of Shoreham in Kent in 1865, and this, Darent Hulme, now became his home. He took time to organize the great collection of geological specimens he had amassed, and started to write up papers based on the innumerable field excursions of the previous thirty-five years. Not that he ceased or slowed down the pace of his work: he travelled in France in 1872 and again in 1873, in Dorset in 1873, and through the north of England in 1874. Few geologists of his day had seen more rock in the field than Joseph Prestwich. 
In 1874 Prestwich was offered and, after some hesitation, accepted, the chair of geology at Oxford, vacant after the death of John Phillips. He held the chair until 1888, working in the museum, leading field excursions, and giving regular courses of lectures. He maintained the pace of his own researches, publishing papers on an astonishing range of subjects including the parallel roads of Glenroy, raised beaches, the causes of volcanic action, regional metamorphism, and on an iguanodon from the Kimmeridge Clay near Oxford. Towards the end of his time in Oxford Prestwich laboured to produce a textbook, and 'Geology, Chemical, Physical and Stratigraphical' was published by the Clarendon Press in two volumes in 1886 and 1888. This book was planned as an antidote to the rigidly uniformitarian views which were the legacy of successive editions of Charles Lyell's 'Principles of Geology', and which Prestwich believed were harming the subject. He was prepared to believe that the scale and rate of many geological phenomena had been different in the past from what they are today, and therefore that the earth was not as ancient as postulated by those who insisted on total uniformity. Indeed, towards the end of his life Prestwich found himself backing a number of unfashionable causes. Chief among these was his support for eoliths, supposed human artefacts which had been found by Benjamin Harrison and others in the ancient gravels which cap many plateaus in southern England, and which seemed to take the human race back to the early, or even preglacial period. Papers on this and other topics were published in one of Prestwich's last books, 'Collected Papers on some Controverted Questions in Geology' (1895). 
Prestwich remained active well into old age. He was president of the International Geological Congress held in London in 1888, regularly visited plateau gravel sites and raised beaches in 1890 and 1891, and wrote a long paper on the great submergence of the land which he detected at the close of the Glacial period, which was published by the Royal Society. However as each year went by he became less and less active, until his health failed in November 1895. He was knighted in the new year's honours list, but never recovered sufficiently to enjoy the honour. Sir Joseph Prestwich died at Darent Hulme on 23 June 1896, aged eighty-four and was buried a few days later at Shoreham. In his will he left money to the Geological Society of London to endow a medal to be awarded for researches into stratigraphical and physical geology. 


@@@@@


doc= 22737


Prevost, Sir George, first baronet (1767-1816), soldier and governor-in-chief of British North America, was born on 19 May 1767 in New Jersey, America, the eldest son of the five children born to Augustin Prevost, a French-speaking Swiss protestant who served in the British army in Canada, and his wife, Nanette (Ann), the daughter of Chevalier George Grand, a wealthy Amsterdam banker. He was educated in England and in continental Europe before in 1779 he entered the army. He became a captain on 9 June 1783, took a company in the 25th foot on 15 October 1784, and was promoted major in the 60th (Royal American) foot on 18 November 1790. On 19 May 1789 he married Catherine Anne, the daughter of Major-General John Phipps, RE; they had four children who survived infancy, including a son, George Prevost (1804-1893). Shortly afterwards Prevost was sent to the West Indies with his regiment. He became lieutenant-colonel on 6 August 1794. In that and the following year he commanded the troops in St Vincent and saw much active service, in 1796 being twice wounded. On 1 January 1798 he became a colonel, and on 8 March brigadier-general. 
In May 1798 Prevost was nominated lieutenant-governor of St Lucia. He spoke fluent French and set himself to conciliate the French population and to reform the disorganized law courts. Following a petition by the local people he was appointed civil governor on 16 May 1801. In the following year poor health compelled his return to England. On 27 September 1802 Prevost was appointed captain-general and governor-in-chief in Dominica. In 1803 he helped retake St Lucia from the French, and in February 1805 prevented their taking Dominica. On 10 May 1805 he again obtained leave to visit England, was placed in command of the Portsmouth district, and on 6 December 1805 was created a baronet. He was now major-general and on 8 September 1806 became colonel commandant in his regiment. In 1808-9 he was second in command when Martinique was captured. In January 1808 he was promoted lieutenant-general. 
As relations with the United States deteriorated, the imperial government replaced civilian with military governors in British North America. One such appointment was Prevost's, in 1808, as lieutenant-governor and commander-in-chief of Nova Scotia, where he increased his reputation as a colonial administrator. He helped undermine the American trade embargo by naming customs-free ports in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, action widely applauded in Anglophile and soon to be neutral New England. In the political arena Prevost's governorship uncannily foreshadowed his later regime in Lower Canada -- except for his championing the claims of the Anglican church in Nova Scotia. By avoiding arbitrary positions, he dissociated himself from his predecessor, Sir John Wentworth, whose strident defence of the royal prerogative had antagonized the house of assembly, and he won over the house leader, William Cottnam Tonge, by appointing him assistant commissary for the Martinique expedition. Conciliation produced a useful militia act, generous supply for defence purposes, and, for the most part, placid politics. As in Lower Canada, the assembly voted him money for a testimonial gift. 
On 14 February 1811 Prevost was, at a critical juncture, chosen to be governor of Lower Canada, and governor-in-chief of and military commander in British North America, in succession to Sir James Henry Craig. 
Craig had imprisoned, without bail or trial, the leaders of the assembly's majority grouping, the 'parti canadien', and had removed their militia commissions. He had treated the Roman Catholic bishop with suspicion and threats. With war against the United States imminent, Prevost wisely adopted the opposite approach of thoroughgoing conciliation. The commissions were restored and 'parti canadien' men favoured by patronage, their leader, Pierre-Stanislas Bedard, even being appointed to the bench in 1812. The bishop was promised legal recognition by London (achieved 1817) and had his government stipend raised. The governor distanced himself from the ruling English party, rarely socializing or consulting with its leaders, even when they were executive councillors. Conciliation paid handsome dividends. Senior Roman Catholic clergy were indefatigable in inculcating loyalty among the French-speaking population. Over several legislative sessions Prevost secured legislation strengthening the militia by sanctioning various levels of conscription for active service, granting lavish funds for defence purposes, and authorizing the circulation of up to $1,500,000 in army bills, a form of paper money. The Canadian militia played an important role in repelling the two American invasions of Lower Canada in the battles of Lacolle (November 1812) and Chateauguay (October 1813). 
On 18 June the United States declared war; on the 24th the news reached Quebec. Prevost acted promptly, yet showed every consideration to American subjects then within his jurisdiction. When the news of the repeal of the orders in council was received he concluded an armistice with the American general; but it was disavowed by the United States, and the war went on. Through Prevost's influence Canada made it primarily a defensive war. Although he was nominally commander-in-chief, he mostly left the conduct of the war to others, and his own appearance in the field on two occasions was followed by the humiliation of the British arms. With Sir James Yeo he went to Kingston, and on 27 May 1813 concerted the attack on Sacketts harbour. A brilliant attack was made by the British troops -- the Americans were already routed -- when Prevost, seized with doubt, sounded the retreat. The scheme of invading New York state, in September 1814, was likewise due to Prevost. The Canadian forces had been reinforced by Peninsular War veterans; the army and fleet were together to attack Plattsburg. The attempt ought to have been successful, both by land and sea. But by some error the 'Confiance' was sent into action alone, and Prevost, instead of giving her immediate support, suddenly decided to retreat. 
Prevost continued his conciliatory policy throughout the war. Despite opposition from the appointed legislative council, he forwarded home articles of impeachment against chief justices James Monk and Jonathan Sewell passed by the assembly early in 1814. When he refused to suspend them, the lower house did complain that its privileges had been violated, but soon made amends by reiterating its belief in the overall 'wisdom of his excellency's administration' (cited in Christie, 2.165). 
Prevost's neutrality was the last straw for English party leaders. In the spring of 1814 they attempted to persuade the prince regent to order his recall. Letters attacking the governor's appeasement of 'factious' elements as preparing the way for another Ireland and portraying his military strategy as that of a cowardly fool appeared in the 'Montreal Herald' (1814-15), two sets of which, by 'Nerva' (Samuel Gale) and 'Veritas' (unknown), were subsequently published as pamphlets. Much of the military information was supplied by shocked and disgusted Peninsular War veterans. 
On 21 January 1815 Provost met the new parliament of Lower Canada, and soon announced that peace had been concluded. The assembly proposed presenting him with a service of plate to the value of $5000, 'in testimony of the country's sense of his distinguished talents, wisdom, and ability'. The legislative council, however, declined to assent to the bill. In closing the session Prevost announced that he was summoned to England to meet the charges arising out of his conduct before Plattsburg. On 3 April he left amid numerous addresses from the Canadians. The English remained aloof, indeed sullen. 
Prevost reached England in September, and, on learning that he had been incidentally condemned by the naval court for his actions at Plattsburgh, he obtained from the duke of York permission to be tried in person by court-martial. But the consequent anxiety ruined his health, and he died of dropsy in London on 5 January 1816, a month before the day fixed for the meeting of the court. He was buried at East Barnet, Hertfordshire. At the urging of Lady Prevost the prince regent publicly expressed his regard for Prevost's services, and granted the family additional armorial bearings, although nothing could be done legally to clear Prevost's name. 
Prevost seems to have been cautious to a fault, wanting in decision, always anticipating the worst; but he was straightforward, well-intentioned, and honest. There seems to be little room for questioning his success in civil affairs, and he was an efficient soldier while he filled subordinate rank. 


@@@@@


doc= 22738


Prevost, Sir George, second baronet (1804-1893), Church of England clergyman, only son of Sir George Prevost, first baronet (1767-1816), governor-in-chief of British North America, and Catherine Anne, daughter of Major-General John Phipps, was born at Roseau on the island of Dominica on 20 August 1804. He succeeded to the baronetcy on 5 January 1816. He matriculated at Oxford, from Oriel College, on 23 January 1821, and graduated BA, taking a second class in 'literae humaniores' and a first class in mathematics, in 1825. He proceeded MA in 1827 and was ordained deacon in 1828 and priest in 1829. 
Prevost was a pupil and disciple of John Keble, whom he frequently visited at Southrop; there he met Isaac Williams whose sister Jane (died 1853) he married on 18 March 1828. He maintained a lifelong friendship with his Oriel contemporary Samuel Wilberforce, successively bishop of Oxford and Winchester. Prevost was curate to Keble's brother Thomas at Bisley, Gloucestershire, from 1828 to September 1834, when he was instituted to the perpetual curacy of Stinchcombe in the same county. He was rural dean of Dursley from 1852 to 1866, proctor of the diocese of Gloucester and Bristol from 1858 to 1865, archdeacon of Gloucester from 1865 to 1881, and honorary canon of Gloucester from 1859 until his death. 
Prevost, retiring by nature and profoundly pious, was an ardent supporter of the Tractarian movement from its inception, and despite his attachment to J. H. Newman remained faithful until death to the 'via media'. He contributed to 'Tracts for the Times' and translated the 'Homilies of St. John Chrysostom on the Gospel of St. Matthew' (1843) for the 'Library of the Fathers'. He edited the 'Autobiography of Isaac Williams' (1892), and printed his archidiaconal charges and some sermons. 
Prevost and his wife, who died on 17 January 1853, had one daughter and two sons, George Phipps (1830-1885), who held a colonel's commission in the army, and Charles, the third baronet (died 1902), who married Sarah, daughter of the Revd Thomas Keble. Prevost died at Stinchcombe on 18 March 1893, and was buried in the churchyard there on 23 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 22739


Prevost, Louis Augustin (1796-1858), linguist, the son of a French functionary, was born at Troyes in Champagne on 6 June 1796, and was educated at a college in Versailles. Having come to England in 1823, he was at first tutor in the family of William Young Ottley, afterwards keeper of the prints in the British Museum. From 1823 to 1843 he was a teacher of languages in London, and had Charles Dickens as a pupil. On 30 August 1825 he married Lucy Smith, an Englishwoman. His leisure was spent in the reading-room of the British Museum studying languages. He gradually acquired most of the languages of Europe, many of Asia, especially Chinese, and even some of Polynesia. He was, finally, acquainted more or less perfectly with upwards of forty languages. Like Mezzofanti, who was credited with knowing sixty, he was chiefly interested in their structures. From 1843 to 1855 he was engaged by the trustees of the British Museum in cataloguing the Chinese books. On 25 October 1854 his only son, Frederick William Fraser, who had assumed the name of Melrose, was lost in the charge of the light brigade at Balaklava. Prevost's health gave way, and he died at Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, London, on 25 April 1858, and was buried in Highgate cemetery on 30 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 22740


Price, Arthur (1678/9-1752), Church of Ireland archbishop of Cashel, was the son of Samuel Price, vicar of Straffan in the diocese of Dublin and, from 1672, prebendary of Kildare. Arthur Price entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 2 April 1696, aged seventeen, and was elected a scholar in 1698; he graduated BA in 1700 and DD on 16 April 1724. After taking holy orders he was successively curate of St Werburgh's Church, Dublin, and vicar of Cellbridge, Feighcullen, and Ballybraine. On 4 April 1705 he was named prebendary of Donadea, Kildare. On 19 June 1715 he became canon and archdeacon of Kildare, and on 31 March 1721 he became dean of Ferns and Leighlin. Two years later he received the benefice of Louth in Armagh. 
On 1 May 1724 Price was appointed to the see of Clonfert, a promotion that the Irish chancellor, Lord Middleton, found highly provocative. From Clonfert, Price was translated, on 26 May 1730, to the see of Ferns and Leighlin, and, on 2 February 1734, to that of Meath, the latter on account of his loyalty to George II and his service to the House of Lords. While bishop of Meath he began to build an episcopal residence at Ardbraccan but he left the diocese before it was completed, and the design was abandoned. In May 1744 he succeeded Theophilus Bolton as archbishop of Cashel. Three years later he was made vice-chancellor of Dublin University. At Cashel he initiated the dismantling of the old and rapidly decaying cathedral (proceedings initiated by act of council, 10 July 1749). Price died in 1752 and was buried in the churchyard of St John's, the parish church at Cashel. In 1783 a new cathedral building was completed on the site of St John's. 


@@@@@


doc= 22741


Price, Bartholomew (1818-1898), college head, was born on 14 May 1818 at Coln St Dennis in Gloucestershire, the second son of William Price (died 13 April 1860), rector of Coln St Dennis and of Farnborough in Berkshire. He was educated privately and at Northleach School, before matriculating as a scholar from Pembroke College, Oxford, in 1837. He graduated BA in 1840, obtaining a first class in mathematics, and MA in 1843. In 1842 he gained the senior university mathematical scholarship, and two years later was elected a fellow of Pembroke, taking holy orders. In 1845 he became tutor and mathematical lecturer, and in 1847-8 and 1853-5 was a public examiner. He continued to take a large number of private pupils, including C. L. Dodgson, who became a lifelong friend. In 1858 he was a university proctor. 
In 1848 Price published his first mathematical work, 'A Treatise on the Differential Calculus', and he then began to prepare his great undertaking, the 'Treatise on Infinitesimal Calculus', which included differential and integral calculus, calculus of variations, applications to algebra and geometry, and analytical mechanics. It was completed in four volumes, the first appearing in 1852 and the last in 1860. A second edition was commenced in 1857, before the completion of the first, and was completed in 1889. Price was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 3 June 1852 and of the Royal Astronomical Society on 13 June 1856. On 20 August 1857 he married Amy Eliza, eldest daughter of William Cole of Highfield, Exeter. They had several sons and five daughters, the latter befriended by Dodgson. 
In 1853 Price was chosen Sedleian professor of natural philosophy at Oxford, a chair which he retained until June 1898. Soon after his appointment he became involved in a controversy over the mathematics examinations at Oxford, complaining that the examiners were placing too much emphasis on pure mathematics as opposed to the 'mixed' mathematics, comprising elements of physics, which Price taught. In 1855 he became a member of the hebdomadal council, and in 1868 he was made an honorary fellow of Queen's College and secretary to the delegates of the university press. At that time he was doing a very large part of the mathematical teaching in the university, but his success in his new position was so great that he became gradually absorbed in its duties. He showed great financial ability in directing the affairs of the press, having assumed overall responsibility for its management in 1873, and increased its business and income enormously before resigning the secretaryship in 1884. He resumed the responsibilities for six months during 1897, his eightieth year. 
As time went on the affairs of the university passed more and more into his hands, and 'Bat' Price became a member of nearly every board of council of importance connected with it. His omniscience in university business was hinted at in Lewis Carroll's lines: '
Twinkle, twinkle little bat, 

How I wonder what you're at. 

' He gave evidence to all the official inquiries touching on Oxford, including the 1867 select committee on university extension, the Devonshire commission on scientific instruction (1870), and the Selborne commission (1877). He was a member of the Cleveland commission, appointed in 1872 to investigate the wealth of the university and colleges. When the university observatory was founded in 1874 he was put on the board of visitors, and in 1878 he was one of a committee of three appointed to consider its outstanding requirements. He was also one of the six representatives of the Royal Society on the board of visitors to the Royal Observatory at Greenwich. 
A financial scandal involving his brother, the bursar of Pembroke College, prevented Price from succeeding Francis Jeune as master of Pembroke in 1864. He was eventually elected in 1892, though only by the appointment of the visitor of the college, Lord Salisbury, the votes of the fellows being equally divided. With the mastership went a canonry of Gloucester. Price took the degrees of BD and DD in 1892. He died in Pembroke College on 29 December 1898 and was buried on 3 January 1899 in Holywell cemetery. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22742


Price, Bonamy (1807-1888), economist, was born at St Peter Port, Guernsey, on 22 May 1807, the eldest son of Frederick Price and his wife, Maria Martha, 'nee' Vardon. At the age of fourteen he was sent as a private pupil to the Revd Charles Bradley of High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, where W. Smith O'Brien was one of his fellow pupils. He matriculated at Worcester College, Oxford, in 1825, graduating BA with a double first in classics and mathematics in 1829, and proceeding MA in 1832. While he was an undergraduate at Oxford he was an occasional pupil of Thomas Arnold at Laleham, and formed a friendship with F. W. Newman, his brother John Henry Newman, and other leaders of the Tractarian movement. 
In 1830 Arnold, then headmaster of Rugby, offered him the mathematical mastership at that school. In 1832 Price was appointed to a classical mastership, and given charge of a division of the fifth form. He married in Rugby, on 18 December 1834, Lydia (1811/12-1891), the daughter of Joseph Rose, vicar of Rothley, and granddaughter of Thomas Babington of Rothley Temple, Leicestershire. In 1838 he succeeded Prince Lee in charge of the form in Rugby known as the Twenty. He retained this post under A. C. Tait, Arnold's successor, but resigned in 1850, shortly after Tait's appointment to the deanery of Carlisle. Like Tait, he was a proponent of university reform: he was one of the movers of a petition in 1847 for a royal commission, and in 1850 published proposals for reorganizing Oxford on German professional lines. He became identified with strong broad-church views, inspired by German theology, and he attacked 'Anglo-Catholic theory' in the 'Edinburgh Review' (1851). 
An unsuccessful candidate in 1851 for the Greek chair at Edinburgh, Price lived in London from 1850 to 1868, devoting himself to business affairs. He suffered for some months from a cerebral illness, but completely recovered. He served on the royal commissions on Scottish fisheries (1856), which protected the position of herring fishermen on the east coast of Scotland, and on the queen's colleges in Ireland (1857). 
When the Drummond professorship of political economy at Oxford, to which elections were made for a term of five years, became vacant in 1868, Price was elected by convocation by a large majority over the former holder of the office, J. E. Thorold Rogers, who offered himself for re-election. Rogers had offended the conservative majority of convocation. Price occupied the chair until his death, being thrice re-elected. He zealously devoted himself to his professorial duties. Master of a clear and incisive style, he lectured with comparative success. Courageous in the expression of his views, fond of controversy, though kindly in his treatment of opponents, he exercised a stimulating influence on his pupils. Prince Leopold of Belgium, while resident in Oxford, frequently attended his lectures, and became much attached to him. 
Price also lectured in different parts of the country in connection with the movement for the higher education of women, and was a prolific writer for periodicals, contributing nearly fifty articles to 'Fraser's Magazine', 'Blackwood's', and the 'Contemporary Review' between 1862 and 1882. He served on the duke of Richmond's commission on agriculture (1879-82) and on Lord Iddesleigh's commission on the depression of trade (1885-6), on which he made a spirited defence of old-style 'laissez-faire'. At Cheltenham in 1878, and at Nottingham in 1882, he was president of the economical section of the Social Science Association. He was made an honorary LLD by Edinburgh University in 1881 and in 1883 he was elected honorary fellow of Worcester College. He died at his London home, 29 Michael's Grove, Brompton, on 8 January 1888 and was buried in Paddington cemetery. His wife and five daughters survived him. 
Price possessed in a high degree the qualities of a successful schoolmaster. His power as an economist lay in exposition and criticism, not in original work. He made no important contribution to economic science, though he published 'The Principles of Currency' (1869), 'Currency and Banking' (1876), and 'Chapters on Practical Political Economy' (1878). By the 1880s he seemed a rather old-fashioned exponent of the more simplistic aspects of Ricardian free trade. In his speech on the 'Land Law (Ireland) Bill' on 7 April 1881 W. E. Gladstone referred to him, in connection with the duke of Richmond's commission, as: 'the only man -- to his credit be it spoken -- who has had the resolution to apply, in all their unmitigated authority, the principles of abstract political economy to the people and circumstances of Ireland, exactly as if he had been proposing to legislate for the inhabitants of Saturn or Jupiter. ('Hansard 3', 260, 1881, 895)' 



@@@@@


doc= 22743


Price, Sir Charles, first baronet (1708-1772), politician in Jamaica, was born on 20 August 1708, probably in St Catherine's parish, Jamaica, the eldest son of the thirteen children of Colonel Charles Price (1677/8-1730), and Sarah (died after 1730), daughter of Philip Edmunds of Jamaica. Price's grandfather Francis was one of the early English settlers in Jamaica following its capture by the English in 1658, and his father extensively developed several plots of land as sugar plantations. Price himself was educated in England; he matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, on 21 October 1724, and embarked upon a grand tour. He returned to Jamaica in January 1730, shortly before his father's death on 23 May. 
Within a few years of his return Price had married Mary Sharpe. They had four sons, the first being born in 1732 or 1733, if his stated age at matriculation is correct. Price was first elected to the Jamaican assembly on 13 March 1732, and aligned himself with the faction headed by Judge Dennis Kelly. When Price and Kelly quarrelled at the end of the 1730s the governor, Edward Trelawny, won over Price to his interest. On 17 April 1745 he was elected temporary speaker of the assembly when the incumbent was ill, and the following year he became speaker. He acted in close alliance with Governor Trelawny in promoting the interests of the planters. In October 1751 he helped to unite the various political factions in the Jamaica Association. Originally the Jamaica Association was pledged to support the governor as long as he had the interests of the colony at heart, and it continued to have good relations with Charles Knowles for about a year after he replaced Trelawny as governor. However, when political conflict broke out again in 1754, Knowles attempted to move the capital from Spanish Town and imprisoned Price and fifteen of his supporters. Price had excellent contacts with the ministry in London and eventually won the resultant power struggle when Knowles was recalled in 1756. The capital returned to Spanish Town. 
In October 1763 Price retired from the assembly on grounds of ill health, his son, also Charles ['see below'], taking over as speaker. He made a brief return in 1765, but in 1768 he was nominated to the council by Governor William Trelawny, and on 13 August he was made a baronet. He died at his house, The Decoy, on 26 July 1772, custos of St Catherine's, judge of the supreme court, and a major-general in the militia. 
His eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 22744


Sir Charles Price, second baronet (1732/3-1788), succeeded to an over-extended estate which collapsed as a consequence of the American War of Independence. Having been educated at Trinity College, Oxford (he matriculated 14 May 1752, aged nineteen), he returned to Jamaica, and in 1753 was elected to the Jamaican assembly. He married Elizabeth Hannah (1747/8-1771), daughter of John Hudson Guy, of Berkshire House, chief justice of Jamaica, the widow of John Woodcock. They had no children. Price served as speaker of the assembly from 1763. As speaker in 1765, during the confrontation with Governor William Henry Lyttelton, he refused to apply to the governor to confirm the assembly's privileges, and led the assembly through the crises of repeated dissolutions. He remained speaker until 1775, when he retired to take an extended sojourn in England to try to rescue his near bankrupt estate. He returned to Jamaica in 1779, and by 1786 was forced to appeal to the assembly for assistance. Little was forthcoming and properties had to be sold, including Rose Hall for $18,000. Price died in Spanish Town on 18 October 1788. His widow, Lydia Ann, herself the widow of his brother Rose Price (died 1765), sold The Decoy for a paltry $2500 in 1789. 


@@@@@


doc= 22745


Price, Daniel (1581-1631), dean of Hereford, was born in Shrewsbury, the eldest son of Thomas Price (died 1620). His father had been admitted as a preacher to the Shearmen's Company in 1578 and was irregularly granted in 1583 by Shrewsbury corporation the crown living of St Chad's, which he served as 'preacher', 'minister', and 'curate' for the rest of his life. Evidently not a university graduate, Thomas Price was a native Welsh speaker, some of whose annotated books survive in the library of Shrewsbury School, which he may have attended; he was a strong godly influence on Daniel Price and his brother Sampson Price (1585/6-1630). Daniel Price matriculated as a commoner at St Mary Hall, Oxford, on 14 October 1597. Before taking his degree he moved to Exeter College, 'where, by the benefit of a diligent tutor, he became a smart disputant' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.511). He graduated BA on 10 July 1601 and proceeded MA on 22 May 1604. 
From 1607 to 1613 Price was rector of Wiston, Sussex, and from 1610 vicar of Old Windsor, in the gift of Lord Chancellor Egerton. In 1609 he gained admittance to the Middle Temple, and proceeded BD on 6 May 1611 and DD on 21 June 1613. In 1612 he was presented by Prince Henry to the rectory of Lanteglos, Cornwall. 
Price was recognized as a frequent and remarkable preacher, 'especially against the papists' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.511), and achieved his greatest fame in this occupation at Prince Henry's court. In 1608 he printed his first sermon preached before the prince, 'Recusants Conversion', with a dedication to Henry seeking appointment as his chaplain. Although not named in the 1610 establishment list of the prince's household, he styled himself in print as Henry's chaplain-in-ordinary in the same year. By chance Price was one of the two chaplains attending in the month of Henry's death, November 1612, and therefore preached half of the routine sermons to the bereaved household before the funeral on 7 December. Early in the new year Price published six of these, all extravagant in their prose, their anti-Catholicism, and their eulogies for the prince. There followed two equally histrionic commemorative tracts on the first and second anniversaries of the prince's death, derived in title and imagery from John Donne's 'Anniversary' elegies for Elizabeth Drury (1611, 1612). This body of work drew scorn from two leaders of emergent anti-Calvinism at Oxford, Richard Corbett and Brian Duppa, whose verses satirized Price's humble origins and evangelical Calvinism as much as his literary failings; Price's short verse rejoinder hardly disproves the latter. 
In 1620 Price became rector of Worthen, Shropshire. Some time before 1623 he married Isabella ('b'. 1593), youngest child of the wealthy Shrewsbury lawyer Richard Prince and his wife, Dorothy Leighton. On 16 December 1623 Price was instituted dean of Hereford by royal warrant, and in 1624 became a canon residentiary there, and a justice of the peace for Shropshire, Montgomery, and Cornwall. He died at Worthen on 24 September 1631 and was buried in the chancel of the church there on 27 September. A story was circulated in 1633 that he had died a Roman Catholic, but this arises from a confusion of Daniel Price with Theodore Price, who had died in the same year. 


@@@@@


doc= 22746


Price, David (1762-1835), orientalist and army officer, was born in Merthyr Cynog, near Brecon, where his father, also named David Price (died 1775), was curate. The latter soon afterwards became rector of Llanbadarn Fawr, near Aberystwyth, and David Price was brought up until the age of six or seven by his grandfather in Brecknockshire. He then joined his parents in Aberystwyth, and began his classical education under his father. In 1775, however, his father died, leaving a widow and five children, of whom David was the eldest boy. He was then educated at Christ College, Brecon, until October 1779, when he was awarded a Rustat scholarship and matriculated on 5 November 1779 as a sizar of Jesus College, Cambridge. 
By the summer of 1780, however, Price was nearly penniless (partly through his own carelessness) and had to leave Cambridge. Despairing of his prospects in Britain, he volunteered for the army of the East India Company, in which through the influence of friends of his father he obtained a cadetship. He sailed for India in the 'Essex' on 15 March 1781, and, after an eventful passage (see Price, 15-26), reached Madras in August. Price was destined for Bombay, but volunteered for temporary service in the south and took part in the siege of Negapatam and the capture of Trincomali in Ceylon as the 'Essex' passed those places. The ship completed its voyage to Bombay on 22 April 1782; in November he was appointed to the 2nd battalion of Bombay sepoys, which, under Captain Daniel Carpenter, did service in Malabar against Tippu, sultan of Mysore, up to the peace of 1784. He was promoted lieutenant in February 1788, and in the next war with Tippu (1790-92) he served in Captain Little's battalion at the siege of Dharwar, where he was severely wounded on 7 February 1791 and lost a leg. He was therefore moved to the guard of Sir Charles Malet, political minister at Poona. In 1792 he was transferred by the governor of Bombay, Jonathan Duncan the elder, to a staff appointment at Surat, where he had enough leisure to develop a keen interest in Persian studies, and began to collect Persian manuscripts and study Persian historical classics such as the 'Akbar-namah' of Abu'l-Fazl. In 1795, being then brevet captain, he was nominated judge-advocate-general to the Bombay army, a post he retained until his departure from India. He became full captain in September 1797 and served as military secretary and interpreter to Colonel Dow in Malabar (1797-8), where he twice narrowly escaped being cut off. During the last war against Tippu (1799), Price served as Persian translator to the commander of the Bombay army, General James Stuart. He was present at the capture of Seringapatam, and the army appointed him their prize agent to handle the record amount of booty taken; thereafter he was free of financial worries. 
After this Price returned to Bombay and resumed his Persian studies. He was promoted major in March 1804, and in February 1805, after twenty-four years' continuous service, he returned to Britain. He finally retired from the East India Company's service on his marriage, to a relative, in October 1807. Thenceforward he lived at Watton House, Brecon, and became a magistrate, and deputy lieutenant of Brecknockshire. He devoted himself to writing long, leisurely works on Arabian, Persian, and Indian history. Of these the best-known and the most important is 'Chronological retrospect, or, Memoirs of the principal events of Mahommedan history... from original Persian authorities' (3 vols., 1811, 1812, 1821). This covers the period from the death of Muhammad to the accession of Akbar. The earlier volumes are based chiefly on the Persian chronicles of Mirkhand and Khandamir, and are most detailed and accurate with respect to Persian history; but in the last volume Abu'l-Fazl is largely used. It is written in the over-ornate style of Price's sources, but it is the painstaking work of a genuine scholar anxious to do full justice to his authorities. Without pretending to any striking grasp or generalization, it is nevertheless useful and was for many years almost the only English work of reference for some branches of Eastern history. Price's other main works were his 'Essay towards the History of Arabia antecedent to the Birth of Mahommed' (1824, from the Persian text of Et-Tabari); the translation of the unique 'Memoirs of the Emperor Jahangueir' (1829; new edn, 1972); 'Account of the Siege and Reduction of Chaitur... from the Akbar-namah' (1831); and 'The Last Days of Krishna' (1831). These last three were published by the Oriental Translation Fund, of which Price was a committee member, and which awarded him its gold medal in 1830. He also wrote 'Memoirs of the early life and service of a field officer on the retired list of the Indian army' (published anonymously in 1839). He was a member of the Royal Asiatic Society, to which he bequeathed over seventy valuable oriental -- chiefly Persian -- manuscripts (see 'Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society', [1st ser.,] 3, 1836, xii-xiv). He died at Watton House on 16 December 1835. His widow had a memorial inscribed in Brecon parish church paying tribute to his 'unassuming simplicity', 'high moral courage', 'universal benevolence', and 'genuine piety' (Poole, 312-13). 


@@@@@


doc= 22747


Price, David (1790-1854), naval officer, entered the navy in January 1801 on board the 'Ardent', with Captain Thomas Bertie, and was present in the battle of Copenhagen on 2 April. He was afterwards in the 'Blenheim', which, on the renewal of the war in 1803, went out to the West Indies. In 1805 he was in the 'Centaur' with Sir Samuel Hood, and again in 1806, being present in the action off Rochefort on 25 September, and at the capture of the Russian battleship 'Sevolod' on 26 August 1808. In April 1809 he was appointed acting lieutenant of the 'Ardent', and during the following summer was twice captured by the Danes, once while in command of a watering party, and again in a prize which was wrecked; each time, however, he was soon released. The confirmation of his rank as lieutenant was dated 28 September 1809. He continued in the 'Ardent' until February 1811, when he was appointed to the brig 'Hawk', with Captain Henry Bourchier, employed on the north coast of France. On 19 August the 'Hawk' drove four armed vessels and a convoy of fifteen merchantships on shore near Barfleur. Price, in command of the boats, was sent in to finish the work, and succeeded in bringing out an armed brig and three store-ships; the others were lying over on their sides, completely bilged. 
Two months later, on 21 October, Price was severely wounded in an unsuccessful attempt to cut two brigs out of Barfleur harbour. It was nearly a year before he was able to serve again; in September 1812 he was appointed to the 'Mulgrave' (74 guns) off Cherbourg. In January 1813 he joined his old captain, Bourchier, in the 'San Josef', carrying the flag of Sir Richard King off Toulon. On 6 December he was promoted to command the bomb-vessel 'Volcano', which he took out in the summer of 1814 to the coast of North America. In the same year he engaged in the operations in the Potomac, against Baltimore, and at New Orleans, where, on 24 December, he was severely wounded in the thigh. On his return to England Price was advanced to post rank on 13 June 1815. From 1834 to 1838 he commanded the 'Portland' in the Mediterranean, during which time his services to the Greek government won him the order of the Redeemer of Greece, as well as complimentary letters from Sir Edmund Lyons. 
For the next six years Price lived in Brecknockshire, for which county he was a JP. In 1846 he married Elizabeth, daughter of John Taylor, and niece of Admiral William Taylor. In 1846 he was made superintendent of Sheerness Dockyard, where he continued until promoted rear-admiral on 6 November 1850. In August 1853 he was appointed commander-in-chief in the Pacific, and arrived on the station shortly before the declaration of war with Russia. Price proved to be a tactful and courteous joint commander-in-chief, but it appears that the responsibilities of wartime command, and the difficulty of working with his French colleague, weighed heavily on him, and he was susceptible to any advice. The allies moved slowly across the Pacific, spending a considerable period in the Marquesas Islands, and at Honolulu, where they worked to reduce the influence of the Americans. In July 1854 the two squadrons, English and French, met at Honolulu, and on 25 July sailed to search for two Russian frigates, which were reported to be at sea. They found the frigates dismantled at Petropavlovsk; but, on the morning of the attack, 30 August 1854, Price shot himself with a pistol, and died a few hours later. Opinion has long been divided as to whether Price deliberately shot himself, or was the victim of a terrible accident. On balance, the evidence of those closest to him, including the chaplain, to whom he confessed his 'crime', favours the suicide verdict. Sir Frederick Nicolson succeeded to the command, but the attack was postponed until 4 September, when it met with a decisive repulse. On 1 September Price was buried on shore, beneath a tree, on which the letters 'D. P.' were rudely cut with a knife. 
Price, a brave and successful junior officer, had suffered severe wounds. Long years of peacetime service and half pay left him ill prepared for the scale of his task in the Pacific; and, when he was confronted with the problems imposed by an unnecessarily complex command structure, and the prospect of going, once again, under fire while engaging shore batteries, his resolve apparently collapsed. As an isolated incident the suicide of a British admiral on the point of action might seem remarkable; but Price's career had done nothing to prepare him for this situation, while his experience had given him every reason to dread the prospect. 


@@@@@


doc= 22748


Price, Ellis (c.1505-1594), administrator, was the second son of Robert ap Rhys (died 'c'.1534) of Foelas and Plas Iolyn, Denbighshire, chaplain to Cardinal Wolsey and, as chancellor of St Asaph, the cardinal's principal agent in north Wales. The family had served the Tudors since 1485. As a member of St Nicholas's Hostel, Cambridge, Ellis Price (or Prys) distinguished himself in a disputation with two Oxford students. He graduated BCL in 1533 and DCL in 1535, and was known to his fellow Welshmen as 'y Doctor Coch' ('The Red Doctor'), a sobriquet that has been variously explained as denoting either his red hair or his scarlet doctoral gown. He married Ellyw, daughter of Owen Pool, priest, of Llandecwyn, Merioneth; they had two sons and four daughters. 
Price was one of the monastic visitors in Wales in 1535. Despite the support of Rowland Lee, president of the council in the marches, he was suspended from his duties when his fellow commissioners complained of the scandal caused by his youthful indiscretions and 'progeny'. He was rehabilitated in 1538, when at Thomas Cromwell's instigation he was appointed commissary-general and chancellor of the diocese of St Asaph. In the meantime he and his brother Richard, abbot of Aberconwy, sought to have the house exempted from the dissolution of the smaller monasteries. Along with his kinsman John Lloyd, Ellis was sued in the court of chancery in 1537 by the vicar of Llanarmon-yn-Ial, in the newly formed shire of Denbigh, for misappropriation of tithes. Ellis was later ejected from the rectory of Llangwm, but retained the sinecure rectories of Llandrillo-yn-Rhos and Llanuwchllyn. 
Price was an assiduous iconoclast in implementing the new laws against the 'superstitious' abuse of images and religious practices. In 1538 he drew Cromwell's attention to the continued veneration by pilgrims of the image of Derfel Gadarn in the diocese of St Asaph. He was careful to inform Cromwell that he had spurned a bribe offered by the incumbent and parishioners of Llandderfel to spare the image. Cromwell used it as kindling for the burning of the Observant friar John Forest, condemned for denying the royal supremacy. An active member of the convocation of 1547, Price was appointed by Archbishop Thomas Cranmer in 1549 to a commission to visit the diocese of St David. But after the Henrician 'Acts of Union' of Wales with England he was mainly involved in civil administration. He was 'custos rotulorum' of Merioneth in 1543, and from 1555 until his death, and served as sheriff of Merioneth, Anglesey, Caernarfon, and Denbigh during three reigns. He was elected knight of the shire for Merioneth in Mary's last parliament and in Elizabeth's second. 
In 1560 Price became a member of the council in the marches of Wales. After 1564 he assumed the role of chief agent of the earl of Leicester in his lordship of Denbigh and the forest of Snowdon. As steward of Denbigh he was one of the four chief tenants who represented the Welshry of the lordship in negotiations with the earl for the commutation of their customary dues. He also served on the last of three commissions obtained by Leicester to search out concealed lands in the forest of Snowdon (1573). Some of the gentlemen of Llyn who resisted these inquiries were subsequently imprisoned. The commotion was commemorated in the 'cywydd' by Edmund Prys (1544-1623), archdeacon of Merioneth, 'yn erbyn anllywodraeth y Cedyrn' ('against the unruliness of the great'). In 1560 Price had secured from the crown the manor of Tir Ifan, parcel of the lands of the knights hospitaller at Ysbyty Ifan, Dolgynwal, which became one of the family seats. His younger brother Cadwaladr established another branch of the family with an estate at Rhiwlas, Merioneth. By 1561 Ellis was chancellor of the diocese of Bangor, where he also held the parsonage of Llaniestyn. When in February 1566 the earl of Pembroke nominated Price to the vacant see of Bangor, Archbishop Parker appealed to William Cecil to prevent the appointment, he 'neither being priest nor having any priestly disposition'. Parker would rather run the risk of offending Pembroke than commend a 'doubtful man' to the queen for consecration. In a later letter to Cecil, Parker added another reason for taking pause before filling the vacancy. The 'wise men' he had consulted, some of them from the country there, had advised against appointing a Welshman to Bangor, for the Welsh 'band so much together in kindred, that the bishop can do not as he would for his alliance sake' ('Correspondence', 257-61). 
This objection was overcome with the appointment to the see of the Welshman Nicholas Robinson, with whom Price seems to have co-operated well enough on a commission of 1578 to investigate the recusants of the Llyn peninsula. He was particularly assiduous in searching Plas-du, Caernarvonshire, the home of Thomas Owen, who maintained regular correspondence with his Catholic exile brothers Hugh and Robert. Price was one of the assistant justices in the trial at Wrexham in October 1584 of the schoolmaster Richard Gwyn (alias Richard White) for denying the queen's supremacy. The anonymous Catholic author of 'The Life and Martyrdome of Mr Richard White' doubted whether Ellis, 'who is known to be as prophane a life as any in the world', was a fit man to sit in judgment on 'the servant of God', alleging that he had had children with his own sister (Thomas, 104, 108). 
The bard Wiliam Llyn commended Price as a Hebrew and classical scholar, but he took no discernible role in promoting the contribution of the reformers to consolidating the status of Welsh as a language of learning and worship. During a dispute over property rights in Wrexham in the reign of Henry VIII, Price was arraigned in the court of Star Chamber on a charge of assaulting his brother-in-law William Salesbury, the humanist scholar and translator. He was present in the Commons when the bill for translating the prayer book and 'Bible' into Welsh was introduced in late February and early March 1563, but was absent from parliament for its final reading. However, Price may well have been responsible for devising the act 8 Eliz. c. 20, passed in this parliament's session of 1566. It repealed the measure of 1534 which provided 'inter alia' for the trial in Caernarvonshire and Anglesey of offences committed in Merioneth. Merioneth was in a particularly anomalous position among the Welsh shires: another provision of the act of 1534, authorizing the trial in the border shires of suspects arrested in the marcher lordships, had in the second 'Act of Union' of 1543 been extended to apply to Merioneth as well, so that crimes committed there were also triable in Shropshire as the nearest English shire. As a crown official Price had experienced the difficulties of administering the provision of 1534 in a case involving his own household. In July 1553, at the sessions held at Shrewsbury for trial of offences committed in Wales, five men were indicted for murdering Ellis's servant in Denbighshire. Three of the defendants were executed, one was found guilty of manslaughter, and one acquitted. Price continued to intervene in Merioneth electoral politics after he had ceased to represent the shire in the Commons. He supported the Owens of Llwyn in their feud with the Salesburys of Rug, but his influence declined after Leicester's death in 1588. In an exchequer case of 1590 he and his son and heir were accused of unlawful entry into lands in the county. 
Ellis Price's name figures prominently in the royal commission set up by the council in the marches for organizing the eisteddfod at Caerwys in October 1567. His eldest son, Thomas Price (c.1564-1634), became a bard and buccaneer of renown, and his own patronage kept his reputation sweet among the bards. Wiliam Llyn, one of the most distinguished poets of the age, lauded him as a 'second Moses' endowed with great attributes of character and wisdom in exercising divinely ordained authority. In the verse of Sion Tudur, chief apprentice bard at the Caerwys eisteddfod, he is depicted as a protector of the country who was dedicated to imposing the rule of law. In gauging his reputation, the conventional praise of the bards must be weighed in the balance against the colourful accounts of his oppressions and 'indirect dealings' left by his opponents. He was remembered in the community long after his death as a ruthless exploiter of opportunities for his own advancement. Thomas Pennant in his 'Tours in Wales' describes him as 'the greatest of our knaves in the period in which he lived; the most dreaded oppressor in his neighbourhood, and a true sycophant' (Pennant, 3.140). Price's devoted service to Leicester is well documented, though the surviving correspondence with his patron does not bear out Pennant's claim that his invariable form of address was 'O Lord, in thee do I put my trust'. 
Price died on 8 October 1594, but his will was not proved until 24 May 1596; in it he charged his heir and executor, Thomas Price, to protect the interests of his brothers and sisters, and to 'place my base sons in some service, and not to suffer them to go a begging'. Pennant refers to a portrait of him dated 1605 preserved at Bodysgallen, Conwy, which was presumably a copy, but its present whereabouts have not been traced. 


@@@@@


doc= 22749


Price, Francis (bap. 1704?, d. 1753), architectural surveyor and author, was probably the Francis Price who was baptized on 23 June 1704 at Petworth, Sussex, son of Francis and Sarah Price. Nothing is known about his father, but his mother, who is described in his will, married twice, her second marriage being to Thomas Consard of Petworth, a vintner with whom she had at least three children (John, Sarah, and Richard Consard). Little is known about Price's early career or education. He was married (his wife, Elizabeth, outlived him, dying on 25 February 1761 at the age of fifty-seven) but at the time of writing his will in 1750 they had no surviving children. By 1736 he was in Salisbury, possibly at the instigation of Bishop Sherlock; certainly he appears to have lived and worked in the city from that date. A number of accounts survive for works done by him on buildings in the cathedral close, including repairs and additions to the bishop's palace (1736-8), Braybrooke (1746), and the north canonry (1751). He was also responsible for rebuilding the west end of Ellingham Church, Hampshire, in 1747. His most important official post was that of surveyor and clerk of the fabric of Salisbury Cathedral -- his gravestone records that he had held this position for seventeen years but, although he seems to have acted in this capacity from around 1737, he was not officially appointed until 1745. As clerk of works he carried out an extensive survey of the cathedral and supervised a number of important repairs and rebuildings of the roof and fabric. His 'Series of particular and useful observations... upon... the cathedral church of Salisbury', published just three months after his death, is one of the first serious architectural studies of a Gothic building. A second enlarged, but anonymous, edition was printed by R. Baldwin in 1774. 
Although this book was undoubtedly important, Price's fame chiefly rests on his earlier work, 'The British Carpenter'. First published as 'A Treatise on Carpentry' in May 1733, it was reprinted under its new title as an expanded second edition in 1735 and it is by the latter title that it has been known ever since. 'A Treatise on Carpentry' was the first English book devoted entirely to carpentry and designed specifically for the instruction of craftsmen. The first edition had twenty-eight plates, each labelled alphabetically, with the page of text accompanying that plate beginning with the same letter. In the second edition sixteen plates were added which confused this system further. Through copious drawings Price demonstrated how to construct both timber joints and wooden structures, most of the engravings being devoted to designs for roof trusses for a variety of spans and purposes. In all his books Price drew the plates himself, but had them engraved by others. Many of the structures he showed are complex and may reflect more on the creativity of the artist than the practice of the time, but the popularity of the work meant that his designs were frequently copied by subsequent builders, architects, and writers. From the start the book was well received, running to seven editions by 1768, and this was probably helped by the fact that from the second edition onwards it carried a tribute, dated 28 June 1733, as a 'very Useful and Instructive Piece' from three of the most famous architects of the day, Nicholas Hawksmoor, John James, and James Gibbs. 
Price evidently gained some status in his own lifetime in Salisbury but he does not seem to have held any other public office. A portrait of him by George Beare dated 1747 is in the National Portrait Gallery; it shows him holding a drawing of the eastern crossing roofs at Salisbury Cathedral which he himself had designed. At the end of his life he lived in the cathedral close and on his death he was thought sufficiently eminent to warrant an obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. He died in Salisbury on 20 March 1753 and was buried in the cathedral cloister outside the chapter-house door. 


@@@@@


doc= 22750


Price, Hugh (c.1495-1574), founder of Jesus College, Oxford, was the son of a Brecon butcher, Rhys ap Rhys. He may have been educated in Brecon, or perhaps at Osney Abbey, and later attended Oxford University; he graduated BCL (probably in 1518), BCnL in 1524, and DCnL in 1526. He was one of a group of judges who tried and condemned James Bainham for heresy in 1532. There is no record of his ordination, but at intervals he held a number of livings: Cranbrook, in Kent (1533-54); St Leonard, Foster Lane, London (1542-8); and Llan-faes, Brecknockshire (1554-74). In 1541 he was appointed treasurer of St David's Cathedral, with dispensation from residing there. When the see of Rochester was re-established in the same year, he was appointed as first prebendary there. He held both preferments until his death. He purchased and retained a house in Brecon, and has been identified as the Hugh Price who was bailiff of the borough in 1572. He died, almost certainly in Brecon, in August 1574, and was buried in St John the Evangelist Priory church; he never married. 
Jesus College, Oxford, was founded on Price's initiative in 1571 'for the spread and maintenance of the Christian religion in its sincere form' (Williams, 62). He provided an endowment and petitioned Queen Elizabeth, who established the college, claimed for herself the title of founder, and transferred to it the site, buildings, and property of the former White Hall. Price promised his foundation $60 a year. Only part of the main quadrangle was built before he died. He bequeathed 100 marks and his books, and confirmed the $60 a year to the college on condition 'that I remaine Founder of the same College' (Jones, 146), but there were long delays before the money was made available. In the eighteenth century Edward Yardley remembered Price, as he would have wished, as 'the worthy promoter or rather the founder of Jesus College'. However, the college did not pay its founder the compliment of adopting his arms. Its familiar arms, originally with a blue field, which can be linked with the arms of the family of Green, were in use by 1590. 


@@@@@


doc= 22751


Price, James (1757/8-1783), chemist, son of James and Margaret Higginbotham, was born in London. He entered Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1772, graduating MA in 1777. In 1781 he changed his name to Price, in accordance with the will of a relative who had bequeathed him a fortune. On 10 May 1781 he was elected to the Royal Society, having been described on the certificate of recommendation by Richard Kirwan, who headed the list of proposers, as 'well versed in various branches of Natural Philosophy, and particularly in Chymistry' (Royal Society election certificate, Royal Society Archives, London). On 2 July 1782 the degree of MD was conferred on him by the University of Oxford. 
Between 6 May and 25 May 1782 Price performed, at Stoke, near Guildford, experiments which appeared to show that he possessed a white powder and a red powder capable of converting mercury into silver and gold respectively, the substances being heated together in a crucible with a flux of borax. The witnesses included lords Onslow, King, and Palmerston, and other men of social, though not scientific, rank. The gold and silver alleged to be produced were found genuine on assay. 
Price related the experiments in detail in 'An account of some experiments on mercury, silver and gold, made in Guildford in May, 1782, in the laboratory of James Price, M.D., F.R.S.' (1782). The experiments were the subject of a correspondence between Sir Joseph Banks, president of the Royal Society, and his close friend Charles Blagden, initiated by Banks on 14 July 1782 with a letter telling Blagden of the anger of Richard Kirwan and other chemists caused by 'such an apparent charlatanism' (Royal Society Archives, BLA b.8). A letter written by Blagden, however, shows that he thought it possible that Price had made a genuine discovery. Although alchemy was regarded as discredited by Price's chemist contemporaries, prevailing chemical theories did not preclude the possibility of transmuting metals. Blagden was particularly incensed by the award to Price of the degree of MD by Oxford, assuming like many others that it had been conferred for his apparent success in transmutation. 'Was ever any country more disgraced than ours has been by the conduct of our University?', he wrote. If Price had made the discovery he claimed without revealing it to his colleagues, he continued, he deserved to be excluded from their society, not 'to be adorned [with] extraordinary academical honours' (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, Archives, H 165). Price later insisted that the award of the degree was for former work in chemistry. 
In the preface to his account, Price had declared that his stock of the powders was exhausted, and that the cost of replenishment would be too great in labour and health for him to undertake it. Nevertheless it was made clear to him that he must repeat his experiments in the presence of scientific colleagues, Banks, in particular, reminding him that the honour of the society was at stake as well as his own. Early in 1783, having tried to obtain information in Germany of alchemical processes, Price apparently worked incessantly for six weeks, attempting to verify his claims. In March he prepared a concentrated infusion of laurel leaves (which would contain hydrocyanic acid) and made his will. According to Chambers's 'The Book of Days' (1863) he drank this in the presence of the three colleagues who alone came to the laboratory at his invitation on a day in early August which he had appointed for a demonstration. This has usually been repeated in subsequent accounts of Price's suicide. It is, however, difficult to discount the probability of an alternative version in a letter dated 30 September 1783, to an editor of the 'Gottingisches Magazin' (3. 886-9) who had earlier published an abstract of Price's book in the journal. The unnamed writer from London, who seemed well informed and went into considerable detail, stated that Price was alone when he drank the poison, no one having accepted his invitation to attend the laboratory that day. Price was buried at St John's Church in the parish of Stoke-next-Guildford, where a memorial gives the date of his death as 31 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 22752


Prise, Sir John (1501/2-1555), administrator and scholar, was born between 12 October 1501 and 11 October 1502, the son of Rhys ap Gwilym ap Llywelyn of Brecon and Gwenllian, daughter of Hywel ap Madog. After study at Oxford University and practice in the court of arches he graduated BCL at Cambridge in 1535/6. However, the crucial step in his career had been taken by 1530, when he is found in the service of Thomas Cromwell. Appointed registrar-general in ecclesiastical causes on 1 September 1534, Prise played a direct role in the dissolution of the monasteries, both as visitor in 1535 -- when he urged the virtues of a moderate approach in the face of the arrogant, even violent, behaviour of his fellow visitor, Thomas Lee -- and as a commissioner for the surrender of monasteries in Hampshire, Wiltshire, and Gloucestershire in late 1539 and early 1540. He also participated in other aspects of the turbulent politics of the 1530s, being involved in the search for incriminating documents in the bishop of Durham's palace in 1532; recording, as a public notary, the interrogations of various rebels and traitors in the Tower of London, including Bishop John Fisher and Sir Thomas More, as well as of participants in Hallam's rebellion at Kingston upon Hull early in 1537; and drawing up documents relating to Henry VIII's divorces of Anne Boleyn (at whose marriage in 1533 Prise had been a servitor) and Anne of Cleves. 
On 11 October 1534 Prise, aged thirty-two, married Joan Williamson ('b'. 1515/16), aged eighteen, niece by marriage to Cromwell, at the latter's house in Islington. This may not have been Prise's first marriage, for his will refers to a married daughter apparently older than any of the eleven children he had with Joan. The first four of those children were born in London, and the godparents after whom they were named reflect their father's connections in the city: the eldest son, Gregory, was named after Thomas Cromwell's son, the second surviving son, Richard, after Cromwell's nephew, Richard Williams, and the eldest daughter, Eleanor, after the wife of Christopher Barker, Garter king of arms. 
Although Prise retained royal favour following Cromwell's execution in July 1540 he was never again to play such a central role in public affairs as he had in the 1530s. Instead his public career entered a new phase, focused mainly on Wales and its borders. From 8 June 1540 he had the lease, and from 13 November 1542 the grant in fee, of the dissolved Benedictine priory of St Guthlac at Hereford, which he seems to have made his principal residence, for it was the birthplace of his fifth and subsequent children from 1542 onwards. He was also granted Brecon Priory in fee in 1542, though he never resided there. In the meantime, on 27 September 1540 Prise was appointed secretary for life of the council in the marches of Wales, subsequently serving the crown in a variety of capacities, for example, as sheriff of Brecknockshire (1542-3) and justice of the peace in Herefordshire and numerous other counties. 
Prise was knighted two days after Edward VI's coronation, on 22 February 1547, and was elected MP for Brecknockshire in the same year: the poet Lewys Morgannwg aptly likened his progress to 'a long summer's day' in 1548 (Gruffydd, 'The earliest Welsh printed book', 106). In 1552 he was admitted at Doctors' Commons. Nor was Prise's success clouded by the accession of Queen Mary, for he sat in the first three Marian parliaments without opposing measures to restore Catholicism, and also dedicated a treatise on the coinage to the queen. He died at St Guthlac's Priory, Hereford, on 15 October 1555, survived by his wife and ten of their children, leaving lands worth about $135 per annum together with numerous bequests, including 1000 marks for the dowries of his daughters. His will, made nine days earlier, was essentially Catholic in character, bequeathing his soul to God, to 'owre blessede ladie Sainte Marye And to all the blessed cumpanie of heavin' (Morgan, 255), and requesting prayers on its behalf. He asked to be buried in Hereford Cathedral. 
Although critical of the monasteries he helped to dissolve, Prise also played an important role, which has been compared to that of Bale and Leland, in collecting and studying monastic manuscripts, of which he owned or annotated more than a hundred; in his will he urged his son Richard to arrange for the publication of the works of William of Malmesbury and other medieval historians in his collection. His familiarity with medieval texts informed his two best-known works, the 'Historiae Brytannicae defensio' (probably completed by 1547 though not published until 1573), a measured refutation of Polydore Vergil's attack on Geoffrey of Monmouth's account of early British history, and 'Yny lhyvyr hwnn...' ('In this book...'), attributed to Prise by Richard Davies, bishop of St David's in 1567, a compilation of religious texts in Welsh, including the creed and Lord's prayer, published in 1546 and the earliest known printed book in Welsh. Drawing extensively on medieval Welsh religious texts, the latter compilation reveals not only a deep dissatisfaction with the failure of the clergy to provide elementary religious instruction but also an awareness, shared by other contemporary Welsh humanists, of the potential of print as a means of preserving and disseminating the vernacular literary heritage of Wales. Though he certainly carved a successful public career through his prudently supple commitment to the Tudor regime, it is as 'a lover of antiquity', to quote Leland's tribute (Gruffydd, 'The earliest Welsh printed book', 109), that Prise enjoys his greatest reputation. 


@@@@@


doc= 22753


Price, John (1602?-1676), classical scholar, was born in London, according to the information transmitted to Anthony Wood by Thomas Lockey, canon of Christ Church, Oxford; he describes himself in his earliest published work as 'Anglo-Britannus'. He was a scholar of Westminster School and went up in 1617 to Christ Church, where he neither matriculated nor graduated, presumably because of his Roman Catholic faith. In this period he apparently composed verses in memory of Queen Anne, who died in 1619. Given the commonness of the names, it is uncertain whether he is the John Price, 'son and heir of John Price of London, Esq., deceased', admitted at Gray's Inn in 1619 (Foster, 'Register', 156). He had apparently acquired a doctorate of law, presumably abroad, some time before 1640, but nothing in his career suggests an interest in legal practice. His references to his ownership and acquisition of books show that he was a man of some means. 
In 1629 Price was in Venice; by 1635 he was in Paris, working on the 'Apologia' of Apuleius, his edition of which he published there in that year. It is dedicated to Henry Howard, eldest surviving son of Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel; Price describes himself as having been for three years Arundel's protege ('cliens'), as a result of the intervention of William Petty. Price had done a great deal of work for this edition before leaving England; while in Paris without his books, he was helped by Jean Bourdelot. His letters to Bourdelot from London in 1635 and 1636 reveal that, before Paris, Price had visited Padua and met Lorenzo Pignoria, perhaps on the same journey as his visit to Venice in 1629; it was presumably in Italy that he had discovered the edition of the 'Apologia' by Scipione Gentili (1607), and modified his own plans accordingly. The final outcome is remarkable for the range of classical and medieval texts and earlier scholars cited, and for the use of visual and inscriptional evidence, drawing partly on the Arundel collections and partly on material recorded by Bourdelot. (The Arundel marbles had been collected in Asia Minor by an agent of Nicolas Claude Fabri de Peiresc, diverted by Petty; the inscriptions were published by John Selden in 1628 with the help of Patrick Young and Richard James.) Price describes himself as 'foreign and unknown' to Bourdelot, but his letters show that he was already in touch not only with Pignoria, but also with Cardinal Francesco Barberini, Peiresc, and Selden (Larroque). 
It may be that confidence should be placed in the belief that Price went to Ireland during the rule of Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, and met Archbishop Ussher, and even that he served Strafford, but it can only have been for a brief period in 1636, since by February 1637 Price was in Vienna, attracted by the manuscripts brought back from Constantinople by Augerius Busbequius. Price copied manuscripts not only in the Imperial Library, but also in the Tengnagel collection. It was at this stage also that he compiled the index of authors used by Hesychius, printed in his edition of the 'Metamorphoses' of Apuleius of 1650. Before the end of the year Price was in Venice copying inscriptions, texts of which passed via Selden and George Harbin to Edmund Chishull. It was presumably from Venice that Price visited Piacenza (a visit to which he refers in a letter of 1658) and that he left for Rome in May 1640. 
By late 1640 Price was back in England, writing to Archbishop Ussher from the country house of George Radcliffe, the friend of the earl of Strafford, on 29 August 1640; earlier that month, the dean and chapter of Christ Church had recommended Price to Archbishop Laud for a prebend. The traditions that Price published royalist pamphlets, supported the royalist cause, and was imprisoned by parliament are poorly grounded. By 1644 Price was in Antwerp having his portrait done by Wenceslaus Hollar, a portrait engraved by R. A. Persyn for Price's edition of the 'Metamorphoses'. In 1645-6 he was in Paris, where he associated with Claude de Sarrau, leaving with him on 10 February 1646 copies of his notes on the 'New Testament' for G. J. Vossius and Claude de Saumaise. De Sarrau admired Price's learning and fortitude in adversity. An anonymous letter to Ussher from Rouen of 18 May 1647 is probably from Radcliffe, who was at Caen in April 1647; the letter records Price's intention of going to London and recommends him to Ussher. (If the letter is indeed from Radcliffe, he would undoubtedly have known of any earlier visit to Ussher.) Meanwhile, it was in Paris that Price's work on 'Matthew' (1646), 'Acts' (1647), the epistle of 'James' (1646), and 'Psalms' (1647) was published, probably also on five chapters of the gospels and the letter to 'Philemon' (1646). Price's work in this field was in part republished with other 'New Testament' material in London in 1660 as 'Joannis Pricaei commentarii in varios novi testamenti librae', a book to which Price refers in his later correspondence with the Medici. Price's 'Apuleii Metamorphoseos libri XI' was published in Gouda in 1650. He had worked on it in England in 1640, using a manuscript he had originally owned, which he had given to Laud, and which Laud had given to Oxford, which Price had borrowed through the good offices of Patrick Young, librarian to James I and Charles I. He had recorded a certain amount of autobiographical data in it, and had also used the notes of Casaubon in his copy of the Leiden edition of 1588 by P. Colvius. 
Price had written to Archbishop Ussher from London on 19 August probably of 1649, undertaking to transmit a book of Ussher's to Pierre and Jacques Dupuy. By 1653, when he wrote again to Ussher (also sending greetings to Selden), Price had been for a year in the employ of the Medici as their keeper of coins; he told Ussher that he was working on the epistles of Paul and Aulus Gellius. He was also appointed professor of Greek at Pisa. Tradition has it that he also intended to work on Avienus and further on Hesychius, having resigned his chair in Pisa and gone to Venice for the purpose, only to abandon the project with the publication of the Leiden edition of 1668. This edition, however, includes Price's index, originally published in 1650, and substantial contributions to the commentary. It is in any case certain that Price went to Venice in 1658. In 1661 he moved to Rome and into the patronage of Cardinal Francesco Barberini, and remained there until his death in 1676. He was buried in the Augustinian monastery there. Notes on some of the younger Pliny's 'Letters' had by his death perhaps reached proof without being published. 
Price was in touch with many of the major European classical scholars of his time, and Colomies lists many of those who cited him with esteem in their work. Price's scholarship had something of the magpie quality that Peiresc's had, but he did not have Peiresc's birth and wealth that enabled the latter to act as the centre of a European network of scholars. Price's work on classical authors shows judgement and learning, but when he turned to the 'New Testament' he was insufficiently aware of the different nature of its textual tradition and excessively adventurous in emendation. 


@@@@@


doc= 22754


Price, John (1626/7-1691), Church of England clergyman, was born at Gatcombe on the Isle of Wight, the son of Ellis Price, rector of Gatcombe, and his wife, who was probably Ann, 'nee' Rathborne. John Price went to Eton College as a king's scholar: he and his younger brother William (1631-1684) were so poor that in 1645 they received a grant from the college. On 10 January 1645, aged eighteen, he went to King's College, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1650, and was elected to a fellowship of the college, a post he held until 1656. He proceeded MA in 1653. His brother William followed him from Eton to King's in 1648 and was also a fellow there, from 1651 to 1666. 
Price served General George Monck, who had been a fellow-commoner at King's in 1627, as a chaplain in Scotland from 1654 to 1659, becoming his chosen confidant. In August 1659 he was particularly involved, along with Monck's clerical brother, Nicholas, Dr Thomas Gumble, the Presbyterian chaplain to the Edinburgh council, and Dr Samuel Barrow, a physician, in the plan to send a remonstrance to parliament, 'to complain of the long sitting of Parliament and to call for elections' (Masson, 5.476-7). Indeed Price seems to have been the trusted amanuensis of this Dalkeith letter, which was later burnt once General Lambert had crushed the summer insurrection. 
Travelling south with General Monck towards London, Price complained of a long fast sermon he and the general had to endure from Hugh Peters at St Albans in late January 1660. The House of Commons instructed him on 26 April 1660 to preach before them at St Margaret's Church to celebrate the day of solemn thanksgiving for the 'Mercies God has bestowed on the nation through the successful conduct of the Lord General Monk'. In his sermon on 10 May he observed that the Church of England 'could not have fallen but by the heates of its own Ecclesiasticks', that the country would never mean mischief to the court, 'unlesse the Court first minister occasion of offence, either seeming or real', and that it was to the subjects' advantage 'to keep the prerogative of the Crown inviolable' (J. Price, 'Sermon Preached before the Honourable House of Commons at St Margarets', 1660, epistle dedicatory) and likened the occasion to the annual thanksgiving for the 1605 Gunpowder Plot. 
Price was later well rewarded for his loyalty. Nicholas Monck having become provost of Eton, on 12 July 1660 Price became one of the fellows there. He kept rooms at Eton until his death, when he bequeathed the tapestries and fireplace picture in his 'great Roome' to his successor (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/404, fol. 188'v'). Further, Charles II presented him to the prebendal stall of Grimston in Salisbury Cathedral, on 8 October 1660 during the vacancy in see. This was fully three weeks before the house committee on religion was due to meet again to discuss the status of non-episcopally ordained clerics. This followed the rowdy discussions in July for the settling of ministers. Sir Edward Dering fulminated that 'ordination by presbyters without a bishop is... not so much discountenanced, but left equally estimable to the ancient episcopal ordination' ('Diaries and Papers', 49). Dering's appeals reopened the debate over discipline and nonconformity. In spite of this Price was instituted on 28 November 1660 and later installed. He received Anglican orders as deacon on 23 January, and priest on 31 January the following year, and in the same year the University of Cambridge conferred on him a DD by royal letters patent. (He incorporated this degree at Oxford in 1680.) 
In 1669 Price became rector of Petworth, Sussex. Price remained close to Monck and in 1676 wrote 'The designed loyaltie of the renowned Generall George Monck in restoring King Charles', now in the British Library, published in 1680 as 'Mystery and Method of his Majesty's Happy Restauration'. In September 1683, following the Rye House plot, he preached against division and backbiting, appealing for unity and, by way of admonition, recalled a time when parliament soldiers 'did Plunder the Houses and take away the Houses of honest country-men' (J. Price, 'Sermon Preached at Petworth in Sussex Sept. 9. 1683', 1683, 9). The sermon was printed at the behest of his patron, the duchess of Somerset. 
For many years Price lived at Petworth with his wife, Frances, who suffered from dementia. By his will of 10 October 1690 he provided that she and her sister Margaret Edmonds should be allowed to live in his house in Suffolk Street in London with a lifelong maintenance grant from his estate. He required that at her death a substantial charity be established to support scholars of King's College. He died at Petworth on 17 April 1691 and was buried in the parish church on 20 April. He and his wife had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 22755


Price, John (d. 1736), architect of London, of whose parents nothing is known, was a designer of early Georgian churches in an unsophisticated vernacular style derived from Wren. He was the John Price 'of Richmond', who designed Isleworth church, Middlesex, 1705-7, and also architect and builder of the church of St Mary-at-the-Walls, Colchester, Essex, 1713-14. In 1714-16, in conjunction with his son John Price (also of Richmond), he designed and built St George's Chapel, Yarmouth, Norfolk, where in 1715 they also contracted to build a new town hall and assembly room. John Price subsequently designed the church of St George, Southwark, the foundation-stone of which was laid on 23 April 1734 by the deputy of George II, 'adjuvante' 'Johanne Price' 'armiger, architecto'. It was completed in 1736. 
Price engaged in speculative building in London, and in 1718 took leases on the Harley estate in Holles, Oxford, Margaret, and Prince's streets. In 1720 he was responsible for a project for residential development at Headley in Surrey, near Epsom, then a fashionable watering-place. The design is remarkable as 'the earliest English essay in urban terrace composition' (Hussey, 1539-40) since Inigo Jones's Covent Garden, anticipating Colen Campbell's for Grosvenor Square by five years. This is known from an engraving (found separately, and as plates 96-7 of Badesdale and Rocque's 'Vitruvius Brittanicus', vol. 4, 1739) inscribed 'The Elevation of West Prospect of Part of a Design of Building already began to be Erected on the Lawne at Headly in Surrey/Design'd by John Price, Architect, 1720'. It shows a grand central building with portico and mansard roofs (presumably some sort of assembly rooms) flanked by two identical ranges each of nine houses treated as a uniform composition. It was never completed, but traces of Price's unfinished buildings were still to be seen at Headley in the early nineteenth century. 
Price was employed by the duke of Chandos at Cannons House, Middlesex, in 1720-21. By this time the structure was largely complete, and Price's contribution, so far as original designs were concerned, was probably small. However, the elevations of Cannons published by Hulsbergh at this time are inscribed 'John Price Architect, Built Anno 1720', although what they show was largely the work of his three predecessors in the duke's service. The design of the duke's projected mansion in Cavendish Square, owing much to Cannons, is similarly described as 'Design'd by John Price, architect 1720'. It was never built, and by 1723 Price's place as the duke's surveyor had been taken by Edward Shepherd. In 1726-8 Price was among those who made designs for a bridge to be built across the Thames between Fulham and Putney. His designs were not, however, accepted by the Company of Proprietors of Fulham Bridge. In 1735 Price published 'Some considerations humbly offered to the House of Commons, for building a stone-bridge over the River Thames from Westminster to Lambeth', with an engraved design. 
John Price died in November 1736. Little is known of the career of his son John, although he appears principally to have been a London surveyor. He was warden of the Carpenters' Company in 1751-2, and was elected master in 1753. He acted as surveyor to the Fishmongers' Company in the 1760s, and died on 17 October 1765. 


@@@@@


doc= 22756


Price, John (1773-1801), topographer, was born at Leominster, Herefordshire. He gave lessons there in French, Latin, Italian, and Spanish. Subsequently he became a bookseller at Hereford, but finally settled at Worcester. He occasionally made walking tours on the continent. In 1795 he published 'An Historical and Topographical Account of Leominster and its Vicinity'. This was followed in 1796 by 'An Historical Account of the City of Hereford, with some Remarks on the River Wye'. This 'very respectable performance' was founded on collections given to the writer by John Lodge, author of 'Introductory Sketches towards a Topographical History of Herefordshire' (1793). In 1797 Price published 'The Ludlow guide, comprising an historical account of the castle and town, with a survey of the various seats, views, &c., in that neighbourhood'. In 1799 appeared a similar 'Worcester Guide'. Price's other publications included 'The Seaman's Return, or, The Unexpected Marriage' (1795), an operatic farce, partly translated from German. He died at Worcester on 5 April 1801. 


@@@@@


doc= 22757


Price, John (1735-1813), librarian, was born on 1 March 1735 at Llandegla, Denbighshire, and baptized on 7 March, the son of the Revd Robert Price ('b'. 1705?), rector of the parish, and his wife, Anne (died 1756). In 1737 his father became vicar of Llangollen, Denbighshire, where John was educated before matriculating from Jesus College, Oxford, on 26 March 1754. He graduated BA in 1757 and MA in 1760. In the latter year he was ordained. In 1757 Humphrey Owen, who was Bodley's librarian and a fellow of Jesus College, appointed him janitor of the Bodleian -- a position he held until 1760. From 1761 to 1763 he occupied the post of sub-librarian and from 1762 to 1763 also acted as Owen's substitute as curate of Kingston Bagpuize, Berkshire. Owen was elected principal of Jesus College in 1763, and from 1765 to 1767 Price was acting librarian and received Owen's salary. On Owen's death in 1768 Price succeeded him as Bodley's librarian after a close election in which he defeated William Cleaver, afterwards principal of Brasenose College, and, successively, bishop of Chester, Bangor, and St Asaph. Price took the degree of BD in the year of his election and also succeeded Owen as a delegate of Oxford University Press. 
Throughout his long period of office in the Bodleian Library, Price also held ecclesiastical appointments. He was curate at Northleigh, Oxfordshire, from 1766 to 1773 and at Wilcote, Oxfordshire, from 1775 to 1810. In 1782 he was presented to the living of Woolaston with Alvington, Gloucestershire, and in 1798 to Llangattock, Brecknockshire, both by Henry Somerset, fifth duke of Beaufort, whom Price frequently visited at Badminton. He was never a fellow at Jesus College, although he drew an annual stipend as a graduate scholar from 1758 until 1783. In June 1789, persuaded by his friend, the poet laureate Thomas Warton, he migrated to Trinity College where he remained until his death. 
The advances made by the Bodleian Library during Price's forty-five years as its librarian owed little to his administrative skills. In 1787 Thomas Beddoes, who had just been elected chemical reader at Oxford, addressed a printed 'Memorial concerning the state of the Bodleian Library, and the conduct of the principal librarian' to the library's curators. In it he attacked Price for 'a regular and constant neglect of his duty', for non-attendance at the library, and for lending out books before they were catalogued. He also criticized in detail the library's opening hours, its methods of acquisition, its choice of books and serials, and the expenditure of its meagre income on fitting up rooms rather than on acquisitions. The 'Memorial' has been called 'a classic of library criticism' (Philip, 107), but it was the curators rather than Price who acted upon it to reform the library's policies and finances. Price's reputation rested elsewhere. To John Nichols he was the 'able Pioneer in Literature, whose friendly attentions will be recollected by many researchers into the vast treasures of the Bodleian Library' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 5.514). He was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and shared the interests and enjoyed the friendship and respect of many in the antiquarian and literary worlds. His correspondence reproduced by Nichols shows in particular how much the bequest of Richard Gough's enormous topographical collection to the Bodleian owed to Price's careful cultivation of the benefactor. In these circles he was known as 'honest Johnny Price'. 
Price wrote little, although he is acknowledged in the prefaces of many of the works of his friends. His 'Short Account of Holyhead in the Isle of Anglesea' was included in Nichols's 'Bibliotheca Topographica Britannica' (10, 1783) and an 'Account of a brass image of Roman workmanship found at Cirencester' written in 1767 was published in 'Archaeologia' (7, 1785). He amassed a considerable collection of books, prints, maps, and manuscripts (including the benefactors' book from the parish of Northleigh) which were sold, partly at a five-day sale from 17 June 1814 by Thomas King junior, at 125 High Holborn, and partly through a catalogue subsequently issued by King. 
Price, who was unmarried, died at his house at 1 St Giles', Oxford, during the night of 11-12 August 1813 and was succeeded as Bodley's librarian by his godson Bulkeley Bandinel. He was buried on 20 August at Wilcote church, where a mural tablet was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 22758


Joshua Price (bap. 1672, d. 1722), glass painter, was baptized on 11 July 1672 at St Andrew's, Holborn, London. The next reference to him appears to be an advertisement of 1705 in which he is mentioned as working with his father in Hatton Garden. In 1715 he reset the seventeenth-century glass in the chapel of Queen's College, Oxford, and supplied an east window in 1717. The following year he painted a 'Last Supper' and 'Resurrection' (both des.) for the east window of St Andrew's, Holborn. Between 1719 and 1721 he supplied twelve windows for the chapel of Cannons at Lord Chandos's house at Stanmore, Middlesex. Ten of these are now at Great Witley, Worcestershire, and of the other two, a 'Conversion of St Paul' and a 'Stoning of St Stephen', only the former survives (in St Andrew by the Wardrobe, London). His last work, the rose window (1721-2) in the north transept of Westminster Abbey, showing the apostles and evangelists, was based on cartoons by Sir James Thornhill. A contemporary account in the 'Northampton Mercury' mentioned 'The great window... glazed with glass curiously painted after the Antique fashion, by Mr Price, who is reckon'd the only artist in England capable of doing it; so that that ornamental art is not so entirely lost as some have alledg'd' (23 Feb 1723). He was buried on 25 September 1722 and his wife, Elizabeth, received the administration of his estate in 1723. 


@@@@@


doc= 22759


Price, Laurence (fl. 1628-1675), ballad and chapbook writer, is a shadowy figure despite his prolific output. Only three contemporary references to him are known, all from the 1650s and all derogatory. One patronizes his astrological pamphlets, the other two belittle his ballads and verse. In default of information on his origins and life, his bibliography is his biography. However, connections with Bristol have been suggested; and one commentator roundly states that Price was a native of London, adding that 'during the civil war he seems to have occasionally been a hanger-on of the parliamentary army' ('DNB'). Internal evidence from successive publications indicates that Price supported Charles I ('Great Britaines Time of Triumph', 1641), then at least sympathized with the Commonwealth ('The Quakers Feare', 'The Matchles Sheapard', both 1656) before in due course welcoming the Restoration ('Win at First, Lose at Last', 1660?). 
Unlike his royalist ballad-writing rival, Martin Parker, Price did not have a strong ideological commitment; rather he sought to write what would sell in order to make a living. (One of his ballads, 'Oh, Gramercy Penny', 'c'.1628, deals at length with the predicament of those without money.) He therefore trimmed politically while exploring the traditional staples of the cheap literature trade. His thirty-three 'small books' -- in effect, pamphlets of usually eight or twelve pages, roughly 3 inches by 6, illustrated by (sometimes relevant) woodcuts -- cover such topics as crime ('Bloody Actions Performed', 1653), social comment ('Fortune's Lottery', 1657), sensational news ('The Shepherd's Prognostication Foretelling the Sad and Strange Eclipse of the Sun', 1652), and fictional tales ('The Famous History of Valentine and Orson', 1673, Price's version of a tale which originated in fifteenth-century France). Some publications of this kind were miscellanies; for example, he described 'Make Roome for Christmas' (1657) as 'A delightful New Book, full of merry Jests, rare Inventions, pretty Conceits, Christmas Carols, pleasant Tales, and witty Verses' (title-page). 
Price's broadside ballads, of which sixty-two have been identified (though others may be lost), cover much the same ground as his small books, though with greater emphasis on relations between the sexes, as in 'Two Fervent Lovers' (1632), 'Loves Feirce Desire' (1656), and 'Flora's Farewel' (1675). One may not accept C. H. Firth's judgement that, together with Parker, Price 'perfected' the ballad as a literary form (Firth, 28), but Price's success is clearly demonstrated by the frequent reprintings of his ballads and books not only during his lifetime but in some cases well into the nineteenth century, in both London and the provinces. As was normal with broadsides, his work frequently appeared without acknowledgement; unfortunately, this was also the case in compilations by Thomas Percy, Walter Scott, and F. J. Child. Despite his professed dislike of broadsides Child paid Price a singular compliment by admitting three of his ballads to a collection intended to include only traditional material, 'The English and Scottish Popular Ballads' (5 vols., 1882-98). Of one of these, 'Robin Hood's Golden Prize' (1656), Child remarked that his copy 'seems to be signed L. P., probably the initials of the versifier' (Child, no. 147, headnote). The other two, 'The Famous Flower of Serving Men' (1656) and 'A Warning for Married Women' (1657), were not acknowledged. Nevertheless, they remained in popular favour, with versions continuing in oral tradition long into the twentieth century, in both Britain and North America. Price's 'Rocke the Cradle' (1631) enjoyed a similar vogue. 
There is no complete and definitive list of Price's publications and their whereabouts; seventeenth-century editions are scattered through a variety of collections such as Douce, Rawlinson, and Wood (Bodl. Oxf.), Euing (Glasgow University), Pepys (Magdalene College, Cambridge), Bagford, Huth, Roxburghe, and Thomason (BL). Selections, sometimes restricted by considerations of perceived indecency, were published in learned volumes by Victorian ballad scholars. A few items resurfaced in anthologies of the late twentieth century. An edition of Price's collected works is long overdue because of their intrinsic qualities, documentary value, and significance in the history of popular culture. 


@@@@@


doc= 22760


Price, Owen (d. 1671), schoolmaster, was born in Montgomeryshire. He was made a scholar of Jesus College, Oxford, by the parliamentary visitors in October 1648, and he matriculated on 12 March 1649. He remained at the university for four years before taking a job as a schoolmaster in Wales, where 'he advanced his scholars much in presbyterian principles' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.942). He eventually returned to Oxford to finish his education, graduating BA, and proceeding MA by accumulation from Christ Church on 6 May 1656. In 1657 he succeeded William Wroth as master of Magdalen College School, 'where by his industry and good way of teaching, he drew many youths of the city, whose parents were fanatically given, to be his scholars' (ibid.). He apparently supplemented his income by teaching out-college boys as well as his regular pupils. 
On 21 June 1658 Price sent a letter to Henry Scobell, secretary of Oliver Cromwell's council, to complain about the delay in making him master of Westminster School in succession to Richard Busby. The delay 'has disswaded several persons from sending their children to me', he writes, and 'I fear that I shall suffer by it very much' (Peck, 502). He challenges his detractors to 'let any scholars in Oxon be appointed to make a tryall of my boyes here [Magdalen]' (ibid.). His candidacy for Busby's position does not appear to have been successful. At the Restoration Price was ejected from his position at Magdalen for nonconformity, and he taught subsequently in Devon and Besselsleigh, Oxfordshire, where he became 'useful among the brethren, and a noted professor in the art of pedagogy' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.942). 
Price's first book, 'The Vocal Organ' (1665), comprises a 35-page primer and a 29-page praxis, as well as brief sections on calligraphy, punctuation, and arithmetic. In the primer Price adapts the phonetic system of John Wallis, author of 'Grammatica linguae Anglicanae' (1653), to the teaching of spelling. Price's method is to have students master the pronunciation of letters before they are introduced to fifty-six spelling rules. The praxis is a collection of alphabetically arranged verses 'to difference the words of like sound' (p. 47), such as 'ant'- 'aunt', 'earn'- 'yarn', and 'sought'- 'soft'. In his preface Price claims that he was not 'guided by our vulgar pronunciation, but by that of London and our Universities', but it has been suggested that some of Price's pronunciations betray the time he spent in Devon. 'The Vocal Organ' contains the first illustration of the organs of speech (lips, teeth, palate, tongue, throat) in an English book. 
Price's second book, 'English Orthography' (1668), is a major revision of 'The Vocal Organ'. Price abandons Wallis's phonetic system and presents his spelling rules in a question and answer format; he replaces the verses in the praxis with a table of homophones, or near homophones, and their definitions. In a second edition (1670) he adds a list of frequently misspelt words. His lists are derived largely from earlier spelling books, such as Richard Hodges's 'A Special Help to Orthographie' (1643) and Jeremiah Wharton's 'The English Grammar' (1654), and they were, in turn, included in many later spelling books, such as George Fox and Ellis Hookes's 'Instructions for Right Spelling' (1670). 
On 2 July 1657 Price was married in Oxford to Lydia, daughter of John Blagrave of Merton College. Their children included John ('b'. 1659), Samuel ('b'. 1664), and possibly Martha ('b'. 1669). Joseph Foster mentions another son, Thomas, who graduated BA in 1693 and MA in 1695 at Oxford. These dates seem rather late for a son of Price's; however, the register of St Peter-in-the-East does record the baptism of a Thomas Price on 21 May 1672, approximately six months after Owen's death. According to Wood, Price died in his house near Magdalen on 25 November 1671 and was buried two days later in 'the church of S. Peter, in the East, near to the door leading into the belfry' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.943). On 4 December 1671 an Oxford court ordered that no action should be taken on Price's goods, mentioning the name of a possible creditor, Henry Hodges. The administration of Price's effects did not take place until 13 December 1676; his widow Lydia was still living at the time. An inventory of his goods and chattels, dated 15 February 1677, shows his wealth to have been a little more than $298, most of which was derived from a lease granted by the president and fellows of Magdalen College. 


@@@@@


doc= 22761


Price, Richard (1723-1791), philosopher, demographer, and political radical, was born on 23 February 1723 at Tyn-ton, in the parish of Llangeinor, in the county of Glamorgan, the only son and eldest of three children of Rice Price (1673-1739) and his second wife, Catherine (1697-1740), daughter of David Richards of Oldcastle, Bridgend. Rice Price was a dissenting minister who officiated at different times in his career at Brynllywarch, Cildeudy, Newcastle, Bridgend, and City, Betws. He also taught for a brief period at the academy founded by Samuel Jones at Brynllywarch. Richard's sister Sarah had eight children, including William Morgan (1750-1833), the pioneering actuary, and George Cadogan Morgan (1754-1798). 
Price's education began at home under a Mr Peters, who later became a dissenting minister. At the age of eight or thereabouts he began attending a school run by Joseph Simmons, a dissenting minister at Neath, and in 1735 he went to a school run by Samuel Jones at Pen-twyn in Carmarthenshire. Price then spent a short time at an academy run by Vavasor Griffiths (died 1741), located at Chancefield, Talgarth, Brecknockshire. 
Rice Price died in 1739, and Catherine and her two daughters left Tyn-ton to live in Bridgend. In the following year Catherine died and, probably on the advice of his uncle Samuel (who was assistant to Isaac Watts at St Mary Axe in Bury Street, London), it was decided that Richard should go to London to attend the academy at Tenter Alley, Moorfields. Here Price remained for four years, being taught by John Eames and Joseph Densham. Eames, a friend and a disciple of Sir Isaac Newton, had won a reputation both as a mathematician and as a teacher, and he gave Price an excellent grounding in mathematics (which was to serve him well in his distinguished career as an adviser to the Society for Equitable Assurances) and in Newtonian physics. One important feature of Price's education is that in the course of it he was weaned away from the theological beliefs of his father and his uncle Samuel, who were both high Calvinists. The home at Tyn-ton had a reputation for a strict puritanical discipline; it was not this, however, that Price rebelled against so much as the orthodox trinitarianism of the older generation. It is likely that it was the teaching of Samuel Jones at Pen-twyn that moved Price towards the rationalism and the libertarianism that in later life he defended with such conviction. 
When his stay at Moorfields came to an end in 1744, Price became family chaplain in the household of George Streatfield, a wealthy dissenter, who lived at Stoke Newington. During this period he served as an assistant to Samuel Chandler at Old Jewry Lane, though not to the satisfaction of Chandler, and he also took services at Edmonton and Enfield. Streatfield became involved in a celebrated legal case which proved a landmark in the dissenters' struggle for the full legal recognition of the right to religious freedom. The practice had grown up of appointing dissenters to offices in the City of London. Some dissenters were nevertheless unable to accept them because a precondition was that they should take the sacraments according to the rites of the Church of England, which they could not in conscience do. Those who refused were liable to heavy fines which were unceremoniously exacted. 
The dissenters fought the issue through the courts, and their dilemma was not resolved until 4 February 1767 when Mansfield issued his famous judgment that 'Nonconformity was certainly not a crime.' Although Streatfield had been withdrawn from the case at an early stage because he was found not to be within the jurisdiction of the court, Price learned a great deal about the nature of the fight the dissenters would have to wage in order to secure freedom of worship, and the experience had a profound influence on his thought on the subject of toleration. Throughout his career he maintained strongly that everyone has not only the right to worship God according to his conscience but also the right not to be disadvantaged in the way the dissenters had been by the policy of reserving offices under the crown and in municipal authorities to members of the Church of England. 
Price's uncle Samuel died in 1756 and his patron George Streatfield died in January 1757. From both he received legacies which enabled him to contemplate marriage. On 16 June 1757 Price married Sarah Blundell (1728-1786), the daughter of a speculator who had been ruined by the South Sea Bubble. In the following year Price accepted the appointment of pastor at the presbyterian chapel at Newington Green, and he and Sarah moved to a house nearby. Not long after their marriage Sarah suffered an attack of the palsy, the first of several which led to her becoming a permanent invalid. There were no children of the marriage. 
After the death of Dr George Benson in April 1762 Price became minister at Poor Jewry Lane, retaining the afternoon service at Newington Green. In 1770 he relinquished the appointment at Poor Jewry Lane, and instead became morning preacher at Gravel-Pit Meeting Place at Hackney. He continued to be pastor at Newington Green until 1783, and he remained a preacher at Gravel-Pit until he retired on 20 February 1791, not long before his death the following April. From the accounts that have survived Price does not seem to have been a success as a preacher in the early years of his ministry, and it was after becoming a celebrity that his congregation steadily increased. Notwithstanding his fame in other fields, Price always maintained, as did his friend Joseph Priestley, that his work as a pastor was the most important that he undertook and had the first claim upon his attention and energies. 
Despite his devotion to the pulpit, Price found time for several other occupations. In 1758 he published 'A Review of the Principal Questions and Difficulties in Morals'. In 1765 he became a fellow of the Royal Society, Benjamin Franklin being one of his sponsors. This honour was largely due to the work he did editing Thomas Bayes's manuscripts on the theory of probability. In 1767 he published his first theological work, 'Four Dissertations', and in the same year on 7 August he was awarded the degree of doctor of divinity at Marischal College, Aberdeen. In 1766, or thereabouts, he began his influential work with the Society for Equitable Assurances which led to the publication in 1771 of 'Observations on Reversionary Payments'. Alongside his actuarial and demographic studies he also became interested in warning the government of the perils of maintaining a large national debt and in advocating the adoption of sinking fund procedures for its reduction. 
In 1771 Price's friendship with William Petty, second earl of Shelburne, later the first marquess of Lansdowne, began. Shelburne's first wife died in January 1771 and he found consolation in Price's 'On providence' and 'On the reasons for expecting that virtuous men shall meet after death in a state of happiness', both of which had been published in 'Four Dissertations'. Shelburne asked Mrs Montagu to arrange an interview, which eventually took place at Price's home in Newington Green. Price soon entered the Bowood Group, the informal gathering of intellectuals and professional men who met at Shelburne's estate at Bowood in Wiltshire or at his London house in Berkeley Square and advised him on a wide range of subjects. In some ways this circle was an eighteenth-century form of 'think tank' which kept Shelburne abreast of developments in the professions, at the bar, in the armed forces, and in the church, and which kept him well informed as to current opinion on economic and financial matters. This group included Isaac Barre, John Dunning (later Lord Ashburton), Joseph Priestley, Jonathan Shipley, bishop of St Asaph, and, at later periods, Samuel Romilly and Jeremy Bentham. 
Price prepared several papers for Shelburne -- on toleration and the extension of legal recognition of the freedom of worship, on the relations between Britain and America, but mainly on financial matters, particularly on the most efficacious way of raising government loans and on his favourite project, the revival of sinking fund procedures for the redemption of the national debt. Shelburne helped Price by supplying him with information from official statistics, both when he was in opposition and during the short period when he was in office, and by being his patron -- the third and subsequent editions of 'Observations on Reversionary Payments' were dedicated to him. Both at Bowood and at Berkeley Square, Price had more opportunities to meet the famous and the learned than might otherwise have fallen to his lot: it was through Shelburne, for example, that he had access to the earl of Chatham, whose support he solicited on behalf of the dissenters' campaign to secure relief from subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. Price was instrumental in securing Joseph Priestley's services as Shelburne's librarian. 
Another important group which contributed to Price's intellectual development was the Club of Honest Whigs, which met at St Paul's Coffee House and, later, at the London Coffee House on Ludgate Hill. Many of the leading dissenters in London were members, as were Benjamin Franklin (whom Price had first met during Franklin's first visit to England from July 1757 to August 1762) and Jonathan Shipley. 
Price's fame increased substantially with the publication of 'Observations on the Nature of Civil Liberty' (1776), a pamphlet written in defence of the American patriots. This was followed by 'Additional Observations' in 1777, and 'Two Tracts' (in which he republished both pamphlets) in 1778. For his work as a political writer Price received two unusual honours. He was elected a freeman of the City of London in 1776 and in 1778 received an invitation from congress to go to America to advise them on financial matters, an invitation conveyed to him by Benjamin Franklin, Arthur Lee, and John Adams, which, however, he declined. In 1780 he published his study on demography, 'An Essay on the Population', which brought him a great deal of notoriety, largely because events proved that his thesis that the population of England and Wales had been and was still declining was false. While Price's support for the rebels made him unpopular in many quarters at home, and made his wife anxious for his safety, in America the opposite was true. His pamphlet 'Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution' (1784) was well received in all the regions of the former colonies in which his denunciation of slavery did not make him unpopular. 
In 1787 Price published 'Sermons on the Christian Doctrine' and 'The Evidence for a Future Period of Improvement in the State of Mankind', which, as the title suggests, shows his optimistic enthusiasm for the doctrine of the indefinite perfectibility of mankind. This address was delivered at the Old Jewry on 25 April 1787 to mark the first anniversary of the founding of what came to be known as New College, Hackney. Price played a part in the founding of the college and it was expected that he would teach there. He did start to take classes but, as his health was declining, he found the strain too much and was glad to hand over his duties to his nephew George Cadogan Morgan. 
Throughout the American War of Independence and afterwards, Price maintained an active interest in domestic political reform. He was engaged in the agitation for the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' and promoted the cause of parliamentary reform, notably the extension of the franchise, the abolition of corrupt practices, and the redistribution of constituencies to secure a more equitable representation. He was a founder member of the Society for Constitutional Reform (1780) and when the Society for Commemorating the Revolution in Great Britain (known as the Revolution Society) revived its activities, Price played a prominent part in its proceedings. He was invited to address the Revolution Society at the meeting held at Old Jewry on 4 November 1789. His address was published under the title 'A Discourse on the Love of our Country' (1789). Price welcomed with great enthusiasm the opening events of the French Revolution, holding that the French were doing for themselves what the British had done in the revolution of 1688 and what the Americans had done in the War of Independence. In the evening of the same day at a dinner held by the society at the London tavern, Price moved a resolution congratulating the French national assembly and welcoming the prospect of a common participation in the blessings of civil and religious liberty by the 'first two kingdoms in the world' (Price, 'Discourse on the Love of our Country', 13). He also drafted the correspondence between the society and the national assembly. 
Price's role in these proceedings and the publication of his address to the Revolution Society inflamed the wrath of Edmund Burke, who was provoked to write 'Reflections on the Revolution in France' (1790), in which he assailed Price with vitriolic invective of the most uninhibited kind. The ferocity of the attack was thought by some to have contributed to Price's decline and death. This must remain doubtful as Price had been in failing health for some time. He did reply briefly yet effectively in a preface which he attached to the fourth edition of the discourse, and it was left to his friends Joseph Priestley, Mary Wollstonecraft, Joseph Towers (who was morning preacher at the chapel at Newington Green from 1778 until 1799), and Thomas Paine to make lengthier and more studied replies. Price's political sympathies were in any case only one strand of his wide-ranging activities, which covered moral philosophy and theology, as well as probability theory, actuarial science, and demography. 
Price's moral philosophy was firmly grounded in a theistic framework, but although he maintained that it is God's will that we should obey the moral law and that God attaches grave penalties to disobedience, he was quite clear that the obligatoriness of the moral law is founded not in God's will but in the rectitude of the law itself. Following Ralph Cudworth he was able to reconcile this position with God's omnipotence by assuming that the moral law is part of God's nature to which his will is subordinate. 
The main controversial purpose of Price's 'Review of the Principal Questions and Difficulties in Morals' (1758) was to establish the objectivity of moral judgement against the subjectivism of Francis Hutcheson and David Hume. To secure this position Price tried to show that moral judgement was a function of reason, which apprehends eternal truth, and not a function of feeling or sentiment. Other topics discussed were the universality of moral principles, the indefinability of some simple moral terms, such as 'right' and 'ought', the criteria of moral judgement, a critique of utilitarianism, the principle of subjective rectitude (namely, the principle that everyone ought to do what he thinks he ought to do, provided always that he has done his best to find out what his duty really is), and the principle of candour, that we have a duty to subject our opinions to rational criticism and actively search out the truth. In this work Price adopted a libertarian position, that every man is free in the sense that he has a real choice to do what he thinks is his duty, undetermined by any elements in his character or in the environment. Later in his career he entered into an amicable controversy with Priestley on this last topic, defending a position largely derived from Samuel Clarke against Priestley's position, which had much in common with that defended by Anthony Collins. The exchange of correspondence was published in 1778 under the title 'A Free Discussion of the Doctrines of Materialism and Philosophical Necessity'. 
There is an incoherence in Price's moral philosophy which has an important bearing on the interpretation of his political philosophy. On the one hand, as a rationalist he believed that moral principles are instances of necessary truth, parallel to the truths of mathematics, and as such are categorically binding, admitting of no exceptions; on the other hand, he was forced to allow that moral principles do sometimes conflict, and that some, at least, are defeasible. (It will be argued below that Burke was unfair in taking his political thought as operating simply at the level of abstract principles.) Price's claim that we should always do the action that we think is the most fitting does not remove the difficulty, for no generalization of what is most fitting in a particular situation can be represented as the apprehension of a general principle that is necessarily true. 
Both in his practical life and in his thought Price lived under the superintending eye of providence. He believed that the existence of God and the nature of his attributes can be rationally demonstrated. The deity superintends the working of the universe, and though he has laid down the laws that govern the working of his creation, he still needs to intervene from time to time to correct any occasional deviations from the rule. Price distinguishes a particular providence from a general one, and in this way presents as divinely ordained both the general rule and the occasional intervention that is needed to correct a deviation. His theology thus accommodates Newtonian cosmology: a happy instance of a harmony between science and religion. It was the feasibility of divine intervention that made it possible for Price to defend the possibility of miracles in his dispute with David Hume. 
From the omnipotence and the benevolence of the deity Price draws the conclusion that the deity does not allow anything to happen that ought not to happen. Every seeming calamity is tolerated because it is part of the divine purpose, and what appears to be evil in human life plays a role in the selection of those who are to enter into eternal life -- our time on earth being just a period of probation. On the nature of redemption Price took an annihilationist position, which he might have derived from John Locke's 'The Reasonableness of Christianity' (1695). He did not think that the doctrine of predestination to eternal punishment was consistent with God's benevolence, and he was reluctant to adopt the doctrine of universal restoration, partly because he thought it unscriptural, and partly because he believed that its adoption would have antinomian tendencies. There are, however, some indications that towards the end of his life he was beginning to move towards universalism. In his early life he believed that the fate of the wicked would not be eternal punishment but oblivion. Price does not make it clear, however, how annihilationism is to be reconciled with the doctrine of the immortality of the human soul. 
In his youth Price rebelled against the strictly orthodox Calvinism of his father and his uncle Samuel, and became an Arian. In 'Sermons on the Christian Doctrine' he attempts to establish a middle way between the Calvinist orthodoxy of the elder generation and the Socinianism of his friend Joseph Priestley. He allows the pre-existence of Christ, but rejects the doctrine of the consubstantiality of the Father and the Son, as well as the Socinian doctrine of the simple humanity of Christ. The implications of his Arianism for his moral philosophy are that neither the doctrine that man is saved by grace alone nor the doctrine that Christ saves simply through his teaching and his example is valid. For Price a man must contribute to his own salvation in trying to obey the moral law, but no man is worthy by his own efforts alone to merit eternal life. The efforts of the virtuous need to be complemented by the grace that has been made available to mankind by Christ's sacrifice on the cross. 
There is a strong millennialist element in Price's theology. Like all good protestants who adopt the doctrine of 'sola scriptura' he has to interpret the biblical prophecies, particularly those of 'Daniel' and 'Revelation'. The doctrine that this terrestrial life is primarily a life of probation, testing our worthiness for eternal life, is accompanied by the doctrine that God intervenes in human history to bring about a gradual improvement to make the world fit for the rule of Christ and his saints. Millennialism could thus be reconciled with belief in social progress. There are other unresolved tensions in Price's teaching, not least those that arise from his defence of a rationalist moral philosophy and his adherence at the same time to Christian teaching. If we can discover our duty simply by the exercise of our reason, then revelation is not essential. If we can achieve moral excellence by striving to do what we believe to be our duty, and if we are always free to do what we believe to be our duty, redemption does not of necessity depend upon grace; and if eternal life is the reward due to moral excellence, the interposition of Christ is essential only on the assumption that in practice we will always be found to be wanting in some respect or other. 
When Thomas Bayes, a dissenting minister and a mathematician who gave his name to the theorem of inverse probability, died in 1761, it was found that several of his manuscripts remained unpublished. His relatives asked Price, a friend of Bayes, to examine his papers, and when he did so Price realized their importance. He edited 'An Essay towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances', adding an introduction of his own, and submitted it in the form of a letter to John Canton to the Royal Society, where it was read on 23 December 1763. Price submitted a further development of the topic under the title 'A Demonstration of the Second Rule' to the Royal Society, where it was read on 6 December 1764. Price believed that this work was important not just for the contribution it made to the development of the theory of probability but also because of the contribution he thought it made to the study of induction, and the support he believed it gave to arguments for the existence of God. 
Not long after his election to the Royal Society on 5 December 1765 Price was invited to assist the Society for Equitable Assurances. This society, which had been founded in 1762, sold annuities which were attractive to those who wished to provide for their declining years and for their dependants. The society needed assistance on actuarial matters -- the calculation of rates to be paid for reversions, and on demographic trends, particularly those concerning the expectation of life. Price worked hard to provide what was needed on both fronts and the fruits of his work were published in 'Observations on Reversionary Payments' in 1771. The book was an immediate success. The second edition appeared in 1772 and the third a year later. A fourth edition, expanded to two volumes, was published in 1783 and Price was working on the fifth edition before he died, this edition and two others being completed by his nephew William Morgan. 
The significance of Price's work is much wider than the contribution it made to the success of the Equitable. Many assurance societies were started at this time and Price was able to show that some of the schemes which they operated were ill-founded. Because of defects in their computations or information on the expectation of life, they were likely to promise early annuitants too much, leaving insufficient funds for later claimants. Price criticized the plans of these societies, and in doing so prevented the misery that would have befallen the victims of unsound schemes. On 29 October 1771 the directors of the Friendly Society of Annuitants wrote to Price to say that on receiving his letter of 13 July criticizing their scheme they had decided to dissolve their society. Price helped the Equitable in many other ways, not least in the organization of the office. After some resistance he was able to convince the society that there was no justification for charging women higher premiums, as their expectation of life was longer than that of the men. He suggested introducing medical examinations to avert the dangers of 'bad lives', and he trained his nephew William Morgan, who was appointed actuary to the society in 1775. Thereafter the society thrived, and Morgan, with Price's help, produced the 'Northampton tables', which remained in use for more than a century. 
While he was helping the Equitable, Price also became involved in projects for promoting social insurance. In 1772 Francis Maseres published 'A Proposal for Establishing Life-Annuities in Parishes for the Benefit of the Industrious Poor'. The scheme he advocated was a simple one: parishes in town and country would be empowered to sell to persons during their working life annuities which would be paid when they reached the age of retirement. The scheme was designed to encourage people to make provision for their old age, and in doing so help to reduce the increasing burden of providing for the poor. A bill embodying the scheme was presented to parliament, and Price was invited to draw up the actuarial tables that its operation would require. The bill passed its third reading in the Commons on 5 March 1773, but it failed in the Lords, due largely to the intervention of the lord chancellor, Camden, who feared that any failures of the scheme would lay intolerable burdens on parish rates. 
Another scheme in which Price became involved was to provide relief for the poor in times of sickness, disablement, and old age, promoted by John Acland, rector of Broad Clyst in Devon. This was not a voluntary scheme: all men and women, with only a few exceptions, would be required during their working lives to subscribe to a scheme that would provide assistance for them when their working lives were over or when they were incapacitated. More ambitious than Maseres's earlier scheme, it was also a pioneering attempt to address the need to provide relief for the poor in times of sickness as well as in old age. Acland published the details of his scheme in 'A Plan for Rendering the Poor Independent of Public Contribution' (1786). A bill embodying the scheme was prepared, and once again Price was invited to draw up the actuarial table. The bill, under the title 'A bill for the more effective relief of the poor', was presented to parliament in 1789, but, though it passed the Commons, like its predecessor it failed in the Lords. In his 'Reflections on the Revolution in France' Edmund Burke derided Price as 'the calculating divine'; his contempt was misplaced, for in these schemes of private and social insurance Price had given a vivid illustration of the ways in which the skills of the actuary could be brought to bear on social problems, and had shown how well-founded schemes could prevent suffering and meet the needs of those in distress. His involvement in these schemes and other attempts to relieve distress by his fellow dissenters such as Joseph Priestley and Thomas Percival give the lie to the accusation that the dissenters lacked compassion for the poor and the disadvantaged. 
One parallel development of Price's interest in financial matters was his advocacy of sinking fund operations to reduce the national debt. In the first edition of 'Observations on Reversionary Payments' he drew attention to the dangers that would imperil the financial health of the nation if the debt were not reduced, and he expanded his arguments in a separate publication, 'An Appeal to the Public on the Subject of the National Debt' (1774). During his long friendship with the earl of Shelburne, Price wrote many papers dealing mainly with what he regarded as the best way of raising public loans and advocating ways of reducing debt. He also criticized the fashionable policy of raising loans on substantial discounts on the nominal capital. Shelburne was sympathetic to Price's schemes but was not in office long enough to put them into effect. He was able, however, to secure the interest of William Pitt (1759-1806), and Price was summoned to Downing Street to advise. When the 'Sinking Fund Act' was passed in 1786 to much acclaim, William Morgan was incensed that his uncle had not received recognition for the part he had played in the development of the legislation. Price himself does not seem to have been as troubled as his nephew, but he was doubly unfortunate. Although he did not receive applause when the scheme was thought to be beneficial, long after his death, when the mismanagement of the fund became known, much of the blame was laid upon what was thought to be his misleading advocacy. 
Another offshoot of Price's interest in demography was his thesis that the population of England and Wales had been and was still declining -- in sad contrast to the American colonies, in some of which the population was doubling every twenty-five years or even less. Price turned out to be mistaken, as the census of 1801 made clear, and his reputation suffered. Coming to his defence William Morgan maintained that Price had been in error because he had taken the returns of the window tax on trust. Had these not been corrupt his methods of calculation would have led him to the truth. 
In the pamphlet he wrote in defence of the American patriots, Price distinguished four different types of liberty: physical, moral, religious, and civil. Physical liberty is the ability to make one's own decisions and not to be determined by forces over which one has no control; moral liberty is the ability to act in accordance with one's conscience; religious liberty is the ability to worship God according to one's own convictions and not to be disadvantaged in any way in so doing; civil liberty is the enjoyment of the right to govern oneself. Self-government means different things: it includes enjoying one's natural rights, participating in the government of one's own society, and being a member of a community that governs itself and is not subject to the will of another community. Whereas Joseph Priestley made a clear distinction between civil liberty and political liberty, allowing that the former can be enjoyed without the latter, Price was so adamant that political liberty, that is, participation in the government of one's own society, is essential to the enjoyment of civil liberty that he built it into his definition of the term. 
The presentation of the different kinds of liberty as different forms of self-government is the basis of Price's strategy for defending the patriots; since every nation has the right to govern itself the American colonies had the right to be independent if they so wished. Price did not want to see the dismemberment of the British empire; on the contrary, he hoped some way could be found of converting it into a confederation of self-governing communities, but this could only be a legitimate solution if the Americans consented. Price expands the notion implicit in the doctrine of the social contract, that a person can be subjected to authority only by his own consent, to embrace the idea that no man is to be subjected to a government in the operation of which he does not in some way participate. To be free is to be subject to no other will than one's own. The main core of the argument is not that a man is more likely to be secure in the enjoyment of his natural rights if he has some part to play in government, nor that democratic government is more efficient and more equitable than other forms, but rather that self-government is required by the demands of moral personality. Morally speaking, a man is not fully a man if he does not enjoy the right and discharge the duty of governing himself. 
Price was heavily criticized by Edmund Burke for drawing political prescriptions from abstract ideas and principles and for ignoring the empirical element in political judgement. The charge is unfounded, as a detailed examination of his writings will show, but it has to be conceded that some of Price's expressions can easily give rise to the belief that he thought that political judgement is simply the application of a priori principles. Just as in moral philosophy he admitted that moral principles are defeasible, so in his political writing he allowed that the application of the principle has to be modified to accommodate conflicting considerations. A case in point is to be found in his discussion of the extension of the franchise. In principle, he maintains, every man has the right to participate in the government of his society, but in practice the vote has to be restricted to those capable of independent judgement. There is a danger that some will sell the vote, and to prevent this the vote has to be restricted to those unlikely to fall into temptation. Full participation is always something to be aimed at, but it may not be wise to attempt its realization in all circumstances. 
In 'A Discourse on the Love of our Country' (1789), his last publication, Price summarized his political credo in a list of what he believed all men have a natural right to enjoy. 'First, the right to liberty of conscience in religious matters; secondly, the right to resist power when abused; and thirdly, the right to chuse our own government, to cashier them for misconduct, and to frame a government for our selves. (Price, 'Political Writings', 89-90)' The most telling implication of Price's defence of self-government in its different forms, is the contribution it made to the assault on imperialism, on the idea that one nation is justified in imposing its will on another, and that there is glory to be found in conquest and domination. Price's enduring legacy is the clarity with which he stated his main thesis: that the true love of country lies in the defence of a system of natural rights, the enjoyment of which promotes the equal status and prosperity of all peoples. 
In addition to his published works, Price's letter writing contributed to his influential position. The last entry Price wrote in his shorthand journal (6 February 1791) reads 'I should be much happier than I am had I no letters to write. They are indeed a burden to me' ('Richard Price's journal', ed. Thomas, 396). This 'cri de coeur' reminds us that Price was heavily engaged in correspondence throughout his life. He led a relatively quiet life as a dissenting minister in the seclusion of Newington Green or Hackney. He travelled little, other than visits to his family in south Wales, occasional visits to Shelburne at Bowood, or for 'a recruit of spirits' at Brighthelmstone (Brighton). So it is remarkable that he established such a diverse and wide-ranging set of correspondents. 
Through Shelburne, Price had access to Chatham and to William Pitt the younger, who sought his advice on sinking fund matters. His American correspondents included Franklin and Thomas Jefferson, who, when he was in Paris, kept Price up to date with political developments in France. John Adams, who, when he was minister-plenipotentiary at the court of St James, attended Price's chapel at Hackney with his family, was a close friend and sometimes candid correspondent. Other American correspondents included such figures as Benjamin Rush (1745-1813), founder of Dickinson College, Pennsylvania; Charles Chauncey (1705-1787); Henry Laurens (1724-1792), minister of the First Church at Boston; Joseph Willard (1738-1779), Hollis professor of mathematics and natural philosophy at Harvard; and also Jonathan Trumbull (1710-1785), governor of Connecticut (1768-84). Price's correspondents in France included A. R. J. Turgot, A. B. L. R. Mirabeau (whom Price met when he went to London), and L. A. La Rochefoucauld d'Enville. As might be expected he had close contact with his fellow dissenting ministers: these included not only Joseph Priestley but also Theophilus Lindsey, John Disney, George Walker, and Thomas Belsham. He was also friendly with such Anglicans as William Adams, master of Pembroke College, Oxford, and John Howard, the prison reformer. 
Price's sudden death was caused by a chill caught while attending the funeral of a fellow dissenter (and funerals, he had earlier written, had the effect of sending the mourners after the departed). The chill led to the complication of a bladder complaint, from which he died on 19 April 1791. Price was buried at Bunhill Fields burial-ground, London, on 26 April 1791. 
In many of the fields of enquiry in which Price was influential in his lifetime his reputation died with him, and interest in his work lay dormant throughout the nineteenth century to be revived only in the twentieth century. With the exception of his work in the actuarial sciences, and the regard in which his memory was held by Unitarians, his work was not republished after his death. There are many reasons for this. Even among Unitarians, the Arianism that he defended yielded ground to the Socinianism espoused by Joseph Priestley: the doctrine of the simple humanity of Christ, though endowing him with miraculous powers, became more attractive than Arianism. In moral philosophy his objectivism and rational intuitionism was seriously challenged by Hutcheson, Hume, and Adam Smith; his rational intuitionism gave way to the doctrines that grounded moral judgement in feelings and sentiments, and the doctrine that a moral system was composed of a plurality of principles of obligation gave way to the kind of utilitarianism advocated by Jeremy Bentham. His reputation as a demographer was marred by his notoriously mistaken thesis that the British population had been and was still declining, and his authority in financial matters suffered after his death, no doubt unjustly, because of the failure of the attempt to reduce the national debt by sinking fund procedures. 
The greatest blow, however, came from the hands of Edmund Burke in 'Reflections on the Revolution in France'. Burke acquired an immense reputation throughout Europe largely due to his predictions on the course of the French Revolution, and this success lent weight and authority to many other elements in his analysis, including his denunciation of Price, the radicals, and 'the rights of man'. The admiration for Burke in these respects concealed the dangers that lay in his downgrading of human reason. It has to be conceded that Price's rationalism was too optimistic in two respects: he exaggerated the extent to which problems could be solved and difficulties overcome by rational criticism, and he exaggerated the extent to which men were prepared to listen to and be moved by an appeal to rational principles and reasonable considerations. Furthermore, Price was not alive, as Burke certainly was, to the dangers inherent in attempting large-scale comprehensive reforms. He did not appreciate the degree to which habit, custom, prejudice, and inertia governed communities, and the extent to which, when traditional loyalties were destroyed, stability and order could be maintained only by coercion and terror. Yet, despite Burke's views, liberal-democratic societies have enshrined many of the things that Price defended: the idea that the state and social institutions are to be regarded as the servants of the whole people, that all men are entitled to participate to some extent in the government of their society, and that for political purposes the people are not constituted by a relatively small elite. 
Interest in Price's moral philosophy revived in the twentieth century, particularly in the work of H. A. Prichard and W. D. Ross, and this was considerably strengthened by the publication in 1948 of D. D. Raphael's edition of 'A Review of the Principal Questions in Morals', which prompted several studies. The first biography of Price was by his nephew William Morgan, 'Memoirs of the Life of the Rev. Richard Price, D.D. F.R.S.' (1815). Apart from Fowler's article in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', Price's biography remained virtually untouched until Roland Thomas published 'Richard Price, Philosopher and Apostle of Liberty' (1924). This pioneering work was followed in 1952 by Carl B. Cone, 'Torchbearer of Freedom: the Influence of Richard Price on Eighteenth Century Thought', and in 1977 'The Honest Mind' by D. O. Thomas appeared. These works stimulated interest in Price's contributions to a wide range of subjects, including political philosophy, probability theory, insurance, demography, and finance, as well as in his moral philosophy. In 1977 the 'Price-Priestley Newsletter' was founded, to be superseded in 1982 by the journal 'Enlightenment and Dissent', which remains a focus for the study of Price's thought. 


@@@@@


doc= 22762


Price, Richard (1790-1833), literary scholar, was the eldest son of Richard Price, merchant. He entered at the Middle Temple on 29 May 1823, and went on to practise on the western circuit. 
In 1824 Price superintended an edition of Warton's 'History of Poetry', and provided a long preface, which was reprinted in the editions of R. Taylor (1840) and W. C. Hazlitt (1871). Price incorporated the notes of Ritson, Ashby, Douce, and Park, besides adding some of his own. The edition proved valuable to later editors, although Price retained many of Warton's mistakes, and made some of his own. In 1830, two years after he was called to the bar, he revised and brought up to date, in four volumes, Edward Christian's edition of Blackstone's 'Commentaries' of 1809. He also assisted Henry Petrie in his edition of the 'Saxon Chronicle to 1066', in the first volume of 'Monumenta historica Britannica' (1848). 
Price was a sub-commissioner of the Public Record Commission, a body which sponsored the publication of works tending to advance historical and antiquarian knowledge. He had a wide knowledge of German and Scandinavian literature, to which testimony was later borne by Dr James Grimm, Dr J. J. Thorkelin, and Edgar Taylor, translator of Wace's 'Chronicle'. Thorpe, in the preface to his 'Ancient Laws and Institutes of England' (published for the Record Commission, 1840), claimed that his labours had been considerably lightened by Price, whom he called 'a good man and highly accomplished scholar' (Warton, 1840). Price died of dropsy on 23 May 1833, at his home at Branch Hill, Hampstead, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 22763


Price, Robert (1655-1733), judge and politician, was born in the parish of Cerrigydrudion, Denbighshire, on 14 January 1655, the second son of Thomas Price (died before 1670) of Gilar, Denbighshire, and Margaret (1633/4-1723), daughter and heir of Thomas Wynne of Bwlchybeudy, Denbighshire. He was educated at Ruthin grammar school before entering St John's College, Cambridge, on 28 March 1672, aged seventeen. He entered Lincoln's Inn on 8 May 1673. In 1677 Price joined Lord Lexington on a journey to Europe, which saw him visit Paris in the spring of 1678, and then move on to Florence and Rome. While in Rome one of Price's legal texts was mistaken for an English 'Bible' and he was carried before the pope; on explaining the situation he presented the book to the pope, who placed it in the Vatican Library. Price returned home in 1679 and on 23 September married Lucy (died 1736), the eldest daughter and coheir of Robert Rodd, of Foxley, Yazor, Herefordshire. They had two sons and a daughter. Price was called to the bar on 28 October 1679. When his wife's father died in 1681 Price bought out the other Rodd coheirs and established himself at Foxley. He also erected and endowed an almshouse for six poor people in the parish of Cerrigydrudion. 
Price had a successful legal practice, numbering among his clients such influential figures as the first duke of Beaufort, a leading Welsh territorial magnate. Beaufort was presumably important in obtaining for Price several local offices which became available as the tory reaction set in during Charles II's later years. He became a common councilman at Hereford in 1682, and under the new Hereford charter of 1683 he was named an alderman, and in the following year became recorder of New Radnor and attorney-general for south Wales. At the general election following the accession of James II, Price was returned as a court supporter on 19 March 1685 at Weobley. Price became steward to Queen Catherine of Braganza. Local office also came his way as he became steward of Shrewsbury and he replaced a Beaufort opponent as town clerk of Gloucester in September 1685. In 1686 he became a member of the council in the marches of Wales. James II's first declaration of indulgence was a turning point in Price's career as his refusal to read it led to his dismissal as town clerk of Gloucester. Both Lord Chancellor Jeffreys and the king were politely rebuffed when they closeted Price in an attempt to persuade him to support repeal of the 'Test Act'. As a result he lost his place as steward of Shrewsbury under the new charter of January 1688, but he kept his other places and was approved by James II's agents as a court candidate for the abortive elections due in 1688. 
Price supported the revolution of 1688, subscribing $20 to the Herefordshire loan to the prince of Orange. However, his election campaign for the convention of 1689 was derailed by the discovery that in James II's records he was accounted a supporter of repealing the test and penal laws. He petitioned against his defeat, but with little chance of success he withdrew the petition. There were other distractions, too, at this time as in November 1690 Price received $1500 in damages in a suit against 'Mr Neale, the groom porter's son', for 'enticing' away his wife and 'getting her with child' (Luttrell, 'Brief Historical Relation', 2.131). 
Price was re-elected for Weobley in 1690 and retained his seat with one short interruption until 1702. He soon carved out a new career for himself as a tory critic of the government in parliament, which he combined with legal advocacy in the law courts. Thus he spoke on the 'Treason Trials Bill' in 1692; on the 'Bill of Accounts' and the 'Indemnity Bill' in 1693; and acted as defence counsel for Lord Mohun during his trial for the murder of the actor William Mountford in 1693. More famously, he was at the forefront of attempts to prevent the king from granting large estates in Wales to his Dutch favourite the earl of Portland. Price opposed the grant in the Treasury, arguing his case in May 1695. On 14 January 1696 he presented a petition from the freeholders and inhabitants of Denbighshire against the grant, and secured an address to the king which persuaded him to find an alternative means of rewarding Portland. Price's speech on this occasion was subsequently published after the king's death in 1702 under the title 'Gloria Cambriae, or, The Speech of a Bold Briton in Parliament Against a Dutch Prince of Wales'. He cited General Monck in support of his opposition to including an abjuration oath in the bill establishing a Board of Trade in January 1696. Price was a notable opponent of proceeding against the Jacobite plotter Sir John Fenwick by parliamentary bill of attainder. He refused the voluntary association in 1696. In 1699 he was one of those members who compiled a blacklist of those voting against the 'Disbanding Bill' which was later published. 
The inclusion of some tories in the ministry in 1700 saw Price appointed a Welsh judge, as second justice on the Brecon circuit, an appointment he himself thought due to the influence of Robert Harley. However, it was with the accession of Queen Anne that he achieved important office. In June 1702 he was created a serjeant-at-law, and on 24 June he was named as a baron of the exchequer, and henceforth he had to give up his parliamentary career. However, he retained his interest in politics, helping Harley to lobby against the tack in November 1704. As a judge, Price gave a minority opinion in February 1705 in the 'Ashby v. White' case, arguing that a writ of error could be refused as it was not a right but an act of grace from the prince. According to Thomas Hearne, Price delivered a charge to a Hampshire grand jury in 1705 'in which he took notice of the slanders and aspersions of the fanatic party in the libels etc cast on the Church of England, and reminded them that the present liberty which they enjoyed was purely the effect of the bounty of the Church of England. ('Remarks', 2.28)' Given the tone of such public pronouncements, Price's hopes, opined to Harley, of being raised to the court of common pleas in August 1705 were bound to remain unfulfilled. His prospects improved under the ministry headed by Harley from 1710 to 1714 but Harley seems to have used Price as a Welsh parliamentary whip and he was not promoted. 
Following the accession of George I, Price was reappointed to office, the result no doubt of his cultivation of the reversionary interest to the throne through his sons. Price was one of the judges sent to Carlisle to preside over the trial of Scottish Jacobites in December 1716; while there he suffered from gout, his fellow judge Tracy reporting that he had a 'little weakness remaining in his feet' (BL, Stowe 750, fol. 226). In 1717 he built a new house at Foxley. Again he was willing to provide a minority opinion from this bench, this time in January 1718 against the king's belief that he could educate his grandchildren. On 20 October 1726 he was promoted to be a justice of common pleas, and he was reappointed following the accession of George II in the following year. Price died at Kensington on 2 February 1733, and was buried at Yazor in Herefordshire. His elder son, Thomas, who had succeeded him as MP for Weobley in 1702, died in Genoa in 1706, leaving the other son, Uvedale Tomkyns Price, as his heir. His daughter, Lucy, married Bampfield Rodd. 


@@@@@


doc= 22764


Price, Sampson (1585/6-1630), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was born in Shrewsbury where his father, Thomas Price (died 1620), was minister of St Chad's. He followed his elder brother, Daniel Price (1581-1631), to the stoutly Calvinist Exeter College, Oxford, matriculating aged sixteen on 30 April 1602, but transferred to Hart Hall, from where he graduated BA on 28 February 1605 and proceeded MA on 6 June 1608. Like his brother, he served on the staff of the strongly protestant prince of Wales, and he was almoner of the Chapel Royal at Prince Henry's death in November 1612. In 1609 he had succeeded Daniel as rector of St Martin's, Carfax, Oxford, although he did not receive a preaching licence until 13 May 1615, the year he vacated the living. 
By that time Price had already preached at Paul's Cross in London. On 10 October 1613, in a sermon published as 'London's Warning by Laodicea's Lukewarmnesse' (1613), he offered Londoners a general warning of the dangers inherent in religious toleration. In his painful homily ('Revelation' 3: 15, 16) he attacked atheists, papists, and puritans alike. He further claimed that the death, eleven months before, of Prince Henry, 'that sweet Prince, of fresh and bleeding memory, the expectation of all the Christian world' (p. 41), was itself the sinful consequence of lukewarmness. He dedicated 'these rude first-fruits of my paines at the Crosse' (sig. A2) to John King, bishop of London, no doubt hoping for a city benefice since his erstwhile royal master was dead. Initially it was only to a lectureship, that of St Olave (which London parish of that name is unclear), that he was appointed on 24 April 1615. 
Price returned to themes of England's jeremiad when he next preached from 'Revelation' at the Cross on 17 March 1616. In this sermon, published as 'Ephesus Warning before her Woe' (1616), he denounced the moral decay in London. The city could equal Rome's glory but for the 'byting 'usurers, inticing Dalilaes', and 'cozening cheaters'' (p. 71) that were not only the sport and subject of plays but were likely to prompt God's judgment. He pointedly dedicated the sermon to Robert Sidney, Viscount L'Isle, who was lord chamberlain to the Catholic Queen Anna of Denmark. Such homilies won for him the sobriquet of 'the Mawl of Hereticks' (Hennessy, lix). 
Price proceeded BD from Exeter College on 13 June 1615 and DD on 30 June 1617. On 28 July that year Archbishop George Abbot collated him to the rectory of All Hallows-the-Great in London. On 9 October the mayor and corporation and the governors of St Bartholomew's Hospital appointed him vicar of the former Franciscan royal church of Christchurch, Newgate Street; he took up residence at New Rents in the parish, and published his remaining printed sermons from there. In 1617 he also preached another admonition, at Condover, Shropshire, published as 'The Cleansing of the Saints Sight' and on 10 September preached to the corporation of Shrewsbury at the dedication of the town's school chapel by Bishop John Overall. The homily, issued as 'The Beauty of Holiness' (1618), continued his attack on atheists who despised 'the calling of the Teachers of our Temples; scorning 'Priests', whose spirituall sacrifice of praier, God accepteth as well as he did incense in the old law' (p. 31). By the spring of 1618 he had become a chaplain-in-ordinary to James VI and I. In 1620 he became vicar of his father's old Shrewsbury church, a post that he held until 1628. 
On 8 July 1621 Price preached at Oatlands an anti-Spanish homily. He took as his text Isaiah's prophecy of the Babylonian captivity on learning that Hezekiah had shown his household treasures to the Babylonian ambassadors ('2 Kings' 20: 13-18) and linked this to Spanish aggression in Germany. This occasioned a short spell of imprisonment in the Tower. According to Joseph Mead, the king threatened to have him hanged for being 'too busy with Rochelle, the Palatinate, and the Spaniard' (Birch, 2.265-6) and it was only Prince Charles who seemingly interceded for his chaplain. A longer term consequence of his intemperate words may have been the forfeiture of his chaplaincy: his name does not appear in the list of those serving in 1621. However, he seems to have been in the household of Prince Charles and was back in harness as royal chaplain by 5 September 1624 when he preached at the funeral of Sir William Byrde, dean of arches, a sermon published as 'The Two Twins of Birth and Death' (1624). 
In 1622 Price was preacher to Gray's Inn, where his sensitivities to the threat posed by Catholicism to protestant Europe would have been welcome. On 14 July 1626 he was collated by his brother Daniel, by this time dean of Hereford, to the prebendal stall of Church Withington in that cathedral. He died intestate late in 1630 and was buried in the chancel of Christchurch, Newgate Street; administration of his estate was granted on 13 January 1631 to his widow, Elizabeth, of whom nothing else is known. 


@@@@@


doc= 22765


Price, Theodore (c.1570-1631), Church of England clergyman and reputed Roman Catholic convert, was born at Bron-y-Foel, in the parish of Llanenddwyn, Dyffyn Ardudwy, Merioneth, the son of Rees ap Tudor and Marjory, daughter of Edward Stanley, constable of Harlech Castle. He originally entered All Souls, Oxford, as a chorister and, having probably transferred to Jesus College, graduated BA on 16 February 1588 and proceeded MA on 9 June 1591. He held his first living, the poor rectory of Llanfair, near Harlech, only briefly, from 18 October 1591. Thereafter his career progressed more swiftly, and he was appointed a prebendary of Winchester in 1596, although he never served as master of the hospital of St Cross, as is sometimes erroneously stated. In 1601 he obtained the rectory of Llanrhaeadr-ym-Mochnant, Denbighshire. It seems likely, however, that Price had remained firmly part of the Oxford scene, and in 1604 he was appointed principal of Hart Hall, a position he held until his resignation in 1622. In 1609 he obtained an Oxfordshire living, the rectory of Launton, and on 5 July 1614 he proceeded DD, as from New College. Price seems to have been well suited to a donnish career: he was later described as of 'untainted Life... of a reverend Presence, liberal, courteous and prudent' as well as 'learned in Scholastical Controversies' (Hacket, 2.97). Although his lectures and a Latin sermon delivered in Oxford were subsequently praised he was not, apparently, a great preacher, a matter which later came back to haunt him. During this period Price evidently took an interest in the fortunes of his old college, Jesus, the Oxford college traditionally favoured by Welshmen. He was one of five commissioners who drew up new statutes for it in 1621, at which time he was also made a fellow. 
Price's early patrons are unknown, but his kinsman John Williams, the future archbishop of York, must have been responsible for Price's advancement in mid-career. In 1621 Price was appointed to a prebendal stall at Lincoln Cathedral, where Williams was bishop, and in 1623 Price became a prebendary at Westminster Abbey, where Williams was also the dean. In 1622 Price was one of only two clerics chosen to serve on a commission sent to Ireland to explore various grievances, including a number relating to the parlous state of the Irish church. Price was said to have emerged 'with Praise and with Encouragement from His Majesty' and the promise of further advancement (Hacket, 1.207). Instead, however, there followed a series of disappointments as Bishop Williams's attempts to obtain preferment for Price came to nothing. In 1623 Price was considered for the see of St Asaph, which included his native Merioneth, but he was passed over in favour of John Hanmer. In 1624 the notorious 'Arminian', Richard Mountague, praised Price as one who 'loveth the Church' and saw him as a possible candidate for the vacant see of Gloucester ('Correspondence of John Cosin', 1.24). In 1625, however, Price apparently broke acrimoniously with Williams over the latter's less than wholehearted support for Price's bid for the archbishopric of Armagh, which went instead to James Ussher. When challenged that Price had virtually ceased preaching for many years and had never preached before the king, Williams 'could give no good Answer and drew of[f] with so much ease upon it' (Hacket, 1.207). 
Thereafter, it would appear that Price turned to William Laud, Williams's chief opponent within the Westminster chapter, for further preferment. In 1629, when the see of St Asaph was once again vacant, members of the Durham House group again tipped him for preferment, but ultimately Price found himself passed over once again. By the late 1620s, at the least, Price appears to have aligned himself with Laud's allies, whose strongly ceremonialist leanings he clearly shared. These are confirmed by his will, drawn up in 1631, which included bequests to beautify the chancel of the church in his native parish of Llanenddwyn, and to rail in its altar. In addition Price endowed a sermon at his old college, Jesus, to be preached in support of bowing at the name of Jesus, 'against the Scismaticall opinions of theis times', probably a reference to a recent pamphlet controversy over this practice (Westminster City Archives, PCW, 174'v' Camden). 
In the minds of contemporaries, however, the likelihood that Laudian-style ceremonialism could transmute itself into outright Roman Catholicism seemed to be confirmed by the circumstances of Price's death, which took place at Westminster on 15 December 1631. Following unsuccessful surgery for 'the Torment of the Stone', Price told Roman Catholic visitors of his 'Affection and Devotion' for their church, and received Roman rites. In addition, he emphatically refused to be attended by any Church of England clergyman. The conversion became a 'cause celebre', with Price's burial at Westminster Abbey on 21 December seemingly delayed by the reluctance of the prebendaries to conduct a burial service (Hacket, 2.97). Peter Heylin, one of the Westminster chapter at the time, later claimed that the story of Price's conversion was merely invented by Williams to blacken the reputation of Laud, who had most recently supported Price. Philip Herbert, earl of Pembroke, certainly sought to use the incident against Laud, reportedly remarking to the king, 'Is this the Orthodoxe man your Majestie would have made a Bishop the last year? Doe but marke him that recommended him unto you in that kinde' (TNA: PRO, C115/M35/8387). At Laud's trial William Prynne condemned his familiarity with the 'unpreaching epicure... Arminian' and apostate Price. In reply, Laud did not seek to deny Price's conversion, but merely claimed that Williams 'had laboured... more than I' for Price's preferment ('Works of... William Laud', 6.495). Price's closeness to Laud, however, is suggested by Price's will, in which the archbishop was referred to as 'my Noble Lord and worthie auntient freind'. Conversely Williams, although a kinsman, was not named. Price's will also included bequests to Hart Hall, Jesus College, and Oriel College as well as moneys for church beautification, and repairs to organs. Others mentioned in Price's will include 'my Noble friend' the Welsh literary figure Hugh Holland, who had previously converted to Catholicism, and two of Price's fellow commissioners in Ireland, Sir William Jones and Sir Thomas Penruddocke. He had apparently never married; his executor was his nephew, Dr William Lewis, the master of St Cross. 


@@@@@


doc= 22766


Price, Thomas (c.1564-1634), adventurer and Welsh-language poet, was the eldest son of Dr Ellis Price (c.1505-1594), the notorious Red Doctor, and Ellyw Poole. He could trace his lineage to Marchweithan, the head of one of Gwynedd's fifteen tribes. His great-grandfather was Rhys ap Maredudd, who is reputed to have carried Henry Tudor's standard in the battle of Bosworth. Very little is known about Thomas Price's early years, but he is unlikely to have received any formal education. 
Despite a lack of firm historical evidence regarding Price's life as a soldier it is possible to conclude a considerable amount from his poems, his 'cywyddau' in particular. In 1585 he was a member of the earl of Leicester's force in the Netherlands. He was also present in Tilbury in 1588 as a member of the army assembled there to oppose the armada. He fought in France, probably during the French civil war in 1585-9, and in Ireland, probably during the nine-year war between 1594 and 1603, when Hugh o'Neill, earl of Tyrone, rebelled against the English. It is difficult to ascertain whether he ventured to Spain, although as a privateer he sailed around the Spanish coast and in one of his most famous poems he describes in macaronic language his trials and tribulations as a privateer. Later in life, following the death of his father, in 1595 he returned to live at Plas Iolyn, in the parish of Ysbyty Ifan, Denbighshire, but his adventurous spirit did not diminish, as he continued to plunder and pillage ships from the Isle of Bardsey. 
One of Price's contemporaries and colleagues, William Myddleton, was also a privateer, and it is reputed that Price, William Myddleton, and a gentleman named Thomas Koet were the first to smoke tobacco on the streets of London. Price spent much of his time in London and he composed two memorable poems about the city. None the less his time in London was a period of conflicting emotions. In 1613 he was imprisoned in the Fleet prison for allegedly raping his niece, and in one of his poems he sends the nightingale to Wales from his prison cell, bitterly proclaiming his innocence. Price was also involved in a number of other legal wranglings, and his contempt towards the legal profession is frequently expressed in his works. 
Price married twice. His first wife was Margaret, daughter of William Gruffydd of Penrhyn, with whom he had three children. His second marriage was with Jane, daughter of Hugh Gwynne of Berth-ddu, with whom he had five sons and five daughters. His heir, Ellis Price, died suddenly in London in 1610, as did his cousin William Gruffydd, son of Pyrs Gruffydd, his brother-in-law, and one of his closest companions, and Price composed an elegy to lament their untimely deaths. 
More than 200 of Price's poems have survived, more than 100 each of 'cywyddau' and 'englynion', and seven odes. Much of the poetry is conventional, 'cywyddau gofyn', 'cywyddau diolch', eulogies, and 'ymryson', as well as love poems in the style of Dafydd ap Gwilym, which are mainly the products of his early years as their lack of originality and imagination testify. 
Price belonged to a group of poets 'a ganai ar eu bwyd eu hunain' ('who sang on their own food'). These composed poems for pleasure rather than for a living, as they did not receive any patronage. As a consequence he often treated traditional themes in an unconventional way, and a great use is made of satire and wit, with Price shifting effortlessly between light-heartedness and pensiveness. One notable element of his work is that he is at his best when he sings about his own personal experiences -- his experiences in London, on the sea, or when expressing his frustration with lawyers. Before his time the sea did not figure prominently in Welsh literature. 
Lewis Morris, among others, was critical of Price's use of English words, stating that 'his incorrectness and carelessness in his orthography in writing prose, must be attributed to his military & wandring Life in his younger years' (BL, Add. MS 14872, 6'r'). But it is interesting to note that these English words are much more apparent in those poems which deal with his own adventures, rather than in his more traditional poems. His elegies, in particular those to his sons and Pyrs Gruffydd, are some of his best works. 
Until recently there has been a tendency to appraise Thomas Price in the context of his predecessors, poets such as Dafydd ap Gwilym or Tudur Aled. But it is difficult to do this as he is such a unique and original poet. At worst he can be mundane and uninspiring, but at best highly original and memorable. He embodies the traditional and the original, frequently singing on the same subjects as his predecessors but treating them in his own innovative way. Indeed he epitomized all of the characteristics of his period and his personality in his poetry. For the first time the spirit of the sea and the bohemian life of London became a central part of Welsh strict-metre poetry. He stands as a bridge between the professional poets and the more informal and personal poetry that followed. He invigorated a system which was in decline, and although he did not exert a significant influence on those who followed him, with his sparkling personality and his individual muse he left his mark on the poetic tradition in Wales. It is noteworthy that he composed a Welsh grammar (BL, Add. MS 14872, fols. 130'v'-169'v') in which he endeavoured to instruct his fellow gentry in the mysteries of Welsh versecraft. Despite the wealth of his ancestors Price died a comparatively poor man. He had a number of outstanding debts: his legal troubles and extravagance (referred to frequently by Rhys Wyn) were two reasons. Thomas Price died on 22 August 1634 and was buried the following day in the family's traditional burial place, St John's Church, Ysbyty Ifan. 


@@@@@


doc= 22767


Price, Thomas (1599-1685), Church of Ireland archbishop of Cashel, was probably born in Wales, although his parents are not known. He was educated in Trinity College, Dublin, graduating BA in 1623 and MA in 1628. He was elected fellow in 1626. Price was ordained deacon in December 1629. After examining him very thoroughly William Bedell, bishop of Kilmore, ordained him priest in 1632, and Price became Bedell's archdeacon. He married, before November 1633, Jane, daughter of Thomas Browne (died 1613), mercer, of London, and Anne, 'nee' Garraway (died in or after 1642), and stepdaughter of Sir Thomas Dutton, a prominent figure in the English plantation of co. Longford. Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682), physician and author, was his wife's brother. In 1634 Price was described as resident at Drumlaham, co. Cavan, in a document relating to his wife's inheritance. Price supported William Bedell in 1638 against the disapproval of his archbishop, James Ussher, for convening a diocesan synod. In the rebellion of 1641 the insurgents in co. Cavan imprisoned many civilians, and it was Price who drew up the terms for their release in 1642. 
During the interregnum Price became chaplain to the duke of Ormond. After the Restoration he was advanced to the vacant see of Kildare, holding the prebend of Kildare 'in commendam'. James Margetson, archbishop of Dublin, consecrated Price in Christ Church in March 1661. His income was to be $400 per annum. At Ormond's recommendation Price was translated to the archbishopric of Cashel and the bishopric of Emly on 20 May 1667, the sees being vacant after the death of Archbishop Thomas Fulwar. When Price vacated Kildare, the diocese owed the king $217, while the preceptory of Tully owed $40. These debts, the result either of Price's parsimony or of his indolence, meant that the manors and estates of the see were forfeit to the crown. 
Having been well trained by Bedell, Price as archbishop of Cashel understood the importance of using Irish in preaching the gospel. He ordained one Terence Tierney (or Tiernan) in King Cormac's Chapel on June 1677 to minister to the people in Irish. At a synod held the previous year Price and his clergy agreed that Tierney should preach in Irish in Cashel Cathedral every Sunday afternoon. 
The Jesuit Andrew Sall (born in Cashel in 1612) was already friendly with Price by the early 1670s. In 1674, when regular Catholic clergy were proscribed in Ireland, Sall converted to the established church. Price received him into the Church of Ireland, put him up in his house, and acquired benefices for him. Encouraged by Price, Sall was involved in publishing the second edition of William Daniel's translation of the 'New Testament' into Irish (1681). Sall went to England in 1675 to meet Sir Robert Boyle, who was financing the enterprise. Sall returned to Ireland in 1681 and began with others to prepare Bedell's Irish 'Old Testament' for the press. 
Another Catholic convert employed by Price to minister in Irish was Paul Higgins (Pol O hUiginn), who was born about 1628. He had been Catholic vicar-general of Connaught and was brought over to the Church of Ireland by Dr Otway, bishop of Killala. Higgins, at the instigation of Narcissus Marsh, was employed in Trinity College to teach Irish, and while in the college transcribed some of Bedell's 'Old Testament' for the printer. When Sall died in April 1682, Price conferred his benefices on Higgins, who left Trinity College shortly thereafter. Higgins's income from his various livings in the diocese of Cashel amounted to about $200 per annum. 
Public services in Irish as well as English were apparently customary while Price was archbishop. At synods held in Cashel in 1678 and again in 1682 it was ordered that the practice of saying 'Irish prayers' in the cathedral should be continued. William Daniel's translation of the 'Book of Common Prayer' was the service book used, a copy having been given to Price by Andrew Sall. Price himself had some knowledge of Irish. 
Price almost certainly outlived his wife; they appear to have had no children. He died in his archiepiscopal house on 4 August 1685 at the age of eighty-five, and was buried in St John's churchyard in Cashel, where his tombstone still remains. 


@@@@@


doc= 22768


Price, Thomas (1787-1848), historian, was born on 2 October 1787 at Pencaerelen in the parish of Llanfihangel Brynpabuan, Brecknockshire, second son of Rice Price, vicar of Llanwrthwl, Brecknock (died 1810), and Mary Bowen, his wife. In 1805 he entered Christ College, Brecon, after having attended local day schools. There he was taught to play the triple harp by a local harpist and attracted the notice of Theophilus Jones (1758-1812), who was then working on the second volume of his history of Brecknockshire. Price's talent for drawing was turned to good account in the illustration of this work, which aroused an enthusiasm for Welsh history. A letter written to Jones in 1811, in which he described some Roman remains near Llandrindod, was printed in 'Archaeologia' in 1814. 
On 10 March 1811 Price was ordained deacon, and licensed to the curacies of Llanyre and Llanfihangel Helygen in Radnorshire. His ordination as priest on 12 September 1812 was soon followed by a transfer, in April 1813, to Crickhowell, where he served the parishes of Llangenni, Llanbedr Ystrad Yw, and Patrishow as curate-in-charge. To these were added in 1816 the neighbouring parishes of Llangatwg and Llanelli. In 1825 he became vicar of Llanfihangel Cwm Du, to which the curacy of Tretower was added in 1839. He was appointed rural dean in 1832. Crickhowell, however, continued to be his home until 1841, when he built himself a house on the glebe land at Cwm du. 
Price first appeared as a Welsh scholar in 1824, when he contributed a series of papers on 'The Celtic tongue' to 'Seren Gomer', under the name Carnhuanawc, which became his recognized literary title. He was already known as an informed and eloquent speaker on bardism and similar topics at eisteddfodau. Inspired by contemporary interests in minority ethnic cultures and pan-national movements throughout Europe, he became an enthusiastic pan-Celticist and laboured to develop Welsh-Breton links, winning a prize at the Welshpool eisteddfod of 1824 for an essay on the relations between Armorica and Britain. He played a key role in persuading the British and Foreign Bible Society to support a Breton translation of the 'New Testament' and began a long correspondence with the Breton scholars Le Gonidec and Hersart de la Villemarque. The Celtic connections of the Welsh interested him greatly, and during the next few years he travelled a good deal in Celtic countries. His account of his tour of Brittany was published in the 'Cambrian Quarterly Magazine' in 1830. In 1829 he published 'An Essay on the Physiognomy and Physiology of the Present Inhabitants of Britain', in which he maintained against the Scottish antiquary John Pinkerton the doctrine of the single origin of the human race. 
In 1836 Price began his 'magnum opus', the compilation of a history of Wales in Welsh. 'Hanes Cymru' appeared in fourteen parts, the first of which was issued in 1836, the last in 1842: the work appeared also as a single volume in that year. Price's desire to secure as great a degree of accuracy as possible led to long delays. A cumbrous and pedantic style and the absence of any constructive treatment of his material detracted from the merits of the work, but it remained for many years the most trustworthy history of Wales. 
Price, who had an attractive personality, was an indefatigable worker in all movements which appealed to his fervent patriotism. He was an early advocate of Welsh-language schools and was active in establishing the Welsh Minstrelsy Society and the Welsh Manuscript Society. He participated in the foundation of the Cymreigyddion, or Welsh Society, of Brecon (1823), and that of Abergavenny (1833). His involvement with the annual eisteddfodau of the latter society from 1834 drew the support of influential local gentry and antiquarians and they became the means of encouraging the serious study of Welsh literature and history, and an important channel for continuing the work of the previous generation of Welsh cultural leaders through groups such as 'yr' hen bersoniaid llengar ('the old literary clerics'), of which he was a member. Price combined in himself traditional Welsh culture and scholarship and antiquarianism and he was thus able to attract both groups to share their efforts. He was a regular contributor to Welsh periodicals and corresponded widely on Celtic topics. He took a close interest in the Welsh (triple) harp, and through his exertions a school for players of this instrument was for a time maintained at Brecon. He was a regular, though not always successful, competitor at eisteddfodau; in October 1845 he won the prize of $80 offered at Abergavenny eisteddfod for the best essay on the comparative merits of Welsh, Irish, and Gaelic literature. Other essays on the history of Welsh literature, the influence of Celtic literature on European literatures, and the 'Statute of Wales' were published in his 'Literary Remains'. In 1847 he published a pamphlet on 'The Geographical Progress of Empire and Civilisation', an expansion of Berkeley's theory that 'westward the course of empire takes its way'. 
Price died, unmarried, on 7 November 1848 at Llanfihangel Cwm Du and was buried there. In 1854-5 his 'Literary Remains' was published at Llandovery, the second volume containing a biography by Jane Williams (Ysgafell). 


@@@@@


doc= 22769


Price, Sir Uvedale, first baronet (1747-1829), writer and rural improver, was born at Foxley, in the parish of Yazor, Herefordshire, where he was baptized on 14 April 1747. He was the eldest son of 
Robert Price was the son of Uvedale Tomkins Price (1685-1764) and his wife, Anne, the daughter of Lord Arthur Somerset. He made a grand tour in 1738 and was taught to draw in Rome by Giovanni Battista Busiri, one of whose sketchbooks he once owned and which is now in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. Of his many sketches, a number are in public collections (Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and the National Library of Wales, Aberystwyth); his 'Castle Mount at Foxley, 1744' showing the 'Ragged Castle', an early example of the Gothic revival, is in Hereford Library. Price was a friend of the artists Thomas Jones and John Baptist Malchair, while Gainsborough was on good terms with three generations of the Price family. With the naturalist Benjamin Stillingfleet, Price made sketching excursions, in search of picturesque scenery, down the Wye valley and into Wales. He drew the plates for Stillingfleet's 'Observations on Grasses' (1762) and also 'laid a scheme of improvement... which when executed will make Foxley vye with any place' (Lambin, 252). He planted ornamental trees, developed new woods, and created 'walks or rather rides... diversify'd with different prospects' (ibid.). In 1824 John Claudius Loudon could still distinguish the oak, beech, and elm, planted by Robert, from the introductions of his son. Robert Price married Sarah Barrington in June 1746. He was buried at Yazor on 1 October 1761. 
Uvedale Price was educated at Eton College and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, in 1763. He became friendly with the whig politician Charles James Fox (1749-1806), and in the autumn of 1767 they travelled to Florence and then to Rome, Venice, Turin, and Geneva. While passing through Perugia, Price purchased six drawings by Salvator Rosa, whose work epitomizes sublime landscape. In August 1768 they paid a visit to Voltaire at Ferney. 
Price probably took control of Foxley soon after his return from his grand tour, and in 1772-3 alterations were made to the house on the advice of the fashionable architect Robert Adam. On 28 April 1774 Price married Lady Caroline Carpenter (died 1826), the youngest daughter of George, first earl of Tyrconnel, whose family were well connected with Herefordshire. They had a son, Robert (died 1857), and a daughter, Caroline (died 1853). A survey of Foxley carried out in 1775 by the professional land agent Nathaniel Kent (1737-1810) recorded that it was 3537 acres in extent and provided its owner with an income of $2461. Kent transferred much tenanted woodland to Price, but also recommended, contrary to the current trend, retaining a large number of smallholders and cottagers. Price was a conscientious landowner, farming profitably but at the same time conscious of the aesthetic bonus produced by meticulous management guided by a discriminating eye. Like Joseph Addison and Alexander Pope earlier in the century, he saw no reason why a whole estate should not please the eye, rather than just the pleasure grounds around the house. Indeed, Price had little interest in the picturesque but sterile landscapes of the more rugged parts of Britain, popularized by such tourists as William Gilpin, or the new parklands laid out by Capability Brown. Instead, he celebrated landscapes which were 'flourishing, populous, domesticated and needed to be worked industriously to keep them so' (Daniels and Watkins, 161). Price condemned the improving landowner who, perhaps aided by Capability Brown, lived within a ring-fence of shelter belts, isolated from his tenantry. He believed that Britain could escape the horrors of the French Revolution if the landowning classes espoused the concept of 'connection', maintaining their links, both socially and economically, with the lower classes. These ideas were developed in a pamphlet, 'Thoughts on the Defence of Property', printed in Hereford in 1797, on the occasion of the French landing on the Pembrokeshire coast. 
Price's indignation at what he regarded as the 'false taste' purveyed by Capability Brown and his many imitators, such as the 'mechanic improvers' Richard Woods and William Emes, was expressed in the 'Essay on the Picturesque' (1794). This work was long in gestation, and Price sent various drafts to his friends, including Fox and the collector and amateur landscape painter Sir George Beaumont, for their comments. The 'Essay' celebrated localism and the diversity of the English landscape in all its forms, epitomized in the phrase 'intricacy and variety'. Price feared that a new uniformity was being imposed upon the countryside because modern improvers were replacing 'intricacy in disposition, and variety of forms, the tints and the lights and shadows of objects' with 'monotony and baldness [which] are the greatest defects of improved places' (Price, 1.22-3). Brown had been consulted at well over 250 estates in Britain, where he had deployed the same elements -- belts of trees, clumps, serpentine lakes and drives, and endless acres of lawn -- which ignored the singularity of each landscape. Roughness and ruggedness had been banished for acres of smooth turf. 
Essentially, the 'Essay' promoted in measured terms the more radical view of the picturesque landscape voiced by Richard Payne Knight in 'The Landscape: a Didactic Poem, Addressed to Uvedale Price', also published in 1794. Both authors argued that landscaping was safer in the hands of men of liberal education who understood the character of their own estates. Price, in particular, wished to revive the role of the amateur gardener -- such as William Shenstone and Charles Hamilton -- who eschewed the borrowed taste of a professional landscaper who, after a brief visit to an estate, in a remote part of the country -- such as his native Herefordshire -- would make inappropriate improvements. Like Knight, he believed that the sensitivity of the amateur improver was enhanced by a knowledge and understanding of the paintings of Claude, Poussin, and Salvator Rosa. These paintings, set in a rugged classical landscape, where nature was about to engulf the works of man, provided a variety of vignettes, which could be used as a corrective in the late eighteenth-century countryside. Price was conscious that this was being damaged not only by professional landscapers but also by new agricultural practices, industry, and even the turnpike roads. It was this reaffirmation of the role of great art in moulding the countryside which underpinned Price's version of the picturesque. As his taste was more catholic and domestic than Knight's, Price also recommended the paintings of the seventeenth-century Dutch school, such as those of Ruisdael. In every painting there were object lessons for the amateur landscaper, who with sensitivity and imagination could create similar 'pictures' on his estate without sacrificing its productive capacity. 
In addition to promoting a more painterly approach to the landscape, Price sought to give greater definition to the much-abused term 'picturesque', which had become a descriptive commonplace in the eighteenth century -- 'pittoresco' being 'after the manner of painters'. Price believed that the picturesque existed between Edmund Burke's categories of the 'beautiful' and the 'sublime': 'When I first read that original work ['Inquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful', 1756], I felt that there were numberless objects which gave delight to the eye and yet differed as widely from the beautiful as from the sublime' (Price, 1.43). Whereas the beautiful was characterized by smoothness and freshness, the picturesque had the opposite qualities of roughness and decay. Similarly, the sublime, with its characteristics of greatness and infinity, was the antithesis of the picturesque's intricacy and variety. Price was equally unhappy with William Gilpin's category of 'picturesque beauty', which he applied to landscapes that were beautiful and yet would make good pictures. Price expanded the discussion of his theory in 'A Dialogue on the Distinct Characters of the Picturesque and the Beautiful' (1801), which was subject to a forthright attack by Knight in 'An Analytical Inquiry into the Principles of Taste' (1805). Price's theory, although going beyond Burke, had followed the latter, as well as Hogarth, in believing that the aesthetic categories he described were inherent in objects themselves, whereas Knight, exploiting the views of David Hume, thought that they were simply in the mind of the beholder. 
The 'Essay' and his letters are an excellent guide to the application of Price's ideas. He admitted to George Beaumont that he spent his time at Foxley 'trying the effect of my own principles'. In another revealing letter he described a moment of picturesque creativity: 'It has been ingeniously said... that in every block of marble a fine statue is enclosed; you have only to clear away the rubbish: so it is with such a place as this; there are pictures in every tangled wood and thicket when the rubbish is removed: but what does, or does not constitute rubbish, is a very nice point: you must not destroy the appearance of intricacy and wildness in the near parts, nor injure the mass and general outline from the distance, and must take special care, while you are clearing, to make one picture, not to sacrifice others in the neighbourhood.' For Price the spade and the axe were the landscaper's tools, and although they were coarse instruments they could be used to picturesque effect 'when working under the eye of a painter, and guided by his potent art'. Like the artist, once the outline of the composition had been achieved, he looked to his palette -- 'the improver's palet is his nursery' (Allentuck, 73-5). 
During the last decade of the eighteenth century and the first of the nineteenth, the picturesque controversy was debated both in writing and in the salons of polite society throughout the country. Several critics, such as George Mason, William Marshall, and Horace Walpole, writing during the climax of the French Revolution, failed to distinguish between Price's practical 'landscape husbandry' and the 'Jacobinical' gardening recommended by Knight (Ballantyne, 'Turbulence and repression', 66). Both Mason and Walpole had aired criticisms of Brown's system at an earlier date, but in the 1790s, perhaps through affection for the memory of Brown, they defended his reputation. Unfortunately for Price, the picturesque ideal was absorbed into the political milieu and taken as a symptom of the social anarchy released in France. The critics claimed that the promoters of the picturesque, by espousing 'undressed nature', were attacking the tastes of the 'folks of high degree' who enjoyed the convenience and obvious charms of the Brownian landscape and, instead, they were championing a revolution in the countryside. This was a parody of Knight's 'The Landscape' and unfair to Price, and yet there was a grain of truth in it. Both Price and Knight were strongly committed whigs. Price supported his friend Fox against the tory prime minister William Pitt, circulating in 1796 several epigrams 'somewhat splenetic' against the government's excessive expenditure (Owen and Brown, 90). This was a traditional whig position, but in the context of the war could be interpreted as radical and unpatriotic. 
Jane Austen was also fully conversant with the nuances of the picturesque debate and parodied Gilpin in 'Northanger Abbey', while in 'Mansfield Park' her sympathies are certainly with Price. Thomas Love Peacock, in 'Headlong Hall' (1816), produced some knockabout scenes between the characters Sir Patrick O'Prism, representing Price, and Mr Milestone, representing the landscape gardener Humphry Repton. The debate clearly impinged upon the professional aspirations of Repton, who quickly went into print with 'Sketches and Hints on Landscape Gardening' (1795), in which he denied the affinity between gardening and painting suggested by Price on the premise that the landscape gardener's creativity was much more restricted than the artist's. Repton had also defended the merits of his profession in a 'Letter to Uvedale Price' (1794), where he revealed that he had spent 'pleasant hours' with Price 'amidst the romantic scenery of the Wye' (Price, 3.5). Price replied in a 'Letter to H. Repton' (1795), and both letters were published with a further three essays in 1798. Finally, all the 'Essays' were collected in a three-volume edition issued in 1810. An extended edition entitled 'Sir Uvedale Price and the Picturesque' was published in 1842 edited by Sir Thomas Dick Lauder. 
Once the heat of the controversy had faded, Price's original contribution to landscape gardening was generally acknowledged by contemporaries and later generations. Towards the end of his career, even Repton, under pressure from his clients, accommodated the picturesque canons in his layouts, as is evident in the 'Red Books' for Hewell, Worcestershire (1811), and Endsleigh, Devon (1814). In his 'Memoir', Repton referred to Price and Knight as those 'ingenious authors' (BL, Add. MS 62112, 'Memoir', 212). The landscape gardener W. S. Gilpin presented himself to his clients as the person who could render Price's 'Essays' 'practically useful' (Gilpin, 'Practical Hints upon Landscape Gardening', 1832, vi), while, for John Claudius Loudon, Price was 'the great reformer of landscape gardening' of whom he was a 'profound admirer and disciple' (M. Simo, 'Loudon and the Landscape', 1988, 93). Edward Kemp, writing in 1850, still felt that 'The work of Sir U. Price on the Picturesque is probably the most valuable thing of its kind in our language' (Kemp, 'How to Lay Out a Garden', x). Finally, the American landscape gardener Frederick Olmsted visited Herefordshire in 1850 with the specific intention of soaking up the countryside which nurtured Uvedale Price. 
The 'Essays' were not only a practical handbook for professional gardeners, but also a manifesto for a new movement in painting -- 'an ideology for British romanticism' (J. Murdoch, 'David Cox, 1783-1859', 1983, 12). Thomas Hearne responded in the 1790s to Price's theory by his rejection of prospects and espousal of intimate scenes. David Cox went to live in Herefordshire in 1814 because it was the county of the picturesque, and his adoption of 'the broken tint style' was designed to capture the texture of the countryside admired by Price. Cox painted a 'Scene at Foxley Park' which was engraved by G. Hunt in 1823, and one of his pupils, while he was living in Hereford, was Charlotte Price -- perhaps Uvedale Price's niece. 
The 'Essay on architecture' in volume 2 of the 'Essays' was equally influential, especially for its assessment of buildings in the landscape. Lord Aberdeen, who corresponded with Price, made several references to it in 'An Inquiry into the Principles of Beauty in Grecian Architecture' (1822), while architects providing designs for 'ornee' cottages, such as P. F. Robinson (1776-1858) and Edward Bartell, derived credibility by referring to 'Mr. Price's ingenious 'Essay'' (E. Bartell, 'Hints for Picturesque Improvements', 1804, 76). 
In 1794 Price built a seaside house at Aberystwyth -- the Castle House -- designed by the then relatively unknown architect John Nash. Here Nash was inducted 'into the mystery of the Picturesque' by Price and subsequently carried the style with him into metropolitan improvements in London (J. Summerson, 'John Nash', 1980, 21). Eventually, a synthesis of Nash and Loudon produced the picturesque Victorian suburb, perhaps Price's most abiding legacy. Nash also produced delectable cottages, some of the earliest for Price, which became the essence of Arcadian dreams in the nineteenth century. 
The 'Essays' and the picturesque controversy brought many visitors to Foxley. Fox came about 1785 and admired Price's planting. The antiquary and topographer John Britton was 'eager and curious to have a personal view of the homes of the literary belligerents' (J. Britton, 'Autobiography', 1850, 150) and visited Foxley on a walking tour in 1798. Writing in 1850, he felt he could detect a 'palpable contrast' (ibid.) between the landscape at Foxley and the pleasure grounds laid out elsewhere by Repton. Perhaps the most flattering reference to Foxley comes from France and occurs in Jacques Delille's much printed work 'Les jardins' (1801). Delille recommended Foxley as a model for the improvement of rural estates ('Les jardins', 12). In 1799 James Plumtre was impressed by the 'Forest Scenery' at Foxley with its under wood of holly, thorns, and brambles. He also noticed some more conventional aspects of Price's pleasure grounds, such as the small flower garden at the back of the house, with its creeping and trailing plants, the conservatory, and rustic alcove. Nearby there was a menagerie and beside a pond a cool grotto (I. Ousby, ed., 'James Plumtre's Britain', 1992). Among other notable visitors to Foxley were the dramatist Richard Sheridan, the poet Samuel Rogers, Sir George Beaumont, and William Combe, the author of 'Dr Syntax'. Wordsworth visited Foxley in 1810 but felt that Price had become too 'delicate and fastidious' in his picture making and, notwithstanding the emphasis of its owner upon 'connection', found the estate 'lacked the relish of humanity' (Daniels and Watkins, 163). Price admired Wordsworth's poetry and thought his 'Scenery of the Lakes' (1820) should be regarded as 'the manual for improvers in every part of the kingdom' (Owen and Brown, 201). Price and Wordsworth collaborated on the quarry garden at Coleorton, Leicestershire, laid out for Sir George Beaumont. Price gave informal advice on gardening and tree planting to many of his friends. For example, he provided plants and helped with the design of a new walk at Fox's house near Isleworth, on the outskirts of London. It has been suggested by Denis Lambin that Eywood and Whitfield in Herefordshire, Cassiobury in Hertfordshire, Packington Hall and Guy's Cliffe in Warwickshire, and Bentley Priory in Stanmore, London, all received his attention. 
Price's well-publicized association with Knight and his whiggism created a certain detachment from his fellow gentry in Herefordshire. One of them, Dr John Matthews of Belmont, near Hereford, was prepared to challenge the picturesque point of view in print with 'A Sketch from the Landscape' (1794). Another neighbour, Thomas Symonds of the Mynde, was very self-conscious about employing a local gardener in 'the county where Mr. U. Price and Mr. Rd. Payne Knight (the first gentlemen professors) reside' (NL Wales, Mynde Park, 2473). Several of Price's neighbours also employed Repton, who expressed his surprise on being consulted by James Hereford of Sufton Court in 1795, in the 'enemy's quarters' ('Red Book', Sufton Court). Price could, however, be a generous neighbour. Sarah Harford Jones, newly married, living close to Foxley at Mansel Lacy in 1798, and left alone with difficult servants by her husband, who was travelling in Persia for the East India Company, found Price and his wife very civil and attentive; dancing was provided at Foxley, gardening advice proffered, and a holiday suggested at the Castle House, Aberystwyth. 
In 1826 Price, nearly eighty years old, struck up a friendship with Elizabeth Barrett (Browning), the twenty-year-old poet of Hope End, near Ledbury. Price was impressed by her 'Essay on the Mind, with other Poems' (1826), and a dialogue ensued. Barrett visited Foxley, discussed the poetry of George Crabbe with Price, and found herself being asked to read and criticize the proof sheets for Price's last publication, 'An Essay on the Modern Pronunciation of the Greek and Latin Language' (1827), a work which Wordsworth regarded as 'most ingenious... If he be right, we have all been wrong, and I think he is' (Hewlett, 38). Elizabeth Barrett wrote subsequently that 'Mr. Price's friendship has given me more continual happiness than any other single circumstance ever did' (ibid., 39). On Price's death two years later she wrote a poem 'To the Memory of Sir Uvedale Price, Bart' (1829). She recommended reading the 'Essay on the Picturesque' for the 'sake of its style... natural, chaste and humorous to a captivating degree' (B. McCarthy, 'Elizabeth Barrett to Mr Boyd', 1955, 44). Price was a compulsive letter-writer, and Edward Henry Barker (1788-1839) began collecting his correspondence with a view to publishing it. He wrote to Elizabeth Barrett asking for her letters, but her father, Edward, thought that to agree would be 'a dereliction of all I know you to feel towards the memory of Sir U. Price' (M. Forster, 'Elizabeth Barrett Browning', 1988, 54). 
Price was elected a member of the Society of Dilettanti in 1784 along with his lifelong friend Sir George Beaumont. He was sheriff of Herefordshire in 1793 and served upon a number of local committees, including the commission for the new county gaol in Hereford, which employed John Nash as architect in 1796. He was the first and only superintendent to the deputy surveyor of the Forest of Dean (1816). On 12 February 1828 he was created a baronet. 
Price died at Foxley on 14 September 1829, aged eighty-two, having been predeceased by his wife, on 16 July 1826. His obituary in the 'Hereford Journal' (16 September 1829) referred to his 'learning, his sagacity, his exquisite taste, his indefatigable ardour'. He was buried against the east wall of Yazor church, in the churchyard, under a simple table tomb. It survives today, albeit in ruins. 


@@@@@


doc= 22770


Price, William (b. 1596/7), university teacher, was the son of a Denbighshire gentleman. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 16 October 1616, aged nineteen, graduating BA on 26 October, and proceeding MA on 21 June 1619. He was appointed White professor of moral philosophy in 1621, with a stipend of $100 a year, and in April 1624 was selected to give the oration in memory of the founder of the post, Thomas White. He proceeded BD in 1628. The following year he resigned his readership at the end of his allotted five-year span, but must have remained for a time at the university. On 23 April 1630 he and several others signed an appeal to the king against the appointment of William Laud as chancellor of the university, secured illegitimately, as they thought, at the university's convocation eleven days earlier. Price's subsequent movements are obscure, but he may have been the William Price who, also in 1630, acquired the vicarage of Llandeilo Bertholan, Denbighshire. He died on 25 October 1646. 


@@@@@


doc= 22771


Price, William (d. 1666), Reformed minister, was born, according to his own account, in London, but he was later taunted with being a Welshman by one of his congregation, so his family may have come from the principality. His publications reveal that he was educated at Cambridge University and that he gained a BD, but it is not clear if he was either the William Price born in London who was admitted to Sidney Sussex College in 1617, or the namesake who was admitted to Emmanuel College on 28 June 1622, matriculated in 1623, and graduated BA early in 1626. It is possible that it was he who was instituted vicar of Brigstock, Northamptonshire, on 4 January 1633 and who published, as William Price BD, 'Janitor animae: the Soules Porter to Cast out Sinne' (1638), dedicated to William Cecil, earl of Salisbury, and his wife from their 'devouted orator and chaplaine'; this man was still resident in Brigstock in 1639, but by 1641 had been replaced as vicar by one Francis Lewis. It is more certain that at some time in or before 1640 William Price (died 1666) married Sybella Geens of London and they had a son, John. 
On 13 April 1642 Price, as 'preacher at Covent Garden', delivered before the lord mayor and civic leaders 'A Sermon Preached at St Maries Spittle', published later that year. He was still at Covent Garden when appointed in 1643 to the Westminster assembly, where he spoke often and always supported the presbyterian position, although he opposed the solemn league and covenant. By the time he published 'Mans Delinquencie Attended by Divine Justice Intermixt with Mercy' (1646), a fast sermon delivered to the House of Lords, he was pastor of Waltham Abbey. However, as the revolution gathered speed, he became alarmed about religious radicalism and Oliver Cromwell. 
On 23 March 1648 the English Reformed church of Amsterdam called Price to serve as co-pastor with Richard Maden; formal induction was on 12 August 1648. Price approved of this church's presbyterial polity, and he supported the larger Dutch Reformed system by joining the Amsterdam classis. He was an active co-pastor but his effectiveness was hampered by family problems. His wife stayed behind in London for over two years, claiming illness and weakness, and this prolonged separation of husband and wife was scandalous. Moreover, Price's own ministerial work was intermittent because of illnesses. On the other hand he translated into English the shorter Dutch catechism, published two Latin works, 'Triumphans sapientiae' (1655) and 'Ars conciandi' (1657), dedicated respectively to the rulers of Amsterdam and to the University of Cambridge, and was resolute in agitating about political affairs. Price and Maden filled the church with one-sided royalist, anti-Cromwell prayers and sermons. English agents put Price on a list of 'violent incendiaryes' (Thurloe, 2.373-4). 
Price's active service in the Amsterdam church ended in 1659, but the following year he published, as from there, 'Gods Working and Brittains Wonder', expressing his 'unspeakable joy' at the Restoration; he remained on the list of pastors until his death in Amsterdam in July 1666. He was survived by his wife, who was buried at the New Church of Amsterdam on 29 July 1687. His son John had become preacher of the English church at The Hague on 22 May 1661. 


@@@@@


doc= 22772


Price, William, the elder (d. 1709), glass painter, of whose parents nothing is known, lived in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London. He worked in Hatton Garden, and in 1683 was described as being one of only four glass painters in London. His earliest known work (1687) is a royal arms (des.) for the east window of St Andrew's, Holborn, London. In 1696 he supplied a 'Nativity' (des.) for Christ Church, Oxford, and in 1701-2 a 'Life of Christ' for the east window of Merton College, Oxford. A coat of arms signed by him and dated 1703 is in the Hall of Trinity College, Cambridge. He became an assistant at the Glaziers' Company in 1685, upper warden in 1697, and master in 1699. His wife, Anne (or Ann) Cranley, whom he had married on 9 April 1671 at St Peter-le-Poer, London, received the administration of his estate following his death in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields in May 1709. 
William Price's son 
Joshua Price's son 


@@@@@


doc= 22773


William Price the younger (1702x7-1765) was also a glass painter. His earliest works of any consequence appear to be the east window (1726) of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, and the west window (1735-6) of Westminster Abbey. Between 1735 and 1740 he executed five windows for New College, Oxford, followed by the east window ('c'.1742) of Turner's Hospital, Kirkleatham, Yorkshire, and the central window in the great court room of St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. About 1747 he installed the windows that his father, Joshua Price ['see above'], had made for Lord Chandos's house, in St Michael and All Angels, Great Witley, Worcestershire, adding further glass. In 1754 he carried out extensive work for James West of Alscot Park, Warwickshire, both in the house and at St Mary's, Preston-on-Stour, near by. He was almost certainly also responsible for the complete glazing of St John the Evangelist, Shobdon, Herefordshire, from 1750 to 1760, and windows at St Andrew Wimpole, Cambridgeshire. At least nineteen other works may be attributed to him, among them panels for Sir Horace Walpole, whose preferred artist he was. Walpole wrote in his 'Anecdotes of Painting in England': 'William Price the son, now living, whose colours are fine, whose drawing good, and whose taste in ornaments and mosaic is far superior to any of his predecessors, is equal to the antique, to the good Italian masters, and only surpassed by his own singular modesty. (Walpole, 2.17)' Price retired in 1761 and died in Great Kirby Street, Hatton Garden, London, on 16 July 1765. His obituaries described him as 'a Batchelor, possessed of a large fortune' ('London Chronicle', 16 July 1765) and 'the most ingenious painter and stainer of glass in Europe' ('GM', 347). His will, which was proved by his mother, Elizabeth George (who had remarried), his sole executor, left money and interests in mines in Flintshire, Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 22774


Price, William (1771-1830), orientalist, was born at Worcester on 9 November 1771, the son of a ladies' shoemaker who had a shop in the High Street, Worcester. His mother died when he was still a child, and he followed his father into the family business, which prospered, and which he ran from 1798. 
From a young age Price, who had been taught some Latin at school, wanted to learn languages. A visit to Paris on business, in 1791, enabled him to study French, and this was followed in 1792 by a journey to Brussels, Antwerp, Rotterdam, and Amsterdam, where he learned Dutch, which introduced him to German. Returning to Britain, as war broke out, he met some Italians and learned their language; he next studied Spanish and Portuguese, moving to Russian and Hebrew before concentrating on Persian and Arabic. He came to know the philologist George Hadley, and this led in 1796 to an introduction to the orientalist William Ouseley, who helped him to obtain books for his studies, and gained him admission to the British Museum. 
Price was largely self-taught, and made little use of dictionaries or grammars. Where possible his method of learning languages was to try to learn the pronunciation by listening to native speakers: he began studying Turkish by writing down phrases he heard spoken while in the company of the Turkish ambassador, and began Arabic through noting the colloquial phrases used by some Moroccans in London. His ear was so acute that he was able to write down with complete accuracy the words of a Persian song he had heard. He acquired a working knowledge of Sanskrit in a matter of weeks, and Chinese in a year, having studied a Chinese book setting out the Chinese method of learning the language of the Tartars, which gave him an understanding of both languages. 
Price's proficiency in oriental languages attracted notice, and influential patrons offered him a position in the service of the East India Company, but he turned down the opportunity to go to India in the face of his father's concerns, as he was the only child. On the death of his father in 1807 he became financially secure. Being apparently unmarried and having no dependants, he retired from business in order to pursue his interest in oriental languages, purchasing manuscripts and rare books. Thomas Burgess, bishop of St David's, noted his achievements in a survey of Hebraists. 
In 1810 Price was appointed assistant secretary and interpreter to the embassy of Sir Gore Ouseley to Persia in 1811-12. Price kept a diary, and made hundreds of drawings, of both landscapes and buildings. The journal, with its illustrations, was published in 1825. Price deciphered many cuneiform inscriptions. On his return to England he devoted himself to literary pursuits. His remarkable ability was publicized in May 1813, as making him a possible candidate for the chair of oriental languages at the University of Edinburgh, made vacant by the death of Alexander Murray; the electors, however, appointed Alexander Brunton without allowing Price's claims to be considered. He taught oriental languages at the seminary of his friend, Alexander Humphreys, at Netherstone House, near Worcester. He set up a private printing press in his house, and became a member of the Royal Asiatic Society of London and the Asiatic Society of Bengal. He translated from Hindustani and Persian into both French and English and wrote books on the grammar of oriental languages. He died of apoplexy at his home at Merryman's Hill, Worcester, on 15 June 1830. He is to be distinguished from a contemporary William Price who taught oriental languages at Fort William College in Calcutta from about 1815 to 1834. 


@@@@@


doc= 22775


Pritchard, Evan (1769-1832), Welsh-language poet, was the son of Richard Thomas, a stonecutter, of Ty-mawr in the parish of Bryncroes, Caernarvonshire, and his wife, Mary Charles (Mari Siarl). Both his mother and her father, Siarl Marc, were writers of Welsh verse. Evan Pritchard began life as a schoolmaster at Llangian, near his home; he afterwards kept school at Llanddeiniolen in the same county. In 1795 his parents emigrated to America, and he lived at Ty-mawr, first with his grandfather, and then with his uncle, Lewis Charles. In 1800 he went to England as an excise officer, and returned to Ty-mawr in 1812; for the rest of his life he conducted a travelling school in the neighbouring parishes. In 1816 he married his cousin, Mary Roberts of Hen-dy, Bryncroes, and they had two sons and a daughter. 
Pritchard was a versatile writer in all forms of Welsh verse. He wrote much for the periodicals of his time, and edited 'Yr Eurgrawn', of which some numbers appeared at Caernarfon in 1800. He was a frequent competitor at eisteddfodau, and his best-known poems are the 'Ode on Belshazzar's Feast', that on the massacre of the bards, and the translation of 'The Cottar's Saturday Night'. He died on 14 August 1832, and a collected edition of his verse was published under the title 'Caniadau Ieuan Lleyn' at Pwllheli in 1878. 


@@@@@


doc= 22776


Prichard, James Cowles (1786-1848), physician and ethnologist, was born on 11 February 1786 in Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire, the eldest child of Thomas Prichard (1765-1843), a businessman in the iron trade whose ancestors had emigrated from Ireland in 1688, and his wife, Mary Lewis (1763-1794), whose forebears Prichard assumed to be of Welsh descent. Prichard's second Christian name was the family name of his father's mother. 
His parents belonged to well-established Herefordshire Quaker families. He had a very wealthy great-uncle. One of Prichard's two sisters died shortly after birth in 1793; the other married a certain Robert Moline. His brother Thomas, born in 1787, emigrated to America, where the family had commercial connections in New York. The youngest son, Edward (1789-1822), became a banker in Ross-on-Wye. Until 1800 Prichard's father kept two houses, one in Ross-on-Wye and one in Park Street, Bristol. He had inherited part of a local iron trade business which brought him into close connection with the influential Harford family of Bristol. In 1793 James Cowles attended Richard Durham's school on College Green, Bristol, as a day scholar. Afterwards his education was entirely private, with an emphasis on languages. According to an apocryphal anecdote, as an eight-year-old he delighted a Greek sailor at Bristol harbour by addressing him in modern Greek. In 1800 Thomas Prichard returned to Ross-on-Wye where he remained until his death on 21 August 1843. 
Despite the religiously motivated reservations of his father, Prichard chose to study medicine. In 1802 he was placed with a Bristol man specializing in anatomical preparations, named Pole; this stay was followed by a period of study of medical pharmacy under the Quaker William Tothill and his partner, Robert Pope, at Staines. In September 1804 Prichard moved to London to study anatomy at the school attached to St Thomas's Hospital, and in 1805 he went to Edinburgh University where he took his MD degree in 1808. Motivated not least by the lectures of Dugald Stewart and thanks to an early fascination with anthropology, he chose the varieties of mankind as the subject of his MD dissertation which, in 1813, appeared in an extended, Anglicized version. Prichard's education was completed by a few terms at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1809, and, in 1810, short stays at St John's College and Trinity College in Oxford. In the latter year he converted to the Church of England, in part to be able to enter Oxford, and in part, according to his friend, the Quaker Thomas Hodgkin, 'on the grounds of conviction' (Hodgkin, 'Biographical notice', 553). Still, Prichard was exceedingly devout, his faith falling in with contemporary evangelicalism which also influenced his scholarship. In 1810 he took up residence in Bristol in Berkeley Street, set up in private practice and, in 1811, became a physician to St Peter's Hospital, a combined poorhouse and lunatic asylum which he attended until 1832. When, in 1815, a French invasion seemed imminent, Prichard joined a defence corps, priding himself on being 'a tolerable good Match for a Frenchman' (Prichard, letter to J. R. Hale). In 1816, at his third attempt, he was elected to the Bristol Infirmary where he was to serve as physician until 1843. 
On 28 February 1811 Prichard married Anna Maria Estlin, the daughter of the Unitarian minister John Prior Estlin (1747-1817) and sister of John Bishop Estlin (1785-1855), Prichard's student friend in Edinburgh. They had ten children of whom two died in infancy and three others predeceased Prichard. Augustin (1818-1898), the second son, took over his father's Bristol practice. Among the others were James Cowles ('b'. 1818) and Constantine Estlin ('b'. 1820), both of whom were ministers, Albert Hermann ('b'. 1831), a postmaster, and Iltudus ('b'. 1825), a soldier in the Bengal army who published 'The Mutinies in Rajpootana'. From 1816 the family lived in a house on College Green, Bristol, then in another house in Berkeley Street until, in 1827, they rented the spacious Red Lodge in Park Row. When, in 1837, the Red Lodge was for sale, Prichard bought it at auction for $1800. From the last male member of the Cowles family he also inherited a summer residence in the countryside (its value is not known). 
Apart from his medical duties, Prichard took part in the activities of several clubs and societies, figuring prominently in the Bristol Institution for the Advancement of Science, set up in 1822. In 1829 he was one of the leading spirits behind the plan to found a college for classical and scientific education designed to admit religious dissenters. Otherwise his political views, as well as his medicine, were decidedly conservative. He was an adherent of heroic treatment and counter-irritation, including blood letting (which he also practised on himself as a cure for headaches) and trepanning, nicknamed the 'tomahawk practice'. A frightened patient was driven to poetry: '
Dr. Prichard do appear. 

With his attendance & his care, 

He fills his patients full of sorrow 

-- You must be bled to day & cupped tomorrow. 
(Smith, 512)' From 1826 to 1828 Prichard acted as a medical visitor to Gloucestershire madhouses, an experience which he used for his publications on insanity. In 1827 he was made a fellow of the Royal Society. In 1835 he received an honorary doctorate from Oxford University. As Prichard's fame grew he became a respected member of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association and of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS), though his efforts to have ethnology accepted as an independent section in the BAAS succeeded only partially in 1846 when the subject was made a sub-section. In 1845 Prichard moved to London to take up a well-paid post under Lord Shaftesbury on the lunacy commission -- a task for which he had commended himself with his book on legal aspects of mental disorder: 'On the Different Forms of Insanity, in Relation to Jurisprudence' (1842). 
The Reverend William Daniel Conybeare and Francis Newman, as well as the Quaker physicians Thomas Hodgkin and Thomas Hancock were part of Prichard's circle. But his tight schedule and what he called his 'scribbling habit' (Prichard, letter to Hodgkin) did not leave him much time for informal socializing. Despite his keen ethnological interest he travelled little abroad, apart from a few trips to France, Germany, and Switzerland. Prichard was rather bookish. According to a student at the Bristol Infirmary, 'he generally wore a large, loose overcoat, with roomy side-pockets, large enough to hold a quarto or small folio case-book; and he generally carried other books with him on the seat of his carriage' (Alford, 176). Despite his frequent appearance as the chairman of committees, he was a shy and reserved man who was deemed 'too quiet' to be made president of the Bristol meeting of the BAAS in 1836. He was universally praised as 'the scholar, the gentleman, and the Christian', though it did not escape his contemporaries that the wide range of his learning had its limits. His medical colleague, John Addington Symonds (1807-1871) held that: 'Fancy and imagination were not prominent faculties in Dr. Prichard.... I think that he had no decided aesthetical tendency, no such sensibility to the beautiful as would lead him to dwell on the enjoyments of poetry and the fine arts. (Symonds, 48)' 

Prichard's various intellectual occupations converge, being all aspects of the science of mankind and the mind. He owed his fame to his ethnological endeavours. Starting with his MD dissertation, 'Disputatio inauguralis de generis humani varietate' (1808), he spent his life rewriting the same book some five times. 'Researches into the Physical History of Man' was published in 1813; the second edition, 'Researches into the Physical History of Mankind', appeared in two volumes (1826), and the third in five volumes (1836-47), as well as in a German translation: 'Naturgeschichte des Menschengeschlechts' (trans. R. Wagner and J. G. F. Will, 4 vols., 1840-48). In 1843 he published a more popular and more biologically oriented version, 'The Natural History of Man', which went through four editions and appeared also in French: 'Histoire naturelle du genre humain' (trans. F. Roulin, 1843). Starting from an attempt to refute Lord Kames's polygenism, Prichard's main ethnological aim was to prove the unity of mankind and to vindicate the veracity of the anthropology laid down in 'Genesis'. For this purpose he grappled with problems from all the natural and human sciences: anatomy, physiology, biology, ethnology, palaeontology, archaeology, mythology, and philology. He perceived that traditional accounts of difference in skin colour were flawed: eighteenth-century environmentalism was empirically false. Prichard particularly disdained the notion, put forward by J. B. Lamarck and Erasmus Darwin, that acquired characteristics could become hereditary. To him this seemed to defy the order of creation. Without departing from the notion that external circumstances influenced physiognomy, he offered a new theory of heredity: only those characteristics could be passed on to the offspring that were 'connate', hence his unusual assertion that 'the primitive stock of men were Negroes' (Prichard, 'Researches', 1st edn, 25, 233) who gradually turned white once the process of civilization set in, instilling a better taste in individuals which made them prefer light-skinned spouses over darker ones. Latterly, this argument has been taken for an early form of Darwin's theory of sexual selection. Prichard never came to terms with the question how external influences could engender connate traits. While in the third edition of the 'Researches' he did not return to his argument concerning heredity, he still believed, on the one hand, that sudden variations that had sprung up in one individual might over time become characteristics of the entire population, and, on the other, that cultural customs and living standards determined human physiognomy. 
Thanks to his great command of literature -- in the late 1810s he even learned German -- by the 1830s Prichard was appreciated as the main authority on ethnological and anthropological matters. Endeavouring to prove monogenism, he divided the problem into two propositions: he argued first that all mankind belonged to one species: second, that all human varieties were referable to one single place of origin. The first part of the thesis rested on three arguments: that the 'principal Laws of the Animal Economy' worked uniformly in all human tribes; that all mankind was prone to the same diseases; and that G. L. L. Buffon's criterion of hybridity was valid, that is to say that all those individuals belonged to one species who could engender fertile offspring. To prove the second part of his theory Prichard drew upon a welter of learning. He engaged in bio-geography, arguing that not only mankind but each species came from its own particular centre of creation. Then he ventured into philology to show that all human languages were related, whence he inferred genealogical relationships among human tribes. Finally, he asserted that the myths of all human cultures were so similar that they all necessarily had to share the same primeval history. Prichard had already made this point, concerning Egyptian mythology, in 'An Analysis of the Egyptian Mythology, to which is Subjoined a Critical Examination of the Remains of Egyptian Chronology' (1819). 
In his philological studies Prichard was one of the very first British scholars to take up the latest methods of comparative historical linguistics from such German scholars as Friedrich Schlegel, Franz Bopp, Jacob Grimm, and Wilhelm von Humboldt. Using their historical comparative approach for his own pious ends, he endeavoured to show in his 'The Eastern Origin of the Celtic Nations Proved by a Comparison of their Dialects with the Sanskrit, Greek, Latin, and Teutonic Languages' (1831) that Celtic was the connecting link between the ancient Sanskrit and Hebrew. While not every critic endorsed this fanciful theory, Prichard's other claim, namely, that Celtic was part of the Indo-European language family, was later corroborated independently by continental scholars. 
While he always maintained the accuracy of scripture, Prichard never accepted an absolutely literal reading of it. His views adapted smoothly to new findings, since they were so multifarious and eclectic, sometimes collapsing into paradox. Thus he maintained in 1826 that environmental stimuli exerted an effect on physiognomy, while at the same time he rejected the idea that acquired characteristics could become heritable. As he abhorred polygenism he also was a great opponent of racial theories. This attitude was fuelled by his sympathetic attitude towards foreign tribes, many of whom he saw threatened with extinction by European recklessness and an acquisitive selfishness which Prichard called utilitarian: 'It is only by christian nations', he wrote in 1830, 'that such a work of total extermination has ever been thoroughly accomplished' (Prichard, 'Horae Africanae', 738). And as his more secular-minded scientific peers grew intrigued by racial theories, Prichard employed all his knowledge to prove them wrong. 
In the third edition of the 'Researches', Prichard emphasized the psychological unity of mankind: common fears of retribution after death and the desire to seek atonement seemed to characterize all human cultures. This evangelical streak of his thought also surfaced in his theory of insanity. Influenced by J. E. D. Esquirol and German somaticists, he developed a new pathological category: moral insanity. Stripped of its religious and anthropological undertones it was to survive until the twentieth century. In 'A Treatise on Diseases of the Nervous System' (1822) Prichard toyed with the idea that there might be a mental disease in which 'the active powers are primarily disordered, without any affection of the intellectual faculties' (p. 135). But it was only from the 1830s that he was prepared to shed the Lockian definition of madness and envisage a type of insanity that left the rational faculties unaffected, expressing itself simply in a distortion of the emotive faculties ('Insanity', 'The Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine', ed. J. Forbes, A. Tweedie, and J. Conolly, 2, 1833, 10-32, 847-75). This notion was further deepened in his comprehensive overview of the state of knowledge concerning mental disorders in 'A Treatise on Insanity, and other Disorders Affecting the Mind' (1835). 
The pathology of moral insanity Prichard derived from his experiences as a visiting alienist. As the concept stipulated the perversion of the moral, that is, the non-intellectual, faculties, it was rooted in Scottish common-sense philosophy. Unconventional theories such as Philippe Pinel's 'manie sans delire' and Esquirol's notion of monomania had paved the way for a departure from received wisdom. Prichard strove to account for insanity in a way that would explain various bodily symptoms, while not infringing on the notion of the inviolable soul. If he was gradually driven towards a somaticist notion of madness, which focused on the entire body rather than the brain alone, this was due to his vehement hostility towards phrenological theory which he, with many others, suspected of attempting to reduce the mind to the cerebral structure. His alternative view of insanity was inspired by a group of German somaticists who contributed to the 'Zeitschrift fur Anthropologie', and by the theological ideas of his Quaker friend Thomas Hancock whose theory of an inbred moral sense liable to distortions spelt out the connection between the superior realm and the mundane sphere. Prichard envisaged moral insanity as both a distortion of the emotive faculties and a sign of moral perversion. Yet he was not enough of a religious, or a medical, zealot to believe that the source of corruption could be rooted out. Although he embraced contemporary notions that civilization, commercial worries, and an uprooted lifestyle left their mark on the mind, he none the less believed that the inclination to mental disease was part of the make-up of human nature, common to primitive peoples and refined men alike. Moral insanity became a widely used category, valid well into the twentieth century. But most doctors who adopted it ignored its complex, more or less implicit theological underpinnings. Medical phrenologists appropriated it for their own purposes. Later on, it became linked to notions of the pathological personality. 
Prichard fell ill in December 1848. He died of pericarditis in the night of 22-3 December 1848 at his house, 1 Woburn Place, Russell Square, London, and was buried on 30 December in Sellack, Herefordshire, by his son-in-law, William Henry Ley, the local vicar. By the time of his death many perceived that Prichard's anthropological views were tied up too closely with religion. While alienists with a predilection for phrenology took up his nosological category of moral insanity for their own purposes, adherents of racial theory thought that his short time-scale, that left only a few thousand years for the development of mankind, was flawed. His 'Researches' remained highly esteemed as a compendium of ethnological detail, yet not for its theoretical frameworks. Prichard became considered as the representative of a bygone age. With the popularization of evolutionism E. B. Tylor thought that his discussion of the races of man as varieties of a single species was rehabilitated. Some historians of anthropology later mistook Prichard for a precursor of Darwin. In fact, his merits lay in his understanding of the problems inherent to eighteenth-century theories of man, in his readiness to grapple with evidence that seemed to contradict his theories, and in his early appreciation of scientific developments on the continent, especially in the fields of linguistics and psychiatry. 


@@@@@


doc= 22777


Prichard, Rhys (c.1573x9-1644/5), Church of England clergyman and poet, was born at Llandovery, Carmarthenshire, the eldest son of Dafydd ap Richard of Llandovery, and his wife, Mary. His birth date depends on Anthony Wood's assumption that he was eighteen when he entered Jesus College, Oxford, in 1597, but an exchequer deposition in 1642 described him as 'clerk, 69 years or thereabouts' (Evans, 182), which puts his birth nearer 1573. In 1602 he was ordained priest and appointed as curate of Witham, Essex, on 20 April; he graduated BA on 26 June, and was presented to the living of Llandingad with Llanfair-ar-y-bryn in Llandovery on 6 August. 
The date of Prichard's marriage to Gwenllian is not known, and only one child is ever mentioned, Samuel or Sami bach ('dear/little Sami') of the poems ('b'. 'c'.1605), who died before his parents. In his youth Sami vexed his father somewhat, but in a letter from Oxford (5 June 1623) he repented: 'My sinns I doe bewaile and with dayly prayer I will crave the almightie to forgiue' (Jones, 20). These youthful indiscretions gave rise to stories of a louche life and dissolute ways, and he figures in the folklore of the Tywi and Teifi valleys as the lover of various heiresses who met his death by drowning at a young age. In reality Samuel met his future wife, Francis Hardinge, at Oxford, married her and served as his father's curate, before himself becoming rector of Llanynys, Brecknockshire. They had two children, Elizabeth and Rice. Elizabeth, who married Thomas, the son of Bishop Mainwaring of St David's, was anxious to see her grandfather's work published 'provided it be done in the Original Language in which they were wrote and not translated into English or otherwise altered as some have done'. 
The only works published during Prichard's lifetime appeared in 1617: 'Y catechism nev athrawiaeth Gristianogawl, rhwn y mae pob plentyn y ddyscu, cyn iddo gael y vedydd episcob: neu y dderbyn yr cummun bendigedig' ('The catechism or Christian doctrine which every child is to learn before he receives confirmation or is received into holy communion'), and a poem, 'Cyngor episcob I bob enaid oddi vewn I episcobeth' ('A bishop's advice to every soul within his diocese'). These texts, though on the same theme and bound together, are separate entities, and the poem begins with a direct, personal address to his son, 'F'annwyl blentyn dere nes' ('My dear child come nearer'), but its title, like that of the catechism, encompasses everyone in a diocese. The 'Catechism' was inspired by a zeal to educate the illiterate members of his parish, as were his popular little quatrains, and shows that he was well aware of the literary and religious fashions of the day. 
Prichard's catechism is the first surviving Welsh printed catechism separate from the prayer book, although there are earlier examples recorded in the Stationers' register, of which no copies have survived. The basic text is that of Archbishop Cranmer's 1552 prayer book, translated by William Salesbury and published in 1567 in an orthographically eccentric version, but Prichard also used Bishop William Morgan's version, published in 1599, which largely eschews the peculiarities of Salesbury. The last part of the catechism provides a good example of Prichard's own translating skills; he incorporates a discussion of the importance of the sacraments of baptism and the eucharist which were added to the prayer book after the Hampton Court conference of 1604, and here Prichard had no earlier translation to guide him. He used vivid phrases, dialect forms, and substantives as he did in his demotic quatrains, and the directness and simplicity of his vocabulary reveal the same sure touch. There is anecdotal evidence that he was a charismatic and successful preacher, although this mostly dates from the post-Methodist revival period which stressed preaching. There is direct evidence from the poems that he himself favoured preaching, even advising people to travel to another parish to hear a sermon if there was none in their parish or if the preacher lacked conviction. This was not acceptable Anglican practice. 
Prichard's importance lies in his hundreds of quatrains on all sorts of subjects, from the mysteries of Christian doctrine to the benefits of breast-feeding babies and the nutritional value of vegetables. His biggest concern was to help the poor -- first by making good use of the pitifully few resources to which they had access, and second (but more importantly) by helping them to understand the Christian gospel. Despite his love of preaching he realized that few of his listeners would understand or remember theological discourse or the usual homilies of the Anglican church; on the other hand, since they readily picked up songs and ballads heard in fairs and markets, he decided to use these simple forms to teach some of the more abstruse doctrines of the 'New Testament', in addition to telling vivid stories from the 'Old Testament' over and over again. He stated his intention clearly: it was because people tended to forget a sermon but easily remembered a frivolous song that he turned these verses/lessons into songs, 'for you, the Welsh'. He added, self deprecatingly: '
I sought no intricate work, 

but a smooth, perfect metre, 

Easy to learn in a short time 

by all who hear it thrice. 
(Jones, 34)' Consequently, he was not afraid of repeating himself and many favourite lines were recycled, while characters from the 'Old Testament' or classical antiquity turn up time and again as role models -- Daniel and Alexander the Great being particular favourites, the latter sometimes praised as a good man but at other times used as a warning against drunkenness and pride. 
Prichard had a successful clerical career and acquired several livings; in 1613 James I appointed him rector of Llanedi, to be held with Llandovery, and in 1614 he became prebendary of the collegiate church at Brecon. In 1626 he was appointed chancellor and a canon of St David's, with the living of Llawhaden. He was diligent in his chapter work, and his distinctive signature occurs frequently in its muniments. Despite his loyalty to the king during the civil war he resented the taxes levied by the commissioners of array, and a letter of 1642 voices his dismay at his assessment of $200, when his 'Meanes' was in 'Deires or little farmes' from which he received only payment in kind. 
The first edition of Prichard's poems predated 1659, and from then on editions came frequently; the first collection of four parts in 1672 by Stephen Hughes was followed by another in 1681 the first to be known as 'Canwyll y Cymry' ('The Welshmen's Candle'). Fifty-two editions appeared before 1820. The early printing may have obviated the need to preserve his manuscripts, and only recently are works in his hand being recognized, such as the volume of notes for a sermon found in MS Jesus 145, in the Bodleian Library, and a collection of drafts of poems on eight narrow folios bound into a later manuscript, NL Wales, 15416 E, in Aberystwyth. 
Prichard's signature appears in the chapter records of St David's on 2 August 1643. On 2 December 1644 he made his will, leaving bequests to his wife, his daughter-in-law and her children, and others in his family, as well as money to the town of Llandovery to fund a free school. He died at Llandovery -- when exactly is not known, nor was his will proved; his burial place is unknown but was probably in the chancel of Llandingad church, where he had served for more than forty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 22778


Pricke, Robert (c.1642-1708), publisher and translator, was born in central London, the son of Robert Pricke ('bap'. 1624) and his wife, Dorothy Mitchell. Little is known of his early life, but Horace Walpole says that he was a student of the etcher Wenceslaus Hollar. His first known publication is an etched map of London showing the damage caused by the great fire, issued about 1667 from an address in Whitecross Street. This was probably his father's house: Robert senior was beadle of the Salters' Company which had, in 1651, granted him the lease of a 'tenement in Whitecross street' (Watson, 45). The fire marks the beginning of Pricke's work as a printseller, and he went on to supply the regenerators of London with a range of practical treatises and pattern books. He had contacts in Amsterdam, probably with the Danckerts family, and imported French, Dutch, and Italian books and prints. Indeed, his greatest contribution was as a popularizer and disseminator of continental ideas and models, which formed the basis for nearly all his own publications. 
Pricke's first book was probably 'A Booke of Archetecture', copied from the French artist J. Barbet and issued in the late 1660s from 'the flower pot in Fleete streete'. This was followed by 'A New Book of Architecture' and 'A New Treatise of Architecture', both translated by Pricke, from the works of Alexandre Francine and Julien Mauclerc respectively, and published in 1669 from Whitecross Street. At about the same date he married Abigail, and their first child, Robert, was born in 1670, although he seems not to have survived infancy. They had at least six further children: Dorothy ('b'. 1671), Elizabeth (1672-1678), Abigail ('b'. 1673), Mary ('b'. 1676), Anne ('b'. 1678), and Robert ('b'. 1681). 
By 1670 Pricke was also publishing from the 'Golden Lion at the corner of New Cheapside'; between 1674 and 1676 he was to be found 'adjoining Cripple Gate within', and in 1677 he moved to the 'Golden Ball' in St Paul's Churchyard. Throughout his life he followed his father's trade of salter (invariably given as his occupation in parish records), and publishing and bookselling were evidently sidelines. However, by 1679 he had issued a dozen books on art and architecture (often in his own translations from French or Dutch), as well as selling maps, games, and anatomical, satirical, and biblical prints, and carrying on a secondhand trade. Thereafter his printselling activity was virtually suspended for twenty years, although he republished Edward Cocker's 'Penna volans' in 1685. During this period he succeeded his father as beadle of the Salters' Company. In the 1690s the Golden Ball address was used by the printseller and etcher Sutton Nicholls, and in 1695 Pricke, his wife, and his daughter Mary are recorded as Nicholls' lodgers. By 1696, however, Pricke was living 'against Aldermary Church in Bow Lane', and in 1698 he collaborated with Samuel and John Sprint in reissuing three of his books; in 1700 his last publication appeared, a reissue of 'The Architect's Store-House' of 1674. He died in late 1708, and was buried at St Mary Aldermary on 10 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 22779


Pricket, Robert (fl. 1603-1645), poet, saw some military service in Elizabeth I's reign and afterwards sought a precarious livelihood as a verse-writer and pamphleteer against those holding unorthodox religious and political beliefs. One of his earliest publications, 'Times Anotomie', which he describes as a love song on the death of Queen Elizabeth, was published in 1606, three years after the queen's death. In 1603 he printed two panegyrical celebrations of the accession of James I. 'A Souldier's Wish unto his Soveraigne Lord King James' was entered in the Stationers' register in April; it was dedicated to the privy council in a passage anticipating James's arrival and emphasizing Pricket's own loyalty. Similarly 'Unto the most High and Mightie Prince King James. A Poore Subject Sendeth a Souldiours Resolution' reiterated these themes before panegyrizing Queen Elizabeth, denouncing the church of Rome, and articulating hopes for sustainable peace and unity. These pledges were made particularly pertinent by Pricket's suspected involvement in the pro-Catholic activities of Philip May, a servant of Lord Hunsdon, for which he was examined on 19 April 1603 ('CSP dom.', '1603', 14/1/31, 33). 
In 1604 Pricket secured wider fame by a poetic tribute to the memory of the second earl of Essex, entitled 'Honors Fame in Triumph Riding, or, The Life and Death of the Late Honourable Earle of Essex' and dedicated to the earls of Southampton and Devonshire and to William, Lord Knollys. Pricket referred with satisfaction to the disgrace of Cobham, Grey, and Ralegh, but the praise he bestowed on Essex -- '
He doubtles had a sound and faithfull hart. 

To Prince and State, and for the publicke weale, 

The things amisse he alwaies fought to heale. 
(stanza 9)' -- led to his imprisonment by order of the privy council and to the recall of copies of the verse ('Gawdy MSS'). He successfully appealed to Lord Salisbury for release in September 1604 and he sought to atone for his offence in 'Times Anotomie, Containing: the Poore Man's Plaint, Britton's Trouble and her Triumph'. Dedicated to the privy council, the first part had been written in 1604 and is a bitter attack on Roman Catholicism and contemporary secular abuses. 
Pricket's protestant zeal steadily increased. In 1607 he printed both 'The Jesuits Miracles, or, New Popish Wonders', a critical account of Jesuit activities in England, culminating in a prayer for stability, and a pamphlet entitled 'The Lord Coke his Speech and Charge. With a Discoverie of the Abuses and Corruption of Officers'. In the dedication to the latter, signed R. P. and addressed to Coke's father-in-law, Thomas Cecil, earl of Exeter, Pricket described himself as a poor soldier 'unseperably Yoakt with leane-fac't povertie' (sig. A3'v'), willing, once more, to resume his military career to acquire solvency ('Salisbury MSS', 24.iii, Pricket to the privy council, 1606 or earlier). In a closing request for patronage he represents his text as a verbatim account of a charge given by Coke to the grand jury at Norwich assizes on 4 August 1606: 'So exelent as that it worthyly deserves to be continued in perpetuall memorie which being thus prodused to a publique view, I hope it shall unto our publickeweale remaine a worthy persedent' (sig. A4'r'). On 12 February, however, one day after the text was released, it was suppressed and, in 1608, in the preface to 'La sept part des reports S. Edw. Coke Chivaler', it was repudiated by Coke himself, who condemned its 'palpalde mistakings in the very words of art, and the whole context of that rude and ragged stile, wholly dissonant... from a lawyers dialect' (sig. aV'v'; 'Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.243, Chamberlain to Carleton, 13 Feb 1607). 
About the same period Pricket, according to his own account, took holy orders; one 'Robert Pricket, A. M.' was curate of St Botolph, Aldgate, in April 1611 (Newcourt, 1.916). He obtained some preferment in Ireland but, exiled by the rising of 1641, and in great distress, he sought refuge in Bath, where in 1645 he wrote 'Newes from the King's Bath'. Printed at his own expense this work catalogues and criticizes examples of political and religious rebellion. In the dedication of the text Pricket retrospectively examines his life of military campaigning, wrangles with the court of high commission, and forty years in God's ministry with dejected cynicism and frustration: '
I am alive as buried in my grave 

With grief I see the wofull misery 

Of honest, poor, dispised poverty. 
(p. 3)' 



@@@@@


doc= 22780


Pridden, John (1758-1825), antiquary and architect, was born on 3 January 1758 in London, the eldest son of John Pridden (1728-1807), bookseller, and his wife, Anne (died 1801), daughter of Humphrey Gregory of Twemloves, near Whitchurch, Shropshire. His father was born on 20 July 1728 at Old Martin Hall, near Ellesmere, Shropshire, of wealthy parents and ran away from home to escape a cruel stepfather. In London in 1748 he worked for booksellers John Nourse in the Strand and then Richard Manby, in Ludgate Hill, whom he eventually succeeded, and was friends with many well-known authors and antiquaries. 
Pridden entered St Paul's School, London, on 3 August 1764 at the age of six, and matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 15 April 1777 at the age of nineteen. In 1778 he gained the Pauline exhibition which, together with as many other exhibitions as he could obtain from the London livery companies, almost paid for his university education. During vacations he made numerous walking tours, visiting every cathedral and many other historic towns and filling sketchbooks with accurate drawings of what he considered worth preserving. He graduated BA in 1781 and was ordained soon afterwards. 
In 1782 Pridden became an afternoon lecturer at Tavistock Chapel, London, and, in November of the same year, a minor canon of St Paul's Cathedral. In Essex, he was vicar of Heybridge, near Maldon, from July 1783, and of Little Wakering from 1788. On 4 September 1787 at St Bride's, Fleet Street, he married Anne (died 1815), eldest daughter of John Nichols (1745-1826) ['see under 'Nichols family (per. c.1760-1939)], the compiler and editor, and his first wife, Anne Cradock. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1785 and contributed many illustrations, particularly of the Leicestershire collections of his father-in-law, and 'An Appendix to the History of Reculver and Herne' (1787) to Nichols's 'Bibliotheca Topographica Britannica'. From 1783 until 1803, he was also curate of St Bride's, Fleet Street, where the vicar was non-resident, and in 1789 was incorporated MA at St John's College, Cambridge, and became chaplain to Earl Paulet. In 1795 he was appointed both priest-in-ordinary of his majesty's Chapel Royal and a minor canon of Westminster Abbey. 
With Dr John Coakley Lettsom, the successful Quaker physician and philanthropist, Pridden was co-founder in 1791 and for many years honorary secretary of the Sea-bathing Infirmary at Margate, Kent. He designed the buildings erected in 1796 which included 'provision for patients to sleep on verandahs in the open air, a thing previously unheard of in hospital architecture' (Abraham, 286). He resigned his Essex livings in 1797 on becoming vicar of Caddington, Bedfordshire, where, acting as his own surveyor and architect, he rebuilt the vicarage in 1812 (dem. 1970). He was finally rector of the united parishes of St George's, Botolph Lane, and St Botolph without Bishopsgate, London, from 1812 until his death. 
Pridden's extensive knowledge of architecture and interest in civil engineering found expression in a complex scheme which he submitted to the corporation of London to connect the tops of Snow Hill and Holborn Hill by a bridge spanning a projected road linking Blackfriars and the Great North Road. Though considered prohibitively expensive at the time, the project was eventually realized as the Holborn Viaduct. In 1811 he proposed a more effective method for draining the fens at the Bedford Level. 
Pridden's greatest antiquarian achievement, assisted by John Calder, was the continuation of the index and glossary, begun by Archdeacon John Strachey, to the 'Rolls of Parliament'. 'This laborious task... occupied the last 30 years of his life, broke down his health, and embittered his existence' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 8.677). It was completed after 1825 by Edward Upham and published in 1832. 
Pridden's wife died in 1815; he later married Anne (died 1847), eldest daughter of Robert Pickwoad of London. He died at the age of sixty-seven on 5 April 1825 at his house in Fleet Street and was buried on 12 April at St Mary's, Islington, beside his first wife. There were no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 22781


Pride, Thomas, appointed Lord Pride under the protectorate (d. 1658), parliamentarian army officer and regicide, was the son of William Pride, yeoman of Pedwell Manor, in the parish of Ashcot, Somerset. On 30 January 1622 he was apprenticed to Thomas Bradway, citizen and haberdasher of London, for seven years. He was duly made free of the company on 24 April 1629, and less than four months later married Elizabeth, daughter of the ironmonger Robert Tomson of St Botolph, London. Rather than practise as a haberdasher, however, he took up the lucrative trade of brewing. His business prospered, so that by the 1640s he owned, in partnership with a Maior Yates, two profitable brewhouses in Surrey, and possibly a third in Edinburgh. In August 1647 he affixed his name prominently to a petition of seventy-six brewers to the House of Lords demanding the elimination of the excise tax on beer and ale, on the grounds that they were 'the cheapest food, and cheifest nourishment' of the poor; that the price of malt had reached 'extraordinarie' heights, and that the brewers faced 'utter ruine and destruction' if they continued to be taxed on their product (Parl. Arch., main papers, 24 Aug 1647). The Lords turned a deaf ear to these entreaties. 
When war broke out between king and parliament, Pride contributed 'one browne horse with three whyte feete', along with its rider and equipage, to the parliamentary war effort (TNA: PRO, SP 28/131, pt. 3, fol. 1). As a member of the Society of the Artillery Garden he enlisted with the rank of ensign in the Red regiment of London trained bands. By September 1642 he had been given a captaincy in the new regiment of Colonel Henry Barclay in the earl of Essex's army. In December 1643 he rose to the rank of major in the Orange auxiliaries and later in Essex's infantry when it was forced to surrender at Lostwithiel in Cornwall. In March 1645, at the foundation of the New Model Army, the House of Lords attempted to alter Sir Thomas Fairfax's proposed list of officers by demoting the radical Major Cowell to captain, and restoring Pride to the rank of major in Barclay's regiment. The Lords' attempt failed; Cowell stayed a major, but Pride none the less soon found himself lieutenant-colonel of the regiment, now under Colonel Edward Harley. Since Harley was absent during the 1645 campaign, Pride was the effective commander of the regiment. At Naseby he played a critical role as leader of one of the three infantry regiments that were held in reserve behind the front line. The king's infantry rolled back their New Model counterparts until they fell behind the reserves. Major-General Philip Skippon had already been gravely wounded; however, thanks to Pride, Hammond, and Rainborowe the reserves did not panic but halted the royalist advance, and helped to save the day for parliament. Pride also distinguished himself at the storming of Bristol, where his regiment was among the first to scale the city walls, and also at the storm of Dartmouth, when his men were the first to enter the town from the north. 
When the New Model Army revolted against parliament's attempt to disband it without its arrears in the spring of 1647, Pride was one of the officers most militant in asserting the right of soldiers to petition for redress of their grievances. He drew his regiment to a rendezvous, had the soldiers' petition read at the head of the regiment, threatened a fellow officer that any who declined to sign the soldiers' petition 'should be blotted out of the rolls and excluded and counted as no members of the army' ('Portland MSS', 1.418), and extracted 1100 signatures (virtually the whole regiment). His conservative presbyterian colonel, Edward Harley, complained of his activities in parliament, and Pride was summoned to the bar of the House of Commons to explain his conduct. Undeterred and defiant, he next took part in a high-level delegation that laid a 'Petition and Vindication of the Officers' before the House of Commons on 27 April. In July he also helped draft the New Model's articles of impeachment against the eleven members who were viewed as its mortal enemies in the House of Commons. When one-quarter of the officers withdrew from the army out of loyalty to parliament Pride replaced Harley as colonel. 
In the second civil war Pride served under Cromwell in the Welsh campaign, his regiment fighting 'desperately' at Chepstow (Rushworth, 6.1118). He was also at the battle of Preston, where his regiment played a secondary role. In late September he was at the Scottish border, blocking up Tweedmouth and blowing up the guard house that the royalists had built on the bridge. His regiment joined with Richard Deane's and Thomas Harrison's to present a petition demanding that parliament should proceed against the king 'as an enemy to the kingdom' ('Severall Petitions Presented to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax', 1648, 8). It was also part of the 7000-strong force that occupied London at the beginning of December 1648. Although David Underdown has questioned whether Pride was 'anything more than the obedient instrument of a policy dictated by others' (Underdown, 141), he was quite possibly a member of the subcommittee of six officers and MPs who, on the night of 5 December, made the arrangements for the purging of the House of Commons of its conservative or presbyterian members. There is no doubt about his enthusiasm for the policy concerted by Ireton and others, for it was Pride who on the morning of the 6th set a guard around the house. He then stood on the stairs leading to the entrance, flourishing his list of members to be secured. Presently Thomas, Lord Grey of Groby arrived to help him with identifications. About forty-five members were arrested and four times that number were secluded or stayed away. Pride carried out the political cleansing with courtesy except in the case of the lawyer William Prynne. The cantankerous member for Newport tried to force his way past, but Pride with the help of his soldiers pushed him down the stairs and hustled him away to nearby Queen's Court. Prynne is said to have demanded, as he was being carried off, 'By what authority and commission, and for what cause, they did thus violently seize on and pull him down from the House', to which Pride and Sir Hardress Waller pointed to their soldiers with swords drawn, muskets at the ready, and matches alight, answering 'there was their commission' ('The Parliamentary or Constitutional History of England', 18.449). This violence against the House of Commons became known as Pride's Purge. The colonel and his regiment were richly rewarded for their services. Twelve days after the purge the committee of the army ordered that he should be paid $2600 on account for his regiment. During December 1648 and January 1649 warrants totalling $7691 were issued for the pay of his regiment. Hardly any other regiment was as generously treated at the climax of the English revolution (TNA: PRO, SP 28/57, fols. 350'v', 462, SP28/58, fols. 65, 244, 278'v'). 
In January, Pride was appointed to the high court of justice that was created to try Charles I for treason against the people of England. He attended all but two of the planning meetings of the court in the painted chamber, as well as every one of the four public sessions of the court in Westminster Hall, and signed the death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. Beside his signature he affixed a seal bearing the impress of a chevron inter three animals' heads erased. His regiment was stationed in London for the rest of the year as a guard for parliament, while Pride himself was elected to the London common council in December. 
Pride's election to the common council foreshadowed an intense involvement in local politics which lasted for the better part of a decade. A member of John Duppa's separatist church, he had a dense network of personal contacts within the City. In late 1652 he was implicated in a scheme for the overthrow of the oligarchy which controlled the Saddlers' Company, and in another to replace Prideaux's lucrative postal system by a cheaper and more frequent service. In 1653 he was appointed to the committee to look into the Savoy Hospital and Ely House to ensure 'that only such men may be admitted as are proved to be deserving of relief' ('CSP dom.', '1652-3', 363). In the same year he was one of a group of sequestrators who petitioned for a prolongation of their powers, and for a cure to be provided for St Bartholomew-the-Less. In 1656 he was one of three army officers who were asked by the council of state to examine a petition from sick and maimed soldiers in the Savoy. Finally, he got himself named a governor of St Bartholomew's Hospital, and attended several of their meetings. In 1655-6 he was high sheriff of Surrey, and a commissioner for securing the peace of London, in which posts he continued his campaign, dating back to 1653, for the suppression of cock-fighting, bear- and bull-baiting, and 'playing for prizes by fencers' ('CSP dom.', '1652-3', 306) in Southwark. After the Restoration he became a figure of fun to royalist wits, who mocked his hostility to these popular entertainments. 
From his political base in London, Pride also involved himself in national issues. In August 1649 he presented on behalf of the army's council of officers a petition to parliament calling for the repeal of all statutes and ordinances 'whereby many consciencious people are molested, and the propagation of the gospel hindered', the suppression of 'open acts of prophaneness, as drunkenness, swearing, and uncleanness', the release of political prisoners, and the reform of the law ('Kingdomes Faithfull and Impartial Scout', 10-17 Aug 1649, 224). Two months later the council of officers, wary of the continuing threat from the religious and Leveller left, decided to meet once a week to work out plans for law reform and the abolition of tithes. Again Pride was prominent in the radical agitation on these questions. Indeed, he stood at the Commons door on 26 December 1651 during the debate on law reform as a mute reminder to MPs of the fate they might expect if they failed to implement desired changes. The vehemence of his feeling towards the legal profession is further reflected in a comment he is reported to have made in Westminster Hall in 1652 'that it would never be well with England until... mercenary lawyers' gownes were hung up by the Scotch-trophies' (N. Burt, 'A New Yeers Gift for England', 1653, 15). 
Satisfaction for the state's financial creditors was another issue in which Pride took a keen interest. As a revolutionary insider he had had no difficulty obtaining redemption of his own debts. In December 1647 he had received $100 towards his arrears of pay, while in 1652 he used his arrears debentures totalling $1418, as well as debentures purchased from the men of his own regiment, to acquire Nonesuch Great Park (also known as Worcester Park) in Surrey for $11,591. In May 1652 parliament further rewarded him with a grant of forfeited Scottish lands worth $500 per annum. He was briefly associated with Samuel Chidley in the latter's agitation for payment of the state's creditors. However, when Chidley, in December 1652, attempted to claim Pride's support for his petition against the Rump's requirement that holders of public faith bills should 'double' (advance the same amount again in cash) in order to be paid off, the colonel issued an angry disclaimer, and the two went their separate ways. 
Pride sought profit from the revolution in another way. In November 1650 he and several business associates signed a lucrative contract with the navy commissioners to provide 'good, sweet, wholesome and serviceable provisions' to the fleet (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A.216, pp. 261-2). They were to victual it at sea and in harbour at the ports of London, Dover, Harwich, Portsmouth, Plymouth, Liverpool, and Chatham, as well as Leith (Scotland) and Kinsale (Ireland). In July 1653, however, there was 'great complaint of victuals, especially of beer and water'. Pride was forced to condemn the beer on two ships and 'promise a better supply' ('CSP dom., 1653-4', 9). Before that could be procured, $1600 worth of his own beer had been dumped overboard as undrinkable. He and the other victuallers now wanted out of the contract, and petitioned the lord protector to that effect. Cromwell did not yield to their request until October 1654, yet for some reason the navy commissioners extended the contract to August 1655. 
Pride also begged to be forgiven his arrears of excise, dating from the years 1643 to 1645, when he was 'absent in the army' ('CSP dom.', '1654', 426), and amounting to $5580. The excise commissioners opposed Pride's petition on account of the precedent it would create for other merchants who were in arrears. Although he was based mainly in London during the 1650s, Pride did see military action. In 1650 he accompanied Cromwell to Scotland, commanded a brigade at Dunbar, and fought the following year at the battle of Worcester. 
Pride was elected to only one parliament during the 1650s, that of 1656, and he never served on the council of state. A committed republican, he was reportedly kept in England in 1654 while his regiment was sent to Scotland because the protector distrusted him. Nevertheless, on 17 January 1656 Cromwell knighted him, performing the ceremony with a faggot stick, according to Ludlow. Little over a year later, however, he played a leading part in the agitation among the officers against making Cromwell king. 'He shall not' ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 2.25) was his blunt response to the report that Cromwell was thinking of accepting the crown. He then set about to organize the petition which changed the protector's mind. Yet curiously, after the passing of 'The humble petition and advice', he was pleased to be appointed to Cromwell's other house. 'He hath now changed his principles and his mind with the times' was the sour remark of a republican pamphleteer: 'the noble lawyers will be glad of his company and friendship, for that there is now no fear of his hanging up their gowns by the Scottish colours in Westminster Hall' ('A second narrative', 381). Shortly after the death of Oliver, Pride signed the proclamation of Richard Cromwell as new protector. 
Pride died shortly thereafter, on 23 October 1658, and was buried at Nonesuch on 2 November. According to a London newsbook, his last words were 'that he was very sorry for these three nations, whom he saw in a most sad and deplorable condition' ('Weekly Intelligencer', 1-8 Nov 1659, 212). His will confirmed the picture of a convinced puritan, who bequeathed his soul 'into the hands of my pretious Redeemer, Lord Jesus Christ, being perswaded by the faith he hath wrought in me, that he will wash it thoroughly from all its defilements and present it to his father and my father as his own purchas'. It also revealed a man who by the end of his life had become wealthy, suspicious, and perhaps quarrelsome. He warned his sons William and Samuel not to practise 'fraude, or cousenage' in their stewardship of his major property, Nonesuch Great Park. He named his 'faithfull and loveinge wife', Elizabeth his executrix, but allowed her 'no more then foure hundred pounds p. annum' out of the park. He threatened to cut her off from all benefits if she disposed of any part of her interest in his estate. Previously he had settled the manor of Great Stoughton, Huntingdonshire, on his first son, Thomas, as well as half the partnership of his two brewhouses at Kingston, Surrey. His son Joseph was to be paid $4000 from the brewhouses when he reached the age of twenty-one, but if Thomas and the other partner tried to block this bequest, the entire ownership of the brewhouses was to be turned over to Joseph. To his daughter Elizabeth and her husband, Robert, son of Colonel Valentine Wauton, he left only $5 each (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/283, fols. 213'v'-214'v'). 
At the Restoration, Pride's estates were confiscated and Nonesuch Great Park was restored to the crown. His carcase, which was voted to be exhumed, drawn to Tyburn, hung up in its coffin, and buried under the gallows, along with those of Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw, seems in the event to have escaped that indignity. 
Pride was one of the fearless revolutionaries of the New Model Army who were instrumental in winning the war against the king, bringing him to judgment, and shaping the regime that came after him. No intellectual, he spoke little and wrote even less. But he was a radical puritan who knew his own mind, and did not shrink from imposing his views upon others. Remembered above all for the purge of parliament which bears his name, he also enjoyed a flourishing career as a merchant, in addition to enriching himself from the spoils of revolution. 


@@@@@


doc= 22782


Prideaux, Edmond (1601-1659), lawyer and politician, was born in September 1601 at Netherton, Devon, and baptized at Farway in the same county on 27 September, the second surviving son of Sir Edmund Prideaux, baronet ('c'.1555-1629), lawyer, and his second wife, Katherine, daughter of Piers Edgcumbe of Mount Edgcumbe, Cornwall. He was descended from an ancient family originally of Prideaux Castle, Cornwall. He entered the Inner Temple, where his father was an eminent lawyer, in 1615 and was called to the bar on 23 November 1623, where his practice was chiefly in chancery. He lived in Devon during the 1630s serving as a sewer commissioner and a JP. His first wife was Jane (1609/10-1629), daughter and heir of Henry Collins of Ottery St Mary, Devon; shortly after her death he married Margaret (died 1683), daughter and coheir of William Ivery of Cothay in Somerset. 
Prideaux was returned to the Long Parliament for Lyme Regis (which seat he held until his death), and forthwith took sides against the king. His subscription for the defence of parliament, in 1642, was $100. By his own side he was regarded as one of the persons best informed as to the state of feeling in the west of England. He was 'custos rotulorum' of Devon from 1646. Retained as a legal counsellor by the corporation of Exeter by 1642, he was recorder there from 1643, serving Bristol in the same capacity from 1647. On the national scene Prideaux attained prominence as a manager of first the 'war' then the independent interests, or parties. For three years, from 10 November 1643 until it was transferred to the custody of the speakers of the two houses, he was one of the commissioners in charge of the great seal of parliament, an office worth $1500 a year; as a mark of respect he was, by order of the House of Commons, called within the bar with precedence next after the solicitor-general. He had also been one of the commissioners appointed to negotiate with the king's commissioners at Uxbridge in January 1645. He fled parliament for the safety of the army in July 1647. On 12 October 1648 he was nominated by the Commons as solicitor-general, the Lords accepting his nomination on 18 October, and an ordinance passed both houses accordingly on 24 November. He avoided acting in the king's trial, but remained busy in the House of Commons throughout December 1648 and January 1649. On 9 April 1649 he was appointed attorney-general, and remained in that office for the rest of his life. He sat on the third and fifth councils of state during the Commonwealth, polling a respectable fifty-three votes in the December 1652 election. 
From 1644 to 1653 Prideaux was intimately and profitably connected with the postal service. The question of the validity of patents for the conduct of posts was raised in both houses of parliament in connection with the sequestration, in 1640, of Thomas Witherings's office, granted in 1633. Prideaux served as chairman of the committee appointed in 1642 upon the rates of inland letters. In 1644 he was appointed, by resolution of both houses, 'master of the posts, messengers, and couriers' ('JHC', 3, 1642-4, 619), and he continued at intervals, as directed by the House of Commons or otherwise, to manage the postal service. He was ordered to arrange a post to Hull and York, and also to Lyme Regis, in 1644; in 1649 to Chester, Holyhead, and Ireland, and also to Bideford; in 1650 to Kendal, and in 1651 to Carlisle. By 1649 he is said to have established a regular weekly service throughout the kingdom. Rumour assigned to his office an income of $15,000 a year -- at any rate it was so profitable as to excite rivalry. 'Encouraged by the opinion of the judges given in the House of Lords in the case of the Earl of Warwick 'v'. Witherings, 9 July 1646, that the clause in Witherings's patent for restraint of carrying letters was void', Oxenbridge, Thomson, and others endeavoured to carry on a cheap and speedy post of their own, and Prideaux met them by a variety of devices, some in the way of ordinary competition, others in the shape of abuses of power and breaches of the law ('CSP dom.', '1654', 22). The common council of London endeavoured in 1650 to organize the carriage of letters, but Prideaux brought the matter before parliament, which referred the question to the council of state, on 21 March 1650. On the same day the council made an order that Prideaux should take care of the business of the inland post, and be accountable for the profits quarterly; a committee was appointed to confer with him as to the management of the post. After various claims had been considered, parliament, on 21 March 1652, resolved that the office of postmaster ought to be in the sole disposal of the house, and the Irish and the Scotch committee, to which the question was referred, reported in favour of letting contracts for the carriage of letters. Prideaux contended that the office of postmaster and the carrying of letters were two distinct things, and that the resolution of parliament of 1652 referred to the former only, but eventually all previous grants were held to be set aside by that resolution, and contracts were let for the inland and foreign mails to John Manley in 1653. The loss entailed affected Prideaux little; his legal practice continued to be large and lucrative, being worth $5000 a year. Among several acquisitions of real estate, he bought Forde Abbey, at Thornecombe, on the Devon/Dorset border, and built a large house there. On 31 May 1658 he was made a baronet, ostensibly in reward for voluntarily undertaking the maintenance of thirty foot soldiers in Ireland. He died, leaving a great fortune, on 19 August 1659 and was buried in the chapel of Forde Abbey. He appears to have been a sound chancery lawyer and highly esteemed by his party as a man of religion as well as learning. He was survived by his second wife and a son by that marriage who was to take part in Monmouth's rebellion. 


@@@@@


doc= 22783


Prideaux, Frederick (1817-1891), lawyer, fifth son of Walter Prideaux of Plymouth, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Joseph Kingston of Kingsbridge, Devon, was born at 1 Portland Square, Plymouth, on 27 April 1817. His father, a partner in the private bank of Kingston and Prideaux, was a descendant of Humphrey Prideaux, dean of Norwich, but was raised as a Quaker. Frederick Prideaux was educated at the Plymouth grammar school, at a private school at Egloshayle, near Wadebridge, Cornwall, and under a private tutor. He was instructed in law by his elder brother, Walter Prideaux, of the firm of Lane and Prideaux, solicitors, London, and by the eminent Quaker conveyancer John Hodgkin. On 26 May 1834 he was admitted a student at Lincoln's Inn, where he was called to the bar on 27 January 1840. At Clifton on 14 April 1853 he married Fanny Ash, a poet and the second daughter of Richard Ball of Portland House, Kingsdown, Gloucestershire. 
After practising for some years in London, Prideaux moved to Bath in 1858. He returned to London in 1865, and in 1866 obtained the post of reader in real and personal property to the inns of court, which he resigned because of ill health in 1875. He afterwards lived successively at Torquay, Gatcombe, and Taunton. In his youth Prideaux abandoned Quakerism for the Church of England, but in later life he became attached to the Baptist society. He was the author of a work on conveyancing that saw a number of subsequent editions. He died in Taunton on 21 November 1891. He was survived by his wife, who died in September 1894. 


@@@@@


doc= 22784


Prideaux, Humphrey (1648-1724), dean of Norwich and author, was born on 3 May 1648 at Padstow, Cornwall, third son of Edmund Prideaux ('bap'. 1606, died 1683) of Padstow Place and his wife, Bridget ('bap'. 1620, died 1690), daughter of John Moyle of Bake in St Germans and his wife, Admonition. He was first educated locally at Liskeard and Bodmin schools. On 19 November 1664 his uncle Sir William Morice, then secretary of state, recommended him to Richard Busby at Westminster School with the hope that 'Nature hath in good measure disposed him for Learning, and that his Country-rudiments will be no prejudice to his progresse therein' (BL, Add. MS 28104, fol. 11). He was chosen king's scholar at Westminster in 1665; then on 20 April 1668 commended by the king to the electors of Christ Church, Oxford. He was admitted to Christ Church on 26 October 1668 (matriculating on 11 December) and tutored by Arthur Squibb. He graduated BA on 22 June 1672, MA on 29 April 1675, BD on 15 November 1682, and DD on 8 June 1686; he was praelector in 1673, and in 1680 praelector graecae. In 1676 Lord Chancellor Finch asked him to tutor his undergraduate son Charles, and through Finch's patronage Prideaux became sinecure rector of Llandewi Felffre, Pembrokeshire (1677), rector of St Clement's, Oxford (1679), and prebend of Norwich (installed 15 August 1681); also, thanks to Finch's successor, Lord Guilford, rector of Bladon-cum-Woodstock, Oxfordshire (1683). 
Dean Fell employed Prideaux as an editor. On 27 September 1674 he complained to his student friend and correspondent John Ellis, 'I am now groaneing under the oppression of two or three heavy burdens which Mr. Dean hath layed upon me.' One was completion of Edmund Chilmead's edition of John Malalas -- 'a horrid musty foolish booke' -- eventually published in 1691. Another was a catalogue of the Arundel, Selden, and other marbles, from which (in particular the Parian marble) Prideaux designed an annotated 'table of all Greek chronology... the most methodicall and correct of any that have yet been set forth' ('Letters', 22-3). But 'Marmora Oxoniensia' (1676), hastily completed and depending largely on earlier scholarship, was, as Hearne noted in 1719, 'wonderfully defective, and what the Dr. was now asham'd of, at least as to the transcribing part' (T. Hearne, 'Remarks and Collections', vol. 7, 1906, 6). Like Busby at Westminster, Fell valued the Near Eastern languages, and Prideaux was further encouraged in those studies by 'the more than ordinary helpe' he hoped to receive from Edward Pococke ('Letters', 43). In 1677 a letter described Prideaux as 'Hebrew reader in our college' (Bill, 206), and in 1679 he published Moses Maimonides' 'De jure pauperis et peregrini', with Latin translation and notes. Prideaux's dedication to Finch links the lord chancellor with Maimonides by supposing English municipal law to have Mosaic origins. 
On 9 July 1685 Prideaux announced his resolution to leave Oxford and marry: 'I little thought I should ever come to this; but abundance of motives have overpowred me' ('Letters', 144). On 16 February 1686 he married Bridget, the only child of Anthony and Mary Bockenham of Helmingham, Suffolk, who brought him $3000. Having exchanged his Bladon rectory for Saham Toney, Norfolk, and settled there 'in great content', he refused the Hebrew professorship offered him on Pococke's death in 1691 -- 'I nauseate that learning,' he wrote, 'and I nauseate Christ Church' -- but later regretted his decision (ibid., 147, 150). 
Prideaux was not a retiring man: his correspondence shows him concerned with his preferment and with church and local politics. He was active against Catholics (and later Jacobites) and in mid-1688 published letters he had written to dissuade a Norfolk convert -- 'The Validity of the Orders of the Church of England'. He preached against the Catholic mass, frustrated the reading of James II's declaration of indulgence, and armed his servants in support of William of Orange's landing. As archdeacon of Suffolk, installed on 21 December 1688, he used his visitation the following May to urge subscription to the new oaths, only three incumbents refusing. He advocated the prayer-book changes for dissenters that were never brought forward when convocation met on 21 November 1689; but he feared a misunderstanding of the 'Toleration Act' would 'turn halfe the nation into downe right atheisme' ('Letters', 154). Among other questions, he took up that of clandestine marriage and wrote for Bishop Richard Kidder of Bath and Wells 'The Case of Clandestine Marriages' (1691), which argued that the bill before parliament was needlessly severe and the existing canons, if enforced, quite sufficient. 
In 1694 Prideaux gave up Saham, which he found unhealthy, to live in Norwich; in 1697 he acquired the neighbouring vicarage of Trowse and held it until 1709. His superiors in Norwich were uncongenial: the 'close designeing' Bishop John Moore and the 'horrid sot' Dean Henry Fairfax ('Letters', 148, 160). However, he succeeded Fairfax as dean in 1702 (installed on 8 June) and might have succeeded Moore in 1707, except that he thought himself too old and supported Charles Trimnell's elevation instead. 
Prideaux's practical churchmanship led him to write 'The Original and Right of Tithes', first published at Norwich in 1710. His main fame as a writer has rested on two frequently reprinted works, his 'Life of Mahomet' (1697) and his 'Connection' (1716-18). The former's title states its purpose -- 'The True Nature of Imposture Fully Displayed in the Life of Mahomet' -- and the life itself is followed by a long 'Letter to the 'Deists'' identifying seven marks of imposture chargeable on 'Mahometism' but not on Christianity. Prideaux's learned footnotes and bibliography of thirty-six Arabic authorities imply original research in manuscript sources; but, as P. M. Holt shows, everything derives from printed editions (with Latin translations) or citations and references in Christian writers. '[Edward] Pococke above all provided a mine of information in his 'Specimen historiae Arabum' [1650].... An impressive array of Arabic authorities in a footnote usually implies the incorporation of material from Pococke's notes in the 'Specimen'' (Holt, 293-4). Prideaux's 'Old and New Testament Connected' is a much larger work, covering the history of the Jews from 747 BC to AD 33 in two parts, divided at 292 BC, when the 'Old Testament' canon was complete. Here too Prideaux had, as his preface acknowledges, one of the great seventeenth-century scholars to guide him, James Ussher in his 'Annales veteris et novi testamenti' (1650-54). However, unlike Ussher (or Pococke), Prideaux aimed to make things easy for the general reader by writing clearly and fully in English, with translated quotations and without exotic words; so the 'Connection', while outdated in execution and perhaps conception, continued to be printed into the mid-nineteenth century. Two Gaudy orations on Prideaux at Christ Church, in 1790 and 1863, are evidence of his work's continuing currency. 
In his preface to the 'Connection' Prideaux describes himself as disabled from preaching. In 1710, when seriously afflicted with the stone, he was told 'I cannot bear that operation, but that in all likelyhood I must dy under it' ('Letters', 205). In fact he was operated upon successfully, but afterwards his case was unfortunately managed. Although ill and depending on an amanuensis, his last letter to Ellis, of 29 September 1722, shows him concerned with the usual matters: an unconscientious clergyman, a local election, a Jacobite, and a new session of parliament ('Letters', 206-7). Prideaux died in the deanery, Norwich, on 1 November 1724 and was buried in the nave of Norwich Cathedral. In his will, dated 4 August 1714, he left his whole estate to his first child, Edmund. He had already given his oriental books to Clare College, Cambridge, in 1721. 


@@@@@


doc= 22785


Prideaux, John (1578-1650), bishop of Worcester, was born at Stowford, Devon, on 17 September 1578, one of twelve children and the fourth son of John Prideaux, farmer, and his wife, Agnes (died 1625/6). The death of his father in 1592 or 1593 left resources stretched and the latter part of Prideaux's early education, probably at Ashburton grammar school, was subsidized by Lady Fowell. After failing to become parish clerk of Ugborough, Prideaux walked to Oxford and entered Exeter College as a servant. He matriculated on 14 October 1596 and was tutored by William Helme. 
Prideaux graduated BA on 31 January 1600, became fellow of Exeter College in June 1601, and proceeded MA on 11 May 1603. Subsequently he was appointed chaplain to Henry, prince of Wales, and was thereby dispensed from some requirements in taking his BD on 6 May 1611. Shortly before Prince Henry died he secured Prideaux's election on 4 April 1612 to the rectorship of Exeter. As a result Prideaux took his DD early, on 30 June 1612. In his theses he denied that grace sufficient for salvation was granted to all; that those reborn to grace might lose it; and that sacraments confer grace 'ex opere operato'. In the same year Prideaux became chaplain to King James, a post in which he continued under Charles I. 
Prideaux shortly after married Anne, daughter of Dean William Goodwin of Christ Church, and granddaughter through her mother of the Marian martyr Rowland Taylor. Of their nine children, two daughters survived their father. Anne Prideaux died on 11 August 1627 and in August the next year Prideaux entered a childless marriage with Mary (died 1666), daughter of Sir Thomas Reynell of Ogwel, Devon. 
Fuller calls Prideaux a generous almsgiver, but it was ecclesiastical pluralism which made this possible: with his headship of Exeter College came the vicarage of Kidlington, Oxfordshire; in 1614 he obtained the vicarage of Bampton, Oxfordshire, which he resigned to his son-in-law, William Hodges, in 1634; in 1617 he received a Christ Church canonry in reversion and in 1620 the vicarage of Chalgrove, Oxfordshire, which he resigned to a miscreant brother-in-law in 1625; also in 1620 he became a canon of Salisbury. Nine years later he became rector of Ewelme, and soon after of Bladon-cum-Woodstock. 
Prideaux was famed as tutor and theologian before his rectorship, during which he enhanced the college's appeal to Calvinists at home and abroad, and numbers in residence increased. Some came after a period in the household of Bishop John Williams. There were distinguished Scots, such as James Hamilton, marquess of Hamilton from 1624, and Richard Spottiswood. Prideaux attracted John Sigismund Cluverius, James Casaubon, Sixtinus Amama, and other continental scholars. Archbishop Ussher dispatched a kinsman reclaimed from popery, James Dillon, who later returned to Catholicism. Wood noted that Exeter produced besides sound men 'many that did great mischief' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.271). Anthony Ashley Cooper, later first earl of Shaftesbury, was there from 1637. Prideaux had a pedagogue's penchant for punning and wordplay, in part mnemonic technique; Thomas Fuller spoke of his 'becoming festivity' ('Worthies', 1.279). He kept the well-born, some of whom were accommodated in his lodgings, on a loose rein and tolerated some indiscipline. Exeter men were prominent in 'coursing' or baiting rival colleges at academic exercises, and Laud induced Charles I to threaten implicated heads in 1631. 
By-products of Prideaux's arts tutoring were his widely used manuscript notes and published textbooks, notably 'Tabulae ad grammaticam Graecam introductoriae' (1607), 'Tyrocinium ad syllogismum legitimum contexendum' (1629), and 'Heptades logicae' (1639). John Aubrey was taught with Prideaux's logic at Trinity College in the early 1640s, and also used his notes on moral philosophy; he later praised these easy-to-memorize manuals. To improve college tuition Prideaux obtained from his kinsman Sir John Maynard endowment of a theological readership, and established another in Hebrew. 
Effective fund-raising enabled major building work, and even the hostile Peter Heylyn allowed that the college was transformed. Sir John Acton funded a new hall, Sir John Peryam new rector's lodgings, and George Hakewill a new chapel. Prideaux's sermon at the chapel consecration was published in 1625 and in 1631 he produced a survey of the altered college. Ever intolerant of opposition, he accepted in 1630 forged documentation of birthplace for a tied fellowship and expelled dissenting fellows. Petitions and appeals drew in Laud (as chancellor), the Star Chamber, and the king. The visitor, Bishop Joseph Hall of Exeter, censured Prideaux and reinstated the fellows. 
Prideaux was active in the university at large. William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, and chancellor, 1616-30, whom Prideaux called his 'Maecenas', nominated him vice-chancellor during four years, 1619-21 and 1624-6. In 1620 Prideaux high-handedly imposed a kinsman of the chancellor as principal of Jesus College over fellows' objections. In January 1626 he declared Sir Thomas Edmonds, recommended by Pembroke and Archbishop Abbot, MP for the university despite opposition at the election by supporters of Sir Francis Stewart. The latter appealed, and despite a skilful rebuttal, the vice-chancellor was summonsed by the committee of privilege and the election quashed. Prideaux vigorously asserted academic privileges against the city. When free to do so he courted popularity, backing in 1620 a demand by young masters to wear caps in congregation and convocation and securing Pembroke's assent. 
Laud's ascendancy banished Prideaux to sterile opposition. In a 1627 dispute at Wadham College the enemies of Laud, then bishop of Bath and Wells, sought unsuccessfully to undermine his visitatorial jurisdiction in the secular courts, and Prideaux, a member of Gray's Inn from 1625, was implicated. In 1630 he worked to elect as chancellor the deceased Pembroke's brother, Philip, instead of the victorious Laud. 
Since December 1615, however, Prideaux had been regius professor of divinity and he remained in control of theological teaching. Peter Heylyn observed that James I's 'Directions' for uprooting puritanism of 1617 had been thwarted because the then vice-chancellor was Prideaux's father-in-law ('Cyprianus Anglicus', 1668, 72). Prideaux responded to the 'Directions' by debating anti-Arminian points at Exeter College. 
Prideaux had a deep knowledge of continental writers, medieval and modern, protestant and Catholic. An eclectic rather than an original theologian, he was a skilful dialectician. He was a competent Hebrew scholar and always a promoter both of that language and of Arabic. Placing great emphasis on the Synod of Dort, and a consistent proponent of the absolute decree of reprobation, he was esteemed by non-Arminians and opponents of liberal or rational theology. Affirmation of the pope as Antichrist was central to his creed and he rejected the alternatives of Mohammed or the Turk, but he had reservations about extreme apocalyptic approaches. He assailed Richard Montague's 'Appello Caesarem' in 1625 and told students, contrary to the 'Directions', to apply themselves first to systematic catechism and only then to the fathers. Although prominent in collecting for distressed Calvinist ministers abroad, he rejected being labelled as a Calvinist. Always hard to pin down, he supported episcopacy but excused foreigners unable to enjoy it. He believed in visible pre-Reformation congregations of protestant hue but claimed that they had remained under legitimate bishops and pastors. 
Prideaux used less measured expressions in the heat of public disputations: mature opponents were flayed by sarcasm -- his rebuke of Christopher Potter at his doctoral disputation in 1627 rankled ever after with the provost of Queen's College. When Gilbert Sheldon, later warden of All Souls, denied in his 1628 DD disputation that the pope was Antichrist, he was assailed by Prideaux who said the pontiff was his debtor and likely to award him a cardinal's hat. Prideaux's most celebrated opponent was Peter Heylyn, a dialectically sharp protege of Laud, who provoked him and then reported incautious expressions. At his BD exercises in 1627 Heylyn examined the visibility of the church. Prideaux, addressing jibes to the youthful gallery, spoke sufficiently loosely to be represented as asserting pre-Reformation visibility in conventicles. In considering church authority at his 1633 DD disputation, Heylyn drove Prideaux to speak as if deprecating church authority. 
1631 was a black year for Prideaux. Laud rebuked him for failing to deliver the statutory number of lectures, and again in the king's name for allowing an inconvenient Act question. Charles I considered dismissing him for his implication in efforts to thwart new statutes, entangled with court intrigue and anti-Arminian sermons by young men who flouted the vice-chancellor's jurisdiction. Laud, however, after vigorous prosecution, unexpectedly sought leniency and Prideaux escaped with a reprimand, probably after intervention by Philip, earl of Pembroke. Harassment by his ascendant enemies continued in 1634 when Heylyn published a translation of his '1622 Act' lecture, 'The Doctrine of the Sabbath', to embarrass the professor with puritanical supporters and Vice-Chancellor Brian Duppa had a sermon by Francis Mason on church authority reprinted to undermine Prideaux's influence in lectures. Meanwhile Prideaux had published nothing new since collections of his lectures and Act orations in 1625/6. He had complained to Ussher in 1628 that supervision hindered printing sound theology. For fear of Laud's spies Prideaux refused open support to John Durie's promotion of international protestant unity. The content of a set of sermons he published in 1637 got him into trouble and he must have been under considerable pressure from the archbishop when he tamely approved in that year Chillingworth's 'Religion of Protestants', the tenor of which was hateful to him. However, there were occasional flashes of spirit as when in 1636 he criticized adulatory language in the university's letter thanking Laud for new statutes. In 1640 he backed Laud's enemy, Sir Nathaniel Brent, to be a university MP. 
Prideaux's career revived with the fall of Laud, and the new chancellor, Philip Herbert, nominated him vice-chancellor in 1641. He struggled to balance loyalties to king and chancellor. Obeying royal directions, and raising money for Charles, he seems none the less to have acquiesced in the protestation oath in early 1642. He accepted Pembroke's imposition in March 1642 of a lay lawyer, Giles Sweit, as commissary to exercise judicial functions from which parliament had seemingly debarred a clerical vice-chancellor. Infuriated fellow heads later censured his accounts for unwarranted spending, especially on Sweit's commission. 
On 22 November 1641 the king, at the marquess of Hamilton's urging, made Prideaux bishop of Worcester to assuage religious opposition. Consecrated at Westminster in December, he seems to have been absent when most of the bishops incurred impeachment and, despite voting against removing bishops from the Lords, he had sufficient credit with the Commons to be approved Worcestershire representative to the assembly of divines. His fund-raising for the king as vice-chancellor, however, provoked parliament to order his arrest on 12 July 1642. By then Prideaux had left Oxford for Worcester. Although 'almost grown to the Chair, he had sate so long and close therein' (Lloyd, 536) he was replaced as professor by Robert Sanderson on 19 July. Prideaux resigned as rector of Exeter College on 3 August. 
According to Wood, the royalist Bishop Prideaux excommunicated the king's enemies. In 1643 he headed a parliamentary list of Worcestershire delinquents to be sequestrated and the following year his eldest son, William, died a colonel at Marston Moor. At the surrender of Worcester, Prideaux helped calm military hotheads. Petitioning the Lords on 24 September 1646 he claimed that he had no private means on which to survive the sequestration of his bishopric. On 25 December the Commons allowed bail to Prideaux, then in custody of the serjeant-at-arms, and granted him his books and manuscripts providing he stayed within 20 miles of London. Later he was permitted to live with his son-in-law, Henry Sutton, at Bredon rectory in Worcestershire, where he was allowed 4's'. 6died a week for his support. He visited Oxford about 1648, probably to publish 'Viginti-duae lectiones de totidem religionis capitibus', a collection of his Latin theological works. His important 'Fasciculus controversiarum theologicarum' appeared in 1649. 
Prideaux died of a fever at Bredon on 29 July 1650. 'Such was the number and quality of persons attending his funeral' there on 16 August that 'such as deny 'Bishops' to be 'Peers', would have conceived this 'Bishop' a 'Prince'' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 1.280). An ornate and adulatory Latin sermon was delivered. In his will of 20 June, Prideaux declared that he died 'firmely beleevinge and houldinge the Doctrine Worshipp and Discipline established and professed in the Church of England, in the raigne of Queene Elizabeth King James and the beginninge of the raigne of the late Kinge Charles' (Butcher, 24). He bequeathed his wife bonds for $1000 owed by her family and $100 in gold, as well as other goods. To Henry Sutton he left leasehold property adjoining Exeter College. He divided his library between his two sons-in-law, Sutton and William Hodges, joint executors and residuary legatees. Stories that he sold his library to support himself are evidently exaggerated: more than 600 of his books survive in Worcester Cathedral Library. 
A number of Prideaux's works were published posthumously during the interregnum. In 1651 there appeared his 'Scholasticae theologiae syntagma mnemonicum' and his 'Conciliorum synopsis'. Notes left to his daughters on the use of common prayer were printed as 'Euchologia' (1655), and a work on conscience written for his wife appeared in 1656. His collected 'Hypomnemata logica, rhetorica, physica, metaphysica, pneumatica, ethica, politica, oeconomica', tutorial notes for undergraduates, reached the press in 1656, and 'Manuductio ad theologiam polemicam' the following year. 




@@@@@


doc= 22786


Prideaux, John (bap. 1720?, d. 1759), army officer, was the second son of Sir John Prideaux, sixth baronet (1695-1766), of Netherton Hall, near Honiton, Devon, and his wife, Anne (died 1767), the eldest daughter of John Vaughan, first Viscount Lisburne. He was probably the John Prideaux baptized at Sutcombe, Devon, on 21 September 1720. On 17 July 1739 he was appointed ensign in the 3rd foot guards (later the Scots Guards); he was adjutant of his battalion at Dettingen (27 July 1743), and became lieutenant-colonel of his regiment on 24 February 1748. On 24 November 1746, at St George's, Mayfair, Westminster, he married Elizabeth, the daughter of Colonel Edward Rolt and the sister of Sir Edward Baytum-Rolt, bt, of Spy Park, Wiltshire; they had three sons and two daughters. She was described by a nineteenth-century descendant as 'a worldly, heartless, extravagant woman' ('N&Q', 8th ser., 9, 1896, 85) who played little part in her children's upbringing. 
On 20 October 1758 Prideaux was appointed colonel of the 55th foot, in succession to George Augustus Howe, third Viscount Howe (1725?-1758), killed at Ticonderoga. In 1759, during the Seven Years' War, William Pitt, the secretary of state, instructed General Jeffrey Amherst 
(later Baron Amherst; 1717-1797)
, commander in America, that, while Wolfe attacked Quebec, attempts should be made to invade Canada via Ticonderoga and Crown Point, and that at the same time he should undertake any other operations to weaken the enemy without detriment to the main task of the expedition. Amherst decided to attempt the capture of Fort Niagara, and entrusted the task to Prideaux, then brigadier-general, who had just arrived, appointing Sir William Johnson (1715-1774) his second in command. Prideaux was to ascend the Mohawk River with 5000 troops, regulars and New York provincials, together with Native Americans drawn from the Five Nations under Johnson, to leave a strong garrison at Fort Stanwix, the great portage, descend the Onondega, leaving part of his force under Colonel Frederick Haldimand (1718-1791) at Oswego, and to attack Niagara with the rest. Prideaux reached Oswego by the middle of June, rebuilt the fort, and on 1 July started for Niagara. Fort Niagara, on the site of a former post, was a strong modern fort, recently rebuilt by the French, commanded by Captain Pouchot, and garrisoned by part of the French regiment of Bearn. Prideaux arrived before it on 6 July 1759 and began siege operations. The British engineers were so incompetent -- a highland officer called them 'fools and blockheads' (Parkman, 448) -- that, to Prideaux's disgust, the first approaches were completely swept by the French fire and had to be constructed anew. On 19 July 1759 the batteries were ready. That morning Prideaux's force repelled a French vessel which attempted to land reinforcements, but in the afternoon Prideaux was struck on the head by a fragment of shell, which burst prematurely at the mouth of a British cohorn and instantly killed him. He was described by some writers as an unpopular officer. Colonel Eyre Massey 
(later first Baron Clarina; 1719-1804)
, 46th regiment, the next senior regular officer, waived any claim to command in favour of Sir William Johnson, to whom the fort surrendered on 24 July 1759. 
Since his elder brother, Sanderson Prideaux, a lieutenant in Colonel Moreton's marines, had died at Cartagena, Spain, in 1741, Prideaux's elder son, John Wilmot Prideaux (1748-1826), became heir to the baronetcy, to which he succeeded, as seventh baronet, on his grandfather's death in August 1766; he was father (with his third wife) of the last two holders of the baronetcy, which became extinct in 1875 on the death of Sir Edward Prideaux, ninth baronet. 
Prideaux had two daughters, Maria Constantia (died in or before 1793) and Georgina Frances Anne, one of whom (although which is unknown) became an actress. She appeared first at Bath in October 1787, and played several times at the Haymarket or Drury Lane in London between 1788 and 1790, although never to any acclaim, and was discharged from the Drury Lane company in the 1791-2 season. 


@@@@@


doc= 22787


Matthias Prideaux (c.1625-1646?), author, was son of John Prideaux and his first wife, Anne. He matriculated from Exeter College on 3 July 1640 and was elected fellow on 30 June 1641. Graduating BA on 2 November 1644, he entered the king's army and his captaincy obtained him an accelerated MA on 3 December 1645. Following the surrender of Oxford in 1646 he moved to London where he died from smallpox shortly after. His father edited from his papers for publication at Oxford in 1648 the popular 'An Easy and Compendious Introduction for Reading All Sorts of Histories'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22788


Priestley, Joseph (1733-1804), theologian and natural philosopher, was born on 13 March 1733 at Birstall Fieldhead, West Riding of Yorkshire, about 6 miles south-west of Leeds. He was the first of six children of Jonas Priestley (1700-1779), cloth dresser, and his first wife, Mary (died 1739), daughter of Joseph Swift, farmer and maltster of Shafton near Wakefield. Priestley was a major figure of the British Enlightenment and a notable polymath, and his publications number, in first editions, more than 150 books, pamphlets, and papers in journals. An early nineteenth-century edition of his collected works, minus the science, filled twenty-six octavo volumes and the science would have added at least five more. Remembered today primarily for his isolation and identification of seven gases, including oxygen, in his own day he was known also as a vigorous advocate of unitarianism and of liberal reform of government, education, and theology. 
Priestley's independence of thought and authority was a partial consequence of virtual estrangement from his family. His 'mother having children so fast', as he says in his memoirs, Joseph was taken from home to live with his maternal grandfather and there he was to stay, 'with little interruption till my mother's death'. Even then he was not to live long at the family home, for his father remarried in 1741 and Joseph was sent to the father's older sister and her husband, Sarah and John Keighley, at Old Hall, Heckmondwike, about 3 miles from Fieldhead. The Keighleys were childless, and possessors of considerable property. When John Keighley died in 1745 young Joseph became Sarah's presumptive heir. Though Old Hall and the Independent chapel of Heckmondwike provided a centre for Priestley family social life, Joseph was already on a path diverging from that of his cloth-working family. 
Sarah Keighley, impressed with the intelligence of her ward, determined that he should be educated to become a dissenting minister. He learned to read and write probably at a local dame-school, but was then sent to Batley grammar school, where he learned Latin and some Greek, and began his facility in shorthand -- Peter Annet's, for whom he wrote some commendatory verses published in an edition of Annet's 'Expeditious Penmanship' ('c'.1750). From 1746 to 1749 he went to a small school kept by John Kirkby, minister at Heckmondwike Upper Chapel, where he began his study of Hebrew and (probably from a polyglot 'Bible') the rudiments of Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic. When, at sixteen, it was thought he might have to go to Lisbon for his health, he taught himself French and High Dutch (German) for service in a counting house. Health recovered, he resumed his plan to become a minister and continued his studies independently with the occasional aid of George Haggerstone, a former student of Colin Maclaurin and Calvinist minister of nearby Hopton. 
Some thirty-five years later, when he commenced writing his memoirs, Priestley cited only three books, Isaac Watts's 'Logic', John Locke's 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding', and W. James 'sGravesande's 'Mathematical Elements of Natural Philosophy', as those he read during this period of self-education. His career suggests that they were primarily influential for their treatment of language, of the nature of history, and of Sir Isaac Newton's 'mechanical philosophy'. Together with his earlier studies, his learning from these works was sufficient to excuse him from the first and most of the second year of the curriculum of his dissenting academy. 
As an Independent it was not possible for Joseph to go to Oxford or Cambridge, while the alternatives of Scotland or the continent were excluded by expense. As the eighteenth-century English universities were in the doldrums, certain of the academies established by English dissenters for the education of their ministers and sons could be eminently worthy competitors. That initially selected for Priestley, Zephaniah Marryat's in Stepney, was not one of these, but Joseph, with the support of John Kirkby, refused to go there. And, in any event, he could not have done so. The extended Priestley family in Birstall parish, father, stepmother, aunts, uncles, sisters, brothers, cousins, were all fervent dissenting Calvinists. Joseph's memoirs report the importance of religion in family activities. His mother, 'the little time I was at home', taught him the shorter Westminster catechism; he could repeat all its 107 questions and answers 'without missing a word' by the time he was four. There were family prayers, morning and evening, at Fieldhead and Heckmondwike. Priestley led those at Old Hall when he became seventeen. He attended weekly prayer meetings, attended chapel twice each Sunday, committing the sermons to memory and writing them down at home. But his serious illness, at sixteen, had brought on a religious crisis. Thinking he might die, he lived months in a state of terror, for he could not persuade himself that he had experienced the 'new birth', that religious experience produced by the immediate agency of the spirit of God he had been taught was necessary for his salvation. Fortunately Sarah Keighley entertained the candidates to succeed the superannuated Kirkby as guests at Old Hall and some of these were Baxterians, or even Arminians, and did not believe in the necessity of a new birth. They eased Priestley's mind and even persuaded him that the sin of Adam had not condemned all mankind forever to the wrath of God. A consequence of this liberation, however, was his rejection by the elders when he applied for membership of Heckmondwike Upper Chapel. And without the recommendation of his church he could not attend Marryat's academy, even had he wanted to. His family was forced to choose another. 
Priestley's stepmother had been housekeeper for Philip Doddridge, and she and Kirkby recommended his academy at Northampton. Doddridge died in 1751, but his academy was moved to Daventry under the auspices of Caleb Ashworth, a Priestley family connection, and Joseph was sent there, in September 1752, one of the earliest to enrol in the new academy. Daventry Academy continued the liberal practices that had earned Northampton its reputation as one of the finest of the dissenting academies. Priestley was happy there in its spirit of intellectual freedom and though he was later (somewhat unfairly) critical of its curriculum, he was solidly grounded in the classical languages, ancient history, and biblical studies. There he was also schooled in the classics of English literature and in rhetoric and sermon making, though he never quite lost his Yorkshire accent nor his tendency to stammer. He also studied mathematics, anatomy, medical chemistry in the work of Herman Boerhaave, and Newtonian natural philosophy, including the dynamic particle matter theory of John Rowning and the physico-theologians. 
Priestley was introduced to metaphysics in a set of lectures by Doddridge, later published as 'A Course of Lectures on the Principal Subjects in Pneumatology, Ethics, and Divinity' (1763). Doddridge's 'Lectures' contained references to many of the early eighteenth-century religious and philosophical controversalists, including the Cambridge Platonists and Samuel Clarke, Anthony Collins, and John Toland. Most important, it referred Priestley to the 'Observations on Man' (1740) by David Hartley, which was to be of enormous influence throughout Joseph's life. Doddridge's teaching practices, begun at Northampton and continued at Daventry and other major dissenting academies, involved the study and comparison of opposing views before reaching a final conclusion. This introduced Priestley to the dialectic process of obtaining truth which made him one of the most contentious theologians of eighteenth-century England, for he came to believe that truth was always ultimately to emerge from the conflict of contending ideas. 
Theological debate at Daventry also persuaded Joseph to become an Arian. This partial denial of the doctrine of the Trinity completed the break with his family, for while Joseph was adopting the liberal radical adjustment of eighteenth-century dissent, his family had adopted the conservative evangelical. During the process of finding a new minister for Heckmondwike Chapel they had become evangelical Calvinist Methodists. Timothy Priestley, Joseph's brother, became a minister in the Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion and it was he who engineered Priestley's disownment, revealing to Sarah Keighley the liberal direction of Joseph's theology. She eventually transferred her financial support to the building of a new chapel at Heckmondwike. From this time, though there were occasional references to family (including, oddly enough, Timothy), Priestley essentially lived without association with the Fieldhead Priestleys or their Leeds and London relations. 
Upon graduation from Daventry Academy in 1755 Priestley accepted the call to assist the ageing minister of the dissenting chapel of Needham Market, Suffolk. Although he had preached at Needham and been interviewed by the congregation, his appointment there was a mistake. The senior minister, the Revd John Meadows, resented his coming, neither his stammer nor his Yorkshire accent was welcome, and no one seemed aware, initially, that he was an Arian. The congregation was poor and Priestley could not qualify for assistance from the Independent fund established to promote the denomination's cause, while the allowance his aunt had promised him should he become a minister was not now forthcoming. Without the aid of Andrew Kippis and George Benson, London ministers with access to various charitable funds, he might have suffered severely and, as it was, the stress increased his stammer, his congregation dwindled, and no one enrolled in the school that he proposed to open. 
Rejected by the local dissenting community and in desperate material circumstances, Joseph maintained his spirits by referring to David Hartley's determinism -- a wise providence disposed all things for the best -- and by concentrating on theological studies. Besides writing a sermon a week, he produced a treatise, 'The Scriptural Doctrine of Remission', which challenged the orthodox view of atonement by an analysis of relevant texts in the 'Old' and 'New' testaments, to be understood in the cultural and historical context in which they were written. This treatise, published in 1761 with the encouragement of Samuel Clark, his former tutor at Daventry and by Caleb Fleming and Nathaniel Lardner, London leaders of liberal dissenting thought, was Priestley's first use of a method of biblical analysis which was to be taken up in the nineteenth century as 'the higher criticism'. 
It was clear to Priestley's friends that his position at Needham Market was untenable. Benson, Kippis, and Samuel Clark recommended Priestley for a position as tutor of languages and 'belles-lettres' at the newly opening (1757-8) dissenting academy at Warrington, Lancashire, but the trustees were apprehensive about his youth and the report of a 'hesitation' in his manner of speaking. They chose, instead, John Aikin, former pupil and assistant of Doddridge and tutor at Kibworth Academy. Thomas Haynes, a distant relation of Priestley's mother, then arranged an appointment for him as minister to the dissenting chapel at Nantwich, Cheshire, where he moved in September 1758. 
Priestley's congregation at Nantwich was no larger than that at Needham, but was less obsessed with Priestley's heterodoxies; members were from the same midlands dialect region as his West Riding accent, and sufficiently sympathetic to his stammer as to allow him to learn its control. They also encouraged him to open a school in a building opposite the chapel yard. The school was very successful and lasted, with various vicissitudes, through at least four succeeding ministers and until 1846. Priestley taught both boys and girls (in a separate room) for three years. He taught Latin and some Greek, English grammar, geography, natural and civil history, some mathematics, and natural philosophy, for which he purchased apparatus -- an air-pump and electrical machine, among others -- that his older pupils operated. 
The success of his school at Nantwich prompted the trustees of Warrington Academy to offer Priestley the tutorship in languages and 'belles-lettres' vacated when Aikin was transferred to that in divinity. He accepted the offer, moved to Warrington in September 1761, and immediately fitted happily into the academic community. He made friends with other academy faculty, soon became deputy to John Seddon, resident agent of the academy's committee of managers, was a member of the governors of Warrington's subscription library, and, in May 1762, moved into a new house provided by the trustees. Later in May he was ordained minister at the Warrington Provincial Meeting of the ministers of the county of Lancaster and on 23 June he married Mary Wilkinson (1743-1796), daughter of ironmaster Isaac Wilkinson, sister of John Wilkinson and of William Wilkinson, who had been one of Priestley's students at Nantwich and who followed him to Warrington. Their first child, a daughter, Sarah, was born in April 1763. 
At the academy Priestley gave his immediate attention to the languages and 'belles-lettres' for which he had been employed. He taught the classical languages and antiquities, French, and English grammar and composition for which he used the text he had prepared for his Nantwich students. Printed and published in Warrington in 1761, 'The Rudiments of English Grammar' and a companion work, 'A Course of Lectures on the Theory of Language and Universal Grammar', printed in 1762, had a long and influential history. The 'Rudiments' went through nine English editions and the lectures, though not published, were distributed for use in other dissenting academies. Together these books have earned Priestley the reputation as a major grammarian of his time. His insistence that usage was the only viable standard for correct English and his detailed descriptions of the structure and vocabulary of his day are noted in most modern histories of the English language. His 'Course of Lectures on Oratory and Criticism' (1777) has also won attention from modern students of rhetorical theory. Not himself a gifted speaker, he avoided the subject of elocution, concentrating instead on the other offices of rhetorical theory. There his use of Hartleyan associationism led him to a psychological rationale for topical analysis and for aesthetic taste. 'Oratory and Criticism' was less generally influential than the 'Rudiments', as the delay in its publication let George Campbell's 'Philosophy of Rhetoric' take precedence in basing rhetoric on human nature, but it is still regarded as one of the classics of modern rhetoric. 
Priestley's greatest contribution in making Warrington the most notable of dissenting academies was, however, in his restructuring of its curriculum. In his 'Essay on a Course of Liberal Education' (1765) he argued that the standard course of studies had been designed for pupils entering the learned professions. Most of the students at Warrington and other dissenting academies were intended, instead, for civil, active, and commercial life. A different plan should be adopted and that plan, outlined in the 'Essay' and later developed in his 'Miscellaneous Observations Relating to Education' (1778), showed Priestley as an innovative educational philosopher. Probably the most important of his innovations was the minimizing of language study, except for English, and an emphasis on that of natural history, natural philosophy, and modern history. He had a broad conception of history as involving the social, cultural, and economic aspects of a society as well as its government and laws. A syllabus of his lectures on history was printed in 1765, but the 'Lectures on History and General Policy' were not to be published until 1788. 
To supplement his history teaching Priestley prepared and had published two aids to study: a 'Chart of Biography' (1765) and a 'New Chart of History' (1769) with accompanying 'Descriptions'. These graphic time line representations of the span of life of major historical figures or of empires were popular for the rest of the century in England and the United States, and the 'Descriptions', at least, went through several editions. The time line form of biography was adopted, with acknowledgement to Priestley as late as 1853, by J. C. Pogendorff and that of history by Francis Baily in 1813. More important to Priestley the forthcoming publication of the 'Chart of Biography' was instrumental in his being awarded the LLD degree of Edinburgh University on 4 December 1764 and the 'Chart' is the only publication explicitly cited in his certificate for fellowship in the Royal Society of London. 
Although Priestley's interests in science had been growing since his days at Daventry, he had little opportunity of exploring them before going to Warrington and there, because John Holt was tutor in mathematics and natural philosophy, he was, at first, confined to lecturing in anatomy and aiding in the organization of some lectures in chemistry by Matthew Turner. Examples drawn from the sciences in his 'Oratory and Criticism' and in the 'Description' of the 'Chart of Biography' show that he had not lost interest and when, in 1765, he could finally find some time, he commenced writing a didactic history of electricity. Associationist theory maintained that history and geometry were the best approaches to teaching and he could prevail on Seddon to introduce him to John Canton and, through Canton, to Benjamin Franklin, then the foremost authority on electricity in Britain. After going to London he obtained the assistance of Canton, Franklin, William Watson, and Richard Price for his enterprise. They also became his friends and supported his bid to become a fellow of the Royal Society, even before his history was published. After 12 June 1766 Priestley could, and usually would, style himself J. Priestley LLD FRS. 
When published, in 1767, 'The History and Present State of Electricity, with Original Experiments' was to be one of Priestley's most successful non-theological publications. The historical part was based, whenever possible, on primary sources and the 'present state' on papers in scientific journals and on interviews with his new London friends. The friends also insisted that he perform the experiments that he wrote about. What he had intended as a Baconian 'histoire' became also a manual of competently described experiments and an example of independent work and analysis on his subject. The work went through five English editions and was translated into French and German. A primary source for eighteenth-century understanding of electricity it is credited for the first statement of the inverse square law of electrical force based on reasonable deduction from experiment. 
Hardly had the 'History of Electricity' been published when Priestley received an invitation to be minister to the dissenting congregation of Mill Hill Chapel in Leeds. He accepted the call and moved in September 1767. His memoirs cite Mary Priestley's bad health to explain the move and one can add that the financing of Warrington was always uncertain and there was little prospect for an increase in salary to match a possibly increasing family. Additionally, Priestley was always to regard the role of dissenting minister as the most important of any in the world and he was here invited to return to it for a major congregation and one within the cognizance of his family. He was, that is, returning a success to the 'home' that had rejected him. 
The Mill Hill congregation was a liberal one and supported Priestley's move from Arianism to complete anti-Trinitarianism. This probably occurred in 1769 after he re-read Nathaniel Lardner's 'Letter... [on] the Logos' (1759). The Priestleys were happy in Leeds, though there is no record of visits to or from Fieldhead. Joseph junior was born there in July 1768 and William in May 1771. Priestley took a minor part in community activities. He helped organize the Leeds proprietary circulating library and preached annual charity sermons for the charity school and general infirmary. And it was there that he began his long career in religious and polemical publication. 
Anxious to succeed as a minister Priestley exploited his major talent, that of teacher, by organizing religious classes within his congregation. He wrote catechisms for two younger groups and a text, 'Institutes of Natural and Revealed Religion' (1772, 1773, 1774), to teach the principles of rational dissent. He had begun the 'Institutes' while a student at Daventry, and its publication was not completed until after he had left Leeds, but it soon became a standard exposition of Unitarian beliefs. He also attacked the sacramental nature of the Lord's supper, recommended family religious exercises and a renewal of some kind of church discipline, and supported the practice of infant baptism. His pamphlets 'An Appeal to the Serious and Candid Professors of Christianity' (1770) and 'Familiar Illustration of Certain Passages of Scripture' (1772) went through multiple editions -- 30,000 copies of the 'Appeal' being circulated by 1787. And he established the first English scholarly journal for speculative theology, the 'Theological Repository', published in three annual volumes (1769-71) and then suspended for lack of support from any contributors but Arians or Unitarians. Priestley himself contributed about one third (fifteen articles) of the early 'Repository''s contents. 
Each of his religious publications elicited attacks and, to most of these attacks, Priestley published at least one answer. This was partly because he sincerely believed that controversy was the best avenue towards truth, but also, it is clear from his polemical works, because he enjoyed debate. He developed a style of patient condescension and irony which, from this provincial schoolmaster and dissenting minister, infuriated his opponents, usually university graduates. Although not conducive to convincing his opponents, his polemics were to make of Priestley the most prominent English spokesman for rational theology in the later eighteenth century. 
They were also to make Priestley a major spokesman for liberal political reform. In his 'Liberal Education' he had objected, partially on political grounds, to a scheme for national education. His friends encouraged him to develop these ideas further in his 'Essay on the First Principles of Government' (1768), which separated the concepts of civil and political liberty and used a principle of utility which Jeremy Bentham was to claim, in his 'Short history of utilitarianism' (1829), was the source of his own normative greater happiness principle. Priestley's 'Remarks on some Paragraphs in... Blackstone's Commentaries' (1769) objected to William Blackstone's description of dissenters as tolerated criminals and succeeded in making Blackstone retract some of his statements and moderate his language in others. In the same year Priestley's anonymous 'Present State of Liberty in Great Britain and her Colonies' reflects his, and his congregation's, concern over the economic and political consequences of government action toward Britain's American colonies. This plea for liberal reform in politics led, in turn, to pamphlets on liberal reform in church establishment. 
None of his Leeds activities precluded Priestley's scientific investigations. Indeed, he regarded both the politics and the science as aspects of his theological work. He sent five papers of electrical experiments to the Royal Society between 1768 and 1770 in which he explored aspects of electrical spark discharge, including an early reference to oscillatory discharge of Leyden jars, and a study of comparative conductivities / impedances. He also prepared 'Familiar Introductions', teaching manuals for electricity (1768) and perspective (1770), and commenced preparations for a series of volumes on the history of experimental philosophy to follow his 'History of Electricity'. 
For the first of these volumes Priestley chose the history of optics, on which there was abundant information. He had to publish by subscription and the 'History and Present State of Discoveries Relating to Vision, Light and Colours' (1772) was a disappointment. The subject required mathematics, which he had determined not to use, and the excess of information called for a nicety of judgement that Priestley was unable to supply. Though it was favourably reviewed many of the subscribers defaulted payment and the only advantage Priestley gained was his reintroduction to a dynamic particle theory of matter in the detailed form proposed by the Abbe Roger Joseph Boscovich in his 'Philosophiae naturalis theoria' (1763). 
As he had not received an adequate financial return for his labours on the 'Optics', Priestley declared that he would not continue his histories. He had, however, already become intrigued by 'taking up some of Dr. [Stephen] Hales's inquiries concerning air', as he wrote to his friend Theophilus Lindsey in 1770, and doubtless would not have continued writing about other people's discoveries anyway. He had been doing some chemical experiments as early as his work on electricity. When living next to a brewery the ready supply of by-produced carbon dioxide led him to seek applications for what was then termed fixed air. His first explicitly chemical publication 'Directions for Impregnating Water with Fixed Air' (1772) developed out of a contemporary mistaken view that scurvy was a putrefactive disease associated with the loss of carbon dioxide from the body tissues. The publication elicited much favourable attention and ultimately led to the establishment of the carbonated beverage industry. 
Priestley's study of airs (gases) took a more significant form in his long paper, 'Observations on different kinds of air', published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' for 1772. Seldom has a first paper been so important: it announced the isolation and identification of nitric oxide and anhydrous hydrochloride acid gases, introduced the notions of eudiometry and of photosynthesis, and described simple apparatus and manipulative techniques that enabled others to extend his work. The paper richly deserved the Copley medal conferred by the Royal Society for 1773. 
By the time he received the medal Priestley had moved from Leeds and Mill Hill Chapel to Calne, Wiltshire, and the service of William Petty, second earl of Shelburne. The combined failures of the 'Theological Repository' and the 'History of Light' had brought financial problems and Priestley's friends also agreed that Leeds was too small a niche for a man of his abilities. There had been one abortive effort to extract him when Joseph Banks, planning to go on James Cook's second voyage to the south seas as supernumary botanist, invited Priestley to accompany him as an astronomer. The invitation, in December 1771, had to be withdrawn when Banks realized that he had exceeded his authority in offering the appointment and that Priestley lacked the astronomical expertise demanded by the board of longitude and the Royal Society. Franklin failed to locate an academic post for him in the colonies and, finally, Richard Price came to the rescue by recommending him to Lord Shelburne for a post of companion at a salary of $250 and a house. The Priestleys moved to Calne, near Shelburne's estate of Bowood, in June 1773. 
Shelburne was a major figure in the Chathamite faction in opposition to the North ministry and Priestley was a vigorous representative of the most vocal part of dissenting interests. Priestley and Shelburne were too unlike to become the kind of companions that Shelburne had wanted, but Priestley could provide political information and intellectual consequence. He performed experiments for Shelburne's guests, supervised the education of his children, and acted as librarian, buying books and cataloguing the library and manuscript collections. The Calne years were good ones for Priestley. During them he became an important political voice among British dissenters, as well as developing a metaphysical position and continuing his theological and pneumatic studies. His third son, named Henry at Shelburne's request, was born there in May 1777. 
Priestley's first political chore for Shelburne was to summarize dissenting opinion respecting the attempted repeal, in 1773, of the 'Test Act'. Failure of that attempt led to a pamphlet advising dissenters on conducting the next appeal, including suggestions on reform of the established church. It also led to his 'Address to Protestant Dissenters on the Approaching Election' (1774) attacking the parliamentary majority for its failure to repeal and for its activities relating to the colonies. The 'Address' was the most extreme political tract Priestley had written and attracted the most national attention of any appeal favouring the Americans. Continuation of the North ministry dampened overt political activity though Priestley continued to act as intermediary between Shelburne and dissenters and, as an impartial agent, between the allies of the marquess of Rockingham and the Chathamites. His only visit to the continent was during August to October 1774, in the company of Shelburne. 
Not having a congregation in Calne, Priestley's religious activities were confined to occasional preaching and publications such as his homily advocating premarital celibacy. He supported Theophilus Lindsey in establishing Essex Street Chapel, the first avowedly Unitarian place of worship in England and he again directed his attention to formal theology. He attempted a chronological arrangement of passages in the four gospels in a 'Harmony of the Gospels, in Greek' (1777), and in English (1780). Though a somewhat conventional approach to biblical study prior to synoptic analysis, his 'Harmony' inevitably led to a pamphlet argument. He also published the first of a continuing series of letters answering atheistic arguments, this one addressed to Holbach and Hume. His most singular activity of this period was the writing of five metaphysical works, starting with an acerbic attack on several leading Scottish philosophers, 'An Examination of Dr. Reid's Inquiry... Dr. Beattie's Essay... and Dr. Oswald's Appeal' (1774), presenting an alternative to their doctrine of common sense. He followed this with an edition of that part of David Hartley's 'Observations on Man' which provided an associationist alternative to the common-sense philosophers. His 'Hartley's Theory of the Human Mind' (1775) provided an influential source for Hartley's ideas into the next century. 
One of the introductory essays to the 'Hartley' announced Priestley's adoption of monism, which he was then obliged to defend in his 'Disquisitions on Matter and Spirit' (1777), followed by his 'Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity' (1777), which supported a type of mechanistic determinism. Together these books started a flood of criticism which Priestley attempted to answer in a 'Free Discussion of the Doctrines of Materialism and Philosophical Necessity' (1778) with his good friend Richard Price. Price was never to understand, nor did the majority of Priestley's contemporaries, that Priestley saw matter as the manifestation of spiritual force and determinism as an active acceptance of causality in the will of God. 
During the period of his metaphysical writing Priestley was also continuing his pneumatic investigations. Except for occasional 'Philosophical Transactions' papers, such as that of 1776 which inspired Lavoisier's oxidation theory of respiration, these appeared as books. The papers, and the volumes of experiments and observations -- 'Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air' (1774, 1775, 1777) and 'Experiments and Observations Relating to Various Branches of Natural Philosophy' (1779) -- were eagerly awaited for their new discoveries and new techniques. In them, he announced his discovery of ammonia gas, nitrous oxide, nitrogen dioxide, sulphur dioxide, and, most important, of oxygen. The latter, for which he is most famous, was first mentioned in 'Transactions' letters (1775) and was described in detail in the book of that year. He also wrote a vigorous defence again a charge of scientific plagiarism and expanded his pneumatic studies beyond chemistry into investigations of heat expansion, indices of refraction, and sound transmission of gases and continued his study of photosynthesis. 
Lack of real companionship between Priestley and Shelburne was amplified by the latter's becoming head of the Chathamite whigs on Lord Chatham's death (1778) and his remarriage in 1779. The Priestleys had become political and social impediments. By mid-1780 the association was broken and Priestley retired to Birmingham, retaining an annual pension of $150. By December he accepted an invitation to be senior minister of New Meeting, one of the largest and most affluent dissenting congregations in England, at a salary of $100 and he was, once again, happy in his real vocation. He retained his scientific avocation, particularly in becoming a member of the Lunar Society of Birmingham, comprising entrepreneurs and scientists such as Matthew Boulton, Erasmus Darwin, James Watt, Josiah Wedgwood, and William Withering. Most of his Birmingham science was in the area of applied science, in service of the interests of that group or of his brother-in-law, the ironmaster John Wilkinson. Priestley advised Wedgwood on the airs entrapped in ceramic clays, Boulton on the cost and elasticity of the new gases, Watt and Wilkinson on steam interaction with iron, and Withering on the inexpensive generation of hydrogen for balloon flight. Priestley continued sending occasional papers to the Royal Society for publication, including a confusing set ultimately revealing the diffusion of gases through unglazed ceramic walls. His volumes of 'Experiments and Observations Relating to... Natural Philosophy' were continued (1781, 1786) and in 1790 he published an 'abridged and methodized' version of the six-volume 'Experiments and Observations'. The originality in the earlier volumes had, however, chiefly disappeared and the major theme of his published science during the remainder of his life was his conflict with Antoine Lavoisier, who had used his discovery of oxygen and the work of Watt and Cavendish on the composition of water (started by hints from Priestley) to attack the doctrine of phlogiston. Priestley never accepted Lavoisier's interpretation of oxygen, nor the composite nature of water and his criticisms of Lavoisier's experiments, though frequently correct, could not succeed in face of the systematization and pedagogic usefulness of the Lavoisian taxonomic revolution of chemistry. 
Most of Priestley's time was devoted to the role of minister, which he happily resumed. During the Birmingham years he was to publish thirty-eight pamphlets or books, some of the latter in several volumes, on religious and educational issues, including sermons, prayers, exhortations to Jews, an edition of hymns, annotations for an edition of the 'Bible', and the resumed publication of the 'Theological Repository' (1784, 1786, 1788). He preached regularly and, as in Leeds, conducted religious classes for children and young adults in the New Meeting congregation. Priestley's Sunday class had a total membership of nearly 150, of whom 80 were aged between seventeen and thirty. He also joined members of Old and New Meeting in establishing Sunday schools at which nominees of the congregations could learn reading, writing, sums, and basic job skills and that led to the Birmingham Sunday Society -- open to any former pupil of a basic Sunday school in town -- at which were taught natural and revealed religion and a range of philosophical subjects. 
In 1788, Priestley's 'Lectures on History and General Policy', first delivered at Warrington Academy, were finally published. They did not have the influence they warranted, though there were to be seven English editions and translations into German and French, but they were adopted for use in dissenting academies throughout England, in universities in the United States, and even, it is said, were used by John Symonds at Cambridge and Thomas Arnold at Oxford. More historiographic than narrative, and in the exemplary rather than the nineteenth-century historicism mode, still the 'Lectures' supported a doctrine of progress and recommended a wide variety of sources for research into a broadly defined social, economic, and cultural as well as political and diplomatic history. 
Priestley's major historical work of the period was also theological, in that he wrote some five historio-theological works dedicated to the single purpose of establishing an uncompromising monotheism. In Priestley's opinion both Arianism and Trinitarianism were compromises between the monotheism of Judaism and the early Christian church and the polytheism of Hellenistic gnosticism and neo-Platonism. To prove this he wrote 'An History of the Corruptions of Christianity' (1782) in two volumes, and, in response to the arguments that caused, 'An History of Early Opinions Concerning Jesus Christ' (1786), in four. Positions adopted in these works -- insistence that the early Christian church had been unitarian, denial of the virgin birth of Christ, and supporting Nazareth as his birthplace -- led to increasingly intemperate argument, especially with Samuel, soon to be Bishop, Horsley, who attacked Priestley's scholarship without addressing the substance of his arguments. Soon there were annual volumes in defence of Unitarianism, and, in 1790, a two-volume 'General History of the Christian Church to the Fall of Empires'. Altogether, counting the pamphlet war, Priestley wrote nearly 4800 pages in this cause and many of his arguments have been sustained by modern, liberal scholarship. 
Anger of many clergymen at their inability to silence Priestley's theological arguments was increased by his support of attempts to repeal the 'Corporation and Test Acts', represented, for example, in his 'Letter to the Rt. Honourable William Pitt' (1787) and his sermon of 1789 (for he regarded repeal to be a religious issue), 'The Conduct to be Observed... to Procure the Repeal of the Corporation and Test Acts'. Priestley's enthusiastic welcoming of the French Revolution, evidenced in his 'Letters to the Rt. Hon. Edmund Burke' (1791), convinced many people that he was a revolutionary, bent on destruction of church and crown. Untrue though these suspicions were they encouraged members of the Birmingham establishment to acquiesce, at least, in those acts of mob violence variously known as the Birmingham, church and king, or Priestley riots of 1791. The immediate excuse for the riots was a dinner in celebration of Bastille day, held by the Constitutional Society of Birmingham, a dinner which Priestley did not attend though he had assisted in the organization of the society. The riots raged from the evening of the 14th of July to that of the 16th, and were put down only at the arrival of dragoons sent from Nottingham. Damage was extensive: Old and New Meeting houses and seven residences were destroyed, other houses were wrecked. Priestley's house, his library, laboratory, and papers were ruined and his life was saved only because he had fled. English authorities generally approved of the riots, but they were denounced by many persons and organizations in England, Europe, and the United States and remain a blot on the history of British toleration. 
Priestley found temporary refuge with friends and then, in November, settled in Clapton, near Hackney, and accepted the invitation to succeed Richard Price, whose funeral sermon he had preached six months earlier, as morning preacher at Gravel Pit meeting. He was discouraged from returning to Birmingham with a sermon -- 'Forgive them Father, they know not what they do' -- guaranteed to incite the establishment to blind fury. Only seventeen of the rioters were ever tried and, of these, only notorious criminals were convicted. Compensation paid the victims by assessment on Hemlingford hundred was woefully inadequate, but John Wilkinson made Priestley an annual allowance of $200, and settled on him an (unproductive) $10,000 in French funds. He was elected a citizen of France, which he accepted, and a representative to the National Convention, which he declined. 
Priestley's polemical and theological work continued, as in his 'An Appeal to the Public on... the Riots in Birmingham' (1791), which went through four printings in a year. He continued his series pamphlet war on atheists, this time attacking Gibbon's 'Decline and Fall'; Gibbon declined to respond publicly. Priestley lectured on history and on natural philosophy at Hackney New College, publishing his only general statement on the latter in his 'Heads of Lectures on a Course of Experimental Philosophy' (1794). Hackney was not, however, a satisfactory solution to his problems. He missed his friends of the Lunar Society, associates of the Royal Society avoided him, and he ceased attending meetings, publishing his continued attack on Lavoisian chemistry, 'Experiments on the Generation of Air from Water' (1793) as a separate pamphlet. His sons were unable to find employment and attempts of the younger Pitt's administration to silence all criticism were coming closer and closer to him. Finally, in 1794, he resolved to emigrate to the United States. 
After obtaining official notice that he was not fleeing arrest Priestley sailed with his wife, on 8 April 1794, for the United States. They arrived at New York city on the evening of 4 June, to be met by Joseph junior and his wife and, the following day, by official greetings from Governor Clinton, and deputations from merchants and various patriotic societies all expressing delight at their arrival. A fortnight later the Priestleys went to Philadelphia where, again, they were warmly welcomed. In mid-July they began their five-day journey, 130 miles, to Northumberland, Pennsylvania, where they were to stay while a community of emigrating English liberal dissenters and reformers was to be established on the nearby 700,000 acres of land optioned to Priestley's sons and Thomas Cooper. The projected community was never realized as the expected flood of refugees from the younger Pitt's liberal witchhunt failed to materialize after the acquittals in the high treason trials of Thomas Hardy, Horne Tooke, and John Thelwall late in 1794. Nevertheless the Priestleys remained at Northumberland. Experiences of the Birmingham riots had given Mary Priestley a distaste for cities, and the location in central Pennsylvania, at the junction of two branches of the Susquehanna River, was an attractive one. There they were to build their home, though Harry, who died in late 1795, and Mary, who died on 17 September 1796, never saw the completed house. Priestley moved into it, along with the family of Joseph junior, and there he was to stay, with occasional visits to Philadelphia, until his death. 
When the Priestleys had left England they were recipients of many public statements of sorrow and support. In New York and Philadelphia, Priestley was welcomed as a friend of liberty and a distinguished philosopher who had been badly treated in England. He visited President Washington several times and was befriended by Thomas Jefferson as 'one of the few lives precious to mankind'. Not everyone was as welcoming and Priestley was to discover that bias and bigotry were as evident in the United States as in England. William Cobbett, just embarked on his career as reactionary radical journalist, was incensed at the criticism of England implied in the reception given Priestley and, under the name Peter Porcupine, crudely attacked him as a friend of anarchy and godlessness. Many ministers preached against him in their pulpits and he was unable to establish himself as a minister in any church, though he preached occasionally in Philadelphia, where he assisted the formation of a small Unitarian society, and regularly at services held in his home in Northumberland. 
It was the summer of 1795 before Priestley could return to his experiments and though he was to build a laboratory and publish more scientific papers (at least forty), in the 'Transactions of the American Philosophical Society' and the 'New York Medical Repository', as well as two pamphlets affirming his continued belief in phlogiston, his scientific work was essentially an anticlimax. He inspired a number of young chemists in the United States to experiment, had an indirect influence in the identification of carbon monoxide as a new gas, and extended his interests to opposing Erasmus Darwin's belief in spontaneous generation and writing an essay on hearing and another on dreams. In essential isolation he kept up as well as he could with the news in science, experimenting, for example, with the newly discovered voltaic cell. But most of his work was a repetition of experiments he had done before, inadvertently illustrating Priestley's own complaint that he frequently forgot things he had done in the past. His futile opposition to Lavoisian chemistry was a solitary one. 
Priestley retained his political interests. In February 1798 he wrote an anonymous article, 'Maxims of political arithmetic', published in the Republican newspaper, 'Aurora', which John Adams, elected president in 1797, regarded as attacks on his policies. Reacting to French interference in American politics, and to suppress criticism, the Adams administration had passed the 'Aliens and Sedition Acts', which Timothy Pickering, secretary of state, wanted to apply to Priestley. Responding to federalist attacks, Priestley wrote 'Letters to the Inhabitants of Northumberland' (1799) to defend himself. Adams rejected Pickering's suggestion -- Priestley's influence was too weak to take that seriously -- but Priestley was not to feel completely secure until the election to the presidency of Jefferson, to whom he wrote, in dedicating the second part of his church history (1802), 'Tho' I am arrived at the usual term of human life, it is now only that I can say I see nothing to fear from the hand of power, the government under which I live being for the first time truly favourable to me.' 
Priestley's most effective activities in exile were in education and theology. He had an extensive correspondence with Jefferson on the establishment of the latter's new college for the state of Virginia, including a lengthy 'Hints concerning public education', which echoed his Warrington recommendations, but with some specifics such as the number of professors (nine) that would be needed for a fledgeling college and the value of a good library, though students should not be encouraged to read while 'under tuition'. He delivered two sets of discourses on the evidences of revealed religion, continued his series of attacks on atheistic ideas -- this time those of Tom Paine and those of Constantin Volney, and completed his 'General History of the Christian Church' (1802-3). He wrote notes on the scriptures and prepared his 'Index to the Bible' (1804). Of more than twenty theological publications while in America the most noteworthy is perhaps 'Socrates and Jesus Compared' (1803), which was among Jefferson's favourite religious reading. His last works, corrected on his deathbed, were theological, particularly the 'Doctrines of Heathen Philosophy Compared with those of Revelation'. 
Priestley died on 6 February 1804 in his Pennsylvania home. He was buried beside his wife and son, Henry, in the Friends' burial-ground in Northumberland. His daughter, Sarah Priestley Finch, predeceased him (1803). His eldest son, Joseph Priestley, returned to England in 1812 and died there (1863). The younger Joseph's first son remained in the United States and continued the Priestley line there, but his eldest daughter married a Birmingham politician, Joseph Parkes. Their daughter Bessie married Louis Belloc, and their children included Hilaire Belloc and Marie Belloc Lowndes. Of Priestley's other children, William Priestley was a disappointment to his father. Though he had married a Miss Peggy Foulke in February 1796, he was unable to settle down. In 1800 he created a scandal by putting tartar emetic in the family flour before departing to become a sugar planter in Louisiana. His daughter Catherine married another sugar planter named Richardson and their son, Henry Hobson Richardson, became a towering figure in the history of American architecture. 
When most of the reforms he had advocated were achieved in the nineteenth century, and then superseded, Priestley was forgotten, except as a name occasionally cited in dispersed topical histories. Even in theology, to which he had devoted most of his efforts, he became a remote historical figure. German theologians surpassed him in revisionary scholarship and the sentimental ecumenism of W. E. Channing and James Martineau replaced his militancy in unitarianism. Only in science, usually the least historical of areas, has his memory remained bright -- as the discoverer of oxygen, who never quite recognized his own discovery, and as the persistent critic of Lavoisian chemistry who, with the advent of physical chemistry, was shown to be not entirely wrong. His house and laboratory at Northumberland became a museum and the American Chemical Society was planned by men meeting on its porch on 1 August 1874. Memorials and brief biographies of Priestley have been published since his death, but only during the last years of the twentieth century was the full range of his accomplishments recognized. 


@@@@@


doc= 22789


Priestley, Timothy (1734-1814), Independent minister, was born on 19 June 1734 at Owler Lane, Birstall Fieldhead, West Riding of Yorkshire, the second of the six children of Jonas Priestley (1700-1779), cloth-dresser, and his first wife, Mary Swift (1706-1739), daughter of Joseph Swift, maltster and farmer of Shafton, near Wakefield. He was brought up by his maternal grandfather after his mother's death in childbed in December 1739 and was sent to school at Batley, Yorkshire. For some time he followed his father's trade. His elder brother, Joseph Priestley, the scientist and theologian, who thought him frivolous, related how he snatched from his brother 'a book of knight-errantry' and flung it away. Timothy recalled kneeling down with Joseph 'while he prayed' at the age of six and his brother's growing interest and delight in scientific experiments ('Autobiography of Joseph Priestley', 140). Whenever his brother made a new discovery Timothy was 'soon acquainted with it', and he remembered that when Joseph 'was making much progress in electricity' he showed him 'how to melt steel' (ibid., 12). None the less, Timothy was far more practical than his brother and later used his self-taught skills in brass- and wood-working to make 'electrifying machines' to his brother's designs (ibid., 20). Their strong Calvinistic family background encouraged both brothers to train for the dissenting ministry, and Timothy became only the second student to enrol at the academy established in 1756 by James Scott (1710-1783), the recently appointed minister of Upper Chapel, Heckmondwike, Yorkshire. Joseph Priestley regarded the course of studies as 'an imperfect education', but it strengthened Timothy's Calvinist theology. Joseph subsequently embraced unitarian doctrines, which placed an increasing strain on the relationship between the two brothers. Timothy distinguished himself as an assiduous pupil; he got into trouble, however, by going out to preach without leave. His preaching was popular, and he was employed in mission work at Ilkeston, Derbyshire, and elsewhere. 
In 1760 Priestley was ordained pastor of the congregation at Kipping, Thornton, near Bradford. It was a difficult pastorate, for the owner of the Kipping estate had ceased to be in sympathy with nonconformity. He also faced difficulties when he became minister of Hunter's Croft Congregational Church, Manchester, in 1766. Although the chapel was enlarged during his ministry, he had frequent quarrels with his deacons. Described by Dr Alexander Mackennal as 'a strong preacher, careless of personal dignity, and of abounding audacity both in his pulpit utterances and in private speech', many stories were told of his eccentricities: his deacons criticized him for irreverently ascending the pulpit with his hat on his head and for making packing cases for the liquor trade on Sunday nights (Nightingale, 5.117). He retorted that he never began work until the clock struck twelve and that his ministerial stipend of $60 was inadequate to support his wife and family. Priestley had married some time before 1768 when his son William was born, and referred to his 'small family... having a child added to my number every year' ('Autobiography of Joseph Priestley', 20). His wife may have been Margaret Brodie, whose marriage to a Timothy Priestley on 26 April 1764 is recorded in the parish register of Manchester parish church. 
Priestley's unsolicited and ultimately unsuccessful attempts to persuade the congregation at Hale Chapel, near Altrincham, Cheshire, to resist the appointment of an Arian or Socinian minister when a vacancy arose at the chapel after 1767 confirm his uncompromising adherence to Calvinist orthodoxy. A letter written to William Whitelegg at Hale Barns Green ('c'.1767-1769) reveals his concern for 'the decay of the Dissenting cause in general' as a result of the advance of theological liberalism (Kenworthy, 131). Priestley refused to join the petitions of 1772-3 for relaxation of the 'Toleration Act' unless concealment of heresy should be made a capital offence. His relationship with his brother deteriorated further after 1774 when Timothy received an invitation to preach at George Whitefield's Tabernacle, Moorfields; Joseph told him that it mortified him to hear people say 'Here is a brother of yours preaching at the Tabernacle.' In August 1782 the two Priestleys were appointed to preach the 'double lecture' at Oldbury, Worcestershire; Joseph wished his brother to decline, and, on Timothy's refusal to give way, withdrew himself, his place being taken by Habakkuk Crabb. 
Priestley's Manchester ministry terminated in his formal dismissal on 14 April 1784, only two hands being held up in his favour. He moved to Dublin, where he remained for some two years. He then received a call to succeed Richard Woodgate, who had died in 1787, as minister of the Jewin Street Independent Church, London. He issued a periodical, the 'Christian's Magazine, or, Gospel Repository', designed to counteract unitarianism, under the patronage of Selina, countess of Huntingdon, to whom he dedicated the first volume in 1790 and whose friendship he enjoyed. It contains a biography of his tutor, Scott, which was reprinted separately in 1791. On his brother's death he preached at Jewin Street on 29 April 1803 and printed a funeral sermon, with an appendix of 'authentic anecdotes', the authenticity of some of which has been disputed. He was more imaginative than his brother and probably shared his defects of memory. His advertised 'Animadversions' on his brother's theological views does not seem to have been printed. He did, however, publish 'The Christian's Looking Glass' (1790-92), 'Family Exercises' (1792), an annotated 'Family Bible' (1793), and a few single sermons. He died at Islington on 23 April 1814 'in great peace and tranquillity', and was buried at Bunhill Fields on 29 April (Nightingale, 5.117). The Revd Joseph Cockin of Halifax delivered the funeral address and the Revd George Burder preached a funeral sermon at Jewin Street 'to a very crowded congregation'. The inscription on his tomb recorded that 'for more than half a century he preached with fidelity and success the unsearchable riches of Christ' (ibid., 5.119). His son William (1768-1827) was Independent minister at Fordingbridge, Hampshire. 


