@@@@@


doc= 2483


Bisset, Robert (1758/9-1805), historian and novelist, was one of the leading anti-Jacobin writers during the era of the French Revolution. Little is known of his life beyond his published works. His first production, appearing in 1793-4 (with a second edition in 1799), was a new edition of 'The Spectator', to which he prefixed biographies of the authors. In 1796 he graduated as doctor of laws from the University of Edinburgh, and in the same year he published a 'Sketch of Democracy', the aim of which was to show, by a survey of the democratic states of ancient times, that democracy is a vicious form of government. His next work, 'The Life of Edmund Burke' (1798; 2nd edn, 1800), was well received, but his militantly conservative sentiments are most evident in his many contributions to the 'Anti-Jacobin Review'. Over the period 1798 to 1800 Bisset produced more articles for that magazine than anyone save its editor, John Gifford. He has been called the 'Review''s 'pacesetter' (de Montluzin, 58), and as such Bisset has a strong claim to be thought of as having set the standard for the whole loyalist campaign of the 1790s and early 1800s. 
Bisset edited the short-lived 'Historical, Biographical, Literary, and Scientific Magazine' in 1799, and then produced two vociferously anti-Jacobin novels, 'Douglas, or, The Highlander' (1800) and 'Modern Literature' (1804). His chief targets here, as well as avowedly radical writers such as Thomas Paine, William Godwin, and Mary Wollstonecraft, were contemporary novelists who, in Bisset's opinion, undermined the morals, piety, and loyalty of an all too susceptible readership. Also in 1804 Bisset published, in six volumes, 'A History of the Reign of George the Third, to the Termination of the Late War', to which he prefixed 'a view of the progressive improvement of England, in prosperity and strength, to the accession of his Majesty'. (Volume 7 was written by the miscellaneous author Ralph Rylance and published anonymously in 1820.) The work was generally praised and, surprisingly, was applauded for its impartiality. Three pamphlets are attributed to Bisset by manuscript notes in the British Library copies: 'A Defence of the Slave Trade' (1804), 'A Plain Reply to the Pamphlet calling itself 'A Plain Answer'' (1804), and 'Essays on the Slave Trade' (1805). By 1796 he was living in Chelsea, and at the time of his death in 1805 at the age of forty-six he was master of an academy in Sloane Street. His death, at his home in Sloane Terrace, is said to have been caused by 'chagrin under embarrassed circumstances' ('GM'). 


@@@@@


doc= 2484


Bisset, William (1669/70-1747), Church of England clergyman and pamphleteer, was the son of William Bissett of Middlesex. His father was a royalist, but Bisset claimed he was not rewarded for his devotion to the crown. After being educated at Westminster School as a king's scholar ('c'.1684), he went in 1687 to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was elected a scholar in 1688 and took his BA degree in 1691. Having taken orders, he was for some time in charge of the parish of Iver, Buckinghamshire. From the start of his career he was a pugnacious clergyman. While at Iver he married, and his wife brought him some money. With this he set up a coach, which gave his enemies occasion to make many sneers at his foolish ostentation in the pamphlet war he afterwards engaged in. He defended himself in the second part of 'The Modern Fanatick' by declaring that he bought this 'leathern conveniency' in order to enable himself to fulfil an engagement to preach three times a week in a neighbouring parish. During this period of his life he appears to have been industrious in his clerical work. He became rector of Whiston, Northamptonshire, in 1697. Having been elected elder brother of the hospital church of St Katharine by the Tower in 1699, he resided much in London, leaving his wife and children at Whiston. 
The first of the books for which Bisset is remembered, 'Plain English', was published in 1705. It was the text of his sermon before the Society for the Reformation of Manners, which he had been asked to preach as a substitute at the last moment. To the astonishment of all, he attacked the society for wanting to quieten the people rather than reform them; he also criticized its prosecution of poor sinners, rather than the affluent and prominent. The tract caused a controversy in which Isaac Sharpe responded with 'Plain English Made Plainer', but Bisset produced six editions of the work. As a low-churchman and a whig he was offended by Dr Sacheverell's sermon at St Paul's on 5 November 1709, and at once preached and published a reply to it. He followed up this attack in a pamphlet entitled 'The Modern Fanatick', which appeared in 1710. In it he raked up Sacheverell's family background, and published stories of Sacheverell's debts to besmirch his character. Nevertheless 'The Modern Fanatick' ran through eleven editions in 1710 alone. The pamphlet stimulated many replies, and among them one by Dr W. King. Bisset responded by publishing a second part of 'The Modern Fanatick' in February 1711, and a third part followed in May 1714. William Cole, in his manuscript 'Athenae Cantabrigienses', described him as 'almost a madman' (Cole MSS), yet the character of the pamphlets put forth by both sides in this controversy is little proof of the sanity of any of the parties concerned in it. A more recent historian has called him a 'muckraker' (Holmes, 14). Bisset was the champion of an unpopular cause. He fought with courage, and bad as his weapons were, they were of much the same kind as those used against him. There is no reason to doubt the truth of his assertion that he was constantly mobbed and insulted, especially by Sacheverell's 'female proselytes'. He also declares that there were three attempts on his life. He deserves credit for having raised an indignant protest against the cruel floggings then often inflicted on soldiers. A probably exaggerated account of the flogging of a man and his wife is given in the collective edition of the 'Fanatick' tracts. He was made chaplain to Queen Caroline. He died on 7 November 1747. 


@@@@@


doc= 2485


Bisset, William (1758-1834), Church of Ireland bishop of Raphoe, was born on 27 October 1758, the son of the Revd Dr Alexander Bisset (died 1782), chancellor of Armagh, into a family from Lessendrum, Drumblade, near Huntly, Aberdeenshire. Like his father, William was educated at Westminster School, where he was admitted a king's scholar in 1771, and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 16 April 1775, and was elected a scholar in the same year; he graduated BA (4 November 1779), and MA (7 February 1782). In 1784 he was presented to the rectory of Dunbin, co. Louth, which he resigned upon his collation on 31 January 1791 to the prebend of Loughgall, or Levalleaglish, in the cathedral church of Armagh. In 1794 he became rector of Clonmore, and on 29 September 1804 was collated to the archdeaconry of Ross, in the united episcopate of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross. In 1807 he resigned as prebend of Loughgall in order to become rector of Donoghmore, and was appointed in 1812 to the rectory of Loughgilly. All his preferments, with the exception of the archdeaconry of Ross, were within the diocese of Armagh. In August 1817 he was appointed to the chancellorship of Armagh, thus succeeding his father after an interval of twenty-five years. 
In June 1822 Bisset was promoted by Marquess Wellesley, lord lieutenant of Ireland, to the bishopric of Raphoe. His administration of the diocese, which met with general approval, included the building of several churches and improvements to the palace at Raphoe. Bisset also made up the deficit in funds when the parliamentary grant was withdrawn from the Association for Discountenancing Vice. He was later pressed to become archbishop of Dublin following the death of William Magee in August 1831, but declined on the grounds of ill health. Bisset was married but nothing is known of his wife except that she predeceased him. He died on 5 September 1834, while on a visit to his nephew at Lessendrum. His clergy erected to his memory a monument in Raphoe Cathedral, with an inscription by W. Archer Butler. At his death the see of Raphoe became annexed to that of Derry. 


@@@@@


doc= 2486


Bix, Angel (1645/6-1695), Franciscan friar, was born in London; the surname may be the same as Biss. In 1655 a Brigit Biss was the mother of a Poor Clare nun named Margaret Figg in Flanders; Bix may have been a relative of hers as he later gave devoted service as chaplain to the Poor Clares in that area. When he died in 1695 it was said that he was forty-nine years old, having spent twenty-nine years as a Franciscan and twenty-three as a priest; he was therefore ordained about 1672. 
Nothing is now known of Bix's early years and education, nor of his entry into the Franciscan order; however, a gifted preacher, his subsequent priestly life was divided among England, northern France, and the southern Netherlands. The English Franciscan chapter held at Somerset House in London in 1677 asked him to go to Aire-sur-la-Lys, south of St Omer, to supply for the chaplain to the Poor Clares there, Joachim St Ann. In 1680 the chapter was held in Bruges, and Bix was reappointed to Aire; at the chapter held in York a year later he was transferred as chaplain to the Poor Clares in Bruges. In 1684 he was recalled to the mission in England, and was succeeded at Bruges by Joseph Woodward. 
Three years later, with James II on the throne, Bix was stationed as preacher at the new friary beside the arches at Lincoln's Inn Fields in London, and became chaplain to the Spanish ambassador. Still there in 1688 he was elected titular guardian of the vacated Canterbury friary, which post gave him a vote in chapter. In the same year he published 'A sermon on the passion... preach'd before her majesty the queen dowager in her chappel at Sommerset House upon Good Fryday, 13 April 1688'. However, on the same day that the prince of Orange landed in Devon, on 4 November, a mob attacked the friary. James was asked to send soldiers to protect the friars but after his own flight the following month he had to tell the friars to vacate their residence beside the arches. Three or four years later, when it had been repaired at the friars' own expense, it became the residence of the Portuguese ambassador; once the friars' ten-year lease expired they had no more to do with it. 
Bix left London for the continent in 1688 and in 1690 was again chaplain to the Poor Clares at Aire, and later to the third order sisters in the ancient palace at Princenhoff in Bruges. He returned to England about 1692, and in 1693 was the 'praeses' or local superior at Osmotherley in Yorkshire; two years later he was at York itself. He died at Durham on 15 January 1695. 


@@@@@


doc= 2487


Bizzarri, Pietro (b. 1525, d. in or after 1586), historian and spy, was born probably in Sassoferrato Castello (Marche), Italy, the son of Antonio Bizzarri, a soldier who died in 1528. He must also have lived in Perugia, hence his common description as 'Perusinus'. He was sent to Venice for an excellent education in classical letters. There in his eighteenth year (1542-3) he was converted to protestantism, perhaps under the influence of Bernardino Ochino and the writings of Erasmus. Now devoted to evangelical reform, Bizzarri left Italy in the summer of 1545 for Germany, settling first in Nuremberg, and then in Wittenberg, where he sought his spiritual guide, Philip Melanchthon, with whom he planned to study. However, Charles V's victory at Muhlberg (1547) resulted in Bizzarri abandoning Germany, and after stopping briefly at several German universities he eventually crossed the channel to England, where he was resident from 1549. 
What drove Bizzarri to England is unknown, although it is probable that other Italians who had adopted reformed beliefs, such as Ochino and Pietro Martire Vermigli, and the German Martin Bucer, had much to do with his decision. The intervention of powerful friends is clear from the young man's career: in July 1549 he was named a fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, by the royal visitors. This appointment was, however, brief. The death of Bucer in February 1551 and Bizzarri's increasingly close relations with Francis Russell resulted in his resigning his fellowship to follow Russell to court, perhaps as his secretary and Italian tutor, hoping to build a career as a poet and courtier. Unfortunately, the death of the king and the accession of Mary exploded Bizzarri's ambitions and drove him back to the continent. 
Bizzarri next appears in Venice in December 1558 complimenting Elizabeth I on her accession. Subsequently he returned to England, where he dedicated a beautiful manuscript, 'De principe tractatus', to the queen. In return for this treatise -- essentially a collection of commonplaces on the ideal ruler, heavily influenced by Erasmian eirenic principles -- he received a pension from the crown and the living of Alton Pancras, Dorset, from Bishop Jewel of Salisbury, through the mediation of Archbishop Parker, whom Bizzarri had certainly known at Cambridge. Moreover, he seems to have re-established his connection with Russell, now earl of Bedford. In February 1564 Bedford was appointed governor of Berwick and took Bizzarri north with him. Consequently, Bizzarri became associated with the court of Mary Stuart, and in the hope of acquiring the patronage of the Scottish queen as well he presented to her a Latin treatise, 'De bello et pace'. This is a much more original tract than the one which he presented to Elizabeth. Bizzarri had himself seen and experienced the effects of civil and foreign conflict, both in England and on the continent, and this gives urgency to his discussion of the horrors that result from war. Peace, he argues, should be the highest ambition of any ruler, since peace is Christ's message. War, by contrast, is an affront to God, causing true religion to be neglected and making resistance to the Turks impossible. 
For some reason Bizzarri left Scotland almost immediately afterwards, requesting permission from William Cecil on 12 June 1564 to settle on the continent with the continuation of his pension. That summer he left for Venice, but stopped for the autumn in Padua, where he engaged in informal studies. It is also at this time that Bizzarri began his lifelong career as an intelligencer, passing political and diplomatic information to Cecil. Although there is no clear evidence, it is possible that Bizzarri had been used at the Scottish court as an agent, and that it was Cecil who encouraged him to settle in Venice to collect and transmit information at a time when no Venetian ambassador was resident in England. 
Bizzarri also frequented the literary circles of Venice. He solicited poems in praise of Elizabeth for his first volume, 'Varia opuscula', printed by Aldus in 1565, which not only contained his earlier poems to English courtiers but also included the works dedicated to Elizabeth and Mary Stuart. Also, in 1566 Bizzarri edited and had printed 'La santa', a comedy by his fellow Italian exile in England, Mario Cardoini. This productive period in Venice also included the completion of his 'Historia della guerra fatta in Ungheria', which follows the events of the current Turkish-imperial confrontation in Hungary, written in an almost journalistic style. 
Bizzarri, however, fled Venice almost immediately afterwards, and had the book printed at Lyons in 1568, dedicated to Bedford. Perhaps a warning from the Inquisition forced him from Italy, or Cecil may have ordered his return as a result of the flight to England of Mary Stuart, whom Bizzarri had praised and briefly served. From April 1570 until August 1572 Bizzarri was again in England, apparently in the service of Bedford. During his absence from Venice he seems to have arranged for another informer, della Roche, to send reports on European affairs, implying that he managed information for Cecil as well as collecting it. Leaving England again for Venice, Bizzarri travelled by way of Paris and found himself in danger that August during the St Bartholomew's day massacre. He sought refuge with the English ambassador, Sir Francis Walsingham, beginning a lasting association not only with the ambassador but also with Hubert Languet, and through him with Philip Sidney, with whom Bizzarri would engage in correspondence. 
Once safely able to flee Paris, Bizzarri travelled to Basel, where he had printed by February 1573 a work prepared in London, his 'Cyprium bellum' -- Cyprus had just been conquered by the Turks. To this he added a Latin translation of his earlier history of the Hungarian war, now entitled 'Pannonicum bellum', which he dedicated to the Elector August of Saxony, probably on the advice of his new friend, Languet, who was August's representative in Paris. Bizzarri then travelled to Dresden, where the elector honoured him with an annual pension of 100 thalers. 
Bizzarri then began to function as an intelligencer for August of Saxony as well, with a first report from Augsburg sent in April. In September 1573 Bizzarri's pension was increased by 50 thalers, and the Italian enjoyed a comfortable, secure income for the first time, acquiring a large house in Nuremberg. He even attempted to arrange a marriage with the eighteen-year-old daughter of his former fellow Italian protestant exile in England, Pietro Martire Vermigli, although the negotiations failed. 
Bizzarri remained in Augsburg until early 1576 when he is found in Cologne. Beginning in 1575-6 he also sent intelligence reports to Walsingham, a practice he continued for the rest of his career. Although Cecil still received reports, they became less frequent than those to Walsingham or August. From his base in Cologne, Bizzarri travelled widely in Germany, but by January 1578 he was established in Antwerp, where he frequented the circle of the printer Christopher Plantin. It was Plantin who in 1579 printed Bizzarri's most ambitious work, his immense history of Genoa ('Senatus populique Genuensis... historiae atque annales'). Unfortunately, despite having personally presented his work, Bizzarri was refused any reward. The senate had been prejudiced against the history by Uberto Foglietta, the city's official historian, who denounced its style and suggested parts were heretical. Although he importuned the republic for years after, Bizzarri received nothing for this monumental piece of scholarship, which was later placed on the index of prohibited books. 
Despite this failure, Bizzarri continued to write histories for Plantin's press. In 1583 appeared his Persian history, 'Rerum Persicarum historia', dedicated to August of Saxony, although two presentation copies were also sent to England: one for the queen and one for Walsingham. Bizzarri left for Dresden to present the book, and narrowly escaped death when his ship was captured on the Rhine by Catholic soldiers. Nevertheless, the voyage was a success: August generously granted Bizzarri 100 thalers and increased his pension. On 11 July he returned to Antwerp, where he produced his last work, 'De quattuor monarchiis', and sent it to Frankfurt for printing. Unfortunately, the work was lost and no trace of it remains. 
In August 1585, although very ill, Bizzarri was forced to flee the Spanish armies of Alessandro Farnese, first to Dordrecht and then to England, where he was resident by February 1586; but the death of August of Saxony in that year drew him back to Dresden to plead for continuation of his pension. From Saxony Bizzarri returned to the Netherlands, where from The Hague on 23 November 1586 he wrote his last letter to Cecil. He must have died soon after, since no further trace of him survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 2488


Blaauw, William Henry (1793-1870), antiquary, was born on 25 May 1793 in Queen Anne Street, Marylebone, Middlesex, the only son of William Blaauw (1748-1808), an immigrant from Amsterdam, and his second wife, Louisa (died 1812), daughter of Christopher Puller of Woodford, Essex. He was educated at school in Sunbury and then at Eton College and privately before going to Christ Church, Oxford, where he gained a first-class BA in classics in 1815 and proceeded MA in 1818. On 24 June 1825 he married Harriet, daughter of John King MP and under-secretary of state, but she died in 1828; both daughters of the marriage died young. His second wife, whom he married at St Marylebone on 16 June 1832, was Margaret Emily (1798/9-1881), daughter of Sir John St Leger Gillman, bt, of Curraheen, co. Cork; their elder son died young, and a son and a daughter survived him. His first wife's marriage settlement gave Blaauw an annual income of $1000 for life. 
Between 1827 and 1837 Blaauw lived at 24 Lower Brook Street, St George's Hanover Square, London. In 1834 he purchased a 39 acre estate in Newick, Sussex, and after greatly enlarging the farmhouse on the estate, Beechland, he took up residence there in 1837. As a country gentleman, Blaauw extended his estate by judicious purchases, sat on the bench, and served in the lieutenancy. The distant view of the battlefield of Lewes inspired him to study the upheavals of Henry III's reign and in 1844 to publish 'The Barons' War', which drew extensively on chronicles then only in manuscript. As many as 120 years later R. F. Treharne considered that it 'is still the only account of the baronial reform movement as such, and remains a work of great perception and value today' ('The Battle of Lewes, 1264', 1964, 121). 

'The Barons' War' brought Blaauw to the attention of those active in organized historical scholarship. He was known as a very valuable supporter of the Archaeological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland from its first congress (1845). He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1850 and also of the Royal Geographical Society, and he served as a council member of the Camden Society from 1848 and as the society's treasurer from 1862. Nearer home, he was a founder of the Sussex Archaeological Society in 1846, its first secretary until 1859, and the first editor of 'Sussex Archaeological Collections' (1847-58). As a gentleman and scholar of independent means, he made the society possible by providing the bridge both to the national societies, and between the Sussex gentry and nobility and the lesser professional men of Lewes, such as Mark Antony Lower, who were the other prime movers. 
Blaauw did not again produce sustained research to match 'The Barons' War', although he was preparing a revision at the time of his death (edited by C. H. Pearson, 1871). All his contributions to 'Sussex Archaeological Collections' (as also to the 'Archaeological Journal') were based on a single or a few documents, or described one antiquity, and they ended in 1861. His public service culminated in the office of high sheriff in 1859. A portrait in middle age suggests a man of medium height and build, clean shaven and balding. An obituary referred to a melancholy illness which had long precluded any exertion. Blaauw died on 26 April 1870 at Beechland and was buried on 3 May in the churchyard at Newick. 


@@@@@


doc= 2489


Blackadder, Robert (c.1445-1508), administrator and archbishop of Glasgow, may have been born in Berwickshire; he was the brother of Sir Patrick Blackadder of Tulliallan, Fife. He determined as BA at the University of St Andrews in 1462, was admitted to the faculty of arts at the University of Paris in 1464, and graduated MA there in 1465. A study of his seven visits to Rome from 1471 onwards, and especially after his admission as protonotary apostolic in 1476, shows him to have been a strong and forceful pursuer of causes for James III, James IV, and for himself at the papal curia, despite the debts he incurred with the apostolic camera as he sought to annex the precentorship of Dunkeld, the archdeaconry of St Andrews, and the archdeaconry of Aberdeen to his rectory of Lasswade, Edinburghshire, before being provided to the see of Aberdeen on 14 July 1480. He was transferred unconsecrated to Glasgow on 19 March 1483; the cathedral chapter there had already elected George Carmichael to the see by 13 February 1483, but this election was annulled by the pope, and Blackadder was consecrated in Rome between 13 and 30 April 1483. 
Blackadder, conscious of the ancient traditions of Glasgow as a 'filia specialis' of the Holy See, deeply resented being subject to the jurisdiction of William Scheves (died 1497) when St Andrews was raised to the primacy of the Scottish church in 1487, and with his diocese he was formally exempted from its jurisdiction by Innocent VIII ('r'. 1484-92) on 25 May 1488. Backed by a strong plea from James IV, whom Blackadder had supported in his rebellion against his father in 1488, Glasgow was raised to archiepiscopal and metropolitan, but not primatial status on 9 January 1492 -- a situation which could only deepen the rift between the two metropolitan jurisdictions. Nevertheless, Blackadder remained an active, hard-working participant in the daily government of the realm. He was one of James III's representatives at the coronation of Henry VII at Westminster in 1485 and visited Spain twice, in 1495 and 1496, to seek a bride for James IV. He helped to negotiate the terms of the marriage settlement between James IV and Margaret Tudor, and performed their marriage ceremony in Holyrood Abbey on 8 August 1503. 
A learned, orthodox archbishop, Blackadder also devoted much time and energy to his cathedral, refashioning its choir and transepts and extending a project to provide a proper setting for the shrine of St Kentigern, besides building a chapel at Culross, where St Kentigern was thought to have been educated. In February 1508 he set off on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem. In June, having got to Venice, he made his will, leaving most of his goods and money for the completion of his building projects in Glasgow, to religious orders to preach the gospel throughout his archdiocese, and to the poor. But on 28 July 1508 he died at sea between Venice and Jaffa with twenty-six other pilgrims, almost certainly from typhoid or cholera, and never reached Jerusalem. He was probably buried at sea on the day of his death or soon after. 


@@@@@


doc= 2490


Blackadder, Adam (supp. fl. 1319), supposed author, is said by Thomas Dempster, writing in the early seventeenth century, to have taught philosophy at Cracow and Bologna before settling in Paris, where he was rector of the university and head of the College de Tournai. With a precision which he does nothing to explain, Dempster states that Blackadder flourished in 1319. He allegedly wrote 'Dissertatio pro Alexandro Magno contra T. Livii locum ex decad. I. lib. IX', said to have been published at Lyons. None of this has been confirmed by subsequent research. There is no record of Blackadder at either Bologna or Paris; his supposed work on Livy cannot be traced; and he cannot have taught in Cracow at the time Dempster suggests, since the university there was not founded until 1364. It is possible that he owes his shadowy existence to confusion with the Adam Blackadder who was prior of Coldingham from 1528 to 1541 and thereafter commendator of Dundrennan. This Adam Blackadder matriculated at St Andrews in 1532, but there is otherwise no indication that he had an academic career. In any case, Dempster's unreliability makes even this supposed confusion of identity quite uncertain. 


@@@@@


doc= 2491


Black, Adam (1784-1874), publisher and politician, was born on 20 February 1784 at 7 Charles Street, Edinburgh, the second of the three sons of Charles Black (1755/6-1826), master builder, and his wife, Isabella Nicol (1757/8-1847) of Drygrange Farm near Melrose. 
After initially attending a school in the Pleasance, Edinburgh, Black was sent to the Edinburgh high school in October 1791. His progress was hampered by the need to help at home. He attended Greek and Latin classes at Edinburgh University in 1798-9, again without much profit. In March 1799 he began an apprenticeship with John Fairbairn, an Edinburgh bookseller, a period he described as 'a dreary, disgusting servitude, in which I wasted five of the best years of my life' (Nicolson, 18). At this time he also served in the Edinburgh Volunteers. In 1804 Black took employment as an assistant at Lackington, Allen & Co., the 'Temple of the Muses', in Finsbury, London, and stayed there for over two years. He was subjected to a thorough drilling, the hardships of which he would recount to his own employees in later life. 
Having returned to Edinburgh, Black married Isabella, daughter of James Tait, an Edinburgh builder, on 4 June 1817. Her brother, William Tait (1793-1864), was later well known as the publisher of 'Tait's Edinburgh Magazine'. Adam and Isabella had four sons and five daughters who lived to survive their father. Black set up in business on his own account, and by the time he moved his shop into the old General Post Office premises on the North Bridge in 1823 he had begun to be recognized as one of the principal booksellers in Edinburgh. He took his nephew, Charles Black, into partnership, thereby establishing the house of A. and C. Black. With the collapse of Archibald Constable & Co. in 1827 and Black's acquisition from them of the copyright to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', he moved his business into the first rank of publishers. In addition A. and C. Black became the Edinburgh distributing agents of the important whig-Liberal periodical the 'Edinburgh Review'. In 1830 he began to issue the seventh edition of the 'Encyclopaedia', and by 1837 the firm of A. and C. Black was its sole proprietor. An eighth edition was completed in 1861 and a ninth was in preparation at the time of his death. Black also contributed articles to the 'Encyclopaedia'. His firm consolidated its position still further in 1851 by purchasing the remainder of the copyright on Sir Walter Scott's works. These were then published in a variety of editions, the popular sixpenny edition of Scott's novels with particular success. At this time also Black moved to new, extensive premises on the other side of the North Bridge. 
From the period of his return from London, and at some risk at that time to his business prospects, Black was also active as a Liberal reformer in Edinburgh politics. His initial power-base was the Edinburgh Merchant Company, of which he served two terms as assistant and one, from 1831, as master. Black was consulted by the Parliament House whigs on whether the mercantile community of the city would support the reformers' landmark protest meeting eventually held in the Pantheon in December 1820. In 1822 he moved and carried a series of resolutions in the Merchant Company welcoming Lord Advocate William Rae's proposals to open up the system of burgh administration but at the same time attacking them for not addressing the root of the problem. This early example shows the direction his political activity was to take, namely that of pressing for limited constitutional and civil reform. 
In addition to pressure for burgh reform Black was instrumental in getting the Merchant Company to petition against the 'Test and Corporation Acts', which imposed civil disabilities on religious dissenters. Black was himself a prominent voluntary dissenter and later a member of the Voluntary Church Association for the diffusion of voluntary principles. He also used his influence with the Merchant Company to support the movement for city improvement which resulted in the development of the George IV Bridge and Johnston Terrace areas round the castle. Black was a governor of the Merchant Maiden Hospital and was active in the 1820s in various positions, including that of chairman, in the Edinburgh chamber of commerce. 
With this record of public activity behind him Black went on to take a prominent role in the demonstrations called in Edinburgh to press for parliamentary reform in 1831 and 1832. He was convener of the first Liberal committee set up after the passage of the 'Reform Bill' to support the two whig candidates for Edinburgh, Francis Jeffrey and James Abercromby, at the election of December 1832. In 1833 Black was himself elected to the reformed town council and became city treasurer. Finding the city bankrupt and deeply in debt, in the following three years he laid the basis of the settlement with the city's creditors which was completed by his successor as treasurer, Duncan McLaren. Black refused to stand for re-election in 1836, but by late 1840 he was again a member and was then the loser in a very bitter contest for the provostship with Sir James Forrest, also a Liberal. The campaign against Black was explicitly based on objections to his voluntary religious beliefs, and his eventual election as lord provost in 1843, in the changed religious atmosphere immediately surrounding the Disruption of that year, was seen as a triumph for unsectarian principles. He was re-elected in 1846 and left office and the council in 1848, before the end of his second term. At this time he declined the offer of a knighthood. Black himself described his main achievement as demonstrating that the interests of the whole community could be safely entrusted to a voluntary dissenter. 
Overlapping with these years during which he held civic office, Black was also active in other roles. In 1839 he became a director of the Edinburgh Zoological Gardens Association and was elected the first president of the Philosophical Institution at its foundation in 1845. As provost he was an 'ex officio' director of the Edinburgh Water Company, and as a leading shareholder in the Edinburgh and Leith Gas Company he was its chairman for a period from 1846. His spirit of religious tolerance found expression in his chairmanship from 1846 to 1848 of the Edinburgh Cemetery Company, which was set up to facilitate Sunday burials, especially important to working people, in the face of opposition from the sabbatarian party. 
Adam Black owes his significance beyond his contribution to the development of reformed municipal government in Edinburgh to his involvement with the parliamentary politics of the city. His position as link man between leading whig lawyers and the business community in Edinburgh was enhanced by the contacts he formed with nationally prominent figures, especially whigs, through being agent for the 'Edinburgh Review' and publisher of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. 
One of these was T. B. Macaulay, whose candidature for the city at a by-election in 1839 Black suggested to the Liberal committee. For the next eight years Black was the major channel of communication between Macaulay and his constituency. Seen through the eyes of Duncan McLaren it was at this time in the early 1840s that Black chose to remain true to his whig roots, especially on the subject of corn law repeal, and began to find himself at odds with more 'advanced' Liberals. Although personally in favour of immediate and total repeal, Black, unlike McLaren, remained loyal to whigs such as Macaulay, who were trying to find a compromise based on a fixed duty. A further source of division between Black and more radical Liberals and voluntary dissenters was his opposition to attempts to repeal the grant to the Roman Catholic college at Maynooth in Ireland. This issue had been made into a 'cause celebre' by the Peel government's decision to increase the grant and make it permanent in 1845. Black's position was that it was unfair to select this particular grant for withdrawal while public money was still given to other religious institutions. 
At the general election of 1847 Black gave public expression to his mortification at Macaulay's defeat in Edinburgh. This result was in large measure caused by Macaulay's positions, similar to those of Black, on issues such as corn law repeal and Maynooth. At the next general election (1852) Black took the lead in getting Macaulay again returned for Edinburgh, a candidacy which Macaulay himself made a point of taking no step to further. The election also saw the defeat of Black's former town council colleague Duncan McLaren. 
On Macaulay's retirement in early 1856 Black was elected in his place. Although his partner, Charles, had died in 1854, Black was now relieved of the pressure of running his business by the participation of his sons. He identified his support as coming from the whigs, the Roman Catholics (because of his position on Maynooth), the publicans, and the 'Scotsman' newspaper. A combination of radical Liberals, Conservatives, and many voluntary dissenters (despite Black being one of their number) gathered round his opponent, Francis Brown-Douglas. One of the leaders of this anti-whig grouping was again Duncan McLaren. 
Black was re-elected twice for Edinburgh, in 1857 and 1859, and sat in parliament until his defeat at the general election of 1865. Especially in the latter part of his parliamentary career he found himself more and more out of step with the increasingly powerful advanced or 'independent' Liberals in Edinburgh led by Duncan McLaren, who came top of the poll in 1865. To them, his earlier offences were compounded by his reluctance to further extend the franchise and a willingness to compromise on the still unsolved problem of the Edinburgh annuity tax. 
Black was comfortable with the prevailing Palmerstonian unwillingness to engage in electoral reform. He voted against the Disraeli-Derby 'Reform Bill' in 1859, against lowering the franchise to $6 as proposed in the Liberal government's bill of 1860, and more than once against Baines's 'Borough Franchise Bill'. Black believed that the franchise was a duty to be exercised in the interests of others rather than a right. During the 1859 election he commented on the tyranny and oppression prevalent in some trades, which he implied made their members unfit to be electors. Together with his position on the franchise, these comments were held to have particularly offended new, mostly working-class electors who had come onto the register by 1865. 
Black's acceptance of Lord Advocate Moncreiff's bill to reform the Edinburgh annuity tax was, in McLaren's opinion, even more important than the franchise question in bringing about his defeat. He had long been associated with the movement to abolish this tax, raised to support the city's established clergy. In the 1830s he had been recognized as an authority on the subject of ecclesiastical revenues in the city, and had produced a report which had provided ammunition for agitation against the tax. His brother-in-law, William Tait, though an established churchman, had been imprisoned for four days for non-payment. In 1860, however, Black had abandoned a bill of his own and with it the principle of total abolition, and had compromised on Moncreiff's which, while it lowered the tax, made it perpetual. In 1865 McLaren was therefore able to draw on the support of those who continued to press for the tax's total removal. 
Black's parliamentary career was also marked by his interest in educational matters. He was partially successful in his attempt to ensure that the 'Scottish Universities Act' of 1858 preserved the part played by the Edinburgh town council in the management of Edinburgh University. Untypically for a voluntary he supported the giving of state aid to the ragged schools. In 1864 he was appointed to the Argyll commission of inquiry into education in Scotland. For Black the 'religious difficulty' did not exist and he was consistently in favour of an unsectarian, national educational system. 
After his defeat Black continued to travel, visiting Spain and Wiesbaden, the latter for his health. He had also been in 1863 to Italy, where he met the pope. He continued to be interested in his own firm until his retirement in favour of his sons in 1870. Twenty-six years later Black's grandson acquired the biographical register 'Who's Who', which remains one of the titles for which the company is best-known. In addition to his publishing work Black acted as chairman of the Edinburgh and Leith Shipping Company, and participated in the management of other companies, such as the Union Bank, in this period. When not attending to business he spent the greater part of his time at his country house at Prior Bank, near Melrose. 
At eighty Black was variously described as having an elastic and wiry frame, good features marked by the effects of smallpox, and a firm nose and mouth, 'altogether the form and face of a strong man, physically and mentally, eminently healthy, capable, trustworthy' (Nicolson, 256). His strict religion, which included daily religious observances at home, was not at all marked by intolerance or sanctimoniousness. Black could relish a good joke. 
Adam Black died at his Edinburgh home, 38 Drummond Place, on 24 January 1874, and was buried in the Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh, on 28 January. His wife survived him. Three years later a statue in his memory was placed in East Princes Street Gardens. This had been proposed in 1854 but turned down by Black himself on the grounds that statues should not be put up to those still alive. It is likely that the vein of shyness in his temperament played just as big a role as any such principle. Black may have seen himself as the link man, the facilitator, for the whigs in Edinburgh in their struggle to achieve moderate constitutional and civic reform. He himself, however, was a central figure in mid-nineteenth century Scottish politics whose political fate mirrored that of the whigs to whom he remained so loyal. In the vanguard of Liberalism up until the 1830s, he subsequently, by standing still and continuing to concentrate on the limited whig reform agenda of civil, religious, and commercial freedom, slowly found himself left behind as those such as Duncan McLaren moved on to forge an independent Liberalism. This drew strength from those interested in more franchise reform and involved in the Edinburgh trades union movement, people with whom Adam Black publicly said he was out of sympathy. He refused to 'bow popularly low' ('The Scotsman', 26 Jan 1874) and, like Macaulay before him in 1847, paid the price electorally. 


@@@@@


doc= 2492


Black, Alexander (1789-1864), Free Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born in Aberdeen on 18 January 1789, where his father was a gardener. Educated at the grammar school and at Marischal College, Aberdeen, Black's initial interest in medicine gave way to the study of divinity. Licensed by the presbytery of Aberdeen in February 1814, Black was at first assistant to Dr James Ross, East Church, Aberdeen. He was a candidate for the divinity chair in King's College, Aberdeen, in 1817. When Duncan Mearns was preferred, Black succeeded him as minister of Tarves, Aberdeenshire, where he was ordained on 1 April 1818. He married, on 9 November 1826, Rachel (died 1839/40), daughter of Alexander Booth, a merchant of Aberdeen; the couple had two sons and a daughter. 
Black received appointment as professor of divinity in Marischal College in 1831, having received the degree of DD there in 1824. A formidable linguist, able to converse in nineteen languages and correspond in twelve, he was a natural choice as a member of a mission of inquiry to the Jews in 1839. His colleagues were Alexander Keith and two young ministers, R. M. McCheyne and A. A. Bonar. The rigours of travel in the Holy Land, exemplified by Black's fall from a camel, persuaded the senior members of the party to opt out of the later stages of the journey. Their return home, via the Danube, came to a halt at Pest in Hungary, where illness prostrated them. These mishaps were later seen as providential and led in time to the establishment of a mission to the Jews in Pest. However, misfortune had not finished with Black, who returned to Scotland to find his wife on her deathbed. 
At the Disruption of 1843 Black adhered to the Free Church and was appointed professor of biblical exegesis in New College, Edinburgh, where he remained until his retirement in 1857. For whatever reason, his tenure at New College was deemed a disappointment: despite his prominent position Black was not subsequently included in the pantheon of Free Church ministers, 'Disruption Worthies' (1881). It may have been that, as an obituary stated, 'The very fulness of his resources was the chief cause of his comparative unacceptability as a preacher and a professor' ('Aberdeen Journal'). Certainly, his considerable knowledge was not transmitted in any publication of note. In his final years Black occupied himself with the study of Chinese. He died at his home, 16 Claremont Crescent, Edinburgh, on 27 January 1864, after failing to recover from injuries received in a fall; he was buried in Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh, on 30 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 2493


Black, James (1788/9-1867), physician, the son of William Black, merchant, and his wife, Janet, 'nee' Douglas, was born in Scotland and admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1808. He then entered the Royal Navy and at the end of the Napoleonic wars retired on half pay. After beginning practice at Newton Stewart, he shortly afterwards moved to Bolton, where he lived until 1839. From that date to 1848 he practised at Manchester. He then returned to Bolton, where he stayed until 1856. Black became MD at Glasgow in 1820; LRCS, London, in 1823; and FRCP in 1860. He was for some time physician to the Bolton Infirmary and Dispensary, and to the Manchester Union Hospital. While practising in Manchester he also lectured on forensic medicine at the Royal School of Medicine. He was sometime president of the Manchester Geological Society, and he was an original member of the British Association (1831); he was also elected FGS (1838) and FRSE (1857). 
Black wrote a number of medical works, and also published several papers on geological subjects and antiquarian matters. In 1837 he published in the 'Transactions of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association' a paper entitled 'A medico-topographical, geological, and statistical sketch of Bolton and its neighbourhood'. On the establishment of a free library in Bolton, Black was chosen as a member of its committee and he published 'A few words in aid of literature and science, on the occasion of opening the public library, Bolton' (1853). 
Black, who was married to Jane Galt, eventually moved to Edinburgh, where he died at his home, 2 George Square, on 30 April 1867, aged seventy-eight; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 2494


Black, John (1783-1855), journalist and newspaper editor, was born on 7 November 1783 in a poor cottage on a farm called Burnhouses, 4 miles north of Duns in Berwickshire. His father, Ebenezer Black, had been a pedlar in Perthshire, but in the decline of life he accepted employment at Burnhouses, and married Janet Gray, another worker on the farm. Four years after the marriage Janet was left a widow with one daughter and a son, John, and before the boy reached the age of twelve, his mother and sister had died. He was taken in by his mother's brother John Gray, a labourer on the same farm, who sent him to the parish school at Duns. Black gained there a knowledge of English, Latin, and Greek. He made many friends at Duns, among them James Gray, poet and missionary, and James Cleghorn, actuary. At the age of thirteen Black was articled by his uncle to Mr Turnbull, a writer of Duns, with whom he remained until 1800. During this time he borrowed extensively from the subscription library in the town, and formed a very creditable collection of his own, beginning the habit of book collecting that was to become so important in his adult life. He accepted a well-paid clerkship in the branch bank of the British Linen Company, but was obliged to leave the town on account of a practical joke played upon one of the 'respectabilities'. 
Black found a situation in Edinburgh in the office of Mr Selkrig, an accountant, who allowed his clerk time to attend classes at the university. Black's official duties were strictly performed, his attendance in the lecture-rooms never failed, and he undertook any remunerative work that was offered, notably some translations from the German for Sir David Brewster's 'Edinburgh Cyclopaedia'. He met with an intellectual companion in William Mudford, the son of a London shopkeeper. 'Cobbett's Weekly Political Register' was then a popular serial, and there Black and Mudford engaged in another 'battle of the books', the former defending ancient classical study, the latter insisting on the acquisition of modern learning as better. 
In Edinburgh the hot-tempered Black is reported to have delivered a dozen challenges before he was thirty years old. His schoolfellow James Gray was now classical master at Edinburgh high school, and exercised a moderating influence upon him. In 1809 Black became engaged to a lady from Carlisle, but broke off the engagement when an expected increase of income did not materialize. This seemed to have had a demoralizing effect upon Black. He fell into low company and bad habits, quarrelled with his employer, from whom he was receiving a salary of $150 a year, and distressed his best friends. 
William Mudford was then in London and editor of the 'Universal Magazine', to which Black contributed articles on the Italian drama and on German literature from 1807 to 1809. It was through Mudford's persuasion that Black left Edinburgh for London in 1810. Charles Mackay gives as a doubtful statement of Black himself, that he walked with a few pence in his pocket all the way from Berwickshire to London, subsisting on the hospitality of farmers. He carried a letter of introduction to Robert Hartley Cromek, engraver and publisher, who received him at once into his friendly home. Three months after his arrival in London Black was engaged as a reporter and translator of foreign correspondence by James Perry, who, with an assistant master at Charterhouse School named Gray, had in 1789 become the proprietor of the 'Morning Chronicle'. Black's longer translations included 'Humboldt's Political Essay on New Spain' (4 vols., 1811-12), 'Travels in Norway and Lapland, by Leopold von Buch' (1813), 'Berzelius on a System of Mineralogy', and 'Schlegel's Lectures on Dramatic Literature' (1814). 
Black's first marriage, in December 1812, was to the mistress of a London friend, after a five-month courtship promoted and encouraged by the duplicitous pair. The union was extremely unhappy, as his wife made no pretence of love for him, and in the space of two months she had involved him in debt, sold some of his furniture, and clandestinely renewed acquaintance with her former lover. In February 1813 she left Black, and in 1814 he sought a divorce. An arrangement was made that she should go to Scotland and be domiciled there long enough to sue for a divorce on her petition. The project, however, failed, the proof of domicile of both parties not being deemed adequate by the court. Black, in full expectation of a divorce, had offered marriage to an old friend, a 'Miss Cromeck', possibly a relative of his former employer who became his housekeeper and bore the name of Mrs Black. The undivorced wife continued to extract money from her husband, and this persecution went on for many years. This episode in Black's life explains the disorganization of his official labours which led to a quarrel with James Perry, but due explanation being given, the breach was healed. In 1817 Perry's health was giving way, and the functions of editor gradually devolved on Black. 
The 'Morning Chronicle' was the most uncompromising of all the opposition papers, and Black maintained its position, greatly assisted by the counsels of James Mill. John Stuart Mill wrote of Black: 'I have always considered Black as the first journalist who carried criticism & the spirit of reform into the details of English institutions. Those who are not old enough to remember those times can hardly believe what the state of public discussion then was. People now & then attacked the Constitution & the boroughmongers but none thought of censuring the law or the courts of justice & to say a word against the unpaid magistracy was a sort of blasphemy. Black was the writer who carried the warfare into these subjects... And by doing this he broke the spell. ('Later Letters', 978-80)' Black's methods were also admired by Jeremy Bentham, who called him 'the greatest publicist yet produced in Great Britain' (Escott, 159). At the outset of his editorial career Black attracted much public attention by his determined condemnation of the conduct of the authorities in the Peterloo massacre (16 August 1819), and he was denigrated for this by Cobbett's 'Register' as 'Doctor Black the feel-osopher'. In the matter of Queen Caroline's trial the 'Chronicle' leaned to the unpopular side, deeming the queen guilty, and the circulation of the paper was greatly diminished. 
In 1821 Perry died, and his executors sold for $42,000 the newspaper which thirty years before had been bought for $150. Black retained his post of editor, but the new proprietor, William Innell Clement, owner also of 'The Observer' and of 'Bell's Life', had not the public spirit of his predecessor, and the paper began to decline in commercial terms. In 1834 it was again sold, for the sum of $16,500, to Sir John Easthope and two partners. 'The Times' had outdistanced the 'Chronicle' when, by shifting its politics in 1835 to support Sir Robert Peel's tory ministry, it caused great numbers of its whig subscribers to abandon it and support the 'Chronicle'. This was a turn of events that greatly pleased Black, as his rivalry with Sterling of 'The Times' had been intense, and may have suggested the battles of Pott and Slurk in 'The Pickwick Papers'. 
In November 1835 Black demonstrated that his hot temper and keen sense of honour had not been characteristics merely of his youth, as he fought a duel with John Arthur Roebuck. The latter had published a pamphlet in which cowardice was attributed to the editor of the 'Chronicle'. Although shots were fired at the meeting, no one was injured. 
When Lord Melbourne returned to office (8 April 1835) he found a useful ally and a congenial companion in Black, who supported the ministry with all his powers, and wrote some especially vigorous articles against Sir Robert Peel in 1839. During his next administration, Melbourne professed a desire to serve Black, who declined the offer on the ground that he 'lived happily on his income'. 'Then by -- I envy you', said the peer, 'and you're the only man I ever did.' Black did not get on quite so well with Lord Palmerston. He once exasperated the busy foreign secretary by launching out into half an hour's dissertation on the ethnological peculiarities of the Finnish, when the business of the interview was simply to know what the government meant to do at a certain crisis in foreign affairs. Lord Brougham was very intimate with 'Dear Doctor', as he styled Black, a title derisively applied by Cobbett, and so distasteful to Black. 
It was Black's great pleasure to encourage the ambitions of the young writers around him, and among others those of Charles Dickens, who began his literary career as a reporter for the 'Chronicle'. As late as the year of his death, Dickens remembered Black as 'my first hearty out-and-out appreciator' (Forster, 1.65). 
Latterly there was thought to be a decline of energy in the management of the paper, and in 1843 Black received an intimation that his resignation would be accepted. Black, who was now sixty years old, had saved no money, and had to part with his beloved library of some 30,000 volumes. This product of a lifetime's book collecting had not always been augmented in the most straightforward manner. As James Grant puts it: 'it was an essential part of his creed that no book which he borrowed from a friend should ever be returned... The truth was that Mr Black never could part with any books that ever came into his possession, -- no matter by what means, or under what circumstances. (Grant, 1.285-7)' His rooms had reputedly been so full of books that he and his second wife had occasionally been 'obliged to creep into bed at the end, both sides being blocked up with dusty volumes of divinity and politics' ('Men of the time'). 
After the difficult auction of his library, friends and admirers rallied round Black and a sum, to which the proprietors of the 'Chronicle' contributed, was raised sufficient to buy him an annuity of $150. His old friend Walter Coulson placed a comfortable cottage at Snodland, near Maidstone, at his disposal, and there Black passed the remaining twelve years of his life in the study of Greek, and in the practice of gardening. Black's Newfoundland dogs Cato and Plutus were as well known as himself; one of them rescued from the Thames a boy who subsequently attained a seat on the judicial bench. James Grant described Black in his latter years as having 'the blunt and bluff appearance of a thickset farmer... never seen in the streets without being accompanied by a large mastiff (? Newfoundland), and a robust stick in his hand'. He died on 15 June 1855 at Birling, near Town Malling in Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 2495


Black, Joseph (1728-1799), chemist and physician, was born on 16 April 1728 in Bordeaux, the sixth of twelve children of John Black, an Ulsterman who was a factor in the wine trade, and his wife, Margaret Gordon (died 1747). Black's brothers all became manufacturers or tradesmen of various kinds and all were unsuccessful in business. Black alone became an academic and, being financially astute, was often called upon to assist his impoverished siblings. 
Black was first educated at home but at the age of twelve he was sent to school in Belfast. In 1744 he went to Glasgow University to continue his education, entering (as was then usual) the arts class. After five years he was prevailed upon by his father to study a subject which would lead to a profession. He chose medicine, coming under the influence of William Cullen (1710-1790), who had been appointed to a lectureship in chemistry in 1747. Black did not, however, graduate from Glasgow, for in 1752 he transferred to Edinburgh University where medical teaching had a higher reputation and was better established. For graduation, a thesis had to be produced. Black took this work very seriously (not all students did) and he involved himself in chemical experiments on alkalis. Causticity, the property produced when alkaline earths such as chalk are roasted in a lime kiln, had been a matter of considerable discussion by medical professors at Edinburgh University. Because he did not wish to become embroiled in their specific quarrels, Black conducted his research on a substance similar to limestone, magnesia alba. He initially believed that this substance was simply another progenitor of quicklime and lime water and his research started with limited aspirations. It led, however, to a new theory of causticity and, later, to the first chemical identification of a gas. After heating a weighed quantity of the magnesia alba, Black noticed that the weight of the substance which remained was less than that of the original white powder. The weight lost could be replaced by reacting the product with potash in solution. The potash must have contained the gas which was driven off, which Black called fixed air. Black offered his thesis in 1754 and graduated MD. He then extended his work to experiments on limestone and he showed in a paper presented to the Philosophical Society in 1755 and published one year later in a refined paper that fixed air could be distinguished from the air which makes up the atmosphere. The series of experiments by which he arrived at this conclusion are the most important experiments which Black conducted. He confirmed the view of his teacher, Charles Alson, that when lime is produced by roasting chalk the caustic properties acquired by the former do not derive from the absorption of fiery particles from the heating process but are a property of the lime itself. 
In experiments similar to those previously performed for his thesis, Black showed that both chalk and lime combine with the same quantity of acid to form salts, and that a given weight of chalk can be recovered by forming lime and then reacting this with a solution of potash. The explanation is the same in both cases: the lime combines with air contained in the alkali. He then considered a paradox. Lime in solution should combine with air dissolved in water to form a small amount of chalk as an insoluble precipitate, but this does not happen; one explanation might be that on solution of the lime, the air might be driven off. Black tested this by placing two vessels under a bell jar, then reducing the pressure with an air pump. He observed that the same quantity of air bubbles off from both liquids. Clearly this explanation is not tenable. The air in the lime solution was not the sort which formed a chalk precipitate. This 'fixed' air and atmospheric air are not chemically the same. Black was the first to show, decisively, that gases can be differentiated in the same way as can solids and liquids. 
The elderly and poorly regarded Edinburgh professor of chemistry, Andrew Plummer, died in 1756 and Black's former Glasgow teacher, Cullen, was appointed in his place. This allowed Black to apply for the Glasgow lectureship. He was successful and later he was elevated to the title of professor. His main research interests in Glasgow were conducted on the properties of heat, interests probably inherited from Cullen's own work. Black considered the phenomenon of heat transfer to or from a body on liquefaction or solidification, evaporation or condensation, which he noticed could occur without a change in temperature being registered on a thermometer. He had been intrigued that when snow melts to form ice it does so over a period of time, not instantaneously. Black introduced the term 'latent heat', that being the quantity of heat which needed to be supplied to the snow before it would melt. He also discovered that different bodies have different capacities for heat: when equal volumes of mercury and water at different temperatures were mixed, the temperature of the mixture at equilibrium was found to be closer to the initial temperature of the water than that of the mercury. This led to a concept of 'specific heat'. Black never published his findings on heat, though he presented some of the results to the Literary Society in Glasgow in 1762 and he taught his ideas to his students throughout his long teaching career. 
Also working on heat experiments at Glasgow, though apparently somewhat independently, was James Watt (1736-1819), then mathematical instrument maker to the university. The two men became lifelong friends and Watt was able to supply Black with furnishings for his laboratory. Black formally formed a partnership with Watt, along with Alexander Wilson (1714-1786), a typefounder who later became professor of astronomy. Black was to help finance Watt's early endeavours at Glasgow, debts which were not repaid for several years. From 1766, when Black moved to Edinburgh, they were never again to live in the same place but kept up a lively and informative correspondence. 
Black's reputation as an inspired teacher of chemistry began to grow in his early years at Glasgow and later at Edinburgh, attracting numbers of foreign students to undertake courses. Although formally part of the medical curriculum, many more students attended the lectures than ever intended to graduate in medicine. Chemistry was a rapidly developing subject and Black's audience included many who wanted to experience the intellectual stimulation which it provided. A significant proportion had not even matriculated; all that was necessary was to pay the 3 guinea fee for the mid-November to mid-May course comprising about 120 lectures. At Edinburgh, only about 20 per cent of those following medical lectures would graduate as doctors of medicine. Black did not vary the basic structure of the lecture series throughout his teaching career. Introductory lectures consisted of definitions and an outline history of chemistry. Following this there were four sections: the general effects of heat (expansion, fluidity, and inflammation); the general effects of mixture; chemical apparatus; and the 'chemical history' of bodies. This last, and largest, section was divided into salts, earths, inflammable substances, metals, and waters. Though the content of the lectures was to some extent kept up to date by intelligence provided by Black's wide circle of correspondents and his own reading, the course must have seemed to be very dated by the time he retired. Nevertheless, his reputation as an accomplished lecturer, combined with his skill at performing lecture demonstrations, did not dim even when he was close to retirement. The lectures were published after Black's death (as well as the British edition there were German and American ones) in a somewhat restructured form, the editor being John Robison, professor of natural philosophy at Edinburgh. Robison initially considered his task as an act of piety, though he became disillusioned before long with Black's outmoded approach. 
After he had taught for only a few years at Glasgow efforts were made to attract Black back to Edinburgh. In a complex series of moves which involved his former teacher, Cullen, the chair of medicine and chemistry was vacated and Black was appointed to it. Curiously, the move to Edinburgh marked the end of Black's researches into fundamental chemical concepts. It was not the end of his experimental work, however; it is clear that he spent considerable periods of time in his laboratory. His work was largely directed to investigations which would improve industrial processes and benefit public health. At Glasgow, he had provided metal analyses of minerals for landowners anxious to exploit their estates. This was all part of a drive towards 'improvement', a process which had started early in the eighteenth century in Scotland following the 'Act of Union' of 1707. An early form of financial assistance had been made available from the board of trustees for manufactures in Scotland, established by the government, whereby an annual sum of money was set aside initially to encourage the coarse woollen industry. The scope of assistance was increased and from 1727 help was made available for the herring, linen, and woollen industries. Black and his colleagues were involved in proposals put to the board and in adjudicating proposals of others made to it. A particularly important commodity to Scotland was linen. A crisis had arisen in the 1750s when the price of the agent used for bleaching, caustic potash, rose sharply. The alternative, sour milk, was slow reacting and less effective. Black's colleague, the professor of materia medica, Francis Home, was awarded a premium by the board for proposing dilute sulphuric acid, though it was considered by many to have a destructive effect on the fabric. Black set out to discover cheaper ways of making caustic potash, and showed that kelp, a form of seaweed commonly found around Scottish islands, could be economically turned into the alkali. For this, he was awarded a premium in 1783. Somewhat earlier, Black had sought an alternative means of alkali production by chemical reaction. He had the idea about 1766 that lime and common salt might react to produce soda. This was taken up with enthusiasm by Watt and John Roebuck, a manufacturer of vitriol and leading industrial chemist. The reactants were formed into bricks or cakes and from these walls were built. After a few months, crystals of mild alkali (soda) were formed on the surface and could be scraped off, but the yield was low and the time needed for reaction long. Black seems to have realized the limitations of the process from an early date, but all the same experiments continued until well into the 1780s, with Black playing an unenthusiastic role. 
As assessors for the board of manufactures, Black and the geologist James Hutton, a friend who shared many of Black's scientific interests, were asked in 1783 to adjudicate the effectiveness of a new design of furnace for the production of pig iron by a founder in Leith. Though the furnace was not a success, they took significant pains in their judgement and the episode illustrates the efforts being made in Scotland, with the help of the intellectual community, to establish innovative processes for the promotion of industry. A further example, in which Black's economic as well as his technical assessment was important, was the advice he gave to Archibald Cochrane, earl of Dundonald. Lord Dundonald had discovered that if ships' hulls were coated with tar the destructive effect of worms eating their way through the wood could be considerably lessened. He had established a tar works at Culross, on the Firth of Forth, to produce tar by the distillation of coal in closed vessels. Dundonald's business skills were not sophisticated enough: though the process seemed to be potentially profitable, he had immediate financial problems. Black was called in as a consultant to check the technological and financial viability of the scheme. His estimates took many factors into account including the significant one of whether or not the country was in a state of war -- in time of war the demand for tar would be much greater and its value higher. He also considered increased profitability which would derive from selling the by-products of the process -- varnish from the resin, coke which might be used for iron production in the nearby Carron iron works, and so on. Dundonald was guided by Black to proceed and applied to parliament for an extension to his patent. The advice proved correct and by 1788 Dundonald's British Tar Company was yielding a clear annual profit of $5000. Referring to this success, Sir John Dalrymple, solicitor to the board of excise (and entrepreneur himself) described Black as 'the best judge, perhaps in Europe, of such inventions' (Dalrymple, 6). 
Black's correspondence reveals a wide range of topics on which he was approached to offer advice. In addition to those mentioned already, these included sugar refining, ceramic glazing, dyeing, brewing, metal corrosion, salt extraction, glass making, vinegar manufacture, the properties of materials, and water analysis. This last was at the request of the Edinburgh and Leith authorities who were anxious about the quality of the water supply being provided from various sources. For this work Black devised a delicate balance for weighing small quantities of solid matter derived from the water samples which he was sent. 
Black had originally trained as a physician and he practised, to a very limited extent, throughout his career; he mentions that private patients were occupying him from as early as February 1753. Only the most famous of his patients are known. He advised Walter Scott, father of the future author Sir Walter Scott (1771-1832), that his son might contract consumption if his tuberculous nurse were not dismissed. Both Edinburgh philosophers, Adam Ferguson and David Hume, consulted Black, and it was he who appreciated the incurable nature of Hume's last illness (other physicians had not) and who informed him of its fatal consequences. Black laid great stress on the benefits of fresh air, exercise (he rode for this reason), and a plain diet including milk and vegetables. 
Black was closely involved in the two major Scottish medical institutions of his time, the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh and the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. He served as a manager to the infirmary on four occasions between 1771 and 1794, his responsibilities being to make regular inspections and to report these to the board. He also acted, briefly, as physician to the infirmary. Black was admitted a member of the Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow in 1757, and as a fellow of the Edinburgh Royal College in 1767. He played a significant role in the life of the college, serving as its president from 1788 to 1790. He was a member of the revision committee for the sixth, seventh, and eighth editions of the college's 'Pharmacopoeia Edinburgensis' of 1774, 1783, and 1794, taking particular interest in mercurial and antimonial preparations. Black was appointed principal physician to George III in Scotland (though the king never, in fact, visited Scotland). He was a founding fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and was elected a member of the Imperial Academy of St Petersburg, the Societe Royale de Medecine and the Academie Royale des Sciences of France. Catherine the Great tried unsuccessfully to persuade him to teach in St Petersburg. 
Black ceased teaching in 1796, handing over to his chosen successor, Thomas Charles Hope (1766-1844), son of John Hope (1725-1786), professor of botany. Towards the end of his career the aspect of his teaching which seemed particularly behind the times was his approach to combustion. Through most of the eighteenth century, the accepted explanation of burning was offered by the phlogiston theory, propounded in the previous century. Phlogiston was said to be an invisible, weightless substance which was given off when inflammable substances were burned or metals calcined. When Black's contemporary Henry Cavendish (1731-1810) discovered hydrogen in 1766 some considered this to be pure phlogiston. On the other hand, the chemist (and religious dissenter) Joseph Priestley (1733-1804), on heating the calx of mercury found that a gas was produced which strongly supported burning and living systems. He believed this to be atmospheric air without its phlogiston component ('dephlogisticated air'). At the same time the French chemist Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier, produced and studied the gas and suggested that it was a chemical species which he called 'oxigene'. This theory, which he developed in a sophisticated way, was formulated by 1777 and it gradually overturned the phlogiston theory. Black was very slow to accept this changed view -- certainly he was not yet won over in the mid 1780s, though by 1790, in a letter to Lavoisier, he wrote that he had: 'been habituated 30 years to believe and teach the doctrine of Phlogiston... I felt much aversion to the new system... This aversion however proceeded from the power of habit alone has gradually subsided... Your plan... is infinitely better supported than the former Doctrine. (Black to Lavoisier, 24 Oct 1790, Archives Nationales, Paris, Lavoisier MSS, letters and notes 1770-1794)' Black's students had, however, been discussing enthusiastically the new theory five years earlier in their own chemical society (which is thought to be the first of its kind). 
Though Black was slow to accept this most significant of chemical theories, his popularity as a lecturer did not wane, with classes of well over 200 students regularly subscribing each year. Attending with the students were well-established chemists who wanted to hear Black describe the seminal experiments which he had performed many years earlier ('the historian of his own discoveries' as Henry Brougham put it). For those who did not require as rigorous a programme Black put on more popular courses. James Boswell (1740-1795) attended one such series for members of the legal profession in 1775. Though Black's fame was widespread, this did not arise from self-promotion. He steadfastly refused to publish his work, though urged to do so by his friends. As Robison put it 'Dr Black was perhaps... too severe in his observations on the hurried publications of some chemists, which he called slovenly, and to consider as literary manufacture for profit'. He wrote only two really significant papers for publication: the MD thesis (in Latin), 'De humore acido a cibis orto, et magnesia alba' (1754), and the much developed further paper, 'Experiments upon magnesia alba, quicklime, and some other alcaline substances' in 'Essays and Observations, Physical and Literary' (1756). He published nothing on heat, though a pirated version of his lectures on the subject appeared anonymously, 'An Enquiry into the General Effects of Heat' (1770). A number of letters written by Black were published by their recipients in his lifetime, which annoyed him. A letter to the president of the Royal Society on the subject of the effect of having boiled water on its freezing point was published in 'Philosophical Transactions' (1775), as was a letter on the temperature of mercurial congelation (1783). The 'Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh' for 1794 includes a paper by Black on the analysis of some hot springs in Iceland. 
Black had a thin and pale physique. He frequently complained about his poor health and took care of himself, renting houses on the edge of Edinburgh for long summer breaks. He disliked travelling and avoided it as much as possible; many eminent men of the day seemed happy enough to come to Edinburgh in order to call on him. Black was sociable in the manner of his day, attending a variety of dining clubs regularly with male friends, the circle including Cullen, Hutton, Hume, Smith, Ferguson, and the eccentric Lord Monboddo. Black could play the flute, sing, and draw skilfully. Though he never married, he appears to have enjoyed the company of intelligent women. After what may have been a heart attack he died on 6 December 1799 at Nicolson Street, Edinburgh, and was buried on 13 December in Greyfriars churchyard. 
In the second half of the eighteenth century Black was widely known throughout the academic communities of Europe and North America. He helped to maintain and develop the reputation of the Edinburgh medical school as the leading place of study of its age. On the other hand, he had a conservative outlook and did not encourage practical skills among his students. No research school was to develop at Edinburgh, and after Black's death there was a relative decline in its status. He had no pupils who became major chemists but he stimulated many students to become competent ones. His own significance as a chemist lies in the work of a few years in the 1750s. His meticulous quantitative technique and his logical mind led to the first chemical characterization of a gas. Other chemists, using similar methods, followed, discovering more and more new species. Black can be seen as the modest initiator of the age of pneumatic chemistry. His work on theoretical concepts of heat was also of great importance and was widely acclaimed. The influence of this on Watt's development of more efficient steam engines is difficult to assess. Watt was anxious to assert that his practical work was independent of Black's ideas on latent heat. 
Important though his conceptual work was, Black's contribution to Scottish industrialization and teaching must be properly recognized. When he was born in 1728, industry in the country was in an embryonic state and the youthful medical school, established only two years earlier, regarded chemistry purely in terms of its pharmaceutical applications. At the time of his death seventy-one years later Scottish industry was poised for its great leap forward in the nineteenth century and chemistry had become recognized as an independent subject. Black had much to do with both these changes. 


@@@@@


doc= 2496


Black, Patrick (1813-1879), physician, was born in Aberdeen on 22 August 1813, the second son of Lieutenant-Colonel Patrick Black (died 1819/20), of the Bengal army, and his wife, Jane Young. Black, like his father, was named after his ancestor Sir Patrick Dun, a former president of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland. Black's father died when he was only six years old, and after an early education in Aberdeenshire the family moved to London, in 1825, where Black went to Mr Roberts's school at Chelsea. Black attended Eton College between 1828 and 1830, and his subsequent failure at his first attempt to gain entry to Christ Church, Oxford, encouraged him to work harder, so that he spent six months in Paris studying anatomy, toxicology, and medical jurisprudence before matriculating from Christ Church on 10 November 1831. He graduated BA in 1835 and began his medical studies at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. He graduated BM (1838) and DM (1844) from Oxford. He was elected assistant physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital in 1842, and became warden of the medical school (1851-6), physician to the hospital in 1860, and lecturer on medical jurisprudence (1855-61) and on medicine (1861-78). He was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1845 and was later its censor. 
During the cholera outbreak in London in 1854 Black took charge of the cholera wards at St Bartholomew's Hospital. In 1855 he delivered the Croonian lectures at the Royal College of Physicians, on the forces of the circulation. Black was appointed examiner for the Oxford medical degree in 1874, and he also held positions as physician to Christ's Hospital, the Marine Society, the Royal Naval Hospital on the 'Dreadnought', and was a director of the Clerical, Medical and General Life Assurance Company. 
The most significant part of Black's association with St Bartholomew's was his appointment as its first administrator of chloroform from 1852 to 1856. During this period he published 'Chloroform; how Shall we Ensure Safety in its Administration?' (1855), which examines the exact source of danger in the administration of chloroform. In this pamphlet he expresses indebtedness to the writings of John Snow but differs in his interpretation of the cause of death from chloroform. Snow argued that death followed the paralysis of the heart after chloroform had been inhaled in too concentrated a form; Black believed it to be due to asphyxia -- the chloroform being too pungent to be breathed in the first moments of administration -- and referred to numerous fatal cases in support of his theory. He had presented these views in a paper read to the Abernethian Society in 1854, of which he was president for several years. Debates surrounding the probable cause of chloroform fatalities were intense during this period, and Black's pamphlet represents some of the then commonly held views. 
Black was a tall and handsome man, and was respected and loved by his family and many friends. He married in November 1843 Julia Louisa Mark, daughter of William Mark, HM counsel at Malaga, and their marriage was noted by his friends to be a happy and fulfilling one, even though the couple sadly lost two sons within the space of two years -- one from a wasting disease and the second in the 'Eurydice' disaster. Black was a careful observer, a just reasoner, well read in medicine and literature, and a physician who, as one of his patients remarked, hastened no one into the grave; yet he never attained a large medical practice. His contemporaries suggested that the reason for this was his strong scepticism of the value of therapeutics and a lack of interest in the new methods of physical examination and clinical enquiry. His practice of medicine was more akin to the traditions of the late eighteenth century, rather than the rapidly developing medicine of the 1860s and 1870s. As a result he questioned such practices as the value of quinine as a remedy for malaria and the use of lime juice in the treatment of scurvy. It was a trait which prevented him from totally fulfilling his promise. Another reason may have been the fact that 'he was a man of considerable property' ('DNB'). Nevertheless, he was sound in his judgement of character, firm in his friendship, and universal in his kindness. 
In spite of a talent for original and lucid writing Black wrote little. He revised the Latin part of the 'Nomenclature of Diseases' (1867) for the Royal College of Physicians, and his writings included 'An Address to Students' (1852), 'Respiration, or, Why do we Breathe?' (1876), 'Scurvy in high latitudes; an attempt to explain the cause of the 'medical failure' of the Arctic expedition of 1875-6' (1876), and 'An essay of the use of the spleen with an episode of the spleen's marriage; a physiological love-story' (1876). 
On 12 October 1879, after several months of illness during which he had gained pain relief from morphia, Black died from pancreatic cancer at his home, 11 Queen Anne Street, Cavendish Square, London, leaving an estate valued at under $60,000. His personal appearance, character, and manner of teaching were recorded in a Latin poem dedicated to him in 1876 by Robert Bridges (1844-1930), a former house physician and later poet laureate. It was a lasting mark of esteem from one of his many friends. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 2497


Black, Robert (1752-1817), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster, was the eldest son of Valentine Black, a farmer at Mullabrack, co. Armagh. In 1770 he entered the class of ethics under Dr Thomas Reid at Glasgow University. He was licensed by the Armagh presbytery, declined in 1776 a call to Keady, co. Armagh, and in the following year, on the death of Alexander Colville MD, the non-subscribing minister of Dromore, co. Down, he accepted the call of this congregation, which returned to the jurisdiction of the General Synod of Ulster. Black was ordained at Dromore by the Armagh presbytery on 28 June 1777. On 15 February 1782 he attended the convention of Irish volunteers at Dungannon as Captain Robert Black (Dromore first company) and seconded the resolution adopted in favour of Catholic emancipation. He attended also the second great Dungannon convention, on 8 September 1783, when his eloquence attracted the attention of Frederick Augustus, earl of Bristol and bishop of Derry, and of Robert Moore of Molenan, near Londonderry. Hence his call to First Derry, where he was installed by the Londonderry presbytery on 7 January 1784 as colleague to David Young. Black, whom contemporaries described as a handsome man of dark complexion, aquiline features, and a commanding presence, married his cousin Margaret Black (died 1824). 
On 2 December 1788 Black was elected synod agent for the 'regium donum' (the small royal bounty paid to Irish Presbyterian ministers since the reign of Charles II), in succession to James Laing. He delivered an applauded oration at the centenary commemoration (7 December 1788) of the closing of the gates of Londonderry, an occasion which was (unusually) celebrated by both religious traditions. As agent for the royal bounty he exerted himself to secure its augmentation; in 1792, through the influence of the earl of Charlemont, Henry Grattan, and Colonel Stewart of Killymoon, the Irish parliament added $500 a year to the grant. In gratitude for his services the synod, in 1793, presented Black with a piece of plate. 
The seditious tendencies that began to appear in the volunteer movement in the early 1790s alarmed Black and he delivered a solemn warning against them in a speech at a meeting of the parishioners of Templemore, held in Londonderry Cathedral on 14 January 1793. He never, however, receded from the positions he had taken in favour of parliamentary reform and Catholic emancipation. In the rising of 1798 he was strongly on the side of constituted authority and had great influence as the friend and correspondent of Lord Castlereagh. One form in which this influence was exercised was a further increase of the 'regium donum', which from 1804 was distributed in three classes ($100, $75, and $50), the agent being henceforth appointed not by the synod but by the government. Black held this office until his death and did not scruple to use the power it gave him. Opponents called him 'the unmitred bishop' and 'chief consul of the general synod'. In 1800 or 1801 the degree of DD was sent him by an American college. As a speaker he had no equal in his day. 
In theology Black was suspected of the heresy of not believing in the divinity of Christ, a view which seemed to be confirmed when, in 1804, he endeavoured to secure as his colleague William Porter, whose Arianism was openly known. Black's local prestige was impaired by the circumstances of Castlereagh's defeat at the County Down election of 1805, but his influence at Dublin Castle was equally strong with all ministries. In 1809 the synod publicly thanked him for his exertions in procuring the act of parliament incorporating the widows' fund. In 1813 his controversy with William Steel Dickson, who was implicated in the rising of 1798, was ended by a synodical resolution declaring that words in a previous resolution (1799), complained of by Dickson, had been 'inaccurately used'. Black's influence, however, was still powerful enough to cause the expulsion of an elder who, in the course of debate, had laid charges against him in connection with the bounty; he published an account of these proceedings in 1814. Black was opposed to the establishment of the Belfast Academical Institution (opened 1814), which, it was hoped, would develop into a college for training Presbyterian ministers. At the synod of 1815, in Black's absence, a resolution was passed in the institution's favour, and in the same year the government made it an annual grant of $1500. The grant was withdrawn on political grounds the following year after some of the managers were accused of drinking disloyal toasts on St Patrick's day, and Black vainly endeavoured, in two successive years, to obtain the permanent rescinding of the synod's resolution. His defeat was softened by a less than successful public dinner that was given by his admirers in Belfast. 
Black outlived his power and popularity. His ambition could not brook repulses; his temperament alternated between geniality and gloom. Loss of leadership unhinged his spirit and he threw himself over the railing of Londonderry Bridge and was drowned in the Foyle on the evening of 4 December 1817. His body later disappeared from its grave. He was survived by his wife, who died in April 1824, and by three sons and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 2498


Black, William (1749/50-1829), physician and writer on medicine, was born in Ireland of unknown parentage. He studied medicine, first at Edinburgh, then from 1771 at the University of Leiden, gaining his MD there in 1772 with a dissertation on fevers, dedicated to his fellow students at Edinburgh. Black's first publication, in 1781, was on smallpox and the arguments for inoculation at a time when concern was being voiced over the prevalence of this disease among children of the expanding industrial towns. He next published 'A Historical Sketch of Medicine and Surgery... with a Chronological Chart of... Authors' (1782). Black was licensed by the Royal College of Physicians in 1787, after which he moved to Piccadilly, Westminster, where he practised. 
Black did not rise to eminence as a physician, but he was one of the first writers in England to apply statistics, previously employed in politics and commerce, to medicine. Having delivered the annual oration before the Medical Society of London, he expanded his lecture into a volume entitled 'A comparative view of the mortality of the human species at all ages, and of diseases and casualties, with charts and tables' (1788). Before the edition was even half sold he cancelled the remainder and brought out a corrected edition as 'An Arithmetical and Medical Analysis of the Diseases and Mortality of the Human Species' (1789). His purpose was to show that births, mortalities, diseases, and casualties could be subjected to arithmetical proof, to construct for the benefit of the progress of medicine a 'medical arithmetic', a phrase suggested by the 'political arithmetic' of Sir William Petty. His efforts had considerable importance in their day although they were eventually eclipsed by later workers in the same field. Events in revolutionary France led him to publish anti-French pamphlets in 1792 and 1796. 
Observations on two to three thousand cases at Bethlem Hospital, provided by a member of Bethlem's staff and added to an expanded chapter from the 'Arithmetical... Analysis', provided the substance of Black's 'Dissertation on Insanity' (1810). Black retired to live in Hammersmith, Middlesex, where he died in December 1829. There is no evidence that he ever married; administration of his modest estate was granted to his widowed sister, Jane Elliott. 


@@@@@


doc= 2499


Black, William (1841-1898), journalist and novelist, was born at Glasgow on 9 November 1841, the son of James Black (died 1855), a merchant. After receiving his education at various private schools, he studied landscape painting for a short time in the Glasgow School of Art, but, becoming connected with the 'Glasgow Citizen', gradually exchanged art for journalism. His contributions to the 'Citizen' included sketches of the most eminent literary men of the day. 
In 1864 Black published his first novel, 'James Merle: an Autobiography', which was a total failure. In the same year, after an unhappy love affair with an actress, he went to London and built up a reputation as a contributor to the magazines. He married a German woman, Augusta Wenzel, on 8 April 1865. She died in May 1866, and left him a son, who died in 1871. In 1865 he became connected with the 'Morning Star', and in the following year went to Germany as its correspondent in the Franco-Prussian War. As he himself admitted, he had no special qualification for the part except for a smattering of German. During most of the very short campaign he was under arrest on suspicion of being a spy, but the observations he made in the Black Forest aided the success of his third novel, 'In Silk Attire' (1869), partly set there. He had already, in 1867, produced 'Love or Marriage', which was unpopular on account of its discussion of delicate social questions, and which he spoke of later as 'fortunately out of print'. The success of 'In Silk Attire' helped 'Kilmeny' (1870), a story equally delightful for its sketches of artistic life in London and its rural scenery, and 'A Monarch of Mincing Lane'; but the author's first real triumph was won by 'A Daughter of Heth' (1871). Here he was most fortunate in his subject, depicting the transformations and tragic adventures of a lively French girl, a coquette, transplanted into a Scottish puritan family. 'The Strange Adventures of a Phaeton' (1872) was even more successful, and introduced what became Black's special characteristic: so thorough a combination of scenes of actual experience in travel and sport with fictitious adventures that readers sometimes hardly knew whether they were reading a book of travel or a novel. After the interruption of publication of the 'Morning Star' Black became connected with the 'Daily News' in 1870, and was for some time assistant editor, but retired from journalism upon gaining an assured position as a novelist. In 1874 'A Princess of Thule' thoroughly confirmed his reputation. It was very popular in both England and America and was translated into German, Russian, and Swedish; Queen Victoria even had an imaginary portrait of the heroine painted for her private collection. Both in this book and in 'Madcap Violet' (1876), as previously in 'A Daughter of Heth', the delineation of young female characters was particularly successful. In 1874 Black married Eva Simpson, the daughter of a journalist. 
Black was a very entertaining author, and continued to maintain his popularity to the end of an active career, although he never regained the level of the best work of his middle period. The most remarkable of his later novels were 'Macleod of Dare' (1878), the story of a highland chief who discovers London; 'Sunrise' (1880), a controversial picture of international socialism; and 'Judith Shakespeare' (1884), a romance about the dramatist's daughter. He also wrote the study on Goldsmith in the 'English Men of Letters' series (1878). A collected edition of his works in twenty-six volumes appeared between 1892 and 1894. Although lacking in extraordinary incidents or situations and in subtlety, his novels were built on precise and exhaustive descriptions which won the admiration of many readers, among whom was Ruskin, who commended warmly their closely observed picturesqueness. 
Black was wealthy enough to spend most of his time in travelling and yachting, and his amusements helped to provide material for his novels. His permanent residence was Paston House, 1 Paston Place, Brighton, where he was a liberal host. He died at his home after a short illness, on 10 December 1898. He was buried on 15 December within a few yards of Sir Edward Burne-Jones in Rottingdean churchyard. A William Black memorial lighthouse tower, designed by William Leiper RSA and erected on Duart Point in the Sound of Mull, was lit for the first time on 13 May 1901. 


@@@@@


doc= 2500


Black, William Henry (1808-1872), antiquary, was born on 7 May 1808 at Walworth, Surrey, the eldest son of John Black of Kintore, Aberdeenshire, and Mary Langley. His mother's family, who owned estates in Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire, influenced his strong religious opinions and formed his taste for antiquarian pursuits. He was educated at a private school, and at seventeen years of age became a tutor among families living at Tulse Hill, London, and the surrounding neighbourhood. His first publications were catalogues of the Arundel manuscripts at the College of Arms (1829) and of Colfe's Library at Lewisham (1831) for the Leathersellers' Company. He contributed to Samuel Bentley's 'Excerpta historica' (1831) and to Sir Richard Colt Hoare's 'A History of Modern Wiltshire' (1822-44). He was in Oxford between 1831 and 1833 compiling the justly esteemed catalogue, published in 1845, of the Ashmole manuscripts, now in the Bodleian Library. As a reader at the British Museum in London he became acquainted with many literary men, through whose influence in 1834 he obtained a situation in the Record Commission. He claimed to be the first on the scene to save some of the records during the burning of the houses of parliament in the same year, while he was living in Lambeth. At the Record Commission he helped to train transcribers of records, and to revise Rymer's 'Foedera', and edited without completing the 'Docquets of Letters Patent Charles I', which was eventually published after his death. 
In 1840 Black was appointed assistant keeper in the newly established Public Record Office, where among other duties he compiled inventories of the Pells Office records and reported on the Treasury records. He suffered from poor health and thought his eyesight was damaged when attempting to salvage records soaked with sewage in a flood at Treasury Chambers. A strong sabbatarian, his service was terminated in 1853 because of his refusal to work on Saturdays and his work at the Treasury ceased the following year. 
Black was a prolific contributor to the journals of antiquarian societies. He issued numerous pamphlets on biblical history, edited three volumes of early English poetry for the Percy Society, and had articles in most issues of the 'British Archaeological Association Journal' from 1846 to 1872. His edition of the Antonine itinerary in preparation for the 'Rolls Series' was never published. 
Black was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1858 and served on the council. Several communications between 1861 and 1871 were reported in the society's 'Proceedings', of which the first, on his discovery of Holbein's will, aroused considerable interest. He was also one of the earliest members of the British Archaeological Association, the Surrey, London and Middlesex, and Wiltshire Archaeological societies, and the founder of the Chronological Institute of London, the Palestine Archaeological Association, and the Anglo-Biblical Institute, besides being a member of the Camden Society. As a conscientious and painstaking antiquary, he was highly regarded by his contemporaries. 
In 1840 Black was ordained minister of a small congregation of Seventh-Day Baptists, whose chapel was in Mill Yard, Leman Street, Whitechapel, until 1885. He lived in the minister's house at 15 Mill Yard. He associated the church with the Unitarians, but his stress on the 'Old Testament' led to a charge of secret Judaism. He was constantly involved in litigation and in 1851 had heavy damages awarded against him for libelling a fellow Baptist minister. Black was married three times. With his first wife -- Elizabeth White, whom he married when he was twenty-two -- he had three daughters. In 1841 he married Mary Anne (died 1843), daughter of Benjamin Noakes, doctor of medicine. In 1844 he married Harriot (died 1861), daughter of William Slater, formerly a minister at Mill Yard. Black's daughter Theodora married William Mead Jones, his own successor as pastor. He died on 12 April 1872 in Mill Yard. 


@@@@@


doc= 2501


Blackadder, Adam (b. 1659, d. in or after 1696), merchant and writer on covenanting, was probably born in the parish of Troqueer, near Dumfries, the second son of John Blackadder (1615/1623?-1686), the minister there, and his wife, Janet Haining (died 1688). Among his brothers were Dr William Blackadder (1647-1696) and John Blackadder (1664-1729). As his father was a prominent covenanting minister (one of Howie's 'Scots worthies'), who was constantly harassed and pursued by the authorities, Blackadder's childhood was turbulent. In 1662 his father was expelled from his parish with the restoration of episcopacy, and the family moved to Barndennock in the parish of Glencairn. In 1666, while Blackadder's father was fortunately away, soldiers sent by the bishop of Galloway raided the family house at night, confiscating John Blackadder's books and sermons, and pillaging the house. Blackadder was forced to hold a candle to assist the men in their search. He managed to escape and fled to a nearby town, where he collapsed on a doorstep and was taken in by the owners of the house when he told them his father's name. After this the family was dispersed for safety. 
The young Blackadder was raised to be a merchant, and is next heard of in Stirling in November 1674, when, still an apprentice, he was arrested for allegedly refusing to sign the 'Black bond' and for attending conventicles. He was kept in prison for five weeks, after which he was released as a result of petitions to the privy council made by his elder brother, William. He was subsequently imprisoned twice more, in Fife and Blackness, in the latter place for attending his father's conventicle near Borrowstounness, Linlithgowshire, where twenty-six children were baptized. 
About 1675 Blackadder went to Sweden, where he lived as a merchant for the next nine years. While there he married a Swedish woman, whose name is unknown, whom he converted from Lutheranism to presbyterian Calvinism. This put both Blackadder and his wife in danger, as the penalty for a Swede making such a conversion was death. The couple lived for a while under the protection of the Dutch ambassador in Stockholm; they then left for Scotland, and arrived in Dunbar in late 1684. After visiting his father, who was at that time in the Bass Rock prison, Blackadder went to Edinburgh, where he settled at the close of 1684, again as a merchant. 
On 26 March 1696 Blackadder subscribed $100 to the Darien scheme as factor for his brother Captain John Blackadder (or Blackader). He is known to have supported the Darien venture in various tracts, and he also wrote pamphlets on the political state of Scotland. He later wrote an account of his father's sufferings and his own experiences during the persecutions of the late seventeenth century, which he sent to the great Presbyterian historian Robert Wodrow. This account was subsequently used by other writers as a source for works about the persecutions, including Andrew Crichton and John Howie. Blackadder probably lived in Edinburgh for the rest of his life; the date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 2502


Blackadder, John (1615/1623?-1686), Church of Scotland minister, was perhaps born in December 1615 or in 1623, the son of John Blackadder of Inzievar, of the families of Blackadder of Blairhall and Tulliallan, and his wife, Helen, daughter of Robert Pont (1524-1606), minister of St Cuthbert, near Edinburgh. In 1640 or 1646 he married Janet (died 1688), daughter of Homer Haining, merchant of Dumfries. He was a distinguished student at the University of Glasgow, where his uncle John Strang (1583/4-1654) was principal, and from where he graduated MA in 1650. Unanimously called to the parish of Troqueer, near Dumfries, in 1652, he was ordained on 7 June 1653. Blackadder is said to have worked hard to restore church discipline and reform his flock during this turbulent period. However, following the restoration of episcopacy in 1662, he was deprived of his charge and temporarily imprisoned in Edinburgh. 
Blackadder then retired with his wife and family to Glencairn, Dumfriesshire, and other places. As one of the deprived ministers who believed that the civil government could not revoke their right to preach, he strove to maintain presbyterianism by preaching at conventicles together with other respected preachers, such as John Welsh, Alexander Peden, and Donald Cargill. The records of the privy council show that letters for his apprehension were issued four times between 1666 and 1677, but Blackadder remained at large. On one occasion, when he delivered a sermon at Kinkell, near St Andrews, the people crowded to hear him, notwithstanding the absolute commands of Archbishop James Sharp (himself a former presbyterian). When the irate archbishop ordered the provost to march out the militia to disperse the congregation, he was told it was impossible, as the militia had gone there as worshippers. 
Outlawed, and with a reward offered for his body, in 1678 Blackadder fled to Rotterdam, where he apparently helped to heal differences between the presbyterian incumbents of the Scottish kirk, the moderate Robert Fleming and the more extreme Robert McWard. He was back in Edinburgh in June 1679, though he seems to have returned briefly to the Netherlands, where in 1680 his eldest son, William Blackadder (1647-1696), enrolled at the University of Leiden. On 5 April 1681 he was seized in Edinburgh, examined before the privy council, and sent to the Bass Rock. After four years of rigid imprisonment his health finally gave way. In December 1685 the privy council gave permission for him to leave, on condition of his confining himself to Edinburgh, but it was too late, and he died on the Bass in January 1686. He was buried in the churchyard at North Berwick, where a dedicatory tombstone was erected in the nineteenth century. He was survived by his wife, who died on 9 November 1688 and was buried the next day at Greyfriars, Edinburgh, and by at least four of his five sons and two daughters: William, Adam Blackadder (b. 1659, d. in or after 1696), John Blackadder (1664-1729), and Elizabeth, who in 1687 married James Young, writer, of Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 2503


Blackadder, John (1664-1729), army officer, was the fifth son of John Blackadder the elder (1615/1623?-1686) and his wife, Janet Haining (died 1688), and was born in the parish of Glencairn, Dumfriesshire, on 14 September 1664. William Blackadder (1647-1696) and Adam Blackadder (b. 1659, d. in or after 1696) were his elder brothers. Notwithstanding the persecution suffered by his father, the son, after receiving from him the foundations of a classical education, attended the courses of humanity and philosophy in the University of Edinburgh, but did not matriculate. He acquired at an early period strong Calvinistic convictions and strict and stern views of conduct and duty. When the regiment raised by the covenanting Cameronians (later the 26th foot) was raised by James Douglas, earl of Angus (died 1692), in 1689, Blackadder volunteered into it as a cadet at the pay of 6died a day. Probably through his intimacy with the commander, Colonel William Cleland, who was an old college acquaintance, he was in a few months promoted lieutenant. The regiment, by the remarkable stand it made against the highlanders at Dunkeld, played a prominent role in quelling the rising. 
Soon afterwards Blackadder embarked with his regiment for Flanders, where he served in all the principal sieges and battles until the treaty of Ryswick in 1697. At winter quarters in Maastricht in December 1691 he was court-martialled for killing Lieutenant Robert Murray in a duel. However, in May 1692 he was pardoned by King William and restored to his position in the regiment. In January 1693 he was promoted captain. After the treaty of Ryswick the Cameronians remained in Holland with the Scots brigade on Dutch pay and were later garrisoned at Perth. 
Following a period in London negotiating over arrears of pay, Blackadder rejoined his regiment at Perth in August 1701. Here he began a courtship of Anne, daughter of James Callender of Craigforth, near Stirling. They were married on 4 February 1702. On the resumption of war in 1702 the Cameronians were ordered to Holland and it became the practice of Anne to reside within the Dutch border towns during this and subsequent campaigns. 
Blackadder served in all Marlborough's campaigns. In 1704 he was wounded at the battle of Blenheim, where his regiment suffered heavy losses in the assault on Blenheim village. He was promoted major in October 1705 and was present at Ramillies (1706) and Oudenarde (1708), and at the siege of Lille he was wounded twice while in command of a force of 400 grenadiers in an attempt to breach the French fortifications. 
Blackadder also fought at Malplaquet (1709), where the vacancy caused by the death of Colonel Cranston led to his promotion to lieutenant-colonel and command of the regiment. Blackadder commanded the Cameronians until October 1711, shortly before the treaty of Utrecht, when he sold his colonelcy to George, fifth Lord Forrester, of the Scots Greys, for $2600. Thus ended twenty-two years of active service with the regiment. 
Blackadder returned to Scotland, taking up residence in Edinburgh, and afterwards at Craigforth, Stirling. He occupied much of his attention with ecclesiastical affairs, becoming an elder of the College Church, Edinburgh, and a member of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, and of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. At the Jacobite rising of 1715, he was appointed colonel of the regiment raised by the city of Glasgow, which he posted at the bridge of Stirling to guard against an attack of the highlanders who, however, were defeated at the battle of Sheriffmuir. In consideration of his services during the rising he was, in March 1717, appointed deputy governor of Stirling Castle. He died on 31 August 1729, presumably at Craigforth, and was buried in the West Church of Stirling, where a marble tablet was erected to his memory. He had no children but was survived by his wife, Anne, who later married Sir James Campbell, bt, of Ardinglas, formerly an officer with the Scots troop of life guards. Blackadder's diaries, extracts of which together with a life were published in 1824, remain a source of information for historians of the period. Although written as a spiritual record of his experiences, they shed some light on Marlborough's campaigns in the early eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 2504


Blackadder, William (1647-1696), physician and plotter, was the eldest son of John Blackadder the elder (1615/1623?-1686), and his wife, Janet Haining (died 1688); Adam Blackadder (b. 1659, d. in or after 1696) and John Blackadder (1664-1729) were among his brothers. Admitted to Edinburgh University in 1665, he graduated in 1668. In 1674 he secured the release of one of his brothers, who had been imprisoned by the provost of Stirling for not taking the prescribed oaths and for attending conventicles. On 14 July 1675 he was apprenticed to Patrick Hepburn, an apothecary in Edinburgh. Blackadder then studied medicine at Leiden, where he graduated MD on 24 August 1680. While in the United Provinces he made the acquaintance of many Scottish exiles, aided perhaps by his father's reputation as a presbyterian divine. 
In 1685 Blackadder joined the earl of Argyll's expedition to Scotland. On 6 May, with three ships anchored off Orkney, he was sent ashore with Argyll's secretary, William Spence, in order to find a pilot and to gather intelligence. He was captured in Kirkwall and ordered to be taken to Edinburgh for examination by the privy council. On 6 June he landed at Leith and managed to signal to his sister to destroy any incriminating evidence in his lodgings. He remained in prison for over a year, until he was able to write to Pensionary Fagel in the United Provinces, a former patient, who sent for James II's envoy and asked him to release Blackadder as a naturalized Dutchman. 
In 1688 Blackadder was sent by the prince of Orange into Edinburgh, but he was arrested by the governor and sent for trial. He was freed following the revolution and on 3 January 1690 was appointed physician to the army in Scotland. He was also appointed a physician in ordinary to William III. He seems to have spent most of his time in Edinburgh. On 6 February 1691 he married Marion ('b'. after 1660, died in or after 1698), eldest legitimate daughter of James Hunter of Muirhouse, advocate. By order of Edinburgh council on 29 September 1693 he was named a burgess of the city, reference being made to his apprenticeship under Sir Patrick Hepburn. Blackadder was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh in 1695, but he died the following year; he was buried on 27 October 1696 in Greyfriars, Edinburgh. His wife survived him and married William Walkinshaw on 14 September 1698. 


@@@@@


doc= 2505


Blackadder, Robert (d. in or before 1468), landowner, is described by Andrew Crichton, in his account of the ancestry of the seventeenth-century covenanter John Blackadder, as having been 'remarkable for courage and daring enterprise' on the Anglo-Scottish borders in the fifteenth century (Crichton, 2). Crichton, who was clearly drawing on a manuscript family history, wrongly names Robert as Cuthbert in a report of his life and exploits which is only sometimes, and then probably coincidentally, reliable. Record evidence shows that Blackadder took his name from Blackadder in Berwickshire, where in 1452 the estate he had once held of the earl of March was granted to him in free barony by James II. Thereafter he received occasional payments for services to the crown, most notably in 1464, when he was one of three envoys paid for going to England to negotiate a truce; on 11 October of that year he was present in parliament at Edinburgh. He probably died in or shortly before 1468, when Adam Blackadder, presumably his son, received sasine of Blackadder. 
Crichton, however, attributes to Blackadder a conspicuous role in the defence of the Scottish borders against English attacks and also participation in a campaign into England which ended in a battle -- assumed by Crichton to have been that of Bosworth -- where he and three of his sons were killed. There is no doubt that Blackadder Castle was involved in the Anglo-Scottish campaigns of the early 1480s, for it was garrisoned by twenty men in 1481 and in the following year the lands around it were devastated by Richard of Gloucester's invading army. And it is equally well established that a Scottish force fought for Henry Tudor at Bosworth, under the leadership of Sir Alexander Bruce of Earlshall. But Robert Blackadder was certainly dead long before 1485, while Adam Blackadder and such other likely members of his family as can be identified as having been active then were still active for years afterwards. Consequently the contribution of the Blackadders to these events would appear to have occupied an indistinct point somewhere between marginality and non-existence. 


@@@@@


doc= 2506


Blackall, John (1771-1860), physician, was born in St Paul's Street, Exeter, on 24 December 1771, the sixth son of the Revd Theophilus Blackall (died 1781), and his wife, Elizabeth Ley, and great-grandson of Bishop Ofspring Blackall. He was educated at Exeter grammar school, from where he matriculated on 25 May 1789 at Balliol College, Oxford. He graduated BA in 1793, MA in 1796, MB in 1797, and MD on 2 March 1801. Immediately after taking his first degree he began to study medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and it was in its wards, while working as the clinical clerk of John Latham, that he made the observations on albuminuria which were afterwards described and enlarged in his treatise on dropsies. 
In 1797 Blackall settled in his native city of Exeter and on 1 June in that year he was chosen physician to the Devon and Exeter Hospital. As a young man, however, he felt eclipsed in his practice by Hugh Downman, Bartholomew Parr, and George Daniell, and in 1801 he resigned his hospital appointment and settled at Totnes. There he worked hard, often riding 60 miles a day, and built an extensive practice. His reputation increased, and in 1807 he returned to Exeter, where he was elected physician to the Devon and Exeter Hospital for the second time. In 1812 he was also appointed physician to St Thomas's Lunatic Asylum, which was later to be relocated and developed as the Exe Vale Hospital, Wonford. 
In 1813 Blackall published his well-known and admirable 'Observations on the Nature and Cure of Dropsies'. The work almost coincided with that of William Wells, who in 1812 published a paper entitled 'Observations on the dropsy which succeeds scarlet fever'. Richard Bright, whose name was to become attached eponymously to kidney disease, did not publish the first of his classic works on the subject until 1827. In it he paid generous tribute to Blackall. However, unlike Bright neither Wells nor Blackall had appreciated the full significance of abnormal appearances of the kidneys in those of their patients on whom post-mortem examinations had been carried out. Nevertheless, Blackall's book made clear the relation between dropsy (accumulation of serous fluid in the cavities and tissues of the body) and the presence of albumen in the urine (albuminuria). He made the important observation that mercurial drugs damaged the kidneys and caused dropsy. An appendix described a number of cases of angina pectoris, which had begun to attract attention after William Heberden's observations in 1802. 
Blackall was admitted a candidate of the Royal College of Physicians on 22 December 1814, and a fellow on 22 December 1815. His progress from this period was rapid and uninterrupted, and for many years he had an extensive and lucrative practice in the west of England, especially since the death of George Daniell. According to Thomas Shapter his diagnostic powers were of the highest order, and as a consulting practitioner no one more entirely won the esteem of his professional colleagues. 
Blackall married Laura Barnes (1773-1862) on 30 August 1806, and they had four sons: John Ofspring, who was drowned in the River Exe, aged seventeen; Theophilus and Henry, who also both predeceased their father; and Thomas MD, who was to outlive him. Blackall retained his strength and faculties to an advanced age, and he did not give up private practice until he was eighty years old. He died at his home, 13 Southernhay West, Exeter, on 10 January 1860, and his burial in Holy Trinity churchyard was attended by a large body of relations and friends and the whole of the medical profession in Exeter. 


@@@@@


doc= 2507


Blackall, Ofspring (bap. 1655, d. 1716), bishop of Exeter and religious controversialist, was born in London and baptized on 26 April 1655 at St Gregory by Paul's, the son of Thomas Blackall ('bap'. 1621, died 1688), freeman of the Haberdashers' Company and later alderman of the City of London, and his wife, Martha ('bap'. 1625, died 1701?), daughter of Charles Ofspring, rector of St Antholin, Budge Row, and trier of the second presbyterian classis (or eldership) of London. Blackall's father owned land in several counties as well as property in the city, and although he conformed to the established church may have retained some puritan sympathies. During Blackall's youth his parents resided in Lordshold Manor, an 'ancient brick house' in Dalston, Middlesex ('VCH Middlesex', 10.89). He was educated in nearby Hackney, perhaps at the free school of which Robert Skingle was master, before being admitted as a pensioner to St Catharine's College, Cambridge, on 26 April 1671. He graduated BA in 1675, proceeded MA in 1678, and was elected in 1679 (by the interest, it was rumoured, of William Wake) to a fellowship, which he resigned in 1687. He was ordained deacon on 11 March 1677 and priest on 19 December 1680. The university awarded him the degree of DD in 1700. 
On 14 January 1690 Blackall was instituted to the rectory of South Ockendon, Essex; he resigned this for the rectory of St Mary Aldermary, London, to which he was presented by the dean and chapter of St Paul's on 6 November 1694. He also held the city lectureships of St Olave Jewry from 1695 to 1698, and St Dunstan-in-the-West from 1698. He was appointed chaplain to William and Mary, although it was later alleged that he had been a nonjuror and had refused to swear allegiance to the new monarchs for two years. 
Blackall came to public prominence in 1699 when he engaged in a controversy with the Irish deist and pamphleteer John Toland. In his 'Life of John Milton' (1699), Toland had disputed Charles I's authorship of 'Eikon basilike'. In a brief aside Toland remarked that if such a recent deception could remain undiscovered, it was not surprising that the dubious authorship of some ancient Christian writings had likewise gone undetected. Blackall understood that Toland had slyly insinuated that parts of the 'New Testament' were forgeries. In a sermon before the House of Commons on 30 January 1699, Blackall called on the Commons to act against this denial of the authenticity of the revelation of God, which if left unchecked would undermine public morality as well as Christian doctrine. Toland replied with 'Amyntor, or, A Defence of Milton's Life' (1699), which attacked Blackall in a highly personal manner and accused him of theological ignorance. Toland disingenuously claimed he had disputed the authenticity not of the 'New Testament', but of 'spurious' apocryphal Christian works, of which he provided an extensive catalogue. Blackall's response, 'Mr Blackall's Reasons for not Replying to a Book Lately Published Entituled Amyntor' (1699), ably demonstrated that Toland's words should most naturally have been taken to have referred to the 'New Testament', but Blackall nevertheless acknowledged Toland's apparent retraction. Blackall's altercation with Toland had brought him to prominence as a defender of revealed religion against the attacks of the deists. Consequently he was chosen to deliver the Boyle lectures in 1700. These consisted of seven sermons, which he preached at St Paul's Cathedral, on the theme 'The sufficiency of a standing revelation'. 
Ten years after his exchange with Toland, Blackall found himself embroiled in controversy again, this time with a fellow clergyman. On 8 March 1709, the anniversary of Queen Anne's accession, Blackall preached a sermon before the queen in St James's Chapel, on the text 'Romans' 13: 4. It was later published, with the title 'The Divine Institution of Magistracy' (1709). Its themes echoed those of a sermon which Blackall had preached on the same occasion in 1705, at St Dunstan's, and which had also been published. It was a strong attack on the doctrines of popular sovereignty and the right of resistance, in which Blackall maintained that the magistrate's authority was a 'Portion of the Divine Authority... entrusted with him by God' (p. 3). It also maintained the independent 'jure divino' basis of clerical authority in spiritual matters. Benjamin Hoadly, in 'Some Considerations Humbly Offered to the... Bishop of Exeter' (1709), took offence to both sermons, which, he alleged, condemned the revolution of 1688-9. Hoadly claimed that the revolution had involved resistance to James II, but that such resistance was justified by the necessity of self-preservation. Blackall, in 'The Lord Bishop of Exeter's Answer to Mr Hoadly's Letter', dismissed Hoadly's premise that civil authority derived from an original contract. He undertook to reply again to Hoadly only if he kept to issues of scriptural interpretation, and avoided speculations concerning matters such as an alleged 'State of Nature' about which the scriptures were silent. Hoadly's subsequent 'Humble Reply' failed to comply with Blackall's conditions, and he did not therefore respond to it. The numerous pamphlets which were published on either side during the ensuing controversy included an anonymous work in support of Blackall, entitled 'The Best Answer Ever was Made' (1709), by the Irish nonjuror and formidable controversialist Charles Leslie. As Blackall was by now a bishop, Hoadly's attack on him was later cited to justify the forthright treatment Hoadly received in the Bangorian controversy, after he himself had been elevated to the episcopal bench. 
Ironically Blackall's same accession-day sermon of 1705, 'The Subjects Duty', had been attacked on its first publication by tory patriarchalist writers, who accused him of being a republican. The anonymous work 'An essay upon government: wherein the republican schemes reviv'd by Mr. Lock, Dr. Blackal &c. are fairly consider'd and refuted' (1705), as well as linking Blackall's name with that of John Locke, took Blackall to task for contending that the precise form of government in any nation was a matter of human, and not divine, institution. Blackall suffered further abuse in a pamphlet entitled 'Dr Blackall's Offspring' (1705). 
Despite being attacked from both sides Blackall was considered by contemporaries to have distinct high-church and tory principles. Gilbert Burnet went so far as to judge that, although Blackall claimed to be loyal to the government, 'his notions were all on the other side', that is, the Jacobite side, and that he 'seemed to condemn the Revolution, and all that had been done pursuant to it' ('Bishop Burnet's History of his Own Time', ed. G. Burnet and T. Burnet, 2 vols., 1724-34, 2.488). In fact Blackall was a consistent 'revolution tory' and maintained the high-church doctrines of passive obedience and non-resistance to sovereign powers, while denying the Filmerian tenet of divine hereditary right. By holding that sovereignty was always absolute, but that it belonged in the English constitution to the monarch in parliament, Blackall was articulating an important theory by which tories reconciled themselves to the revolution. 
Blackall was nominated to the bishopric of Exeter by the personal determination of Queen Anne, upon the recommendation of John Sharp, archbishop of York, but without the knowledge of her ministers, whose politically expedient recommendations the queen, mindful of the royal prerogative, deemed insufficiently orthodox. It was consequently remarked wittily that he was the 'queen's bishop'. He was consecrated at Lambeth on 8 February 1708. In order to supplement his episcopal revenues he was permitted to hold, in addition to his bishopric, the deanery of St Buryan, Cornwall, the rectory of Shorbrook, Devon, and the offices of archdeacon and treasurer of Exeter. He was a diligent bishop in his diocese, and he was also instrumental in the institution of charity schools in Exeter. He lived to see the establishment of two such schools for boys and two for girls, of fifty pupils each. 
During his lifetime Blackall's reputation as a preacher was considerable, and a reading of his posthumously published 'Works' (2 vols., 1723, edited by Blackall's friend, William Dawes, archbishop of York) shows that it was justified. His greatest literary work was a series of eighty-seven sermons issued as 'Discourses on the Sermon on the Mount'. These sermons are both expository and pastoral, and while written in an uncomplicated style, are far from superficial and betray a considerable erudition. However the great magnitude of the work perhaps hindered its reception, and despite its literary and theological merits it receded into relative obscurity. 
Blackall married Anne Dillingham (died 1762) of London, probably the daughter of James and Elizabeth Dillingham. Seven of their children -- Theophilus, John, Charles Ofspring, Elizabeth, Ann, Mary, and Jane -- survived the death of their father on 29 November 1716 in Exeter. Blackall had fallen from a horse in the spring of that year, and as a consequence he suffered a long and painful illness during which he developed gangrene. An earnest account of Blackall's life and death, and particularly of the sufferings of his final illness, can be found in William Dawes's preface to Blackall's 'Works'. Blackall was buried on 2 December in Exeter Cathedral, on the south side of the choir. In accordance with his will, no funeral sermon was preached, and his grave was not marked by any monument or inscription. 


@@@@@


doc= 2508


Blackall, Samuel (bap. 1737, d. 1792), Church of England clergyman, was baptized at Exminster, Devon, on 24 February 1737, the son of Theophilus Blackall (died 1757), chancellor of the diocese of Exeter, and his wife, Phillippa Cooke; his paternal grandfather was Ofspring Blackall, bishop of Exeter. Having been educated at Tiverton under Mr Dadds he was admitted as pensioner at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 29 October 1755. He graduated BA (as twelfth wrangler) in 1760, proceeded MA in 1763 and BD in 1770, and was made fellow of his college in 1772. He was ordained deacon in London on 1 June 1760. 
Blackall was described as a lively, clever, musical man who was a good rower, played the harpsichord well and sang, and was good at drawing and etching. In appearance he was dark and short, with a rather ugly face, and he suffered with a lame leg. He was one of those who in 1771-2 were involved with the Feathers tavern petition, which sought to end the requirements regarding subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. In 1772 he published 'A letter to Dr Hallifax, upon the subject of his three discourses preached before the University of Cambridge, occasioned by an attempt to abolish subscription to the XXXIX Articles'. Samuel Hallifax, then a fellow of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, responded dismissively to Blackall in the preface to the 1772 (third) edition of his controversial 'Three Sermons', whose contents were mentioned in the title of Blackall's tract, merely observing that he held it a duty to himself 'not to render an enemy considerable by opposition, whose malice may most effectually be disarmed by contempt' (Hallifax, xi). The disagreement between the two men was continued in the letter pages of the 'Gentleman's Magazine', where both parties, but especially Blackall, found articulate defenders. 'M.X.' accused Blackall of Socinianism in one letter, prompting 'L.S.', 'C.D.', and 'L.L.B.' to write in Blackall's defence; L.S. asserted that such a charge could only be the invention of slander, and went on to explain that 'I never knew any divine more earnest in the defence of Christianity against the objections of infidels, or a warmer advocate for the fundamental articles of our faith, as well as for the essentials of church discipline' ('GM', 43.69). Certainly Blackall, unlike Theophilus Lindsey, remained in the Church of England after the failure of the Feathers tavern petition. 
In 1786 Blackall was appointed rector of Loughborough, Leicestershire, an Emmanuel College living, which he held until his death, on 6 May 1792, at Bristol Hotwells. He never married, and left most of his possessions to his sister Anne, whose husband, Archdeacon Barnes, was Blackall's executor. Ann inherited $1200 in old South Sea Company stocks, together with the leases of Blackall's house and land in Sidmouth, Devon, and his stables there; she was instructed to bequeath this inheritance, in turn, to her children. Blackall left his nephews Samuel and John Blackall (the sons of his late brother Theophilus) all his books, manuscripts, and drawing and mathematical instruments, and 20 guineas apiece. Blackall was buried at the parish church of Sidmouth, where a memorial was put up in his name. He specially wished to be buried at Sidmouth because it was 'a place in which he had taken great delight when living' ('N&Q', 8.55). 


@@@@@


doc= 2509


Blackbourne, John (1683-1741), bishop of the nonjuring Church of England, was the son of Thomas Blackbourne. He was educated at a school in Audley, Cheshire, and from May 1697 at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1701 and MA in 1705. His refusal to recognize the revolutionary settlement and to swear an oath of allegiance to William and Mary excluded him from clerical preferment. 
Blackbourne then moved to Little Britain in the City of London, where, 'almost lost to the world and hid amongst old books... [he] lived a very exemplary, good life, and studied hard, endeavouring to be useful to mankind, both as a scholar and divine. To keep himself independent, he became corrector of the press to Mr. Bowyer, printer, and was, indeed, one of the most accurate of any that ever took upon him that laborious employ. (Nichols, 1.252-3)' In London he attracted a small religious community and regularly performed secret nonjuring services in an unofficial chapel at Gray's Inn. He was powerfully recommended to the exiled Stuart court in Rome by Lord Winchilsea, whose patronage was crucial for a number of nonjurors in London. In his presence, Blackbourne was consecrated as a nonjuring bishop on 6 May 1725 by the nonjuring prelates Nathaniel Spinckes and Henry Gandy, and later took part himself in the consecration of Richard Rawlinson on 25 March 1728. 
In the 1720s Blackbourne became the leading figure among the group of nonjurors that, in respect to liturgical questions and the 'Book of Common Prayer', adhered to the practice of the Restoration church. He exemplified these principles (in, for example, his refusal to use the mixed chalice) in the biographical account of his friend, 'The Life of the R. Reverend Mr. Nathanael Spinckes' (1731). The group came to be known as the nonusagers, in contradistinction to the usagers, who emphasized the importance of tradition in doctrinal questions and wished to introduce chiefly into their eucharistic liturgy certain changes, based on their knowledge of the ancient church and the first 'Book of Common Prayer' (1549). The two parties remained separate, each consecrating several bishops, from the year 1718 to 1732, when a reconciliation was attempted. Blackbourne, however, 'the most violent opponent of that scheme of conciliation' (Broxap, 226), still refused to relinquish the use of the communion office of the Anglican church. He lost more and more influence within the nonjuring sect, but continued to lead a small separate community, the extreme nonusagers, which ceased to exist with his death. 
Apart from his press corrections for the leading London printer William Bowyer, Blackbourne also edited several religious books and published a four-volume edition of the works of Francis Bacon (1730), which apparently contributed to the fact that he was well off compared to other nonjurors, leaving several hundred pounds to his wife, Philadelphia ('c'.1680-1751), and fellow brethren. He died in London on 17 November 1741, and was buried in Islington churchyard four days later. His library of about 1500 books was sold by auction in February 1743. 


@@@@@


doc= 2510


Blackburn, Colin, Baron Blackburn of Killearn (1813-1896), judge, was born in Levenside, Dunbartonshire, on 18 May 1813, the second eldest son of John Blackburn (1756-1840) of Killearn, a Jamaican proprietor, and Rebecca Leslie ('b'. 1788), daughter of the Revd Dr Gillies. He was educated at Edinburgh Academy and Eton College, before going to Trinity College, Cambridge. Having 'come up after being idle at Eton to be idle again at Cambridge', he was fortunate in having as his tutor at Trinity, not William Whewell, who would never have encouraged him to study, but George Peacock, who 'saw merit in Blackburn's mathematical paper' and 'advised him to cultivate what he saw were his talents and he did' (Trinity College, Cambridge, Add. MS b.49.199). A very serious student, he became a first-class mathematician, graduating as eighth wrangler in 1835. Two younger brothers, Hugh Blackburn (1823-1909) and Robert Bogle Blackburn (1821-1875), shared this academic pedigree: the former became professor of mathematics at Glasgow University, the latter an advocate and later sheriff of Stirlingshire. 
Blackburn was admitted a student at Lincoln's Inn in April 1835, but he later migrated to the Inner Temple and was called to the bar on 23 November 1838. He joined the northern circuit. His early career was that of a relatively briefless barrister, without legal or political connections. Publicly he never expressed political views, although his older brother, Peter Blackburn (1811-1870), was the liberal conservative member for Stirlingshire in the parliaments of 1855 to 1865. His appearance, with his burly figure, strong face, and round bullet head, was not prepossessing. Moreover, as Ballantine observed, 'a scotch accent does not improve a naturally harsh voice and his demeanour can scarcely be termed graceful or his manner pleasant' (Ballantine, 248). He was the antithesis of the suave advocate: his humour was dry, his personality grave. He studied 'human nature' in ''Coke upon Littleton' without assistance from haunts of revelry'; a confirmed bachelor, he was never 'a ladies' man' (ibid., 332, 248). 
It took many years for Blackburn's legal talents to be recognized. His ability to distil principle from raw case law became known with the publication of his much praised treatise on 'Sale' (1845) which led to his appearing as a junior in some heavy mercantile cases. During these years of obscurity he would be seen in the back row of the queen's bench and the exchequer chamber, with Thomas Flower Ellis, T. B. Macaulay's great friend, listening to arguments and judgments which they reported in eight volumes as Ellis and Blackburn and one as Ellis, Blackburn, and Ellis. 
On 27 June 1859 Blackburn, who had never taken silk, was appointed a judge of the queen's bench by the lord chancellor, Lord Campbell, in succession to Sir William Erle, who had been appointed chief justice of the common pleas. He was invested with the coif on 2 November and knighted on 24 April 1860. His appointment was greeted with consternation by the profession. Campbell recorded in his diary the great disgrace he incurred 'by disposing of [my] judicial patronage on the principle 'detur digniori'... whereas several Whig Queen's Counsel, M.P.'s, were considering which of them would be the man, not dreaming that they could all be passed over. They got me well abused in the 'Times' and other newspapers, but Lyndhurst has defended me gallantly in the House of Lords. (Hardcastle, 372-3)' Blackburn's judicial career was a vindication of Campbell's bold appointment. In the course of his seventeen years in the queen's bench from 1859 to 1876, he came to be recognized as one of the ablest judges in a strong court. He was an excellent 'nisi prius' judge, very hard-working, sober in judgment, and fair-minded. There was, said Serjeant Ballantine, 'no one before whom I would sooner have practised' (Ballantine, 333). Blackburn's manner on the bench was said to be 'harsh and uncongenial, but it was soon found that this was only his surface deportment' (ibid.). He was a compassionate man. 
As a judge, Blackburn rarely excited controversy. The one time his conduct was questioned arose from his charge to the grand jury in June 1868 in the trial of Edward Eyre, governor of Jamaica, who had been indicted for acts of oppression in suppressing an insurrection of black rioters in Jamaica and in executing its supposed ringleader, George William Gordon. After the grand jury had refused to return a bill of indictment, the chief justice, Sir Alexander Cockburn, questioned in open court Blackburn's direction that removing Gordon from 'Kingston into the proclaimed district for the purpose of subjecting him to martial law was legally justifiable', and that the execution of Gordon was justifiable if Eyre '
'bona fide' thought... that it was really necessary and proper for the purpose of checking [the insurrection] that Gordon... should be summarily tried, and that it was of importance that he, as the head of the insurrection, should be made an example of at once, in order to stop the insurrection. ('Annual Register', 1868, pt 2, 214)' The chief justice, who had given a different charge in the earlier case of 'R. v. Nelson and Brand' (1867), suggested that the queen's bench judges whom Blackburn had consulted before delivering his charge did not realize that he would so direct the jury. 
In 1875 Blackburn became a justice of the newly constituted high court of judicature, and a year later was appointed to serve as one of the two lords of appeal in ordinary, offices created by the 'Appellate Jurisdiction Act' of 1876. This time his appointment was not greeted with consternation by the legal profession but was applauded. His judgments in the queen's bench had demonstrated his profound knowledge of the principles of the common law. They continue to be read with admiration and cited as authoritative, notably his judgment in 'Taylor v. Caldwell' (1863) which did much to formulate what modern lawyers call the doctrine of 'frustration of purpose' and demonstrates Blackburn's considerable command of civilian sources. The defendants had agreed to let the plaintiffs have the use of the Surrey Gardens and Music Hall on four specific days for the purpose of giving concerts and fetes. Before the date of the first concert the Music Hall was destroyed by fire. The question which the court had to decide was whether the loss which the plaintiffs had sustained should fall upon the defendants. The court, whose judgment Blackburn delivered, held that it should not. The defendants' promise was not an absolute one. It was an implied condition of the contract that the Music Hall should continue to be in existence. Both parties would be excused if 'performance becomes impossible from the perishing of the thing without default of the contractor'. He pointed out that this principle was not novel; contracts had been discharged where performance was dependent on the existence of specific goods or the life of a human being, just as they were in Roman law (the 'Digest') and contemporary civil law (Pothier's 'celebrated 'Traite du contrat de vente''). 
Robust common sense as well as legal learning were the hallmarks of Blackburn's judgments and speeches in the House of Lords. In 'Orr-Ewing v. Colquhoun' (1877) he was 'not inclined to reject the evidence of practical men as to a fact, merely because they [gave] a bad theoretical reason for it, and [he was] not able to furnish the right one'. In 'Foakes v. Beer' (1884) Blackburn, alone of the peers, accepted that 'prompt payment of a part payment of their demand may be more beneficial to [creditors] than it would be to insist on their rights and enforce payment of the whole'. There are many other notable decisions, among them 'Pharmaceutical Society v. London and Provincial Supply Association' (1880) (important for his dictum that a corporation can be sued for a libel or convicted for committing a nuisance) and 'Erlanger v. New Sombrero Phosphate Co.' (1878) (discussing the fiduciary duties of company promoters and the principles determining rescission of contracts). 
Blackburn was a member of the royal commission on the courts of law (1867) and on the stock exchange (1877), and chaired that on the draft criminal code (1878). In 1877 he became an honorary bencher of the Inner Temple. 
After his retirement in December 1886, Blackburn rarely spoke in the house, possibly because he was 'a victim to that sad disease which often attacks the strongest brains' (Manson, 263). His remaining years were lived quietly on his Scottish estate, Doonholm, Alloway, Ayrshire, where he died on 8 January 1896. 


@@@@@


doc= 2511


Blackburn, William (1750-1790), surveyor and architect, was born in Southwark, the son of a tradesman of St John's Horsleydown, probably the John Blackburn who on 15 November 1749 married Eleanor Howell of that parish. His mother, said to be a native of Spain, died in his infancy. Though apprenticed to a surveyor, Blackburn was essentially self-educated. In 1769 he competed for the Dublin royal exchange. He entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1772, and obtained a silver medal in 1773 for the best drawing of the interior of Wren's St Stephen Walbrook. In 1775 he exhibited drawings of minor buildings 'designed for a gentleman in Surrey'. 
Blackburn's great opportunity arose from the 1779 'Penitentiary Act', which permitted imprisonment to replace transportation: solitary confinement was to induce remorse, and hard labour to provide correction. In 1782 he won the subsequent competition for a national male penitentiary house to accommodate 600, out of a field of sixty-three entries which included designs by John Soane, Thomas Hardwick, and Thomas Baldwin. It was he who 'first turned prison design into a kind of technology, translating the doctrine of reform into the practicalities of construction' (Evans, 118). Financial exigencies prevented the construction of his prize design (now lost), but the ideas embodied in the 'Penitentiary Act' were extensively implemented by local authorities under the 1784 'Gaols Acts'; Blackburn secured many of their commissions and began 'to develop prison design into a kind of moral geography' (ibid., 142). By 1787 he was regarded as the leading authority in the country on prison design. 
According to a report of 1826, the plan of Liverpool borough gaol (1786-9; dem. 1855) resembled Blackburn's original proposal. The 1784 legislation required such local prisons to be divided into 'distinct apartments' for various classes of prisoner, graded by sex and delinquency. Designed for 270 inmates -- huge by contemporary standards -- Liverpool gaol's six free-standing radial blocks were all externally visible from the gaoler's house at the hub. John Howard praised it when under construction: 'with a view to security, health, reformation and convenience, I apprehend, it will be one of the first borough gaols in the kingdom' (Howard, 206). Blackburn had in each of his prisons to resolve the problem of reconciling these prerequisites. To achieve security he established a patrollable zone between the cell blocks and the perimeter wall, itself designed so as to afford no internal foothold. He told Jeremy Bentham that his stone walls were too massive to break through, and undermining was blocked by a water trap. His radial plans, perhaps influenced by contemporary French circular forms, facilitated maintenance of order. Fragmentation of the structure facilitated the ventilation then regarded as essential to prevent 'gaol fever', typhus or typhoid; furthermore -- as in his Gloucester gaol and 'houses of correction' -- the structure was punctured by air holes in walls, floors, and ceilings, the cell blocks being elevated on piers or arcades. His gaols were further characterized by a severe flat-roofed entrance lodge that provided a platform for executions. Blackburn was the originator of a type of architecture in which the formal traditional elements were 'sublimated to the requirements of reform' (Evans, 181). John Howard regarded Blackburn as the only man capable of delineating upon paper his ideas of what a prison ought to be. 
In addition to executing or beginning gaols in Gloucestershire (the county gaol, 1788-91, and four houses of correction, 1787-91) and at Oxford (county gaol, 'c'.1785, and city gaol, 1786-9; dem. 1879), Liverpool (1786-7; dem. 1855), Ipswich (1786-90), Salford (New Bayley, 1787-90; dem. 'c'.1872), Preston (house of correction, 1789), Monmouth (1788-90), Dorchester (1789-95), Exeter (1789-95; dem. 1853), Lewes (house of correction, 1789-93; dem. 1967), Stafford ('c'.1789-93), and Shrewsbury (1789-93), Blackburn prepared designs for gaols at Bedford and Lancaster Castle. He is said to have planned the gaol at Limerick ('c'.1789), and designed improvements to the Dublin Newgate (dem. 'c'.1880). For the Bristol Unitarians he designed the chapel at Lewin's Mead (1788-91) and in September 1790 he surveyed the cathedral at Exeter. As surveyor to the Watermen's Company from 1776, he designed their hall in St Mary-at-Hill, London (1778-80). Blackburn also designed houses both on his account and for others: a villa at Denmark Hill (1785-6), 'perhaps the finest house' in South Lambeth ('Survey of London', 146), provided a model for others close by. He worked consistently within the classical tradition, influenced by Robert Adam, employing such features as a rusticated ground floor, lunettes, and continuous sill-courses generally throughout his 'oeuvre'. He was surveyor to St Thomas's Hospital and Guy's Hospital (alterations 'c'.1788) in his native Southwark. His design for rebuilding Hackney church, Middlesex, was set aside by his death. 
Corpulent in figure, medium in height, Presbyterian in religion, Blackburn was noted, according to an obituary, for his candour and modesty. He married a Quaker, Lydia, daughter of Joshua Hobson, a Southwark builder, on 2 February 1783 at St Olave's, Southwark. He died suddenly on 28 October 1790 at Preston, Lancashire, as he was on his way to Glasgow to discuss a proposal for a new prison there. He was buried in Bunhill Fields, London. His wife survived him with a son and two daughters; a second son was born posthumously. Blackburn owned leasehold and freehold property, and left his family in comfortable circumstances. His brother-in-law William Hobson completed several of his undertakings. 


@@@@@


doc= 2512


Blackburne, Anna (bap. 1726, d. 1793), botanist, was born at Orford Hall, north of Warrington, Lancashire, the fifth of nine children of John Blackburne (bap. 1694, d. 1786), horticulturist, and Catherine Ashton (1701-1740). She was baptized (as Anne) in Warrington on 3 January 1726 and grew up at Orford Hall, where her family had held estates for three generations. Following the early death of her mother Anna took on central responsibilities at Orford Hall and also joined her father in scientific activities. John Blackburne established an extensive, much-admired garden that was filled with aquatic plants, fruits, hardy exotics, and hothouse specimens such as pineapples. Anna developed a well-known natural history collection. She did not marry, but was widely known as Mrs Blackburne. She received naturalist visitors such as Thomas Pennant, corresponded widely with Linnaeus and other naturalists at home and abroad, and exchanged plants, minerals, and specimens of birds with other collectors including Peter Simon Pallas. When the German naturalist and traveller Johann Reinhold Forster was tutor in natural science at the educationally progressive Warrington Academy, 1767-70, he regularly dined at Orford Hall and read his entomology lectures to her. 
Anna Blackburne taught herself Latin so that she could study the Linnaean classification system. In his 'System of Vegetables' Erasmus Darwin called her 'learned and ingenious'. On 29 July 1771 she wrote to Linnaeus in Uppsala and offered to send him North American birds and insects collected by one of her brothers, Ashton Blackburne, near New York. Linnaeus replied that he knew of her already, as one of 'three botanical ladies' who 'disputed in 1769 with and triumphed over the botanist in the physic garden at Oxford about the geranium' (Wystrach, 153). The two corresponded in the early 1770s; Linnaeus praised her as 'a true naturalist whose esteem I covet' (ibid., 155). 
At Orford Hall, Anna Blackburne assembled a large and notable museum of natural history that contained specimens of plants, birds, shells, insects, fish, and minerals. Her collection rivalled the museums of natural history established by her cousin Sir Ashton Lever in Manchester and London. After her father's death, in 1787 she moved to Fairfield, a new house closer to Warrington, in which one large room was designed for her collection of birds and other natural curiosities. She planned to organize the garden according to the Linnaean system but ill health interfered with the project. She died on 30 December 1793, and was buried in the family plot at Winwick, Lancashire. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' obituary celebrated her as 'sincere and hospitable, of open, candid, and unaffected manners, with a truly good heart, and a clear head'. The plant genus 'Blackburnia' an Australian shrub, and the Blackburnian warbler ('Dendroica fusca') were named in her honour by Pennant and Forster. Bequests to her family and various charities totalled some $12,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 2513


Blackburne, Francis (1705-1787), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born at Richmond, Yorkshire, on 9 June 1705, the elder son of Francis Blackburne ('bap'. 1680?, died 1708/9?), a businessman and alderman, and his wife, Alice ('b'. 'c'.1670), the elder daughter of Dr Thomas Comber, dean of Durham, and Alice Thornton. His father died at the age of twenty-nine, and his mother later married William Kirkby of Ashlack, Lancashire, to which the family moved. He was educated at schools in Kendal, Hawkshead, and Sedbergh, after which he spent a year studying with his maternal uncle, Thomas Comber, of East Newton, Yorkshire. He was admitted in May 1723 at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he became conduit or chaplain-fellow when ordained on 12 March 1728 by Bishop Green of Ely. He graduated BA in 1727, and MA in 1733. He was refused a fellowship of his college by its conservative fellows, who strongly disliked the firmly Lockean politico-theology which Blackburne had quickly imbibed when advised to read Locke on government on going up to Cambridge. He left Cambridge for East Newton, where he lived until 1739, having been taken ill with a nervous disorder which he overcame by taking up fox-hunting and other field sports. He was ordained priest by Bishop Gooch of Norwich at Ely Chapel, Holborn, on 18 March 1739 in order to qualify for the rectory of Richmond, which had been promised to him on the first vacancy. After taking up the rectory he resided in Richmond until his death. On 30 August 1744 he married Hannah Elsworth, 'nee' Hotham (1713-1799), the widow of Joshua Elsworth, with whom she had had three children, one of whom, Hannah, later married Theophilus Lindsey, the founder of Unitarianism. 
It was at Richmond that Blackburne began seriously to read. In 1742 he became chaplain to Henry D'Arcy of Sedbury, near Richmond. He was collated to the archdeaconry of Cleveland in 1750, and in August that year he was given the prebend of Bilton by Archbishop Hutton, to whom he was titular chaplain. His liberal principles prevented him from taking any further preferment since he had made up his mind never again to subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. In an apology published in 1750 he defended John Jones's 'Free and Candid Disquisitions Relating to the Church of England' (1749), denying that he had any part in their composition, though he had seen the work in manuscript. In 1752 he anonymously published a controversial attack on Bishop Joseph Butler's 1751 charge, 'A Serious Inquiry into the Use and Importance of External Religion', in which he accused Butler of coming close to Roman Catholicism on the matter. This was first printed with Blackburne's name in 1767 in 'Pillars of Priestcraft and Orthodoxy Shaken', a collection edited by the dissenting minister and controversialist Richard Baron. 
Blackburne supported the mortalism of his Cambridge friend and contemporary Edmund Law in a tract called 'No Proof in the Scriptures of an Intermediate State' (1755). This stated the heterodox belief that the soul, which was not naturally immortal, but was made so by Christ, passed into a state of sleep between death and the resurrection into eternal life. This restatement of a doctrine which had been held by several of the civil war sects provoked a minor controversy in the 1750s and 1760s, and it related to Blackburne's increasing interest in the incendiary politico-theology of the mid-seventeenth century. A further contribution to the debate, 'A Historical View of the Controversy Concerning an Intermediate State', appeared in 1765, of which a second, much enlarged edition appeared in 1772. This brought him into collision with Bishop William Warburton on the matter, and Blackburne considered his own 'masterpiece' to be his response to Warburton's ire, 'Remarks on Dr. Warburton's Account of the Sentiments of the Jews Concerning the Soul'. Blackburne played a leading role in the controversy over subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' which convulsed Cambridge in the 1760s and 1770s, an engagement which also saw him on Law's side. In 1758 he had argued, in 'Remarks on the Rev. Dr. Powell's Sermon in Defence of Subscription', against what he considered to be the casuistry which would permit subscription to articles to be made with a considerable latitude of meaning. This led him to write his best-known work, the 'Confessional, or, A full and free inquiry into the right, utility, and success of establishing confessions of faith and doctrine in protestant churches', which appeared in May 1766, but which had been in preparation for some years before. Nathaniel Lardner, the dissenting divine and a fellow church historian, had long wanted Blackburne to go into print on the matter, and it was the bibliophile and philanthropist Thomas Hollis, a champion of the commonwealth tradition in English political thought, who finally persuaded him to publish the manuscript. Andrew Millar published the work anonymously; a second edition appeared in 1767, and a third, enlarged edition in 1770. The work took the form of a decidedly polemical account of the history of the Church of England, in which Blackburne attacked those who defended subscription to Calvinist articles according to their own lax interpretations; he denounced orthodoxy as a man of straw. He was particularly critical of Laud's Arminian interpretation of the articles, and he lamented that conditions of service in the church required of honest men that they confront the dilemma of ''subscribe' or starve'. A lively controversy arose; it has been calculated that orthodox responses to the 'Confessional', largely supported by Archbishop Thomas Secker who despised Blackburne for his attack on Butler, amounted to enough to fill ten volumes. In 1772 a petition was drawn up at the Feathers tavern in London, which belonged to Peterhouse, in support of Blackburne's proposal that a private statement of faith, of the sort sworn by his own son at Cambridge, should be substituted for subscription to the articles. The petition was signed by some 200 people: it was rejected by the House of Commons by 217 votes to 71. 
Theophilus Lindsey, the husband of Blackburne's stepdaughter, and Dr John Disney, who married his elder daughter, Jane, were deeply involved in the debate, and both of them shortly afterwards left the Church of England in favour of the new denomination which they founded: Unitarianism. Blackburne was widely supposed to share their views, and his sincerity on the doctrine of the Trinity was questioned accordingly. On Disney's secession, Blackburne drew up a paper called 'An answer to the question, why are not you a Socinian?', in the course of which he denounced ''rational Christianity', the foster father of modern infidelity'. He also declared himself to be a Calvinist of 'the largest and most liberal sort'. This was later published as an appendix to the introductory 'Life' with which his son, also named Francis, prefaced an edition of his works in 1804-5. Blackburne continued to emphasize his opposition to tests, but it was pointed out that he was no clerical careerist since his preferments produced only $150 a year, and he had declined an offer to succeed Samuel Chandler at the fashionable dissenting chapel in London, the Old Jewry, at a salary of $400. 
Blackburne abandoned plans to publish a life of Luther, on which he had undertaken considerable amounts of research, in favour of an act of personal piety, writing instead a two-volume life of his friend and patron Hollis, which appeared, together with many rich engravings, in 1780. This anonymously published work takes the form of a memorial to the radical tradition whose values Hollis had venerated and encouraged, both in England and in America, and whose extremely liberal religious views were admired but not shared by Blackburne. A figure central to this tradition, John Milton, had been defended by Blackburne in his 'Remarks on Johnson's Life of Milton' (1780). Blackburne began to lose his sight in 1784, and he resorted to the use of an amanuensis. In 1787 he performed his thirty-eighth visitation of Cleveland, and he died peacefully in his chair at home in Richmond on 7 August 1787. He left his wife, who died on 23 August 1799, and four children: Jane, married to Dr Disney; Francis, vicar of Brignal; Sarah, married to the Revd John Hall, vicar of Chew Magna; and William, a physician in London. A son Thomas had died aged thirty-three in Durham in 1782. 
Blackburne's 'Works, Theological and Miscellaneous', together with a detailed memoir, were edited by his son and published by Benjamin Flower, a radical Cambridge publisher, in seven volumes. Besides the works mentioned above, they contain his charges as archdeacon, which reveal his marked antipathy towards Roman Catholicism, to which he was not at all prepared to extend full toleration and of which denomination he was a very firm critic. A large number of miscellaneous pamphlets comprise the remaining volumes. 


@@@@@


doc= 2514


Blackburne, Francis (1782?-1867), judge, was born at Great Footstown, co. Meath, almost certainly on 11 November 1782, though one source gives his year of birth as 1780. He was the fourth son of Richard Blackburne of Footstown, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Francis Hopkins of Darvistown, co. Meath. He was educated at the village school at Dunshaughlin, co. Meath, and subsequently at the school of the Revd William White in Dublin, where the Blackburne family had moved, apprehensive of being attacked in their rural home during a period of agrarian disturbance. Blackburne entered Trinity College, Dublin, in July 1798, where he acquired numerous distinctions; he became a scholar in 1801 and graduated BA in 1803. In 1809 he married Jane, only daughter of William Martley of Ballyfallon, co. Meath. They had fourteen children, five of whom survived him. 
Blackburne entered the King's Inns, Dublin, in 1801, and entered Lincoln's Inn in London in 1803. He was called to the Irish bar in 1805 and joined the home circuit. He specialized in chancery matters, though not to the exclusion of common-law work, and became a king's counsel in 1822. He became third serjeant in 1826 and second serjeant in 1830. In 1822-4, while still a member of the bar, he acted as a special judge in the city and county of Limerick, pursuant to an appointment under the 'Insurrection Act', and helped to restore order at a turbulent time. When Earl Grey became prime minister in 1830, Blackburne, though known to be a tory, was appointed as attorney-general for Ireland, with a view to the Irish administration having a broad political base. He continued in that office until 1835, under Grey and during the initial short administrations of Melbourne and Peel. He was in charge of the government's legal responses to the campaigns of Daniel O'Connell and the disorder associated with Orangeism and tithe issues. 
Blackburne was reappointed by Peel as attorney-general in 1841, and he became master of the rolls in 1842. In January 1846 he was appointed chief justice of the queen's bench, in which capacity he presided over the trials of William Smith O'Brien and other leaders of the 1848 rebellion. During the first government of Lord Derby (who, as Lord Stanley, had been chief secretary for Ireland between 1830 and 1833, during part of Blackburne's initial period of office as attorney-general), between February and December 1852, Blackburne was lord chancellor of Ireland. In 1852 he was appointed as one of the commissioners of national education, but he retired in the following year in objection to a perceived diminution in religious instruction in national schools. He was for some years vice-chancellor of Dublin University. 
In 1856 Blackburne was appointed by Lord Palmerston as lord justice of appeal in Ireland. Two years later he was invited by Lord Derby again to become lord chancellor, but he declined on account of his advanced age and failing health. He changed his mind, however, and decided to accept Derby's offer but was told that the position had been offered to and accepted by Joseph Napier. On the last accession to power of Lord Derby in 1866, Blackburne consented to accept the position, to facilitate other appointments that Derby wished to make. He resigned with some ill feeling in March 1867, at Derby's request. Blackburne's son and biographer remarks that his party loyalty had compelled him to accept Derby's invitation in the first place. In May 1867 he declined an offer of a baronetcy, perhaps having hoped for a peerage. 
In private character Blackburne was generous and urbane. As a lawyer he possessed extraordinary powers of mental concentration, wide experience, and profound acquaintance with every branch of law and equity. He had a dignified and courteous manner, a distinct and melodious voice, and fluent delivery. He resided in Dublin at Leinster Street and then at 34 Merrion Square; and also near Dublin at Roebuck Hall and then Rathfarnham Castle, co. Dublin, a substantial Elizabethan castle which he had bought in 1847. He died there on 17 September 1867 and was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 2515


Blackburne, John (bap. 1694, d. 1786), horticulturist, baptized on 13 September 1694 at Warrington parish church, was born at Orford Old Hall, near Warrington where his father, Jonathan Blackburne (1646-1724), owned a country estate. His mother was the widowed Anne Lockwood, 'nee' Chilton (1655x7-1732). Nothing is known of his education or early years. His wife, Catherine, 'nee' Ashton (1701-1740), whom he married about 1719, was related to Sir Ashton Lever. Hamlet Winstanley painted a memorial portrait, showing her with her husband and eight of their children, in 1741. Their daughter Anna Blackburne made an extensive museum collection of birds, minerals, and insects. Their son, John Blackburne, became mayor of Liverpool; a grandson, again named John Blackburne, was member of parliament for Lancashire. A magistrate in Warrington, Blackburne held the office of deputy lieutenant for the county of Lancashire, and later purchased the lordship of the manor of Warrington. 
John Blackburne was described by his friend Thomas Pennant as 'another Evelyn' ('Tour in Scotland', 1.12), on account of his passion for horticulture and rural improvement. Though he seldom travelled far afield, he acquired many North American plants through his sponsorship of the collector John Bartram in partnership with Peter Collinson and Richard Richardson. The naturalist Johann Reinhold Forster commemorated him and his daughter Anna by naming a genus 'Blackburnia'. Blackburne is also known for his achievement in producing pineapple fruits in his stove, and for successfully growing the fan palm 'Sabal blackburniana', named for him by Thomas Glazebrook. In 1779 his gardener Adam Neal published a catalogue of the living plant collections at Orford Hall which confirmed Blackburne's reputation as Lancashire's leading horticulturist. Blackburne died on 20 December 1786 at Orford Hall, aged ninety-two, and was buried at St Oswald's parish church, Winwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 2516


Blackburne, Lancelot (1658-1743), archbishop of York, was born on 10 December 1658 in London, the son of Richard Blackburne, a gentleman of London, and the brother of Richard Blackburne. He was educated at Westminster School, which he entered as a king's scholar in 1671. On leaving Westminster he was admitted to Christ Church, Oxford, matriculating on 20 October 1676, and was also that year elected a student (fellow) of the college. He graduated BA in 1680, and in 1681, having been ordained, went to the West Indies. He received permission to proceed MA 'in absentia', which he did by a decree of convocation on 28 January 1684. He was at that time at Nevis, in the king's service. The precise nature of Blackburne's services to the crown remains obscure. A list of payments for 'Secret Services' of Charles II in 1681 notes that $20 was paid 'To Launcelott Blackburne, clerk, bounty, for his transportation to Antego' (Akerman, 42). 
Having returned from his travels, Blackburne married Catherine ('c'.1646-1726), daughter of William Talbot of Stourton Castle, Staffordshire, and widow of Walter Littleton of Lichfield, Staffordshire, on 2 September 1684 at the Savoy Chapel. She was the elder sister of William Talbot, later bishop successively of Oxford, Salisbury, and Durham. There is no indication in Blackburne's will that the couple had any children. 
Three months after his marriage Blackburne was presented to the rectory of Camerton, Somerset, on 26 November 1684. Though himself a whig, he cultivated the patronage of Jonathan Trelawny, the high-church bishop of Exeter, and was rewarded with a canonry at Exeter in 1691, the first of several preferments in the diocese that also included the rectory of Calstock, Cornwall, in 1697, and the vicarage of Alternon, Cornwall, in 1699. He was appointed subdean of Exeter on 9 January 1695, and in this capacity wrote to Bishop Trelawny recounting the evidence given at a witch trial at Exeter in 1696 (a copy of the letter is printed in 'N&Q'). He was not without enemies in Exeter, however, and despite the support of influential friends was forced to resign his subdeanery in 1702 following allegations of a scandal, the nature of which is uncertain. Francis Atterbury wrote to Trelawny in support of Blackburne in October 1703, noting that: 'his enemies have been so industrious in spreading and fixing that black scandal, that he would find but a very cold and mortifying reception here, till his friends have made a little way for him, by removing men's prejudices, and clearing up matters to his service. ('Miscellaneous Works', 1.253)' His position had, however, improved sufficiently that following the death of his successor he was reinstalled as subdean on 27 July 1704. During his time as subdean Blackburne came to the notice of the dean of Exeter, William Wake. On Wake's elevation to the bishopric of Lincoln in 1705, Blackburne was appointed his successor as dean. Blackburne maintained the favour of the ministry by keeping a watchful eye on the local gentry who were thought to be disaffected to the government. In 1715 he added to his growing collection of preferments by becoming archdeacon of Cornwall. 
After Wake had been translated to Canterbury, Blackburne continued to benefit from the patronage of the new archbishop. Wake nominated Blackburne to accompany George I as the king's chaplain on his visit to Hanover in 1716. This was an important appointment, and the position came to be seen as the precursor to elevation to the bench of bishops. In 1717 Blackburne was duly elevated to the bishopric of Exeter, although he did not succeed in obtaining 'a prebend of Westminster when one should fall vacant' which he had requested so that he might have a convenient house when attending parliament (Sykes, 150). He took his parliamentary duties seriously and was a strong supporter of the whig government in parliament, siding, for example, with the ministry and against his erstwhile patron Wake in voting for the bill introduced by James Stanhope, Earl Stanhope, for the repeal of the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts' in December 1718. He was appointed lord high almoner in 1723. It was no doubt Blackburne's political loyalties which recommended him to Edmund Gibson, bishop of London and Walpole's ecclesiastical adviser, by whose influence he was translated on 19 October 1724 to the archbishopric of York, a position he held for the remainder of his life. 
While Blackburne was assiduous in executing his political duties, he was less diligent in performing his spiritual functions. During his tenure at York he appears to have conducted no confirmations. Initially he did ordain in person, although he did so only in July, August, and September, during his summer residence at Bishopthorpe, and after 1733 he ceased to ordain in person at all, but gave candidates letters dimissory to be ordained by other bishops. He attended instead to political matters, civil and ecclesiastical, and kept a Westminster residence in Downing Street. He did, however, take seriously the exercise of his ecclesiastical patronage, particularly in promoting the interests of loyal whigs, and he also resorted to the courts to defend the prerogatives and interests of the archbishopric of York against encroachments. His undoubted presence as a court bishop, moreover, gives credibility to the story which attributes to the archbishop's influence the rise of Joseph Butler, the moral philosopher and future bishop, from ecclesiastical obscurity. Butler had given up his preachership at the Rolls Chapel and had for ten years ministered in the northern parish of Stanhope. It is said that Queen Caroline enquired of Blackburne whether Butler was not dead, to which he is supposed to have replied, 'No, madam, he is not 'dead', but 'buried'', thereby prompting the queen to appoint him her clerk of the closet, or private chaplain. 
Unfortunately, however, Blackburne's reputation, both during his lifetime and subsequently, has been characterized, whether justifiably or not, more by unverifiable rumour and scandal than by his political and ecclesiastical accomplishments. A story was told that while in the West Indies he had served on a buccaneering expedition against the Spanish, and took his part of the booty. It was said that one old buccaneer returned to England and asked after his old chum Blackburne, only to be told he was now archbishop of York. Another story, recounted by James Granger, also illustrates the very worldly reputation which Blackburne enjoyed. The archbishop, it was alleged, was conducting a visitation to St Mary's Church in Nottingham. It was said that Blackburne 'had ordered some of the... attendants, to bring him pipes and tobacco, and some liquor into the vestry for his refreshment after the 'fatigue' of confirmation'. The rector of the church, hearing of the orders, 'remonstrated with the archbishop upon the impropriety of his conduct' and told Blackburne that 'his vestry should not be converted into a smoking-room' (Malcolm, 199). The apparent failure of Blackburne to perform any confirmations while archbishop of York, however, calls into question the reliability of this account. 
Blackburne was also alleged to have fathered Thomas Hayter, bishop of Norwich. Horace Walpole described Hayter as: 'natural son of Blackbourn, the jolly old Archbishop of York, who had all the manners of a man of quality, though he had been a buccaneer, and was a clergyman; but he retained nothing of his first profession, except his seraglio. (Walpole, 'Memories', 1.74-5)' It must be acknowledged that Blackburne was particularly munificent in showering preferments on Hayter, a younger man, and that Hayter inherited a large portion of Blackburne's considerable estate. An item in the 'Quarterly Review' (1822) pretended to demonstrate that Blackburne was not Hayter's father by citing Hayter's baptismal entry in the parish register of Chagford, Devon, for 17 November 1702; it reads 'son of George Hayter, Rector of this parish, and of Grace, his wife', although this can hardly be said definitively to settle the question. 
Soon after his death Blackburne was the subject of a piece of scurrilous and satirical verse entitled 'Priest-Craft and Lust, or, Lancelot to his Ladies, an Epistle from the Shades' (1743), which had him lamenting: '
No longer thro' the Town I range with raging Flame 

To seek the Virgin Nymph or married Dame. 
(p. 4)' It was also wittily said, concerning his reputation for carnality, that 'he gained more hearts than souls' (Noble, 3.69). The archbishop also featured in a satirical poem of 1737 entitled 'First Oars to L -- m -- th', which portrayed Blackburne competing against his fellow bishops Edmund Gibson and Benjamin Hoadly for the archbishopric of Canterbury. 
It was contended that Blackburne was favoured by the first two Georges because of the laxity of his moral precepts. One rumour suggested that Blackburne was rewarded with the archbishopric of York for secretly marrying George I to his mistress the duchess of Kendal. Horace Walpole alleged that Blackburne, talking with Queen Caroline in the presence of Sir Robert Walpole, had remarked, 'Madam, I am glad you like the king's new mistress, Lady Yarmouth; it shews you are a sensible woman, your Majesty having no objection for your husband to divert himself' ('Works of... Sir Charles Hanbury Williams', 2.135). The controversial archbishop has even been charged with the evidently groundless allegations that he was the father of Francis Blackburne, the heterodox author of the 'Confessional', and that Dick Turpin was his butler at Bishopthorpe. It is at this distance of time impossible to make definitive judgements about the veracity of the numerous allegations levelled against Blackburne. They must therefore be thought to illustrate the reputation rather than the reality of the man. 
Blackburne was the author of several published sermons: one given before Queen Mary, entitled 'The Unreasonableness of Anger' (1694); two before Queen Anne, 'The Mystery of Godliness' (1706) and 'The Blessedness of Suffering Persecution for Righteousness Sake' (1709); two before the mayor and aldermen of the City of London (1697, 1715); a Latin sermon before convocation (1714); and a sermon before the House of Commons on the anniversary of the martyrdom of Charles I (1716), in which he took the opportunity to liken the Jacobites to the regicides. He also published a pastoral letter addressed to the bishops of the province of York, which is annexed to a sermon of Lewis Stephens published in 1727. His wife, Catherine, died in 1726 and was buried on 11 June in the middle chancel of St Margaret's Church, Westminster. Blackburne himself died on 23 March 1743 at a time of severe weather. As Horace Walpole records it, 'his ancient Grace of York' died of one of the 'epidemical distempers' which accompanied ten days of 'snows, north-east winds, and blue plagues' (Walpole, 'Memories', 1.235). He was buried on 1 April 1743 in St Margaret's, Westminster, near his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 2517


Blackburne, Richard (1651/2-1716), physician and writer, was born in London, the son of Richard Blackburne and the older brother of Lancelot Blackburne. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in 1665 under Thomas Gale. He became a scholar of the college in 1668 and graduated BA in 1670. In May 1676, at the age of twenty-four, he took the degree of MD from Leiden University. His thesis, on the formation of the blood, was published as 'Disputatio medica inauguralis de sanguificatione' (1676). 
Blackburne returned to London, where he assisted John Aubrey in producing a supplement to the prose autobiography of Thomas Hobbes soon after the philosopher's death in December 1679. In February 1680 Aubrey described Blackburne to Anthony Wood as one of 'the best scholars in London of his age, & 'philo' Hobbist' as well as a 'mighty read man' who 'hath harried all Mr Hobbes's adversaries' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ballard 14, fol. 125). Initially Aubrey enlisted Blackburne to be his 'Aristarchus', providing editorial advice. Aubrey however soon relinquished his notes and control of the project to Blackburne, who organized Aubrey's manuscripts and began to produce a Latin translation of the supplement. At first Aubrey was pleased with Blackburne's 'delicate style'. He wrote to Wood that 'it was as if Mr Hobbes's soule were come into his body'. However Aubrey also complained that 'the Dr is a great Judge & consequently magisteriall: he is much against minuteness' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 456a, fol. 23). A serious disagreement developed between Blackburne and Aubrey on the nature of the biography. Blackburne and his advisers, John Dryden and Lord John Vaughan, advocated what Aubrey disparaged as a panegyric 'High Style'. Aubrey objected to the omission of small details, such as Hobbes's having been a page. A disgruntled but prescient Aubrey wrote to Wood that 'The Dr says I am too minute; but a hundred yeare hence that minuteness will be gratefull' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood F39, fol. 340). Aubrey's dissatisfaction with Blackburne's treatment of Hobbes apparently spurred him to begin writing his 'Brief Lives', in which his own biographical ideas and concern with detail was fully expressed. Blackburne's 'Vitae Hobbianae auctarium' was completed by September 1680, giving an unusually positive view of the controversial philosopher's achievements. It included a list of Hobbes's friends and detailed bibliographies of his works and those of his critics and admirers. Although Aubrey was not entirely happy with the finished product, an English translation was projected, although it was never produced. The work does, however, form the basis for the English biographical introduction to 'The Moral and Political Works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury' (1750). Blackburne's biography appeared in the materials published by William Crooke in 1681 under the title 'Thomae Hobbes Angli Malmesburiensis philosophi vita'. This was probably edited by Blackburne and was dedicated to Hobbes's patron, William Cavendish, earl of Devonshire. It contained verses by Abraham Cowley, Ralph Bathurst, and one incorrectly attributed to Aubrey. Blackburne supplied a preface to three works: Hobbes's Latin prose autobiography, 'Thomii Hobbes Malmesburiensis vita', Blackburne's much longer 'Vitae' and finally Hobbes's Latin verse autobiography. The work ran to a second edition in 1682. 
The dispute over the biography did not appear to ruin Blackburne's and Aubrey's friendship. In 1681 they co-operated over an attempt to promote the medicinal chalybeate springs at Seend, near Devizes in Wiltshire, which Aubrey had discovered in 1665. Blackburne, who practised annually at Tunbridge Wells, worded an advertisement celebrating the virtues of the waters. These efforts were unsuccessful -- the springs were not regularly frequented until after 1688. On 25 June 1685 Blackburne became an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. He was admitted as a full fellow at the extraordinary 'comitia' of 12 April 1687 under the new charter granted to the college by James II. Blackburne became a censor of the college in 1688. The revolution of 1688 brought the validity of the new charter, and the position of the new fellows, into question. Blackburne took a leading role in representing the 'new' college in the disputes which resulted in 1689. A sometimes severe critic of the college authorities, Blackburne was a vocal presence at college meetings, being fined on several occasions for 'unseasonable Speaking' and 'unseemly Language' (annals, RCP Lond., 5.127, 6.9). In October 1690 he pointed out the technical illegality of one of the new college statutes which prevented the admission of any physician who had practised any less liberal art or had served an apprenticeship in a shop. The statute conflicted with the college's stated duty to reject only for lack of due learning and skill and, as a result of Blackburne's protest, it was withdrawn. In July 1695 Blackburne was part of a group which refused to contribute funds for the establishment of a charitable dispensary (a measure which could also be seen as an attack upon the apothecaries' trade). Later in the same year he was also one of the fellows who refused to contribute a $50 bond to observe the statutes of the college. From 1706 Blackburne is described in the fellows' list as living in 'the country' and then from 1709 in Epsom. His will (made in 1714) suggests that he was at that time resident in the village of Sutton in Surrey, where he died in 1716. He was buried in Sutton churchyard on 30 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 2518


Blackburne, Sir William (1764-1839), army and political officer in India, was appointed to the Madras army as a cadet of native infantry in 1782, arrived at Madras in June 1783, and in 1784 served with the force employed under Colonel Fullarton in the campaign against the Poligars in Madura and Tinnevelly. He subsequently served in the campaign which ended in the defeat of Tipu Sultan in 1792. His proficiency as a linguist led to his being employed in 1787 as Maratha interpreter at Tanjore during the inquiry into the succession to the Tanjore raj, and he was for some years Maratha interpreter under the British resident at Tanjore. In 1801, having attained the rank of captain, he was appointed resident at the Tanjore court, and held that office until he left India in 1823. 
Very shortly after his appointment as resident, Blackburne had to take the field at the head of his escort and of the raja's troops to repel two invasions of the province by insurgents from the adjoining districts. This he achieved with great skill, and the neighbouring province of Ramnad was recovered. In 1804 he exposed extensive frauds and oppression by the indigenous officials in Tanjore, the civil administration of which was under officials independent of the resident. He was employed subsequently by the Madras government to remodel the administration both in Tanjore and in the princely state of Pudukkottai, and was twice sent on special missions to Travancore. His political services gained the approval of Lord Wellesley and of successive governors of Madras, including Sir Thomas Munro. Blackburne, then a major-general, was knighted in 1838. He died at his house in Portland Place, London, on 16 October 1839, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 2519


Blacker, George Dacre (1791-1871), Church of Ireland clergyman, was the elder son of James Blacker, a Dublin magistrate, and was born in Dublin. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1806, was elected a scholar in 1809, and proceeded BA in 1811 and MA in 1858. He was for several years curate of St Andrew's, Dublin, chaplain of the city corporation, and rector of Taghadoe. In 1840 he became vicar of Maynooth and a prebendary in St Patrick's Cathedral. Blacker wrote several local historical works including the 'Castle of Maynooth' (1853) and 'A Record of Maynooth Church' (1867), which were printed for private circulation. He was also the author of 'Types and Prophecies Relating to Messiah' (1829). He died unmarried at his home, The Glebe, Maynooth, co. Kildare, on 23 May 1871, and was buried on 27 May in the Leinster mausoleum, by Maynooth parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 2520


Blacker, Valentine (1778-1826), army officer in the East India Company and cartographer, was born on 19 October 1778, the fourth son of St John Blacker ('b'. 1743), rector of Moira, co. Down, and his first wife, Grace, 'nee' Close (died 1798). He obtained his commission in the Madras cavalry in 1798, and served as a cornet in the Mysore campaign of 1799, with a troop of cavalry of the nizam's contingent. A year later he was employed in Wainad as aide-de-camp to Colonel Stevenson, and subsequently served with his regiment in the southern provinces of the Madras presidency under Colonel Agnew, by whom he was thanked in dispatches for having surprised a party of the enemy and for a successful charge with the troop of cavalry under his command. In 1803 he was appointed to the quartermaster-general's department and served as captain of guides in the Maratha campaign of 1803-5. He compiled maps of part of the Chittoor district, the country between Seringapatam and Coimbatore, and the coast from Anjendo. 
In April 1810 Blacker was appointed quartermaster-general of the Madras army, a position which he held until 1819, and was particularly concerned with mapping and surveying. He married in Madras, on 22 December 1813, Emma, daughter of Robert Johnson of Liverpool, with whom he had three sons. In 1815 he served with the army of reserve under Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Hislop, and in 1817 under him with the army of the Deccan at the battle of Mehidpur and the other operations in the Deccan. His services at Mehidpur and the reconnaissances made by him before the battle were specially brought to the notice of the governor-general. He was made CB in 1818. He obtained the permission of the government to publish an account of the Maratha war, 'Memoir of the operations of the British army in India during the Mahratta War of 1817, 1818, 1819' (1821), for which he prepared maps of central India. 
Blacker returned to Europe in 1821 on medical grounds, and recuperated in the Mediterranean. In 1821 he was thanked in general orders by the commander-in-chief of the Madras army for his eminent and scientific services as quartermaster-general of the army of Fort St George during a period of ten years. Late in 1822 the directors of the East India Company appointed him surveyor-general of India in succession to John Hodgson. Leaving England in June 1823 he arrived in Calcutta to take up his post, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, in October 1823. He was strongly in favour of the great trigonometrical survey as the foundation for the mapping of India, as against quicker and less expensive expedients. He was elected a member of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, to which he read papers on barometers and hygrometers, the boundaries of India, and the military geography of central Asia. He suffered long periods of ill health while in Calcutta, and died there of fever on 4 March 1826. He was buried in the South Park Street cemetery, Calcutta. 


@@@@@


doc= 2521


Blackerby, Richard (1574-1648), preacher, was born in Worlington in Suffolk, the second son of Thomas Blackerby. He was prepared for a career in the ministry by his pious upbringing and education at Bury St Edmunds and then Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated at Easter 1587. For nine years he spent most of his time in Cambridge, where he graduated BA, probably in 1590, and gained a reputation for great skill in Latin, Greek, and especially Hebrew. His abilities were such that in later years famous divines would send him scriptural problems of a linguistic nature. While still at college Blackerby experienced a religious crisis that seems to have been inspired by the preaching of William Perkins which, as Samuel Clark reports, left Blackerby 'truly converted, but he lay some years in great distress of Conscience, and much perplexity of Spirit' (Clark, 57). His father brought him home temporarily in the hope that a change of air would relieve his melancholy, but relief only came on Blackerby's return to Cambridge, during which journey he experienced reconciliation to Christ and 'that Peace of Conscience (so well grounded, and so clearly evidenced) that he never lost it to his dying day' (Clark, 58). 
Blackerby's ecclesiastical scruples prevented him from pursuing a career as a beneficed minister and he was never ordained. His subsequent career was governed by the desire to work as much like a pastoral minister as was possible without subscribing. After leaving Cambridge he became the chaplain of Sir Thomas Jermyn of Rushbrook in Suffolk, and then lived with Sir Edward Lewknor of Denham, also in Suffolk, presumably in a similar role. The minister of Denham was Robert Pricke (died 1607), whose daughter Sarah Blackerby married in or before 1600; their elder daughters Susan and Margaret were baptized there respectively in June 1601 and June 1603, and a third, Martha, was mentioned in her grandfather's will of November 1607. From Denham, Blackerby went to Feltwell in Norfolk as the minister. He managed to keep his place there for some time but was eventually forced to move. About 1603 he found a new home at Ashen, Essex, near the Suffolk border, and he spent the next twenty-three years teaching young men who boarded with him. His pupils were a mixture of the sons of local gentlemen, tradesmen, and yeomen, and students fresh from university who required preparation for the ministry. This kind of ministerial 'finishing school' had been a common feature of godly education from the time of Richard Greenham's Elizabethan version in Dry Drayton. Blackerby covered Hebrew, scriptural study, divinity, and other topics pertinent to the ministry. Among his pupils were Nicholas Bernard, the biographer of Archbishop Ussher, Samuel Stone, Samuel Fairclough (1594-1677), and Christopher Burrell (died 1660); the last two married Blackerby's daughters. 
Paternal and educational responsibilities were not permitted to hold Blackerby back from pursuing his vocation as a preacher along the Stour valley. Blackerby played a cat-and-mouse game with the ecclesiastical authorities, exploiting the fact that his home was within the range of several counties and moving between them as he was suspended. Like other contemporary preachers he seems to have drawn upon his own experience of the agonies of conscience to induce in his audience a version of the same struggle; as Clark reports, 'He was a mighty man in wounding Consciences by the Sword of the Spirit, and in healing them by the Blood of Jesus' (Clark, 59). His preaching style was unusual, concentrating on scriptural interpretation and adding short spiritual observations. He was a powerful preacher, and left Daniel Rogers, minister of Wethersfield in Essex, unable to come into his presence without trembling because of the 'Divine Majesty and Holiness which seemed to shine in him' (Clark, 65). He tempered his authority with a certain gentleness, or, as Clark puts it, 'His reproofs were truly, as one well expresses, Nailes dipt in Oil, driven with power into the inmost of the heart, and received with acceptation, because of the overcoming kindness they were accompanied with' (Clark, 61). 
As well as preaching Blackerby visited individual families for prayer and exhortation. By his own estimation he was the 'Spiritual Father' to more than 2000 people. Samuel Clark (whose tendency to emphasize the moderation of his subjects should perhaps be borne in mind) reports that Blackerby never swerved from his unwillingness to subscribe, but conformed to the Church of England as far as was possible, bringing his family to common prayer on the sabbath and on weekdays, and conducting himself with great reverence. Blackerby had a keen interest in scriptural prophecies, and was one of the first of those in his locale who came to believe in God's intention to convert the Jews. He was opposed in this by two senior Essex preachers, John Rogers and Stephen Marshall, but he eventually managed to persuade them both of the truth of his opinion. As a preacher, teacher, and disputant, Blackerby was clearly an important figure in one of the most staunchly puritan regions of England. 
About 1629 Blackerby went to live with his son-in-law, Christopher Burrell, who in 1623 had been presented by Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston to the rectory of Great Wratting, Suffolk. Blackerby continued to preach, albeit on a somewhat reduced scale, and lectured regularly at Gastingthorpe in Essex until the end of his life. Burrell was deprived in 1638, and among the articles exhibited later against William Procter, vicar of Stradishall, and Mark Reynolds, rector of Wixoe, before the Suffolk committee for scandalous ministers was that they had opposed the preaching of Blackerby and his sons-in-law. The 1640s brought better times for all three. Blackerby's final home was Great Thurlow, where he was interim minister by 1645 and where he died in 1648. Blackerby has left no literary remains. He was the author of three spiritual diaries in Greek, Latin, and English, but they seem to have been destroyed in a fire. 


@@@@@


doc= 2522


Blacket, Joseph (1786-1810), poet, was born at Tunstall, a Yorkshire village 2 miles from Catterick, the eleventh of twelve children of a day labourer employed by Sir John Lawson, bt, widely admired for his aid to the neighbouring poor. He was taught free by the village schoolmistress until seven, and then by a master until eleven. 
In 1797 Blacket's brother John, a ladies' shoemaker in London, offered him work as his apprentice, and he reached the capital by wagon in ten days. He was devoted to books, and before he was fifteen had read Josephus, Eusebius's 'Ecclesiastical History', and Foxe's 'Martyrs'. A visit to the theatre to see Kemble play Richard III attracted him to Shakespeare. In 1804 he married the sister of his brother's wife, but she died of consumption in 1807 leaving an infant daughter, Mary. Desolate and poor, Blacket turned for consolation to composing poetry and dramatic verse. 
Blacket's first patron was his printer, William Marchant, who set up his poetry for nothing, and in the autumn of 1808 passed his manuscripts to Mr S. J. Pratt. Pratt was at once struck by Blacket's genius and drew a detailed parallel between him and Bloomfield, whose muse had been cherished by Capel Lofft. Pratt became Blacket's patron and promoted him as a literary rarity. 'Specimens of the Poetry of Joseph Blacket' (1809) was a private edition for limited circulation to which the duchess of Leeds, and numerous other people, subscribed. 
Meanwhile ill health compelled Blacket to relinquish his trade. Friends enabled him to take a sea voyage to his brother-in-law, John Dixon, gamekeeper of Sir Ralph Milbanke, at Seaham, co. Durham, in August 1809. There Milbanke, his wife, and his daughter Anne Isabella (later Lady Byron), interested themselves in him. Blacket attempted drama in a tragedy, 'The Earl of Devon'. He died of consumption on 23 August 1810 and was buried in Seaham churchyard. A plain monument bears the concluding lines of his own poem, 'Reflections at Midnight', written in 1802. Gifts from friends covered funeral expenses leaving $97 10's'. for the benefit of his child (Pratt, 101). 
Pratt collected and published his 'Remains' (1811) with a rather fulsome memoir based on his own acquaintance and the poet's letters to his brother, his mother, and his fellow poet Bloomfield. Byron satirized him in 'English Bards and Scotch Reviewers' (ll. 765-70), and wrote a facetious, heartless 'Epitaph' on the 'shoemaker poet'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2523


Blackhall, Gilbert (d. 1671), Roman Catholic priest, was evidently descended from the Blackhalls of Barra, Aberdeenshire, though his parentage is unknown. His brother George (died 1656) was a merchant who became a Jesuit coadjutor (lay brother) in Spain. Gilbert served as a soldier on the continent before, in 1626, enrolling in the Scots College in Rome, where he was ordained as a priest on 30 March 1630. The following year, on the recommendation of a cousin, he became confessor to Lady Isabelle Hay, eldest daughter of the earl of Erroll, in Paris. With the support of the viceroy of the Spanish Netherlands, the infanta, Clara Eugenia, Blackhall arranged her settlement in a house of aristocratic canonesses in Mons in 1637. He then travelled through England to Scotland, arriving there in August 1637, and took up work as a missionary priest in Aberdeenshire. Basing himself in Aboyne Castle (from July 1638) he served as priest to the widowed Lady Aboyne (Sophia Hay, sister of his former charge), as well as ministering to Catholic households between Aboyne and Aberdeen, and between Aberdeen and Strathbogie (Huntly). The outbreak of the covenanters' rebellion against Charles I had intensified persecution of Roman Catholics, and to the dangers of the situation were added the complications of bitter disputes between Jesuits and secular priests like Blackhall. The unsettled times also forced him, not unwillingly, into the role of Lady Aboyne's military adviser, organizing the defence of her castle against highland raiders. 'Know that I was a soldier befor you could weepe your owne nose' (Blakhal, 85), he contemptuously told the captain of a gang of Camerons after disarming his men. 
Shortly before her death early in 1642 Lady Aboyne entrusted Blackhall with ensuring that her only surviving child, Henrietta Gordon, was brought up as a Catholic and not perverted to protestantism. This he undertook with his customary tenacity. He visited the girl's grandmother, the dowager Lady Huntly, in France, in 1643 but she refused to help, whereupon the obscure priest boldly approached Anne of Austria, queen of France, and through her obtained a letter from Louis XIII to the marquess of Huntly, Henrietta's guardian, promising her a position at court. Back in Scotland, however, he found Huntly unwilling to help, and that Henrietta had converted to protestantism. None the less he managed to persuade her to allow him to smuggle her to France and Roman Catholicism. 
In his 'Narration', a lively narrative of his services, which he completed in 1653 and addressed to Henrietta at the French court, Blackhall complains of the lack of thanks he had received from his three ladies. Both Isabelle Hay and Henrietta Gordon had conceived a hearty dislike of him through his well-meant meddling in their lives -- and Lady Aboyne had inconveniently died. In between his complaints Blackhall provides valuable glimpses of a robust and energetic Roman Catholic priest at large in covenanting Scotland. His swaggering boldness and liking for drink and song, no doubt legacies of his military past, on occasion helped to deflect suspicion from him when he was in danger of detection. He served briefly as principal of the Scots College in Paris in 1653, but nothing further is known of him except that he visited Scotland about 1668 and died in Paris on 1 July 1671. 


@@@@@


doc= 2524


Blackie, John Stuart (1809-1895), classical and Scottish Gaelic scholar, was born on 28 July 1809 in Charlotte Street, Glasgow, the eldest son of Alexander Blackie ('bap'. 1780, died 1856), banker, and Helen (1783-1819), daughter of William Stodart of Hamilton and his wife, Christina. In that year his father moved as manager of the Commercial Bank to Aberdeen, where Blackie was educated at Merson's academy, a private subscription school, and at Marischal College (1821-4), where he attended the Greek class. Intended by his father for law, he was placed in an advocate's office, but, with a preference for theology, he went to Edinburgh to complete an arts course, including Greek, which he pursued in 1825-6, but without graduating. 
Preparing for entry to a divinity hall, Blackie returned to Aberdeen to study theology for two years with a view to entering the ministry. A decisive change in his plans resulted from his being sent to Germany in April 1829, studying in Gottingen under scholars including Ottfried Muller, and subsequently in Berlin with Boeckh and Schleiermacher. He also developed an enthusiasm for the long walks which were to become characteristic of his whole life. With two friends he travelled to Italy, adding facility in the language to his good knowledge of German. In Rome, with introductions to well-known scholars, in particular the Prussian diplomat Baron Christian von Bunsen, who became a great friend, he became interested in archaeology and art, and through contact with a Greek student learned also to speak modern Greek, becoming particularly fascinated by the accentuation, which differed so much from the traditional pronunciation of the ancient tongue. 
On his return to Britain in 1831, when Blackie began to study for the Scottish bar, his enthusiasm for both the church and the law was waning, though he was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in 1834, in which year he published his first substantial work, a translation of 'Faust' which was commended by Carlyle. He began a series of articles, often on German literature, in literary periodicals, and joined Edinburgh's Speculative and Juridical societies, which helped him become well known in intellectual circles. 
About this time the Liberal MP for Aberdeen, Alexander Bannerman, who was a close friend of Blackie's father, was pressing for the institution of a chair of humanity at Aberdeen, which alone of the Scottish universities did not have one. When in 1839 this was ratified, Blackie was appointed as its first incumbent, giving rise to vocal criticism of this being a 'whig job'. Before he could be installed, Blackie was required to subscribe to the Westminster confession of faith, and though consenting to sign he nevertheless expressed reservations, declaring that his agreement was 'in reference to university offices and duties merely'. The presbytery then attempted to annul the appointment, and Blackie had to raise an action first against the senatus, then the presbytery. The affair dragged on for two years before his installation was confirmed. 
Meanwhile Blackie returned to Edinburgh, and became the suitor of Eliza Wyld ('bap'. 1819, died 1908), but found her father opposed to the match. By the time his Aberdeen chair was ratified, Mr Wyld relented, and the couple were married on 19 April 1842. It was a long and happy (though childless) marriage. During his eleven years at Aberdeen Blackie applied himself strenuously to university reform, since 'the whole style of academical learning seemed so juvenile and pedantic... I had to sit down in a sort of intellectual Botany Bay, and teach raw country lads and little boys to blunder through Latin sentences, in the human meaning and purport of which they seemed incapable of taking any interest. ('Notes of a Life', 129)' In addition to university teaching, he embarked upon his noted popular lectures on a variety of subjects, delivered mainly extempore, which he found more effective than formal reading.In 1850 Blackie published his verse translation of Aeschylus's tragedies, and he seized the opportunity of succeeding to the Edinburgh Greek chair, when, as he put it bluntly, 'Dunbar [his predecessor] should retire from Greek, or the world, or from both together'. He was appointed Greek professor in 1852, and 'exchanged Latin for Greek, copper for gold'. His inaugural lecture was entitled 'Classical literature in its relation to the nineteenth century'. Again he campaigned for reform, instituting an entrance examination, the introduction of a tutorial system, and the appointment of assistants. He published a short volume on his favourite subject of the pronunciation of Greek, lambasting the Oxford style 'case-hardened in ignorance, prejudice, and pedantry' ('Letters', 395). In 1857 his 'Lays and Legends of Ancient Greece' was published. 
In 1866 Blackie's substantial four-volume translation and commentary on the 'Iliad' appeared. Among its often idiosyncratic notes, that on a minor figure, Agamede, had an interesting sequel. Blackie saw her as 'prophetic of Florence Nightingale', and concluded that 'a field of activity which has recently been claimed for the sex by English aspiration and American example should develop into the systematic instruction of women in certain departments of the medical art'. At that very time, Sophia Jex-Blake was prosecuting her case for women's medical education in America, having also visited Edinburgh. When in 1869 she made her first attempt to enrol in the university, through the support of David Masson, professor of English, she gained an introduction to Blackie, who showed her his note, and was one of her most prominent supporters in the angry debates which ensued in senate. When the women were barred by an angry mob in the 'Surgeons' Hall riot' of 1870, Blackie observed to her 'Ye can now say ye've fought with wild beasts at Ephesus', and on their ultimate victory he composed a Greek triumphal ode for one of the first graduates at a meeting of the Hellenic Society which he formed in Edinburgh, as he had earlier done in Aberdeen. Subsequently, the women's bronze class medal in the Medical College for Women pictured Homer's Agamede, doubtless at Blackie's suggestion. 
There was nothing Blackie liked better than to espouse a cause and pursue it with unflagging commitment. He was a proponent of the new fine art chair (1873), and his passion for modern Greek led to the foundation of a theological fellowship for residence in Greece. (He himself had made the first of his journeys there in 1853.) He was active in support of the establishment of student halls of residence. Above all, he threw himself into fund-raising for a chair of Celtic from the 1870s until its establishment in 1882, almost single-handedly setting about raising the $12,000 required by lecturing, hectoring, cajoling, almost compelling people (from Queen Victoria downwards) to contribute. He had been appalled by the plight of highland crofters, and became fired with enthusiasm for Gaelic, publishing 'The Gaelic Language' in 1864, followed by 'Lays of the Highlands and Islands' (1871), 'The Language and Literature of the Highlands' (1876), and 'Altavona... from my Life in the Highlands' (1882). Mention might be made here too of his 'Life of Robert Burns' (1887) and 'Scottish Song' (1889). Blackie's writings on Scotland made him an important figure in the historicist movement there. 
Blackie's early enthusiasm for German student life had already resulted in publication of a collection of student songs ('Musa Burschicosa', 1869) and 'War Songs of the Germans' (1870), and he wrote the preface and contributed a number of his own songs to the once very popular, and much reprinted, 'Scottish Students' Song Book' (1891). One song in the 1891 volume is about Blackie himself, by his Sanskrit colleague Julius Eggeling, 'A Famous Scotch Professor', celebrating Blackie's visit to Egypt aged seventy, when -- characteristically -- he mounted a pyramid to sing 'Scots wha hae'. He was nothing if not the archetype of the perfervid Scot, and there was an undoubted coolness in his relations with 'those sleek Hellenists on the banks of the Cam and Isis', as he once remarked, and he argued for a separate Scottish parliament, against 'the multitudinous babblement and insolent centralisation' of Westminster (Kennedy, 111, 216). In 1867 he had engaged in a notorious two-day debate in the George Street Music Hall with Ernest Jones on democracy, when he attacked the 'Reform Bill', haranguing for nearly three hours. 
As a teacher, Blackie was not entirely successful. One writer of memoirs commented 'he did everything well, except what he was paid to do, viz. teach Greek to his students' (D. T. Holmes, 'Literary Tours in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland', 1909, 56), who soon learned how to divert their professor to politics, Scottish song, or the like, and his classes were frequently rowdy. After an uproarious lecture, he could be seen striding cheerfully down the Bridges from Old College playing on imaginary bagpipes. He enjoyed his persona as a flamboyant eccentric, and with his long white hair and in his regular dress -- a plaid thrown over his shoulders, a long stick, and a soft hat with a broad band -- he was a familiar figure to the citizens. One well-known anecdote relates his posting of a notice that he was unable to meet 'his classes', which students adjusted by deleting the 'c'; waiting to see how the professor would react, they saw him study the notice, and imperiously delete further the 'l'. The story may be apocryphal, however, since the same tale was told of an earlier Edinburgh professor, W. E. Aytoun, and Blackie himself denied it. 
Even after his retirement Blackie continued to lecture with gusto and good humour throughout Scotland, and was widely admired. He remained also an indefatigable traveller, last visiting Greece in 1891. Not until 1894, when he was attacked with asthma, did his health deteriorate somewhat, and his last public appearance was at the opening of the university session in October of that year. He died at his home at 9 Douglas Crescent on 2 March 1895, and after the public funeral service at St Giles was buried in the Dean cemetery four days later. It was a raw, drizzling day, yet the streets were lined with mourners along the route via Princes Street, and the cortege bore wreaths from persons as diverse as the prime minister and Sir Henry Irving. 'The Scotsman' devoted nearly a whole page to his obituary, and the muse of notorious 'poet and tragedian' William McGonagall was stirred to compose a funeral ode, to be found in his 'Last Poetic Gems'. David Masson in a tribute referred to his 'almost childlike innocence of heart and a seraphic kind of goodness' (Duncan, 202). 
In addition to the works mentioned above, Blackie published prolifically on Greek, Scottish, religious, philosophical, and political topics. A. Stodart Walker collected and published from manuscript 'random thoughts on life, character, literature, and general economics' in 'The Day-Book of John Stuart Blackie' (1901), and also compiled a selection of his poems (1896). 


@@@@@


doc= 2525


Blacklock, Thomas (1721-1791), poet and writer, was born on 10 November 1721 in Annan, Dumfriesshire, the son of John Blacklock (died 1740), a bricklayer from Cumberland, and his wife, Ann, the daughter of Richard Rae, a cattle dealer. In early infancy Blacklock lost his sight owing to smallpox. Despite this misfortune the attentions of his father and friends engendered in him an interest in languages and literature, particularly poetry. In 1740 his father was killed while trying to repair a malt kiln. Richard Hewitt, a young boy from Rockcliff in Cumberland, then came to be educated and to attend Thomas as his guide and reader. 
John Stevenson, an Edinburgh physician, became Blacklock's benefactor and enabled him to attend a grammar school in Edinburgh. Because of the Jacobite rising of 1745 Blacklock returned to Dumfries to live with his sister and her husband. Blacklock's first book, 'Poems on Several Occasions', was published in Glasgow in 1746: the poems ranged from one written before he was twelve to two odes about the disturbances. This book was reprinted with a life by Gilbert Gordon after Blacklock resumed his studies at the University of Edinburgh. He studied philosophy and then divinity, and continued his interest in languages including French, Greek, Latin, and Italian. 
David Hume exhorted his friends and acquaintances to support Blacklock by purchasing his 'Poems'. In 1754, in order to retain his position as keeper of the Faculty of Advocates library, Hume used the tactic of a token transfer of his salary to Blacklock. 
Joseph Spence, prebendary at Durham, wrote a short life of Blacklock which was attached to a reprint of the 1754 edition of the 'Poems'. Spence attempted an analysis of Blacklock's treatment of visible objects, and after Spence met Blacklock the account was amended for publication with an expanded edition of the 'Poems' (1756). Spence made great efforts to ensure that the publication was supported by a long and prestigious list of subscribers. 
In 1759, after Blacklock abandoned his hopes of lecturing in the University of Edinburgh, he was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Dumfries. In 1760 the earl of Selkirk proposed to place him as minister of the church at Kirkcudbright but the parishioners were resistant to church patronage and judged that Blacklock's blindness made him unfit to be their spiritual leader. Legal opinion was sought and the case aroused interest throughout the country. There were many delays before he was ordained on 22 April 1762. On 4 April Blacklock had married Sarah Johnston (1732-1808), daughter of a Dumfries surgeon. At his ordination Blacklock had to make his way through jeering crowds. The stress of the occasion was such that later in the day he appeared to be in a state of altered consciousness. The disputations continued and the kirk session refused to work with him. A local man even threatened to kill him. Eventually an agreement was reached whereby, in return for an annuity, Blacklock demitted the charge in 1765. 
Blacklock and his wife then moved to Edinburgh and established a boarding-house for young gentlemen studying at the university or associated with the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. Young men from Europe and America as well as from the British Isles boarded and studied with Blacklock and also on occasion acted as his amanuensis. Several students later achieved eminence and kept in touch with the man who had influenced their careers. When Samuel Johnson met Blacklock the two men compared the difficulties and enjoyment of compiling a dictionary with those experienced when writing poetry. The discussion was noted by James Boswell, but led to a request by Blacklock that the account be corrected. Although Blacklock's comment was acknowledged in a later publication, Boswell maintained that a written record was superior to one of memory (Boswell). Blacklock was also acquainted with the young Walter Scott, who appreciated his guidance and made use of his library. 
Blacklock produced 'An Essay on Universal Etymology' (1756), where the general principles of grammar and the definitions of the parts of speech were given in verse followed by illustrative notes in prose. In 1760 and 1762 Blacklock's work was published in the two-volume 'A Collection of Original Poems. By the Rev. Mr Blacklock and other Scotch Gentlemen'. Blacklock was highly respected and his literary opinion was sought by his contemporaries. Throughout his life he produced poems, reviews, articles, sermons, translations, and other prose works. His writings were to be found in journals such as the 'Edinburgh Magazine and Review'. Blacklock was encouraged to express his support of James Beattie's criticism of Hume's writings ('Edinburgh Courant', 1770). In 1781 a small collection of pieces of scripture in verse-form 'to be sung in churches' was approved by the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. An amended version of Blacklock's paraphrase of part of 'Ecclesiastes' 12 was included. His work also included an extensive and detailed article on blindness for the second edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1783). Blacklock occasionally wrote satirical verses but usually consigned them to the flames soon after their composition. 'Pistapolis', an astonishing poetic diatribe lampooning those in Kirkcudbright who had rejected him, survived but remained unpublished until 1907. 
In 1767, on the recommendation of James Beattie, Blacklock was awarded an honorary DD by Marischal College, Aberdeen. By 1768 he had communicated to Beattie his intention of compiling a collection of Scottish music and poetry with a view to publication. In October 1779 his (more general) 'Discourse on national musick' appeared in the 'Scots Magazine'. Although Blacklock rarely wrote in the Scots vernacular he did not follow the fashion that it should be disregarded, and when he became aware of the poems of Robert Burns he indicated his wish to subscribe for their first publication. After receiving a copy of the 'Kilmarnock Edition' of Burns's poems he advised Burns that he should come to Edinburgh and produce a second enlarged edition. This advice from someone of Blacklock's literary standing resulted (according to Burns himself) in Burns's abandoning his planned journey to Jamaica. Blacklock introduced Burns to many influential people and was active in winning support for an Edinburgh edition of Burns's poems. Burns soon began to collaborate with Blacklock, Beattie, and William Tytler of Woodehouselee in their project to collect the songs and music of Scotland (published by James Johnson as 'The Scots Musical Museum', 6 vols., 1787-1803). 
Blacklock was an accomplished musician and composer, and advocated that blind children should learn music precisely rather than play by ear. He made recommendations about the manner of treatment and the means of education of blind children and adults, and applied his mind to the invention of techniques and devices for the education of the blind. When Blacklock became aware of the new methods of educating blind children being developed in Paris by M. Hauy at the Institut des Jeunes Aveugles he requested a sample of the raised type used to help the children to print and learn to read. Although communication between the countries was disrupted by the onset of the French Revolution, Blacklock received a copy of the book containing the raised text and began translating it into English as 'An Essay on the Education of the Blind'. Blacklock determined that an institution similar to that in Paris should be set up in Edinburgh so that blind children and adults could be educated and earn their living with dignity. Blacklock died at his home in Chapel Street, Edinburgh, on 7 July 1791, after contracting a fever. He was buried in the churchyard of St Cuthbert's Chapel of Ease, Edinburgh, on 11 July. His ambition to establish an institution to educate blind people was realized through the efforts of his friend David Miller (also blind) and the Revd David Johnston. The Society for the Relief of the Indigent Blind was established in 1793, two years after the first such institution in Britain had been formed in Liverpool. 
Editions of Blacklock's work continued to be published after his death and in 1793 a new edition of his 'Poems' was published together with 'An Essay on the Education of the Blind' and a life by Henry Mackenzie. Many of Blacklock's sermons remain in manuscript form. 


@@@@@


doc= 2526


Blacklock, William James (1816-1858), landscape painter and lithographer, was born on 3 March 1816 in Shoreditch, London, the second of the five children of James Blacklock (1782-1823), bookseller and publisher, and Mary Ann Pearson (1784-1853). In 1818 the family moved to Cumwhitton, Cumberland, where the Blacklock family had been farmers and property owners since the 1730s. James Blacklock was a friend of Charles Thurnam, a publisher, bookseller, and printer in nearby Carlisle, and William was apprenticed under him as a boy along with George Routledge, the future London publisher. In 1833 William first exhibited at the decade-old Academy of Art, Carlisle, and was described as a 'rising artist' with a 'feeling for nature and a correctness of taste' ('Carlisle Journal', 2 Nov 1833). In 1836 he moved to London and first exhibited four pictures at the Royal Academy of Arts. J. Robinson of London published a series of his engraved views of the new Newcastle-Carlisle railway in 1838, as well as 'Sketches in Norway' in 1841 with Blacklock's engravings after studies by Bruce Skinner. Blacklock showed thirty-six pictures at the Royal Academy, four at the British Institution, and eleven at the Society of British Artists from 1836 to 1855. Garnering the praise of the contemporary landscapists J. M. W. Turner, David Roberts, and Thomas Creswick, he developed a picturesque style likened by contemporaries to the works of William Mulready, and gained the patronage of William Gladstone, who bought 'Lanercost Abbey' in 1847. In the same year Blacklock's 'Calder Abbey' was selected by a prize-holder in the London Art Union. The Scottish artist and head of the Newcastle School of Art, William Bell Scott (1811-1890), introduced him to the important Tyneside lead manufacturer and art collector James Leathart (1820-1895), who bought several paintings in the 1850s and brought Blacklock to the notice of the industrialist and collector William Armstrong (1810-1900). In 1850 Blacklock moved back to Cumwhitton owing to ill health and failing eyesight, establishing a studio at Stanwix. By this time he was regarded as ''the' painter of Cumberland' and more specifically 'the painter 'par excellence' of lake and mountain scenery, border tower and heath-clad waste' ('Carlisle Journal', 21 Feb 1851, 23 June 1855). By late 1854 Blacklock's career had become seriously threatened by illness and loss of vision in one eye, and in the next year he gave up work and his youngest brother, Thomas, consigned him to the Crichton Institution in Dumfries. According to medical records, he died there on 12 March 1858 of general paralysis of the insane, or syphilis, after much mental deterioration; he was buried on 16 March at Cumwhitton. The 'Art Journal' obituary described him as a 'truthful and unpretending artist, who wooed nature rather than popular favour' ('Art Journal', 1 May 1858). Over thirty oils and watercolours are in the Tullie House Museum and Art Gallery, Carlisle. There are works in the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the National Gallery of Ireland; drawings executed while in the Crichton Institution are at Edinburgh University Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 2527


Chewning Blackmore (1663-1737), Independent minister, was born on 1 January 1663 and was baptized at St Peter Cornhill on 2 January 1663, the only surviving son of William Blackmore and Mary Chewning. He was educated at John Woodhouse's academy in Sheriffhales in Shropshire because of the ban on nonconformists entering universities, and followed his father into the church. In 1688 he became the assistant to Thomas Badland at the congregational church in Worcester, where he remained for the rest of his life. He married Abigail Higgins in 1694 and together they had two sons: Francis, who was the Presbyterian minister at Evesham (1728-30), Coventry (1730-42), and Worcester (1743-61), and Edward, who became the Presbyterian minister at Stoke, near Malvern. Chewning Blackmore died on 2 August 1737. 


@@@@@


doc= 2528


Blackmore, Sir Richard (1654-1729), physician and writer, was born on 22 January 1654 at Corsham, Wiltshire, the third of the four children of Robert Blackmore (died 1681), a wealthy attorney, and Anne Pilsworth, 'nee' Harris ('fl'. 1633-1676), widow of Edward Pilsworth. According to Giles Jacob, Blackmore was educated at a country school and then at Westminster School for a brief period. On 19 March 1669 he matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, where he took his BA on 4 April 1674 and MA on 3 June 1676. He continued as tutor at St Edmund Hall and perhaps worked for some time as a schoolmaster. 
The year after his father's death Blackmore went to the continent. He first stayed in France, then moved to Geneva, where he composed his first literary work: a Latin epitaph for Thomas Bent, a fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford. From there he went to Italy, where he visited Rome, Venice, and Padua. In Padua he stopped to study medicine at the local university, where he graduated doctor of pure medicine on 24 March 1684. He then returned to England via Germany and Holland, and settled in London to start practice. On 9 February 1685 Blackmore married Mary Adams (died 1728), who was related to an important whig family, the Verneys of Claydon House, Buckinghamshire, who probably helped him in his career. On 12 April 1687, at the 'comitia majora extraordinaria', Blackmore was admitted as a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. His relationship with the college was turbulent: he was censured for leave-taking without permission and had strong disagreements with the president and the majority of the college, principally over the project to establish a dispensary to provide free drugs for the London poor, something which Blackmore opposed vehemently. 
In 1695 Blackmore published 'Prince Arthur: an Heroick Poem in Ten Books', which he stated he had written with the aim of reforming contemporary poetry from the immorality and impiety of the age. The poem, modelled on Virgil's 'Aeneid' and based on Geoffrey of Monmouth's 'Historia regum Britanniae', narrates Arthur's defence of the Britons against the usurping Saxons and his final conquest of London. It displays a transparent political allegory, with the pious Arthur representing William III and his ungodly antagonist symbolizing James II. Despite the severe criticism by John Dennis, who in his 'Remarks on a Book Entitled Prince Arthur' (1696) reproved Blackmore's 'servile' imitation of Virgil, the tedious digressiveness of the plot, and the inconsequency of its 'fearful' hero, the poem sold well, reaching a third edition. 
King William, who had appointed Blackmore as one of his physicians-in-ordinary, was so pleased with the poem as to present him with a medal of gold and then to knight him on 18 March 1697. Blackmore, who always manifested his attachment to the king and the revolution (TNA: PRO, C.213/168, chancery: petty bag office, association oath rolls, College of Physicians, London, 1696), was chosen to write the story of Sir George Barclay's plot to murder the king (which was published only in 1723 as 'A true and impartial history of the conspiracy against the person and government of King William III, of glorious memory, in the year 1695'). In 1697 a sequel to his first poem appeared, 'King Arthur: an Heroic Poem in Twelve Books', which continued the allegorical treatment of contemporary events with a Virgilian structure and a Miltonic diction; in its preface, however, Blackmore acknowledged the defects of his former epic, rejecting Aristotelian 'rules' for a more sublime style. The poem was greeted with less enthusiasm than 'Prince Arthur' and did not go into any further editions. 
Blackmore was made the object of ridicule and lampoons by the wits he had chastised for their impiety and by the Dispensarians (particularly virulent was Sir Samuel Garth's attack in his 'The Dispensary', 1699), and he decided to retort with the poem 'A Satyr against Wit' (1700). The wits, led by Tom Brown, made things worse with the publication of the mocking 'Commendatory Verses, on the Author of the Two Arthurs, and the Satyr against Wit' (1700). Blackmore, who in the meantime was engaged in his 'Paraphrase on the Book of Job' (1700), a Christian epic with a virtuous and peaceful hero, saw the assault rebutted by his supporters' 'Discommendatory Verses, on those which are Truly Commendatory, on the Author of the Two Arthurs, and the Satyr against Wit' (1700). The attacks on Blackmore were further exacerbated when John Dryden accused him of plagiarism of his own project of an Arthurian epic. Dryden described Blackmore (who had offensively portrayed him in 'Prince Arthur' and in the 'Satyr against Wit') as a 'Pedant, Canting Preacher, and a Quack' who wrote while travelling from patient to patient, 'to the rumbling of his Coaches Wheels' (J. Dryden, prologue to 'The Pilgrim', 1700, 42, 49). The wits sneered at the 'City Bard' and 'Cheapside Knight', as they labelled Blackmore on account of his residence in Cheapside, both as a poet and a physician who 'killed' his victims with his verses and his pills. This trite stricture aside, Blackmore was considered one of the leaders of the medical profession and his skills were commended by his contemporaries, notably by John Locke. As a physician-in-ordinary to King William (whom he assisted until his death) Blackmore was entitled to a lodging at Hampton Court and to a salary of $100 per half year (TNA: PRO, T. 61/16/78). He later held the same post to Queen Anne. 
Despite the wits' assault, in 1705 Blackmore published one more epic, 'Eliza: an Epic Poem in Ten Books', a poem on the Spanish (that is, Popish) conspiracies against Elizabeth and protestantism (Anne and the Church of England). Samuel Johnson stated that 'Eliza' 'dropped, as it seems, dead-born from the press' (Johnson, 'Poets', 3.81), but the poem did not pass unobserved, for its sardonic portrayal of Roderigo Lopez, the Portuguese physician who made an attempt on Elizabeth's life, was an allegory of John Radcliffe, the eminent physician who was suspected of Jacobite inclinations and had alienated the sympathies of the queen. Blackmore celebrated Queen Anne in her triumphant campaigns in the War of the Spanish Succession, with the long poem 'An advice to the poets: a poem occasioned by the wonderful success of her majesty's arms, under the conduct of the duke of Marlborough in Flanders' (1706), and the 'Instructions to Vander Bank, a sequel to the Advice to the poets: a poem, occasion'd by the glorious success of her majesty's arms, under the command of the duke of Marlborough, the last year in Flanders' (1709). In 1711 appeared 'The Nature of Man', a physico-theological poem about the effects of climate on man's intellectual faculties, and a tribute to English prosperity and constitutional freedom. It was followed in 1712 by another physico-theological work, 'Creation: a Philosophical Poem', which was highly praised for its lofty, Miltonic style by Dennis, Addison, and, later, by Johnson, who included it in his edition of the English poets. The poem, which was acclaimed as the English 'De rerum natura' and went through sixteen editions, becoming the most popular of Blackmore's works, is a confutation of the atomistic theories of Epicurus and his modern followers, and a vindication of the operations of divine providence. 
On 13 November 1713 Blackmore and his friend John Hughes started 'The Lay-Monk', published every third week, and which followed the example of 'The Spectator' and 'The Guardian'. It ceased publication on 15 February 1714, after forty numbers, subsequently collected as 'The Lay-Monastery' (1714). With the accession of the Hanoverians, Blackmore was no longer summoned to court as physician-in-ordinary, yet his medical career was still successful: in 1716 the College of Physicians made him censor and, on 22 August 1716, selected him as one of the eight elects, the college's ruling body. Meanwhile he moved residence from Cheapside to Earls Court, Kensington. In 1716 and 1717 Blackmore published two volumes of 'Essays upon Several Subjects' (on topics ranging from the immortality of the soul to the origin of civil power). The second volume contained a tirade against Alexander Pope's blasphemous parody of the first psalm of David, which had been surreptitiously printed by the hack publisher Edmund Curll. A feud between Blackmore and Pope started and never really ended, though it remained mostly at a literary level. Blackmore became one of the main butts of Pope and his Scriblerian friends, who castigated him as poet in 'The Dunciad' (1728, 2.247-56), and scoffed at his bombastic verses in the mock treatise 'Peri Bathous: of the Art of Sinking in Poetry' (1727). In 1718 'A Collection of Poems on Various Subjects' appeared, containing many of Blackmore's previously published shorter poems and a few new ones. 
In 1721 Blackmore published a religious treatise, 'Just Prejudices against the Arian Hypothesis', written 'in the Defence of God's Existence against the Atheist; and in Vindication of the Christian Religion against the Deist; and of the Divinity of Christ against the Arian and Socinian' (p. 11). It was immediately followed by a sequel, 'Modern Arians Unmasked' (1721). Blackmore had always been a supporter of the established church: he was a member of the vestry in the parishes of St Vedast, Foster Lane, and St Michael Le Quern, London, where he also served as a verger, and in 1704 was made one of the vice-presidents of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in America. In 1721 he published 'A New Version of the Psalms of David', which he strove ineffectually to have adopted in the church. In 1724 the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel undertook to print a selection of Blackmore's psalms, which however never came to press because of the opposition of the bishop of London. Blackmore was not discouraged in his zealous fight for the reformation of the age, and in 1722 sent to the press 'Redemption', a poem on the divinity of Christ, against the Arian hypothesis. 
On 22 October 1722, after leaving Kensington to retire to Boxted, Essex, Blackmore resigned his position as an elect of the College of Physicians. In 1723 his last epic poem, 'Alfred', appeared, which he dedicated to Prince Frederick of Hanover with the aim of instilling in him 'just Ideas of political Prudence, and... an honourable Ambition of becoming a publick Blessing' (sig. a2'r'). The poem failed to win him the attention of the court and went unnoticed by the public. Far from the London crowd, in his Boxted retirement, Blackmore dedicated the last years of his life to the writing of various medical treatises, on the plague (1720), the smallpox (1722), consumption, the gout, dropsy (1727), and the spleen. They are imbued with a religious zeal against atheistic and heretic conceptions and earnestly advocate a pragmatic and anti-academic approach to medicine; Blackmore wrote in English instead of Latin to preserve 'the true Dignity and Worth of Physick... as much as can be [from] Philosophical Notions and Scholastick Darkness' ('A Treatise of Consumptions and other Distempers Belonging to the Breast and Lungs', 1724, xi). Blackmore was a follower of Sir Thomas Sydenham and stressed the importance of experience and observation over pure speculation and erudition, the 'extensive Mechanical Knowledge of Books... that is call'd Misteria Literaria' ('Discourse on the Gout, a Rheumatism, and the King's Evil', 1726, xxxvii). His strenuous empiricism made him reject the Galenic theory of the four humours, as well as other medical schools based on hypothetical conjecture. He was particularly attracted to the subject of the spleen, to which he had already devoted one of his 'Essays on Various Subjects', and which he investigated in 'A Treatise of the Spleen and Vapours' and 'A Critical Dissertation upon the Spleen' (both 1725). In 1728 he published one more religious treatise, 'Natural Theology, or, Moral Duties Consider'd apart from Positive'. 
Blackmore, who in later life suffered from colic, died at Boxted, Essex, on 9 October 1729 and was buried at the parish church there, where a monumental inscription to his memory was erected. His last work, 'The Accomplished Preacher', was posthumously published by his literary executor, the Revd John White of Nayland, Essex, in 1731. 


@@@@@


doc= 2529


Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900), novelist and fruit farmer, was born on 7 June 1825, at the vicarage, Longworth, Berkshire, the third but second surviving son of the Revd John Blackmore (1794-1858) and his first wife, Anne Basset Knight (1794-1825). Anne was the eldest daughter of the Revd Robert Knight ('bap'. 1764, died 1819), vicar of Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire, and of Bayton, Worcestershire, and his second wife, Harriet Mercy Humphreys (1769-1846), after whose maternal grandfather, the nonconformist minister Philip Doddridge (1702-1751), Richard was named. 
John Blackmore had been curate-in-charge of Longworth, a few miles south-west of Oxford, since 1820, and supplemented his income by coaching undergraduates. However, before Richard was three months old, typhus struck the village and carried off, among other members of the household, his mother and her twin sister. The baby Richard and his elder brother, Henry (1824-1875), were taken in charge by his mother's younger sister Mary Frances Knight ('bap'. 1797, died 1878), whom he described as 'my dearest relative (who was my mother till I got a step one)' (R. Blackmore to Mrs Halliday, 1 July 1875, cited in Dunn, 27). Much of his early childhood was spent with her at the home of his maternal grandmother and uncles at Newton Nottage, Glamorgan, on the north shore of the Bristol Channel. His bereaved father, who had left Longworth after the tragedy, moved back to King's Nympton in his native Devon in 1832. Blackmore also used to visit his paternal grandfather, the Revd John Blackmore (1764-1842), who lived at Combe Martin, in north-west Devon, but held another cure at Oare on the north edge of Exmoor. All these remote and beautiful places were later to feature largely in his fiction, which was haunted by the figure of the homeless orphan baby, and was also coloured by an enthusiasm for antiquarianism and natural history encouraged by his mother's brother the Revd Henry Hey Knight (1795-1857). 
In November 1831 Blackmore's father married his second wife, Charlotte Ann Platt; they were to have two daughters and a son. This event, which was followed by Mary Knight's marriage to the Revd Richard Gordon in July 1832, meant that the Blackmore boys again had a permanent home with their father. In 1833 Richard was at Squier's Grammar School, South Molton, Devon, and in 1833-4 at the King's School, Bruton, Somerset. In August 1837 he went to Blundell's School, Tiverton, Devon, where his father had been before him, and where he himself was to send John Ridd, the hero of his most famous novel. His brother did not go with him. Tiverton is some 10 miles east of Culmstock, the village in the Blackdown hills where John Blackmore was curate-in-charge from 1835 to 1841, and Blackmore lived in the town during the week and returned home for Sunday. He lodged with two older boys, Frederick Temple (1821-1902), later archbishop of Canterbury, and his younger brother John, sons of an impoverished widow living at Culmstock; when they left the school in March 1839 Blackmore became a boarder. During his time at Blundell's the day boys, who were educated by the foundation, were subject to appalling persecution by the fee-paying boarders (in 1847 a public scandal led to reform). Blackmore's treatment is sometimes said to have caused his lifelong epilepsy. The main authority for Blackmore's sufferings at Blundell's is F. J. Snell, whose father had been at school with him: he claims that Frederick Temple used to hit him on the head with a hammer, and that Blackmore was given a nickname so vile as to be 'too brutally frank for mature ears' (Snell, 'Richard Doddridge Blackmore', 155). However the picture Blackmore gives of Blundell's in 'Lorna Doone' is not a wholly antagonistic one, and his old-fashioned grammar school education laid the foundation for his lifelong devotion to the classics. He became head boy of the school, and gained a school scholarship to Exeter College, Oxford, where he went at the end of 1843 and where he was happy. He graduated with a second-class degree in classics in 1847, and after a short time as a tutor decided to study law; he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in June 1852, and is said to have practised as a conveyancer for some years. 
On 8 November 1853 at Holy Trinity Church, Gray's Inn Road, London, without the knowledge or approval of his family, Blackmore married Lucy Maguire or McGuire (1822?-1888) of Guernsey, who was a Roman Catholic born in Dublin, and whose father, Edmond Paul Maguire, is unilluminatingly described on the marriage certificate as a government secretary. Her mother, Margaret Lynch, is listed in the 1841 census as a laundress. It is said by S. J. Reid that Blackmore had first met her as an undergraduate, while with a college reading party in Jersey which was boarding in her family's house. The marriage proved happy, though childless; Lucy Blackmore became a member of the Church of England, and friendly relations between the couple and the Revd John Blackmore had been established before the latter's death in 1858. Religious and social barriers between lovers were to be a frequent motif in Blackmore's fiction, notably in 'Lorna Doone'. The marriage certificate also gives Blackmore's profession as 'writer for the press', which suggests that, like many briefless barristers of the time, he had taken to journalism. It has been said that Blackmore's decision to abandon his career at the bar was connected to his fear of having an epileptic fit in court, rather than a result of any lack of success as a lawyer. Whatever the truth of this, in 1855 he joined the staff of Wellesley House grammar school, Twickenham. Hitherto he and his wife had lived in lodgings in Rochester Square, Camden Town; they now moved to Hampton Wick. In 1857 Henry Hey Knight died and left him enough money to give up teaching, which he is said to have disliked, and buy some land at nearby Teddington, where he built a house, called Gomer House after a favourite dog, planted an orchard, and set up as a market gardener. 
Blackmore's fruit farming was his main occupation for the rest of his life, although, perhaps because of his high standards, he lost more money than he made. Even after he had become a successful novelist, he wrote that 'All the time that I can spare from the pen is occupied by the more congenial trowel' (R. Blackmore to Paul H. Hayne, 31 May 1884, cited in Burris, 177). He became an accepted authority on fruit growing, contributing articles on the subject to several reference books, and in September 1894 took part in a fierce controversy in 'The Times' on the relative merits of British and Californian fruit. From 1883 until 1892 he served on the fruit and vegetable committee of the Royal Horticultural Society. 
The apparently abrupt change of tack from teaching schoolboys Latin and Greek to growing apples and pears should be seen in connection with Blackmore's interest in an ideal of rural life. One of his earlier publications was 'The farm and fruit of old: a translation in verse of the first and second georgics of Virgil, by a market gardener' (1862), and his greatest success as a novelist was with an idyll of seventeenth-century Devon, whose hero is also both a classicist and a farmer. Blackmore had always dreamed of 'a house in the country encompassed by a large garden' ('DNB'): in his novels he was again and again to depict a version of the Horatian Happy Man, farming and gardening in obscure domestic bliss in England in the seventeenth, eighteenth, or early nineteenth centuries. He translated Theocritus and Horace as well as Virgil, and allusions to classical literature and mythology pervade his work. It is hard to assess whether the exigencies of farming fruit (which frost or wind may spoil from one day to the next) developed in Blackmore the passionate interest in weather which is so marked a feature of his fiction, or whether his choice of occupation was determined by a pre-existing obsession with the subject. 
Blackmore's earliest publications were all verse: two volumes under the pseudonym Melanter ('more black' in Greek), appeared in 1854, and in the following year a patriotic poem on the Crimean War, 'The Bugle of the Black Sea: the Fate of Franklin' (1860), was published under his own name. None of them caught the public attention, and even when he did turn to publishing prose fiction, he had no success for some years. 'Clara Vaughan' (1864), the story of a girl who grows up hoping to revenge her father's murder, is an autobiographical narrative, partly set in Camden Town, with some effective passages of lush description of nature in north Devon and Corsica, and a complicated plot involving an Italian vendetta. Inspector Cutting is an early literary portrait of a police detective. The book came out in the heyday of the sensation novel, and some reviewers detected the hand of a woman author; Blackmore later defended himself against the charge of having imitated Mary Braddon's 'Eleanor's Victory' (3 vols., 1863), another novel about a woman revenging her father's murder. His next novel, 'Cradock Nowell: a Tale of the New Forest', was serialized (1865-6), and, Blackmore wrote, 'spoiled by 'Macmillan's Magazine'. I was repeatedly interfered with, and never left to my own course' (R. Blackmore to Nelson Fedden, 17 Feb 1873, cited in Dunn, 116). It appeared in one volume in 1866; a much revised version was published in 1873. Like 'Clara Vaughan', it was set in the present day. 
For his third novel, 'Lorna Doone', begun in February 1865, Blackmore drew on legends and tales circulating in Devon and Somerset associated with the area of north-east Exmoor which he knew from his childhood visits to his Blackmore grandfather, and set his novel in the late seventeenth century, against the background of Monmouth's uprising. John Ridd, a yeoman farmer, recounts the story of his courtship of Lorna, kidnapped as a baby by the outlawed Doones, and brought up in their Exmoor fastness, half-captive, half-queen. The hidden combe becomes a symbolic landscape of initiation and sexual awakening; Lorna is an English Persephone: intermittently visible, shedding her sweetness over the fertile landscape. Her marriage to John symbolizes the appropriation of aristocratic power by the hard-working middle class, while the picture of plenitude and rural festivity at Plovers Barrows offers a fantasy of English communal life in the shadow of war and corrupt government. The first edition of the book did not sell particularly well, but the one-volume cheap edition of 1870 became a best-seller; Blackmore himself believed the story that its sales were boosted by the announcement in October 1870 of the engagement of Princess Louise to the marquess of Lorne (in the novel Lorna is supposed to be descended from the earls of Lorne). Combining romance, adventure, and idyll, 'Lorna Doone' has been continuously in print since its publication, though its wide currency among schoolchildren is probably a thing of the past. Like 'Robinson Crusoe' and 'Gulliver's Travels', however, it circulated in the twentieth century to a very large extent in abridged and simplified versions ('BL cat.' lists nineteen), not only because of its length and its plentiful digressions, and the fact that the story is filtered through a highly self-conscious and ironic retrospective narrative, but because of the striking difficulty of its language, which abounds in archaic and dialect words and literary and historical allusions. There have been three BBC television versions (in 1963, 1976, and 2000) and seven film versions since 1911, the latest, directed by Andrew Grieve (GB 1990, Working Title), starring Sean Bean as Carver Doone and Billie Whitelaw as Mrs Ridd. 
None of Blackmore's other novels ever approached the aesthetic or commercial success of 'Lorna Doone', but his next novel, 'The Maid of Sker' (3 vols., 1872), was his own favourite. It is set during the late eighteenth century on both sides of the Bristol Channel, in Newton Nottage and north Devon. Blackmore's intimate knowledge of the localities, his close observation of nature, and his lyrical celebration of weather (a hurricane, a sandstorm), give the story (another lost baby inheritance plot) colour and drama. The narrative is facetiously and bombastically recounted by an untrustworthy Welsh fisherman, Davy Llewelyn. This narrative technique resembles to some extent the subtle use of John Ridd's voice in 'Lorna Doone', without being as successful. Perhaps Blackmore was influenced here by the sentimental comic novels of Edward Bulwer-Lytton, 'The Caxtons' (1849) and 'My Novel' (1853), of which he wrote 'The Caxton series form to my mind the grandest production of the century' (R. Blackmore to Mrs Halliday, 16 Dec 1876, cited in Dunn, 163). The plot of 'The Maid of Sker' is driven by the machinations of the sinister Parson Chowne, one of the worst of Blackmore's many villains, who gets his just deserts by catching hydrophobia and being strangled by a fellow clergyman. The heroine Bardie, a baby found in a boat by Davy, whose baby talk is lovingly recounted, is known to have been based by Blackmore on a niece of his wife's named Eva Pinto Leite (1866-1911), who was practically adopted by the childless Blackmores, and kept house for him after Lucy's death. 
In 1875 Blackmore's brother Henry, a lonely eccentric who, adopting the name of a remote ancestor of the Knights, had changed his name in 1852 to Henry John Turberville, died in a hotel in Yeovil, having made a will leaving his substantial property to the family of the local chemist, to whose daughter he had been engaged. An autopsy revealed the presence of cyanide, and Blackmore made allegations which led to both the chemist's and the doctor's beginning libel proceedings against him. Objections were raised (on grounds of unsound mind and undue influence) by both Blackmore, as next-of-kin and heir-at-law, and the beneficiaries of several earlier wills (who included the atheist and radical Charles Bradlaugh, 1833-1891); after involving Blackmore in a good deal of anxiety the case ended in compromise. 
Blackmore's next novel, 'Alice Lorraine: a Tale of the South Downs' (3 vols., 1875), an ambitious attempt to depict an early nineteenth-century English Antigone, was so badly reviewed he briefly resolved to abandon novel writing, but a steady stream of novels continued to flow from his pen, and although they never made as much money for him or their publishers as 'Lorna Doone' had, he was able to place them as serials and obtain good prices. 'Cripps, the Carrier: a Woodland Tale' (3 vols., 1876) is set near Oxford in the winter of 1837-8 and mingles pastoral with satire on the Tractarians. Like many British writers of the time Blackmore resented the piracy of his books in America, but he engaged in cordial correspondence with several of his American fans, and, though he had never visited the United States, or indeed it appears any other foreign country, he made California the setting of 'Erema, or, My Father's Sin' (3 vols., 1877), in which, perhaps partly under the influence of his friend the Georgia poet Paul H. Hayne (1830-1886), he gives a sympathetic depiction of the Southern cause. In 1879, shortly after the death of his aunt Mary Gordon, he published anonymously the poem, 'Dominus illuminatio mea', which, placed by Arthur Quiller-Couch at the end of his best-selling 'Oxford Book of English Verse, 1250-1900' (1900), achieved fame, although it was not credited to Blackmore for many years. 'Mary Anerley: a Yorkshire Tale' (3 vols., 1880), is one of his best novels, again patterned as a search for identity and nourishing communal and domestic life, in this case by the lost baby turned outlaw and smuggler Robin Lyth who loves the heroine, a farmer's daughter. 'The Remarkable History of Sir Thomas Upmore' (2 vols., 1884) was an unsuccessful satire, incorporating Blackmore's increasingly choleric views on Gladstonian Liberalism. 'Christowell: a Dartmoor Tale' (3 vols., 1882), is one of several novels named after a village and structured as a portrait of a community; its hero has retreated to an inaccessible house and garden to escape a false reputation for cowardice obtained in the Peninsular War. Another is 'Springhaven' (3 vols., 1887), admired by many of his fans, a naval tale of the Napoleonic wars, set on the Sussex coast. In some ways an invasion scare story on the model of George Chesney's 'The Battle of Dorking' (1871), it has a large cast of characters, mostly residents of the eponymous fishing village, but including both Nelson and Napoleon. In January 1888 Lucy Blackmore died, after many years of chronic invalidism; grief affected all Blackmore's subsequent works, especially 'Kit and Kitty: a Story of West Middlesex' (3 vols., 1890), begun in the year of his bereavement, in which he wrote for the first time about his adopted home the Thames valley, setting the novel in the 1850s and 1860s, when he and Lucy were living in Teddington as a young married couple. Kit's wife disappears unaccountably; he is bereft; after an extraordinary series of events she returns and they live happily ever after; the author portrays himself partly as Kit and partly as Uncle Corney, an elderly and grumpy market gardener. Equally elegiac is 'Perlycross: a Tale of the Western Hills' (3 vols., 1894) which is, like 'Christowell' and 'Springhaven', an anatomy of an entire community. It is set in a village closely modelled on Culmstock, with a hero, a poor widowed curate, modelled on the author's father, in the year 1835, a golden age before the repeal of the corn laws, when 'as yet it was no mockery to cast the fat grain among the clods... Alas, that thy beauty should be of the past, and ground into gritty foreign flour!' (pp. 5-6). The village is struck by a violent storm, and social barriers are overcome for the sake of romance. There are also later works of less importance in prose and verse. 
Blackmore never quite had his due from twentieth-century literary critics, although Max Keith Sutton's 1979 study, written under Northrop Frye's influence, convincingly emphasizes the importance of archetypal patterns to the functioning of his novels. At their best his gift for endowing historical fiction with symbolic resonance, his unsurpassed observation of the natural world, his outstanding power of creating unforgettable visual images (John saving the sheep in 'Lorna Doone', the church struck by lightning in 'Christowell'), give his novels qualities which compensate for their lack of organization and their needlessly crabbed language. Blackmore's books do not respond well to fast reading. His superficial nostalgia and conservatism have not recommended him to academic readers and have obscured his deceptively complex narrative techniques and his interest in marshalling a wide variety of mutually contradictory points of view. 
Blackmore's own tastes in literature as well as politics were conservative; he was no enthusiast for realism in fiction; nor on the other hand was the late-Victorian flowering of the adventure novel to his taste: he particularly disliked the work of Rider Haggard. But he admired and was on good terms with Hardy, and had a considerable influence on younger regional novelists, such as Hall Caine and Eden Phillpotts. Though there are many witnesses to his charm of manner and generosity, it is hard to avoid the impression that he was sometimes irascible and exacting, especially with his employees. There was a gardener who sabotaged his vines in revenge for being dismissed, and there were housekeeping difficulties (though Blackmore did not take up the offer of help recruiting domestic staff which was made by his lifelong friend Arthur Munby). Throughout his time at Teddington he maintained a running battle with his neighbours the London and South Western Railway Company. After his wife's death he became increasingly infirm and seldom moved far from home. He died at Gomer House, of abdominal cancer, on 20 January 1900 and was buried at Teddington cemetery. There is a memorial in Exeter Cathedral, with a verse inscription by Munby, and a statue of Lorna in Dulverton, while on Exmoor the tourists are still sold postcards of Doone country. 


@@@@@


doc= 2530


Blackmore, Thomas (b. in or before 1740, d. in or after 1780), engraver, of whose training nothing is known, modelled his style on that of James McArdell, as may be seen in his untitled print of a woman after Frans Hals. He signed twelve mezzotint engravings: James Chaloner Smith noted ten, C. E. Russell mentioned another, and a small mezzotint after van Ostade is known. The earliest of them appear to be a portrait of 'Master Bunbury' (the future caricaturist William Henry Bunbury), a private plate after Joshua Reynolds, and four prints published by Ryland and Bryer, probably before 1768; some of these are crude and hard. The portrait of Bunbury may have brought Blackmore to the notice of Reynolds, for five of his prints are after that artist and another is from a painting in his collection. Blackmore's later prints bear dates from 1768 to 1771: one was exhibited at the Society of Artists in 1769 as from 'Mr [Joseph?] Pearson's Duke St York Buildings'. All of his prints, with the exception of his portraits of Bunbury and Samuel Foote and a print after Frans Hals, are uncommon. Nothing else is known of his work, although he may have undertaken two other small unsigned prints, portraits of Lady Coventry and of Miss Lascelles, for Ryland and Bryer, and he could be the Mr Blackmore of 14 Denmark Court, Strand, who exhibited 'An Engraving of a Gentleman', a print which does not appear to have survived, at the Free Society of Artists in 1773. Thomas Dodd confused him with a John Blackmore who made drawings of sculpture in St Albans, Hertfordshire, in 1760; John Blackmore also exhibited three pictures at the Free Society in 1769, giving his address as 'at Mr Wilkes opposite Dorset Street Picadilly'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2531


Blackmore, William (1616-1684), clergyman and ejected minister, was born on 24 June 1616, the second son of William Blackmore, a member of London's Fishmongers' Company. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School in London and matriculated from Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1635; he graduated BA in 1638 and proceeded MA in 1641. Blackmore's first employment in the ministry of the church was in December 1645 at the Essex parish of Pentlow. He owed this position to the parliamentarian committee for plundered ministers, filling the place of the ejected minister Edward Alston. 
Blackmore did not remain long at Pentlow and in September 1646 obtained the committee's acceptance of his resignation in order to move to the London parish of St Peter Cornhill. He had been elected by the parishioners of St Peter's in June 1646 to replace Thomas Coleman, the ailing Westminster assembly divine who was the key opponent of the high presbyterianism of men like Blackmore. Unlike the Erastian Coleman, Blackmore believed firmly in the presbyterian system of church government and put into effect the regime of ruling elders at St Peter's. The younger Calamy notes that he was particularly strict in catechizing the young of the parish. Despite his rigid presbyterianism, Blackmore found himself in trouble in April 1647 with the local presbyterian classis. In 1641 he had received deacon's orders from Bishop Prideaux of Worcester, but the fourth London classis demanded that he take full orders before they would permit him to continue to administer the sacrament at St Peter's. In order to test his qualification for the ministry, the fourth classis set Blackmore a telling thesis topic: 'an cui competat ex officio praedicare, competat sacramenta administrare?' ('if a person's office gives him the ability to preach, does it make him competent to administer the sacraments?'). The classis must have known of his competence in this area of theology, for in 1646 London's presbyterian ministers had chosen Blackmore to write the section on ordination by imposition of hands in their treatise on the divine right of presbyterianism, the 'Jus divinum regiminis ecclesiastici' (1646). 
Blackmore later became a stalwart of the London provincial assembly, the governing synod of London's ramshackle presbyterian system, serving in 1648 as its scribe and later on its ruling grand committee. He was a signatory to the 'Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ' (1647), a document calling for parliament to be intolerant of religious heterodoxy and fully to support the presbyterian reformation of the church. He was also involved with Sion College, the religious club of civil-war presbyterianism, being elected junior dean in 1658-9 and senior dean in 1660. 
As a key London presbyterian Blackmore was involved in the attempts to halt the political crisis of 1648-9. He signed the 'Serious and Faithful Representation' (1649) petitioning Lord General Fairfax to put a stop to the king's trial, and later signed the 'Vindication of the Ministers of the Gospel' (1649) in defence of that petition. After the execution of Charles I he became involved in the City presbyterian plot to restore Charles II to the throne. He was implicated with Christopher Love, who was later condemned and executed for treason, and was suspended by the Commonwealth regime from his post at St Peter's. Although his freedom was secured by the surety of his elder brother, Sir John Blackmore, later governor of St Helena, the Commonwealth regime replaced Blackmore with Thomas Hodges. However, Blackmore maintained the support of at least seventy of St Peter's vestry, who petitioned the corporation of London on 13 May 1656 for his return to the parish. This caused a division in the parish and a number of parishioners presented a counter-petition in favour of Hodges, complaining of Blackmore's 'dull and heavie ministry'. Blackmore won the dispute and was reinstituted on 17 October 1656. Hodges tried to gain possession of the living again in 1660, but the parliamentary commissioners upheld Blackmore's title as the rector of St Peter's. 
Hodges finally won the struggle in 1662 when Blackmore's conscience directed him to join the ranks of the ejected clergy. By the time of the great ejection Blackmore had gathered a respectable estate and used this wealth to retire to the village of Hornchurch in Essex. Here he kept a conventicle in his house and was licensed as a presbyterian during the king's indulgence of 1672. Blackmore married three times: his first wife, Martha, died in 1658; Mary Chewning, whom he married at St Mary's Islington on 1 May 1660, died in 1678; and his third wife, Sarah Luttrell, survived him and died in March 1694. Blackmore himself died at Hare Street, Essex, in 1684 and on 18 July was buried at Romford in the same county. 




@@@@@


doc= 2532


Blackner, John (1770?-1816), radical and county historian, was born in Ilkeston, Derbyshire. He served an apprenticeship to a stocking maker in his native town, and there married Sarah, 'nee' Brown, sister of a 'respectable' farmer in Kirk Hallam, Derbyshire, with whom he had four sons and three daughters. Illiterate at the time of his marriage, he taught himself to read and write soon after moving to Nottingham in 1792, where he found profitable work as a lace maker. He was of 'tall and commanding' physique, had natural eloquence, and though mild in private conversation was boisterous, even overbearing, in public. He enjoyed society, and for a time lived a dissipated life of public houses and poaching. He emerged, though, as a leading voice among Nottingham's radical artisan community, publishing political pamphlets, notably 'A Few Reflections on the Corn Laws' (1805), and from 1808 contributing regularly to the editorial comment of the 'Nottingham Review', which was unwavering in its opposition to the war with France. In 1810 Blackner was at the centre of a 'cause celebre' when he was sentenced, with three others, to a month's imprisonment for conspiring to resist wage reductions in the lace trade. His close association with the framework-knitters' cause may thereafter have implicated him in Luddism. In July 1812 he was engaged as editor of 'The Statesman', a radical London evening paper, but he soon returned to Nottingham, apparently on account of failing health associated with heavy drinking. The following year he became landlord of a public house, which he renamed the Rancliffe Arms in honour of the town's radical MP Lord Rancliffe, whose candidacy in 1812 Blackner had helped bring about. In 1815 he published his substantial 'History of Nottingham', a valuable reference work and a contemporary record of the political controversies aroused by the French Revolution. Blackner was both a chronicler of and a participant in these disputes, firmly identifying with the 'democrat' party against the 'aristocrat'. For this partisanship his history has been criticized. Blackner was a radical patriot, who advocated the 'rights of man' but defended government by the social elite. A professed deist for much of his life, he turned to Christianity in his declining years, and died in Nottingham on 22 December 1816, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 2533


Blackrie, Alexander (bap. 1702, d. 1772), surgeon-apothecary, was baptized on 14 June 1702 at the church of St Nicholas, Aberdeen, the seventh of the eleven children of William Blackrie and his wife, Isobel, 'nee' Fordyce. A merchant's son, he was educated at the grammar school and Marischal College, Aberdeen (1718-22), and went on to be surgeon-general on the Indian establishment. Among his friends was an East India Company director, John Hawkesworth of Bromley, Kent; Blackrie moved to the town in the late 1730s and practised there for the rest of his life. He married about 1740; he and his wife, Ann (died 1749), had a son, William, and a daughter, Elizabeth, who, with a $20,000 dowry, became the first wife of John Scott, the political agent of Warren Hastings. 
When in March 1761 Blackrie took Samuel Saunders as his apprentice for seven years with the substantial premium of $84, his practice was described as that of Alexander Blackrie & Co., suggesting an early example of a medical partnership. In October 1763 Blackrie contributed a letter to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' criticizing Walter Chittick of Bath (died 1761) for his recently published cure for renal calculi. Blackrie expanded this into 'A disquisition on medicines that dissolve the stone. In which Dr. Chittick's secret is considered and discovered' (1766). In 1771 a second part appeared, with a 'considerably improved' version of the first edition. In 1775 the work was translated into French. Initially Blackrie's 'Disquisition' attracted only 216 subscribers, but more than 1000 applied for the second edition. 
In his will (made on 19 November 1770) Blackrie bequeathed $5 5's'. to John Hawkesworth and a similar sum to Thomas Wellings, a London druggist. His daughter, the only other beneficiary, inherited his portrait and the copyright of his 'Disquisition'. He died in Bromley on 29 May 1772 and was buried on 4 June in the church of St Peter and St Paul, Bromley. 


@@@@@


doc= 2534


Blackstone, John (1712-1753), apothecary and botanist, was born at Harefield, Middlesex, the eldest of three sons of Edward Blackstone (died 1730), ironmonger and citizen of London, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Francis Ashby of Brakspeare, Harefield. In 1729 he was apprenticed to Thomas Bearcroft, apothecary in the Strand, Westminster. Following his father's death, his mother took her younger sons to live in Harefield; Blackstone spent his holidays there, became interested in the local flora, and from 1734 began to discover new species. 
Blackstone's paternal grandfather, John Blackstone (1650-1712), prominent in the Society of Apothecaries and a benefactor of St Bartholomew's Hospital, had been a friend of Sir Hans Sloane and this probably encouraged the young man to begin corresponding with Sloane, J. J. Dillenius, Isaac Rand, and other eminent botanists. Apart from these letters, he apparently worked alone. Convalescence from an illness during the summer of 1736 kept him at Harefield, enabling further discoveries. Another spell of illness in 1737 forwarded his work, and that year he published his 'Fasciculus plantarum circa Harefield sponte nascentium'. It was a small catalogue in alphabetical order, with synonyms taken from other authors, giving the locations, times of flowering, and other details, of 527 local plants, supported by a general description of the soils, aspects, and drainage. It is valuable as the first example of a complete enumeration of a small district, probably 16 to 20 square miles, and as such was much imitated by later collectors. 
After completing his apprenticeship Blackstone stayed at Charlbury, Oxfordshire, with his uncle John Blackstone, keeper of Wychwood forest, where he compiled a catalogue of local plants. He then went to Essex, where another uncle owned property; there he extended his interest to mycology as autumn drew on. 
Blackstone was made free of the Society of Apothecaries in 1738 and established his own business in Fleet Street, London. On 16 February 1740 he married a widow, Elizabeth Webb, but she died later that year. In October 1742 he married Mary (died 1801), daughter of Richard Abbott, of the Painter-Stainers' Company. Their first daughter ('b'. 1744) died in infancy; a second, Sophia (1748-1827), survived him. 
Friendship with the Yorkshireman Ambrose Dawson, physician at St George's Hospital, probably led Blackstone to visit the north of England. Mary Blackstone inherited $500 from her father and this was spent on acquiring property in Harefield. Blackstone gathered his knowledge of 366 rare and local species within England into his 'Specimen botanicum quo plantarum plurium rariorum Angliae indigenarum loci naturales illustrantur' (1746), intending to follow this with a second volume. This was the last book published in England on indigenous botany to be based on the classification system of John Ray before that of Linnaeus came into universal favour. Blackstone was beset by failing health and died at Harefield on 11 March 1753. He was buried there, near his parents, on 18 March. Some of his own books were bought by Thomas Birch, secretary of the Royal Society, and later went into the British Library with Birch's bequest. His name was perpetuated in the genus 'Blackstonia'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2535


Blackstone, William (bap. 1596?, d. 1675), settler in America and horticulturist, was born to unknown parents. It has been asserted that he was baptized on 5 March 1595 at Whickham in co. Durham, the son of John Blackstone and his wife, Agnes ('nee' Hawley), but there is no entry to this effect in the parish register. A William Blackstone was baptized on 5 March 1596 at Horncastle, Lincolnshire, son of parents of these names. He was admitted a sizar at the puritan-dominated Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 16 May 1614, and graduated BA early in 1618. Ordained deacon and priest at Peterborough on 23 May 1619, he proceeded MA in 1621. 
Soon afterwards dislike of episcopacy, as he later explained, took him to New England. He probably sailed with Robert Gorges in the ship which landed at Wessagusset (later Weymouth) in Massachusetts Bay. The Gorges settlement soon melted away, and Blackstone moved to Shawmut (later Boston), where he had occasional contact with other isolated Englishmen and with Native Americans. For four years from 1630 he co-existed in Boston with the new settlers who arrived with John Winthrop, but his house was on the opposite side of Boston Neck from the main settlement. In 1634 the town of Boston purchased Blackstone's estate, and he moved, probably with servants, to Study Hill, just north of the site where two years later Roger Williams established Providence, and in an area later known as Blackstone River. 
For the next forty years Blackstone remained at this spot and had little communion with the outside world, although he occasionally visited Williams, and on 4 July 1659 in Boston he married 34-year-old Sarah ('nee' Fisher), widow of John Stevenson, a cobbler who had left her with five children. He officiated at the first recorded prayer book service in Rhode Island, and sometimes preached there. At one point he received an invitation to become minister at York. However, he declined to take up a pastorate. Cotton Mather, who noted that he was 'commonly reckoned' among godly episcopalians, recounted that he was a man 'of a particular humor, and he would never join himself to any of our churches, giving this reason for it: 'I came from England, because I did not like the 'lord-bishops'; but I can't join you, because I would not be under the 'lord-brethren''' (Mather, 243). Instead he farmed and cultivated roses and apple trees, breeding the first new strain of apples in the colony, yellow sweetings. 
Sarah Blackstone died in June 1673 and Blackstone himself on 26 May 1675, aged about eighty. The inventory of his moveable estate totalled $56 3's'. 6died, with an additional three parcels of land not valued, amounting to more than 260 acres. His library of nearly two hundred books, one of the largest in New England at the time, accounted for close to a third of his moveables. A marginal annotation in the inventory states that 'this estate was destroyed and carried away by the Indians': this probably occurred during King Philip's War, which broke out on 20 June that year in Plymouth County, just a few miles away. 
Many myths grew up around this man, the so-called 'sage of the wilderness', who deliberately withdrew from society. Tales were told of him travelling round the locality mounted on a white bull, with his nose in a book. Honoured by the protestant episcopal church as a pioneer episcopal clergyman in America and as the first resident of Boston, he features on the Founders' Memorial on Boston Common and at other sites. His pastureland later became North America's first public park. 


@@@@@


doc= 2536


Blackstone, Sir William (1723-1780), legal writer and judge, was born on 10 July 1723 in Cheapside, London, the third surviving but posthumous son of Charles Blackstone (died 1723), a citizen silk mercer 'not of great Affluence' (Blackstone, 'Reports', iii), and his wife, Mary, eldest daughter of Lovelace Bigg, a landed gentleman of Chilton Foliat, Wiltshire. In the biographical memoir prefixed to the 1781 edition of Blackstone's 'Reports', compiled by his executor and brother-in-law James Clitherow from 'a short Abstract of every Circumstance of Consequence in his Life written by himself with his accustomed Accuracy' (ibid., ii), Blackstone's paternal grandfather John is described as 'an eminent Apothecary in Newgate Street' (ibid., iii). But it was a medical practitioner from the other side of his family, the London surgeon Thomas Bigg, who gave protection and support to William and his brothers after the loss of their father and subsequent death of their mother during William's childhood. According to Clitherow the 'liberal Educations' which this affectionate uncle provided his three nephews 'supplied the great Loss they had so early sustained, and compensated in a great Degree for their want of more ample Fortunes' (ibid., iv). 
So William Blackstone followed his two elder brothers into the professions, rather than pursuing his father's trade. But whereas Charles and Henry went from Winchester College to New College, Oxford (where another Bigg uncle was warden), and then into the church, William received a London schooling at the Charterhouse. Enrolled as a fee-paying student in 1730, he became entitled after his mother's death five years later to a free education, provided under the terms of the founder's will for needy, well-recommended boys between the ages of ten and fourteen; Blackstone's nomination came from no less a personage than Sir Robert Walpole, arranged by one of his mother's cousins. While his 'Talents and Industry rendered him the favourite of his Masters', Blackstone's academic performance cannot have disappointed his family and friends (Blackstone, 'Reports', iv). At the age of fifteen he had become head scholar of Charterhouse, 'and although so young, was thought well-qualified to be removed to the University'; he also showed early evidence of literary abilities, not confined to the Latin verse for which in 1737 he won a school prize medal bearing the name and likeness of the poet Milton (ibid.). 
Blackstone matriculated at Oxford on 1 December 1738, having been admitted to Pembroke College as a commoner the previous day, doubtless in anticipation of his election early next year to one of two Holford exhibitions tenable at Pembroke by scholars from the Charterhouse. Classical studies dominated his first two undergraduate years, and Clitherow relates that he worked 'with unremitting Ardour' towards the BA degree (Blackstone, 'Reports', v). Yet he also continued to find time for literary pursuits, while 'Logic, Mathematicks, and the other Sciences were not neglected'; in particular, he developed what would prove to be a lifelong interest in the theory and practice of architecture (ibid.). 
In July 1740 Blackstone was admitted as a candidate for the BCL in the faculty of laws, a course extending over five years after two preliminary years of humane studies, but requiring neither the BA nor MA degree. This shift in direction was seemingly reinforced by his admission to the Middle Temple in November 1741, even if the choice of a legal career was made only reluctantly, and 'with doubtful mind' according to 'The Lawyer's Farewell to his Muse', one of several poems written in his later teens and early twenties ('Select Poems and Translations between the Years 1736 and 1744', cited in the Maggs Bros. catalogue 576 of 1932, 9-10, 73). In view of this ambivalence, it was perhaps fortunate that Blackstone did not yet have to decide whether he would become a civilian, or alternatively a common lawyer. 
As membership of the Middle Temple had no residential requirements Blackstone could remain in Oxford, pursue a relatively undemanding course of reading for the BCL (which he received in June 1745), and otherwise follow a wide range of intellectual interests. These are hinted at by the books and manuscripts he ordered up from the stacks of the Bodleian Library, including works of classical letters, theology, church history, and antiquarian studies, as well as legal texts, although the last become more prominent in the 1750s (Bodl. Oxf., MS records e 554-60). One notable product of Blackstone's student days at Oxford was a systematic treatise on architecture, embellished with proficient pen and ink drawings, which exists in preliminary draft as 'An abridgement of architecture', dated July 1743 (Getty Research Institute, special collections, MS 890227). This work, a precursor of Blackstone's later didactic achievements, was completed 'with considerable Additions and Improvements' at All Souls College, where he had been elected to a fellowship in November 1743, after an unsuccessful attempt the previous year (All Souls College, Codrington Library, MS 333, 'Elements of architecture'). Blackstone's first publication was also written at this time, although not printed until 1747, when an anonymous prefatory 'Advertisement' to 'The Pantheon: a Vision' explained the author's aim as to 'take a Poetical View of the several Religions that have prevailed in the World', concluding with the Church of England, 'the most pure and Apostolical upon Earth' (G. Bingham, 'Dissertations, Essays, and Sermons... to which are Prefixed Memoirs of his Life', 1804, 1.xxiii-xxv). 
Blackstone does not seem to have begun serious study of the common law until January 1746, less than a year before he was called to the bar (on 28 November 1746). In a cheerful letter to Seymour Richmond, a lawyer-uncle on his mother's side, written shortly after reaching 'my new Habitation, (which is at Mr Stoke's a Limner in Arundel-Street)', William depicted his initial encounter with Sir Thomas Littleton's 'Tenures' in confident military terms: 'I have stormed one Book of Littleton, & opened my Trenches before the 2d; and I can with Pleasure say I have met with no Difficulty of Consequence' (Warden, 58-61). But whatever intellectual grasp of the common law Blackstone may have acquired, whether before or after call to the bar -- and following two years at the Temple he reportedly claimed to have 'made myself pretty well master of it' -- he lacked two crucial keys to success: powerful legal or social connections, and the ability to think and argue on his feet. His timing was also bad, because the mid-eighteenth century marked the bottom of a long-term slump in the business of Westminster Hall. Thus he noted in December 1751 that there had been 'not one Determinac'on of any Moment' during the whole of the past Michaelmas term, '& the Courts (except the Chancery) not sitting above an hour in the morning' (Doolittle, 46; 'Legal Observer', 6, 1833, 421). Although the 'Reports' published after his death suggest he remained a constant term-time attender at the superior law courts from 1746 until at least 1750, Clitherow states that his subject 'made his Way very slowly, and acquired little Notice and little Practice' (Blackstone, 'Reports', vii). For a man of Blackstone's abilities and ambition, succeeding his uncle in 1749 as recorder of Wallingford, Berkshire -- where he later made his family home -- can hardly have compensated for lack of success in 'the bustling Practical part' of 'the active Life of Westminster Hall' (Newdigate MSS, CR136/B1488). 
At Oxford, by contrast, Blackstone enjoyed congenial friends, a secure collegiate base, and a growing reputation. There was also ample scope to exercise his abundant intellectual energies and emerging administrative skills. At All Souls College, where as early as 1746 he was elected both dean of laws and bursar, almost every aspect of college life benefited from his 'passion for order and efficiency and... immense capacity for hard work' (Sutherland, 'Blackstone and the legal chairs', 230). His architectural interests found practical expression in overseeing the long-delayed completion of the Codrington Library, together with an adjoining building financed, thanks to Blackstone's 'Care and Activity', from the estate of the duke of Wharton (Blackstone, 'Reports', viii). Thereafter he took keen interest in the arranging and cataloguing of the library's books and manuscripts, according to detailed regulations drawn up in his characteristically incisive style (All Souls College, library book, 8 Nov 1751; Craster, 79-82). As bursar he reviewed all leases of college lands, reorganized the college's archives, and even put the capacious new wine cellars under the Codrington Library on a businesslike footing. His financial and legal talents were further deployed in his stewardship of the college's estates from 1749, and given literary form in an expository open letter compiled in 1753 (with subsequent holograph additions) for Benjamin Buckler, his friend and successor in office. Another abiding college concern motivated Blackstone's first acknowledged venture into print, the 'Essay on Collateral Consanguinity' (1750), in which law, logic, and mathematics were marshalled to defend All Souls's restrictive approach to those seeking privileged access to fellowships on the grounds of their descent from the society's medieval founder. 
Far from confining his energies to All Souls, Blackstone emerged as a leading university figure from 1750, when his DCL degree first admitted him to membership of convocation, the major academic forum. His decision in 1753 'no longer to attend the Courts at Westminster' further enhanced his Oxford profile (Newdigate MSS, CR136/B1488). He served for six years from 1753 as assessor, or deputy judge, of the vice-chancellor's court, where he was responsible for various procedural reforms. He had less success in promoting a scheme for the recently completed Radcliffe Camera to become a 'Library of a new Species' by housing manuscripts and drawings from the Bodleian and college collections (I. G. Doolittle, 'William Blackstone and the Radcliffe Camera, 1753', 'Bodleian Library Record', 11, 1982, 47-50). But this failed initiative stands in sharp contrast to the important academic and institutional reforms which Blackstone was primarily responsible for conceiving and implementing during the 1750s. 
The first of these involved a direct assault on the oligarchical power of the board of delegates, who were traditionally appointed by successive vice-chancellors to control the university's printing and publishing operations. In 1755 dissatisfaction with the limited output, low profile, and high prices of Oxford's press led to Blackstone's nomination as a delegate, despite vice-chancellorial opposition. He proceeded to conduct a one-man review of the printing house, with particular reference to its cost structure, on which he gathered much detailed information from booksellers and printers in Oxford and London. When his report, 'Some Thoughts on the Oxford Press' (1756), was coolly received by his fellow delegates, Blackstone proceeded to publish an open letter, 'To the Reverend Dr Randolph, Vice-Chancellor of the University of Oxford' (1757), which comprehensively indicted both the delegates' managerial incompetence and their mode of appointment. Further resistance saw Blackstone threaten to bring the whole matter 'before another less indulgent Tribunal', whereupon the delegates rapidly back-pedalled, adopting virtually all the proposals for remodelling their own role and the operation of the press which Blackstone had helpfully drafted for them (Philip, 45-72, 80). 
Blackstone's second major initiative broke a constitutional stranglehold on the university's ability to manage its own affairs which had been imposed by the early seventeenth-century statutes known as the Laudian code. The intention of Archbishop Laud to establish a permanent educational structure for Oxford had succeeded so well that by the mid-eighteenth century the university was widely believed to lack the legal capacity to change its curriculum or internal organization, unless by an unwelcome direct intervention from government. Having confronted this potential obstacle in the course of his campaign to reform the press, Blackstone developed a cogent case against the power of any corporate body to bind its successors, 'who have the same right to 'repeal' as the Predecessors had to 'enact'' (Sutherland, 'The Laudian Statutes', 199). However, the issue on which the point of principle eventually turned in 1759-60 was a disputed election for the office of chancellor, when questions about the eligibility of candidates and voters led to convocation's enactment of a statute which not only defined its own membership and rights but effectively established the university's legislative independence for the first time since 1636. 
Blackstone's third significant contribution to his university lay in establishing English law as an academic discipline, initially by presenting a successful course of private lectures, then as the foundation Vinerian professor of common law, and finally with the publication of his acclaimed 'Commentaries on the Laws of England' (1765-9). In the summer of 1753, 'finding the Profits of his Profession very inadequate', Blackstone finally resolved to 'retire to his Fellowship and an academical Life', supplemented by whatever he could earn 'as a Provincial Counsel' (Blackstone, 'Reports', x). He simultaneously commissioned a printed prospectus for 'A course of lectures on the laws of England', to be delivered in the hall of All Souls College. Private lecture courses on subjects outside the formal curriculum were no novelty in Hanoverian Oxford. But it seems that Blackstone had originally begun to think about lecturing in anticipation of an impending vacancy in the regius professorship of civil law. Only when it became clear that his candidacy for this chair would be politically unacceptable to the Newcastle-Pelham administration did he turn to a 'Scheme for lectures' on English common law. In so doing he was possibly influenced by private knowledge that the elderly Charles Viner had recently determined to endow a professorship in that subject for a scholar who, like Blackstone, held qualifications in both civil and common law (Newdigate MSS, CR136/B1488). 
Blackstone's initial lectures were sufficiently well received to be repeated in 1754, the prospectus for that year representing them as part of a 'Design, for cultivating the Study of the Municipal Law in Oxford' (W. Blackstone, 'Proposals for a Course of Lectures', 1754: Bodl. Oxf., G. A. Oxon. b. 111 (50)). Whatever his shortcomings as an advocate, and despite a manner of delivery which the hostile Jeremy Bentham, who attended his lectures in the early 1760s, later characterized as 'formal, precise, and affected', Blackstone proved highly effective when speaking from a prepared text (G. Jones, introduction, in W. Blackstone, 'The Sovereignty of the Law: Selections from Blackstone's 'Commentaries on the Laws of England'', 1973, xvii). His carefully arranged material was presented in a literate and polished fashion, and not directed exclusively to intending future lawyers, but rather to 'such other Gentlemen of the University, as are desirous to be in some Degree acquainted with the Constitution and legal Polity of their native Country' (Bodl. Oxf., G. A. Oxon. b. 111 (50)). With this general audience firmly in mind Blackstone sought to: 'lay down a general and comprehensive Plan of the Laws of England; to deduce their History and Antiquities; to select and illustrate their Leading Rules, and Fundamental Principles; to explain their Reason and Utility; and to compare them frequently with the Laws of Nature and of other Nations; without dwelling too minutely on the Niceties of Practice, or the more refined Distinctions of particular Cases. (ibid.)' From 1756, the year of Viner's death, successive printed editions of the lecturer's 'Analysis of the Laws of England' provided students with 'the Order, and principal Divisions, of his Course' (ibid., viii). Given that neither English university had previously offered any formal instruction in English law, and considering the distinct shortage of accessible introductory texts to that notoriously dry and difficult subject, Blackstone's pioneering exposition was bound to attract attention, both within Oxford and beyond. 
Although Blackstone had made himself the obvious -- and, as it turned out, sole -- candidate for what became the Vinerian chair in English law, establishing Viner's benefaction in a manner acceptable to Blackstone and his supporters was not achieved without considerable wrangling. The eventual comprehensive defeat of various personal and political opponents left a legacy of resentment which outlasted Blackstone's formal election as Vinerian professor in October 1758 and his 'elegant and admired' inaugural lecture, separately published as 'A Discourse on the Study of the Law'. But while such animosities may have contributed to his eventual removal from the university, and undoubtedly frustrated his plan to annex a residential foundation of common lawyers to the Vinerian chair, they hardly dented Blackstone's burgeoning reputation outside Oxford. Lord Bute as royal tutor invited Blackstone to present his lectures before the prince of Wales (who received written copies when the lecturer declined to leave his Oxford classes), while the 'high Character of a Professor at Oxford', said to have brought the law's 'Mysterious Business to some System', attracted notice even across the Atlantic (Blackstone, 'Reports', xiii; 'Letter Book of John Watts', ed. D. C. Barck, 1928, 13). 
This new-found fame, 'which he justly thought might entitle him to some particular Notice at the Bar', encouraged Blackstone in June 1759 to buy a Middle Temple chamber and resume his London practice, declining an offer of promotion to the now diminished professional dignity of serjeant-at-law in the hope of better things to come (Blackstone, 'Reports', xiii-xiv). But it was not until after his marriage in 1761 and the births of his first children (see below) that a printed version of his lectures appeared. While publication was doubtless always a possibility, the decision to go into print may well have been hastened by threats of a pirate edition from Dublin, as also by concern about the growing circulation of imperfect sets of student notes, recognition that his future did not lie in Oxford, and some sense that his text, sufficiently honed by years of repetition and revision, was unlikely to benefit from further reworking. 
The first volume of the 'Commentaries on the Laws of England' appeared in 1765, with the remaining three following over the next four years. In some 2000 pages the common law's tortuous complexities were outlined in a manner at once authoritative, clear, elegant, and even engaging. While far from wholly laudatory or uncritical (of procedural complexities or excessively harsh criminal punishments, for example), the 'Commentaries' depicted England's constitution and laws as reflecting the natural order of the cosmos, yet also rooted in the nation's distinctive historical development, like 'an old Gothic castle, erected in the days of chivalry, but fitted up for a modern inhabitant' (Blackstone, 'Commentaries', 3.268). Although mounting criticism tempered an initial highly favourable reception, Blackstone's 'Commentaries' would become the most celebrated, widely circulated, and influential law book ever published in the English language. 
Long before making his name as a legal author Blackstone had enjoyed a rather different reputation as the most powerful Oxford academic politician of his day. His leadership from All Souls of a loose-knit tory coalition was indeed responsible for giving that relatively small society unprecedented prominence in university affairs throughout the 1750s. Blackstone's public political career began in 1751, when he took over Sir Roger Newdigate's campaign for one of the university's two parliamentary seats. Although near contemporaries as undergraduates, with a common friend in James Clitherow (whose sister Blackstone married a decade later), Newdigate and Blackstone apparently had not met when the latter wrote from All Souls on 13 January 1751, warning Newdigate that a new candidate threatened to split the vote of those 'Old Interest' dons who had successfully maintained Oxford's intransigence towards successive whig administrations ever since the Hanoverian succession (Newdigate MSS, CR136/B1482-1483, 1485-1486). 
Soon after this well-managed by-election launched Newdigate's long career as a university MP, Blackstone's tory sympathies were voiced in the elegiac verses he contributed (albeit under his future brother-in-law's name) to an Oxford anthology mourning the premature death of Prince Frederick (Blackstone, 'Reports', vi-vii). According to his political opponents Blackstone was also responsible for much anonymous journalism in the tory interest during the fiercely fought county election of 1754; he certainly wrote a tract against extending the parliamentary franchise to copyholders, commissioned by candidates in this struggle and published in 1758, together with a pamphlet discrediting revelations of a supposed Jacobite conspiracy in Oxford. His next major political intervention occurred in 1758-9, when he helped the earl of Westmorland become chancellor by arguing that his chief opponent, Lord Litchfield, had rendered himself technically ineligible. The latter's subsequent withdrawal provoked considerable bitterness against Blackstone, even within his own college, which was probably not diminished by the skirmishes preceding modification of the Laudian code in July 1760. 
Henceforth Blackstone's growing activities and reputation outside Oxford, coinciding with the tory party's return from the political wilderness at George III's accession, tended to diminish his effectiveness as a university politician. In the fierce chancellorship contest in 1762 he found himself altogether on the wrong side by opposing Litchfield, who was not only ultimately successful but the candidate backed by Bute and Shelburne, those aristocratic patrons who offered Blackstone his best chance of advancement. Despite this embarrassing debacle, and his eventual departure from Oxford, Blackstone continued to be regarded there as a person of influence, although his last recorded direct intervention in an Oxford political contest, the parliamentary election of 1768, again saw the defeat of his favoured candidate. 
Like other aspects of his Oxford career, Blackstone's political activism was doubtless partly motivated by personal ambition. Yet his role in the 1762 chancellorship election hardly suggests a man driven wholly or largely by self-seeking expediency, even if some contemporaries professed difficulty in understanding just what his principles were. During the 1750s Blackstone had been closely identified with Oxford toryism and its oppositionist 'country' values, including hostility to ministerial corruption, and support for greater parliamentary independence through place bills and more frequent elections. Yet he consistently repudiated any 'Tincture of Jacobitism', observing that 'To be subservient to French Views, is no more to be wished by an Englishman, than to German' (Newdigate MSS, CR136/B1492). This tone of sturdy independence was maintained after 1760, even though Blackstone now could and did seek advancement under the crown. As he wrote to Shelburne in October 1762, explaining (but not excusing) his position in the contest for the Oxford chancellorship: 'I think it is essential to the Spirit of Liberty to follow my own Convictions' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Film 2000, MS Shelburne 35, fols. 158-9). 
Of course there was a price to be paid for acting on such assertions. Shelburne, who had attended his lectures as an undergraduate, not only brought Blackstone to Bute's notice, but vigorously promoted his former teacher's career in the opening months of the new reign. While declining nomination as chief justice of Ireland in March 1761, on the stated grounds of 'a provincial Narrowness in my Constitution, that I could rather wish to exert the little Share of Abilities I am Master of... in my own native Country', Blackstone hesitated only momentarily before accepting the offer of a House of Commons seat, for which he had been recommended to Bute by Shelburne as 'a man of business' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Film 1999, MS Shelburne 35, fol. 137). This entry to public life apparently cost Blackstone nothing: indeed he stipulated that it must not 'injure my private Fortune; which is confined within moderate Bounds' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Film 2000, MS Shelburne 35, fol. 139'r'- 'v'). By year's end he was nevertheless pointing out that the preferment he had received to date, which included a patent of precedence at the bar, equivalent to appointment as king's counsel, 'has no Emolument annexed to it' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Film 2000, MS Shelburne 35, fol. 151). When the office of chief justice of Chester went to someone else, he began pressing Shelburne for a seat on the judicial bench proper. However ambitious for a man of Blackstone's relative youth and limited Westminster Hall experience, his failure to achieve this goal until 1770 must in part reflect the withdrawal of Shelburne's support in the aftermath of the 1762 Oxford chancellorship election, as well as Blackstone's somewhat unsatisfactory parliamentary performance (see further below). Contact between the two dropped off markedly from December 1762 onwards; there is no indication that Shelburne helped him to the largely honorific position of solicitor-general to Queen Charlotte which he achieved in 1763, and Blackstone appears to have ceased approaching Shelburne altogether after October 1766, when he vainly sought assistance in recommending his cause to the new lord chancellor (Bodl. Oxf., MS Film 2000, MS Shelburne 35, fols. 153-4, 155-6, 158-9, 162-3, 168-9). While the aristocratic if financially embarrassed Bertie family were important clients, and he was also 'deeply connected' with Lord Suffolk, these ties hardly compensated for the loss of Shelburne's personal connections and influence. 
Blackstone needed preferment partly because he had been obliged to abandon his All Souls fellowship on his marriage in May 1761, the same month that he became a bencher of the Middle Temple. Regrettably little is known about his wife, Sarah Clitherow (died 1783), the elder daughter of James Clitherow of Boston House, Brentford, Middlesex, 'with whom he passed near nineteen Years, in the Enjoyment of the purest domestic and conjugal Felicity' -- and which (according to her brother) 'he used often to declare, was the happiest part of his Life' (Blackstone, 'Reports', xvi). These sentiments may well have been more than mere conventional rhetoric. Sarah and William had nine children, in whose upbringing and well-being he took a considerable and perhaps somewhat intimidating interest; Henry, his eldest surviving son, later pursued a wholly undistinguished career in Canada, but James, the second-born, eventually followed in his father's footsteps as fellow of All Souls and Vinerian professor. The judge and his wife occasionally travelled together, and having presumably learned to deal with his notoriously short temper, she reportedly objected to 'the Contraction of the Brows, & consequent Sternness of Look' in a contemporary likeness of her husband (Newdigate MSS, CR136/B1500; 'Letters', 16). 
Blackstone did not finally quit Oxford until 1766, when he resigned both his chair and the principalship of New Inn Hall, to which he had been appointed by Lord Westmorland, in belated return for his support in the 1758 chancellorship election. Even then he retained some vestigial involvements with both town and gown. As visitor on the Michel foundation of Queen's College (to which he had been formally elected in 1757), he steered the college through the legal and legislative steps required to complete an ambitious building programme and finally secure the benefits of Michel's endowment. As legal adviser to successive earls of Abingdon he sought to improve the value of their entangled family estates as well as to benefit the city and university by promoting a toll bridge over the River Thames at Swinford, and reconstructing the Botley causeway leading west out of Oxford. However, no more is heard of his larger earlier ambition to reform 'Academical Education', by eliminating 'monastic Pedantry' and adapting it 'to Gentlemen of Rank & Fortune' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Film 2000, MS Shelburne 35, fols. 151-2). 
Besides growing family responsibilities, the demands of his practice, and scholarly activities associated with the Society of Antiquaries, to which he had been elected following his learned edition of 'The Great Charter and Charter of the Forest' (1759) with its substantial 'Introductory discourse', parliamentary business also drew Blackstone away from Oxford. After a first term as member for Hindon (1761-8), Blackstone was returned in 1768 for Westbury, another Wiltshire borough, this time by the influence of his aristocratic client Lord Abingdon. Initially an infrequent and perhaps always 'an indifferent speaker', he followed Bute rather than the Rockingham ministry in opposing repeal of the 'Stamp Act' in 1766 (Namier, 96). While impressed by the substance of his contribution to this debate, one observer thought its manner 'much like that of reading a lecture in College' (P. D. G. Thomas, 'British Politics and the Stamp Act Crisis', 1975, 197). Unsurprisingly Blackstone developed an even greater aversion to parliament 'where' (as he purportedly said) 'amid the Rage of contending Parties, a Man of Moderation must expect to meet with no Quarter from any Side', than he had earlier done to the bar (Blackstone, 'Reports', xx). At the end of a long debate in May 1769 his self-acknowledged 'natural diffidence' left him wordless in the face of George Grenville's claim that his own 'Commentaries' confuted his support for John Wilkes's exclusion from parliament (Bodl. Oxf., MS Film 2000, MS Shelburne 35, fol. 153). Subsequent editions were amended to meet this objection, encouraging opposition toasts to 'the 'first' edition of Dr Blackstone's Commentaries' (G. Jones, introduction, in W. Blackstone, 'The Sovereignty of the Law: Selections from Blackstone's 'Commentaries on the Laws of England'', 1973, xx). Yet while he had largely endorsed the government stand on Wilkes -- despite having voted against general warrants in 1763, and his own claim that he 'could not intirely agree with either the Ministry or the Opposition, in their Conduct with respect to Mr Wilkes' -- his parliamentary record overall hardly justifies the charge of unprincipled place-seeking behaviour levelled by Junius in several slashing responses to Blackstone's printed attempts at self-vindication ('A letter to the author of the question stated', in W. Meredith, 'Letter to Dr Blackstone', 1770, 3). 
Blackstone's House of Commons career ended formally in February 1770, although his refusal of the office of solicitor-general the month before clearly signalled an intention to retire from public political life. While his initial parliamentary seat was, in his words at the time, 'conferred unsought, & accepted unconditionally', and he had told Shelburne as early as July 1762 that 'my ambition now rises to the Post of an English Judge', the long and bruising controversy over Wilkes must have influenced his acceptance of a puisne justice's place on the court of common pleas, together with a knighthood (Bodl. Oxf., MS Film 2000, MS Shelburne 35, fols. 153-4). In the event Blackstone agreed to respond to Justice Joseph Yates's 'Representation of his infirm State of Health' by replacing him on the busier king's bench, where he sat alongside Lord Mansfield as chief justice ('University of California Chronicle', 12/4, 1910, 346-7). But he returned to common pleas less than six months later, following Yates's death early in June. 
According to Clitherow his subject 'seemed now arrived at the Point he always wished for' (Blackstone, 'Reports', xx). Yet Blackstone's judicial reputation was somewhat mixed. As an assize judge sitting alone he purportedly had more new trials granted on cases decided before him than any of his Westminster colleagues: 'The reason was that, being extremely diffident of his opinion, he never supported it with much warmth or pertinacity in the court above if a new trial was moved for' (Prior, 431-2). Yet on appeals to the full court he often carried his brethren with him, as when in 1772 he delivered the exchequer chamber's opinion which upheld a strict construction of the venerable rule in Shelley's case in the long-running suit of 'Perrin v. Blake' (A. W. B. Simpson, 'Leading Cases in the Common Law', 1995, chap. 2). Whether with the majority or in dissent, his arguments were always careful and learned. Blackstone's judicial standing might have been enhanced if the case notes published by his executors in somewhat literal-minded accordance with his will had been better prepared for the press, thereby giving less occasion for Mansfield's remark that 'Mr Justice Blackstone's Reports are not very accurate' (J. S. Waterman, 'Mansfield and Blackstone's 'Commentaries'', 'University of Chicago Law Review', 1, 1934, 555-7). It is also possible that in reporting his own decisions Blackstone erred on the side of excessive modesty (H. J. Hanbury, 'Blackstone as judge', 'American Journal of Legal History', 3, 1959, 26). 
In criminal matters Blackstone displayed characteristic concern 'to keep strictly up to Forms' (Blackstone, 'Reports', xxvii), even when extending 'a Degree of Indulgence' to bail a prisoner from York gaol, deputing a Wallingford attorney to act as deputy clerk of assize for the northern circuit in order to draft the necessary recognizance ('Letters of Sir William Blackstone', 364-5). In 1771 he showed no trace of compassion towards 'a bold artful Man' sentenced to hang for returning from transportation ('I saw nothing in him that made him an Object of Mercy'); but much of his energy and political skills during these years were devoted to the cause of penal reform (BL, Add. MS 61674, fol. 69). As early as April 1770 Blackstone proposed statutory amendments to clarify the law relating to transportation (E. Sussex RO, SAS/RF 18/122-4). Then, in consultation with his former pupil the MP William Eden, he drafted a 'Convict Bill' in 1776, providing for the establishment of 'Penitentiary Houses', or prisons as an alternative to transportation; over the next three years Blackstone 'spared neither Time nor Pains' to further these proposals, and after the 'Penitentiary Act' finally passed in 1779 he continued to work for its implementation. Another successful lobbying campaign, which again relied heavily on Eden and other political contacts, as well as his own 'Industry and Attention' (Blackstone, 'Reports', xxii-xxiii), eventually secured legislation to augment the salaries paid to the puisne judges, and hence their independence from the administration. 
Besides additions and corrections to the five successive new editions of the 'Commentaries' published between 1770 and 1778, Blackstone also found time for 'Poetical Criticism' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. c.15, fol. 21), some fruits of which were subsequently included in Edward Malone's 'Supplement to the Edition of Shakespeare's Plays' (1780) and an 'Investigation of the quarrel between Pope and Addison' published in the second edition of Andrew Kippis's 'Biographia Britannica' (1779-93). But his mental energies were outrunning his physical powers. After a partial breakdown in 1758, the last twenty years of Blackstone's life were marked by frequent attacks of gout and vertigo, to which growing corpulence, dislike of physical exercise, and what one contemporary categorized as his 'temperate use' of port all doubtless contributed (Boswell, 'Life', 4.91). In December 1779 'a violent Shortness of Breath' was temporarily relieved by his physicians, but a second attack early next year in London 'baffled all the Art of Medicine', and led to his death, presumably of congestive heart failure, in London on 14 February 1780 at the age of fifty-six (Blackstone, 'Reports', xxiii). 
Sir William Blackstone was buried in the family vault he had built in the parish church of St Peter's, Wallingford, the reconstruction of which was yet another project of his final years. His will (PROB 11/1061, fols. 101'v'-105'v') appointed his 'dear wife' Sarah as executor, alongside her brother James Clitherow. Besides leaving mourning rings to a wide circle of relatives, and his professional library to the first of his sons to take up the law, Blackstone bequeathed a small number of manuscript and early printed law books to All Souls College, together with his collection of the works of William Prynne. Although he was said to have made over $14,000 from his lectures and the 'Commentaries', the full value of his estate is unknown (Prior, 431). 
The influence of Blackstone's 'Commentaries' is difficult to exaggerate. Twenty-three successive English and Irish editions had appeared by 1854, together with a plethora of digests and extracts, directed mostly at law students, but also adapted for school use, and the education of young ladies; 'The Comic Blackstone' (1844 and later editions) was compiled from instalments first published in 'Punch'. There were translations into French, German, Italian, and Russian (vol. 1 only), while Blackstone's 'Commentaries' continued to represent England's common law throughout the British imperial diaspora for more than a century after their author's death. The 'Commentaries' long dominated legal education in North America, where nearly 100 editions and abridgements had been produced by 1900. Blackstone's other legal, historical, and literary writings received little attention, just as the life of their author has been largely approached via, and overshadowed by, his greatest work. 
The immediate fame of both text and author scarcely precluded criticism. By modifying several passages on the civil disabilities of dissenters, Blackstone showed himself anxious to accommodate complaints from their spokesmen Philip Furneaux and Joseph Priestley (K. Haakonssen, ed., 'Enlightenment and Religion: Rational Dissent in Eighteenth-Century Britain', 1996, 191-2). But he left unanswered Jeremy Bentham's 'Fragment on Government' (1776), which so effectively portrayed him as a confused and shallow apologist for the 'status quo' that his intellectual and political reputation had barely began to recover before the early twentieth century. However, it is now widely recognized that, in targeting Blackstone's shortcomings as a legal theorist, Bentham deliberately ignored his prime aim and achievement, which was to expound the state of English law in his own day, not to justify it in abstract terms. Re-evaluation of Blackstone's life and work has been hampered by a lack of personal papers, the bulk and diversity of his writings, and his tendency to self-effacement. Recent scholarship has none the less broken much new ground, so there may yet be attained a more balanced and realistic portrait of this ambitious, complex, and multi-talented representative of the English Enlightenment. 


@@@@@


doc= 2537


Blackwall, Anthony (bap. 1672, d. 1730), classical scholar and schoolmaster, was baptized on 17 July 1672 at Kirk Ireton, Derbyshire, the son of Anthony Blackwall, of Blackwall, a hamlet in that parish. His sister Elizabeth was also baptized there, on 11 May 1674. Having been educated at Derby grammar school he was admitted sizar at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 13 September 1690; he graduated BA in 1695 and proceeded MA in 1698. In 1697 he was appointed headmaster of Derby grammar school and lecturer of All Saints', Derby. He was presented to the vicarage of Elvaston, Derbyshire, in 1699, and held it until 1723. 
Blackwall was twice married. He and his first wife, whose maiden name was Toplis, had one son, Anthony, who graduated BA from Emmanuel College in 1722. His second wife was the widow of Thomas Cantrell (1649-1698), who was Blackwall's predecessor at Derby School. They had four sons and one daughter: Henry (died 1728), fellow of Emmanuel College; Robert ('b'. 'c'.1704), a dragoon; John ('bap'. 1707, died 1762), attorney at Stoke Golding; William ('b'. 'c'.1708), who died young; and Mary, who married John Pickering on 20 September 1733. 
Blackwall established his credentials as a classical scholar in 1706, when he published an edition of the verse of Theognis, with a translation into Latin; it was prefaced by an address in Greek to Joshua Barnes, professor of Greek at Oxford. His next work, 'An Introduction to the Classics' (1718), was written for his pupils and proved to have a long shelf-life; it reached a sixth edition in 1746 and was reissued with additions by William Mavor, schoolmaster at Woodstock, as 'Blackwall's Introduction to the Classics' in 1809. 
In 1722 Blackwall was appointed headmaster of Market Bosworth grammar school, in Leicestershire, and he brought with him his assistant master from Derby, the Revd John Bradbury. He immediately set about expanding the school. A new gable and penthouse was built over the street door in 1723 and the number of pupils rose to an average of seventy. Among his pupils were Richard Dawes, classicist, and Sir Henry Atkins, who presented him to the rectory of Clapham on 12 October 1726. At both Derby and Market Bosworth Blackwall taught from his own Latin grammar, which he was prevailed upon to publish, albeit anonymously, in 1728 as 'A new Latin grammar: being a short, clear, and easy introduction of young scholars to the knowledge of the Latin tongue'. His grammar was poorly regarded by Samuel Johnson, who said of him that 'By endeavouring to make the rules of Grammar more simple than was possible, he has only shown that the 'easier any subject is in its own nature, the harder it is to make it more easy by explanation'' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 1.133). 
There was an equally mixed critical reception to Blackwall's final work, 'The sacred classics defended and illustrated, or, An essay humbly offered towards proving the purity, propriety, and true eloquence of the writers of the New Testament' (2 pts, 1725). Praised by Philip Doddridge and Thomas Hartwell Horne, its detractors included Edward Bickersteth, William Orme, and Samuel Clarke. John Gilbert Cooper dismissed Blackwall's pretensions to lasting literary merit when he wrote that he was: 'grammatically master of the two dead languages, Greek and Latin, and had 'read over' all the ancient authors in both; but, not having by nature of acquisition that happy taste of distinguishing beauties, nor a digestion to assimilate the sense of others into his own understanding, his conceptions were as crude as his address and style were unpleasing. (ibid., 1.131)' Blackwall's second wife had died by 8 June 1728, when he drew up his final will. He was revising the second volume of 'The Sacred Classics' until within a few weeks of his death, at the schoolhouse in Market Bosworth on 8 April 1730. 


@@@@@


doc= 2538


Blackwall, John (1790-1881), zoologist, was born on 20 January 1790, at 14 St Ann's Square, Manchester, the son of Thomas Blackwall, an Irish linen merchant. He initially worked in partnership with his father, but at the same time developed a keen interest in natural history. In 1821 he joined the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, and in the same year published a note on a method of determining the 'mean temperature of the natural day'. He then published a paper in which he developed an argument of John Gough, on the migration of birds. He wrote about fifteen papers on ornithology and a number on a variety of other subjects. In 1827 he was elected fellow of the Linnean Society, in whose 'Transactions' he published his first researches on spiders, a subject he was to make his own. In 1834 his papers were collected into one volume and published as 'Researches in Zoology' (2nd edn, 1873). He was married and had a son, also called John. 
In 1833 Blackwall gave up his business career to dedicate himself entirely to his hobby. He moved to north Wales, and settled at Hendre House, Llanrwst, Denbighshire. With extraordinary dedication and skill, and with the minimum of artificial aids beyond a small lens, he fully described over 300 spiders; 67 of these were new to science. His work was set out in his 'History of the Spiders of Great Britain and Ireland' (1861-4), which was beautifully illustrated with plates showing 272 different spiders. The work was delayed for ten years by the illness of the artist, Tiffen West, whom Blackwall curiously does not mention. 
Blackwall continued to work until he was eighty-six, when failing eyesight compelled him to stop. He was a recluse who worked alone, unfortunately lacking colleagues in Britain and having little contact with continental scientists. He died at his home at Llanrwst, on 11 May 1881, one of the oldest members of the Linnean Society, of the Manchester 'Lit. and Phil.', and of the British Association. 


@@@@@


doc= 2539


Blackwell, Alexander (bap. 1709, d. 1747), agricultural improver and government agent in Sweden, was baptized in Aberdeen on 10 October 1709. He was the son of Thomas Blackwell (1660?-1728), professor of theology and principal at Marischal College in Aberdeen, and his wife, Christian (died 1749), daughter of John Johnstoun. His brother, Thomas Blackwell (1701-1757), was also a professor and principal at Marischal College. Alexander appears to have been the 'black sheep' of his family and little detail is known of his early years, but he is said to have studied at both Aberdeen and Edinburgh universities before moving on to Leiden in the Netherlands. There he apparently studied under Herman Boerhaave in 1725. During his time on the continent he is thought to have travelled to France and Portugal. Although he subsequently became known as a doctor of medicine he does not appear to have sat any exams or obtained an official diploma. By 1730 Blackwell was living in London where he worked as a corrector for the printer Mr Wilkins. During this time he married Elizabeth Blachrie ('bap'. 1707, died 1758) ['see 'Blackwell, Elizabeth], the daughter of an Aberdeen merchant, who either wrote or undertook the illustrations for 'A Curious Herbal' published in 1737. Blackwell's attempts to establish his own print house resulted in a two-year spell in a debtor's prison when he went bankrupt. Elizabeth allegedly bailed him out of prison by selling illustrations. 
Blackwell then turned his attention to agricultural studies and was employed by the duke of Chandos as a superintendent of works at his house, Cannons, at Stanmore, Middlesex. In 1741 Blackwell published 'A New Method of Improving Cold, Wet, and Clayey Grounds' on developing soil through its fertilization with lime, or marling, of which there is apparently no surviving copy. This work became known in Sweden, where the botanist Carl von Linne mentioned it. Around this time Blackwell met the Swedish minister in London, K. M. Wasenburg, and made such an impact that he was invited to Sweden. It seems that Blackwell was losing favour with the duke of Chandos and probably welcomed the opportunity to start afresh. 
In May 1742 Blackwell arrived in Sweden; after visiting Nicolaus Sahlgren, a director of the Swedish East India Company, in Goteborg he moved on to Jonas Alstromer, a founder of the Academy of Sciences and a major industrialist who had spent seventeen years living and working in London, in Allingsas. Blackwell travelled through south-western Sweden with J. Carlson, Alstromer's brother-in-law, studying local agricultural practices before returning to Allingsas where he conducted his own experiments in both agriculture and animal husbandry. 
Blackwell came to the attention of the Swedish king, Frederick I, and submitted a proposal for employment as an agricultural and animal husbandry improver in November and December 1743. His job was largely based on importing sheep from Great Britain. He seems to have found royal favour, for a letter of 28 May 1744 provided a refund for Blackwell's travel expenses and proposed an annual salary of 2000 daler from 1 June. In addition he was given tax exemption, the promise of a 1000 daler annual pension for his wife or children on his death, and was provided with the royal garden of Allestad in 1745 to conduct his studies. Blackwell also published an article in the same year which was sharply criticized by the learned circles who cried plagiarism. Blackwell had similar problems with his reputation as a doctor in Stockholm, as his Swedish peers questioned his lack of medical understanding. Despite this he was apparently appointed royal physician to Frederick I in January 1745, although no proof of this appointment has been found. 
Blackwell suddenly became involved in the political intrigues of the Swedish court which divided into two factions of 'hats' and 'caps' following the election of Adolf Frederick as the heir to the throne over the Danish crown prince in 1743. Frederick I's party, the 'caps', looked toward the British court for support, whereas Adolf Frederick's followers tended toward France and Russia. At this point Blackwell appears to have made contact with the British minister in Denmark, Walter Titley, perhaps hoping to enter Danish royal service. He was certainly losing favour in Sweden, and in March 1747 was summoned to the court to provide evidence of his work. At his audience with Frederick I Blackwell suggested instead that Queen Louise of Denmark, who was a British princess, could obtain $100,000 sterling from her father for Sweden's use, so long as Frederick allied himself with the king of Denmark. Frederick sent him to consult other members of his council, and Blackwell allegedly suggested ways of destroying the influence of the 'hats' party. Further details of the plan involved transferring two Swedish regiments, largely consisting of the nobility of the 'hats' party, into British and Danish service to remove them from the court and political influence. 
However, Karl Gustav Tessin, councillor, president of both the chancellery and the college of war, and a supporter of the 'hats' faction, became aware of this plan. Blackwell was subsequently arrested on suspicion of attempting to overthrow the king and government of Sweden. At the same time a letter arrived from the Swedish minister in Copenhagen claiming that the Danish king was arming for war. This later was proven false, but caused enough consternation to seal Blackwell's fate. Blackwell was three times subjected to torture in attempts to gain a confession. On 10 June 1747 he was sentenced to death, a sentence confirmed by the state council one month later. Blackwell was executed in Stockholm on 9 August 1747. 
A letter, allegedly written by Blackwell and delivered on the day of his death, was published in London claiming that he had worked in Sweden as a doctor and that he was about to die falsely charged with treason. The account of Blackwell's life which accompanies this letter differs significantly from the facts generally accepted, casting doubt on its authenticity. Even a contemporary publication provided little correct information, and the real story of Blackwell remains unclear. Blackwell's trial and all the documents relating to it were kept secret until the mid-nineteenth century. There is, however, no proof to date that Blackwell was engaged in subterfuge with any foreign party, and it is most likely that he was simply used as a scapegoat to bolster Tessin's position at court. 


@@@@@


doc= 2540


Blackwell, Elizabeth (bap. 1707, d. 1758), botanical author and artist, was baptized on 22 June 1707 at St Nicholas, Aberdeen, the sixth daughter of a prosperous stocking merchant, William Blachrie ('b'. 'c'.1669) and his wife, Isobel Fordyce. Elizabeth married her second cousin Alexander Blackwell (bap. 1709, d. 1747), reportedly eloping to London about 1728. Elizabeth's dowry enabled her husband to establish a printing business at the Atlas, opposite Catherine Street in the Strand, about 1730, but the business foundered and Alexander was incarcerated in the debtors' prison by 1734. Elizabeth decided to extricate her husband from his financial difficulties by applying her artistic talents to drawing and painting lifelike reproductions of medicinal plants. Encouragement came from Sir Hans Sloane, Richard Mead, and apothecary Isaac Rand, director of the botanical garden at Chelsea. Elizabeth took lodgings at 4 Swan Walk in Chelsea, close to the garden where she would find the living models for her botanical drawings. She was assisted in her task by Philip Miller, head of the garden's staff. 
Elizabeth Blackwell's 'A curious herbal: containing five hundred cuts, of the most useful plants, which are now used in the practice of physick' has been described as 'among the earliest publications on botany by a woman... links an older female tradition of herbal work with an emergent female tradition of botanical illustration' (Shteir, 40). Before her work on the 'Curious Herbal' was completed, Elizabeth's son, William, died, and was buried at Chelsea on 3 May 1736. After finishing the drawings Elizabeth engraved them on copper herself, and coloured the 500 prints individually by hand. Alexander assisted with textual translation. Initially published in weekly parts, the first volume, which contained commendations from the Royal College of Physicians, was completed in 1737, the second in 1738 or early 1739. Among those to whom the volumes were dedicated was Elizabeth's uncle by marriage, John Johnstoun, professor of medicine at the University of Glasgow, as well as Richard Mead, Isaac Rand, and other luminaries of the medical profession. The book enjoyed considerable success in the eighteenth century, selling for about $5 for both volumes. A woman of many talents, Elizabeth was personally involved in the accounting and bookkeeping tasks associated with the marketing of her publication, which successfully rescued the family from debt. Although Blackwell's original edition has been seen by some as inferior to the augmented German version published in Nuremburg by J. Trew between 1757 and 1773, it remains aesthetically superior. The text is delicately engraved in her elegant hand (as opposed to the heavy print of the German text) and boasts a more sensible arrangement, with drawings closely integrated with the relevant text. Blackwell's format, as well as the English text, invited lay readership. Elizabeth remained in England when her husband travelled to Sweden in 1742, the year she bore her second son, Alexander, who was baptized at St Paul's, Covent Garden, Westminster, on 7 September 1742. Widowed in 1747 by the execution in Sweden of her husband, after he had become involved in a political intrigue, Elizabeth lived until October 1758. She was buried in the churchyard at Chelsea Old Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 2541


Blackwell, George (1547-1612), archpriest, was born in Middlesex. According to Robert Charnock, his father was 'a pewterer by Newgate in London', perhaps the Thomas Blackwell (died 1553) who was a warden of the Pewter Company in 1547-8. On 27 May 1562 Blackwell was admitted scholar of Trinity College, Oxford, graduating BA in 1563. In 1565 he became probationer and in 1566 perpetual fellow of the college, and in 1567 he was instituted MA. In 1571 six fellows resigned or were ejected from Trinity due to their conservative religious views, among them Blackwell. He moved first to Gloucester Hall, then a refuge for Catholics, and in 1574 to the English College, Douai. It must have been about this time that he met Robert Bellarmine (then professor of theology in Louvain), who in 1607 mentioned having met Blackwell almost forty years before. In 1575 Blackwell was ordained and, on 20 October, graduated bachelor of sacred theology. On 2 November 1576 he left Douai to return to England as a missioner. Two months later it was reported in the English College that his erudition and piety were already having a favourable effect in England, but letters that reached Rheims on 1 December 1578 reported his capture. In 1602 Charnock wrote that 'About twenty years since... you were imprisoned in London; but your brother, being the bishop of London's register, procured your release'. This would have been William Blackwell, perhaps the same who matriculated at Christ Church in 1554-5 and graduated BCL in 1562. 
The Council of Trent's condemnation in 1562 of attendance at Church of England services was not published until 1593, and in the meantime a number of Catholic opinions that allowed attendance in order to escape the rigour of the English laws were in circulation. In the winter of 1580-81 Blackwell prepared the notes from which Robert Persons wrote 'A Brief Discours Contayning Certayne Reasons why Catholiques Refuse to Goe to Church', one of the most influential books persuading Catholics to recusancy. For seven or eight years Blackwell lodged in the house of a Mrs Meany in Westminster, in constant fear of capture. On one occasion, when he was concealed in a priest's hole, with guards posted in the house to starve him out, he was rescued by the intervention of the countess of Arundel and Surrey. 
After the death of Cardinal Allen (1594) the English mission lacked authoritative leadership, and serious divisions arose between the Jesuits and those secular priests unfavourably disposed towards them. The tensions led to accusations of maladministration of funds against the Jesuit superior Henry Garnet, for whose propriety George Blackwell vouched. To put an end to such dissensions, the disciplinary and financial aspects of the Jesuit and secular missions were divided in 1598. Cardinal Cajetan, protector of the English nation, on 7 March 1598 issued letters appointing George Blackwell archpriest of the secular clergy of England and Scotland. Blackwell's instructions ordered him to work in close consultation with the Jesuit superiors. The English College in Rome was already under Jesuit direction, and in 1598 Thomas Worthington, known to be favourably disposed towards the society, became president of the English College in Douai. The institutions of the English secular clergy were thus controlled by Jesuits or by priests willing to work closely with them, and Blackwell's appointment became the focus of discontent. Feelings of personal slight also played a role: among the seculars there were a number of priests more prominent than him either for their birth or for their erudition, and who had experience in dealing with the questions of conscience arising in the spiritual direction of a substantial household, while Blackwell had long 'had charge onely of a widow gentlewoman' (Law, 1.90-98). 
A substantial minority of the secular priests signed a petition which was carried to Rome by William Bishop and Robert Charnock, appealing to the pope to overturn Cardinal Cajetan's arrangements and appoint a bishop. In March 1599 Blackwell suspended three priests for opposing his appointment. On 6 April Clement VIII issued a bull confirming Blackwell's appointment and powers, to which the appellants submitted. Blackwell then insisted that those who had publicly refused to recognize his authority were guilty of schism, and could not carry out their priestly duties until absolved. On 3 May 1600 the faculty of theology of the University of Paris delivered a judgment that the sin of schism had not been committed, but on 29 May Blackwell decreed that this judgment was prejudicial to the dignity of the Holy See and should not be published in England. A second appeal to Rome ensued, drawn up on 17 November. In the winter of 1600-01 Blackwell suspended at least ten priests. On 17 August 1601 the pope issued a breve upholding Blackwell's appointment, criticizing his intransigence, and prohibiting all further controversy on the issue, but it was not promulgated in England until 26 January 1602. In the interval John Mush, Christopher Bagshaw, and Dr Bishop published works attacking Blackwell, and his friends wrote in his defence. 
It was probably about this time that Blackwell requested general prayers for his own intention, which was later revealed to be the safe delivery of the Infanta Isabella, then rumoured to be with child. A report to Sir Robert Cecil dated 27 August 1601 gave a description of Blackwell's person and movements as: 'about 50 years of age, his head brownish, his beard more black, cut after the fashion of a spade, of stature indifferent, and somewhat thick, decently attired... Termly he is in London and at this instant as near to Framingham as he well may be ('Salisbury MSS', 11.363-5)' while in October he was reported as being 'on the Borders'. When in London he lived in the town house of Viscount Montague. 
In September 1601 arrangements were made with the privy council that four imprisoned priests should be banished from the realm so that they could go to Rome to pursue the second appeal, the papal rejection of which was not yet known in England. Richard Bancroft was particularly eager for their success, arguing in letters to Cecil that 'all the Catholics almost that are in England' accepted Blackwell's authority, and that 'To be subject to Blackwell is to be subject to Parsons, the vilest traitor that lives, and consequently to the King of Spain' ('Salisbury MSS', 11.318, 12. 204). In response to this 'third' appeal, Clement VIII on 5 October 1602 censured Blackwell's tactlessness and revoked the instruction that he act in consultation with the Jesuit superiors, instead ordering him to communicate no business to members of the society. This completed the institutional separation of the secular and Jesuit missions, and tempers very quickly cooled. In May 1603 Blackwell had a meeting with Mush and Colleton in which a spirit of reconciliation was evident. At James's accession Blackwell wrote a letter to the clergy commanding them 'to labour to give stay and restraint to all bad attempts' against the new government, and in June, through the mediation of John Gage, he revealed the existence of the Bye plot to the authorities. In October he was dangerously ill, and the nuncio in Brussels wrote to the cardinal secretary of state about possible successors, but he soon recovered his health. 
Throughout 1604 and 1605 Blackwell exercised his authority unimpeded by disputes. As soon as he became aware, on 7 November 1605, of the Gunpowder Plot he wrote a letter condemning the plot and ordering his priests to instruct all Catholics to behave themselves peaceably in civil matters; on the same day he wrote to Paul V requesting that the pope issue a letter to the same effect, which he did on 28 November. When a new oath of allegiance was formulated as part of the 'Act for the Better Discovery and Repressing of Popish Recusants' (1606), Blackwell wrote and spoke to the clergy in favour of taking it, partly basing himself on the pope's call for civil obedience. He was, however, contradicted by Paul V, who condemned the oath. Bancroft, who drafted the oath with the advice of the former Jesuit Sir Christopher Perkins, had framed it in such words that divisions among Catholics were bound to arise. In particular, the requirement to 'abhor, detest and abjure as impious and heretical' the position that the pope could depose the king and encourage his subjects to murder him, was a rejection of murder to which any Catholic could subscribe, but in phrases which might seem to give the king of England the authority to define heresy, and in such a way as to declare heretics several prominent Catholic theologians who maintained the papal deposing power (without the authority to order murder) as a probable opinion. The archpriest, and a number of other Catholic priests, persisted in defending the licitness of the oath despite the papal condemnation and the contrary opinion of many theologians. 
On 24 June 1607 Blackwell, 'comming fromwarde the Charterhouse', where a Mr Leake rented rooms in which some of the archpriest's papers were stored, was apprehended by the pursuivant John Wragg. He was committed first to the Gatehouse in Westminster, then to the Clink in Southwark. Between 25 June and 4 July he was taken to Lambeth Palace seven times to be questioned on his opinion of the oath, and on 4 July he took the oath and wrote a letter to the English clergy exhorting them to do likewise. Cardinal Bellarmine on 18 September wrote a letter to Blackwell deploring his subscription to an oath 'so craftily composed, that no man can detest Treason against the King, and make profession of his Civill subjection, but he must be constrayned perfidiously to denie the Primacie of the Apostolike See' (James I, 39). Blackwell's reply to Bellarmine relied heavily on the distinctions between thesis (a general principle) and hypothesis (a particular application), and between 'de fide, formaliter' (a formal issue of doctrine) and 'de eo quod est fidei, materialiter' (a material issue arising in connection with doctrine), arguing in particular that the contested passage of the oath was not a rejection of the papal deposing power, but only of certain inferences which might be drawn from it, and of its application to England in current circumstances. He further maintained that he had 'not wavered... in the least point, which certainly and definitely may appertaine to the sublime Majestie, and supreme authoritie of the See Apostolicke... in defence of whose Supremacie in spirituall causes, he is readie to yeeld his life' ('A Large Examination... of M. George Blakwell', sig. e2'v'; p. 33). 
The position of an Oxford logician was not the clear statement of adherence or rejection that the government and the papacy required. Paul V repeated his condemnation of the oath on 22 September 1607 and, despairing of Blackwell's retraction, on 1 February 1608 deposed him as archpriest and appointed George Birkhead in his stead. The terms in which Blackwell defended the oath appeared to the civil authorities so qualified that he was interrogated on the matter throughout February 1608, and was kept imprisoned until his death in the Clink on 25 January 1612 (Questier, 136). He maintained to the end that his understanding of the oath of allegiance accorded both with the meaning of the words enacted by parliament and with Catholic doctrine. His conduct towards the appellant clergy and over the oath led the Jesuit historian John Hungerford Pollen to characterize him, perhaps harshly, as 'A man who in easier circumstances might have borne the weight of ecclesiastical dignity creditably, but who was unequal to the strain of those arduous times' (Pollen, 99). 


@@@@@


doc= 2542


Blackwell, John (1797-1840), Welsh-language poet and writer, was born at Ponterwyl, Mold, Flintshire, the son of Peter Blackwell, collier, and his wife, Mary. He received no formal education, and at the age of eleven he was apprenticed as a shoemaker with William Kirkham. From an early age, however, he had shown the greatest avidity for books, and he carried off several prizes offered for poems and essays in the Welsh language, including an award at the eisteddfod at Mold in 1823 for an 'awdl' (ode), 'Maes Garmon'. Such activity brought him to the attention of several gentlemen and clergymen, who created a fund for his education. In January 1824 he was sent to Thomas Richards to prepare for university entrance, and in December he entered Jesus College, Oxford; he took the degree of BA in 1828. In the autumn of the latter year, at the royal Denbigh eisteddfod, a prize was awarded him for his beautiful Welsh elegy on the death of Bishop Heber. During his time at Oxford he had read everything that he could find on the history and literature of Wales in the Bodleian and the college library. 
In 1829 Blackwell was ordained to the curacy of Holywell, Caernarvonshire. During his residence there he was a principal contributor to the columns of the 'Gwyliedydd', a periodical conducted on the principles of the established church, and in 1832 he won a prize medal at the Beaumaris eisteddfod. In 1833 he was presented by Lord Chancellor Brougham to the living of Maenordeifi in Pembrokeshire. Soon afterwards, at the request of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, he became editor of an illustrated magazine in the Welsh language, entitled 'Y Cylchgrawn', and he conducted it with remarkable ability. On 30 July 1839 he married Matilda, daughter of Jonas Dear, tidewaiter, at Holywell church. Blackwell died on 19 May 1840 at St Mary Street, Cardigan, and was buried at Maenordeifi; a tablet to his memory was placed on the wall of the church there. His poems and essays, with a memoir of his life, were edited by Griffith Edwards of Minera, in a volume entitled 'Ceinion Alun' ('The beauties of Alun'; 1851), Alun being Blackwell's bardic name. 


@@@@@


doc= 2543


Blackwell, Thomas (1660?-1728), Church of Scotland minister and college head, was probably born in Glasgow, the son of a covenanting calenderer, Thomas Blackwell, and his wife, Janet Knox. He was educated at the University of Glasgow, where he apparently earned an MA in 1684. He was licensed to preach on 23 February 1693 and received a call to become a minister from the presbytery of Paisley on 5 April 1693, but his ordination was delayed until 28 August 1694. Blackwell took over the first charge in the Abbey parish, and it would seem that while he was in Paisley he married Christian Johnstoun (died 1749), the daughter of the Glasgow physician John Johnstoun. The couple reputedly had twelve children, of whom four sons and three daughters survived into adulthood, including Thomas Blackwell the younger (1701-1757), who also distinguished himself as principal of Marischal College and a leading Aberdonian man of letters, and Alexander Blackwell (bap. 1709, d. 1747), agricultural improver and government agent in Sweden. 
Blackwell transferred to the second charge of St Nicholas Church, Aberdeen, on 9 October 1700, and gradually emerged as a prominent figure in the town. He was made a burgess and in 1716 became patron of Aberdeen's seven incorporated trades. In 1710 he made his mark on the republic of learning with the publication in Edinburgh of two related volumes: 'Ratio sacra, or, An appeal unto the rational world, about the reasonableness of revealed religion' (dedicated to the lord provost and town council of Aberdeen) and 'Schema sacrum, or, A Sacred Scheme of Natural and Revealed Religion' (dedicated to Sir Hugh Dalrymple, lord president of the court of session). In both works Blackwell sought to demonstrate the congruence of revealed religion with what he considered to be the genuine dictates of reason. Although his sense of the reasonableness of religion was very different from that of the English latitudinarians, he seems to have been receptive to the writings of Edward Stillingfleet, for in his attack on deism he invokes the refutation of Cartesianism and other heterodox philosophical systems added to later editions of Stillingfleet's 'Origines sacrae'. Given the deep religious divisions which then existed in Aberdeen and the north-east of Scotland, the 'Ratio sacra' was a highly polemical work because Blackwell took aim not only at atheism and irreligion, but also at the Quakers, who were a significant local presence, and at the French mystic Madame Bourignon, whose tenets appealed to many episcopalians in the region. 
Because of his staunch defence of presbyterianism Blackwell was appointed professor of divinity at Marischal College, Aberdeen, and preacher at Grey Friars Church on 18 December 1711. Beginning in 1710 he also became increasingly involved in the affairs of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. In 1711 the moderator of the assembly, William Carstares, chose Blackwell and the Revd Robert Baillie of Inverness to accompany him to London in an attempt to stave off legislation which threatened to destroy presbyterian hegemony in Scotland. But to the delight of Scottish episcopalians, the lobbying of the trio failed to stop the tory ministry from pushing through the 'Toleration Act' and the 'Act of Patronage' in 1712. While in London, Blackwell additionally acted as an agent for the Aberdeen town council, and reported back on matters of political interest. He returned home in June or July 1712 following the publication in London of his tract on pulpit oratory, 'Methodus evangelica', which he had written as a respite from kirk affairs. 
In the Jacobite rising which began in September 1715 Blackwell was the only member of the Marischal faculty who remained loyal to George I. He was duly rewarded by the royal commission of visitation appointed in 1717 to purge Marischal of residual Jacobitism; the commissioners retained Blackwell as professor of divinity, and he was confirmed as the new principal by the crown on 30 September 1717. He proved an effective manager of the college, although he provoked the opposition of some of his junior colleagues, and his continuing attacks on episcopalianism prompted a minor pamphlet war in 1722. Blackwell died in Aberdeen in February 1728. 


@@@@@


doc= 2544


Blackwell, Thomas (1701-1757), classical scholar and historian, was born on 4 August 1701 in the city of Aberdeen, second son of Thomas Blackwell (1660?-1728), one of the ministers of Aberdeen, later professor of divinity, and his wife, Christian Johnstoun (died 1749). His younger brother was Alexander Blackwell. He was educated at the grammar school of Aberdeen and studied Greek and philosophy at Marischal College, of which his father had become principal in 1717. He graduated AM in 1718 and was presented to the chair of Greek at Marischal in 1723. He went on to teach a number of important figures including a future principal, George Campbell, Alexander Gerard, and James Beattie, and was an important influence on the poet James Macpherson, the compiler of 'Ossian'. In October 1748 Blackwell was appointed principal of Marischal College, and introduced a programme of reforms to modernize the curriculum, including a new class taught by himself in ancient history, geography, and chronology. He married Barbara Black (died 1793), daughter of an Aberdeen merchant, probably in 1749; they had no children. In 1752 he took the degree of doctor of laws. As principal, Blackwell was active in promoting the union of Marischal and King's colleges to form a single university in Aberdeen, a project which came to fruition in the fusion of 1860. 
Blackwell's main fame is as a writer whose books -- 'An Enquiry into the Life and Writings of Homer' (1735), 'Letters Concerning Mythology' (1748), and 'Memoirs of the Court of Augustus' (3 vols., 1753-63) -- were pioneering studies in their fields and mark him as a major figure of the Scottish Enlightenment. The 'Enquiry' was published anonymously in 1735 and went to five subsequent editions. Blackwell considered why Homer had been the supreme epic poet and concluded that his achievement was explicable almost entirely in terms of natural forces. Homer was the outcome of a specific historical context, social organization, geography, and climate, which combined to shape the culture he represented and which provided an ethos uniquely favourable to epic poetry. The argument was that culture was learned, not inherent; it was the basic means of organizing social institutions and was part of a continually changing process -- ideas which were to become the cornerstones of modern cultural anthropology. Blackwell distinguished four periods in Greek history: settlement, growth in civilization, cultural maturity, and decline. A key point of the analysis was the idea of uneven development, an overlap between high civilization in the centres of Greek culture, with a continuation of relative barbarism and its attendant heroic values elsewhere. Advances in civilization brought gains in wealth and sophistication, but also introduced artifice and corruption, a loss of the heroic simplicity and clear moral vision that had distinguished earlier periods. Blackwell declared: 'I am in the case of a noble Historian [Herodotus], who having related the constant Superiority his 'Greeks' had over the Inhabitants of the 'Assyrian' Vales, concludes 'That it has not been given by the Gods, to one and the same Country, to produce rich Crops and warlike Men:' Neither indeed does it seem to be given to one and the same Kingdom, to be thoroughly civilized, and afford proper Subjects for Poetry... Whoever reflects upon the Rise and Fall of States, will find, that along with their Manners, their 'Language' too accompanies them both in their Growth and Decay... It is the 'different Periods' or Steps, naturally succeeding in the 'Progression of Manners', that can only account for the Succession of Wit and Literature. ('An Enquiry into the Life and Writings of Homer', 1735, 26-8, 36, 77)' In the early stages of society language was naturally bold and metaphorical, so that utterance had a rude and energetic quality which it later lost. This was fostered by the clannish nature of early Greek society which limited the growth of centralized power. Blackwell considered the latter inimical to high cultural achievement because of its tendency to foster an artificial 'courtly' style which checked spontaneity and dampened the vigorous localism and particularity characteristic of early poetry at its best, a point he was to develop in his study of Virgil in 'Memoirs of the Court of Augustus'. Homer was peculiarly favoured by circumstance, since he had appeared at the beginning of a new cultural phase, but still had personal experience of the old heroic ethos. Although a member of a powerful bardic class, he had been born poor, and could therefore draw upon the rich pool of popular traditions sustained by the common people, which Blackwell regarded as the ultimate source of all literary creativity. Homer had been a strolling bard, a master improviser whose songs had been committed to writing long after his death: the unitary written text being a late development resulting from deliberate editorial intervention in a previously oral process. A set of unique socio-cultural circumstances therefore made Homer's achievement possible, but also unrepeatable. 

'Letters Concerning Mythology' was published, also anonymously, in 1748. The earlier of the nineteen letters came from another hand, but Blackwell completed numbers seven and eight and wrote the remainder of the series. For almost two millennia the mythology of the ancient world had been attacked by Euhemeristic critics who regarded it as a fabulous form of history and saw the gods as deified priests and kings; by Christian apologists to whom the gods were thinly disguised demons; and by modern rationalists who dismissed the whole affair as merely absurd. Blackwell took a different view. He saw mythology as a humane and civilizing influence, arguing that the system possessed enduring significance, and concluding that, interpreted with sympathetic regard to its original allegorical intention, it was a major key to the world-picture of classical antiquity. While 'the old Divinity' had been accepted quite literally by the vulgar, the wise had treated it as a system of abstractions which dealt with reality in symbolic terms, and these Blackwell set himself to unravel. He cast his net wide, discussing not only obviously 'mythical' tales, but also material culture, iconography, ceremonial and ritual, and even proverbial lore, citing an impressive array of learned works in a variety of languages including French, Spanish, Italian, Hebrew, and Arabic. He attempted to distinguish between earlier and later myths by studying their transmission through the various host societies. Once later priestly and literary accretions had been identified and eliminated, the original deeply meaningful mythic stratum and the ancient thought patterns it represented could be recovered. It was important at the same time that mythology be related to the actual practice of ancient religions. The original source of the Orphic mysteries lay in Egypt, and the evidence suggested that the original twelve 'great gods' of ancient Egypt had been mythic creations from the start -- great metaphors of the creation and the ordering of the universe. It seemed clear, too, how these abstractions had gradually become objectified as ideas passed from one culture to another. Blackwell was an early proponent of the numen/nomen theory later championed by Max Muller and others, which held that the source of myth lay in a 'disease of language', an intensely figurative habit of expression peculiar to early man which invested everything it touched with metaphoric force resulting in the personification of nature: 'As the early 'Egyptian' Rites... were all typical and symbolical, the Type or Symbol came by an easy Transition, not only to signify obscurely, but directly to express the Thing typified... But besides the original Type, any remarkable part of the divine Service, any mystical Mixture as in the Rites of Ceres, any striking posture as in the Feasts of Pan, any uncouth Garb of the Hierophant or Priest, or any uncouth Quality ascribed to the Numen, was enough to fix an Epithet, and that Epithet to wear gradually into a Name. ('Letters Concerning Mythology', 1748, 189-90)' Blackwell viewed early Jewish beliefs in the context of contemporary Near Eastern cosmographies, subjecting the account of creation in the book of 'Genesis' to comparative analysis with ancient Phoenician texts, and discounting the conventional view of the scriptures as embodying the primal religion of which all the others, with the exception of Christianity, were in varying degrees corruptions. He traced the transformation of Chaldean monotheism into polytheism, as the stars began to be worshipped as lesser deities, demonstrating not only that this had happened, but how it had come about. He was even prepared to explain, if not altogether to defend, priapism and phallic worship. Throughout his wide-ranging and subtle study the basic assumption was that the past was coherent, that its correct interpretation was not only of crucial importance to an enlightened understanding of what it meant to be human, but that, viewed in its own terms, it all made perfect sense. 
In 'Memoirs of the Court of Augustus' (3 vols., 1753-63), Blackwell disavowed any intention as a mere annalist, presenting himself as a practitioner of intellectual history, what he called 'This difficult Science of Men' (T. Blackwell, 'Memoirs of the Court of Augustus', 1.5). He discussed how people existed in and were defined by society, and went on to explore the forces that had transformed Rome from an obscure Italian hamlet into a great imperial power. The city had been founded in Spartan military virtue and for a long time its government had been popular and democratic, but the constitution was flawed: everything turned upon the quality of the political culture, and if republican virtue waned there was little to prevent an irresistible slide into tyranny. Insufficient separation of powers meant that if the army went bad -- and it did -- then everything else went with it. The villain of the piece was Julius Caesar who 'dared to point his Sword at his Parent's Throat. He besieged her Towns, trampled upon her Laws, cut off her Consuls, slew her Pretors, pursued her Senators from city to city, and land to land, until he set his unhallowed foot on the Neck of Freedom, and laid Rome's Glory in the Dust. (ibid., 1.192)' A balanced constitution was therefore the indispensable foundation of enduring political success, a lesson underlined by comparative surveys of France, Venice, and the Spanish empire. Blackwell explored how behaviour patterns were moulded by power relations, and in a study of Virgil and Horace demonstrated how the arts were responsive to the political ethos in which they functioned and how they might influence it in turn. This was set within a detailed and racy political history of the later republic and early imperial period from a writer well acquainted with power, and how the greatest of enterprises could be compromised by human weakness, vice, and folly. In Blackwell's urbane and witty pages one might learn how at a meeting of the senate, Cato -- to his horror -- intercepted a billet-doux to Caesar from his own sister; how the rake Pollio's travelling baggage contained a matching set of nude statues of some half-dozen of the loveliest matrons in Rome, done from the life; how Antony made public love to the actress Cytheris in a golden chariot drawn by lions, an act made doubly offensive to good taste by the fact that she was not even a tragedienne. 
Blackwell's contemporary reputation was very considerable, and for nearly half a century he was regarded as the foremost Homeric critic in Europe. But his championship of the Franco-Scots 'galant' style, his evident links with a cosmopolitan pan-European intellectual tradition, and his thoroughly Scottish whig politics provoked bitterly hostile criticism from nationalistically minded English commentators like Samuel Johnson. As Scotland lost ground within the union during the nineteenth century, Blackwell was gradually assigned to the legion of the lost whose works it was permissible not to read. There were stirrings of revival during the twentieth century as classical scholars began to re-explore the history of their subject under the influence of the oral-formulaic theories of the American Homeric scholars Milman Parry and Albert Lord whose work he had partly anticipated, but the full range of Blackwell's achievement has yet to be acknowledged. Blackwell died of a consumptive illness in Edinburgh on 6 March 1757. 


@@@@@


doc= 2545


Blackwood, Adam (1539-1613), civil lawyer and Roman Catholic polemicist, was born in Dunfermline, Fife, one of at least three children of William Blackwood (died 1547), soldier, and Helen Reid (died 1547/8). His parents died when he was about eight years old, his father in battle at Pinkie, and his mother shortly afterwards. After their deaths he came into the care of his maternal great-uncle, Robert Reid, bishop of Orkney, who 'c'.1552 sent him to be educated in Paris. At the university there he was taught by Adrian Turnebe (Turnebus), a well-known literary figure of the day, and Jean Dorat (Auratus), a poet in Latin and Greek, who inspired Blackwood to follow his example. When his great-uncle died in 1558 after negotiating the marriage between Mary, queen of Scots, and the Dauphin Francois, Blackwood returned to Scotland. However, the political and religious circumstances proved unwelcoming for a committed Roman Catholic, and he returned quickly to Paris. There, through the support of Mary, he continued his studies, including philosophy. From about 1560 he also spent two years at the University of Toulouse studying civil law, which became the foundation of his later career. 
Once his studies were complete Blackwood taught philosophy at Paris, where he was rector in 1567-8. He caught the attention of James Beaton, archbishop of Glasgow and the Scottish ambassador, with his early works, firstly 'Caroli IX pompa funebris versiculis expressa per A. B. J. C. (juris consultum)', a memorial poem for Charles IX (Paris, 1574), and secondly and more importantly, 'De vinculo religionis et imperii libri duo' ('Of the chains of religion and government, in two books'; Paris, 1575). 'De vinculo' argued for the legitimacy of state-imposed faith, specifically Roman Catholic, and for state extirpation of heresy. Impressed by Blackwood's arguments, Beaton recommended that Mary appoint him counsellor to the parliament of Poitiers in Poitou, a preferment that she held in her gift as part of her marriage settlement. After Henri III had granted confirmation of his position, Blackwood settled in Poitiers, where 'c'.1580 he married Maria Courtinier ('fl'. 1575-1613), the daughter of the king's treasurer there. They had eleven children, four sons and seven daughters. 
In Poitiers Blackwood continued his writing career, and remained interested in Scottish affairs. 'Adversus Georgii Buchanani dialogum de jure regni apud Scotos pro regibus apologia' ('Apology for kings against George Buchanan's dialogue on the law of government among the Scots'; Poitiers, 1581; Paris, 1588) challenges Buchanan's arguments for the right of subjects to depose unsatisfactory monarchs, on the grounds that a king is set apart once anointed, and can be subject to none but divine judgment. It also repeats a theme of 'De vinculo', connecting heretical belief with political sedition. Blackwood's attack on Buchanan was also rooted in his loyalty to Mary, queen of Scots, whom he is said to have visited in her captivity in England. As well as translating one of her poems into Latin, after her execution he produced 'Martyre de la royne d'Ecosse', which described her treatment at the hands of Elizabeth, and included transcriptions of the correspondence, as well as poems attacking Elizabeth at the end of the volume. This was first published in 1587, shortly after the queen's execution; the printer's mark says it was printed by Jean Nafield in Edinburgh, whereas it was in fact printed in Paris, and reprinted in Antwerp in 1588 and 1589. The work, of which there is a nearly contemporary translation into Scots (printed by the Maitland Club in 1834), is evidently partisan, and demonstrates the loyalty Mary aroused in her followers. 
After Mary's execution Blackwood did not go to England until 1604, when he visited James VI and I in London. By that point Blackwood's writing was largely confined to religious and poetic material. He wrote a series of spiritual meditations, 'Sanctarum precationum proemia' (Poitiers, 1598, 1608), and was the author of a penitential study of the 'Psalms', 'In psalmum Davidis quinquagesimum' (Poitiers, 1608), and a collection of poems, 'Varii generis poemata' (Poitiers, 1609), in which appeared his translation of Mary's poem. In 1606 he returned to political writing, when he published his 'Inauguratio Jacobi Magnae Britanniae regis', and in 1612 he added an extra book to 'De vinculo' and dedicated it to Henry, prince of Wales. 
Blackwood died in 1613, in Poitiers, and was buried in St Porcharius's Church in the town. His contribution to the development of the theory of absolute monarchy can be seen as part of a Scottish Catholic rejection of Buchanan's interpretation of Scottish history, and in his foreshadowing of the 'divine right of kings' an influence on events to come. His contemporary importance in this respect is shown by Gabriel Naude's publication of his complete works in French and Latin in Paris in 1644, together with a eulogy and an engraving by Picart. 


@@@@@


doc= 2546


Blackwood, George Frederick (1838-1880), army officer, was the second son of Major William Blackwood of the Bengal army, and grandson of William Blackwood, founder of the publishing firm. He was born at Moradabad, Bengal, was educated at the Edinburgh Academy and at Addiscombe College, and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Bengal artillery on 11 December 1857. He arrived in India during the Indian mutiny, and was at once appointed to command two guns in Colonel Wilkinson's Rohilkhand column. He was promoted first lieutenant on 27 August 1858, and was adjutant first to the Bareilly and Gwalior divisions and then to the 22nd and 19th brigades of Royal Artillery from 1859 to 1864. 
Blackwood was promoted captain on 20 February 1867, and in 1872 was appointed to command the artillery attached to General Bourchier's column in the Lushai expedition. He was present at the attacks on Tipai-Mukh, Kungnung, and Taikum. His services were specially mentioned in the general's dispatch of 19 March 1872, and he was promoted brevet major on 11 September. He gave further evidence of his ability as an artillery officer by his able report on the use of guns in such country as that in which he had recently served, with views on the best calibre for mountain guns, which was printed by the Indian government and circulated among its officers. Blackwood was promoted major on 10 February 1875, and after temporarily commanding a battery of Royal Horse Artillery came to England on sick leave. He thus missed the first Afghan campaign of 1878-9, but was in India when, on the news of Cavagnari's death, it was determined to once more occupy both Kabul and Kandahar. 
Blackwood was posted to the command of E battery B brigade of Royal Horse Artillery, and ordered to join the force destined for Kandahar. While stationed there the news arrived of the advance of Ayub Khan, and a column was ordered out under the command of Brigadier-General Burrows to assist the wali placed in command by Abdur Rahman Khan and to investigate the strength of the enemy. To that column Blackwood's battery was attached; the column was cut to pieces at the battle of Maiwand on 27 July 1880, where Blackwood was killed and buried in the field, and two of his guns lost. They were subsequently recovered after Ayub's defeat on 1 September 1880, and were presented to Roberts by the government. 


@@@@@


doc= 2547


Blackwood, Henry (d. 1614), physician, was the son of William Blackwood (died 'c'.1547) and Helen Reid (died 'c'.1547) and elder brother of the writer Adam Blackwood, who was also a judge of the parliament of Poitiers. He was born in Dunfermline, and after studying 'belles-lettres' and philosophy, was sent by his uncle, Robert Reid, bishop of Orkney, to the University of Paris, where, about 1551, he taught philosophy. After studying medicine he graduated MD, was incorporated a member of the College of Physicians of Paris, and ultimately became dean of the faculty. At one time physician to the duc de Longueville, he was remembered for remaining in Paris to treat patients during an outbreak of plague. Blackwood died in 1614. He edited 'In organum Aristotelis commentaria', 'Collatio philosophiae atque medicinae', and 'De claris medicis', and left in manuscript 'Animadversio in omnes Galeni libros', 'Hippocratis quaedam cum MSS. collata', 'In Alexandrum Trallianum comment.', and 'Locorum quorumdam Plinii explicatio'. 'Hippocratis Coi prognosticorum libri tres, cum Latina interpretatione, ad veterum exemplarium fidem emendati et recogniti' (1625) was attributed to him, but was really edited by his son, Henry, professor of medicine and surgery at Paris, who died at Rouen on 17 October 1634. George Blackwood, an uncle, taught philosophy at Paris in 1571, took holy orders, and obtained preferment in France. 


@@@@@


doc= 2548


Blackwood, Sir Henry, first baronet (1770-1832), naval officer, was born in co. Down, Ireland, on 28 December 1770, the fourth son of Sir John Blackwood, second baronet (died 27 Feb 1799), of Ballyleidy, co. Down, and of his wife, Dorcas, daughter of James Stevenson, who after her husband's death was created a peeress of Ireland, as Baroness Dufferin and Claneboye (died 8 Feb 1807). In April 1781 he entered the navy as a volunteer on the frigate 'Artois', with Captain Macbride, and in her was present at the battle on the Dogger Bank. He afterwards served with captains Montgomery and Whitshed, and for four years in the 'Trusty' with Commodore Cosby in the Mediterranean. In 1790 he was signal midshipman on board the 'Queen Charlotte' with Lord Howe, by whom he was made lieutenant on 3 November 1790. In 1791 he was in the frigate 'Proserpine' with Captain Curzon, and towards the close of that year obtained leave to go to France in order to improve his French. For most of 1792 he was in Paris, and on one occasion was in much danger, having been denounced as a spy, and eventually he had to flee for his life. 
Blackwood was almost immediately appointed to the frigate 'Active', from which, a few months later, he was transferred to the 'Invincible' at the special request of Captain Pakenham. Of this ship Blackwood was first lieutenant on 1 June 1794, and as such was promoted, along with all the other first lieutenants of the ships of the line, on 6 July. He was immediately appointed to the 'Megaera', and continued in her, attached to the fleet under Lord Howe and afterwards Lord Bridport, until he was promoted captain on 2 June 1795. After a few months in command of the guardship at Hull, Blackwood was appointed to the frigate 'Brilliant' (28 guns), which for the next two years was attached to the North Sea Fleet under the command of Admiral Duncan. Early in 1798 the 'Brilliant' was sent out to join Admiral Waldegrave on the Newfoundland station; and on 26 July, while standing close in to the Bay of Santa Cruz in quest of a French privateer, she was chased by two large French frigates. By seamanship and courage, Blackwood succeeded in checking the pursuit and in escaping. 
Early in 1799 the 'Brilliant' returned to England, and Blackwood was appointed to the frigate 'Penelope' (36 guns), in which, after a few months of channel service, he was sent to the Mediterranean, and employed during the winter and following spring in the close blockade of Malta. On the night of 30 March 1800 the 'Guillaume Tell' (80 guns), taking advantage of a southerly gale and intense darkness, ran out of the harbour. As she passed the 'Penelope', Blackwood immediately pursued. Until dawn, the 'Penelope' successfully engaged her with broadsides, inflicting much damage. At five o'clock the 'Lion' (64 guns), and some little time afterwards the 'Foudroyant' (80 guns), came up, and after a gallant resistance the 'Guillaume Tell' surrendered; that she was brought to action at all was due to the 'Penelope'. Nelson wrote to Blackwood from Palermo (5 April 1800): 'Your conduct and character on the late glorious occasion stamps your fame beyond the reach of envy. It was like yourself; it was like the Penelope' ('Blackwood', 7). 
On the peace of Amiens in 1802 the 'Penelope' was paid off; and in April 1803, when war again broke out, Blackwood was appointed to the 'Euryalus' (36 guns). During the next two years he was employed on the coast of Ireland or in the channel, and in July 1805 was sent to watch the movements of the allied fleet under Villeneuve after its defeat by Sir Robert Calder. On his return with the news that Villeneuve had gone to Cadiz, he stopped on his way to London to see Nelson, who went with him to the Admiralty and received his final instructions to resume the command of the fleet without delay. Blackwood, in the 'Euryalus', accompanied him to Cadiz, and was appointed to the command of the inshore squadron, with the duty of keeping the admiral informed of every movement of the enemy. He was offered a line-of-battle ship, but preferred to remain in the 'Euryalus', believing that he would have more opportunity of distinction; for Villeneuve, he was convinced, would not venture out in the presence of Nelson. When he saw the combined fleets outside, Blackwood could not but regret his decision. On the morning of 21 October 1805, in writing to his wife, he added: 'My signal just made on board the Victory -- I hope to order me into a vacant line-of-battle ship.' This signal was made at six o'clock, and from that time until after noon, when the shot was already flying thickly over the 'Victory', Blackwood remained on board, receiving the admiral's last instructions, and, together with Captain Hardy, witnessing the codicil to Nelson's will. He was then ordered to return to his ship. 'God bless you, Blackwood,' said Nelson, shaking him by the hand, 'I shall never speak to you again.' As Blackwood himself wrote: 'He not only gave me the command of all the frigates, for the purpose of assisting disabled ships, but he also gave me a latitude seldom or ever given, that of making any use I pleased of his name in ordering any of the sternmost line-of-battle ships to do what struck me as best. ('Nelson Despatches', 7.226)' Immediately after the battle Lord Collingwood hoisted his flag on board the 'Euryalus', but after ten days removed it to the 'Queen', and the 'Euryalus' was sent home with dispatches and with the French admiral. Blackwood was thus in England at the time of Nelson's funeral (8 January 1806), when he acted as train-bearer of the chief mourner, Sir Peter Parker, the aged admiral of the fleet. 
After this, Blackwood was appointed to the 'Ajax' (80 guns), in which he joined Collingwood off Cadiz on the first anniversary of Trafalgar, and early in the following year was detached with the squadron under Sir John Duckworth in the expedition up the Dardanelles. At the entrance of the straits, on the night of 14 February 1806, the 'Ajax' caught fire through the drunken carelessness of the purser's steward, and was totally destroyed, with the loss of nearly half the ship's company. Blackwood himself was picked up hanging on to an oar, almost perished with cold, after nearly an hour in the water. During the subsequent operations in the straits he served as a volunteer on board the flagship, and arrived in England in May. 
Blackwood was now offered the situation of pay commissioner at the Navy Board, which he declined, preferring to be appointed to the command of the 'Warspite' (74 guns). In this, after some uneventful service in the North Sea, he again went out to the Mediterranean, where the principal duty of the fleet was the very harassing blockade of Toulon. Here, for some time during the summer of 1810, Blackwood commanded the inshore squadron, and on 20 July drove back a sortie made by a much stronger French force. He returned to England at the end of 1812, but remained in command of the 'Warspite' for another year. In May 1814, on the occasion of the visit of the allied sovereigns, he was appointed captain of the fleet under the duke of Clarence, a special service which was nominally rewarded by a baronetcy (September 1814). On 4 June 1814 he attained the rank of rear-admiral, and in August 1819 was nominated a KCB, and appointed commander-in-chief in the East Indies, from which station he returned in December 1822. He became vice-admiral in May 1825, and from 1827 to 1830 he was commander-in-chief at the Nore. 
Blackwood married three times. On 12 January 1795 he married Jane Mary, 'nee' Crosbie; she died on 19 January 1798, without surviving children. On 3 June 1799 he married Eliza, daughter of Martin Waghorn; they had one son (later the second baronet) and she died on 30 October 1802. On 9 May 1803 he married Harriet, 'nee' Gore; they had several children and she died on 5 May 1851. Two of his sons became captains in the navy. 
Still in the full vigour of life, Blackwood died after a short illness, variously stated as typhus or scarlet fever, on 17 December 1832, at Ballyleidy, the seat of his eldest brother, Lord Dufferin and Claneboye. Blackwood was a brilliant officer, possessing all the qualities that were required for sea command. Nelson's opinion, and the authority he deputed at Trafalgar, were the high point of his career. 


@@@@@


doc= 2549


Blackwood, John (1818-1879), publisher and journal editor, was born on 7 December 1818 at Salisbury Road, Edinburgh, the sixth son of Janet Steuart (1779-1849) and the publisher William Blackwood (1776-1834). Educated at Edinburgh high school (1826-31), the alma mater of Walter Scott, and at the University of Edinburgh (1831-5), John Blackwood subsequently undertook a three-year tour of continental Europe, accompanied in part by his brothers Robert and Alexander, and chaperoned by his classics tutor, William Hay. On his return in 1838, John Blackwood began an apprenticeship with the London publishers George Whitaker & Co., where he remained until 1840. In December of that year Robert and Alexander, by then heads of the Blackwood firm, decided to open a London office at 22 Pall Mall, and John, now a partner in the firm, was chosen to run it. Over the next five and a half years he established the firm's presence in the capital, making close personal connections with, among others, William Thackeray, Laurence Lockhart, Edward Bulwer-Lytton, and John Delane, later to become editor of 'The Times'. Through Delane, with whom he shared lodgings for several years, he was introduced to writers who were later to form a core grouping of 'Blackwood's Magazine' contributors, including generals Edward Bruce Hamley and William Hamley, Frederick Hardman (French correspondent of 'The Times'), and Laurence Oliphant. 
In July 1845, four months after the death of his brother Alexander, John Blackwood returned to Edinburgh to take over as editor of 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine'. In 1852, on the death of Robert Blackwood, John assumed control of the firm, working in partnership with his brother Major William Blackwood, who had returned from India in 1848 to manage financial matters. Now financially secure, John Blackwood married Julia Blandford in 1854 and moved into the New Town dwelling of 3 Randolph Crescent. They had a son, John, and a daughter, Mary, who was to write the publishing memoirs of her father in 1898. After Major Blackwood's death from pneumonia in 1861, John reorganized the family business, making his nephew William Blackwood (1836-1912) a co-partner, and establishing a four-strong editorial team along with William, his London office manager, Joseph Munt Langford, and the Edinburgh office manager, George Simpson. Between them, they strengthened the firm's lists and established its magazine at the forefront of mid-Victorian literary production. 
John Blackwood's editorial flair, warmth of character, and friendly openness led to important and lasting literary relationships with leading authors of the mid-nineteenth century. Although conservative and paternalistic in manner, during his thirty-one-year career he was to gain the trust of, and publish, Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Edward Bulwer-Lytton, Charles Lever, Charles Reade, Richard D. Blackmore, Thomas Hardy, Margaret Oliphant, George Henry Lewes, and George Eliot, among others. Anthony Trollope, seeking a place for experimental work, anonymously serialized 'Nina Balatka' (1867) and 'Linda Tressel' (1868) in 'Blackwood's Magazine'. The experiments were not a success, and it would be another ten years before Trollope's work featured again in the magazine. 
Under John Blackwood's guidance, the firm also became involved in publishing travel and exploration works. James Augustus Grant and John Hanning Speke's accounts of searching for the Nile River source in Africa were best-sellers for the firm in 1864 and 1865. Between 1852 and 1879, 'Blackwood's Magazine' featured Frederick Hardman on Africa, Richard Burton on India and east Africa, Sir Henry Brackenbury on the Second Anglo-Asante War, Sir Garnet Wolseley on expeditions in Canada and Egypt, and Laurence Oliphant on Japan and the Crimea. But it was undoubtedly John Blackwood's connection with George Eliot, begun in 1857 with the anonymous publication in 'Blackwood's Magazine' of 'Scenes of Clerical Life', which was to be one of his greatest contributions to British literary culture; with the exception of 'Romola', John Blackwood was to publish all of her major novels. Although relationships between the author and publisher proved at times fraught and difficult, the result was an unusually strong and personal connection that lasted until Blackwood's death on 29 October 1879 at Strathtyrum, St Andrews, his country home for twenty years. He was buried on 5 November 1879 in the family mausoleum on Calton Hill in Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 2550


Blackwood, William (1776-1834), publisher and founder of Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, was born in Edinburgh on 20 November 1776, the second son of Alexander Blackwood (1736-1802), descended from a family of silk mercers, and Janet Drysdale. On finishing his formal education at the age of fourteen, Blackwood entered into a six-year apprenticeship with the Edinburgh booksellers Bell and Bradfute, located in Parliament Square. Through Mrs Bradfute, wife of one of the firm's partners, William Blackwood met his future wife, Janet Steuart (1779-1849). He completed his apprenticeship in 1796, and subsequently undertook further training in other areas of the publishing trade, superintending the Glasgow branch of the Edinburgh publishers Mundell & Co. for a year, serving as a partner with the antiquarian bookseller and auctioneer Robert Ross for another, and working for two years in London in the antiquarian department of the booksellers Cuthill. In 1804 Blackwood opened a shop at 64 South Bridge, Edinburgh, specializing in acquiring and selling rare books. The business was a success, and in October 1805 he married Janet Steuart; in 1806 they moved to Salisbury Road, where their nine children, seven boys and two girls, were born and raised. 
By 1810 Blackwood had begun experimenting in publishing, producing historical works and publishing a biography of John Knox. Blackwood's breakthrough occurred in 1811, when he was appointed the Edinburgh agent for the publisher John Murray, becoming an important link in the distribution of the latest works from London. Blackwood consolidated his position in the trade by becoming the agent in March 1813 for James and John Ballantyne, printers of Walter Scott's novels. This arrangement paved the way in 1816 for Blackwood and John Murray to co-publish Walter Scott's 'Tales of my Landlord', comprising the novels 'Old Mortality' and 'Black Dwarf'. It is said that Scott's response to Blackwood's suggestions for improvements to 'Black Dwarf', made during production and in consultation with William Gifford, editor of Murray's 'Quarterly Review', was an acerbic comment that 'I belong to the Death-Head Hussars who neither give nor receive criticism'. Scott's publishing connection with Blackwood was terminated shortly afterwards. 
In 1816 Blackwood moved his firm to the more spacious New Town premises of 17 Princes Street. A second and final move was made to 45 George Street in 1830. By 1817 Blackwood had begun concentrating his business in publishing, and in April of that year he launched the 'Edinburgh Monthly Magazine' under the joint editorship of James Cleghorn and Thomas Pringle. Originally envisaged as a 'more nimble, more frequent, more familiar' tory alternative to the whig-orientated quarterly 'Edinburgh Review', the first six issues failed to live up to the publisher's vision. After firing Pringle and Cleghorn, Blackwood took editorial control and relaunched the journal in October 1817 as 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', with new contributors and editorial input from members of his literary coterie, who included John Gibson Lockhart, John Wilson (Christopher North), and James Hogg. The first issue, which included a new blend of literary and political articles and fiction, anonymous attacks on Leigh Hunt, the 'cockney school' of poetry, and, in the mock biblical 'Chaldee manuscript', a ferociously satirical attack on Edinburgh society, set the tone for future issues. Those who smarted most under the attacks were quick to retaliate, bringing lawsuits and libel actions against the magazine, which Blackwood endured on behalf of his editorial team, some of whom fled Edinburgh for the safety of the Lake District until the furore died down. Frightened by the storm caused by this upstart journal, Baldwin, Cradock & Co. (Blackwood's London agents), and Oliver and Boyd (Blackwood's printers), severed their connections with the firm. Leigh Hunt demanded the identity of 'Z', the anonymous author of the attack on him, and for months pamphlet wars raged between pro- and anti-Blackwood camps. Literary hostilities reached a climax in 1821, when John Gibson Lockhart challenged John Scott, rival editor of the 'London Magazine', to a duel. Lockhart's second, G. H. Christie, faced Scott instead, mortally wounding him with his second shot. Future Blackwoodians were confined by Blackwood to the printed page for their literary quarrels. 
Bringing home the first number of his new magazine, Blackwood is said to have presented it to his wife with the words, 'There's ma Maga-zine'. In affectionate parody, the journal became known to future generations of editors, contributors, and readers as 'Maga'. Maga's rising reputation brought competition from London -- the 'London Magazine', for example, was begun in 1820 specifically in response to the journal. Blackwood, however, consolidated his initial success by attracting a core of well-placed writers to work for him, including the Irishmen William Maginn and Samuel Ferguson, John Galt, David M. Moir (Delta), and Thomas De Quincey. The magazine also featured occasional reviews by Walter Scott, fiction by Samuel Warren and Susan Ferrier, and work by Samuel Taylor Coleridge. In 1822 the magazine began a regular feature, 'Noctes Ambrosianae', an extremely popular, imaginative series of collaborative, colloquial, and discursive essays combining politics and literary and cultural criticism, written collaboratively by several Blackwood contributors, chief among them being John Wilson, James Hogg, and Robert Sym. After 1825 John Wilson became the main writer of the series, which ran until 1835. 
Throughout the 1820s and early 1830s Blackwood turned his firm, William Blackwood & Sons, into the leading Scottish publisher of the period, printing seminal works of fiction, history, and biography. A technique pioneered by Blackwood was the publishing in book form of fiction first serialized in the magazine, predating Charles Dickens's use of such marketing strategies by several years. Works featured in this way included Susan Ferrier's 'Marriage' (1818) and 'Inheritance' (1824), John Galt's 'The Ayrshire Legatees' (1820-21) and 'Annals of the Parish' (1821), and David M. Moir's 'The Autobiography of Mansie Wauch' (1824-8). Other important Blackwood publications included John Gibson Lockhart's 'Peter's Letters to his Kinfolk' (1819) and Thomas Hamilton's 'Annals of the Peninsular War' (1829), as well as various learned journals and legal, medical, and theological texts. Blackwood also took on civic responsibilities, becoming a major figure in Edinburgh tory politics as an active member of the Edinburgh town council. He was made a bailie of the city by the council in 1820, and in 1828 was elected commissioner of police, a post he was to discharge with great vigour until shortly before his death at Salisbury Road, Edinburgh, on 16 September 1834. He was buried in the Calton cemetery in Edinburgh. The editorship of the magazine was taken over in 1845 by John Blackwood, Blackwood's sixth son. The William Blackwood (1836-1912) who was editor from 1879 was his grandson. 


@@@@@


doc= 2551


Bladen, Martin (1680-1746), army officer and politician, was born possibly at Abbey Hatch, Essex, the third son of Nathaniel Bladen ('b'. 1642/3) of Hemsworth, Yorkshire, and his wife, Isabella, the daughter of Sir William Fairfax of Steeton, Yorkshire. He was thus a relation of Thomas, third Baron Fairfax, the commander-in-chief of the Cromwellian army, and of Thomas, sixth Baron Fairfax, who inherited extensive estates in Virginia and became a great patron of the Washington family. Bladen's sister Elizabeth was to be the mother of Edward Hawke, first Baron Hawke; Bladen became his guardian and was responsible for his early advancement in the navy. 
Bladen was educated at a small private school and then at Westminster School (1695-7); he matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1697 and in the same year was admitted at the Inner Temple, but did not pursue a career in law. He joined the army, served in the Low Countries and Spain, and became an aide-de-camp to Henri de Massue de Ruvigny, first earl of Galway. In 1709 he was appointed colonel of a regiment of foot raised in Portugal, but he sold the colonelcy in 1710 and retired from the army. As one of Marlborough's colonels he sought to enter politics, but was twice defeated for the seat of Saltash, Cornwall, in 1713 and 1715. Having been appointed to the sinecure of comptroller of the Royal Mint in 1714, he finally won election to parliament at Stockbridge, Hampshire, in 1715. In 1715 he was also elected to the Irish House of Commons, as member for Bandon, a seat he held until 1727. In 1734 he relinquished the representation of Stockbridge and was elected for Maldon, Essex. A political associate of Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, and Sir Robert Walpole, in 1741 he was rewarded for his services with the safe Admiralty seat of Portsmouth, a constituency he represented until his death, whereupon he was succeeded by his nephew, who was then Sir Edward Hawke. 
Bladen's first wife was Mary, the daughter of Colonel Gibbs; with her he had at least two daughters and a son, George Monk Bladen, who seems to have died young. On 3 April 1728 he married Frances (died 1747), the niece and heir of Colonel Joseph Jory and the widow of John Foche, Fouch, or Ffocke, of Aldborough Hatch, Essex. This second marriage brought him great wealth, including vast plantation concerns in the West Indies. He did not, however, make a new will on his second marriage; he named his daughter Isabella and three infant children of 'my very good friend Jane Porter of London Gentlewoman' as his residuary legatees. The only one of the Porter children to survive Bladen was described as 'John Porter otherwise Bladen', suggesting a closer relationship than friendship. 
Appointed through Newcastle's influence to the Board of Trade in 1717, Bladen was sent to Paris in 1719 to represent Britain at a conference to determine the boundaries between British and French North America following the treaty of Utrecht (1713). In 1732 he again acted as the main British representative at a conference at Antwerp to adjust the tariffs between Britain, the emperor of Germany, and the states general. Something of a literary figure, he published a dull tragi-comedy, 'Solon, or, Philosophy No Defence Against Love: with the Masque of Orpheus and Euridice' (1705), and in 1714 an English translation, 'Caesar's Commentaries of his Wars in Gaul', which was dedicated to the duke of Marlborough. Bladen's historical importance, however, is on account of his record twenty-nine years of service at the Board of Trade. 
The political importance and influence of the Board of Trade fluctuated in the eighteenth century, but Bladen's attention to business, and hence his grasp of departmental detail and past official precedent, remained constant. In his first three years in office he attended 463 out of the 572 recorded meetings. During the period 1732-42, when the board declined into a refuge for political placemen, Bladen still managed to attend 978 meetings. His application to colonial affairs was widely respected, and a contemporary pun termed him 'Trade' and his less efficient colleagues as merely 'Board'. Bladen became so influential he often controlled the patronage of various colonial offices, especially in North Carolina. He often broke governors of dubious loyalty and ability, and sometimes made governors, although his motives in doing so have been questioned: of the seven governors appointed through his influence, one was his son-in-law, John Tinker, and another, Thomas Bladen of Maryland, was his nephew. His own economic interests in the West Indies may also have been responsible for his hostility towards the New England colonies, especially Massachusetts, which were notorious for their lax attitude towards the laws of trade. 
The hand of Bladen is clearly evident throughout the Colonial Office papers covering his tenure. His first important contribution was his role in the 135-page report to the king, on 8 September 1721, on the condition and government of the colonies. The product of fourteen separate meetings of the board, it was a crucial restatement of past British official attitudes which, on account of their importance, came to influence later deliberations of the board regarding official policy. Briefly, the report suggested that British authority and security needed to be strengthened in North America. This could best be achieved, Bladen suggested, by restricting extensive land grants, appointing reliable crown officials, weakening the rising power of the colonial assemblies, raising a revenue by a more efficient collection of royal quitrents, sending regular troops to the colonies, recalling the charters of the proprietary colonies, securing the frontiers by the creation of a coherent system of native alliances to prevent French encroachment, and the creation of a colonial union under the direct supervision of a captain-general sent out from Britain. 
Bladen remained a voice for such policies throughout his career. In an attempt to lessen the drift to independence that he perceived to be developing in the New England colonies, especially Massachusetts, and to tie them more closely to the British mercantile system, he undertook in the Commons the defence of the abortive sugar bills of 1731-2, strongly supported the passage of the 'Hat Act' of 1732, and was largely responsible for steering through the house the 'Molasses Act' of 1733. A summary of his colonial policy viewpoints may be found in his personal reports, to Lord Townshend, 'For the settling of Carolina', 1729 (TNA: PRO, CO5/4, fols. 159-62); to Newcastle, 'Reasons for the immediate peopling of Nova Scotia', 1735 ('CSP col.', 41, nos. 592, 454-8); and to Sir Robert Walpole, 'Reasons for appointing a captain-general for the continent of North America', 1739 (Cholmondeley MSS, CUL). 
Throughout his career at the board Bladen rarely formulated new policy; his importance lay in keeping alive the older reform policies of the Williamite board. This was crucial in the development of later British colonial policy, and consequently Bladen was possibly the most influential and best-informed official regarding the American colonies between the retirement of William Blathwayt in 1710 and the appointment in 1748 of George, second earl of Halifax, as president of the board. Bladen died on 1 February 1746, and was buried in the chancel of St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, Middlesex. Administration of his will was granted to one of his creditors, the Revd John Emmerson. 


@@@@@


doc= 2552


Blades, William (1824-1890), printer and bibliographer, was born on 5 December 1824, in Clapham, Surrey, the third son and the fifth of the nine children of Joseph Blades ('c'.1786- 'c'.1860) and his wife, Grace Hainsworth (1792-1863). His parents were both English. His father and uncle were partners with Joseph East in the printing house of East and Blades, later Blades, East, and Blades, of Abchurch Lane. Blades was educated at Stockwell and Clapham grammar schools and bound apprentice to his father's firm on 1 May 1840. 
The early 1850s were productive years: Blades was made a partner and in due course succeeded as senior partner in Blades, East, and Blades, which he ran with his younger brother, Rowland. Unusually for a working printer, he early developed an interest in printing history and furthered his education, in the midst of a busy working life, by forming a fine library; it was 'essentially a workshop and his books [were] his tools' (Reed). He began to concentrate on a study of Caxton. Not wanting to take anything on trust, he personally examined -- in libraries up and down the country and in the Netherlands, Belgium, and France -- more than 450 copies of the products of Caxton's press. His first publication was an introduction to a facsimile of Caxton's 'Governayle of Helthe' of 1491 made from Lord Dysart's copy, printed by Blades, East, and Blades, in 'Types expressly cast in pewter' (1858). 
The firm specialized in security printing and Blades was able to command the highest standards for the production of all his books and use his contacts with lithographic artists and printers of top calibre, in particular the firm of G. F. Tupper & Sons; the eldest son, George Isaac Frederick Tupper, was an outstandingly skilled lithographic 'writer' who produced a lithographic frontispiece for the 'Governayle of Helthe'. This fairly launched Blades on what would, but for business and family commitments, have become his life's work. He infected Tupper with his own enthusiasm and, in the course of tracing individual types and pages from Caxton's works, he made notes on Caxton's types which Blades used in 'The Life and Typography of William Caxton' (1861 and 1863). Following Joseph Ames's seminal work in his 'Typographical Antiquities' (1749) on dating Caxton's works by their types, Blades classified them systematically in an attempt to assign dates to the undated works. With the help of Tupper, and of Henry Bradshaw at Cambridge, he identified six of the eight Caxton types known today. The biographical volume was based on original documents. Bradshaw was one of the most astute bibliographical minds of all time with as sharp an eye for type variants as Blades who was working with type all the time. Blades had sent Bradshaw a copy of the 'Governayle of Helthe', and in the years leading up to publication of the 'Life and Typography' they wrote to each other almost daily on bibliographical subjects. Bradshaw had more leisure to pursue such niceties than Blades, who had to fit his Caxton studies into the interstices of a working printer's life and was soon to be married: 'What with business & evenings lost in visiting future relations', he wrote on the eve of his marriage, '& the feeling that I am not taking pains enough to be correct in my Caxton articles I get quite savage sometimes' (Blades to Bradshaw, 6 Feb 1862). The amount of time he spent on Caxton was beginning to cause family friction and he was forced to press on faster than he wished with publication of volume 2 of his Caxton book: 'for the whole of [the last three months] I have almost entirely neglected my business which has annoyed my uncle & Partner Mr East, and which if continued much longer would lead to disagreeable results' (Blades to Bradshaw, 20 March 1862). 
On 29 April 1862 Blades married Eliza Caroline Anne Fletcher ('b'. 'c'.1837). They had seven children. In the succeeding years Blades produced some more facsimile editions and became the acclaimed authority on Caxton, but he published nothing comparable to his 'Life and Typography' apart from a slim pamphlet, 'How to Tell a Caxton' (1870), which took account for the first time of Jan Veldener, who cut most of Caxton's types. The one-volume octavo revision of his great work, the 'Biography and Typography of William Caxton, England's First Printer', which he published for Caxton's quatercentenary in 1877, has been criticized for failing to include many of Bradshaw's corrections to the earlier work. Professional jealousy may have played some part but the truth is that Blades, as he confessed to Bradshaw, had lost his youthful impetus; 'I am hard at work digesting my quarto volumes into an 8vo... but find it harder to work satisfactorily than I did 14 years ago -- neither body nor mind will stand it' (Blades to Bradshaw, 23 Nov 1876). 
Blades was also deeply involved in the organization of a Caxton quatercentenary exhibition on the development of printing, a venture conceived as part charitable and part educational; it was intended to raise funds for the Printers' Pension, Almshouse and Orphan Asylum Corporation as well as introducing the working man to fine books on the one hand and showing the latest printing machines and technological developments in printing on the other. Blades threw himself into it heart and soul, procuring for the exhibition some 5000 books, type specimens, letters, and ephemera, loaned by nearly 300 owners and libraries. He wrote 286 letters to owners, helped to put up the display, and wrote one entire section of the massive catalogue. 
Later Blades turned to collecting trade tokens in the tradition of coin and medal collecting of earlier centuries -- later considered of little academic account. He published several works on printers' tokens, the most important being 'Numismata typographica, or, The medallic history of printing, being an account of the medals, jettons, and tokens struck in commemoration of printers and the art of printing' (1883). His most popular work, 'The Enemies of Books', light-hearted in a heavy Victorian way, went into six editions between 1881 and 1886. He continued to take an active interest in bibliography, was a founder of the Library Association in 1877, read papers at several of its annual meetings, and published a series of bibliographical miscellanies (1890). He also helped to found the Bibliographical Society but died before it came into being in 1892. 
The world of printing and London civic affairs claimed an increasing part of Blades's time. He was a liveryman of the Scriveners' Company and was involved in the affairs of Candlewick ward, in which his business premises stood. He had progressive views on improving working conditions in the trade and encouraged a strong trade union in his firm. In the early 1880s the works moved to five-storey premises in Appold Street, Finsbury Pavement, London. It was a showplace with the most up-to-date equipment until the whole building was gutted by fire in 1886 and they had to move again, this time to a smaller, four-storey building. 
William Blades died on 27 April 1890 at Suffolk House, Clear Road, Sutton, Surrey; his wife survived him. After his death his extensive library formed the foundation collection of the St Bride Printing Library. Two of his sons followed him into the business. Blades's enduring claim to fame rests on his pioneering use of type identification as a method of dating undated early books, a method still used by incunabulists at the beginning of the twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 2553


Blagden, Sir Charles (bap. 1748, d. 1820), physician and secretary of the Royal Society, was born at Wotton under Edge in Gloucestershire, where he was baptized on 19 April 1748, a younger son of John Blagden (1715-1750) and Elizabeth Phelps (1716-1784). His family was involved in various ways in the local textile industry. His early education is obscure but he studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh, and graduated MD in 1768. 
Blagden was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1772, entering a circle of young fellows that included Joseph Banks. In 1776 Blagden was appointed a surgeon in the army and served on the hospital ship HMS 'Pigot' in the American War of Independence. Returning to England in 1780, he briefly held an army medical position in Plymouth but longed for the London scientific life. In late 1782 or early 1783 he became an assistant and amanuensis to Henry Cavendish (1731-1810). This association lasted until 1789, coinciding with the most active phase of Blagden's own scientific career. Cavendish provided for Blagden's financial security with an annuity, and a bequest of $15,000 in his will. 
On 5 May 1784 Blagden was elected one of the secretaries of the Royal Society amid the dissensions which gripped that institution over the conduct of its autocratic president, Joseph Banks. Blagden was Banks's right-hand man and remained so until he relinquished the secretaryship in 1797. He finally abandoned the pursuit of a medical position in the early 1780s, on assurances that his career would be advanced in other ways. Dissatisfaction with the rate of that advancement created tension with Banks, but it seems to have been dispelled by the knighthood Blagden received in 1792. 
Blagden's centrality in the scientific community was ensured by his closeness to Cavendish and to Banks, but also by his day-to-day control of the 'Philosophical Transactions' and by his thorough knowledge of the European scientific scene, a knowledge made possible by his command of languages and extensive travel. Blagden visited the continent annually until the outbreak of the French Revolution and travelled in Germany, Italy, Switzerland, and France. He was elected a corresponding member of the Academie des Sciences in 1789 and counted Antoine Lavoisier, P. S. de Laplace, Georges Cuvier, and especially Claude Louis Berthollet among his friends. When travel to the continent was again possible, Blagden spent considerable time in France with the distinguished scientific coterie known as the 'Societe d'Arcueil', centred on Berthollet's residence outside Paris. 
Most of Blagden's modest scientific output consisted of a dozen contributions to the 'Philosophical Transactions' between 1775 and 1813. He also published papers in the 'Annales de Chimie'. His first papers for the Royal Society reported experiments, conducted on himself, Banks, and other colleagues, in the tolerance of extreme air temperatures by humans. His most famous work, published in 1788, was his determination that salt lowers the freezing point of water in a simple inverse ratio, subsequently dubbed Blagden's law, even though his finding had been anticipated by Richard Watson in 1771. 
Blagden's best known scientific involvement was in the 'water controversy', beginning in 1783, a contest involving the rival claims of Lavoisier, Cavendish, and James Watt to priority in the discovery of the compound nature of water. Ironically this controversy became more heated in the 1830s and 1840s, after the protagonists were dead, than it was at the time. Subsequent interpretations of Blagden's role have shaped his reputation. His involvement in the controversy was manifold: as Cavendish's assistant; as secretary of the Royal Society, with oversight of the publication of some of the papers in question; and as a scientific traveller, who carried news to Lavoisier and his circle in Paris. The most extreme charges suggest that Blagden falsified documents and otherwise tried to ensure his employer Cavendish's priority. These seem unwarranted, though Blagden was cavalier and presumptuous in his behaviour. 
Dr Johnson found the gossipy Blagden a 'delightful fellow'. Hannah More regarded him as modest, sensible, and knowing. Benjamin Thompson, Count Rumford, who successfully rivalled Blagden for the hand of the widowed Madame Lavoisier, and whose daughter, Sarah, Blagden once sought in marriage, had less flattering things to say about him. Blagden remained unmarried and childless. He died suddenly of apoplexy on 26 March 1820 at Arcueil, near Paris, the home of his friend Berthollet, and was buried in the cemetery of Pere Lachaise in Paris. His will (the estate was less than $50,000) included bequests to his younger brother Richard, a nephew, nieces, and friends. The residuary legatee was his nephew Robert Hale Blagden Hale. 


@@@@@


doc= 2554


Blagdon, Francis William (bap. 1777, d. 1819), journalist and author, was baptized on 19 January 1777 at St Paul's, Covent Garden, the son of Thomas and Mary Blagdon. He began his career as a horn-boy employed to sell the 'Sun' newspaper whenever it contained any extraordinary news. He then became amanuensis to Dr A. F. M. Willich, a medical writer, who taught him French and German; he also learnt Spanish and Italian, and subsequently described himself as 'professor' of those languages, which probably implies that he endeavoured to earn a living by teaching. At one time he published a 'French Interpreter'. In 1802 Blagdon began editing the series 'Modern Discoveries' (1802-3); the first two volumes comprised Vivant Denon's 'Travels in Egypt' in the train of Napoleon Bonaparte, the next two included Golberry's 'Travels in Africa', and the remaining four were devoted to Pallas's 'Travels in the Southern Provinces of Russia'. The first two works were translated by Blagdon from the French, and the last from the German. His interests ranged from the literary to the historical. In 1803 he commenced publishing with the Revd F. Prevost a literary miscellany entitled 'Flowers of Literature', which continued to appear until 1809, and ran to seven volumes. In 1805 he brought out 'A Brief History of Ancient and Modern India', which was reissued in 1813 as an appendix to Captain Thomas Williamson's 'European in India', and in 1806 he contributed the 'Memoirs' to Orme's 'Graphic History of the Life, Exploits, and Death of... Nelson'. 
About this time Blagdon became associated with the 'Morning Post', which he helped to edit for some years. The paper was then committed to upholding tory policies and Blagdon's literary activity took a polemical turn; he had already been imprisoned for six months in 1805 for libelling John Jervis, earl of St Vincent, in the matter of his naval administration. The proposal of the whig ministry of 1806 to remove Roman Catholic disabilities induced him to publish an edition of Foxe's book of martyrs, and this appeared as 'An universal history of Christian martyrdom... originally composed by John Fox... and now entirely rewritten... by the Rev. J. Milner, M.A.' (1807). The pseudonym 'the Rev. J. Milner' should not have been used, as a well-known Roman Catholic divine, John Milner, was then living. 
In 1809 Blagdon came into conflict with political journalist William Cobbett (1762-1835), and in October of that year he launched a Sunday paper, 'Blagdon's Weekly Political Register', in opposition to Cobbett's 'Political Register'. Blagdon was ruined by speculation, however, and this paper, as well as the 'Phoenix', another of his ventures, soon came to an end. In 1814 Blagdon published 'An historical memento... of the public rejoicings... in celebration of the peace of 1814, and of the centenary of the accession of the house of Brunswick', and in 1819 a 'New Dictionary of Classical Quotations'. Among his other noteworthy compositions were an edition of Dr Johnson's poems, together with his biography, contributed to 'The Laurel' in 1808, and a general index compiled for the 'British Critic', volumes 21-43. Blagdon died in obscurity and poverty in June 1819, and a subscription was raised for his destitute widow and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 2555


Blagge, Robert (d. 1522), administrator, was born on an undetermined date, at Northwich, Cheshire (as stated in his will), the son of Stephen Blagge and his wife, Alice. His early life and career are obscure. He received his training in the law at the Inner Temple, where he was a governor in 1511, and served as clerk to John Fitzherbert, who was king's remembrancer of the exchequer from 1480 to 1502. Following Fitzherbert's death Blagge was, on 16 December 1502, granted for life the office of king's remembrancer; he was admitted on 26 January 1503. The king's remembrancer, invariably a prominent lawyer, supervised a department of the exchequer of audit responsible for auditing royal accounts and collecting crown debts. Blagge became the first remembrancer since 1447 to be raised to the exchequer bench, as third baron, on 27 June 1511. Unlike his predecessors, Blagge was permitted to retain the remembrancer's office, to be exercised by deputy, in a confirmation by letters patent. Subsequently, on 19 November 1515, Blagge secured a new life grant of the remembrancership in reversion for his son Barnabe. However, on Blagge's death in 1522 the office passed to a keeper, John Copewood, and in 1524 the patent of 1515 was declared void on the grounds that Blagge possessed no legal estate in the remembrancership from the date of his elevation to the bench. His successor, Thomas Walsh, surrendered the office upon being appointed fourth baron in 1534. 
In 1515 Blagge moved to the centre of royal financial administration with his appointment as surveyor of crown lands alongside Sir Edward Belknap and Bartholomew Westby. He remained active in this office until the year of his death. As a surveyor and a general purveyor of the king's revenue, Blagge proved to be a resourceful and hard-headed administrator. Shortly before his death he was involved in collecting the fines for distraint of knighthood. He also held numerous appointments in local government, being on successive commissions of the peace for Kent and Middlesex, and commissions of sewers for Cambridgeshire, Lincolnshire, Essex, Middlesex, and Hertfordshire. 
Blagge acquired a landed estate in Somerset, Wiltshire, Middlesex, and Kent, which was to be divided upon his death between Barnabe, of the Inner Temple, his only living child with his first wife, Katherine, the daughter and heir of Thomas Brown (or Brune) of Kent; and George (1512/13-1551), his only living child from his marriage of 1506 to his second wife, Mary, daughter of John Brooke, seventh Lord Cobham (died 1512), and Margaret, daughter of Edward Neville, Lord Bergavenny. George would receive the larger portion, including estates that came to his father from his second marriage. At the age of twenty-one George was to inherit property in Holloway, Middlesex, and Bristol, and the manors of Severswoke and Grubbswyk, Somerset; at the death of his mother he was to have the manors of Lucton, Barrers, and Broke Montacute, Somerset, and several tenements in Dartford, Kent. George Blagge esquire, of Westminster and Dartford, later became a courtier to Henry VIII and Edward VI, a comptroller of London customs, MP for Bedford and Westminster, and a prominent protestant associate of Sir Thomas Wyatt the elder. He was knighted during the Scottish campaign of 1547. In his will of 8 September 1522 Robert Blagge required that George marry his ward, Mary Coke, if his son consented upon coming of age, but in the event George married Dorothy, daughter of William Badby of Essex; they had three children, including the Elizabethan MP Henry Blagge (died 1596). Barnabe Blagge received a life interest from his father of lands in Dartford, Wilmington, Sutton, and Darenth, Kent, which had in part been his mother's dowry; an inheritance of his father's property in Westminster; and $106 13's'. 4died in money and plate. He died without heirs; the date of his death is not known. An elder son from Robert Blagge's first marriage, Robert, of the Inner Temple, predeceased his father. 
Robert Blagge died on 13 September 1522 in London and was buried shortly afterwards in the priory of St Bartholomew beside his first wife. Mary Blagge was executor to his estate; the overseers were his close friends Sir Richard Broke (died 1529), serjeant-at-law, recorder of the city of London, and MP for London, and Nicholas Mynne of London, royal auditor. He left a bequest to his brother-in-law, Thomas Pymme, of Middlesex, foreign apposer of the exchequer (1515-49). His last will and testament revealed a devout character, intent upon deeds of late medieval piety and charity. Blagge was a not untypical lawyer of the opening decades of the sixteenth century who through advantageous marriages and government service rose to a position of influence and socio-economic success. 


@@@@@


doc= 2556


Blagrave, Daniel (bap. 1603, d. 1668?), politician and regicide, was baptized on 20 November 1603 at St Mary's, Reading, the fifth son of Alexander Blagrave (died 1612), a clothier of Southcote Lodge, Berkshire, and his wife, Margaret. A nephew of the mathematician John Blagrave, Daniel entered the Inner Temple in 1637 and was called to the bar in 1648. Before then he emerged as a prominent parliamentarian in Berkshire, as treasurer of the county committee. His greatest influence was in Reading, where he was made an 'assistant' of the corporation (1644), and became 'steward' or recorder (1645). Thereafter he began to make an impression outside the county. He was made an exigenter in the court of common pleas and a master in chancery, and secured election as a recruiter MP for the borough of Reading in June 1648, although only after the resolution of an election dispute. Blagrave was vilified almost immediately in the royalist press, who accused him of securing his seat through bribery, and he would remain a controversial figure for many years. He married, in 1632, Elizabeth ('b'. 1612, died in or after 1672), daughter of Abraham Hull, a London merchant, with whom he had at least two sons. 
A friend to the Independents, if not to the army, Blagrave emerged as a prominent MP during the Rump Parliament. He was involved in preparing for the trial of Charles I, during which he was a zealous commissioner who proved willing to sign the death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. He participated in the abolition of the House of Lords, and in introducing the controversial engagement, and secured appointments to many leading committees, not least in relation to the sequestration of delinquents and the sale of confiscated estates and church lands. He became a commissioner for forfeited estates in July 1651. His ambition for preferment and pecuniary office is evident in his frequent letters to Elias Ashmole seeking astrological advice, and his parliamentary activity was closely related to matters wherein he sought promotion. In 1650 the commissioners for compounding expressed fear that his attempt to become steward of forfeited estates in Berkshire conflicted with his positions as an MP and sequestrator, and by the spring of 1653 he faced accusations of having used bribes to secure offices, a practice recommended to him by Ashmole. Such accusations prompted an official investigation which threatened Blagrave's public career in the Commons. 
Blagrave survived this investigation, but the absence of parliamentary privilege after the dissolution of the Rump left him open to other prosecutors, notably the corporation of Reading. This dispute, together with growing hostility resulting from his clashes with local presbyterians, probably prevented him from securing a seat in the 1654 parliament. He was also accused of failing to assist in the prosecution of the local astrologer and mystic John Pordage. Blagrave, having examined Pordage, provided written testimony in his defence in 1654, prompting accusations that he, like his wife, was one of Pordage's acolytes. The presbyterians in Reading removed Blagrave from civic office in March 1656, sparking a lengthy battle to reclaim his post, and a bitter factional struggle within the town. Blagrave's party secured his return in another contested parliamentary election in 1656, against the wishes of the ruling elite, and he was returned again in 1659 after another double return, and was restored to his post as recorder. 
Active in the restored Rump in 1659, Blagrave favoured civilian rather than military rule but probably withdrew from the Commons upon the readmission of the secluded members in February 1660. He gave way to his son in the Convention Parliament, but was confirmed as the town's recorder until he fled at the Restoration, to avoid prosecution as a regicide. The town promised to hold the post open for him until his return, but Blagrave remained on the continent until his death. He probably died at Aachen in 1668, and was certainly dead by 1672 when Bulstrode Whitelocke received a bequest through Blagrave's widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 2557


Blagrave, John (b. before 1560, d. 1611), mathematician, was the second of four sons of John Blagrave of Bulmershe, near Sonning, Berkshire, and Anne, daughter of Sir Anthony Hungerford of Down Ampney, Gloucestershire. He was born at Reading. The date of his birth is unknown, but he was educated at Reading School and was lent mathematical books by Sir Thomas Parry of Hampstead Marshall, Berkshire, who died in 1560. Blagrave had a house at Swallowfield and lived there and at Southcot Lodge, Reading, let to him by his elder brother, Anthony, on a lease of ninety-six years in 1596. 
Blagrave was a practical mathematician. He practised as a land surveyor and was among the first to draw estate maps to scale. He also designed and made instruments, including an astrolabe, which he described in 'The Mathematical Jewel' (1585), whose design modified a number of earlier instruments, particularly that of Gemma Frisius. One astrolabe made to Blagrave's design is known to survive. Between 1589 and 1596 he enjoyed the patronage of Sir Francis Knolles, the dedicatee of 'Baculum familliare, catholicon sive generale: a booke of the making and use of a staffe, newly invented by the author, called the familiar staffe' (1590), and his family. The 'familiar staffe' is an early example of one of the elaborate universal instruments, whose use was short-lived, designed by contemporary mathematical practitioners. In 1596 Blagrave published 'Astrolabium Uranicum generale' and advertised termly visits to London and arrangements to make his instruments available to customers. Blagrave also made sundials and published 'The Art of Dyalling' in 1609. He was ranger of the Forest of Dean until 1611. In his will of 1611 Blagrave directed that a stone monument should be erected in St Lawrence's Church, Reading, which would commemorate his skills: 'representing my said mother w[i]th the hungerfordes and our armes by her and my self lyinge vnder her w[i]th this writinge Johannes Blagrauius totus Mathematicus cum matre sepultus restinge my head on a globe and an astrolabe a quadrant rule and compasse lyinge by me.' Blagrave made many bequests to his wife, Dorothy, her daughter, Jane, his relatives, and servants. He also left legacies to enlarge the market place at Reading and to build a portico to St Lawrence's Church. Among other bequests was the annual sum of 20 nobles to a maidservant of good character who had served one master for five years. To avoid partiality, three servants were to be chosen, one from each of the three parishes of the town and in every fifth year from Southcot, should there be a suitable candidate. Lots were to be cast on Good Friday to select the recipient of the money. Blagrave died on 9 August 1611 and was buried two days later in St Lawrence's Church. An elaborate monument of himself, surrounded by allegorical figures, was erected, which approximated to the directions of his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 2558


Blagrave, Joseph (b. 1610, d. in or before 1682), astrologer, was born in the parish of St Giles, Reading, the youngest of four sons of Alexander Blagrave (died 1639) and his wife, Margaret. He was a nephew of John Blagrave (died 1611), the mathematician, from whom he appears to have inherited a small estate in nearby Swallowfield. What little is known of his personal history is mainly derived from his books. His youth was spent in the study of astronomy and astrology, his later years in philosophy and the practice of physic, on which he wrote: 'Without some knowledge in astronomy one can be no astrologer, and without knowledge in astrology one can be no philosopher, and without knowledge both in astrology and philosophy one can be no good physician, the practice of which must be laid upon the five substantial pillars of time, virtue, number, sympathy, and antipathy. (Blagrave, 'Astrological Practice', preface)' Blagrave's marriage to his wife, Susan, brought him a son, Joseph, in May 1640, but his wife died shortly after the birth, on 2 June. 
Blagrave's first appearance as an author was with a series, 'Ephemerides, with Rules for Husbandry for the years 1658, 1659, 1660, and 1665'. No copy of the 'Ephemeris' for 1658 has survived, and the volume for 1660 states that 'it came into but few hands, by reason of the slackness of the printer before it came forth'. Copies for the years 1659 and 1660 are rare. The next work ascribed to Blagrave is 'The Epitome of the Art of Husbandry, by J. B., Gent.' (1669). The attribution to Blagrave is likely, since its editor was his nephew, Obadiah Blagrave, a bookseller in St Paul's Churchyard. He published this and all the subsequent works of his uncle, two of which were posthumous. Blagrave's 'Astrological Practice of Physick' (1671) certainly appeared in Trinity term for this year, although most copies bear the date 1689, being reprints published in Hilary term 1689/90. His next work was the 'Supplement or enlargement to Mr. Nich. Culpepper's English physitian, to which is annexed a new tract for the cure of wounds by gunshot' (1674). The preface to this work is dated 'From my house called Copt Hall, upon the seven bridges in Reading'. Blagrave's last definite, and posthumously published, work is his 'Introduction to Astrology', in three parts (1682). This work contains an engraved portrait of Blagrave at the age of seventy-two and is dedicated to his friend Elias Ashmole the antiquary. Lowndes (W. T. Lowndes, 'Bibliographer's Manual', ed. Bohn, 1, 1864, 214) ascribes to Joseph Blagrave 'Planispherium Catholicum', but this is certainly an error, for the work is a revised version of the 'Mathematical Jewel' of John Blagrave, edited by J. Palmer, and published in London in 1658. Another work wrongly ascribed to Blagrave is a manuscript, now lost, 'A remonstrance in favour of antient learning against the proud pretensions of the moderns, more especially in respect to the doctrine of the stars', about 1669 or 1670. 
Blagrave's character appears to have been a mixture of earnest piety with a profound belief in the virtues of astrology. One of the cures which he claimed to have effected was that of casting out a dumb devil from a maid at Basingstoke, where, he reported, after he had invoked the name of the Tetragrammaton with that of the blessed Trinity, 'the devil came forth, but invisible, with a great cry and hideous noise, raising a sudden gust of wind, and so vanished' (Blagrave, 'Astrological Practice', 124). The whole story is a curious study in the demonology of the seventeenth century. Blagrave's chief interest lies in his ambiguous status as a leading representative of the long tradition of astrological medicine, at just the time when that tradition was rapidly becoming unacceptable among people of the increasingly powerful 'respectable' sort. In this respect, his complaint in the 'Astrological Practice of Physick' speaks for a generation: 'I find that many being unsatisfied concerning the legality of my way of Cure, have refused to come or send unto me for help to cure their infirmities: and many of those who did come, came for the most part privately, fearing either loss of reputation or reproaches from their Neighbours, and other unsatisfied people; and also fearing that what I did, was either Diabolical, or by unlawful means. (ibid., preface)' Blagrave had died before publication of 'Introduction to Astrology' in 1682, but the exact date and location of his death are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 2559


Blagrave, Thomas (d. 1688), musician, was the eldest son of Richard Blagrave (died 1641) and his third wife, Ann (died in or after 1672), who were married at Northwood, Isle of Wight, on 19 February 1622. Richard, of Berkshire ancestry, was a musician at the court of Charles I; Ann was the daughter of a court musician, Thomas Mason, and sister of another, John Mason (whose will mentions members of the Blagrave family, as does that of the musician John Goodwin). Thomas Blagrave deputized for the sackbut player Edward Bassano from December 1637, and in the next year was admitted to the hautboy and sackbut ensemble to assist his father, on whose death in 1641 he inherited a full post. On 14 October 1645 he married Margaret (died 1689), the daughter of Thomas Clarevell (or Clarvox) of Parson's Green, Middlesex, at St Margaret's, Westminster; the marriage was apparently childless. 
A signet warrant of July 1681 describes Blagrave as 'a great sufferer for loyalty in the late rebellion', but he nevertheless became one of Cromwell's musicians. At some stage he shared with the older Henry Purcell the bass role of Mustapha in William D'Avenant's 'The Siege of Rhodes', though variant cast lists throw doubt on statements that he participated in the original production of 1656. Pepys became friendly with Blagrave, and on 18 March 1660 recorded giving him a lute 'two years ago' in return for a note for 40's'. On 21 June 1660 Pepys had a flageolet lesson from Blagrave, and he afterwards mentioned him several times. 
Following the Restoration Blagrave was sworn in as a court violinist (18 June 1660), and he thereafter played in the king's band of violins. He was also made a gentleman of the Chapel Royal, of which he was to be chosen clerk of the cheque in 1682. Although he was at Windsor as a wind player on 17 April 1661, it was not until 3 August that year that he regained the place he held before the civil wars. 
On 20 April 1662 Pepys visited Blagrave at 'his old house in the Fishyard'; this was in St Margaret's Lane, Westminster, where he lived for the rest of his life (although a poll tax return for 1664 places him on the north side of the Strand). In August 1664 Blagrave became a lay clerk of Westminster Abbey; there in 1666 he succeeded Christopher Gibbons as master of the choristers, a post which he yielded up in 1670 (the accounts assign both events to March, but this may be a bookkeeping convenience). Pepys clearly had Blagrave's several posts in mind when, on 20 May 1666, he described him as 'a sober politique man, that gets money and increase of places'. 
At Windsor in 1674 Blagrave sang as a countertenor, though at the coronation of James II, in 1685, he sang as a bass. The new reign brought a review of posts, leaving Blagrave with only his place in the chapel. He made his will on 14 May 1686, but lived until 21 November 1688 (he is presumed to have died at Westminster) and was buried in the north cloister of Westminster Abbey three days later; he made small bequests to members of his family, and left a house and land at Teddington, Middlesex, to his wife. She made her will on 5 February 1689, and was buried next to him on 12 October 1689. 
Pepys's good opinion of Blagrave was shared by Anthony Wood, who wrote that he was 'a gentile and honest man'. His song 'What conscience say it is in thee' appears in 'Select Ayres and Dialogues' (1669); another song, the short but appealing 'What means this strangeness', survives in manuscript. 


@@@@@


doc= 2560


Blagrove, Henry Gamble (1811-1872), violinist, was born at Nottingham on 20 October 1811, the eldest son of the composer and violinist Richard Blagrove, author of 'A New and Improved System to the Art of Playing the Violin' (1828), and his wife, Elenor Moss. Taught by his father, he first appeared in public at the age of five, and in 1817 played in London at Drury Lane Theatre in 'The Liliputians', as well as in concerts at the Exhibition Rooms in Spring Gardens. From 1821 he studied with Paolo Spagnoletti, and in 1823 with William Crotch and Franz Cramer as one of the first students of the new Royal Academy of Music. He won the silver medal in 1824, and from 1830 to 1837 was solo violinist in Queen Adelaide's private band. At her wish he went in 1832 to Kassel to study with Spohr, and thereafter played with great success in Vienna and elsewhere. 
After returning to England, Blagrove appeared as soloist at the Philharmonic Concerts, served as principal violin at Covent Garden and Drury Lane, performed in Louis Jullien's concerts, and made many other appearances in London and elsewhere; in 1839 he played Spohr's concertante for two violins (op. 48) with the composer at the Norwich festival. On 7 November 1835 he inaugurated the first regular series of chamber concerts in London in the Hanover Square Rooms, and on 17 March 1836 founded the Quartett Concerts there with a quartet whose other members were Henry Gattie, Joseph Dando, and Charles Lucas. These concerts, which established chamber music in Victorian life and lasted until 1859, always included a work by Beethoven but also introduced new music; however, Blagrove left in 1843 to found Blagrove's Quartet Concerts. At Queen Victoria's coronation he led the state band. On 17 August 1841 he married Etheldred, daughter of Henry Combe, with whom he had three children. He returned to Germany in 1858, and later played at the lower Rhine festival in Dusseldorf. 
Blagrove's works include some valuable exercises and studies for the violin and a few solos. He was regarded as one of Spohr's best pupils, his tone and technique alike being admirable. Popular with all with whom he came in contact, he was a persevering and successful teacher, notably at the Royal Academy of Music; however, for Walter Macfarren, 'though a talented and estimable individual, his temperament, like his violin playing, was decidedly cold'. After his wife's death, on 8 January 1869, Blagrove's health declined. He was presented with a public testimonial in 1872, but that December had a stroke while playing at a private concert, and he died at his home, 224 Marylebone Road, on the 15th. He was buried at Kensal Green. 
His brother 


@@@@@


doc= 2561


Blague, Thomas (c.1545-1611), dean of Rochester, was a native of Gloucester. He was admitted pensioner at Queens' College, Cambridge, at Easter 1568, seemingly after proceeding BA at Oxford the previous year. While at Queens' he compiled an anthology of classical aphorisms in translation, 'A Schoole of Wise Conceytes' (1572). On 18 June 1574 he supplicated at Oxford for the degree of BTh as a bachelor of seven years' standing and proceeded DTh on 2 April 1582. The higher degree was incorporated at Cambridge in 1589. 
His successive clerical appointments suggest that Blague was a man not much given to residency. He was instituted rector of Great Braxted, Essex, on 9 September 1570 at the presentation of George Talbot, sixth earl of Shrewsbury, and collated rector of St Vedast, Foster Lane, in the city of London by Archbishop Matthew Parker on 2 September 1571. Appointed one of Parker's household chaplains, he was collated rector of Lambeth by his successor, Edmund Grindal, in 1577, thereafter resigning St Vedast. As chaplain to Grindal he assisted at the consecration of John Aylmer, bishop of London, on 24 March 1577. On 20 July 1580 he was instituted to the rectory of Ewelme, Oxfordshire, on the crown's presentation and (probably in 1582) was appointed a chaplain-in-ordinary to Elizabeth. Presented to the deanery of Rochester by the crown on 14 January 1592, he was installed on 1 February. He resigned Ewelme in 1596 but became rector of Crayford, Kent, in 1599 and in 1604 succeeded Richard Vaughan, newly promoted bishop of London, as rector of Bangor Is-coed, Flintshire. 
Blague remained a royal chaplain after the accession of James I, serving a monthly turn in May alongside Anthony Rudd, bishop of St David's, and Henry Hooke, later archdeacon of the West Riding. In this capacity he greeted James I during his progress south to London and preached the Tuesday court sermon in the chapel of the London Charterhouse on 10 May 1603, when the new king, consciously retracing the entry into London of his predecessor in November 1558, stayed there as a guest of Thomas, Lord Howard de Walden, who was to be created earl of Suffolk only weeks later. One of those present -- perhaps Henry Hooke or else a member of the Howard family (the epistle dedicatory is signed 'H. H.') -- had the sermon (on 'Psalms' 1: 1-2) published, but without submitting the text to Blague himself for correction, 'supposing it to be comfortable a doctrine to others, as he found it delightfull to himselfe' and commending 'the grave and methodicall delivery thereof' (Blague, 'Sermon', epistle dedicatory). The sermon is a felicitous rather than admonitory piece, in which Blague offers advice to his new monarch -- the 'beatus vir' of the psalm -- cautioning him not to take ungodly counsel nor associate with sinners or scorners. Rather he is to delight in and meditate upon the law. Like other royal chaplains that year Blague was at pains to emphasize the new king's obligations as a righteous lawgiver who would exercise justice and mercy. 
In 1604 -- as dean of Rochester, rector of Great Braxted, rector of Lambeth, and rector of Crayford -- Blague was blacklisted in a puritan survey of the Essex clergy: he had not come to Great Braxted 'paste once or twice this eighte yeres laste paste'; it was claimed that he derived an annual income of $70 from Great Braxted, $160 from Lambeth, and $120 from Crayford ('A Viewe', 10). As rector of Lambeth he was responsible for the interment of Archbishop Richard Bancroft in November 1610, and died in possession of all his preferments except St Vedast and Ewelme. 
Blague married twice. His first wife, Mary Holborne, whom he married in 1572, died without children, and in 1575 or 1576 he married Alice Brock ('b'. 1560), who, at fifteen, was half her husband's age. The Blagues make frequent appearances in the papers of the doctor and astrologer Simon Forman, whom they consulted many times, in both his capacities. In 1597, for instance, Blague was hoping for the see of Salisbury and asked Forman for a prognostication of his chances of success. His wife, who appears in the astrologer's notebooks as extravagant and promiscuous, wanted advice over her health but more especially about her love affairs, which included a prolonged liaison with Owen Wood, dean of Armagh, as well as a brief involvement with Forman himself. Nevertheless Blague saluted Alice in his will, drawn up on 4 October 1611, a week before he died, for 'her wisdome and fidelitie', and made her his sole executor. Blague died at Lambeth on 11 October 1611 and was buried at the parish church. He was survived by his wife and three sons, John (who became a fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge, and to whom Blague bequeathed his sermon notes 'if he will use them right'), Cornwallis, and Edmund. Their daughter Frances, wife of John Dove, had died in 1604, leaving a daughter whom Blague remembered in his will. About a year after her husband's death Alice married Walter Meysey, keeper of a portion of the Gatehouse prison at Westminster, but they soon separated, largely owing to debts which she brought with her from her first marriage and which she had herself principally incurred. It is not known when she died. 


@@@@@


doc= 2562


Blaikie, William Garden (1820-1899), Free Church of Scotland minister and writer, was born in Aberdeen on 5 February 1820, one of ten children and the second son of James Blaikie (1786-1836) of Craigiebuckler and his wife, Jane Garden (died 1857). His father, an advocate, was lord provost of Aberdeen at the time of his death. Educated at Aberdeen grammar school and Marischal College, Aberdeen, Blaikie proceeded to the study of divinity, during which he spent a session (1839-40) at Edinburgh University. Licensed to preach by the presbytery of Aberdeen, he was presented to the parish of Drumblade, Aberdeenshire, by the earl of Kintore, a family friend, and was ordained on 22 September 1842. He adhered to the Free Church at the Disruption the following May and remained in Drumblade until he accepted a call to a new congregation at Pilrig in Edinburgh, to which he was admitted on 1 March 1844. 
Social conditions in Pilrig prompted Blaikie to become involved in both the erection of model buildings for rent to workmen, and also in temperance issues. On 20 May 1845 Blaikie married Margaret Catherine Biggar (died 1915) with whom he had fourteen children, though three of them were stillborn, and three more died in infancy. Among those to survive into adulthood was Walter Biggar Blaikie, civil engineer and publisher. William Blaikie's wife shared in his work and ran a children's home for some twenty years, from which many children emigrated to Canada. Blaikie's 'Six Lectures to the Working Classes on the Improvement of their Temporal Condition' (1849), re-issued in 1863 as 'Better Days for Working People', sold 80,000 copies, and brought him to public attention. It prompted a less successful sequel which looked at employers, 'Heads and Hands in the World of Labour' (1865). A new church was also built during his ministry. 
In 1868 Blaikie was appointed professor of apologetics and pastoral theology at New College, Edinburgh. The presence of another professor and near-namesake in Edinburgh, John Stuart Blackie, proved an embarrassment to Blaikie in that, among other confusions, many of Blackie's eccentricities were attributed to him. This caused him to stress the Garden element of his name thereafter. A student dining-hall was instituted at New College on his initiative, and he promoted the work of the New College settlement. He was honoured with the degree of DD by Edinburgh University in 1864, and that of LLD by Aberdeen University in 1871. From 1874 to 1878 he was convener of the Home Mission committee of the Free Church: during the visit of the American evangelists Moody and Sankey in 1873-4, the Blaikies housed the Moody family, an act typical of a couple who were never too busy to take on another commitment. In 1888 Blaikie was Cunningham lecturer, and in 1892 served as moderator of the Free Church general assembly, the last of the pre-Disruption ministers to do so. He was greatly interested in foreign churches and was one of the founders of the Pan-Presbyterian Alliance, of which he was president from 1888 to 1892, as well as helping to raise money for the Waldenses. 
Literary work made constant claims on Blaikie, beginning with the 'Free Church Magazine', which he edited from 1849 to 1853. He also edited the 'North British Review' (1860-63), which he gave up on health grounds, though soon after he assisted Thomas Guthrie with the 'Sunday Magazine', briefly assuming sole editorship on Guthrie's death. He edited the 'Catholic Presbyterian' (1879-83) and kept up a steady output of books. The most famous of several biographies was 'The Personal Life of David Livingstone' (1880), and Blaikie contributed to the early volumes of the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
Increasing deafness led Blaikie to resign his chair in 1897 but he remained active and was only prevented from attendance at the Free Church general assembly by a paralytic seizure from which he died at his home, 2 Tantallon Terrace, North Berwick, on 11 June 1899. Blaikie showed great catholicity of interest while at the same time remaining true to the conservative religious tradition in which he had been raised. Although not a leader of his church in any conventional sense, he was certainly one of its ornaments. 


@@@@@


doc= 2563


Blair, Hugh (1718-1800), Church of Scotland minister and literary critic, was born in Edinburgh on 7 April 1718, the only child of John Blair, a clerk in the Excise Office, and Martha, daughter of Alexander Ogston, an Edinburgh bookseller, and his wife, Martha, who operated her late husband's bookshop in Parliament Square until 1738. Although his father never attained prominence after losing his inheritance in the unsuccessful Darien scheme, Blair was descended from a prominent Scottish family that included his great-grandfather Robert Blair (1593-1666), a professor at the University of Glasgow and a leading Presbyterian reformer. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and the University of Edinburgh, which he entered in the autumn of 1731 at thirteen. At the university he came under the influence of the professor of logic, John Stevenson, who incorporated the study of English rhetoric and 'belles-lettres' into his classes. As he passed through the arts and divinity courses, Blair began to associate with a group of students, mostly a few years younger than himself, who remained his close friends and academic and ecclesiastical colleagues in the moderate party of the Church of Scotland. The roots of Blair's career as an author can be traced to his student days in Edinburgh, when he is supposed to have published 'A Poem Sacred to the Memory of the Reverend Mr. James Smith' (1736), no copies of which have survived, and to have co-authored, with his cousin George Bannatine, a poem entitled 'The Resurrection', which circulated in manuscript. In addition his student notes on chronology are believed to have formed the foundation of a volume of 'Chronology and History of the World' that first appeared in 1754, under the name of his distant relation in the Church of England, John Blair. In February 1739 Hugh successfully defended his MA thesis, 'De fundamentis et obligatione legis naturae', which argued that benevolence is rooted in natural law. While completing his divinity studies he worked as a tutor, including a stint in the highlands in 1740 as tutor to Simon Fraser, eldest son of Lord Lovat. 
On 21 October 1741 Blair was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Edinburgh, and on 23 September 1742 he was ordained as the minister of the little parish of Collessie in Fife, thanks to the patronage of Lord and Lady Leven. Within a few months he was a candidate for the second charge in the Canongate church, then an independent parish, though situated near the heart of Edinburgh. He secured the call to the Canongate after besting a rival, Robert Walker, by a margin of 136 to 82 in a vote among the eligible parishioners, and was translated on 14 July 1743. During his eleven years in the Canongate, Blair steadily developed his reputation as an up-and-coming preacher in the kirk. At the unusually young age of twenty-eight he was elected moderator of the presbytery of Edinburgh, and in that capacity preached a sermon, 'The wrath of man praising God', to open the proceedings on 18 May 1746, one month after the battle of Culloden ended the Jacobite rising led by Charles Edward Stuart. Published in the same year, the sermon was a jeremiad on the 'Forty-Five, interpreted in the style of the 'Old Testament', as a providential chastising of the British people for their sinful ways -- a traditional rhetorical device to which Blair would return in later years. On 1 January 1750 Blair was invited to preach on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the Society in Scotland for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge, and that sermon, 'The importance of religious knowledge to the happiness of mankind', was also published separately. Three years later he edited for the press Frederick Carmichael's posthumous 'Sermons on Several Important Subjects', to which he contributed the preface. Blair has usually been credited with editing another publication of 1753, the Edinburgh edition of Shakespeare's 'Works', but the editor was actually John Reid, the press corrector for the printers, Murray and Cochran. 
It was during his Canongate period, on 19 April 1748, that Blair married his first cousin Katherine Bannatine (died 1795), daughter of his uncle James Bannatine, an Edinburgh minister. She was said to be a woman 'of a Masculine Understanding, of a Cheerfull Temper and Amiable Manners', ideally suited for Blair who, 'Being of an Infantine Disposition, needed a Mate of a Superior and Decisive Mind, on which he could Rely for advice, in all his Doubts and Perplexities, which Occurd almost every Hour' (Carlyle, 'Comparison', 278). In January 1749 the Blairs had a daughter, Katherine, who grew up as an only child after their second child, a son, died in infancy. 
On 8 March 1754 Blair was called to Edinburgh proper as the minister of Lady Yester's Church, where he was settled on 11 October. The mid-1750s was a time of intense conflict over the relationship between culture and piety in the Church of Scotland, and Blair was at the centre of the struggle. In 1755-6 he participated in the original 'Edinburgh Review', a short-lived periodical produced by his circle of friends for the purpose of showing off and encouraging Scottish polite learning, in opposition to the straight and narrow Calvinism of the moderates' opponents. Blair is thought to have contributed to the first number the reviews of Francis Hutcheson's 'System of Moral Philosophy' and the first two volumes of Bishop Sherlock's 'Discourses' (and possibly also Dodsley's 'Collection of Poems'), and to the second and last number the reviews of the third volume of Sherlock's 'Discourses' and John Jortin's 'Six Dissertations upon Different Subjects'. He is also believed to have written about this time two anonymous pamphlets defending his friends David Hume and Henry Home, Lord Kames, against charges of infidelity in the Scottish church courts: 'Observations on a pamphlet, entitled an analysis of the moral and religious sentiments contained in the writings of Sopho [Kames], and David Hume, esq.' (1755) and (with three other Edinburgh ministers) 'Objections Against the Essays on Morality and Natural Religion Examined' (1756). In December 1756 he took part in a rehearsal of the tragedy 'Douglas' by his friend John Home, playing the small part of the maid Anna, but he did not risk the wrath of his fellow churchmen by attending the professional performances of the play that followed. 
Blair received an honorary DD degree from the University of St Andrews on 13 June 1757. On 15 June 1758 he took his place as one of the ministers of the High or New Kirk in St Giles's Church, Edinburgh, after a bitter dispute in which the moderates and their political allies in the general assembly managed, by a vote of sixty-four to fifty-four, to overturn a decision by the synod that would have deprived Blair of that prestigious charge. Once settled at St Giles's, Blair cultivated his reputation as a leading figure in the church. He was a member of the church committee that produced a new version of biblical translations and paraphrases (1781) used in worship, and is supposed to have been personally responsible for revising numbers 4, 33, 34, 44, and 45. He was a delegate to the annual general assembly on a number of occasions, but he never participated in its debates and rarely played a leading role in the management of ecclesiastical affairs, at least until after 1780, when the retirement of the moderate leader -- his lifelong friend the historian William Robertson -- led to Blair's being consulted more often for advice on ecclesiastical matters. He had no enemies in the church and was on excellent terms with Robert Walker, his colleague at St Giles's, a leader of the rival popular party and his former opponent in the election for the Canongate charge, whose life Blair commemorated in a portion of a funeral sermon that was preached on 13 April 1783 and was prefixed to the third volume of Walker's 'Sermons on Practical Subjects' in 1784. 
Meanwhile, Blair was pursuing a second career, as a man of letters and an academic. He was an active participant in the convivial and intellectual club-life that characterized the culture of the Scottish Enlightenment. He was an early member of the Select Society (1754-64) and in 1761 was one of the directors of its offshoot, the Society for Promoting the Reading and Speaking of the English Language. He was a member of the whiggish Revolution Club at Edinburgh, an honorary member of the Belles Lettres Society (elected 8 May 1760), a member of the convivial Oyster Club, and from the early 1760s until the mid-1780s a moderately active member of the Poker Club, established by his circle of friends to promote the establishment of a Scots militia. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh on 17 November 1783, and became one of the four founding presidents of its literary class at their first meeting on the same day. 
On 11 December 1759 Blair began delivering public lectures on English language and literature, following the tradition of Adam Smith and Robert Watson, the future historian, who was his relation by marriage. Six months later, on 27 June 1760, the town council of Edinburgh appointed him professor of rhetoric at the University of Edinburgh, with no salary but the right to collect class fees from his students, and on 3 September he was admitted to the university by the senatus academicus. This was the first dedicated chair of English in any university. On 27 April 1762 it was further enhanced by the creation for Blair of the regius chair of rhetoric and 'belles-lettres', with an annual salary of $70 and the continued right to collect class fees. Earlier in 1762 Blair had half-heartedly put himself forward for the vacant principalship of the university, which was given to his friend Robertson, but he seems to have done so merely in order to strengthen his claim for the regius chair, to which he was formally admitted by the senatus academicus on 21 July. 
Blair's rise to prominence in the field of rhetoric and 'belles-lettres' was closely connected with his leading role in the emergence of the supposedly ancient Celtic bard Ossian during the early 1760s. Learning from friends that a young highlander by the name of James Macpherson possessed samples of ancient Gaelic poetry, Blair arranged for Macpherson's purported translations to appear in a small volume entitled 'Fragments of Ancient Poetry, Collected in the Highlands of Scotland', published in Edinburgh on 14 June 1760, and almost immediately reissued in a second edition which added an additional poem. Blair also wrote the preface to the 'Fragments', which mentioned an 'Epic poem' that might, if recovered, 'serve to throw considerable light upon the Scottish and Irish antiquities' (p. viii). After Macpherson visited the highlands and published in late 1761 the epic poem in question, 'Fingal' (1762), Blair expanded a classroom lecture on Ossian into his first major work, 'A Critical Dissertation on the Poems of Ossian, the Son of Fingal'. It was published in London in January 1763 in a quarto format, and immediately made his international reputation as a literary critic. That spring Blair visited London, where young James Boswell served as his guide and Samuel Johnson insulted him by doubting in his presence the authenticity of Macpherson's work. Pressed by the growing doubts of Englishmen such as Johnson, along with a few sceptical Scottish friends such as David Hume, Blair produced a second, octavo edition of his 'Critical Dissertation' in 1765, which added commentary on Macpherson's second Ossianic epic, 'Temora' (1763). It also had an appendix containing testimonial evidence regarding the authenticity of Macpherson's Ossianic poetry, which he hoped would convince even 'that Barbarian Samuel Johnson' (Blair to Hume, 1 July 1765, NL Scot., MS 23153, no. 53). The 'Critical Dissertation' (without the appendix) was reissued with very minor changes in 1772, 1784-5, 1790, and 1796, was included in most editions of the poems of Ossian, and was translated into several European languages. But it could not quell the controversy over the extent of Ossian's authenticity, which is still being disputed more than two hundred years later. In the early 1780s Blair was reluctantly drawn into a particularly acrimonious controversy concerning Ossian, generated by charges that in 1765 Thomas Percy had been subjected to a bogus recitation of Ossianic poetry at Blair's Edinburgh house in James's Court. 
The house in question was owned by David Hume, who rented it to Blair while the owner was abroad. During the first half of 1769 Blair's little family moved to a 'neat & commodious' house in Argyle Square (James Shaw, 'Nine Months in Scotland, 1795-96', NL Scot., Adv. MS 16.2.15, fol. 53), where Blair was to remain for the rest of his life. On 23 August 1769 the Blairs suffered a severe blow when their beloved daughter Katherine died at the age of twenty. In his grief Blair retired 'for some time from social intercourse and professional labour' (Somerville, 167), and undertook an excursion to the north of England with two clergymen not much older than his daughter, Thomas Somerville and Samuel Charters. Somerville later recollected that Blair remained a good friend for life, and many others found him so as well. He took a particular interest in patronizing younger ministers and writers, such as the African traveller James Bruce, the historian Robert Watson, the miscellaneous writer and clergyman John Logan, and the Scots poet Robert Burns, who called him 'a worthy and most respectable character' in his second commonplace book. But Burns was also aware of Blair's faults as a critic and a man. He spoke with what Burns considered an unpleasant burr, could be vain and prudish, sometimes caring more about propriety than creativity, and all in all seemed to the Ayrshire poet to be 'merely an astonishing proof of what industry and application can do' (Lindsay, 32). However, according to Blair's nephew, James Shaw, 'his vanity... was mixed with so much good nature that it gave offence to no one' (Shaw, 'Nine Months', fol. 13). Blair's contemporary biographer, John Hill, expressed a similar view, and so did his friend Alexander Carlyle, who observed that though 'a vain man' Blair had remarkably little envy or 'malignity', and possessed 'truly a pure mind' ('Autobiography', 307). In this he was much like his good friend David Hume, with whom he lived in great intimacy, in spite of their differences concerning religion and other matters. 
Like most other clergymen affiliated with the moderate party, Blair was staunchly conservative in his political views. Early in the American War of Independence he preached a fast-day sermon against the Americans on 12 December 1776, which so offended James Boswell that it caused him to stop attending Blair's church for a period of time. In opposition to Boswell's claim that in this case 'Resistance is not Rebellion' (Boswell to Blair, 24 Feb 1777, Yale University Library, L59), Blair argued that the Americans were reacting against the fear of oppression rather than against actual oppression, and that therefore 'their resistance is in my view rebellion in its most criminal extent' ('Boswell in Extremes', 359-60). 
Blair's exchange with Boswell on the American war coincided with his publishing an octavo volume of 'Sermons' that evolved into an extraordinarily popular five-volume work. He initially received $100 for the copyright from his friend Alexander Kincaid, bookseller and lord provost of Edinburgh, who was planning to print a small first edition of the work as a favour to the author but died before its appearance. Toward the end of 1776 the London publishers William Strahan and Thomas Cadell purchased shares of the copyright, on the strength of the reputation of the author and a strong recommendation from William Robertson. The book was printed in Edinburgh under the supervision of Kincaid's protege and successor, William Creech, who sent half a printed sheet containing the book's first sermon to London for Strahan's inspection. Strahan thought little of what he read and on 6 December 1776 sent off an angry letter to Robertson, accusing him of prejudice for having recommended the volume 'so warmly' (NL Scot., MS 3942, fols. 299-300). Samuel Johnson reassured Strahan after reading the first sermon, though Boswell's 'Life of Johnson' errs in claiming that Johnson's favourable judgement was instrumental in bringing about the book's publication, which was already assured. The volume was published in Edinburgh on 8 February 1777 and in London on 15 April, and was immediately successful. 
Blair produced a second volume in 1780, a third in 1790, and a fourth in 1794, and at the time of his death he was preparing for the press a fifth volume, which appeared posthumously in 1801. In light of the initial response by Strahan, there is considerable irony in the fact that, by the time of his death in 1785, he had printed 33,500 copies of the first two volumes of Blair's 'Sermons', more copies than he printed of any other book. Sales were so strong that the value of the copyright rose to $500 for the second volume and $600 for each of the subsequent volumes, and the publishers periodically gave Blair additional cash gifts that were the functional equivalent of royalties. Thus Blair earned well over $2000 for the four volumes published in his lifetime -- a vast sum for any eighteenth-century author, but unheard of for an author of sermons. The royal family was particularly fond of the work, making it easier for Blair's former student Henry Dundas, the lord advocate of Scotland, to secure for him a pension of $200 per annum, on 25 July 1780. The first volume of the 'Sermons' reached a twenty-second edition during Blair's lifetime, and in 1807 the 'Critical Review' proclaimed the five-volume collection 'the most popular work in the English language' (vol. 11, 170), excepting 'The Spectator'. That popularity seems to have derived from the combination of an elegant prose style, a reassuring philosophy of moral comfort grounded in Christian stoicism, and perceptive psychological insights into human nature. 
In 1767 Blair published 'Heads of the Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres, in the University of Edinburgh', which was reissued in 1771 and 1777. By the early 1780s he was considering publishing the lectures themselves, allegedly because he was worried about the wide circulation of corrupt manuscript copies, but perhaps also because he was then contemplating his retirement from the classroom. 'Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres' appeared in two quarto volumes on 7 June 1783 in London, and on 5 July in Edinburgh. The publishers were once again Strahan, Cadell, and Creech, who paid Blair a handsome fee of $1500. As the author explained to his publishers on 21 June 1783, the work was based 'on plain common sense, so as to be intelligible to all, without any abstruse metaphysics' (NL Scot., MS 3813, fols. 17-18). It also benefited from Blair's comprehensive approach to his subject, which included discussions of the principles of taste and criticism, the rise and development of language, style, and various types of eloquence, both written and oral. Blair's book immediately became the new standard for the study of rhetoric and literary criticism, and was particularly popular and influential in the United States, where the 'Sermons' also enjoyed great fame during the first half of the nineteenth century. In July 1784 Blair officially became joint holder of the rhetoric and 'belles-lettres' chair with his disciple William Greenfield, who had already begun lecturing and collecting the class fees, while Blair continued to receive the $70 annual salary for life. According to a biographical sketch written just before his death, Blair's pension was raised from $200 to $300 per annum on the occasion of his academic retirement. 
On 18 April 1793 Blair preached a patriotic fast-day sermon against the French Revolution and its influence, 'On the love of our country'; it would eventually find its way into the fifth volume of his 'Sermons', consisting mainly of older sermons which he continued to revise for the press throughout the 1790s. He suffered a blow upon the death of his old friend William Robertson in June 1793, another when Robertson's office as principal of the university was not offered to him as an expected courtesy, and still another, far more devastating, when his wife, Katherine, died on 9 February 1795. He lived his last years with his niece and adopted daughter, Elizabeth Hunter, an orphan whom the Blairs had brought into their home shortly after their daughter's death; they passed winters in Argyle Square and summers at a country house called Summerfield, at the seaside in nearby Leith. On 20 May 1796 Blair preached a sermon that was published for the benefit of the Sons of the Clergy under the title 'The Compassion and Beneficence of the Deity'. Although pained by gout, he nevertheless remained mentally sharp and active until just before his death, at the age of eighty-two, on 27 December 1800. He was buried in Greyfriars churchyard and left behind a substantial estate, including bonds worth approximately $4000, the Argyle Square house and its furnishings, and a fine library of some 2400 volumes, which were sold at auction in two parts, in April 1801 and April 1816. His personal papers and manuscripts were burned, in accordance with a directive in his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 2564


Blair, James (1655/6-1743), Church of England clergyman and founder of the College of William and Mary, was the son of Peter Blair (died 1673), Church of Scotland minister of St Cuthbert's parish, Edinburgh, and his wife, Mary Hamilton (died in or after 1696). He is sometimes described instead as the eldest of four sons and one daughter of Robert Blair, Church of Scotland minister of Alvah, Banffshire, but this is probably an error. Admitted to Marischal College, Aberdeen, in 1668 as a Crombie scholar, aged twelve, Blair the next year matriculated at the University of Edinburgh, and graduated MA on 21 July 1673. He completed his theological studies in 1679, when he was ordained a priest of the Church of Scotland by John Paterson, bishop of Edinburgh. Blair served the parish of Cranston in the presbytery of Dalkeith, 10 miles south-west of Edinburgh, from 11 July 1679 until deprived in 1681. 
The privy council of Scotland on 22 December 1681 noted that Blair, like many Scottish episcopalian clergymen, had refused to swear and subscribe to the test oath that acknowledged the Catholic James, duke of York and Albany (later James VII and II), as the head of the Scottish church should James succeed as king of Scotland. Caught in a dilemma, Blair sought the assistance of his former Edinburgh University professor of divinity, Laurence Charteris, who had resigned his academic appointment rather than sign the oath. Charteris wrote to a fellow Scotsman in London, Gilbert Burnet, preacher at the Rolls Chapel, a former professor of divinity at Marischal College, requesting his help on Blair's behalf. 
Blair travelled to London where through Burnet's efforts he became an under-clerk (1682-5) of the master of the rolls. Burnet introduced Blair to such prominent church leaders as John Tillotson, later archbishop of Canterbury, and Henry Compton, bishop of London. In 1685 Compton, seeking men to serve the overseas church, appointed Blair to serve Henrico parish in Virginia and four years later appointed him his commissary in the colony. In 1694 Blair became minister of the James City parish, serving until 1710 when he became the parson of Bruton parish in Williamsburg, a post he held until his death. 
On 28 April 1687 Blair married Sarah (1670-1713), the seventeen-year-old daughter of the prominent Benjamin Harrison the younger of Wakefield in Surry county, Virginia, a planter and influential member of the colonial council. Blair was linked by marriage to several leading Virginia families. Later his brother Archibald and his nephew John became conspicuous leaders of the house of burgesses and colonial council, establishing for Blair a vital and potent network of political connections. Blair extended his personal fortune and status through his acquisition of land and his financial participation in his brother Archibald Blair's trading store in Williamsburg, and became a prominent defender of the economic and political interests of the provincial gentry. 
Doubtless Blair's most significant legacy was the founding and development of the College of William and Mary. The idea for establishing a college in the colony had been current for nearly eighty years. As early as 1619 the Virginia Company of London had moved to grant 10,000 acres to support the founding of the University of Henrico with special attention for an Indian college. At the time English prelates raised $1500 to aid in the project. However, the Good Friday massacre of 1622 at the Henrico settlement had terminated the project. In 1660 the general assembly of the sparsely settled province renewed efforts to found a college with the purpose of providing ministers for the Church of England in Virginia, enabling the education of the colony's young men on religious and classical principles, and propagating Christianity among the native Americans. 
Provincial political turmoil and Bacon's rebellion in the 1670s and unsteady constitutional affairs in England during the 1680s suspended plans for a college. Recognizing that from the establishment of the colony in 1607 there had been a chronic shortage of ministers at a convention of the clergy in 1690 Blair proposed the need for establishing a college to educate candidates for the ministry. The parsons in attendance approved of the plan and Blair enlisted the financial support of key provincial leaders, including the governor, Francis Nicholson, and members of the general assembly. Recognizing Blair's influential London contacts the legislature requested that he travel to London to obtain a royal charter and an endowment for the institution. He sailed in 1691 and obtained the support of William III and Mary II for the institution. A royal charter for the College of William and Mary was granted on 8 February 1693, with Henry Compton, bishop of London, designated as chancellor, and Blair as president. He was rewarded with appointment to the colonial council in 1694, a position he held for nearly fifty years. 
On Blair's return to Virginia the college, based at Middle Plantation, Virginia, began instruction about 1695 with a handful of students but was exposed to weak financial circumstances and difficulty attracting tutors. In 1699 a joint initiative by Blair and the governor of Virginia, Francis Nicholson, led to Middle Plantation being renamed Williamsburg, replacing Jamestown as Virginia's capital. In 1705 a fire practically reduced the college buildings to ruins and it was not until 1716 that they were rebuilt and classes resumed. Fortunes for the college improved by the late 1720s and Blair spent much of 1726-7 in England raising funds with the assistance of Edmund Gibson, bishop of London. In 1729, nearly three and a half decades after the college opened, Blair entered formally on the duties of his office as president. 
During Blair's first three decades in Virginia and as a member of the colonial council he was regularly engaged in controversies with royal governors. Each dispute was shaped by the strong willed temperaments of the combatants, men archly seeking to protect and advance the prerogatives of their offices. Blair's conflicts with the royal officials led to their recall by the Board of Trade. He stridently complained in a 1697 memorial to Bishop Compton, a member of the Board of Trade, that the governor, Sir Edmund Andros, neglected to serve the needs of the church and the college. He argued that twenty-seven of the fifty congregations in the province were without ministers; that parson's salaries were deficient; and that the recently founded college was in need of urgent provincial financial assistance. The commissary also claimed that Andros had withheld granting the use of glebes to several ministers because the vestries had not presented the men to the livings, a situation that led Andros not to intercede and induct the clergymen. A menu of charges suggested that Andros was not fulfilling his royal instruction on ecclesiastical affairs. Both men were summoned by the archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Tension, to Lambeth Palace in 1697 to discuss the matter. It remains unclear how the objections of both disputants were resolved. None the less Andros resigned his governorship in 1697. 
Blair attacked Francis Nicholson, Andros's successor, in 1703, when he complained to Bishop Compton that Nicholson was marked with a personal streak of 'hypocrisy and profaneness'. The controversy between the two men was expanded and included a division of opinion between several members of the colonial council and the rank and file members of the provincial clergy. Joined by five members of the Virginia council Blair presented to Queen Anne in 1703 a memorial disparaging the arbitrariness and maladministration of Nicholson's regime. The governor counter-attacked by summoning the Virginia clergy to a convention at Williamsburg on 25 August 1703 for a discussion of the dispute. After hearing a presentation of the two antagonists, twenty ministers in attendance supported Nicholson's position and noted their satisfaction with his administration. The men concluded that Blair's action had stirred up public contempt for the clergy. They recommended to Bishop Compton that Blair should be required to confine his duties to furthering his ecclesiastical duties with the aid of the colony's well-to-do planters rather than to indulge in such divisive political affairs. Blair's unrelenting criticism forced the Board of Trade to recall Nicholson in 1705. 
Blair's political and educational interests overshadowed his career as a deputy of the bishops of London in Williamsburg. Despite his tough-mindedness, persistence, and political acumen, he was not venerated by his fellow clerics, and was warily surveyed by politicians and laymen. In churchmanship he was a latitudinarian, and in 1703 he welcomed the first missionary of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel to the colonies, the recently converted former Quaker George Keith, to the pulpit of the Jamestown church. Keith was on an assignment to assess the state of the church in the colonies on behalf of the society. Throughout his career Blair had limited contact with the society, as the Church of England was established by statute in Virginia. There was no need for him or the local vestries to rely on the society for a regular supply of ministers to fill vacant pulpits or to pay their salaries. Successive bishops of London aided in the recruitment of clergymen. Blair's view of doctrine was expounded in 'Our Saviour's divine sermon on the mount, contained in the fifth, sixth and seventh chapters of St Matthew's gospel, explained, and the practice of it recommended in divers sermons and discourses', published in four volumes in London in 1722. A second edition appeared in 1732, with a preface by Daniel Waterland. 
Blair's third major political opponent was Alexander Spotswood, lieutenant-governor of Virginia from 1710. Their dispute festered for several years and came to a head in 1719 and 1720. Blair outspokenly objected to Spotswood's efforts to impose additional imperial authority over such local institutions as the judiciary, the colonial council, and the right of vestrymen to induct into parishes ministers of their choosing. Following Nicholson's example Spotswood called the clergy to a convention in 1719 with the specific purpose of bluntly challenging Blair's charges. Again the clergy were divided in their support of the commissary and the governor. Yet Spotswood emerged from the controversy a blighted official and in 1722 was recalled by the Board of Trade. The Spotswood dispute was Blair's last feud with a royal governor and for the remainder of his life he called the clergy to convention only once, in 1727. He retained his latitudinarian position to the extent that in December 1739 Blair welcomed George Whitefield to his home and church, when his Anglican counterparts in Philadelphia, New York, and Boston had rejected Whitefield, whose preaching excoriated most of the Church of England clergy. Whitefield preached from the pulpit of Bruton parish church to a congregation that included lieutenant-governor William Gooch and members of the provincial council. 
At bottom Blair was a complex personality, at once bold, narrowly tough-minded, self-confident, hot tempered, and politically accomplished. By his offices and longevity Blair was a prominent Virginia public figure. During the absence of the lieutenant-governor, Gooch, from the colony he served for more than a year in the early 1740s as acting governor. 
Childless, Blair died in Williamsburg, Virginia, on 1 August 1743, aged eighty-seven, a wealthy man, and was buried at Jamestown church cemetery alongside his wife, who had died on 5 May 1713. His will, dated 5 April 1743, bequeathed to the college his library and $500 for a scholarship for 'breeding a young divine'. The remainder of his $10,000 estate he left to his nephew, John Blair (1687-1771), including 1250 acres of farmland in New Kent and 100 acres of the Richneck Tract; a half interest in the Blair-Prentis store with a value of $6000; as well as unfree servants and other property. He also bequeathed $100 for the education of poor children. 


@@@@@


doc= 2565


Blair, Sir James Hunter, first baronet (1741-1787), banker, was born James Hunter on 26 February 1741 at Ayr, the second of three sons of John Hunter (died 'c'.1762), a wealthy merchant and probably banker of Mainholm, later of Brownhill, both in Ayrshire, and Anna, daughter and heir of William Cunningham of Brownhill. He had a younger sister, Elizabeth. Hunter was apprenticed to the Edinburgh banking house of the Coutts brothers in 1756, where he met Sir William Forbes, who became a lifelong friend and colleague. When the Coutts partnership was weakened by the death in 1761 of its principal, John Coutts, Forbes successfully persuaded the family in London to give an interest in the firm to himself and to Hunter, who inherited $5000 from his father's estate in 1762. 
The Edinburgh bank traded under the name of John Coutts until 1773, when the name became Sir W. Forbes, J. Hunter & Co., and these two principals conducted the firm in complete harmony until Hunter's death in 1787. Hunter was for some years, but to a lesser extent than Forbes, concerned in the London enterprises of Sir Robert Herries, who had briefly trained with them at the Edinburgh bank. 
In December 1770 Hunter married Jane (died 1817), eldest daughter of John Blair of Dunskey House near Portpatrick in Wigtownshire, and they had at least nine children; his wife had six brothers but they all predeceased her, and when Jane inherited her father's estate, in 1777, Hunter assumed the surname of Blair. It was only after this marriage, in the last ten years of his life, that Blair became particularly well known. He had an interest in the development of Portpatrick, the town from which the shortest crossing to Ireland might be made (to Donaghadee), and he combined this with a concern for urban improvements in Edinburgh. The latter projects were by far the more successful in the long term. Despite his enhancements to the harbour and the provision of better packet-boats, Portpatrick remained little more than a village; it was to be further eclipsed by Stranraer in the steam age. 
In 1781 and 1784 Blair represented Edinburgh in parliament. A single speech has been documented, on 4 August 1784, when he argued against the imposition of new duties on linen and cotton and 'proved his extensive knowledge of the trade and manufactures of Scotland. His arguments were pointed and conclusive' (Haden-Guest, 658). A supporter of William Pitt (1759-1806), Blair vacated his seat later in 1784 to make way for Sir Adam Fergusson. 
Blair became lord provost of Edinburgh in 1784 and set about schemes to improve the university buildings and, more especially, the accessibility of the city centre from the southern suburbs. His enduring memorial is the south bridge over the Cowgate, which was linked to the earlier north bridge on the opposite side of High Street. The south bridge formed part of a viaduct of twenty-two arches, mostly hidden from view, which carried a new road, flanked by new development, towards Nicolson Street. This major project was bitterly controversial, both because of the levies and tolls proposed for the funding, and because of the longer-term fear that people would migrate to the suburbs to avoid the taxes of the inner city. The Edinburgh historian Hugo Arnot, writing at a time when he believed the scheme had been defeated, denounced it at length as 'iniquitous' and 'absurd' (Arnot, 250); paradoxically his appendix, and the publisher's addendum after Arnot's death in 1786, were almost enthusiastic. The foundation stone of the bridge was laid on 1 August 1785; the structure was completed in the following year, though the new road to the south was not opened for carriages until March 1788. The scheme was a triumph, with building land alongside reputedly fetching $100,000 per acre. Although it is usual also to associate the name of Sir William Forbes with the south bridge venture, Forbes himself wrote of it as being 'the magnificent idea' of his colleague (Forbes, 65). 
Blair, who was made a baronet in 1786 as a result of the south bridge construction, did not live to see his ambition fully completed. He had gone to Harrogate in April 1787 for what Forbes called 'a scorbutic complaint' (Forbes, 64), and he died there quite suddenly on 1 July, aged forty-six, 'of a putrid fever' ('GM', 641). He was widely lamented, as a diligent, cheerful, and gregarious man, shrewd in business and honest in his principles. His caricature by John Kay depicts him as tall and corpulent. Forbes wrote that Blair was 'but little acquainted with books or literature' (Forbes, 65), but that he had won the friendship and respect of Robert Burns, who wrote an elegy on his death. As this poem includes the line 'The drooping arts surround their patron's bier' (Burns, 'Poems and Songs'), Forbes's comment might be too severe. Another poem or 'monody' on Blair's death was published in the 'Edinburgh Magazine'. 
Blair was certainly well acquainted with prominent engineers, including John Smeaton, who worked at Portpatrick, and John Loudon McAdam. He was also interested in agricultural improvements, and raised standards among farmers near his Dunskey estate. He is commemorated by Blair Street and Hunter Square in Edinburgh (appropriately near the south bridge), and probably by Blair Terrace, formerly Blair Street, in Portpatrick. He was buried at Edinburgh, his six sons flanking the coffin on its journey to the Greyfriars churchyard on 11 July 1787. Between his death and his funeral, 'the music bells of Edinburgh' had been silenced ('GM', 641). 


@@@@@


doc= 2566


Blair, John (supp. fl. c.1300), supposed biographer and priest, was the creation of Hary, the late fifteenth-century author of a life of Sir William Wallace (died 1305). To give authority to his own tendentious and unreliable verse account of his hero's exploits, Hary invented the learned and Paris-trained clerk John Blair, who, having acted as both Wallace's chaplain and his comrade-in-arms, could plausibly be presented as the man who 'first compilid in dyt the Latyne buk Off Wallace lyff' (Hary, 1.89). There is no evidence that such a man as Hary presents in this role ever existed. But it is highly likely that in the shadow cast by the fictional John Blair lies a real-life namesake, the John Blair who became a Glasgow MA in 1461 and was a royal chaplain six years later, when he was paid by James III for translating Sir John Mandeville's 'Travels' -- a work not without influence on Hary. By 1472 he had become vicar of Maybole in Kyle, Ayrshire, and held that living until at least 1488. This John Blair was surely a friend and adviser of the poet, who paid him the compliment of borrowing his name for the scholarly source required by his epic poem. Among those deceived by Hary's invention was the late sixteenth-century literary historian Thomas Dempster, who attributes to John Blair not only the 'Gesta Guliemi Wallas', but also a treatise entitled 'De liberata Tyrannide Scotia'. The works will have had as much objective reality as their author. 


@@@@@


doc= 2567


Blair, John (d. 1782), Church of England clergyman and chronologist, was descended from the Blairs of Balthayock, Perthshire, although precise information about his parents, date of birth, and early years is lacking. He was born and educated in Edinburgh, where he trained for a career in the Church of Scotland along with Hugh Blair, Alexander Carlyle, John Home, William Robertson, and other young men who would become notable for their association with the Scottish Enlightenment. According to Carlyle's memoirs, he obtained his licence to preach in Scotland, but before receiving a Scottish pastoral charge he visited London with a patrimony of several hundred pounds, and ended up taking orders in the Church of England and remaining in London for the rest of his life. His first known position there was as an usher at a school in Hedge Lane. 
In the early 1750s Blair issued 'Proposals for Printing by Subscription, the General Chronology and History of the World', a work he is said to have adapted from chronological tables originally devised by his Edinburgh classmate and distant relation, Hugh Blair. 'The Chronology and History of the World' was published in London in early summer 1754. The book quickly became the standard work of its kind and was frequently reprinted throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. To the 1768 edition Blair added a set of fourteen maps and 'A dissertation on the rise and progress of geography', which were also published separately in the same year, and in 1784 an expanded version of his dissertation was published in a smaller duodecimo format. A French translation of 'The Chronology and History of the World' appeared in Paris in 1797, and there were several American editions in the 1820s. From 1856 onwards it was known as 'Blair's Chronological Tables, Revised and Enlarged', although the editor of the 1856 London edition, J. Willoughby Rosse, declared in the preface that 'all that remains of 'Blair' is the general outline' (xii); a London edition was published with that title as late as 1904. 
The success of Blair's book led to the author's election as a fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1755; in the same year he published a paper, 'Agitation of the waters near Reading', in the society's 'Transactions'. In 1761 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. In September 1757, through the influence at Leicester House of John Home and Gilbert Elliot, among others, Blair was appointed chaplain to Augusta, princess-dowager of Wales (to whom he later dedicated some editions of his 'Chronology and History'), and mathematics tutor to her son Prince Edward, later duke of York, whom he accompanied on a continental tour in 1763-4. He subsequently served as Edward's secretary, and owed to him his appointment as prebendary of Westminster in March 1761, which was later followed by presentation of the dean and chapter of Westminster to the vicarage of Hinckley, to the vicarage of St Bride's, London, in 1771, and to the rectory of St John the Evangelist, Westminster, in 1776. He was also rector of Horton in Buckinghamshire. 
Alexander Carlyle called Blair 'a lively agreeable fellow, and one of the most friendly men in the world' ('Autobiography', ed. Burton, 198), but he also observed that Blair was 'disliked by many people, particularly by [Tobias] Smollett' on account of 'a certain petulant and wrangling humour' and 'his flippancy of speech' (ibid., 353-4). Blair died in Dean's Yard, Westminster, on 24 June 1782. Three years later Thomas Cadell published by subscription a quarto edition of his only religious work, 'Lectures on the canon of the scriptures, comprehending a dissertation on the Septuagint version', which had been delivered in the cathedral church of Westminster. It was dedicated to the king by the author's widow, Anne Persode Blair, who is identified in the anonymous editor's advertisement as the person 'upon whose account the publication was undertaken' (xii). 


@@@@@


doc= 2568


Blair, Patrick (c.1680-1728), botanist and surgeon, was born at Lethendy, Perthshire, the third son of George Blair (died 1682), a farmer, and his wife, Euphame. Little is known of his early life, and his date of birth is not certain. He was apprenticed to a surgeon-apothecary from the late 1680s, possibly in Coupar Angus, Perthshire, where he was later in practice. Between 1694 and 1697 he was in the Low Countries, mainly Flanders, where he practised surgery and also made botanical observations. His knowledge of continental botanical theories may date from this period. Blair was in Dundee by 1700, and in 1701 advertised a projected anatomical handbook in the 'Edinburgh Gazette' (where he is identified as 'surgeon-apothecary of Dundee'). This work was never published, although Blair described it in a letter to James Petiver in 1709. 
Blair married Elizabeth or Elspeth Whyte in April 1702. Their son John was baptized in 1703. They had another son, Henry, and two daughters, Elizabeth and Isobell (died 1745). 
In April 1706 a female Indian elephant, which had been exhibited around northern Scotland, died near Dundee. Blair was given the opportunity to anatomize it, and with the help of local butchers he skinned the elephant and retrieved the bones, which he mounted for exhibition in Dundee, along with the stuffed skin. He wrote a detailed paper on the elephant's anatomy, which was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of the Royal Society of London in 1710, and also published as a pamphlet in 1713, under the title of 'Osteographia elephantina'. In 1712 Blair was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and in the same year was granted an MD from King's College, Aberdeen, on the rolls of which he is identified as residing in Coupar Angus. Blair also enrolled an apprentice in Coupar Angus in that year, so presumably he had by then moved there from Dundee. He contributed several more papers to the 'Philosophical Transactions', mainly on botanical subjects. Blair corresponded with Hans Sloane and James Petiver on these topics. He had been introduced to Sloane by Charles Preston in 1705. 
In 1713 Blair journeyed to London, staying with Petiver, and visited Jacob Bobart in Oxford on the way back; Bobart, like Blair, upheld Robert Morison's system of classification of plants over that of John Ray. He also travelled to Lichfield to meet Sir John Floyer, with whom he agreed on the value of cold bathing, especially in nervous disorders. 
Blair came from a family of Jacobites and was acquainted with the Jacobite physician Archibald Pitcairne, as well as with the earl of Mar. In 1715 Blair joined Lord Nairn's battalion as a surgeon and was taken prisoner at Preston. He was taken to London and imprisoned at Newgate, where he was tried on 31 March 1716, pleaded guilty, and was condemned to death. Sloane and Petiver visited him in prison, and Blair appealed to Sloane and Richard Mead to secure him a pardon. Blair assured Sloane that he had joined the rebel army involuntarily. On the night before his scheduled execution, Blair awaited impatiently the arrival of his expected pardon, which arrived only after midnight. 
Blair apparently had some difficulty in re-establishing his practice after his imprisonment. In 1719 he wrote to Sloane asking for a loan to enable him to set up a practice in Newcastle. However, he continued to publish scientific works, including an account of pyloric stenosis in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1717, probably the earliest account of that condition. He published his 'Miscellaneous observations in the practise of physick, anatomy and surgery: with new and curious remarks in botany' in London in 1718. 
Blair finally settled about 1720 in Boston, Lincolnshire, where he practised medicine and continued his botanical studies. His 'Botanick Essays' appeared in the same year. Blair's interest in botany was both medical and scientific; he was interested in pharmaceutical uses of plants but also investigated their intrinsic properties. In 'Botanick Essays' he discussed the new concept of plant sexuality. However, like many of his British contemporaries, Blair viewed plant reproduction as hermaphroditic, rather than requiring two different sexes. He was an 'ovulist' rather than a 'pollenist', and engaged in controversy over this matter with other botanists, particularly Richard Bradley. 
In 1723 Blair published the first volume of his 'Pharmaco-botanologia', an encyclopaedic account of the plants listed in the London pharmacopoeia. The last volume of this work, which took it up to the letter H, appeared in 1728. Blair died at Boston in January 1728. 


@@@@@


doc= 2569


Blair, Robert (1593-1666), Church of Scotland minister, was the sixth son of John Blair of Windyedge (died 'c'.1598), a merchant in Irvine, Ayrshire, and his wife, Beatrix or Bessie Mure (died 1640s), both of whom traced their descent from landed families. Having 'profited well in my bairnly studies', Blair, between 1611 and 1614, attended the University of Glasgow, where, perceiving himself 'to be inferior to none of my fellow-students', he was smitten by God with a tertian fever for four months 'lest I should be puffed up' ('Life', 7). Subsequently, when he was studying at night in a haunted room, a spirit fled from him, confirming his faith in God's power. Having graduated MA he spent some time as a schoolmaster before becoming, in 1615, a regent at the university. He was licensed to preach the following year. 
Blair opposed the reforms of worship embodied in the five articles of Perth (1618) and the growing power of bishops, and his presbyterianism was strengthened by 'the daft people of Stewarton', as enemies called those involved in the Ayrshire religious revival of 1622, and by visiting ministers confined to Turriff and Inverness for holding views similar to his own. Under increasing pressure to conform he resigned his post in Glasgow University in 1623 and became minister of a congregation in Bangor, co. Down. In the freer atmosphere of Ulster, where any protestant minister was welcome, he was ordained by the bishop of Down even though he had explained his objections to episcopacy. However, Blair was suspended from his ministry in 1631 for having taken part in a great revivalist presbyterian communion at Kirk o' Shotts (Lanarkshire) the previous year. Deposition followed in 1632, and his 27-year-old wife, Beatrix Hamilton, whom he had married on 16 July 1626, was 'perfected' by death in November 1633 ('Life', 100). Undaunted, he travelled to court in England and persuaded Charles I to order his restoration, but his continued nonconformity led to a second deposition in 1634. 
Despairing, Blair and his new wife, Katherine (daughter of Hugh, Lord Montgomery of Airds) embarked for New England in 1636, but when their ship was driven back by storms he concluded that this was a sign that God needed him elsewhere. A favour from God was that his infant son did not die at sea, but on the day they landed in Ireland, having been 'persecuted to the death by the prelates and their followers' ('Life', 146). Orders were given for Blair's arrest, and he fled to Scotland early in 1637. He lived in Irvine, Ayrshire, and preached in the surrounding area, joining John Livingstone, David Dickson, and other dissident ministers with whom he had worked for many years, in campaigning against the changes in worship embodied in Charles I's new Scottish prayer book. However, Blair despaired of successful resistance to royal policy and decided that it was now God's wish that he should work in France, something he had long contemplated. He accepted an invitation to become preacher to Hepburn's regiment, a Scottish unit in the French service. However, once on board he found the recruits with whom he was to travel 'most profligate, and desperately wicked men' given to 'filthy conversation' ('Life', 152). On being threatened when he rebuked them, Blair hastily decided that God did not want him to go to France after all, and went ashore. 
Following the outbreak of open resistance to the new prayer book in July 1637 and the advent of the national covenant in February 1638 Blair became second minister at Ayr, in July 1638, and sat in the general assembly which abolished episcopacy, but he seems to have been reluctant to become involved in organizing the campaign against royal policies. None the less, the persecution he had endured in Ireland and Scotland had made him a revered figure and the assembly ordered his transfer from Ayr to St Andrews. He 'earnestlie opposed' the move ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.89), and took up his new post only after the 1639 assembly again ordered him to go. Earlier in 1639 he had acted as chaplain in the Scottish army which had assembled on the borders to oppose the king, and he rejoined the army when it invaded northern England in 1640. Subsequently he went to London as chaplain to the Scots commissioners sent to negotiate a peace settlement. When Charles I visited Scotland in 1641 Blair was chosen to preach before him (8 November), and he preached in Ulster to presbyterians and the Scottish army there for three months in 1642. He was involved with negotiating the solemn league and covenant with England in 1643, and served as a regimental chaplain to a Scottish regiment in England in 1644, being 'an eye and ear witness' to the battle on Marston Moor ('Life', 172). 
In 1645, when a number of royalists were executed in St Andrews in the bitter aftermath of civil war, Blair was present on the scaffold with Sir Robert Spottiswood. Blair's supporters recorded Spottiswood's 'railing discourse' against the covenanters, and asserted that Blair's response was mild: 'It's no wonder to hear the son of a false prophet' (the archbishop of St Andrews) speak so of the faithful and honest servants of Jesus Christ. Spottiswood, says Blair, 'died railing and raging' ('Life', 180). Royalists, however, spoke of Blair being white with fury and breaking 'out into scurrilous abuse' of Spottiswood, which he bore in 'serene silence' (G. Wishart, 'Memoirs of James Marquis of Montrose', 1893, 171). 
Blair was elected moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland on 3 June 1646, and he was one of the ministers subsequently sent to negotiate with Charles I when the king was a prisoner of the Scottish army in England at Newcastle. A few months later Charles agreed to appoint Blair to be his chaplain, regarding him as more acceptable than the other Scottish ministers. Blair accepted the post with reluctance, remaining with the king until, in January 1647, the Scottish army withdrew from England. 
Blair opposed the Scottish engagers' attempt to help the king in 1648, and after they were defeated by Cromwell in England he helped persuade the remnants of their army to disband. Sent to England to attend Scottish commissioners there, he sought unsuccessfully to prevent the prosecution and execution of Charles I, and it was rumoured that the king had asked for Blair to accompany him to the scaffold. On his journey home Blair suffered much from gout, and after 'being troubled with the gout, and sometimes more pained with the gravel (his two twins as he used to call them)' ('Life', 218) he was much less active than in the past, although he was one of the ministers who tried to persuade the marquess of Montrose to repent before his execution in May 1650. 
When the Scottish church split into warring factions in 1650 Blair sided with the more moderate resolutioners against the protesters, but he saw the dispute as 'the heart-break of all honest and moderate men' and, being 'displeased with some things on both sides' he worked for reconciliation ('Life', 301). He was one of those summoned to London in May 1654 by Cromwell to try to resolve the matter, but was unwilling to attend and too ill to do so. He concentrated on his work as parish minister but, worn down by the disputes of hostile factions, in 1660 he unsuccessfully sought permission to move from St Andrews to another parish. 
On the restoration of monarchy and episcopacy Blair was removed from the ministry (September 1661) after defiantly preaching in support of presbyterianism. He was at first confined to his room in Edinburgh, but in January 1662 he was ordered instead to confine himself in the parish of Musselburgh. Blair disliked the place and soon obtained permission to move to Kirkcaldy, where he remained for three and a half years. He continued preaching to and worshipping with presbyterian dissidents, but in February 1666, fearing action would be taken against him, he withdrew to Couston, near Aberdour. There his presence still attracted dissidents, but he soon fell ill, 'being worn with old age, but much more with sorrow'. He died on 27 August 1666 and was buried in Aberdour. 
As well as his autobiography (which ends in the 1630s) and some Latin verse Blair wrote a preface for James Durham's 'The Dying Man's Testimony... a Treatise on Scandal' (1659), and several other works which remained unpublished. Though stubborn in his resistance to episcopacy, Blair seems to have had little taste for controversy or a role in public affairs, and was influential mainly through his preaching, praying, and piety. Robert Baillie, who had been his student, was devoted to him, praising him for 'his great dexteritie; yea greater than any man I know living, to insinuate the fear of God in the hearts of young schollars' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.174). 


@@@@@


doc= 2570


Blair, Robert (1699-1746), poet, was born in Edinburgh, the eldest son of the Revd David Blair (died 1710), minister of the Old Kirk parish in Edinburgh and one of the king's chaplains, and his wife, Euphemia Nisbet, daughter of Alexander Nisbet of Carfin, Lanarkshire. Hugh Blair, who was to become famous as professor of rhetoric and 'belles-lettres' at the University of Edinburgh, was his first cousin. Robert was educated at the University of Edinburgh and in the Netherlands, though no specific details of his education remain. 
From about 1718 to 1731 Blair resided probably in Edinburgh as an unemployed probationer, finally being licensed to preach by the presbytery of Haddington on 5 August 1729. Prior to his only church living as minister in Haddington presbytery at Athelstaneford, Haddingtonshire, to which he was ordained on 5 January 1731, references to Blair are scant. There is an 'Epistle to Robert Blair' in a miscellany, 'Lugubres cantus', published in Edinburgh in 1719 that provides no biographical detail of its dedicatee. Blair was a member, probably, of the Athenian Society, an Edinburgh literary club whose members included James Thomson, author of 'The Seasons', who may have been Blair's fellow student at Divinity Hall in Edinburgh. In 1720 the Athenians published a volume of verse, the 'Edinburgh Miscellany', that includes the early work of Thomson. Some slight pietistic poems in the book signed by B are usually taken to be by Blair. In 1728 Blair published his 'Poem Dedicated to the Memory of... William Law', 138 lines of elegiac verse in the form of a quarto pamphlet on the professor of moral philosophy at Edinburgh, William Law of Elvingston. 
On 11 April 1738 Blair married Isabella (died 1774), the daughter of Professor Law. The couple had five sons, David, William, Francis, Robert Blair (1741-1811), who was to become Lord Blair of Avontoun, lord president of the Scottish college of justice from 1808, and a man admired by George III, and Archibald; they also had one daughter, Anna. Blair possessed a private fortune and had long relied on this to give him leisure to pursue his two chief interests, English poetry and botany. At Athelstaneford, Blair seems to have continued a rather solitary life of which, Alexander Carlyle, in his 'Anecdotes and Characters of the Times', provides a rather acidic glimpse during 1744, 'I got away time enough next Day to reach Haddington before Dinner; Having past by Athelstaneford where the Minister Mr Robert Blair Author of The Grave, was said to be Dying Slowly; or at any Rate, was so Austere and void of Urbanity, as to make him quite Disagreeable to young People ('Autobiography', ed. Burton, 49)' At Athelstaneford, Blair worked slowly on 'The Grave', which he had begun while living in Edinburgh. The long genesis of the poem probably resulted from an extreme care not so much born out of perfectionism as out of wariness on the part of Blair, due to a Calvinist cultural climate in Scotland that was only very slowly changing so as to accommodate poetry. The advance of the evangelical revival in Britain in the 1740s licensed the often gloomy, emotional excess that Blair poured into his religious poem and spurred its author to seek publication. In 1742 the poem was finished and Blair sent the manuscript to the great hymnist Dr Isaac Watts, who attempted, unsuccessfully, to interest two London booksellers in publishing it. In 1743 with the help of another English divine, Dr Philip Doddridge, Blair succeeded in having 'The Grave' published in quarto and it enjoyed an instantly huge vogue. 

'The Grave' features 767 lines of blank verse and is notable more for its luxuriantly melancholy atmosphere rather than for any profound intellectual ideas. Not entirely even in its quality of writing, the poem does feature passages of exquisite description. Its opening section invokes the grave as 'Eternal King! Whose potent arm sustains / The keys of Hell and Death' (ll. 1-10). In a manner that sets the tone for the rest of the poem, Blair proceeds very morbidly to describe the physical horror of the tomb (ll. 11-27), the eeriness of the churchyard and human loneliness (ll. 28-87), and from there reflects on 'Friendship! mysterious cement of the soul' (ll. 88-110). Returning to contemplation of the grave, the poet considers the foolish vanity of mankind when set against this certainty, producing a fervent 'contemptus mundi' (ll. 111-368). The poem next considers the strangeness and imponderability of death and includes some of the piece's finest moments on the fragility of human life and understanding (ll. 369-633). The final 140 lines of the poem bring a far from entirely convincing and rather forced, pietistic meditation on human sin and the resurrection. 
As one commentator has noted, ''The Grave' accorded with the Post-Enlightenment vogue of melancholy' (Simpson, 11). Along with Edward Young's 'Night Thoughts on Life, Death, and Immortality' (1742-5), Blair's poem initiated a fashion for 'mortuary poems' and Young himself had been inspired to continue in his own, longer project by the success of Blair's work. Blair's poetry is a harbinger of the literary cult of sentiment and paves the way for the melancholy writing of such proto-Romantic writers as Thomas Gray and James Macpherson. The repeated publication of 'The Grave' also afforded the opportunity for one of the great Romantic artists, William Blake, to provide illustrations for it in 1808. 
In spite of his literary fame, or perhaps because of the awkwardness with which this sat upon a Church of Scotland minister (a number of talented Scottish literary divines found such a co-existence difficult), Blair published nothing else and no literary manuscripts were found posthumously among his effects. Robert Blair died of a fever on 4 February 1746 and was buried in the churchyard at Athelstaneford under a plain stone marked 'R. B.'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2571


Blair, Robert, Lord Avontoun (1741-1811), judge, was born at Athelstaneford, Haddingtonshire, Scotland, the third son of the minister of the parish, the Revd Robert Blair (1699-1746), author of 'The Grave', and his wife, Isabella (died 1774), eldest daughter of William Law (died 1728) of Elvingston, Haddingtonshire, professor of moral philosophy in the University of Edinburgh. 
Blair began his education at the grammar school at Haddington; from there he was sent to the high school at Edinburgh, where he formed a lifelong friendship with Henry Dundas, afterwards Viscount Melville. Thence he was transferred to the university. In 1764 he was admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates and he soon obtained a considerable practice at the bar, where he and Henry Erskine were often pitted against each other. On 19 May 1786 he married Isabella Cornelia (1766-1857), third and youngest daughter of Colonel Charles Craigie Halkett of Lawhill, Fife. They had a son and three daughters. 
In 1789 Blair, having served some years as an advocate-depute and as an assessor for the city of Edinburgh, was appointed solicitor-general for Scotland. About this time he bought a small estate at Avontoun, Linlithgowshire, where he took much pleasure in agricultural pursuits. He continued to occupy his post until the change of ministry that was occasioned by Pitt's death in 1806. During this period he twice refused the offer of a seat on the judicial bench, and in both 1802 and 1805 he declined to accept the office of lord advocate. In 1801 he was elected dean of the Faculty of Advocates. Upon the return of the tory party to power in 1807 he refused the offices of solicitor-general and lord advocate but in the next year, upon the resignation of Sir Ilay Campbell, he accepted the presidency of the college of justice. He had been chosen as a safe pair of hands, his good legal mind more than compensating for a lack of eloquence, at a time of prospective upheaval in the court of session. During his presidency the court was split into two divisions, and rules were introduced to cut down the number of appeals to the House of Lords in an effort to expedite Scottish justice. 
Blair died suddenly on 20 May 1811 at his home in George Square, Edinburgh. Melville, who travelled to Edinburgh purposely to attend the funeral, was taken ill and died on the very day that Blair was buried, 28 May. Blair's wife and children survived him, but he left them so badly off that a pension was granted by the crown to his widow and daughters through the instrumentality of Mr Perceval. 


@@@@@


doc= 2572


Blair, Robert (1748-1828), surgeon and maker of optical instruments, was born at Garvald, Haddingtonshire, the son of the minister Archibald Blair and his wife, Janet Barclay. After studying medicine at Edinburgh University he was apprenticed to Francis Balfour, surgeon in the Royal Navy; as a naval surgeon Blair served in the West Indies, during which time he became interested in navigation and its instruments. His proposal for improving the adjustment of Hadley's quadrant for back observations gained him an award of $100 from the commissioners of longitude; his description was published in 1783 as an appendix to the 'Nautical Almanac' for 1788 and was also issued separately. Blair returned to Britain in the early 1780s. 
In 1785 a regius chair of practical astronomy was established at the University of Edinburgh with the aim of improving navigation and allied arts. Blair was appointed professor, with a yearly salary of $120, and awarded the degree of MD. The following year he was elected to the Royal Society of Edinburgh. As professor, Blair 'enjoyed forty two years of endowed leisure' (Grant, 2.362), for he refused to give lectures on the grounds that he had neither apparatus nor observatory. He declined to attend meetings of the university senate, and indeed was seldom seen, and resided latterly for eight years in London where his son Archibald Blair was an optician. 
While at Edinburgh Blair sought to improve the performance of refracting telescopes which relied on achromatic lenses: doublets of flint and crown glass. It was difficult to procure flint glass without defects, and Blair, as others had done before him, hoped to substitute some dense fluid, with a refractive index similar to that of flint glass, which, when in contact with a crown glass lens, would give an image free from colour and distortion. Two patents (1473 of 1785 and 1800 of 1791) were filed in the course of his lengthy experiments; these labours and the successful outcome were reported at two meetings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in January and April 1791, and published in their transactions in 1794. Blair decided that the most satisfactory form was a triplet, in which a solution of antimony or mercury in hydrochloric acid was sealed in a concavity between two crown glass lenses. For such lenses, he coined the term 'aplanatic', declaring them superior to the common achromatic form, and suitable for telescopes or microscopes. Working with his son, Blair constructed several telescopes equipped with his triplet lenses of apertures between 3 and 4 inches. They were favourably received by astronomers and others; fears that evaporation and loss of transparency would rapidly destroy them were countered by Archibald Blair who in 1827 claimed that lenses made over twenty years previously were still in good condition. 
These optical experiments ceased in 1793 when Blair was appointed emeritus first commissioner of the Admiralty's board for the care and custody of prisoners of war, a post which required him to tour naval establishments around Britain. His contribution to sailors' welfare lay in finding a method for preserving lime and lemon juice, and persuading the Admiralty to issue it for long voyages, thus helping to prevent scurvy. Blair later published 'Essays on Scientific Subjects' (1818) and 'Scientific Aphorisms' (1826), slight works whose contents did not match the promise of their titles. After a long illness he died at Westlock, Berwickshire, on 22 December 1828. 


@@@@@


doc= 2573


Blair, William (1741-1782), naval officer, the son of Daniel Blair of Edinburgh, went to sea in merchant ships and, as surgeon's servant, able seaman, and midshipman, in the 'Windsor', 'Firebrand', 'Amazon', 'Aleide', 'Hussar', and 'Eolus', before passing his lieutenant's examination on 30 May 1760. From 9 October 1760 he served as lieutenant in the 'Grenado', 'Superb', 'Centurion', 'Salisbury', and 'Grafton', and then from 6 December 1777 commanded the sloop 'Wasp'. 
Blair was promoted post captain on 18 April 1778; he was captain of John Byron's flagship, 'Princess Royal' (90 guns), at the action off Grenada on 6 July 1779, and was later appointed to the 'Nonsuch'. From 2 March 1781 he commanded the 'Dolphin' (44 guns). In the hard-fought but indecisive battle of Dogger Bank on 5 August 1781 the 'Dolphin', notwithstanding her small size, took her place in the line of battle. Blair's conduct won for him the approval of the Admiralty and his appointment on 23 August to the 'Anson', a new 64-gun ship, then fitting for service in the West Indies. 
In January 1782 Blair sailed in the 'Anson' as part of Sir George Rodney's fleet. On 12 April he was killed in action at the battle of the Saintes, the 'Anson', in the leading squadron, having been heavily engaged from the very beginning of the battle. 


@@@@@


doc= 2574


Blair, William (1766-1822), surgeon, youngest son of William Blair, surgeon, and Ann Gideon, his wife, was born at Lavenham in Suffolk on 28 January 1766. Educated for the church Blair changed direction to study under John Pearson, surgeon, of Golden Square, London. In 1788 he passed the diploma for membership of the Company of Surgeons, which became the Royal College of Surgeons in 1800; he also took an MA degree at Aberdeen, and at some point married. He was made assistant surgeon to the London Lock Hospital in 1802, and he had appointments to the Finsbury and the Bloomsbury dispensaries in Great Russell Street, the Female Penitentiary in Pentonville, and the New Rupture Society. He was a member of medical societies in London, Paris, Brussels, and Aberdeen. For a time he edited the 'London Medical Review and Magazine'. In 1803 he recommenced his series of physiological lectures, illustrated with anatomical preparations, addressed to the nobility and clergy, and to painters, sculptors, and others. He published his syllabus as 'Anthropology, or, The natural history of man; with a comparative view of the structure and function of animated beings in general' (1803). The lectures, started 'as occasional amusement to a few friends', had grown imperceptibly 'into the mature state of regular and annual discourses' (Blair, preface). 
Blair's other works included: 'The Soldier's Friend, or, The Means of Preserving the Health of Military Men' (1798); 'Essays on the Venereal Disease and its Concomitant Affections, in Two Parts' (1798-1800); and 'The Vaccine Contest respecting Cow-Pox Inoculation... for the Use of Clergymen, Heads of Families, Guardians, etc.' (1806). In this and other publications Blair defended vaccination, mentioning a report of the Royal Jennerian Society and abuse at the London Smallpox Hospital. His 'Prostitutes Reclaimed and Penitents Protected, being an Answer to some Objections against the Female Penitentiary' appeared in 1809. This and subsequent publications debated the rehabilitation of prostitutes after care of their venereal infections. Blair's 'Correspondence on the Formation, Objects, and Plan of the Roman Catholic Bible Society' (1814) drew him into a controversy with Charles Butler of Lincoln's Inn ('GM', 1st ser., 84/2, 1814). 
Blair also wrote a long and elaborate article entitled 'Cipher', in the eighth volume of Abraham Rees's 'Cyclopaedia' (1819); three engraved illustrative plates are inserted under the heading 'Writing by cipher' in the fourth volume of plates (1820). This article was considered the best treatise in the English language on secret writing and the art of deciphering. It included a cipher method invented by Blair, which he declared to be inscrutable; but the key was discovered in 1819 by Michael Gage, who commented that Blair's method was a real improvement on previous ciphers and the first method ever published on a scientific principle. In addition Blair was the author of the article 'Stenography' in Rees's 'Cyclopaedia' (vol. 34, 1819, 12), discussing the origins and history of shorthand. 
Blair was a very earnest Methodist and worked enthusiastically in the cause of the British and Foreign Bible Society, on whose committee he served and to which he presented his valuable collection of rare editions of the 'Bible'. After his wife's death, on 1 March 1822, he gave up his practice to retire to the country. However, before the preparations for moving to the Colchester area were completed, he died at his residence in Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, London, on 6 December 1822. He left no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 2575


Black, John (d. 1566), Dominican friar, was a member of a prominent Aberdeen family. He was procurator of the Aberdeen Blackfriars between 1544 and 1550, before becoming preacher to Archbishop Hamilton of St Andrews and confessor to Mary, queen of Scots. During the 1550s he was an apologist for Roman Catholicism and was associated with a group of Catholic reformers within the Scottish church. In 1559 he taught theology in St Andrews. In Edinburgh in 1561 he disputed with John Willock, a renegade Dominican friar, on transubstantiation and the real presence in the eucharist. In August 1561 Black was attached to the queen's household and officiated in her private chapel at Holyrood. He acted as a channel of communication between the queen and certain conservative Edinburgh burgesses, and may have facilitated secret contacts between Mary and her supporters outside Scotland. 
Black was regarded as a dangerous Catholic influence. A campaign of slander alleging fornication was mounted against him in Edinburgh, and in February 1566 he was seriously assaulted by Edinburgh men who were subsequently implicated in the murder of David Riccio. Simultaneous rumours of association between Black and Riccio, and of the promotion of a Catholic revival planned by the queen, are given credit by Black's own murder on the same night as Riccio, on 9 March 1566. Black was credited in the eighteenth century with the authorship of 'De reali praesentia corporis Christi in sacramento altaris tractatus'; 'Acta colloquii sui cum Johanne Willoxio impio apostata collega Johannis Knoxii'; 'Monitorium ad apostatas'; and 'Conciones et piissima'. These works are not known to survive. 


@@@@@


doc= 2576


Blake, Charles (1664-1730), Church of England clergyman and poet, was born on 31 October 1664 at Reading, Berkshire, the son of John Blake, wharfinger, and his wife, Mary, who were later described as 'parents of the highest rank, even for such a town' (Brown and others, 15). He was baptized at St Giles's Church, Reading, on 1 November 1664 and educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1677/1678 to 1683 and then at St John's College, Oxford, where he 'completely surrendered himself to sound learning' (ibid.): he graduated BA in 1687, and proceeded MA in 1694, BD in 1696, and DD in 1712. He was an accomplished classical linguist and theologian, and acquired 'an outstanding reputation among academics' for his 'intellect and learning' and 'love of piety' (ibid.). He also developed a love of poetry, and composed in 1688 an elegy on the death of Frederick, the great elector, founder of Brandenburg-Prussia and champion of European protestantism, and in 1689 a poem in the style of Virgil's 'Eclogues', 'Hibernia plorans', which empathized with the besieged protestant stronghold of Londonderry. Both poems were published in 1693 in a sixpenny pamphlet, together with Blake's translation from Greek into Latin of the epic poem of Musaeus on Hero and Leander and an extract from Milton's 'Paradise Lost'. 
Blake became domestic chaplain in 1710 to Sir William Dawes, a high-church tory who achieved episcopal preferment under Queen Anne, and served him while he was bishop of Chester and archbishop of York. Dawes, a younger contemporary of Blake at Merchant Taylors' and St John's College, shared his academic interests and love of poetry and remained a close personal friend until his death in 1724. Blake was appointed successively prebendary of Chester in 1710 and York in 1715, subdean of York in 1716, and archdeacon of York in 1720, and held the benefices of St Sepulchre, London, St Mary the Virgin, Hull, and St Helen, Wheldrake, a substantial living in the gift of the archbishop of York. Unassuming and unambitious, he declined several other preferments and voluntarily resigned others. 
Blake appears to have been an efficient ecclesiastical administrator as archdeacon of York and with the archdeacons of the East Riding and Cleveland undertook a major survey of the fabric of the churches in the diocese in 1721-2. However, the foundations, walls, and roofs of the nave and tower of the medieval church at Wheldrake, an open field village in the Vale of York, where he was rector from 1719 until 1730, remained 'in so ruinous a condition' that the congregation later petitioned that they were unable to assemble for 'public worship of Almighty God without manifest danger of their lives' (Brown and others, 6) and the church had to be almost completely rebuilt in 1778. The old timber-framed rectory was also pronounced old-fashioned in 1764 and subsequently extensively altered, but Blake's legacy to the poor of the parish, in the form of bequests amounting to $200, proved more enduring. 
The diary of Henry Prescott, deputy registrar of the diocese of Chester, reveals Blake as a devoted scholar, meticulous liturgist, and a genial companion, who occasionally enjoyed a very spruce dinner and more frequently a domestic glass of wine. In the closing years of his life he became 'racked by the pains of gout', until, 'finally overcome', he died, a bachelor, on 22 November 1730 at Wheldrake. He was buried in the churchyard at Wheldrake in the same month and two large marble plaques were placed in the sanctuary of the church recording his own epitaph on his life, together with tributes from his friends, 'since those who were joined to him by nearness of blood had died' (Brown and others, 15). 


@@@@@


doc= 2577


Blake, Sir Francis, first baronet (1707/8-1780), experimental philosopher, was the son of Robert Blake (died 1734), landowner, of Twisell, co. Durham, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Sir Francis Blake MP (1638-1718), of Ford Castle, Northumberland. His father was of Irish origin and belonged to the Blakes of Menlo Castle, co. Galway, who claimed descent from Richard Caddle, a fourteenth-century sheriff of Connaught. His mother's family, though bearing the same name, was descended from minor Hampshire gentry. His maternal grandfather was a substantial and rising landowner who had made good during the Commonwealth and Restoration, and had given the small estate of Twisell to Robert Blake as a marriage settlement. 
Blake was educated at Lincoln College, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1725. On 9 November 1732 he married Isabel ('c'.1710-1741), daughter of Samuel Ayton of West Herrington; they had two sons and two daughters. He inherited the estate of Twisell on his father's death and held on to it, though his title was challenged by descendants of the Selby family who had owned it until the late seventeenth century. When in London, he appears to have resided at Queen Square, Westminster. He rendered active support to the government during the Jacobite rising of 1745, and was created a baronet on 3 May 1774. 
In 1741 Blake published 'An Explanation of Fluxions, in a Short Essay on the Theory'. He devoted much of his time to mechanics and experimental philosophy, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1746. He was an active member of the society during the 1750s and 1760s, serving on a committee set up to examine John Canton's experiments on the compressibility of water, and publishing papers in 'Philosophical Transactions' on the design of steam engines. He was related to the Delaval family, which included a number of early scientists and industrialists. He died at Tilmouth, Northumberland, on 29 March 1780, and was buried at Houghton-le-Spring, co. Durham. His elder son, Robert, who had been a student at Westminster School, died in 1754 at the age of twenty-one, and was buried in Westminster Abbey, and Blake was succeeded in the baronetcy by his second son, Francis Blake (1736/7-1818). 


@@@@@


doc= 2578


Blake, Sir Francis, second baronet (1736/7-1818), political writer, was the eldest surviving son of Sir Francis Blake, first baronet (1707/8-1780), of Twisell Castle, Norham, co. Durham, mathematician, and his wife, Isabel ('c'.1710-1741), second daughter and coheir of Samuel Ayton of West Herrington, co. Durham. He was educated at Westminster School, and possibly at the Middle Temple from June 1755. On 15 January 1756 he was admitted to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, from where he graduated LLB in 1763. He became second baronet on the death of his father on 29 March 1780 and served as high sheriff of Northumberland from 1784 to 1785. In the following years he published his three most significant studies of state finances 'The Efficacy of a Sinking Fund of one Million per annum Considered' in 1786, 'The Propriety of an Actual Payment of the Public Debt Considered' in 1786, and 'The True Policy of Great Britain Considered' in 1787. These, and other pieces, were republished collectively under the title 'Political Tracts', first at Berwick in 1788 and again at London in 1795. 
Blake spent some $80,000 on building Fowberry Tower on the banks of the River Till; his project was never completed and the structure was sold to George Colley, an agriculturist, in 1807 for $45,000. Blake married Elizabeth Douglas on 15 April 1772. Their eldest son, also named Francis (1774/5-1860), represented Berwick in parliament between 1826 and 1834 and published severe criticisms on the conduct of the House of Lords in relation to the corn laws. The elder Sir Francis died on 22 May 1818 at Twisell Castle; his son inherited the title and died on 10 September 1860, aged eighty-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 2579


Blake, James (1649-1728), Jesuit, was born in London. The names of his parents are unknown. In 1669 he went to the English College at Seville in Spain to study for the priesthood and was ordained there in 1673. In 1675 he entered the English province of the Society of Jesus at Watten in the Southern Netherlands. After a year of noviciate and study at Liege he was chosen to escort four students from the English College at St Omer to the English College in Madrid, arriving there in 1677 and remaining until 1683. While in Spain he was named (as James Cross) as one of the Jesuit conspirators in Titus Oates's account of the Popish Plot. From 1685 until 1720 Blake was stationed in London and was briefly a chaplain at the Portuguese embassy chapel; from 1696 to 1701 he was rector of the Jesuit London district and from 1701 to 1704 was the Jesuit provincial superior. His only published works are 'Applausus in honorem... Jacobi II' (1685), in which he gave himself the epithet 'Galviensis', suggesting an apparent association with Galway, and 'A sermon of the blessed sacrament, preach'd in the chappel of his excellency the Spanish embassador' (1686; reprinted in 1741 in vol. 2 of 'A Select Collection of Catholick Sermons'). 
At the death of Queen Anne and during the Jacobite rising search was made for Blake. When there was discussion among English Catholics in 1718 about what oath might be taken to George I by those who had previously sworn allegiance to James II, Blake was believed to take a liberal view but denied that he was more liberal than others. Having left London, he was chaplain to Mr Mannocks at Bromley Hall, Colchester, from 1720 and it was probably there that he died between 4 and 13 January 1728, leaving all his effects to Robert Ashmall of Lincoln's Inn. 


@@@@@


doc= 2580


Blake, John Bradby (1745-1773), naturalist, was born on 4 November 1745 in Great Marlborough Street, Westminster, the son of John Blake (died 1790) and his wife, Mary. John Blake was a former East India Company captain and, from the 1760s, the promoter and manager of an extensive organization set up to transport fresh fish overland to a new market in Westminster. Blake sailed to China in 1766 as a supercargo for the East India Company, the practice then being for a supercargo to accompany his ship out and back -- a three-year journey. In 1770 the company's directors resolved that in future the supercargoes should reside permanently in Canton (Guangzhou). This allowed Blake to devote his spare time to natural science. 
Blake's plan was to obtain seeds of those plants which served the Chinese for food, medicine, manufactures, or other economic uses, and to send back to Europe both seeds and living plants. His hopes that these plants might be propagated in Britain and Ireland, or in the colonies, met with success. Rice from Cochin-China was grown in Jamaica and South Carolina; the tallow-tree (so called from the fatty covering of its seeds) prospered in Jamaica and other parts of North America; and many of the seeds he sent back throve in various botanical gardens near London. Under his direction, a set of drawings of plants was prepared by a Chinese artist, which later found its way into the library of Sir Joseph Banks. Blake also sent back samples of fossils and ores. 
In February 1774 Blake was proposed for membership of the Royal Society, but this proposal was withdrawn when it was learned that he had fallen ill and died in Canton on 16 November 1773. He was unmarried, but had amassed sufficient money to leave $1000 to each of his three sisters. 


@@@@@


doc= 2581


Blake, Malachi (bap. 1687, d. 1760), Presbyterian minister, was born at Blagdon, near Taunton, Somerset, and baptized there on 16 August 1687, the second son of Malachi Blake (1651-1705). He appears to have been educated and trained for the ministry by his father, an itinerant preacher in the south-west of England and afterwards Presbyterian minister at Wellington, Somerset, where he was credited with 'laying the foundation of the dissenting cause' (Murch, 244). 
The younger Malachi Blake's first ministerial appointment was at Langport, Somerset, in 1712, and then from 1717 until his death at Blandford Forum, Dorset, where he proved a popular preacher. He was minister there when the town was badly damaged by fire on 4 June 1731. Afterwards he wrote 'A Brief Account of the Dreadful Fire at Blandford Forum', to which he added a sermon and an address to the inhabitants of the town. The work was published for private circulation in 1735. A second edition appeared in the same year and a third in 1736. 
In later years Blake suffered increasingly from depression, and he died at Blandford Forum on 15 February 1760, aged seventy-two. His younger brother William (1688-1772), a woolstapler, was father of Malachi (1724-1795), Presbyterian minister of Whitney and Fullwood, and William (1730-1799), Presbyterian minister of Crewkerne. 


@@@@@


doc= 2582


Blake, Robert (bap. 1598, d. 1657), naval and army officer, was baptized on 27 September 1598 at the church of St Mary the Virgin in Bridgwater, Somerset, the eldest of the eight surviving children of Humphrey Blake (died 1625), a merchant of the town, and his wife, Sarah (died 1638), daughter of Humphrey Williams of Plainsfield near Bridgwater. Educated at the free grammar school, Bridgwater, he was admitted to the University of Oxford, studying at St Alban Hall and Wadham College. He graduated on 10 February 1618. Shortly afterwards he stood unsuccessfully for election as a fellow of Merton College. 
On the death of his father in 1625 Blake inherited the manor of Crandon-cum-Puriton. He bought a house in Bridgwater and his name appears in the subsidy list for 1628. Some time between 1629 and 1632 he left Bridgwater, and may have become a merchant and travelled on the continent. There is a story that he lived in Schiedam, so he could be the Robert Blake who was admitted to the Company of the Freemen of Dorchester in 1629 and who was trading in masts, deal, and other timber with Schiedam's neighbouring port of Middleburg. 
Blake was elected to the Short Parliament in April 1640 as one of the two burgesses for Bridgwater, but failed to keep his seat in elections for the Long Parliament which met in November the same year. He was a strong supporter of the parliament during the first civil war. In March 1643 a plot was formed to admit the royalists to the city of Bristol, which was only thwarted at the last minute. Blake was among those who signed the decree sentencing the plotters to death. When William Waller marched into the west Blake is reputed to have raised a troop of horse and it may well have formed part of the cavalry commanded by Colonel Edward Popham which made a foray against Bridgwater in May. By the time Prince Rupert laid siege to Bristol on 23 July, Blake was the commander of Prior's Hill Fort and repelled all the royalist attempts to storm it. He was still resisting when the parliamentarian governor agreed terms surrendering the city four days later. 
Blake next appears at the siege of Lyme Regis in April 1644. He was never the official commander of the garrison but he was, by common consent, the mainspring of the resistance. The royalists outnumbered the defenders by six to one but they failed to make their advantage tell. Lyme was eventually relieved by an army under the earl of Essex. Subsequently Blake was appointed governor of Taunton. After Essex's defeat at Lostwithiel and the indecisive second battle of Newbury, Blake was left isolated and endured three sieges -- between October and December 1644, between March and May 1645, and briefly again in June 1645. The successful resistance in the second one in particular made him famous throughout the country and brought him to the attention of the army leaders. In October 1645 Blake and Colonel William Sydenham were sent with 600 men to lay siege to Dunster Castle. Here Blake got a taste of his own medicine. The castle resisted all his attempts to capture it and only surrendered on terms in April 1646 when the royalist cause was lost. 
In September 1645 Blake was elected as a 'Recruiter' MP for Bridgwater. He was also on the Somerset county committee, where his chief concern was the establishment of a presbyterian system of ministers and lay elders within the county. When it finally came into being in March 1648 Blake figured as a lay elder in the Taunton classis. While Blake did not like the Church of England he did not much care for the sects either and suppressed an Independent meeting-house in St Mary Street, Taunton, but by this time he was a republican and opposed to any compromise with the royalists. Taunton was one of the first places to support the vote of no addresses of January 1648, by which the MPs pledged themselves never to negotiate with Charles again. No fighting took place in Somerset during the second civil war but Alexander Popham seems to have been convinced that a rising was imminent. Blake had ceased to be governor of Taunton in September 1647, as part of the programme for the reduction of unnecessary garrisons, but Popham had him reappointed in August 1648. He was back in London in early November but took no part in Pride's Purge or the trial and execution of the king. 
In March 1649 the new Commonwealth government appointed three generals-at-sea. Their qualifications for command were to be that they were loyal to the new regime and that they had good military records. Previous naval experience was of small importance as the commander usually consulted his council of officers when he needed navigational advice. The first appointment was that of Richard Deane. He appears to have recommended Blake, who in turn suggested Edward Popham. The first priority, to re-establish order and discipline, which had been badly dented by the mutiny of 1648, was effected smoothly and rapidly. On 21 May the Commonwealth fleet appeared off Kinsale to find a squadron of royalist ships, commanded by Prince Rupert, inside. After drawing lots Popham returned to the Downs. Deane was assigned the task of organizing the transport of Cromwell's army, designed for the reconquest of Ireland, from Milford. Blake was left off Kinsale to watch Rupert. 
Cromwell's original intention was to land in Munster but when winds proved consistently contrary the army made for Dublin instead, leaving Blake to a very lonely vigil. All summer Blake kept Rupert penned in the harbour, unable to interfere with the movement of troops from England to Ireland. In September 1649 Cromwell offered Blake the post of major-general of foot in the Irish army but Blake preferred to stay with the fleet. While his political masters were pleased with his performance Blake was not. Just when it looked as if the parliamentarian army would capture the whole royalist fleet, a storm blew Blake off his station and Rupert escaped. 
Rupert was no longer a military threat but his attacks on English merchant shipping from his new base in Portugal were costly and embarrassing. In March 1650 Blake was dispatched with a squadron of eleven ships to deal with him. When the king of Portugal refused to expel Rupert, Blake attempted to force his way up the Tagus but he had to retreat, the fire from the forts at the river mouth being far too strong for wooden ships to endure successfully. Faced with the prospect of a long blockade Blake was compelled to change tack. A request was made to King Joao IV that the English fleet be allowed to water in Oeiras Bay, to which he agreed on condition that no attack was made on Rupert while he was in Portuguese waters. The nearest Spanish port where he could water was Cadiz so, fearing a repeat of the Kinsale escape, Blake reluctantly accepted the limitation. 
On 26 May Popham arrived with eight more ships and orders instructing both generals to seize Rupert's ships wherever they might be found, which obliged Blake to abandon his agreement with King Joao. In reprisal the king arrested the goods and property of the English merchants in Lisbon and expelled Charles Vane, the Commonwealth agent. Rupert's presence was an embarrassment to Portugal, especially as the blockading fleet was now seizing any ships attempting to enter the Tagus, and Joao tried to push the prince into leaving, but Popham and Blake combined gave the royalists little hope of getting away. Twice Joao persuaded Rupert to try, each time while part of the parliamentarian fleet was watering at Cadiz. The first attempt was on 22 June but the royalists and their Portuguese and French allies hardly got beyond the Catchops shoals before the powerful Commonwealth ships sent them scuttling back to the Tagus. The second was on 3 September during foggy weather while Popham was away watering, preparatory to returning to England. This time the determination of Blake not to be faced down when his flagship, the 'George', encountered Rupert in the 'Constant Reformation', was enough to persuade the royalists to seek the shelter of Lisbon once more. 
The English did not get what they wanted until Popham had left and Blake had given up the close blockade as pointless. Returning from a short cruise in search of French privateers Blake learned that Rupert had left Cadiz. The English pursued his squadron into the Mediterranean, coming up with the royalists just short of Cartagena. One ship was captured and a second forced on shore, the remaining four taking refuge in Cartagena harbour. The Spanish government did not prove as accommodating as that of Portugal. Rather than have their ships and goods seized, the royalists decided to make a run for it on the night of 6-7 November, but they had little knowledge of Cartagena harbour and all four vessels were wrecked. Neither Rupert nor his brother Maurice were present but the destruction of most of their ships had the result of reducing them to naval insignificance. 
In spring 1651 Blake was appointed to command a small squadron designed to capture the Isle of Man but before he could sail he was redirected to the Isles of Scilly. The Commonwealth government, fearing a pre-emptive strike by the Dutch, wanted immediate action. Blake's own small force was augmented by the diversion of the squadron under Sir George Ayscue, designed for the recapture of Barbados. Blake quickly grasped that the key to success was the island of Tresco. The first attack was mismanaged by the landing party but a second one was more successful. The island was quickly occupied and two small royalist frigates captured. The surrender of the main island of St Mary's soon followed. The terms were very lenient -- there were no reprisals against the islanders and for those royalists who wished for it transport was provided to take them wherever they wanted to go. 
By the summer the war with Scotland was reaching crisis point. Cromwell ordered Major-General John Disbrowe into the midlands and Blake came on shore to replace him as the chief officer commanding the west of England, but at the crucial moment news arrived of Popham's death. As Deane was already with the army Blake was the only one of the original three generals-at-sea still active so he was instructed to return to the fleet. 
The last action of the year was the reduction of Jersey. This Blake accomplished with his now customary efficiency. He first of all exhausted the defenders by cruising up and down the west coast and round the Corbiere Rocks, forcing them to anticipate where he was going to strike by marching parallel to the fleet. Then, night having fallen, an amphibious descent was organized just after high tide when the tired royalists thought that the immediate danger had passed. Once ashore the result was a foregone conclusion. 
By this time relations with the Dutch had deteriorated so much that war seemed only just over the horizon. The immediate pretext was the English demand that all Dutch ships should strike their flags when in the presence of an English warship and submit to search for contraband of war. In March 1652 the Dutch dispatched a squadron into the channel under Lieutenant-Admiral Tromp to protect incoming Dutch merchant shipping and prevent searches. At first Tromp avoided the small squadrons of Blake and Nehemiah Bourne to prevent arguments about striking the flag but then he received information which led him to believe that the English had stopped and were searching a Dutch merchant fleet off Fairlight. He altered course right into the path of Blake's ships. When Blake fired shots across his bow to try and force him to strike his flag, the Dutchman replied with a broadside and a melee ensued which has become known as the skirmish off Dover. Tromp's squadron numbered forty-two. Blake had no more than twelve ships with him and even when Bourne joined in the English were never more than half the Dutch strength. Despite this the English lost no ships; they captured one Dutchman and another was so badly damaged that only the superior Dutch seamanship prevented it from falling into English hands. 
The English were eager to force the Dutch to fight pitched battles which they now knew they could win. Blake was dispatched with a fleet of over eighty ships to the Shetland Islands to intercept the Dutch East India fleet, which was reported to be coming home 'north about'. This was a challenge the Dutch could not turn down and Tromp was sent after him, only for both fleets to be caught in a terrible storm on 25-7 July. The English were able to take shelter in Bressay Sound so their fleet, though battered, remained intact. There was no refuge for the Dutch caught off a hostile lee shore. When the weather let up after three days of continuous rain and gale force wind Tromp found that he had only thirty-four ships in company out of a fleet of over 100. Most of the others found some sort of shelter away from the main settlements but six foundered at sea and ten were wrecked. Blake had won a major victory without raising a finger. Ironically seven of the nine East Indiamen successfully rendezvoused with the now much depleted Dutch fleet. 
Both fleets returned southwards to find that events in the channel had been much more favourable to the Dutch. A Dutch squadron under Commodore de Ruijter, escorting a merchant convoy, had encountered an English one under Ayscue off Plymouth. The English fought bravely but Ayscue adopted the old charge tactics, which proved inadequate, suggesting that more than superior morale and gunnery were required if complete success were to be achieved over the more experienced and skilful Dutch -- a lesson which the winter campaign was to drive home. 
By this time Blake was back in the Downs. For the moment the Dutch were impotent. Blake took advantage of the respite to attack a French convoy designed for the relief of Dunkirk in retaliation for the way Mazarin had allowed royalists to sell their prizes in French ports. The result was the surrender of Dunkirk to its Spanish besiegers. Then, mustering all his available force, Blake set off down the channel to try and waylay de Ruijter's returning convoy. He sent on ahead a strong force of the speediest and most weatherly third- and fourth-rate frigates under the command of William Penn, which was to seek out de Ruijter and hold him until Blake could come up with the remainder of the fleet. Penn came in sight of de Ruijter's squadron off Berry Head and went in pursuit but lost it in worsening visibility and approaching darkness. Neither Penn nor Blake saw it again. Sure now that the English were off their own coast, de Ruijter took his fleet over to the French side and got home without trouble. The ease with which Blake had been fooled again suggested that the war might not be as plain sailing as the skirmish off Dover and the Shetland voyage seemed to presage. 
As trade was the lifeblood of the Dutch the English stranglehold had to be broken. Tromp was now out of favour and after much dispute a fleet was organized with Cornelis Witte de With, the vice-admiral of Holland, in command, assisted by de Ruijter. As soon as Blake knew the Dutch were at sea his only thought was for a battle. The English ships got under way with all speed and rushed out of the Downs northwards as fast as they could with little regard for order, so much so that Rear-Admiral Bourne's division got left behind. When the English appeared, on 28 September, the Dutch were sailing westward. De With immediately ordered a change of course to SSE with the aim of sailing right past Blake and Penn's squadrons to attack Bourne, who was still trying to get his ships clear of the Downs. The plan was thwarted by an accident. The two leading ships of Penn's squadron, the 'Sovereign of the Seas' and the 'James', went aground on a shoal called the Kentish Knock. Neither was seriously damaged but the incident had the effect of halting the English charge and forcing them to turn east straight into the path of the oncoming Dutch. The result was a violent melee out of which the English emerged triumphant partly because of their superior firepower and partly because many Dutch captains had no stomach for the fight. The Dutch lost only one ship sunk and one captured but there would have been many more had darkness not fallen before the English could exploit their victory, because the whole fleet had been badly mauled. So much so that all de With's attempts to get the captains to re-engage the next day failed. Even de Ruijter thought such a course would be suicide. 
The euphoria induced by the result of Kentish Knock led the Commonwealth to make a serious error. The campaign had been very costly and, believing there would be no further fighting until the spring, a large part of the main fleet was stood down. On the Dutch side Tromp was reinstated because he was the only man who commanded sufficient respect to calm the factious behaviour of the other senior officers. The Dutch had to keep their trade flowing and over 400 merchant ships were awaiting convoy, so Tromp decided on a winter campaign as the only way that they could be got through the channel safely. Blake was in the Downs with forty-two ships but he made no move until Tromp's fleet of eighty-eight men-of-war was approaching the entrance to the channel. A council of war recommended that they sit tight but such was not Blake's way and the English fleet was soon heading south out of the Downs parallel to the Dutch. At first shoals prevented an engagement but once the Varne, the last of these, had been left behind, soon after noon on 30 November, Tromp closed with the English and a violent conflict began between the leading ships of the two fleets. The English, unable to manoeuvre because of the proximity of Dungeness, got much the worst of it. Two English ships, the 'Garland' and the 'Anthony Bonadventure', were captured in the fighting and a third, the 'Hercules', was lost when she sailed into the Dutch fleet on her way from Portsmouth to the Downs. The Dutch suffered only one casualty when an accidental spark fired the magazine of Captain Juynbol's ship. The English recoiled on Dover and a major disaster might have occurred if Tromp had followed up his advantage but he regarded escorting the merchant ships to their destinations safely as his main task. When his ships disappeared over the horizon the English heaved a great sigh of relief. 
The main reason for the defeat was the failure of the Commonwealth to maintain an adequate fleet. The government was quick to accept its share of responsibility and refused Blake's offer to resign. Yet Blake was not free from blame, rushing into battle with scant regard for the tactical situation, though he himself refused to accept this as the crucial factor. For him the defeat was caused by the failure of a number of his captains to support him properly. His determination to make them do exactly as he wanted, regardless of the cost, runs like a refrain throughout the war. After the skirmish off Dover captains Charles Thorowgood and John Gibbs were dismissed for, allegedly, keeping their ships out of the action. Thorowgood was the senior captain in the fleet. Blake conducted a running battle with another, John Taylor, who had been his flag captain in the Scilly campaign and was now one of those who incurred his wrath after Dungeness, together with four others, among them another distinguished captain, Anthony Young. Most extraordinary of all was his quarrel with his brother Benjamin. As Benjamin was his flag captain at the time his sin must have been to stand up for the others. Many of the ships appear to have been short of ammunition and the captains were angry at the way Blake rode roughshod over the council of war. The government supported Blake, as it had to, issuing a new set of thirty-nine articles of war which made the authority of the commander-in-chief paramount and provided severe punishments for any subordinate who failed to carry out the orders of a superior officer. But all the captains, except one, were later quietly reinstated, though their promotion prospects were irretrievably damaged. 
Deane, who had gone on shore to serve in the Scottish campaign, was sent back to sea and Monck was appointed to succeed Popham. Blake welcomed them. While the war had been progressing favourably he was quite happy to command alone but when the prospects darkened he was unwilling to be made the scapegoat. The determination of the government to repair the situation, combined with the influence of Deane, brought more order and method into the conduct of the fleet which was now divided into three squadrons -- the red, blue, and white -- each with its admiral, vice-admiral, and rear-admiral. 
A refurbished fleet of sixty to seventy ships put to sea to prevent Tromp's return. On 18 February 1653 advanced elements of the English fleet spotted the Dutch off Start Point. To begin with the Dutch had a decided advantage. In order to prevent Tromp slipping past, as de Ruijter had done, the English fleet was strung out across the channel. Tromp on the other hand had all his ships well in hand, and the weather gauge. He attacked immediately. The result was that the Blue squadron, commanded by the vice-admiral, William Penn, and leading elements of the Red squadron, among them the 'Triumph', which had Blake and Deane on board, bore the entire brunt of the initial Dutch assault. For over an hour the battle raged south of Portland Bill, over the decks of Penn's squadron and around the little group of ships with the 'Triumph'. Blake's flag captain, Andrew Ball, and his secretary were both killed, and Blake himself was seriously wounded in the thigh. The battle began to swing the English way when the rear-admiral, John Lawson, managed to bring the remainder of the Red squadron into the fray. The White squadron, commanded by Monck, had been far away to leeward and took some time to come into play. When it finally did so Tromp was obliged to break off the action for fear that the English frigates would get among his convoy. 
For the next two days the English harried the Dutch up the channel until, on the evening of 20 February, they were forced to seek sanctuary under the cliffs of Cap Gris Nez. The English prepared to administer the 'coup de grace' the next morning but when day dawned the Dutch were nowhere to be seen. They had used the shallow draught of their ships to escape over the shoals around the cape. The English claimed that seventeen Dutch men-of-war and forty merchant ships had been either sunk or captured. The Dutch only admitted to twelve but even that showed that the English had achieved a major victory. Yet once again English inexperience had let the Dutch off the hook. 
Blake continued to exercise command as a general-at-sea throughout the battle despite his wound, but he seems to have caught a severe cold which turned to a fever and forced him to go on shore. He was ill during March and April and then went to London where he organized a new squadron designed to reinforce the fleet. Meanwhile Deane and Monck had sailed into the North Sea where Tromp once more attempted to contest the English supremacy. The battle of the Gabbard was a stunning victory for the English. The Dutch lost twenty men-of-war and the rest were so badly battered that they were forced to seek the protection of the shoals. The only real casualty on the English side was Richard Deane, killed at the outset of the battle. Blake's squadron did not get to sea early enough to take part but his appearance completed the Dutch rout. The pressures of life at sea brought a recurrence of his illness and he was forced to go on shore once again. During July he was so ill that his life was despaired of. He then made a slow recovery but he missed the final victory at Scheveningen, in which Tromp was killed, and did not return to duty until October. 
The crisis of the war had been marked by a prolonged political upheaval. In April 1653 Cromwell had forcibly dissolved what remained of the Long Parliament. After an unsatisfactory experiment with Barebone's Parliament during 1653 Cromwell took power himself in December, as lord protector. He had never liked the war with the United Provinces and the Dutch were unwilling to face another summer campaign, so peace was concluded in spring 1654. 
Blake accepted the new protectorate and was appointed to command a powerful fleet destined for the Mediterranean. The long cruise which ensued had three main phases. The French were planning an attack on Spanish-controlled Naples. A fleet was to sail from Toulon, escorting the troop transports. Blake carried instructions to thwart the intended invasion if he could. When he reached the Strait of Gibraltar he found himself in a dilemma. He received information that the French Brest squadron was intending to sail for the Mediterranean to reinforce the Toulon fleet, picking up four Portuguese warships on the way. He waited a vital three weeks off the strait until he heard that the French had taken refuge in Lisbon and had no intention of stirring so long as he was anywhere around. The result was that when he finally reached Naples on 12 December 1654 he found that the action was all over. The 8000 French, under the duc de Guise, arrived at the beginning of November. After two unsuccessful attempts to storm the city, they retired discomfited on 7 December. Had Blake not delayed in the strait the French expedition would have been destroyed completely. 
Another part of Blake's instructions related to the corsairs of Tunis. The English claimed that the Tunisians had broken an agreement of 1646 by seizing a merchant ship called the 'Princess'. Blake was to demand the ship's return and compensation for the merchants concerned. In February 1655 Blake sailed to Tunis but the negotiations soon reached an impasse. The dey claimed that the ship had been seized in reprisal for the action of a Captain Mitchell who had sold into slavery a group of Turkish soldiers he was supposed to be transporting to Malta. Blake contemplated offensive action but the harbour of Tunis was too well defended and there was no trade to attack. He inspected the more open roadstead at Porto Farina where the 'Princess' and eight frigates lay at anchor. As he was closely watched by the dey's army Blake took no action and the English sailed away to Sicily for supplies. A second round of negotiations in March also proved fruitless because the dey was now confident that there was nothing Blake could do. His belief was reinforced when the English fleet disappeared over the horizon for a second time. 
He was soon undeceived. Blake had sounded Porto Farina harbour earlier and he reappeared there suddenly on 2 April. Using the early-morning land breeze the third- and fourth-rate frigates sailed in, covered by the larger ships which bombarded the forts. All nine ships in the roadstead were destroyed and the English ships warped out again without any loss. The successful action made no difference. As Blake well knew the frigates were Turkish ones destined for the attack on Venetian Candia (Crete) and not the property of the dey. 
By the time Blake sailed away from Tunis Cromwell had practically finalized the details of an alliance with France and a war with Spain was imminent. An expedition under William Penn had already sailed to attack the Spanish West Indies. Additional orders were sent to Blake to prevent any reinforcements reaching there from Spain so he returned to the Atlantic, posting his fleet off Cadiz. On 16 August 1655 the English fleet came in sight of the Spanish battle fleet. Blake's immediate instinct was to engage but the seas were running high, making it impossible to use the lower tier of guns, so he held away. During the delay he had second thoughts. There had been no declaration of war and he was informed that the Spaniards only intended to escort home the plate fleet. As they were not going to the West Indies he believed that his instructions did not entitle him to begin hostilities and he let them go. 
The fleet reached the Downs at the beginning of October 1655, having apparently failed in all its aims. Blake was too late to be of use at Naples. He got no concessions out of the dey and the destruction of the Turkish ships only delayed the capture of Candia (Crete). Cromwell was dismayed by Blake's decision not to attack the Spanish fleet, though he admitted that his instructions were ambiguous. Yet the expedition was seen by everyone as momentous. Blake's presence effectually ruptured French schemes of Mediterranean dominance and forced Mazarin to accept an alliance with England on Cromwell's terms. Tunis may have got away with it but the strength and bellicosity of the English fleet led Algiers to make an agreement and England became a major player in Mediterranean politics. Blake may not have destroyed the Spanish fleet but he effectually prevented any reinforcements reaching the West Indies, saving Penn's mismanaged expedition from total disaster. 
Cromwell showed his confidence in Blake by reappointing him to command the new expedition which was to blockade the coast of Spain now that war had been officially declared. He was joined by a new general-at-sea, Edward Mountagu. Mountagu's primary task was to negotiate a treaty with Portugal and Blake may well have been relieved that the political decisions which had plagued his last expedition were now to be transferred to someone else's shoulders. The fleet of thirty-seven powerful ships sailed from the Downs on 17 March 1656. The negotiations proved difficult. Cromwell demanded $50,000 compensation for the damage done by royalist privateers, participation by English merchants in the Brazil trade on favourable terms, freedom of worship for English residents in Portugal, and free access to Portuguese ports for English warships. In return he was prepared to support Portugal in her fight for freedom from Spain which had been going on since 1640. King Joao wriggled hard and at one point Blake had to convince Mountagu that an attempt by the fleet to force the issue would not work. Blake had learned the lesson of 1650. In the end the Portuguese bowed to necessity. They needed English support badly. The treaty was concluded and the compensation money safely embarked and sent to England. 
The English were now faced with the problem of what to do. The greatest prize, the plate fleet, was not expected for some time. Mountagu favoured an expedition to the West Indies but he received no support from the captains who feared the high mortality rate common in the tropics. A close inspection of Cadiz showed that a Porto Farina-style attack would not work. Mountagu had instructions to examine the Rock of Gibraltar to see if it would be suitable as a permanent fleet base. The report was not favourable. A large garrison would be needed and seamen were not suitable material. There was nothing of real importance on offer. Eleven ships were sent home and the rest prepared for a long and wearisome blockade, only varied by respites for victualling and watering at Lisbon and sporadic forays against the more exposed Spanish ports. 
On 8 September 1656 the event occurred for which everyone had been waiting. Blake had divided the English fleet into three. Mountagu went with one squadron to negotiate a settlement with the pirates of Sale, in which he was successful, due in no small part to the fear Blake inspired. Blake himself stood off to sea, leaving six of the fittest frigates under Captain Richard Stayner to watch Cadiz. Stayner it was who fell in with the plate fleet as it tried to make a dash for home, believing that the way was clear. Of the eight ships only two escaped. Three were captured, a fourth was sunk, and the other two forced on shore. The English haul was later valued at about $200,000. They were rather disappointed because they thought that it would be much more valuable. In a way they were right. The ships with the most plate on board were the one sunk and one of those forced on shore, but the enduring belief that the war could be paid for with captured Spanish gold and silver was a myth. 
Mountagu went home with the proceeds of Stayner's victory, leaving Blake to continue his weary watch off the Spanish coast. The plate fleet Stayner had captured was smaller than usual and information from prisoners indicated that a larger fleet was expected in the new year. When Cromwell heard what Mountagu had to say he had Blake reinforced and the weaker ships replaced so that he could ride the winter out. By this time everyone knew that the English fleet was there and merchant shipping kept away. The only excitement the English had was when a Dutch fleet appeared under de Ruijter. There were rumours that he intended to try and waylay the Portuguese Brazil fleet, which could have been a severe embarrassment. In the end all he did was escort Dutch trade to and from the Mediterranean. The first news of the plate fleet came when an English merchant captain, William Sadlington, reported seeing it on his voyage across the Atlantic. Blake made no move partly because of de Ruijter's presence and partly because he feared that he would miss it 'en route'. Then information reached him that the fleet was at Tenerife and had no intention of moving so long as the English fleet was off the Spanish coast. Still he waited until de Ruijter had gone home and there was no danger to the ships left behind to maintain the blockade. The English sailed for the Canary Islands on 14 April 1657 and sighted Tenerife four days later. 
After closely reconnoitring Santa Cruz harbour the English attacked on the morning of 20 April. The larger ships were to use their powerful guns to engage and, if possible, silence the Spanish forts. Twelve third- and fourth-rate frigates under the overall command of Stayner were to use the land breeze to sail into the harbour and get alongside the galleons. Strict instructions were given to sink them and not to try and take prizes. The attack commenced at 8 a.m. As at Porto Farina the English guns proved too strong for the main forts, which were quickly knocked out. The entire foreshore was fortified but the gunners there found that they could not see for smoke and risked hitting their own ships moored in front of them. By 9 a.m. the frigates were moored alongside the Spanish ships. By 11 a.m. all the smaller ships had been struck and many were on fire. The greater galleons were a tougher proposition and the larger ships had to enter the bay in order to complete their destruction, which was not accomplished until about 2 p.m. when the ships of the Spanish admiral and vice-admiral blew up in quick succession. 
The most difficult part of the operation now began. The English ships had to warp themselves out of the bay under continuous fire from the forts, where some of the guns had been remounted, and from the foreshore, where, now that their own ships had gone, the gunners could at last see their targets. To make matters worse some of the captains greedily tried to tow their prizes out. Blake had to repeat his orders twice before they consented to fire them and cast off the ropes. It says a good deal for Blake's authority and leadership that they all successfully escaped; Stayner in the 'Speaker' was the last to leave, very battered but still afloat. 
In one way Blake's victory was a barren one. The Spaniards had had the forethought to transport the plate and bullion into the interior of the island, so the successful outcome of the battle did nothing to swell English coffers. Shortage of money was to force them to scale down their activity within a year. Yet in all other respects what Blake had done was of paramount importance. The victory at Tenerife resounded round Europe and made the English fleet feared far and wide. Santa Cruz harbour was believed to be one of the best defended on the Atlantic coast, a reputation that Nelson was later to find not unjustified. Yet the English fleet had sailed in and sunk all seventeen ships of the plate fleet without losing a single one of its own, an achievement almost unparalleled against land-based guns in naval annals. England may have been embarrassed for money but Blake's fleet had reduced the Spanish to desperate straits. In 1656 all the bullion from the New World had been lost, either to the English or sunk to the bottom of the ocean. The 1657 consignment was safe at Tenerife but the Spanish government could not get at it because of the English blockade. The Spanish armies ground to a halt for lack of money. 1658 was to be a disastrous year which finally forced them to the negotiating table. 
The destruction of the plate fleet rendered a large armament off the Spanish coast unnecessary. Leaving a squadron of fourteen ships under Captain John Stokes, Blake sailed for home with the rest. Blake had never really recovered from the wound sustained at Portland. During the Mediterranean cruise of 1654-5 he never set foot on shore, leaving diplomatic contacts to other officers such as Joseph Jordan. Part of the problem was ill health, which got worse in 1656 particularly after Mountagu went home. He was ill and in pain for part of the winter but rallied for the Canary Islands expedition. His state of health was causing concern to the Commonwealth agent Thomas Maynard, who visited him in July 1657. Blake must have known that he had not long to live and he breathed his last on 7 August 1657 as his flagship, the 'George', entered Plymouth Sound. 
Blake never married and seems to have been almost totally without interest in women beyond the usual civilities. By his will dated 13 March 1656 he left his manor of Puriton to his brother Humphrey and his house in Bridgwater to his brother Benjamin. Apart from a house in Taunton he had no other property, not even in London, using the apartment at Whitehall to which his official duties entitled him as his residence. He left $3000 in money. After giving $100 each to Bridgwater and Taunton for distribution among the poor, the remainder was divided among his numerous relatives. He was buried in great state in the Henry VII chapel of Westminster Abbey, on 4 September, apparently against his expressed wishes, but at the Restoration his remains were thrown out by the royalists. 
Blake's achievements have led him to be ranked as one of England's three greatest seamen alongside Drake and Nelson, but often for the wrong reasons. In his day naval warfare was in the throes of a revolution but Blake had little part in making it. Regular broadside firing was already standard practice in the parliamentarian fleet and in the East India Company's fleet of defence. Disputes will always rage as to when fighting in a single line ahead became the norm. None of the battles where Blake was in charge show evidence of such tactics, yet this should not detract from his reputation. Neither Drake nor Nelson was a revolutionary and all three stand out for the way they led their fleets and took the tactics of their day to their logical conclusion. Yet, unlike the other two, Blake was not bred to the sea. He was appointed to the command on the strength of his record as a soldier and his loyalty to the Commonwealth, and had to learn the seaman's trade. 
To begin with Blake seems to have been ignorant of the power of the guns English ships carried. At the beginning of the Anglo-Dutch War he soundly rated Christopher Myngs for rashness in taking on three Dutch warships single-handed. The skirmish off Dover opened his eyes and at Dungeness he went to the other extreme, rushing into battle with less than half the strength of the Dutch fleet. The critical early stages of Portland saw him treating a sea battle like the siege of Taunton, his ships being tied together so that guns were firing in all directions. Not until the Spanish war did he evolve a system by which he could use them to the greatest effect. The results both the Tunisians and the Spaniards had good cause to rue. How his conception of a battle in the open sea had developed will never be known, because he declined the one chance he had to engage the Spanish battle fleet. 
In the same way Blake learned the art of blockade. In 1649 he let Rupert escape from Kinsale. In 1650 he learned first that attempts to force the issue could be counter-productive, then that accepting favours could limit his sphere of action, and finally that the enemy was only likely to emerge if the odds were not too heavily stacked against him. 1656 showed how well he had learned them. 
Blake's most enduring contribution was in bringing a disciplined approach to naval warfare. What his captains liked were expeditions in search of plunder and prizes. What they disliked were pitched battles which threatened both life and limb, the irksome discipline which forced to them to spend long months on blockade, and, when they were on detached service, the priority which was given to defending their own merchant shipping over seeking rich pickings by attacking that of the enemy. His experiences before the First Anglo-Dutch War led him to suspect advice given by the traditional council of captains. During the war he was unsparing in his criticism of them. He was undoubtedly behind the new articles of war and supported the hierarchical arrangement of flag officers, introduced after Dungeness, which supplanted the earlier more egalitarian system. 
Blake's disciplined approach continued during the Spanish war. He had learned the value of proper scouting and woe betide the frigate captain who abandoned his station to chase potential prizes or who returned before his relief had arrived. Blake was 5 feet 6 inches in height with a squat build and heavy jowled features, the very image of the church militant here on earth, the English 'bear' who struck fear into his subordinates and visiting diplomats alike. So cowed were his captains before Tenerife that when Blake asked for their advice they refused to give it. The battle itself was the culmination of his work when he succeeded in forcing his captains to abandon their prizes in the interests of the operation as a whole. 
If that had been all, Blake would not have been able to secure the response he did. In 1648 Lord Saye referred to the seamen with contempt as a group not worth considering in comparison with the soldiers. By 1660 all that had changed, and Blake played a major part in altering perceptions. It is typical of the man that, though most of the $3000 he left were arrears from the civil wars, not claimed until he made his will, he realized that good men would not serve if they were not paid properly. In 1648 Popham had refused the command of a ship probably because becoming a navy captain would have entailed a reduction in his pay. In 1652 senior captains at last reached the pay levels of army colonels, who were their official equals in rank. Blake did not neglect the ordinary seamen either. There had been pay rises in 1642 and 1647 but rates were still poor in comparison with the Dutch and they were raised again. In order to encourage the men the prize regulations were altered so that they were rewarded for ships sunk as well as those captured, in proportion to the number of guns they carried. After Dungeness new regulations covering the sick and wounded were introduced and the interests of the relatives and dependants of captains were safeguarded. The widows and children of senior captains killed in battle were generously compensated. The interregnum governments and the other generals all played their part but only Blake identified himself totally with the interests of the fleet. He had no home life. His captains were his only family; he may have treated them like unruly children but he never asked them to do anything he would not do himself, with the result that they and their crews responded by following him wherever he led. The standards he set were the bench-mark by which later ages were to measure their own performances. 
Perhaps Blake's greatest achievement in his own time was to create a unity of purpose when the country was beset by unrest and division. He himself wanted the Church of England to be replaced by a national presbyterian church along the lines laid down by parliament in 1646 and he regarded the sects with distaste. He was a republican. When he became one is not clear but Clarendon may well have been right in thinking that the idea took as early as his university days. While he was far from indifferent to what was happening, he took little active part in politics and, like Sir Henry Vane junior, he may have favoured the forced abdication of the king rather than his execution. He made no difficulty about serving the Commonwealth but he viewed the behaviour of Barebone's Parliament with disfavour, and he accepted the protectorate unenthusiastically as the least damaging alternative. As the earthly Jerusalem he sought became more and more elusive he tried to forget what was happening at home and treated the wars against the Dutch and the Spanish as in the interests of English people everywhere whatever their religious and political opinions. Clarendon again mirrored the extent to which he succeeded. He regarded Blake as an obstacle to a royalist restoration, second only to Cromwell, but he could not disguise his admiration for the 'miraculous' victory at Tenerife which raised the reputation of the English nation throughout Europe to new heights (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 6.37). 


