@@@@@


doc= 22790


Priestley, Sir William Overend (1829-1900), obstetric physician, was born at Morley Hall, near Leeds, on 24 June 1829, the eldest son of Joseph Priestley and Mary, daughter of James Overend of Morley. He was a great-nephew of Joseph Priestley. Priestley was educated at Leeds, King's College, London, Paris, and the University of Edinburgh. In 1852 he became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons and in 1853 he graduated MD from Edinburgh with a thesis entitled 'The development of the gravid uterus', which was awarded Professor Simpson's gold medal and the senate gold medal for excellence in original work. After graduating Priestley acted as private assistant of Sir James Young Simpson, then went to London and lectured at the Grosvenor Place school of medicine, where he was one of the pioneers of the new science of gynaecology. Following his master, Simpson, he was among the first to convert midwifery into obstetric medicine by attempting to use scientific methods. On 17 April 1856 Priestley married Eliza, the fourth daughter of publisher Robert Chambers (1802-1871); they had two sons and two daughters. Through his wife Priestley came into connection with the Edinburgh intelligentsia and made many influential contacts. His close friends included Louis Pasteur and Oliver Wendell Holmes. 
In 1858 Priestley was appointed lecturer in midwifery at the Middlesex Hospital, and in 1862 he was elected professor of midwifery at King's College, London, and obstetric physician to King's College Hospital in the place of Arthur Farre. Priestley suffered a severe attack of diphtheria soon after his election and was absent from his posts for some months. Despite this set-back his future appeared to be brilliant and Priestley's reputation and connections enabled him to build up the largest maternity and gynaecological practice in London. This prevented him from giving sufficient time to his scientific work and in 1872 he resigned from his hospital appointments. As a result, he fell into the background in the London medical establishment. He was appointed consulting obstetric physician to King's College Hospital and became an honorary fellow of King's College and a member of the council but this did not compensate for his loss of clinical status. Though personally respected and liked, Priestley came to be regarded as somewhat reactionary and out-of-date in his own subject. In 1896 he gave evidence in the famous libel case in which his successor at King's, William Playfair, was sued by a patient for breaching medical confidence. Priestley, like other medical witnesses, thought it was in order for a doctor to breach a patient's confidence to protect his own family from contact with an 'immoral' woman. 
Priestley became a member of the Royal College of Physicians of London in 1859 and a fellow in 1864. He was a member of the council from 1878 to 1880, Lumleian lecturer in 1887, and censor in 1891-2. He became a member of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh in 1858, and from 1866 to 1876 he was an examiner in midwifery at the Royal College of Surgeons of England. He was also at different times an examiner at the Royal College of Physicians of London and at the universities of Cambridge, London, and Victoria. He was president of the Obstetrical Society of London in 1875-6 and was a vice-president of the Medical Society of Paris. Priestley was a physician accoucheur to Princess Louis of Hesse (Alice of England), and to Princess Christian of Schleswig-Holstein. He received the honorary degree of LLD at the University of Edinburgh in 1884 and was knighted in 1893. 
In 1895, in an address to the British Medical Association, Priestley deplored the current craze for 'over-operating' in gynaecology. A Conservative and Unionist, in 1896 he was elected to parliament, where he represented the universities of Edinburgh and St Andrews for the rest of his life. He had long been interested in politics but entered parliament too late in his life to have much influence there. He was especially interested in the remodelling of London University from an examining to a teaching body. He also wished to restore the library of the University of Edinburgh but the government refused to give a grant for this. Priestley was taken in ill in December 1899 and in January was moved from his country house in Sussex to London. He died at his home at 17 Hertford Street, Mayfair, London, on 11 April 1900 and was buried on 14 April at St Margaret's, Warnham, near Westbrook Hall, his estate in Sussex. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 22791


Priestman, John (1805-1866), manufacturer of worsted goods and peace campaigner, son of Joshua and Hannah Priestman, was born at Thornton, near Pickering, Yorkshire, where his ancestors had lived for more than 200 years. He is believed to have been educated at the Society of Friends' school at Ackworth, Yorkshire, and apprenticed to an uncle, a tanner at York, but at nineteen he joined his brother-in-law James Ellis in the Old Corn Mill, Bradford. Together they founded the first ragged school in Bradford, in a room at the top of one of their mills. Priestman was one of the founders in 1832 of the Friends' Provident Institution, a society whose conspicuous success was due to economic management and the temperate habits of the members, and he remained on the board of directors until his death. 
In early life Priestman became a free-trader, and he represented Bradford at many of the conferences called by the Anti-Corn Law League. A staunch Liberal, he was twice invited, and twice declined, to stand as a parliamentary candidate for Bradford. Priestman and his partner Ellis actively resisted the collection of church rates. For refusal to pay the rate for 1835 they were summoned before the magistrates; and, partly because of the publicity surrounding their case, the rate was not levied again in their parish. 
Chiefly from a desire to utilize the surplus power of machinery in his mills, Priestman in 1838 commenced manufacturing worsted goods in an upper room. He removed to larger premises in Preston Place in 1845, and in 1855 he abandoned corn milling altogether. His treatment of the millhands, chiefly women and girls, was sympathetic and enlightened, and they grew so refined that his works became known as 'Lady Mills'. He successfully introduced a system of profit sharing with part of his workforce. 
Much of Priestman's time and money was devoted to the causes of peace and temperance. From 1834, when the Preston 'teetotallers' first visited Bradford, he adopted total abstinence. At the same time he and his partner relinquished malt crushing, a process in the manufacture of beer, which was the most profitable part of their milling business. He was one of the few supporters of Richard Cobden in his condemnation of the Crimean War and he seconded the unpopular anti-war resolution proposed by Cobden at a great meeting at Leeds in 1854. In 1855 he was elected a town councillor, but resigned before taking his seat. 
Priestman married on 28 November 1833 Sarah, daughter of Joseph Burgess of Beaumont Lodge, Leicester, who died in 1849, leaving two sons and a daughter. In 1852 he married Mary, daughter of Thomas Smith, miller, of Uxbridge, Middlesex, who survived him; they had two sons. 
A stern adherent to Quaker principles through life, after three months of illness Priestman died suddenly while dressing at his home at Whetley Hill, Bradford, on 29 October 1866; he was buried on 2 November in the Undercliffe cemetery, Bradford; 1100 of his workpeople attended the funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 22792


Prime, John (1549/50-1596), Church of England clergyman and preacher, was born in Holywell parish, Oxford -- according to Anthony Wood, son of Robert Prime, a fletcher. Scholar of Winchester College from 1564 and then of New College, Oxford, from 1569, he became fellow there in 1571, gaining his BA in 1572 and his MA in 1576. Ordained in 1575, he then proceeded to supplicate successfully for a university preaching licence in 1581, and for the degrees of BTh and DTh in 1584 and 1588 respectively. He established a reputation for aggressively protestant preaching, and fittingly dedicated to Sir Francis Walsingham in 1583 'A Short Treatise of the Sacraments' and a longer 'Fruitefull and Briefe Discourse... of Nature... [and] of Grace', especially directed against the Rheims edition of the 'New Testament', both insisting on the indefectibility of election. Between 1586 and 1590 Prime delivered the Oxford city lecture at Carfax. His longest work, 'An Exposition and Observations upon St Paul to the Galatians' (1587), was dedicated to John Piers, bishop of Salisbury (possibly also the recipient of a paper by Prime two years before on the question of Christ's descent into hell), and was professedly based upon sermons that Prime had been preaching at Abingdon 'every other week'. 
Prime made something of a speciality of sermons in the university church, St Mary the Virgin, for Elizabeth's accession day, 17 November. In 1585 he delivered and then rapidly published 'Sermon Briefly Comparing the Estate of King Salomon and his Subjects with Queene Elizabeth and her People', in which he seemed to consider himself as compensating for the popish past of New College (perhaps hinting at tensions that he might have experienced there); in 1588 there followed 'The Consolations of David Briefly Applied to Queen Elizabeth'. This last was dedicated to Thomas Cooper, bishop of Winchester, with expressions of dismay at the attack on him by Martin Marprelate. 'Were all thinges amisse, is this the way to reforme... ?' (sig. A2). Calvinist theology did not presuppose presbyterian sympathies, and Prime was certainly concerned to dissociate himself from Marprelate. The latter retorted in 'Hay any Worke for Cooper' (1589), calling Prime 'Wynken de Worde', an otherwise obscure allusion to a printing pioneer which may refer to Prime as having been one of the signatories of the foreword to John Case's 'Moral Questions' (1585), the first book from Oxford University's press, which soon afterwards printed books by Prime himself. 'Hay any Worke' threatened, 'I'll bepistle you, Dr Prime, when I am at more leisure; though, indeed, I tell you true, that as yet I do disdain to deal with a contemptible trencher-chaplain' (Pierce, 267). 
In 1589 Prime was presented to the New College vicarage of Adderbury, Oxfordshire, being instituted early the following year and soon afterwards quitting his fellowship and lectureships. Perhaps he fulfilled the stern views of parochial duties he had expressed earlier; at any rate he seems to have distracted himself no further with publication. In April 1596 he made his will in 'sickness of body', but with 'full hope for a better resurrection' (Oxfordshire Archives, MS Wills Oxon. 190, 167), leaving his books to his old college and most of his money to his nieces. He died on 11 or 12 April at Adderbury, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 22793


Primrose, Sir Archibald, first baronet, Lord Carrington (1616-1679), legal official and judge, was born on 16 May 1616, son of James Primrose (d. 1640), clerk to the privy council of Scotland (1599-1640), and his second wife, Catherine (died 1651), daughter of Richard Lawson ('fl'. 1603-1622) of Boghall, Lanarkshire, presbyterian bookseller of Edinburgh. Little is known of Primrose's early life and education but he clearly studied law before he succeeded his late father as clerk to the privy council in September 1641. 
Primrose's career was split into two halves by the Cromwellian interregnum. At first he acted as clerk to the convention of estates in 1643 and 1644. However, after the royalist victory at Kilsyth he joined the army of Montrose, persuading others to switch sides. He was taken prisoner as Montrose was defeated at the battle of Philiphaugh on 13 September 1645, and found guilty of treason at the covenanting parliament of St Andrews in 1646, yet suffered only a spell in prison. Having taken part in the failed engagement of 1648, that last attempt to unite moderate Scottish royalists with the interests of Charles I, he was on 10 March 1649 deprived of the office of clerk of the privy council by the 'Act of Classes'. However, he was absolved by the commission of the kirk on 4 January 1651, pardoned by the committee of estates on 10 January, and fully reinstated on 6 June 1651. Primrose went on to accompany Charles II on his march into England and was created a baronet in August 1651 just after being knighted. But after the disastrous defeat of the Scottish army at the battle of Worcester, Primrose had his estates sequestrated and remained out of office during the protectorate. 
At the Restoration, Primrose was appointed lord clerk register on 7 August 1660. It was necessary for him to buy off Sir William Fleming to whom Charles II had granted the post during his exile. On 15 February 1661 he was appointed a lord of session under the title Lord Carrington, and also a lord of exchequer and member of the Scottish privy council. As clerk register he was instructed to draft legislation reasserting royal authority and especially the 'Rescissory Act', by which all the acts of the Scottish parliament since 1633 were rescinded. Gilbert Burnet's idea that Carrington suggested this sweeping act 'half in jest' is incredible ('Bishop Burnet's History', 1.213). Although associated with the Clarendonian party in England and a follower of the party of the royal commissioner John, earl of Middleton, in opposition to John Maitland, earl of Lauderdale, secretary of state, Carrington was astute enough to oppose the 1662 'Act of Billeting' which was designed to destroy Lauderdale. He, therefore, retained his offices after Middleton's fall from power in 1663-4, his position apparently 'right and fixed' in Lauderdale's interest (Airy, 1.180). 
Unfortunately, Carrington fell foul of Lauderdale's second wife, Elizabeth, countess of Dysart, whom Lauderdale had married in 1672. Intrigues attributed to her led to his resignation from the office of clerk register by 11 June 1676. The position passed in November 1677 to the duchess's kinsman Sir Thomas Murray of Glendook. As compensation Carrington was granted the office of justice-general with its inferior emoluments. He then had an important role in the trial of the covenanter James Mitchell. Mitchell had been arrested in 1674 for an attempt in 1668 to murder Archbishop James Sharp and had been promised his life by Lauderdale and the privy council provided he confessed. After his confession Mitchell was left in prison. However, he was brought to trial again in January 1678, the indemnity conveniently forgotten. No doubt for reasons both of revenge and of justice, Carrington made known the extract of the privy council register to embarrass Lauderdale who hid behind a lapse of memory. This made not the slightest difference to the outcome and Mitchell was executed. In October, Carrington was, not unexpectedly, deprived of the office of justice-general. 
Carrington married, first, in or before 1641, Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of Sir James Keith of Benholm, and second, in or before 1657, Agnes, daughter of Sir William Gray of Pittendrum and widow of Sir James Dundas of Newlinston. William, his eldest son from his first marriage, succeeded to the baronetcy. His youngest son of the same marriage, Gilbert (1654-1731), served on the Rhine and in the Low Countries under Marlborough and by 1710 had risen to the rank of major-general. The only son by the second marriage, Archibald Primrose, became the first earl of Rosebery in 1703. 
Carrington became extremely wealthy. In 1662 he acquired the lands and barony of Barnbougle in Dalmeny, Linlithgowshire, from the earl of Haddington for 160,000 merks ($106,000 Scots); in due course this became the seat of the Rosebery family. He died on 27 November 1679 with an estate valued at $58,000 Scots, including $27,000 of cash and gold, and was buried at the parish church of Dalmeny. He was well read and died with a library valued at $200. He was a born conservative, an astute politician, and a believer in compromise. Burnet, Carrington's contemporary, describes a conscientious public servant, 'dexterous... in business... he had always expedients ready at every difficulty [and]... was always for soft councils and slow methods' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 1.192). His long tenure as clerk register is testament to these qualities. 


@@@@@


doc= 22794


Primrose, Archibald, of Dalmeny, first earl of Rosebery (1664-1723), politician, was born on 18 December 1664 at Edinburgh. He was the only son of Archibald Primrose, Lord Carrington (1616-1679), lord justice-general, and his second wife, Agnes, daughter of Sir William Gray of Pittendrum, and widow of Sir James Dundas. In his youth he travelled abroad and served in the imperial army of Hungary, returning to Scotland in 1687. On 26 June 1688 he was summoned before the privy council on the charge of spreading discord among the officers of state opposed, like him, to James II's policies in Scotland. Through the intervention of the duke of Berwick, however, the investigation was suspended. 
After the revolution of 1688 Primrose was appointed one of the gentlemen of the bedchamber to Prince George of Denmark, on whose death in 1708 the salary of $600 a year attached to the office was continued to him for life. He married on 3 February 1691 Dorothy Cressy ('b'. 1672/3?, died after 1724), daughter of Everingham and Anne Cressy of Birkin, Yorkshire; they had six sons and six daughters. In 1695 he was chosen to represent the county of Edinburgh in the Scottish parliament, and, on account of his consistent support of the government, he was in April 1700 created Viscount Rosebery, Lord Primrose and Dalmeny. On the accession of Queen Anne in 1702 he was sworn of the privy council, and in April 1703 created earl of Rosebery, viscount of Inverkeithing, and Lord Dalmeny and Primrose in the Scottish peerage. He was one of the commissioners for the Union with England, and after its accomplishment was chosen as a Scottish representative peer in 1707, 1708, 1710, and 1713. Between 1703 and 1714 he also served as chamberlain of Fife and Strathearn. Rosebery died on 20 October 1723, and was succeeded by his eldest son, James Primrose, second earl of Rosebery (1691-1755), who on the death in 1741 of his kinsman Hugh, Viscount Primrose, inherited the family estate and baronetcy of the elder branch of the family. 


@@@@@


doc= 22795


Primrose, Archibald John, fourth earl of Rosebery (1783-1868), politician, eldest son of Neil, third earl of Rosebery (died 25 Jan 1814), and his second wife, Mary, only daughter of Sir Francis Vincent of Stoke d'Abernon, Surrey, was born at Barnbougle Castle, Dalmeny, near Edinburgh, on 14 October 1783. He was educated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, graduating MA in 1804; he was made an honorary DCL by the university in 1819. He sat in parliament for Helston, Cornwall (1805-6), and for Cashel (1806-7), for which he paid 4000 guineas. He succeeded his father on 25 January 1814; for several parliaments he was chosen a representative peer, until the parliament of 1828 when, on Goderich's advice, he was created a peer of the United Kingdom with the title Baron Rosebery of Rosebery, Midlothian. In 1819 he moved the family seat from the medieval Barnbougle Castle to the neo-Gothic Dalmeny House, newly built near by. He was well liked in the Forth valley as a public-spirited, reforming landowner. 
Rosebery took an active interest as a whig in the passing of the 'Reform Bill' of 1832. In 1831 he was sworn of the privy council, and in 1840 was made a knight of the Thistle. From 1843 to 1863 he was lord lieutenant of Linlithgowshire. He was a fellow of the Royal Society, and a member of other learned institutions. 
With his first wife, Harriet, second daughter of the Hon. Bartholomew Bouverie (afterwards earl of Radnor) and his wife, Mary, Rosebery had two sons and a daughter. The marriage was dissolved in 1815 after her adultery with Sir Henry Mildmay, bt, from whom Rosebery obtained $15,000 in damages. Harriet married Mildmay the same year and died in 1834. Rosebery married as his second wife the Hon. Anne Margaret Anson, eldest daughter of Thomas, first Viscount Anson (afterwards earl of Lichfield), and his wife, Anne Margaret, with whom he had two sons. His eldest son from the first marriage, Archibald, Lord Dalmeny (1809-1851), represented the Stirling burghs in parliament from 1833 to 1847, and from April 1835 to August 1841 was a lord of the Admiralty. He was the author of 'An Address to the Middle Classes on the Subject of Gymnastic Exercises' (1848), and was the father of Archibald Philip Primrose, fifth earl of Rosebery, the prime minister. 
Rosebery died at his London residence, 139 Piccadilly, on 4 March 1868, and was buried at Dalmeny. 


@@@@@


doc= 22796


Primrose, Gilbert (1566/7-1642), Reformed minister, was born in Edinburgh in late November 1566 or 1567, the son of Gilbert Primrose ('c'.1535-1615) of Culross, Perthshire, principal surgeon to James VI, and his wife, Alison Graham. In 1587 he entered St Andrews University, where he graduated MA. He then went to France, and in August 1596 was received as a minister of the French Reformed church. His first charge was at St Jean d'Angely, Mirambeau, in the province of Saintonge, where he married Elizabeth Brenin ('c'.1567-1637) and where his first two children, James (or Jacques) Primrose (1600-1659) and David, were born. In February 1603 he was transferred to the large and important church of Bordeaux. 
However, Primrose maintained his contacts with Scotland and its ministers, and it was mainly through his influence that John Cameron (died 1625) was made regent in the new college of Bergerac. The national synod of the Reformed church, which met at La Rochelle in March 1607, appointed Primrose to wait upon John Welsh and other Scots ministers who had been banished, and to inquire into their financial needs. At this synod Primrose presented letters from King James and from the magistrates and ministers of Edinburgh recalling him home to serve the church in that city. The synod entreated him to consider the interests of his present charge, 'which, by his most fruitful preaching and exemplary godly conversation, had been exceedingly edified' (Quick, 1.290), and he was induced to remain at Bordeaux. In the latter part of the same year he visited Britain, when he was commissioned by the Reformed congregation at La Rochelle to ask King James to set at liberty Andrew Melville, who was then a prisoner in the Tower of London, and to allow him to accept a professorship in their college. The request was refused, and the application gave offence to the French court. On his return Primrose was called before the king of France, and the people of La Rochelle were reprimanded for communicating with a foreign sovereign without the knowledge or consent of their own. In 1608 John Cameron became Primrose's colleague at Bordeaux, and they 'lived on the most cordial terms and governed the church with the greatest concord for ten years' (Wodrow, MS Gen 1207), after which Cameron left for a professorship at Saumur. 
Throughout his ministry at Bordeaux, Primrose was an active theological controversialist, publishing a number of works, including 'Le voeu de Jacob oppose aux voeux de moines' (4 vols., 1610), which was later translated into English by John Bulteel as 'Jacob's Vow, Opposed to the Vows of Monks and Friers' (1617); 'La trompette de Sion' (1610); and 'La defense de la religion reformee' (1619). 
In 1623 an act was passed forbidding ministers of other nations to officiate in France, and at the national synod which met at Charenton in September of that year the royal commissioner presented letters from the French king intimating that Primrose and Cameron were no longer to be employed, 'not so much because of their birth as foreigners as for reasons of state' (Quick, 2.101). Primrose was obliged to quit the country, and, according to an account of his own life which he wrote in 1626, his banishment was mainly due to the machinations of the Jesuits, to whom he had given special offence. 
On his return to London in the autumn of 1623, Primrose was chosen one of the ministers of the French and Walloon refugee church, an appointment which he held for the rest of his life. On 18 January 1625 his degree was incorporated at the University of Oxford, and he received the degree of DD on the same day on the recommendation of James I. Charles I appointed him chaplain, probably some time after October 1626, and in July 1628 preferred him to a canonry of Windsor. During his career in England, Primrose continued to maintain his contacts with the Huguenot churches. He corresponded frequently with Andre Rivet, professor of theology at Leiden, to whom he relayed news of their French and Scottish colleagues and of the education in the French church of London of Rivet's nephew, Pierre du Moulin the younger (whom Primrose considered talented but lazy). 
Primrose's writings of this period equally evince a continuing concern for the Huguenots. The 'Panegyrique a tres grand et tres puissant Prince Charles, prince de Galles' (1624) and the collection of sermons 'Reconciliation de l'homme avec Dieu' (1624) were both published in French for a French audience. In 'The Righteous Man's Evil, and the Lord's Deliverance' (1625), Primrose places the recent military campaign by the French crown against the Huguenots firmly in the long history of Christian martyrdom and persecution, and advocates continuing support from England for those brethren suffering abroad. His friend Bishop Joseph Hall of Exeter dedicated his response to Urban VIII's vituperative attack on the Huguenots, 'An Answer to Pope Urban his Inurbanity' (1629), to Primrose, who in return wrote a grateful letter of commendation (printed as an appendix to the same work). Primrose's other major works include 'The Christian Man's Tears and Christ's Comforts' (1625), 'Three Sermons of the Table of the Lord' (1627), and an English translation of his son David's work, 'A Treatise of the Sabbath and the Lords-Day' (1636). 
After the death of his first wife, Elizabeth, in July 1637, Primrose married twice more -- on 14 December 1637 to Jeanne, 'nee' Hersent, widow of Abraham Aurelius, and (Jeanne having died on 8 June 1641) on 21 September 1641 to Louise de Lobel, widow of Jacob Cool. At his death in early December 1642, 'att my house in Chiswell streete neare to Finsbury house' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/190, fols. 351'v'-352'v'), Primrose was survived by his sons James, David, Stephen, and John and by his married daughter Louise Blakal. 


@@@@@


doc= 22797


Primrose, James (d. 1640), government official, was the second son of Archibald Primrose, of Culross, Perthshire, a law agent, and Margaret Bleau, of Castlehill. Nothing is known of his early life. He was appointed clerk to the privy council of Scotland for life on 1 February 1599. He was twice married: his first marriage was to Sibylla Miller, with whom he had a son, Gilbert, and six daughters; by 1616 he had married Catherine (died 1651), daughter of Richard Lawson of Boghall, Lanarkshire, with whom he had a son, Archibald ['see 'Primrose, Sir Archibald, Lord Carrington (1616-1679)], and six daughters. 
On 13 June 1616 Primrose was granted a monopoly of printing and selling the catechism entitled 'God and the King', a work that emphasized the supremacy of royal prerogative over the kirk. James VI intended that it should supplant John Craig's 'Examination before the Communione', which had served as the 'official' catechism of the kirk since 1592. In entrusting the monopoly to Primrose, the king sought to employ the authority of the privy council to enforce its use in schools, universities, and kirks, and to disseminate a copy in every household in Scotland. Presbyterian opponents of royal policy, however, were quick to broadcast that the new 'catechisme' contained 'little of God and much for the king' (NL Scot., Calderwood, 'Ane answere', fol. 49'r'). Thus the work was never widely popular, and Primrose appears to have made little effort regarding recovery of payment and distribution of stock following the king's death in 1625. 
Although Primrose courted royal favour, he and his wife were not unsympathetic to the plight of presbyterianism in Scotland. In 1617 Primrose drew up the 'Act of Caution' by which the nonconformist minister David Calderwood was released from 'ward' pending his appeal against the sentence of banishment. Subsequently, Calderwood received a letter, 'penned by James Primrois... informing me that [meanwhile] it was his majesties will that I should forbear to preach', which clause had been omitted from the act. Primrose, noted the minister, beseeched him 'to bewarr that I involve myself not in a new trouble' (Calderwood, 'A trew relatioun', fols. 5'v'-6'r'). Catherine Lawson (a prominent presbyterian matron) shared her husband's concern for Calderwood, and was entrusted with the care of 'twa kist full of [the minister's] books' during his enforced exile (Wells, 132). The discovery of such material in the house of a trusted servant of the crown would almost certainly have led to Primrose's dismissal. 
Almost nothing is recorded of Primrose's private activities during the reign of Charles I. He was a man of moderate means, leaving possessions worth $700 Scots to his second wife, Catherine, who died in 1651. Primrose continued as a trusted servant of the crown until his death at Edinburgh, on 21 January 1640, of causes unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 22798


Primrose, James (1600-1659), physician, the eldest of four sons of Gilbert Primrose (1566/7-1642), a Scottish minister in the French Reformed church, and his wife, Elizabeth Brenin ('c'.1567-1637), was born at Mirambeau, Saintonge. Much of his youth was spent in Bordeaux, to whose Reformed church his father had been called in 1603. He attended the University of Bordeaux and graduated there MA. After a period of medical study in Paris he matriculated at the University of Montpellier in 1615 and in short order gained an MB, a medical licence, and in 1617 an MD. At least part of his studies were paid for by James I of England. 
The Primroses had a strong connection to the house of Stuart. Primrose's grandfather was Gilbert Primrose, principal surgeon to James VI and I and his wife, Queen Anne. On the surgeon's death in 1615, his place was taken by Duncan Primrose, probably his son. In 1623 James Primrose's father was forced to leave France and took a position as minister of the French Reformed church in London. He continued in that position until his death in 1641. Gilbert Primrose was made a royal chaplain and in 1625, on the king's personal recommendation, he was created a DD by the University of Oxford. 
James Primrose incorporated on his Montpellier MD at Oxford in 1628, doubtlessly as a prelude to applying for a medical licence from the London College of Physicians. On 9 December 1629 he was successfully examined for the licence at the home of the college president, John Argent. On 11, 12, and 14 December Primrose attended the lectures of Helkiah Crooke on morbid anatomy, held in the college house. Much of the discussion among the fellows centred on William Harvey's book on the circulation of the blood, which had been published only recently. Primrose became concerned over the lack of criticism of the new theory and subsequently was able to gain the support of Charles I, a family patron and ally, for delivering a series of public medical lectures in London. The college was aghast that a new licentiate, and not even a fellow of their company, should be allowed the right of any public lectures. The matter was dropped, but Primrose, in a very short time, according to his later reckoning, published in London in 1630 the first serious rebuttal of Harvey's discovery: 'Exercitationes et animadversiones in librum Gulielmi Harvaei de motu cordis et circulatione sanguinis'. Primrose's stay in the capital was a brief one. He first appeared before the college in 1629; was listed among foreign doctors in the City in 1632; but was not named among licentiates living in London in 1635. 
In his appearance before the college, Primrose stated among his qualifications that he had studied medicine with Professor Jean Riolan at the University of Paris. This may have occurred just after his Montpellier MD of 1617, but much of the time from that date was spent in actual medical practice, probably in Yorkshire, and possibly in Hull, where he was to spend a large part of his medical life. In one of his last books before his death in 1659 he mentioned having seen a case of rickets, before the illness even had a name, in Yorkshire in 1628. The ten years of medical practice, to which he referred in his book against Harvey, were likely therefore to have been spent in England not France. His return to Hull by no later than 1634 has better documentation, for he was charged with being a Roman Catholic recusant there in 1637 and 1640. He returned briefly to London again in the latter year to marry Louise (Lucie) de Haukmont (died 1653) at his father's Reformed church. They had several children. The marriages of Roman Catholics in protestant churches for legal reasons was not unknown. Primrose's religion is not easy to tease from his many books, but there are indications in them that he remained a Roman Catholic after the charges of 1637 and 1640. 
In 1638 Primrose had published in London what would turn out to be his most popular book: 'De vulgi in medicina erroribus'. The book was a systematic attack on the non-professional practice of medicine, folk medicine, quackery, and malpractice. In 1640 a young physician from Hull, Robert Wittie, published an English version of a separate work by Primrose on part of the same subject, 'The Antimonial Cup Twice Cast'. It was the beginning of a long and fruitful friendship and professional partnership. Though Wittie was strongly Presbyterian in religious sympathies and a Harveian on the circulation of the blood, a fierce dedication to the medical profession, shared by Primrose, made possible an unlikely alliance. In 1651 Wittie published his translation of a revised edition of Primrose's 'De vulgi': 'Popular Errours, or, The Errours of the People in Physick'. Some of the common errors refuted by Primrose were that the linen of the sick ought not to be changed; that remedies ought not to be rejected for their unpleasantness; and that gold boiled in broth will cure consumption, to name but a few. The book featured some dedicatory poetry by another Hull resident and native, Andrew Marvell. Primrose remarried in 1653 and with his second wife, Elizabeth, had two children: James, baptized in 1654, and Maria, baptized at Holy Trinity, Hull, in 1656. 
Despite writing many books on many medical topics, Primrose is best known as the orthodox Galenic opponent of Harvey's discovery of the circulation. Using some contemporary anatomists as well, including Vesalius, Primrose questioned the truth of any doctrine based on vivisection, which was an unnatural intrusion into the ordinary functioning of the body that could yield only unnatural conclusions. Such discoveries had absolutely no utility to the actual practice of medicine, an art that was best learned from the well-established authority of Hippocrates and Galen, and traditional commentators. More than that, these discoveries threatened to undermine fundamental therapeutic techniques like phlebotomy, based on ancient physiology and which would be rendered nonsensical if the blood actually circulated through the body as Harvey maintained. Primrose did allow that in systole, or contraction, some blood left the heart, but this was not the heart's primary function which was rather as a receptacle for the heating of the blood. Primrose was by no means a slave to books and his own medical practice was tempered by experience, which he thought essential for a doctor. He was suspicious of academic medicine because it inevitably produced useless novelties, like that of the circulation, but he was very capable of independent thought which led him to accept in his last years the lesser or pulmonary circulation. He was also open to the benefits of chemical medicine, while his work throughout showed him flexible in modifying his traditional method with original thought and observation. 
Primrose was a prolific and highly regarded medical author, enjoying a wide European audience and numerous reprints of his many books. In addition to the 'Exercitationes' of 1630, he wrote at least four other books against Harveian professors of medicine: one against Walaeus of Leiden in 1639; two against Regius of Utrecht in 1640; and a fourth against the converted Harveian, Plempius of Louvain, in 1657. Like his idol Galen, there was scarcely a field of medicine on which he did not write. These included two handbooks on the main principles and practice of medicine, 'Aphorismi necessarii ad doctrinam medicinae acquirendam perutiles', published at Leiden in 1647, and 'Enchiridion medicum', at Amsterdam in 1650; another on pharmacy and the compounding of medicines, 'Ars pharmaceutica', appeared in Amsterdam in 1651. Three of his later books were published at Rotterdam: one on gynaecology, 'De mulierum morbis' (1655); a second on fevers, 'De febribus' (1658); and his final book, on childhood illnesses, 'Partes duae de morbis puerorum', which was published in the year of his death, 1659. The last was still much respected by British physicians in the late eighteenth century. Primrose was also the author of a short Latin history of Montpellier, 'Academia Monspelienses descripta', published at Oxford in 1631 and dedicated to the regius professor of physic, Thomas Clayton. Primrose died in Hull in December 1659 and was buried in the parish church of the Holy Trinity, a parish in which he had lived and worked for most of his medical life. He was buried near his first wife. At least six of their children had been baptized in the church between 1642 and 1651. Primrose left his surviving sons under the guardianship of Robert Wittie, who is known to have seen Caesar and Isaac, the sons of Primrose and his first wife, through Cambridge. Primrose's widow married John Smithson, vicar of Paghill on 18 January 1664. 


@@@@@


doc= 22799


Prince, John (1643-1723), Church of England clergyman and author, was born at Newenham Abbey farmhouse in Axminster, Devon, on the site of the Cistercian abbey, and probably baptized at Uffculme on 4 February 1644, the eldest son of Bernard Prince (died 1689) and his first wife, Mary, daughter of John Crocker of Lyneham, Yealmpton, Devon. His kinsman Sir John Drake, maternal uncle to John Churchill, later duke of Marlborough, was his godfather. Prince matriculated from Brasenose College, Oxford, on 13 July 1660, and graduated BA on 23 April 1664. The same year Lord Petre nominated him to one of the fellowships on the foundation at Exeter College vacated by ejected nonconformists, but the right of patronage was not acknowledged by the college. 
Prince was ordained as curate to Arthur Giffard, rector of Bideford, north Devon, and he remained there until the rector's death in March 1669. His next post was at St Martin's, Exeter, where he seems to have been curate and minister until 1675. While there he published, in 1674, 'A Humble Defence of the Exeter Bill in Parliament for Uniting the Parishes' and 'A Sermon Preached... at the Visitation of the Bishop of Exon'. It was probably also at Exeter that he met and married Gertrude (1644-1725), youngest daughter of Anthony Salter, physician at Exeter, and his wife, Gertrude, daughter of John Acland. 
In 1675 Prince was incorporated at Cambridge, and proceeded MA from Gonville and Caius College. From 25 December 1675 until 1681, according to articles of agreement between the corporation and himself, he received a stipend of $50 from the vicarage of Totnes, Devon, being instituted on 4 April 1676. On 21 April 1681 he was instituted, on the presentation of Sir Edward Seymour, to the neighbouring vicarage of Berry Pomeroy. 
Prince published a few other religious tracts and several unpublished sermons and tracts by him are mentioned by Anthony Wood, some of them withheld because they were too intemperate in their opposition to dissenters. His great work was the chatty and entertaining 'Danmonii orientales illustres', better known by its subtitle, 'The Worthies of Devon'. The first edition came out in 1701, with a dedication 'from my study, Aug. 6 1697'. The manuscript materials on which it is based were a transcript by Prince of the work of Sir William Pole (BL, Add. MS 28649) and a similar transcript of Thomas Westcote's 'View of Devonshire' (Bodl. Oxf., MSS Top Devon b 1-6, c 6-19, e 7-8). The insertions between brackets in the 1845 published text of Westcote's work were from Prince's notes, and are described in the introduction as containing many errors. Prince also owned in the 1680s the manuscript of John Hooker's 'Synopsis chorographical of Devonshire' (Devon RO). His own library was very small, but he had the free use of the very good library of Robert Burscough, his successor at Totnes. 
A long letter from Prince to Sir Philip Sydenham dated 5 August 1712 (BL, Egerton MS 2035) details the problems faced in the publication (by subscription) of 'The Worthies of Devon', a task made more difficult by a sentence given against him for misconduct, which deprived him of his living in 1700. During the appeal he incurred the wrath of Bishop Trelawny, who described him as 'impudent' and as having 'as little truth as modesty' (Smith). The result of Prince's appeal is uncertain, but in 1701 he resumed his duties at Berry Pomeroy, where he remained for the rest of his life. Prince died intestate on 9 September 1723 and was buried in the chancel of the church at Berry Pomeroy. Letters of administration were granted to his widow, who was herself buried there on 4 February 1725. 


@@@@@


doc= 22800


Prince, John Critchley (1808-1866), poet, was born on 21 June 1808 at Wigan, Lancashire, and baptized on 11 August 1808 at Ebenezer Methodist New Connexion Chapel, Bolton-le-Moors, the eldest among eight or more children of Joseph Prince (1788/9-1854) and his wife, Nancy Critchley (1787/8-1868). Joseph Prince was a maker of 'reeds' (instruments of lath and wire used by hand-loom weavers for separating threads); he was also a drunkard and a wanderer. John Prince learned to read and write at a Baptist Sunday school, but at nine he started reed-making for fourteen to sixteen hours a day with his father; his few hours of leisure were spent reading. He improvidently married Ann Orme ('bap'. 1808, died 1858) of Hyde, near Manchester, when they were both eighteen, and by 1830 they had two daughters and a son. From 1828 Prince earned tiny sums from verses contributed to 'The Phoenix' and many other local periodicals. 
In 1830 Prince spent seven fruitless months seeking work in northern France, at St Quentin in Picardy, and Paris, and underwent extraordinary hardships on his homeward journey; meanwhile his wife and children were in Wigan poorhouse. Reunited, they slept on straw in an unfurnished garret in a court off Long Millgate, Manchester, and would have starved if Ann had not worked as a power-loom weaver while Prince was unemployed; even so, their youngest baby died and its flesh was putrid before they could raise money for a funeral. Prince found work as a reed-maker for a while at Ashton under Lyne, then returned to Hyde. There, at 'Flowery Field' in 1836, he established a small club of working-class poets, the 'Literary Twelve', and in Hyde in 1837 he was prosaically employed in a cotton mill, twelve hours a day for 18's'. a week (when fully employed). Between 1838 and 1840 he worked as a yarn warehouseman. 
Prince's 'Hours with the Muses', printed for and sold by the author, ran into three successively enlarged editions in 1841-2 and attracted attention in London as well as Manchester, giving Prince hopes of making money by poetry. He now had a small shop in Long Millgate, Manchester, and was secretary of a short-lived Lancashire Literary Association which met at The Sun inn, opposite the shop, and where it seems he drank the profits of trade and verse. Promised a government post, he wrote on 22 June 1842 of being 'feasted, flattered, lionized, and promise-crammed for twelve months' (Procter, 'Memorials', 180), but the 'post' was a postman's job at 15's'. a week in Southampton which he left after a few days. Robert Peel refused his application for a librarianship but sent him $50 from the royal bounty in October 1842 and in the same year 'Bradshaw's Manchester Journal' paid him for cheerful articles describing the 'rambles of a rhymester' in search of work. 
The shop failed and was relinquished at the end of 1842. Prince resumed work as a reed-maker, at 20's'. a week if fully employed, and found intermittent employment in Manchester, Blackburn, and Ashton under Lyne. His wife was disabled with rheumatism but worked in factories when she could. For six years from 1845 he earned $12 p.a. as editor of the 'Ancient Shepherds' Quarterly Magazine', the journal of an Ashton under Lyne friendly society; he was awarded $40 from the Royal Literary Fund in 1844 and another $20 in 1846. A 'Prince testimonial' was established by well-wishers in 1846 to give financial help, 'but the committee found that intemperance was his weakness' (Lithgow, 187), despite his taking the pledge more than once and writing verses for temperance journals. 
Prince's 'Dreams and Realities in Verse and Prose' (1847), 'The Poetic Rosary' (1850), 'Autumn Leaves' (1856), and 'Miscellaneous Poems' (1861), were printed for the author, and were sold by him from his home through what were little better than begging letters to friends, acquaintances, and strangers. Reed-making was in decline as machinery supplanted manual labour, Prince's addiction to poetry and/or drink deterred potential employers, and his income from poetry was at best precarious. Rent on a succession of cottages in Ashton was often in arrears until in 1851 the Princes were 'sold up, dish and spoon, goods, working tools, everything' (Lithgow, 212), and moved in with their married daughter Elizabeth in Hyde and later in Ashton under Lyne. In 1855 another daughter died, leaving two infants in the Princes' care. Prince tramped widely and usually fruitlessly in search of work and was often disabled by inflamed eyes, severe rheumatism, or drink. He tried to live by his pen but survived only by scrounging. 
Prince's wife died in September 1858; one of his daughters took care of the orphaned grandchildren and, after a spell of wandering, Prince married Ann Taylor ('b'. 1813/14) on 30 March 1862 at St Mary's parish church, Mottram in Longdendale, Lancashire. Ann was illiterate, so perhaps to save her from humiliation, or perhaps as a joke, Prince too signed the marriage register with a mark. Fortunately, she was more careful, thrifty, and tidy than Prince's first wife -- soon after the wedding Prince had a stroke from which he never fully recovered and they were both out of work during the cotton famine. By autumn 1865 Prince was dependent on tobacco and drink, almost blind, and partially paralysed. He died on 5 May 1866 at Brook Street, Hyde, and was buried in St George's churchyard, Hyde. 
Prince was about 5 feet 10 inches tall, 'of slight physique, but wiry', his head unusually large, his neck narrow (Lithgow, 109, 120). He disapproved of socialism and Chartism and his verse rarely touches on social issues; it consists mostly of anodyne lyrics on religion and nature, and, considering the circumstances of his life, is astonishingly sunny and optimistic. 


@@@@@


doc= 22801


Prince, John Henry (b. 1770, d. in or after 1818), writer, was born on 21 May 1770 in the parish of St Mary, Whitechapel, the son of George Prince (died 1773), originally of Dursley, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Dorothy, 'nee' Dixon (1735/6-1791). He was educated in the charity school of St Mary's, Whitechapel; he started life as errand-boy to a tallow chandler, and eventually, about 1790, became clerk to an attorney in Carey Street, Lincoln's Inn. Dismissed after three years' service, Prince entered another office, and a year later became secretary to a retired solicitor, who gave him access to an excellent library. His weekly salary was only half a guinea, but he deemed it sufficient to maintain a wife, and was married on 29 May 1794; he and his wife had one daughter. 
From 1796, when Prince's essay 'On detraction and calumny' appeared in the 'Lady's Magazine', he began to turn out articles and pamphlets on the most varied subjects. He left his patron in 1797, and served with several firms of solicitors. Besides his literary and legal work, he found time to act for a while as minister of Bethesda Chapel -- a Methodist congregation -- and was prominent in debating societies, such as the London and Westminster forums. A religious organization of his own, of a methodistical type, had a short-lived existence. 
Besides ephemeral tracts including three letters (1801-2) attacking Joseph Proud, Prince wrote 'A Defence of the People Denominated Methodists' (1797), 'Original Letters and Essays on Moral and Entertaining Subjects' (1797), 'The Christian's Duty to God and the Constitution at all Times, but Especially at this Critical Juncture' (1804, 3rd edn), and 'Remarks on the Best Method of Barring Dower' (1805; republished, with additions, 1807). His 'Life, Pedestrian Excursions, and Singular Opinions of J. H. P., Bookseller... written by Himself' (1806) is a lively and entertaining work, dedicated to the Society of Eccentrics, of which he declared himself a worthy and enthusiastic member. 
In 1813 Prince was living at Islington, and in 1818 he published a small legal treatise on conveyancing. The date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 22802


Pring, Martin (bap. 1580, d. 1626), naval officer and explorer, was baptized on 23 April 1580 at Feniton, Devon, the son of John Pring of Awliscombe. His early life is obscure, but by 1603 he had gained the confidence of Richard Hakluyt and the patronage of the Society of Merchant Venturers of Bristol, especially of John Whitson, the local MP. 
Pring was put in charge of a voyage to Virginia to make a more intensive study of the area covered by Gosnold and Bartholomew Gilbert (1602). With a licence from Ralegh, the Virginia patentee, he set out with the 50 ton 'Speedwell' (possibly Drake's ship of 1587-8) and the 26 ton 'Discoverer', and sailed from Milford Haven (10 April 1603) via the Azores to the coast of Maine. He established a camp on the shore of Massachusetts Bay which he called Whitson Bay. Most commentators place the site at Plymouth harbour, but Quinn suggests it was near modern Provincetown on Cape Cod (Quinn, 359-62). Having protected his camp with a palisade and two mastiffs to keep the curious natives at bay, Pring stayed there for seven weeks, loading his ships with cedar and sassafras, a tree whose dried root was considered good for flavouring and a cure for plague and the pox. He commented on the fertile soil, the abundance of fish, and the great variety of trees. He arrived home on 2 October 1603, having clarified available knowledge about the region; his descriptions, printed by Purchas, were a great encouragement to future settlers. 
Pring is almost certainly identifiable with the Martin Prinx who sailed from Woolwich in March 1604 as master of the 'Phoenix' (or 'Olive Branch') in Charles Leigh's ill-fated expedition to Guiana. He seems to have led a mutiny against Leigh, who was determined to colonize the area, despite the climate and lack of food, and finally Pring sailed home in a Dutch ship, leaving those who remained to die of disease and hunger or to linger in Spanish prisons. 
In 1606 Pring was employed by Sir John Popham to link up with Challons in choosing a site for a new colony in north Virginia. Challons failed to reach the rendezvous (his ship was seized by the Spanish authorities) but Pring's exploration of the coast of Maine produced a chart and report that Sir Ferdinando Gorges later pronounced 'the most exact discovery of that coast that ever came to my hands since' (Gorges, repr. in Baxter, 1.73). Pring's encouraging report led to Popham's attempt to establish two colonies in the area (1607). 
Pring then entered the East India Company's service, probably in 1607-8. In 1610 he was employed in surveying the Bristol Channel, but the first mention of him in the East Indies is in 1613-14, when he was master of a new 550 ton vessel, the 'New Year's Gift', the flagship of a squadron of four ships engaged in the first voyage of the newly formed joint-stock company. The fleet defeated a far larger Portuguese armada off Surat (January-February 1615), and the 'New Year's Gift' proceeded to Bantam to load spices. On Pring's return to England the dividend on the voyage proved to be 120 per cent. 
The East India Company's regard for Pring can be seen from his appointment in 1617 to command the fifth joint-stock voyage, with the 1000 ton 'James Royal' as his flagship. After confiscating two interlopers outfitted by Lord Robert Rich, Pring formed a close relationship with Sir Thomas Roe, the English ambassador to the Mughal empire, and with him planned the expulsion of the Portuguese, the extension of British trade in the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, and Persia, and keener rivalry with the Dutch. Pring joined his ships to those of Sir Thomas Dale off Bantam and in 1618-19 engaged the Dutch fleet in Jacatra Bay, Java, and at Masulipatam, where Dale died in August 1619, leaving Pring in overall command. 
The poor condition of the fleet and news of peace made with the Dutch at home persuaded Pring to favour an alliance with the Dutch in the East to overthrow Spain and Portugal there, and in March 1620 he entered into friendly relations with Coen, the Dutch commander. Pring then voyaged to Japan (July) and after a stay of five months, in which his ships were repaired, he arrived back in the Downs on 16 September 1621 with a rich cargo on board. On the voyage home Pring had contributed the largest amount ($6 13 's'. 4 died) towards a collection for the building of a free school in Virginia; he became a freeman of the Virginia Company, and was granted 200 acres of Virginian land. After his return the company censured Pring for his lack of vigour in opposing the Dutch following Dale's death, for his friendship with them after the signature of peace (which the Dutch had not kept), for his diversion to Japan, and for indulging in private trade to his own profit. Pring narrowly escaped a privy council trial and eventually cleared himself, but when he left the company's service in 1623 the customary gratuity was withheld. 
In the same year Pring was elected a member of the Society of Merchant Venturers of Bristol, and in 1625 he was one of its wardens. He commanded the 300 ton privateer 'Charles', authorized by the government to prey on French and Spanish shipping, and was very successful in capturing prizes. He may have sailed to Virginia again in 1626, the year of his death. He was buried in St Stephen's Church, Bristol, where his monument bears a long epitaph, the arms of the Society of Merchant Venturers, and four carved ships. His will mentions his wife, Elizabeth, and six children. 


@@@@@


doc= 22803


Pringle, Andrew, Lord Alemoor (d. 1776), judge, was the eldest son of John Pringle, Lord Haining, a lord of session, and his wife, Anne, eldest daughter of Sir John Murray of Philiphaugh. He was admitted advocate at the Scottish bar in 1740, appointed sheriff of Wigtown in 1750, and in the following year named sheriff of Selkirk. Pringle first came to notice as counsel for the crown in the claims on the forfeited estates, earning a good name and much money. In contrast to many of his contemporaries, his language was plain and straightforward, his gestures restrained, his success at the bar being entirely due to his legal ability. The historian Thomas Somerville described him as 'the most admired speaker at the bar in the middle of the last century' (Somerville, 108). 
On 5 July 1755 Pringle was named solicitor-general, and on 14 June 1759 he was raised to the bench as Lord Alemoor, taking his title from a property he owned in Selkirkshire. At the same time he was appointed a lord of justiciary, retiring in 1769. Pringle was a lay elder of the general assembly of the kirk in 1757 when that assembly, opposed to the theatre, expressed outrage at the staging in Edinburgh of 'Douglas', a play written by John Home, himself a minister. His speech on behalf of Alexander Carlyle, who had been criticized by the synod for attending the performance, led Carlyle to judge him 'the most eloquent of all the Scottish bar' ('Autobiography', ed. Burton, 321). 
Alemoor built himself a beautiful villa at Hawkhill, near Edinburgh, where he erected the first grape-house in Scotland. He died at Hawkhill on 14 January 1776. As he was unmarried his estates passed to his brother John Pringle of Haining. 


@@@@@


doc= 22804


Pringle, George (1631-1689), politician, was born on 3 March 1631, the eldest son of James Pringle (1596-1658), of Torwoodlee, Selkirkshire, and his second wife, Janet ('b'. 1614), daughter of Sir Lewis Craig of Riccarton. He may have been the Georgius Pringle who attended Glasgow University in 1646. On 22 June 1654 he married Janet ('c'.1626- 'c'.1690), daughter of Alexander Brodie of Lethen, Moray. They had one son and four daughters. Like his brother-in-law, Walter Pringle of Greenknowe, he was a zealous covenanter. He fought against Cromwell at the battle of Dunbar on 3 September 1650. He made his peace with the Cromwellian regime and both he and his father were made commissioners for the cess in 1655. Pringle succeeded his father in 1658 and was named as sheriff of Selkirkshire by Richard Cromwell in 1659 and a commissioner of cess in 1660. 
Following the Restoration, Pringle was excepted from the 'Act of Indemnity' of 1662, but allowed a royal pardon upon payment of a fine of between $1600 and $2000. 'Though he did not conform to prelacy', according to Wodrow, 'he had no share in those struggles for religion and liberty at Pentland and Bothwell.' Rather, while Pringle lived in quiet retirement, 'his home was a sanctuary for all the oppressed that came to him, and these were neither few nor of the meanest quality' (Wodrow, 4.228). 
Pringle became active in politics once more in the late 1670s, being named a commissioner of supply in 1678. He was involved in the escape of Archibald Campbell, ninth earl of Argyll, on 20 December 1681, meeting him at an alehouse near Torwoodlee and ensuring his safe escape into England and thence to the Netherlands. To the government he was a dangerous man, being described as 'a great fanatic and of anti-monarchical, republican principles, from his infancy' (Willcock, 285). In 1684 Pringle was fined 5000 merks for church offences, and in September, William Carstares, under torture, implicated him in the Rye House plot of the previous year, when he revealed that meetings had been held at his house. Pringle escaped arrest in September 1684 and fled to the Netherlands. He was summoned to appear at the Scottish parliament on 26 March 1685 but did not do so. His estate was then declared forfeit for treason and granted in May 1686 to Lieutenant-General Drummond. Meanwhile in Amsterdam on 7 April 1685 he was one of twelve exiles who constituted the council 'for the recovery of the religion, rights and liberties of the kingdom of Scotland'. He was sent by Argyll to the south of Scotland in preparation for Argyll's expedition, but upon its failure he escaped again to the Netherlands. 
Pringle returned to Scotland at the revolution of 1688, and he was elected a commissioner for Selkirkshire to the convention of estates in 1689, which was later turned into a parliament. He served as a commissioner of supply and the militia, but he was clearly ailing, and was excused attendance at the parliament on 22 July 1689, being 'very sick'. He died soon afterwards. His son, James, was able to secure the reversal of his attainder in 1690. 


@@@@@


doc= 22805


Pringle, Sir John, first baronet (1707-1782), military physician, was born on 10 April 1707 at Stichill House, in the Scottish border county of Roxburghshire, the youngest son of Sir John Pringle, baronet, and his wife, Magdalen, sister of Sir Gilbert Elliott, baronet, of Stobs. Robert Pringle and Sir Walter Pringle were his uncles. After receiving private tuition at home Pringle attended St Andrews, Scotland's oldest university, where his uncle Francis was professor of Greek. Pringle matriculated in 1722 in St Leonard's College, and in 1727 entered Edinburgh University. 
It appears that Pringle was intending to pursue a career in commerce and was sent to Amsterdam to gain some knowledge of business. During his stay there he paid a visit to Leiden and heard a lecture by the renowned physician Hermann Boerhaave, which made him decide to follow a career in medicine. He then went to Leiden to take his studies further. From student age Pringle maintained contact with Flanders and Holland, where he would later return to earn his great reputation as a military physician and epidemiologist. Pringle graduated MD at Leiden in 1730, his thesis diploma, 'De marcore senili', being signed by Boerhaave, C. B. Albinus, and W. J. Gravesande. He then completed his medical studies in Paris. Four years after graduating MD and starting practice in Edinburgh, Pringle was appointed joint professor of pneumatics (metaphysics) and moral philosophy in Edinburgh University. The appointment did not stop him from practising medicine. Pringle's move into military medicine was probably because of local connections. The earl of Stair, a nobleman whose lands lay only a short way north of Roxburgh, and who knew the Pringle family, appointed him his physician. Lord Stair was then general officer commanding the British army on the continent. Dr Stevenson, a prominent Edinburgh physician, also advanced Pringle's career. Again through the good offices of the earl of Stair, in 1742 Pringle was appointed physician to the army in Flanders. He achieved further advancement after the retirement of the earl of Stair, when the duke of Cumberland appointed him physician-general in 1744. He now resigned his professorship in Edinburgh. His service ran from the fall of Walpole, through the campaign launched by the French into the Austrian Netherlands, to the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748. Pringle's great innovations encompassed both administration and epidemiology. It was probably owing to his efforts that military hospitals were first recognized as neutral territory and safely set up near a battlefield. At the battle of Dettingen in 1743, the last in which a British king led his army into battle, British and French hospitals under a temporary red cross and with the agreement of the duc de Noailles, the French commander, were set up side by side, each taking wounded from the other army if the occasion arose. 
Although Pringle left the physician-general's post in 1748 -- he had been posted back to Britain during the 1745 Jacobite rising and was present at the battle of Culloden in 1746 -- he did not publish his 'Observations on the Diseases of the Army' until 1752. This watershed work has probably not received the credit it deserves. Like his countryman James Lind, Pringle had quickly recognized hospitals as the chief causes of sickness and death in the army. His special contributions were the first scientific account of epidemiology in the field and prevention of cross-infection. In his own words, as expressed in the fourth edition of his 'Observations': 'in the camp, the contagion (of dysentery) passes from one who is ill to his companion in the same tent, and from them perhaps to the next. The foul straw becomes very infectious. But of what nature is this infection? In the former editions of this work, I considered the spreading of the distemper as owing to putrid exhalations of the humours of those who first fell ill of it; and that when this 'miasma' is received into the blood, I conceived it to act upon the whole mass as a ferment, disposing it to putrefaction... But having since perused the curious dissertation, published by 'Linnaeus', in favour of 'Kircher's' system of contagion by animalcula, it seems reasonable to suspend all 'hypotheses', till the matter is further enquired into. ('Observations', 4th edn, 24-5)' In his thinking he was influenced by the great men of Leiden: 'Leeuwenhoeck had shown 'small insects' in the pustules of scabies, under the microscope... So the frequency of the itch is not to be ascribed to change of air or diet, but to the infection propagated by a few such.' Pringle also began to think in terms of 'septic' and 'antiseptic': 'The faeces are rendered less, if at all infectious, by means of a strong acid combined with the parts that are really septic -- especially, in the dysentery, where the faeces are highly corrupted and contagious' (ibid., 103-4). He even considered the systemic use of such 'antiseptics': 'were putrefaction the only change made in the body by contagion, it would be easy to cure such fevers, at any period, by the use of acids, or other antiseptics' (ibid., 258). 
From 1748 Pringle settled in London and continued in medical practice. He entered into the period of his life when he published a series of papers and received a succession of honours. In 1749 he became physician-in-ordinary to the duke of Cumberland. In 1750 he published 'Observations on the Nature and Cure of Hospital and Jayl Fevers', and, in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', 'Experiments upon septic and antiseptic substances, with remarks relating to their use in the theory of medicine'. For the latter he received the Copley gold medal in 1752 from the society, of which he had been admitted a fellow in 1745. His 'Account of persons seized with the gaol fever while working in Newgate' appeared in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1753. Pringle became a council member of the Royal Society in 1753, LRCP in 1758, FRCP in 1763, 'speciali gratia', physician to the queen in 1761, president of the Royal Society in 1772, and in 1766 was created a baronet. He was gazetted physician-in-ordinary to the king in 1774. On 14 April 1752 Pringle had married Charlotte, the second daughter of William Oliver, an eminent physician of Bath; they had no children. In 1778 Pringle resigned as president of the Royal Society. His resignation has usually been ascribed to his ill health, as it preceded his return to Scotland, where he was soon known to have been failing. However, recent evidence shows that Pringle may have been forced to resign following his difference of opinion with George III on the best shape of lightning conductors. Carl van Doren, in his 'Life of Benjamin Franklin', writes that 'because Pringle would not sustain the king in this prejudice [that blunt lightning conductors were superior] he was forced to resign as president of the Royal Society and dismissed from his post as royal physician'. He returned briefly to Edinburgh, but Edinburgh did not cheer his spirits. While there he presented a manuscript collection of his 'Medical and physical observations' in ten volumes to the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh and to St Andrews. Pringle was also the author of the first biography of General James Wolfe, published in 1760. In 1781 he was back in London, and soon after, on 14 January 1782 had a probable stroke while at his club, Watson's in the Strand. He died on 18 January 1782, aged seventy-four. He was buried in St James's Church, Piccadilly. A monument was erected in his memory at Westminster Abbey; his name was celebrated in eulogies by Vicq d'Azyr and Condorcet at the French Academy. Through his life his religious belief varied -- he was a Unitarian for a time -- but he became 'very diligent in reading sermons and Scripture in his later life'. In politics he was a strong whig. While he loved music, he had no liking for poetry. His portrait by Sir Joshua Reynolds shows him to look somewhat severe, with a high cheek colour. His letters and writings, however, show him a pleasantly civil person. 


@@@@@


doc= 22806


Pringle, Robert (d. 1736), politician, was the third son among nineteen children of Sir Robert Pringle, first baronet ('c'.1630-1692), of Stichill, Roxburghshire, and his wife, Margaret, the daughter of Sir John Hope, Lord Craighall. After studying at the University of Leiden, which he entered on 19 November 1687, he served with William III in the invasion of 1688. He was called from his advocate's practice to become under-secretary of state for Scotland on 29 April 1695. He attended William on his later campaigns abroad as his man of business for Scotland, and kept office under Anne without becoming embroiled in the union controversy. He was promoted to under-secretary for the southern department in June 1710. Pringle married a Miss Law and had one son, Robert; the date of the marriage is unknown, but it ended with his wife's death before 1736. On 18 May 1718 he was appointed secretary at war on a salary of $1000, plus $500 rent for a London house at the king's desire following William's grant. He presented the annual army estimates to the Treasury in November, but was replaced on 24 December. Later he became registrar-general of shipping. Pringle resided at Hampstead, but kept up his Dutch links. He died at Rotterdam on 13 September 1736. 


@@@@@


doc= 22807


Pringle, Thomas (1789-1834), poet, journalist, and philanthropist, was born on Blaiklaw Farm near Kelso, Roxburghshire, on 5 January 1789, the third son of Robert Pringle, farmer, and Catherine Haitlie, daughter of a Berwickshire farmer. Thomas seemed destined for a farming life until an accident at the age of three months, which left him permanently disabled and unable to walk without the aid of crutches. Barred from outdoor activities, he was encouraged to develop an interest in learning and literature, which he retained even after his mother's death in 1795. After attending a local parish school he was enrolled in Kelso grammar school in 1802, the former school of Walter Scott. In November 1805 he matriculated at the University of Edinburgh, where he studied classics. His early academic promise was not realized during his three years at university. By all accounts his was an undistinguished scholarly record, due in part to his outside literary interests, which included a weekly literary club he started to discuss poetry and read original work and compositions by club members. 
In February 1808 Pringle left university to take up a post as clerk in Edinburgh's General Register House. When not copying old records he spent time writing poetry and engaging in fledgeling literary work. His first major publication, in 1811, was 'The Institute', a satirical poem lampooning the Edinburgh Philomatic Society, and co-written with his schoolboy friend Robert Story. It was not until 1816, however, with publications in 'Albyn's Anthology' and the featuring of the lyrical verses 'The Autumnal Excursion' in the 'Poetic Mirror', edited by James Hogg, that Pringle began making a literary mark for himself. 'The Autumnal Excursion', set in Kelso and a clear imitation of Walter Scott, was read and admired by Scott, who knew the area described and remarked upon receiving it from Pringle that he wished his own notes on the subject 'had always been as fine as their echo' (Doyle, 184). It led to a close friendship between the two authors, and Scott was to prove significant in advancing Pringle's career in future years. 
Pringle quit his clerical post to concentrate on literary activity. In 1817 he was invited to co-edit with James Cleghorn the newly established 'Edinburgh Monthly Magazine'. Envisaged by its publisher, William Blackwood, as a tory alternative to the whig-influenced 'Edinburgh Review', as well as a riposte to his rival Constable's 'Scots Magazine', the magazine was launched in April 1817 to lacklustre reception. Pringle's energies were not in the enterprise, as he was simultaneously occupied with editing the Edinburgh 'Star', described by Pringle's first biographer, Josiah Conder, as 'almost the only Liberal paper in Scotland' (Doyle, 23). Disappointed with his editors' lack of inspiration and commissioning zeal, Blackwood dismissed them and set about recruiting a more dynamic team to run the journal. Calling on James Hogg, John Wilson, and John Gibson Lockhart, he relaunched 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' in October 1817 to great success. In the same month Pringle took on the editorship of Constable's rival publication, the 'Edinburgh Magazine'. By now he was also married, having wed Margaret Brown (1780-1854) on 18 July 1817 in St Cuthbert's Church in Edinburgh. 
By 1819, however, Pringle's editorial activities were at an end. Despite publication that year of his first volume of poetry, ''The Autumnal Excursion' and Other Poems', the dissolution of the 'Star' and the 'Edinburgh Magazine' saw him return to clerical duties at the register house. Soon after, with his extended family in similar reduced circumstances, Pringle decided to emigrate to southern Africa. With the help of Sir Walter Scott he secured free passage to and a grant of land in southern Africa for the Pringles. On 15 February 1820, with Pringle as their leader, what became known as the 'Scottish party' of twenty-four Scots emigrants set sail from Gravesend for the Cape on the brig 'Brilliant'. The group arrived at their new southern African landholding in late June 1820. Over the next two years, Pringle worked hard to secure the future of the new settlement of Glen-Lynden. He was also to undertake several journeys round southern Africa, which were to form the basis for his ground breaking 'Narrative of a Residency in South Africa' (1834), one of the first published travel accounts of pioneering life in the Cape. 
In September 1822 Pringle took up a post in Cape Town as librarian of the South African Public Library, a position secured through the influence of Sir Walter Scott and Sir John MacPherson. Sixteen months later, in December 1823, joined by his long-time friend John Fairbairn, he founded the Classical and Commercial Academy, which enrolled fifty pupils within a month of its launch. Not content with this, Pringle also launched a newspaper in January 1824, the 'South African Commercial Advertiser', and in March of the same year started South Africa's first literary journal, the bilingual Dutch-English monthly 'South African Journal'. 
During this period Pringle also assisted in raising funds for the relief of settlers in Albany, who as a result of crop failures and floods between 1820 and 1823, had been left destitute. Through determined letter writing, journal publications, and his account of their plight, 'Some Account of the Present State of the English Settlers in Albany, South Africa', published in London in 1824, he helped raise more than $10,000 by the end of 1825. 
Pringle's activities were not always welcomed, though. His uncompromising championing of freedom of the press brought him into conflict with the autocratic Cape governor Lord Charles Somerset, who in May 1824 suppressed both Pringle's periodical publications and launched a campaign against him. By October, with his school struggling for support and no further outlets for income, Pringle and his wife returned to the Pringle homestead at Glen-Lynden to prepare for the long voyage back to Britain. In July 1826, 'Ruined in circumstances and in prospects but sound in conscience and character', Pringle arrived in London with his wife and sister-in-law, and resumed his journalistic career (Meiring, 109). An article in the 'New Monthly Magazine' in November 1826 on the horrors of slavery led to his appointment in 1827 as secretary of the powerful Anti-Slavery Society. Working with the abolitionists William Wilberforce and Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, he was reputedly responsible for producing more than half the organization's multi-varied publications. Pringle's energetic political activism bore fruit. On 23 August 1833 parliament passed the bill which abolished slavery. On 27 June 1834 the document proclaiming the 'Act of Abolition' was published, with Pringle its signatory. 
In addition to political work Pringle found time to publish several collections of prose and poetry, including 'Ephemerides, or, Occasional Poems Written in Scotland and South Africa' (1828), 'Glen-Lynden: a Tale of Teviotdale' (1828), and 'African Sketches' (1834). His best known poem, 'Afar in the Desert' (1832), a romantic description of the southern African bush, was admired by Samuel Taylor Coleridge, who declared it 'among the three most perfect lyric poems in our language' (Meiring, 163). Pringle's poems were the first to represent southern African life and incorporate local dialect and phraseology, leading him to be dubbed the father of south African poetry, a view still held at the end of the nineteenth century by Rudyard Kipling who, when asked what southern African poetry there was, replied: 'As to South African verse, it is a case of there's Pringle and there's Pringle' (Meiring, 163). According to a South African critic, A. M. Lewin Robinson, Pringle was 'the first poet of any acknowledged ability to attempt to describe the South African scene in English' (Meiring, 163). 
Pringle's political and literary successes came too late in his life for him to enjoy the benefits. The day following publication of the 'Act of Abolition', Pringle was taken seriously ill with tuberculosis, eventually dying at his home in London on 5 December 1834. Buried at Bunhill Fields, London, he was reinterred on 5 December 1970 at Eildon church, on the grounds of the Pringle family estate in South Africa's Baviaans river valley. 


@@@@@


doc= 22808


Pringle, Walter, of Greenknowe (1625-1667), covenanter, was born in Bartinbush, Dumfriesshire, the second son of Robert Pringle (1581?-1649), first laird of Stitchel, Roxburghshire, and his first wife, Catherine Hamilton of Silverton Hill. Robert Pringle, second son of George Pringle of Craiglatch, was originally of Bartinbush but, making his fortune as a writer to the signet in Edinburgh, in 1628 he purchased the lands and barony of Stitchel from Sir John Gordon of Lochinvar, later first Viscount Kenmure. Robert continued to acquire various lands in Berwickshire, including in 1637 the lands of Wester Gordon from James Seton of Touch which were granted to Robert and his wife, but on his death to pass to his second surviving son, Walter, including 'the manor place called Greenknowe' (Thomson and others, 6/2.374-5). Robert Pringle represented Roxburghshire as a commissioner to parliament from 1639 to 1641 and became a regular on the parliamentary commissions and committees of the covenanter regime, including the commission for manufactories (1641), the commission for loans and tax (1643), and the committee of war (1643-9). 
Walter Pringle was apparently educated at Edinburgh University but seems not to have graduated. As a boy he and his elder brother John were put in the care of James Leckie, an ejected minister of Stirling. This attempt at a 'godly' education was abandoned after Leckie's death in the 1630s, and the youthful Pringle began, in his own words, 'years of darkness, deadness and sinfulness' including a year in Leith and two years in France ('Memoirs', 1.424). On the death of his father in 1649 he succeeded to the estate of Greenknowe, his father's grandson Sir Robert Pringle of Stitchel succeeding to the Stitchel estate. He married Janet Pringle, daughter of James Pringle of Torwoodlie, Selkirkshire, in November 1649. Their marriage took place at Stow and the officiating minister was James Guthrie of Lauder, and later of Stirling, the covenanting martyr who was executed in 1661. Walter Pringle had his father's enthusiasm for the covenanting regime and, according to his own memoirs, spent five years in the 1640s as a volunteer soldier. On the invasion of Scotland by Cromwell in 1650 Walter, along with his younger brother-in-law George Pringle of Torwoodlie (1631-1689), who was later part of the disastrous Argyll rebellion of 1685, joined the covenanting army in its defeat at the battle of Dunbar in September 1650. Cromwell's victory over covenanting forced Walter and George Pringle to take refuge at Torwoodlie. In November, however, when Walter was returning from a visit to his wife at Stitchel where she had just given birth to Catherine, their first child, an incident occurred whereby he killed an English trooper. This led him to take more distant refuge in Northumberland where he stayed with his cousin, a certain Major Pringle, although before long he was arrested and brought to trial at Selkirk. Fortunately, his plea of self-defence was accepted and he was allowed liberty on a bond of $2000 sterling. He lived peaceably for the remainder of the 1650s. 
After the Restoration, Pringle's covenanting beliefs became the target of official displeasure and he was cast into prison in Edinburgh Castle in September 1660 for 'ayding, assisting and pairtaking with the Remonstrantors and uther seditious persones' (Nicoll, 302). Although not detained long, in July 1664 his nonconformity led to his trial and examination before Archbishop Sharp and the court of high commission, created that year. Finding difficulty in taking the oath of allegiance, and especially that part referring to royal supremacy over the church, Pringle incurred the wrath of the episcopate when attempting to take the oath according to Bishop James Ussher's old formula as approved by James VI. He was heavily fined and subsequently, in November, imprisoned in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh for defaulting on the fine. After confinement for several months he was in the summer of 1665 banished to the burgh of Elgin, and his exile continued until February 1666 when a group of his friends, without his knowledge, obtained from the high commission a transfer to 'open prison' at his own home of Greenknowe and 3 miles around. The government conceded this on payment of $200 sterling and his agreement to peaceable behaviour. 
Little detail of Pringle's private life is known, other than that provided by his autobiography, 'The memoirs of Walter Pringle of Greenknowe, or, Some of the few mercies of God to him, and his will to his children, left them under his own hand', written in those years of intermittent captivity from 1662 to 1666, first printed posthumously in 1723 and republished by the Wodrow Society in 1845. It is a pious 'life' full of fatherly advice, Christian virtue, and awe at the godliness of the ministry, yet tinged with doubt and fallibility. Pringle and his wife had a large family of five sons and three daughters; he was succeeded by his sons Robert and, in 1677, James, who transcribed the 'Memoirs', then by his grandson George, son of James (1694), and after him his own ageing son John (1724). Walter Pringle died at Greenknowe on 12 December 1667. He was survived by his wife. His will and testament have not survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 22809


Pringle, Sir Walter, Lord Newhall (1664?-1736), judge, was the second son among the nineteen children born to Sir Robert Pringle, first baronet ('c'.1630-1692), of Stichill, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Sir John Hope, Lord Craighall. Thirteen children survived infancy; Thomas Pringle and Robert Pringle (d. 1736) were distinguished in law and politics. Walter Pringle graduated at Edinburgh in 1682 and at Leiden in 1684, and was admitted advocate on 10 December 1687. He married first in 1698 Helen, daughter of Sir John Ayton, and secondly a daughter of Johnston of Hilton, Berwickshire, with whom he had three sons: Robert, his heir, Joseph, who was a captain in the earl of Drumlanrig's regiment when he died in Holland in 1753, Walter, who was a captain in Holmes's foot when he died at Aberdeen in 1756, and a daughter, Margaret (died 1742), married to Andrew Handyside. 
Although he became a leading Scottish barrister, Pringle was not made a judge until 6 June 1718, taking his seat as Lord Newhall, from the family estate of that name, and being knighted at the same time. On 24 June 1725 the hated malt tax led to an insurrection in Glasgow; the leaders were taken to Edinburgh for trial, and sentenced to whipping or transportation. Concerning this trial, the president wrote to the secretary of state: 'I find four of the Judges inclined to do all they can, and more than there is any shadow of law to warrant, to screen the criminals from justice. Those I mean are Lord Newhall, who is a Whig, and the best lawyer among them, and consequently does most harm, so far as to influence lords Polton and Pencaitland, both Whigs; the other is Lord Dun. (Pringle, 313)' Newhall died on 14 December 1736; at his funeral, his judicial colleagues paid him the unique tribute of attending in their robes of office, while a special eulogy, written by Sir Robert Dundas of Arniston, then dean, was included in the minutes of the Faculty of Advocates. The estate of Lochton, Berwickshire, which had come to Newhall in 1726, passed to a nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 22810


Charles Robert Prinsep (1789-1864), was admitted a pensioner of St John's College, Cambridge, on 23 May 1806, and proceeded BA in 1811 and MA in 1814. He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in Trinity term 1817. He was the author of 'An Essay on Money' (1818) and a translation of J. B. Say's 'Political Economy, with Notes', 2 vols. (1811). He was created LLD in 1824, practised at the Calcutta bar from 1824, and was advocate-general of Bengal (1852-5). He died at his home, Rothbury House, Chiswick Mall, Chiswick, Middlesex, on 8 June 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 22811


Prinsep, Henry Thoby (1792-1878), East India Company servant, was the fourth son of 
Henry Thoby Prinsep was born at Thoby Priory on 15 July 1792. At the age of thirteen he went to Mr Knox's school at Tonbridge, and in 1807, having obtained a writership to Bengal, he entered the East India College, then recently established at Hertford Castle. He left the college in December 1808, and arrived at Calcutta on 20 July 1809, at the age of seventeen. After spending two years in Calcutta, first as a student in Fort William College, where he came to know Holt Mackenzie, and afterwards as an assistant in the office of the court of 'sadr adalat', he was sent in 1811 to Murshidabad, where he was employed as assistant to the magistrate, and also as registrar, a judicial office for the disposal of petty suits. After serving in the jungle mahals and in Bakarganj, Prinsep was appointed, in 1814, assistant to the secretary to the governor-general, Lord Moira (afterwards marquess of Hastings), whom he accompanied on his tour through Oudh and the North-Western Provinces (1814-15). He was subsequently (1816) the first holder of the office of superintendent and remembrancer of legal affairs -- an office established for the protection of the interests of the government in the courts in the provinces. His tenure of the post was interrupted by summonses to join the governor-general's camp during Lord Hastings's second tour (1817-18), which embraced the period of the Pindari wars and the third war with the Marathas; the governor-general, who was also commander-in-chief, exercised the chief command. At the close of the Anglo-Maratha War, Prinsep obtained the permission of the governor-general to write 'A Narrative of the Political and Military Transactions of British India under the Administration of the Marquis of Hastings, 1813 to 1818'. He sent the completed manuscript to his elder brother, Charles Robert Prinsep ['see below']. A letter to George Canning, president of the Board of Control, from Lord Hastings recommended that the publication of the work should be sanctioned, but, without reading the manuscript, Canning prohibited it. Charles Prinsep, however, decided to publish on his own responsibility, and placed the manuscript in the hands of John Murray, who brought out the book in 1820. The proofs were sent to the Board of Control, where they were seen by Canning, who, on reading them, approved of the work. The book is generally considered to be the best and most trustworthy narrative of the events of that time. The original edition was revised, extended to 1823, and republished in two volumes, when the author was in England on leave, in 1825. 
In 1819 and 1820, while still holding, as his permanent appointment, the office of superintendent and remembrancer of legal affairs, Prinsep was employed upon more than one special inquiry. The most important was an investigation into the condition of the land tenures in the district of Burdwan and the adjoining country. The principal landowner in these districts was the raja of Burdwan, who paid over 40 lakhs of rupees, representing in Prinsep's time over $400,000 sterling, as annual revenue to the government. The raja had introduced the system of letting his estates in large blocks, called 'patni taluks', to tenants who were called 'patnidars', on payment of large sums of money as bonus; these again sublet them to under-tenants called 'darpatnidars', by whom they were again further sublet; so that there were sometimes five or six middlemen between the raja and the cultivating ryot. The tenure of the 'patnidars' was, by stipulation, perpetual and hereditary, and gave to them all the rights and authority of the raja over the subtenants; the result was much confusion and litigation, difficulty in collecting the raja's dues, and risk to the government revenue. Prinsep, after a thorough inquiry, came to the conclusion that there was no security for the government revenue, and no remedy for the existing confusion, unless a law were passed that, on default of the 'patnidar', all the middlemen who derived their rights from him should fall with him. He accordingly drafted a regulation, which was passed into law as regulation 8 of 1819, which remained in force in Bengal for the rest of the century. 
From that time Prinsep was recognized as one of the ablest men in the service, and his promotion to high office was assured. On 16 December 1820, before he had been twelve years in India, he was appointed Persian secretary to the government on a salary of 3000 rupees a month; and except on two occasions (1824-6, 1832-4), when he was compelled by the state of his health to leave India for a time, he never left the secretariat until he was appointed a member of council, first during a temporary vacancy in 1835, and five years later, when he was permanently appointed to the office. He finally retired from the service and left India in 1843. 
During his long service Prinsep was brought into close contact with a succession of governors-general, including lords Hastings, Amherst, William Bentinck, Auckland, and Ellenborough. Many years afterwards, in 1865, he wrote a valuable but unpublished autobiographical sketch of his official life, in which he recorded his impressions of each of these men. Of Lord Minto, whom he saw only from a distance, Prinsep had a poor opinion, although he gives him credit for the firmness he displayed in the operations against Java. He regarded Lord Hastings's nine-year administration as 'a glorious one', which had 'nearly doubled the revenues and territories of the East India Company, and established its diplomatic influence over the whole peninsula of India'. Lord Amherst he describes as a courteous gentleman, and a ready and fluent speaker, but he 'lacked confidence in his own judgment and was by no means prompt in decision', and 'had extraordinary notions of the importance of a very punctilious ceremonial'. He had a high admiration for John Adam, who was acting governor-general for seven months in 1823, and on his death in 1825 wrote a memoir of Adam at the request of his family, which was published in the 'Asiatic Journal' for 1825. 
The governor-general upon whom Prinsep is most severe is Lord William Bentinck. He regarded him as addicted to change for the mere sake of change, as unduly suspicious of those who worked under him, and too much given to meddling with details; but he gives him credit for honesty of intention, especially in the distribution of his patronage. The two men differed essentially in character. Lord William was a strong liberal, while Prinsep was a conservative to the backbone. On the education question Prinsep was strongly opposed to the policy, initiated by Macaulay and supported by Bentinck, of imposing English as the language of instruction. The policy ultimately adopted was a compromise in deference to Prinsep's opposition. Later on, during the interregnum in which Sir Charles Metcalfe officiated as governor-general, Prinsep, while not opposing the act to give freedom to the press of India, predicted gloomily, and without any real justification in his lifetime, that 'the native press might become an engine for destroying the respect in which the government is held'. 
Prinsep appears to have been on very friendly terms with Lord Auckland throughout his administration, but he regarded him as slow to take decisions, and timid of his responsibilities. He entirely disapproved of Auckland's Afghan policy, and foretold the failure of the policy of supporting Shah Shuja. 
On his return to England in 1843 Prinsep settled in London. His ambition at that time was to enter the House of Commons, and he contested no less than four constituencies as a Conservative candidate, the Kilmarnock burghs (1844), Dartmouth (1845), Dover (1847), and Harwich (1851, twice). At the last of these places he was returned, but was unseated by petition on technical grounds. He then canvassed for a seat in the court of directors of the East India Company, to which he was elected in 1850. He took a prominent part in the discussions at the India House, and when the number of directors was reduced from twenty-four to eighteen (six being crown nominees) under the act of 1853, he was one of those elected by ballot to retain their seats. In 1858, after the East India Company's rule was superseded by that of the crown, and the Council of India was established, he was one of the seven directors appointed to the new council. 
Prinsep served in the Council of India until 1874, displaying the same activity and conservatism which had characterized his whole official life. He recorded frequent dissents from the decisions of the secretary of state. He was much opposed to some of the measures adopted after the mutiny. He emphatically disapproved of the transfer of the East India Company's European regiments to the British army, and joined on that occasion with thirteen other members of the council in a written protest against the course taken by the cabinet in deciding this question before the Council of India had been consulted on it. He also disapproved of the original scheme for the establishment of staff corps for India, and especially of that part of it which provided for the appointment of officers from the line for Indian service. He was much opposed to the re-establishment of the maharaja of Mysore after the state had been administered since 1831 by British officers; the rendition of Mysore finally took place in 1881. On financial grounds he opposed the works undertaken to improve the navigation of the Godavari River, which subsequently, owing to their enormous cost, had to be abandoned. In his last year of office he recorded a protest against the adoption of the narrow, or metre, gauge for Indian railways. 
Busy as was Prinsep's official life, he found time to write a number of works on Indian subjects, including 'Origin of the Sikh Power in the Punjab' (1834), 'Tibet, Tartary, and Mongolia: their Social and Political Condition' (1851), and an exhaustive pamphlet, 'The India Question in 1853', when the 'Charter Act' of that year was under discussion. He also brought out the work of Ramchunder Doss (Ramachandra Dasa) entitled 'Register of the Bengal Civil Servants, 1790-1842, Accompanied by Actuarial Tables' (1844), a subject to which he had given a good deal of attention. He also wrote verses; in his old age he printed for private circulation 'Specimens of Ballad Poetry Applied to the Tales and Traditions of the East' (1862). He kept up his classical studies to the end of his life. When failing health brought him sleepless nights, he often whiled away the time by translating the odes of Horace into English verse. He was a keen mathematician. Only a few days before his death he worked out a new method of proving the forty-seventh proposition of the first book of Euclid. 
Prinsep's domestic life involved him in a very different circle from that of his official career. On 14 May 1835 he married Sara Monckton (1816-1887), daughter of James Pattle of the Bengal civil service; she was one of seven sisters known for their beauty and talents, including the photographer Julia Margaret Cameron and Virginia, Countess Somers. The Prinseps had a daughter and three sons. Through his sister-in-law Virginia he met the artist G. F. Watts, and when the Prinseps set up their home at Little Holland House, Kensington, Watts joined them and remained an inmate of their house and a recipient of their patronage for some twenty-one years. Under the guidance of Sara Prinsep, Little Holland House became one of the artistic and literary centres of London, where Tennyson, Browning, and Thackeray mingled with Du Maurier, Ruskin, and Burne-Jones. The Prinseps' second son, Valentine Cameron Prinsep, became an artist of the aesthetic movement. It was at Watts's house at Freshwater on the Isle of Wight that Henry Thoby Prinsep died on 11 February 1878. 
Of Prinsep's numerous brothers one, James Prinsep, is separately noticed. Another, 


@@@@@


doc= 22812


Prinsep, James (1799-1840), Indologist and scientist, was born on 20 August 1799 at 147 Leadenhall Street, London, the seventh son and tenth child of John Prinsep (1746-1830) ['see under 'Prinsep, Henry Thoby (1792-1878)], merchant and MP, and his wife, Sophia Elizabeth Auriol (1760-1850). John Prinsep went penniless to India in 1771. He was successful as an indigo planter and entrepreneur, and returned to England in 1787 with a fortune of $40,000. He established himself in the City in 1793 as a general merchant and India agent, but business losses and the expenses of contested elections and of his large family (eight surviving sons and three daughters) caused him to move to Clifton, Bristol, in 1809. Prinsep's connections, however, secured places for his sons: all but one made their careers in India. They included Charles Robert Prinsep ['see under 'Prinsep, Henry Thoby], economist and advocate-general of Bengal, and Henry Thoby Prinsep, a civil servant and commentator on Indian affairs, whose son, Valentine Cameron Prinsep, was a noted painter. 
James Prinsep's only formal early education was two years at the school of a Mr Bullock in Clifton. He was educated mostly at home, with help from his talented siblings. He excelled from an early age at drawing, music, and mechanical invention. Such skills destined him for architecture but a temporary weakness of the eyes developed and his father therefore sought for him an opening in the assay department of the government of India. After studying chemistry at Guy's Hospital and assaying at the Royal Mint in London (1818-19), Prinsep was appointed assistant assay master at the Calcutta mint and arrived in Calcutta on 15 September 1819. Within a year he had been sent by the assay master, Horace Hayman Wilson, to be assay master at the Benares mint, where he remained until its abolition in 1830. He returned to Calcutta as deputy assay master, and upon Wilson's resignation in 1832 he was (despite Wilson's favouring his own protege James Atkinson) appointed to succeed him at the newly built Greek revival mint on the Strand with its adjacent house for the assay master. He married in the cathedral of Calcutta on 25 April 1835 Harriet Sophia Aubert, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Jeremiah Aubert and his wife, Hannah. There was only one surviving child, a daughter, Eliza, born in 1837. 
Prinsep's early death prompted many eulogies from his contemporaries. He was one of the 'most talented and useful' Englishmen ever to work in India (Malconer, 'Colonial Magazine', December 1840). 'Of his intellectual character, the most prominent feature was enthusiasm, a burning, irrepressible enthusiasm, to which nothing could set bounds [which led him] to apply his powers to a greater range of subjects than any human mind can master or excel in. To this enthusiasm was fortunately united a habitude of order, and power of generalization, which enabled him to grasp and comprehend the greatest variety of details. (ibid.)' His official duties as assay master drew him first to scientific research, and to the means for more accurate measurement of very high temperatures. He invented the first practical pyrometer utilizing the expansion of gases for such measurements; his research was communicated to the Royal Society in London and published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1828. He was shortly afterwards elected FRS. In Calcutta he organized the reform of Indian weights and measures in 1833, and advocated the introduction of a uniform coinage based on a new, East India Company's, silver rupee. This was introduced in 1835. 
Prinsep's major contributions, however, fell outside his official duties. His enthusiasm for the communication of scientific knowledge led him to collaborate with Major James Herbert in a new monthly journal 'Gleanings in Science' in 1829. He was himself a principal contributor, and became sole editor in 1831. In 1832 he succeeded Wilson also as secretary of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and he brought new vigour to the society's meetings and publications. In the same year he became editor of a new monthly title, 'The Journal of the Asiatic Society', which absorbed the earlier 'Gleanings'. To this new journal Prinsep contributed articles on chemistry and mineralogy, and above all on Indian antiquities, into the study of which he now wholeheartedly threw himself. 
As a result of both his own labours and his encouragement of others, Prinsep's seven years as editor of the 'Journal' was one of the most fruitful periods of ancient Indian studies. Coins and copies of inscriptions were transmitted to him from all over India, to be deciphered, translated, and published. He reduced to order the complex dynasties and dating systems of pre-Islamic India. His 'Useful Tables', published in 1834, stands as a monument to his labours in this field. Prinsep's greatest achievement was to decipher the hitherto unreadable scripts of the most ancient of Indian inscriptions: the results were published in a series of papers in the 'Journal' in 1837-8. These scripts were the Brahmi used on the pillars at Delhi and Allahabad and on rock inscriptions from both sides of India, and also the Kharosthi script in the coins and inscriptions of the north-west. He demonstrated that the pillar and rock inscriptions were put up by the emperor Asoka Maurya, whose dates could be approximately fixed through his references to contemporary kings of western Asia in the third century BC. They allowed the first verified correlation of Indian history and archaeology with those of the Western world. In consequence of these discoveries Prinsep was elected a corresponding member of many of the learned societies of Europe. 
Both in 'Gleanings in Science' and in the 'Journal' Prinsep undertook much of the drawing and lithography of the accompanying plates. In 1822 he had applied his talents in draughtsmanship to a thorough survey of Benares. A complete map at 8 inches to the mile was prepared, and lithographed in England. A series of exquisite watercolours of the monuments and festivals of Benares was sent to London in 1829 to be lithographed. These were published in Calcutta and London between 1830 and 1834 as 'Benares Illustrated, in a Series of Drawings'. Nor did he confine his interest in Benares to recording it: he designed and built several public buildings. He improved the sanitation of Benares by constructing underneath the most densely populated part of the city an arched tunnel down to the river, thereby draining various stagnant lakes and pools. The high and graceful minarets of Aurangzeb's mosque were in danger of collapse, so he had them taken down and rebuilt. And so that pilgrims approaching Benares by road from the east should not have to set foot in the polluting waters of the River Karamnasa, he built a stone bridge over this stream of ill repute. In Calcutta one of his first duties, self-imposed but accepted by government, was to complete his brother Thomas's canal linking the River Hooghly at Calcutta with more easterly branches of the Ganges, work on which had been interrupted by his brother's sudden death in 1830. 
He was a man who had to fill every waking moment with intense activity. Victor Jacquemont calls him 'the wittiest man in India' ('Letters from India', 1834, 1.166) and describes him in Benares devoting his mornings to his own manifold projects, his days to work at the mint, and his evenings to musical entertainments (Jacquemont, 'Voyage dans l'Inde', 1.341-5). From the recollections of his brother William he emerges as a charming and gracious individual who 'carried everything we did together to perfection, whether in writing, drawing, music or invention of any kind' (W. Prinsep, 1.126). His enthusiasm emerges from his memorial bust, executed with William's help, with its round, open, and generous face, and wild tufts of hair emerging from the crown. 
The heavy labours to which Prinsep subjected himself began to tell on his health, and in 1838 he fell severely ill. He suffered from recurrent headaches and sickness, and eventually from a deterioration in mental functioning. A sea voyage to England afforded no relief. He arrived in England in a very poor condition which did not improve. He died in London on 22 April 1840 in the house of his sister Sophia Haldimand, at 31 Belgrave Square. The news of his death was greeted with the greatest dismay in Calcutta, and subscriptions for memorials immediately opened among both the European and Indian communities. The former commissioned a bust from Francis Chantrey, finished by Henry Weekes, for the Asiatic Society's rooms in Calcutta; the latter subscribed to an elegant Palladian porch on the river, built by W. Fitzgerald in 1843 and still known as Prinsep's Ghat. 


@@@@@


doc= 22813


Prior, Sir James (c.1790-1869), writer, son of Matthew Prior, was born at Lisburn, co. Antrim, about 1790. He entered the navy as a surgeon, and sailed from Plymouth in the 'Nisus' frigate on 22 June 1810 for the Cape of Good Hope, Mauritius, the Seychelles Islands, Madras, and Java (at the capture of which by the British in September 1811 he was present). This journey he described in a 'Voyage in the Indian Seas' (1820). His next expedition (1812-13), in the same frigate, was to South Africa, Brazil, and other areas, and was described in a 'Voyage Along the Eastern Coast of Africa' (1819). 
Prior was present at the surrender of Heligoland and, in 1815, at the surrender of Napoleon. He then became staff surgeon to the Chatham division of the Royal Marines, and to three of the royal yachts. In 1817 he married Dorothea, widow of E. James. She died at Oxford Terrace, Hyde Park, London, on 28 November 1841. 
Prior was appointed assistant to the director-general of the medical department of the navy, and on 1 August 1843 he was created deputy inspector of hospitals. In 1847 he married Caroline, widow of Charles H. Watson. He was knighted at St James's Palace on 11 June 1858. In 1830 he had been elected to the Royal Irish Academy, the Athenaeum, and the Society of Antiquaries. For many years before his death he lived at 20 Norfolk Crescent, Hyde Park, London; but he died at Brighton on 14 November 1869, survived by his widow who died on 14 December 1881 aged eighty-five. 
Prior's chief works were biographies. His 'Memoir of the Life and Character of Edmund Burke' (1824) ran to several editions and was quite well regarded. His 'Life of Oliver Goldsmith' (2 vols., 1837) and his 'Miscellaneous Works of Goldsmith' (4 vols., 1837) were assiduously compiled. When John Forster (1812-1876) brought out 'The Life and Adventures of Oliver Goldsmith' (1848) he was accused by Prior of wholesale plagiarism, an accusation which Forster consistently denied. Washington Irving, in his 'Life of Goldsmith' (1849), admitted his obligations to 'the indefatigable Prior', who none the less denounced him in 'Goldsmith's Statue'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22814


Prior, Matthew (1664-1721), poet and diplomat, was born in Stephen's Alley, Westminster, on either 21 or 23 July 1664, the son of Elizabeth (probably 'nee' Pennefather) and George Prior (died 'c'.1675), a London joiner. The fifth of six children, he was the only one to survive early childhood. 
Prior's father had left Dorset to practise his joiner's trade in Westminster, where two of his brothers were already keeping taverns -- Arthur, The Rhenish tavern on Channel Row, Samuel, The Rummer tavern between Whitehall and Charing Cross. Prior's mother appears to have married below her class -- she was probably Elizabeth Pennefather, from a good Dorset family. His father George, however, appears to have prospered in his carpenter's trade, and could afford to send young Matthew to nearby Westminster School, which was presided over by the formidable Dr Richard Busby. Dr Busby emphasized strict discipline, the traditional classical curriculum, extemporaneous composition in both prose and verse, and oratory. Prior was later to praise what Thomas Sprat, bishop of Rochester, had called ''the genius of that Place'' -- that even very young boys there were made to compose extemporaneous verses and declamations in a very short space of time. 
His father's death -- when Prior was about eleven -- had forced the family to withdraw him from Westminster School and put him to work at his uncle Arthur's Rhenish tavern. A year later Charles Sackville, sixth earl of Dorset, came into The Rhenish tavern and found the twelve-year-old Matthew behind the bar, reading Horace. Dorset asked Matthew to construe a passage or two of Horace, then to turn a Horatian ode into English. He did so with such skill that on subsequent visits to the tavern Dorset often asked him to entertain his friends and himself by turning Horace or Ovid into English verse. Finally, the earl of Dorset offered to pay Prior's tuition to return to Westminster School, if his uncle Arthur would pay for his clothing and other necessities. The Priors gratefully accepted this offer, and Matthew returned to Westminster School about 1676, becoming a king's scholar there in 1681, an award based on his distinction in classical languages. 
Westminster king's scholars usually went to Christ Church, Oxford, and Dr Busby and the earl of Dorset expected Prior to do the same. Instead, he defied them and chose to attend Cambridge, where three of his best friends (Charles and James Montagu and George Stepney) were already in attendance or planned to be. Prior applied for and in the spring of 1683 received one of the first five duchess of Somerset scholarships to St John's College, Cambridge. By the terms of this scholarship Prior was exempted from paying tuition and received an allowance of 5's'. a week for living expenses, a bedroom that he shared with four other young men, and a private study. During his four years at St John's College, Prior followed a curriculum still heavy in logic and divinity, one that he later felt had turned him away from poetry and in the direction of politics and prose. Yet while he was an undergraduate at St John's he wrote more than thirty Latin pieces and a dozen poems in English. None would have made his reputation as a poet, but he thought highly enough of them to preserve them carefully for the rest of his life. They show the direction in which his writing of poetry in English was moving: they are particularly concerned with royal or aristocratic occasions, and in them he utilizes pastoral or mythological machinery to advance his own causes. 
On 9 February 1687 Prior graduated BA, eleventh in the 'orde senioritatis'. He produced a thirty-four-line Latin hexameter poem in honour of the occasion, arguing against Thomas Hobbes that 'Fuit justum et injustum ante Leges Civiles'. 
Soon after graduating from Cambridge, Prior returned to London, probably largely because of the death of his uncle Arthur, who died there in May 1687, leaving Prior $100. For the next three years Prior was reaching out for a professional role he had not yet defined, but which he was increasingly convinced he might find in politics rather than poetry. On 3 April 1688 he was entered as a Keyton fellow at St John's and moved into the fellows' quarters there, assigned to one of its two medical fellowships, and was later required to lecture on Galen as Linacre lecturer (1706-10). 
Prior seems to have spent most of this period (1687-90) as tutor to the two sons of the earl of Exeter at Burleigh and as a fellow at St John's College. In his poems of these years there is an increasing sense that poetry is not his metier and that politics might be, if he were given an opportunity to serve in that sphere. 'The Hind and the Panther Transvers'd' (1687), written in collaboration with Charles Montagu, was a satiric attack on Dryden's 'The Hind and the Panther', out less than two months earlier, and won instant public acclaim for both Montagu and Prior. 'On Exodus Iii. 14' was an irregular ode in the style of Cowley, later to be echoed frequently in the fideistic sections of Alexander Pope's 'Essay on Man'. Apparently one of Prior's favourite serious pieces, he was to use the 'Exodus' ode as the lead poem in both his collected editions of 'Poems on Several Occasions'. 'Journey to Copt-Hall', written in this period but not printed until 1907, is interesting chiefly as a predecessor, in content, method, and tone, thirty years earlier, of Prior's now famous 'Down-Hall: a Ballad'. A group of four poems addressed to Fleetwood Shepherd, the wit and poet who served as intermediary between the earl of Dorset and the many poets whose patron he became, show two of the other directions in which Prior was moving in his light verse: the mock heroic and the familiar verse epistle. 
Prior's opportunity to enter politics came on 1 November 1690, when he was appointed as secretary to Charles Berkeley, Viscount Dursley, British ambassador to The Hague. Prior's responsibilities included issuing or refusing passports, forwarding newspapers with details relevant to England, sending on with his own comments newsletters arriving from various important towns in the League of Augsburg, and reporting details of battles in the war and of local diplomatic gossip. For three of his seven years at The Hague (1692-5) there was no English ambassador in residence there and Prior fulfilled those duties, acting as chief minister with skill, diligence, and good sense while receiving the pay only of a secretary. The Hague was at this time an important listening post and relay station in the Nine Years' War, which had already been going on for two years when Prior was appointed to The Hague and was to continue for almost seven more. Finally, Edward, Viscount Villiers, later earl of Jersey, assumed office as ambassador to The Hague in September 1695. For Prior it was a fortunate appointment. Both men were alumni of St John's College, and Prior's favourite cousin, Katharine, had married Colonel George Villiers, Edward's cousin. The earl of Jersey requested that Prior remain at The Hague and that his salary be doubled. When the peace negotiations of the treaty of Ryswick were beginning, Prior received the appointment he requested to be secretary to the embassy at The Hague, beginning on 10 March 1697. In the subsequent drawing up of the treaty of Ryswick (9 May - 20/21 September 1697), it was Prior's function to check the French and Latin versions of the negotiations. 
Prior's poems during his seven years at The Hague assumed a much more laureate bent, celebrating British war victories and events in the life of the royal family. From this period dates his most famous and successful such poem, 'An English Ballad, on the Taking of Namur by the King of Great Britain, 1695', in which Prior takes Nicolas Boileau's earlier 'Ode sur la prise de Namur, par les armes du roy, l'annee 1692', in a stanza by stanza refutation and demythologizing. Boileau had referred to himself (or Pindar) as an audacious eagle; Prior reduces him to a handsomely paid vulture. Boileau had described Louis XIV's plume as a leading star; Prior retorts that it was more like a short-lived meteor. 
Prior wrote two other equally successful poems in two very different veins during this same seven-year Hague period. In 'Written in the Year 1696' Prior describes his unusual Saturday and Sunday activities at The Hague and hence, by indirection, his usual daily activities there. 'To the Honourable Charles Montague, Esq.' strikes the note of melancholy which was to characterize Prior's treatment of a favourite moral insistence that mankind can console itself with imagined pleasures, for the truth, if seen, is bleak. 
Prior was physically much the same figure when he first went to The Hague at twenty-six as he was thirty years later: thin, wooden-faced, red-cheeked, already somewhat easy prey to the lung and intestinal disorders that were to mark his remaining thirty years and eventually claim his life. 
By the year he went to The Hague, Prior had also established an intimate relationship with Jane, or Jinny, Ansley (also known as Jane Flanders), and while helping to draw up the treaty of Ryswick in 1697 he had met at the congress of Ryswick a man who was to become his friend, amanuensis, transcriber, and preserver of his manuscript poems after his death, Adrian Drift. Like Prior, Drift was London-born and came to the congress of Ryswick in the service of the earl of Jersey. 
On his return to England in November 1697 Prior expected to be sent to Dublin to assume his duties as secretary to the lords justices. Instead, he was sent to the reopened British embassy in Paris as secretary to the new ambassador, William Bentinck, first earl of Portland. Prior's appointment was announced by 11 December 1697; he and Portland left for Paris one month later, on 21 January 1698. During his brief sojourn in London, Prior had been nominated as a fellow of the Royal Society. He was elected to membership in his absence, possibly on 23 March 1698. Meanwhile in Paris, Prior had his first private audience with Louis XIV on 4 February 1698; in mid-August of the same year he saw the exiled James II and his queen; still later he glimpsed the young Stuart prince. Prior had few official duties during his early stay in France, his main responsibility being to report to his superiors in England the activities of those in power in France and of the Jacobites there. When the earl of Portland left France in June 1698, the earl of Jersey was appointed to succeed him, arriving in September of that year. 
In his initial nineteen-month stay in Paris, Prior found his expenses painfully greater than his pay, so when in April 1699 the fourth earl and first duke of Manchester was appointed to replace Jersey in Paris and Jersey was appointed secretary of state for the southern department, Prior at his own request was sent back to London as under-secretary of state, leaving Paris on 27 August 1699. In these nineteen months in Paris he had produced no poems, but had established a network of friendships and favourable recognitions from such political figures as the duc de Villeroy, the marquis de Torcy, and Louis XIV himself, and such literary figures as Boileau, Dacier, and Fontenelle. 
From Paris, Prior travelled first to Loo in Holland to report to William III. Through William's intercession, Prior was permitted to keep his Irish post, 'in absentia', and was given an allowance of $600 per year as well, to continue until he received a new government post. From Loo, Prior journeyed to The Hague and returned from there to London with William III and the earl of Jersey. For the remaining two years of William's life, Prior acted mainly as a peripatetic diplomatic agent, going on repeated journeys to Paris and Marly, in secret negotiations with Louis XIV on the second partition treaty. On 28 June 1700 he was appointed a commissioner of the Board of Trade and Plantations, succeeding John Locke, who had resigned because of poor health. The Board of Trade and Plantations oversaw the governing of all the American colonies and supervised all international English trade. 
Although Prior was frequently ill during this twelve-year sojourn in London, it was also a significant social period for him. By 1700 he had become a member of the Kit-Cat Club, the gathering of whig wits that included Charles Montagu, Jacob Tonson, Joseph Addison, Richard Steele, William Congreve, and the earl of Dorset. But Prior, like his friend Jonathan Swift a few years later, found himself moving away from the whig political positions to the tory ones, especially in his belief that England needed a strong king, unhampered by the majority opposition in parliament. 
In 1700 Prior decided to run for the position of member of parliament from Cambridge, presenting himself as an independent. When it became apparent that he had neither the funds nor the time to run for this position, he accepted instead, from the earl of Dorset, membership in parliament from the pocket borough of East Grinstead, a position that he held for five months (February-June 1701). The last surviving child of Queen Anne had just died, and the whigs feared that on Anne's death a Stuart would be brought in from France to rule. The issue came to a climax during Prior's brief term in parliament in a vote of censure on the partition treaty, which Prior himself had had some hand in drawing up. The treaty had never been popular in England, had never been signed by the Austrian emperor, and was later repudiated by Louis XIV. Prior voted with the tories to impeach the four leading whigs involved in drawing up the treaty -- barons Somers and Halifax (Prior's old friend Charles Montagu) and the earls of Orford and Portland. 
Prior explained later that 'not' to vote to impeach these lords would have been to blame William himself for the unpopular treaty, but by his vote he had estranged himself from any further whig patronage and from the whig party itself. The earl of Dorset did not award him again the pocket borough seat in parliament; the earl of Portland and Charles Montagu were no longer his friends; his membership in the Kit-Cat Club was abruptly terminated. Yet Prior avoided much of the bitterness often attendant on political shifts in party; he later patched up his friendship with the Montagus, and Horace Walpole, son of the greatest whig of the eighteenth century, later wrote that 'Prior is much a favourite with me, 'though a Tory', nor did I ever hear anything ill of him. He left his party, but not his friends, and seems to me to have been very amiable' (letter to William Cole, 10 June 1778, in Walpole, 'Corr.', 2.90). 
Even in this period of his relative prosperity, Prior often found himself in financial distress. He was not paid his salary as one of the commissioners of trade and plantations from 29 September 1700 to 8 March 1702. Yet in 1700 he had increased his expenses by buying 'Matt's Palace', a Westminster house on the west side of Duke Street, overlooking St James's Park to the rear. A source of great pleasure to Prior, the palatial house was his chief home for the remaining twenty years of his life. During the last three years of William's life, Prior had written a wide-ranging variety of original poems: political poems and laureate verse, love songs, poems to and about children, two more Horatian nostalgic requests for the simple life. But Anne's succession to the throne in 1702 limited Prior's political activities for two reasons -- she disapproved of appointing to public political office those of 'meane extraction' (as she described Prior), and Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, her trusted friend, considered herself Prior's implacable enemy. 
During this same period in London, Prior courted Elizabeth Singer (later Elizabeth Rowe), the poet, whom he met at Longleat, the country seat of Viscount Weymouth, in the autumn of 1703. He wrote her nine extant letters and two poems, but neither of the participants seems to have taken the courtship very seriously. Slightly later during this same period (between 1706 and 1708), Jane Ansley was replaced in Prior's affections by Anne Durham, who remained his mistress for perhaps a decade, until she was at least twenty-six. When he returned to Paris she accompanied him. When the two finally parted, Prior set her up in business, apparently as proprietor of a small shop, and left her $300 in his will at his death three years afterwards. Less demanding than his other two mistresses, she seemed genuinely grieved at his death and satisfied with her legacy. 
In 1709 Prior published 'Poems on Several Occasions', the first of two so-named collections of his poetry that he was to supervise and bring out during his lifetime. Prior himself spoke of the poetry contained in this collection as divided into four categories -- 'Public Panegyrics', 'Amorous Odes', 'Idle Tales', and 'Serious Reflections' -- but some of its most famous poems ('Henry and Emma', 'An English Padlock', and 'Jinny the Just') do not fit easily into any one of these four categories. 
Another equally significant result for Prior of these dozen years when he was based in London was the cementing of his friendship with Swift and the Tory Brothers Club, which ranged from seventeen to twenty-two members, and met weekly during the last years of Queen Anne's reign. Swift's 'Journal to Stella' records at least thirteen occasions when Prior dined with Swift, often with all the Brothers but sometimes with only two or three of them. On 21 February 1711 Swift records that he and Prior often walked together in St James's Park (behind Prior's 'Duke Street Palace'). 'This walking is a strange remedy', he wrote to Stella; 'Mr. Prior walks to make himself fat, and I to bring myself down' (J. Swift, 'Journal to Stella', ed. H. Williams, 2 vols., 1948, 1.198). On another occasion he wrote that 'Prior and I stayed on, where we complimented one another for an hour or two upon our mutual wit and poetry' (ibid., 1.98). Several of Swift's anonymous political writings were attributed by their readers to Prior, and Swift reported to Stella that a whig newspaper had called Prior and him 'the two Sosias' (ibid., 2.422). 
During the latter part of June 1711 Robert Harley, now earl of Oxford and lord treasurer, asked that Prior be sent to France along with Abbe Francois Gaultier, the French priest who was serving similarly as a secret negotiator for the opposite side. On 12 July 1711 Prior and Gaultier left London and eventually crossed the channel incognito and journeyed to Fontainebleau. There Prior entered into negotiations with Jean Baptiste Colbert, marquis de Torcy, his friendly acquaintance from his previous mission in Paris over a decade before. After ten days of negotiation and an audience with Louis XIV, Prior (still travelling under a false passport) set out once more for England, this time accompanied by Nicholas Mesnager, who was empowered to carry out further negotiations on behalf of France in England. However, Prior was apprehended and briefly gaoled by an over-zealous English customs official. The secret negotiations were secret no longer, and when Swift attempted to divert attention by an imaginative satiric spoof, a pamphlet called 'A New Journey to Paris: together with some Secret Transactions between the Fr -- h K -- g, and an Eng -- Gentleman', he probably made matters worse, for his 'pure inventions' came uncomfortably close at several points to the fiercely guarded truth. 
Prior was annoyed, but the peace negotiations continued through August and September 1711, often at Prior's Duke Street house, where Mesnager was sequestered. On 8 October 1711 three documents were signed as preliminary treaties between England and France. Prior's share in drawing up these documents, to become the basis of the treaty of Utrecht, was so conspicuous that the whigs derisively called the preliminary treaties 'Matt's peace'. Yet although the English government wished to name Prior as plenipotentiary to protect Britain's commercial interests, Queen Anne did so only grudgingly, and Lord Strafford, ambassador at The Hague (described by Swift as 'proud as hell'), flatly refused to serve with Prior. Prior nevertheless continued to function behind the scenes during the final negotiations, in both London and Paris. His comings and goings across the channel were at this period of sufficient importance in the mind of the English populace that Swift could write to Stella 'Prior is just come over from France for a few days; I suppose, upon some important affair. I saw him last night, but had no private talk with him. Stocks rise upon his coming' (J. Swift, 'Journal to Stella', ed. H. Williams, 2 vols., 1948, 2.566). 
Finally, on 11 April 1713, the treaty of Utrecht was signed between England, Holland, Portugal, Prussia, Savoy, and France, ending the War of the Spanish Succession for these nations. The duke of Shrewsbury wrote to the earl of Oxford, on 8 March 1713, of Prior's role in the treaty of Utrecht: 'I think I may congratulate your Lordship that the peace is made, in which if by good fortune I have any share, I must do Mr. Prior the justice to inform you, that I have been in so particular a manner assisted by his zeal, diligence and ability that I hope he will be immediately encouraged and countenanced by some mark of your Lordship's favour. ('Bath MSS', 230)' However, in the celebrations that followed the signing of the treaty of Utrecht, Prior fell ill of cholera morbus, recurring fits of vomiting to which he was subject all his mature life, complicated this time by pleurisy as well. Though he remained in Paris, his commission had really expired with the signing of the treaty. He served in the absence of the duke of Shrewsbury as an acting ambassador to France and stayed at Fontainebleau during September and October 1713 at the particular request of Louis XIV. His main role during this period was, at the request of Henry St John, Viscount Bolingbroke, to draw France into a closer military, political, and commercial alliance with England. 
After Anne's death on 1 August 1714, Prior continued his duties in Paris, negotiating with Louis XIV about the destruction of Dunkirk. Prior had already incurred a $5000 debt while serving as unofficial and poorly allowanced ambassador in Paris, and his financial condition worsened when he was removed from his post as commissioner of customs. In January 1715 John Dalrymple, earl of Stair, came to Paris to serve as English ambassador to France and to relieve Prior of his duties there. The whig ministry finally agreed to pay off Prior's ambassadorial debts there, chiefly in order to return him to London for questioning. 
The House of Commons had set up a secret committee to investigate corruption and treason in the tory party, particularly as related to the negotiations for the treaty of Utrecht, and Prior and Thomas Harley were arrested and confined in their own homes on Duke Street on 9 June 1715. As Prior later noted in his 'History of his Own Time', the secret committee intended to support charges of treason against the earl of Oxford by having Prior verify that the earl had been present at a meeting with Mesnager and Gaultier at Prior's Duke Street house, but Prior replied that either the duke of Shrewsbury or the earl of Oxford had been present, with the other absent, but that he could not recollect, four years later, which man had attended -- an answer, Prior recorded, that 'had this Effect, that it was the same Thing as if they were both absent, since they could not determine which of them was present' (M. Prior, 'The History of his Own Time', 1740, 417-35). Despite repeated questioning, Prior kept to his story. He was confined in the home of the serjeant-at-arms of the House of Commons for more than a year thereafter, and unable to receive guests without permission of the speaker of the House of Commons or to write or receive letters from friends. But he had managed to protect his tory friends while saving his own neck, the most delicate diplomatic manoeuvring of his whole political career. 
Prior was released on 26 June 1716, when parliament was prorogued. Even a year later his name, along with Thomas Harley's and the earl of Oxford's, was omitted from the list of those pardoned by the royal 'Act of Grace' in July 1717. The injustice of the whole episode rankled with many tories; Prior's name became synonymous with undeserved political ill treatment. Yet it was during the spring months in London, when his life and those of his friends hung in the balance, that Prior wrote one of his most successful poems in domesticating the myth, his 'Daphne and Apollo', and while under house arrest that he wrote the first draft of one of his equally successful longer poems, a favourite of Alexander Pope's, 'Alma, or, The Progress of the Mind'. 
After he was released, his political career irrevocably ended by the whig-Hanoverian ascent into power, Prior returned to his Duke Street home without any immediate source of funds. To assist him, Bathurst and Lord Harley conceived the scheme of bringing out his poems in a subscription edition. Details of the plan were worked out at a meeting in January 1717, at which Bathurst, Harley, Prior, Pope, Gay, Arbuthnot, and Erasmus Lewis were present. Jacob Tonson, who was much experienced in subscription publication, was to be its publisher, and Alexander Pope, who had himself recently brought out his 'Iliad' in a very successful subscription, would be a valuable adviser. When the volume finally appeared in mid-March 1719, it was a large, handsome folio, 1 foot across and 1 yard tall, 500 pages long, with a list of 1445 persons who had subscribed for 1786 books. The book reprinted and reordered all the poems from the 1709 edition of 'Poems on Several Occasions' and added a number of poems written since that time, notably 'Solomon' and 'Alma'. Though he probably did not make as much money as is commonly cited (4000 guineas), Prior undeniably made a small fortune by this publication and found himself comfortably off for the rest of his life, independently wealthy and no longer dependent on repayments from a remiss and recalcitrant government. 
Prior thus found himself free to devote himself to his chief interests beyond politics: women, collecting, friends, a country estate, and writing. By 1715 or 1716 he had met Elizabeth Cox, wife of John Cox, a Long Acre tavern keeper, and by 1718 Betty (Lisetta) had apparently replaced Anne Durham (Cloe) as Prior's mistress. Shortly after Prior's death, Dr Arbuthnot wrote that 'PRIOR has had a narrow escape by dying; for, if he had lived, he had married a brimstone bitch, one Bessy Cox, that keeps an alehouse in Long Acre. Her husband died about a month ago' ('European Magazine and London Review', 13, January 1788, 8). 
But an affluent Prior was collecting more than mistresses. A virtuoso, he filled 'Matt's Palace' with treasures: coins, medals, jewels, antique bronzes, prints, drawings, and sculptures. Almost a hundred paintings covered the walls of his drawing-room and its adjacent 'closet'; his bookshelves were lined with several thousand volumes. 
Always a gifted and winning public letter-writer when abroad, Prior displayed the same abilities as a private correspondent at home in retirement. Through his correspondence he kept up his friendship with Swift, whom he never saw again, and in person he strengthened his friendship with Adrian Drift, who moved into the Duke Street house at the latest by the end of 1717 to serve as amanuensis, companion, and friend. Drift wrote after Prior's death that Prior had honoured him with 'Esteem and Affection full Five & Twenty Years, without One harsh word ever falling from his Tongue' (Rippy, 'Prior', 38). Finally, the brightest new friendship which Prior made during his last years was with Edward Harley, son of the earl of Oxford, his wife, Lady Harriett, and his daughter, Margaret Cavendish Harley, later duchess of Portland. The Harleys and Prior became close friends; three solemn poems of Prior's last years are responses to the parents, and a charming poem ('My Noble, Lovely, Little Peggy') and the coda to another ('The Turtle and the Sparrow') are directed to young Peggy Harley, these last notable in a century that showed little interest in children's poems. 
It was partly through Harley that Prior was able to realize his wish to own a country estate -- Down Hall near Hatfield Broad Oak in Essex. Harley provided Prior with half the amount necessary for its purchase in return for an agreement that the property would revert to Harley at Prior's death. Prior engaged James Gibbs to draw up plans and specifications for the new house and Charles Bridgeman to plan its gardens -- and wrote a long, colloquial poem, 'Down Hall: a Ballad', about his mixed anticipations and disillusionments connected with its first viewing. But his sudden death put an end to all this estate planning. Down Hall, with a number of improvements already made, reverted to Harley. Two other financial arrangements that Prior had worked out with Harley -- with Prior's paying a large lump sum to begin with and Harley then paying Prior an annuity for every year he lived -- would have had to exist for ten years for Prior to break even (excluding any calculation of interest). Prior lived only four years after the first and two years after the second. Harley, as Drift wrote, 'was a Gainer by Mr. Prior's Death by the sum of $2058. 6's'. 8died' 
During the two years after the appearance of his subscription edition and before his sudden death, Prior continued to write poems, the most notable three being 'The Conversation: a Tale', 'The Turtle and the Sparrow', and ten fragments of 'Predestination, a Poem'. 
In August 1721 Prior went to visit Wimpole as a guest of the Harleys. On 11 September he once again fell violently ill of cholera morbus. On 13 September he seemed somewhat better, but the attacks resumed that evening, and he died at one in the afternoon on 18 September 1721. On Friday 22 September his body was carried to Westminster Abbey in a hearse accompanied by a mourning coach, each drawn by six horses and escorted by an outrider. The body lay in state in the historic Jerusalem chamber for three days. The funeral, held on 25 September, was attended by, among others, Richard Shelton (probably Prior's closest personal friend), Dr Arbuthnot, Erasmus Lewis, forty king's scholars from Westminster School, carrying white tapers, seventy men in mourning with branchlights, and a dozen almsmen with torches. A few weeks after the funeral, all those who had been present, and forty-two persons who had not, received gold mourning rings engraved 'M. Prior. Ob: 18.Sep:1721 Aetat 57'. James Gibbs, who had drawn up the plans for Prior's new country estate at Down Hall, instead designed his 'stately Monument', the most sumptuous in the Poets' Corner of Westminster Abbey, planned by Prior himself and wryly described by him as 'this last piece of human vanity'. 
Prior, famous British diplomatist, was arguably the most important poet writing in English between the death of Dryden (1700) and the poetic majority of Pope in 1712. To his friend Jonathan Swift he gave specific lines and, more significantly and pervasively, an elegant courtliness and ease of familiar verse that Swift had not hitherto mastered. In 1723, as his prospective editor, Pope read almost everything extant of Prior's, looking closely at Prior as he did at Dryden, as a literary figure whose unusual merit both he and the English reading public conceded without question. His own work displays a lasting awareness of Prior's example. Prior likewise influenced Samuel Johnson in two of Johnson's works that shared Prior's Christian pessimism: 'The Vanity of Human Wishes' (1749) and 'Rasselas' (1755). Among lesser eighteenth-century writers influenced by the poetry of Prior were William Cowper, Anne Finch, countess of Winchilsea, and John, Charles, and Samuel Wesley the younger in England, Allan Ramsay in Scotland, and Christoph Martin Wieland and Friedrich von Hagedorn in Germany. 
As the eighteenth century moved into heavy use of the heroic couplet form, Prior continued to practise other forms commoner in the Restoration -- anapaests, tetrameter, lyrical lyrics, 'vers de societe' -- and helped to keep these feet and syllables and tones alive through eighteenth-century English verse, as minor streams within a major current of heroic couplet versification. Finally, his very successful 1717-19 subscription edition of his 'Poems on Several Occasions' made a useful point: that a popular poet might make a small fortune from a subscription edition of his original poems, not just as a translator but as a practising poet, without dependence on one particular titled patron. 


@@@@@


doc= 22815


Prior, Thomas (1681-1751), author and a founder of the Dublin Society, was born at Garriston, near Rathdowney, Queen's county, the second son of Colonel Thomas Prior (died 1700) and grandson of Captain Thomas Prior of Ely, who settled in Ireland with his regiment in 1636. He was educated at the public school at Kilkenny between January 1697 and April 1699; there he formed what became a lifelong friendship with George Berkeley, subsequently bishop of Cloyne, to whom he later served as legal adviser and Dublin agent. Prior entered Trinity College, Dublin, obtained a scholarship in 1701, and graduated BA in 1703. He subsequently devoted himself to the promotion of trade and industry among the protestant population in Ireland. 
In 1729 Prior published his 'List of the Absentees of Ireland', which contained details of estates and incomes from rents. In this popular and often reprinted pamphlet he estimated that up to $600,000 went overseas in remitted rents, a figure which has since been identified as an over-estimate (Cullen, 172). In 1730 there appeared his 'Observations on Coin'. In the following year Prior and twelve other associates including Samuel Madden, philanthropist, Sir Thomas Molyneux, physician, Francis Bindon, architect and portrait painter, and Patrick Delany, dean of Down, succeeded in establishing the Dublin Society for the Promotion of Agriculture, Manufactures, Arts and Sciences. It was duly incorporated, and in 1749 received a grant of $500 per annum from parliament; it subsequently became the Royal Dublin Society. Prior dedicated his 'Authentic Narrative of the Success of Tar-Water in Curing a Great Number and Variety of Distempers' (1746) to Lord Chesterfield, with whom he had corresponded during the latter's spell as viceroy to Ireland (1745-6). An essay by Prior, advocating the encouragement of the linen manufacture in Ireland, was also published at Dublin in 1749. 
After a long illness Prior died, unmarried, on 21 October 1751 at Rathdowney, where he was buried on 25 October. A monument erected by subscription to his memory in Christ Church, Dublin, carried an inscription by Bishop Berkeley, who styled him 'Societatis Dubliniensis auctor, institutor, curator'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22816


Prior, Thomas Abiel (1809-1886), line engraver, was born on 5 November 1809. His early work was done for the publishers Henry Fisher and George Vertue and consisted of landscapes of Britain, the Mediterranean region, China, and America. He first distinguished himself with a print, 'Heidelberg Castle and Town' (1844), engraved on copper from one of Turner's drawings that he had bought, and executed under Turner's supervision. It was published by subscription, and its success led to its re-engraving on steel for the 'Art Journal' (1864). After one plate in mezzotint, 'More Frightened than Hurt', after James Bateman, Prior returned to line engraving, executing several more plates after Turner, including 'Zurich' (1852), 'Dido Building Carthage' (1863), 'Apollo and the Sibyl' (1873) -- the latter two were exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1864 and 1874 respectively -- and 'The Sun Rising in a Mist' (begun by William Chapman; 1874). Other plates were engraved for the Turner Gallery and the Vernon Gallery. He produced 'Crossing the Bridge' after Sir Edwin Landseer, and fourteen plates on steel for the 'Art Journal' between 1850 and 1871, notably several pictures from the Royal Collection, among them 'The Windmill', after Ruysdael; 'The Village Fete', after David Teniers; 'Dover', after George Chambers; 'The Opening of the New London Bridge', after Clarkson Stanfield; and 'Constantinople: the Golden Horn', after Jacobus Jacobs. 
Prior married on 18 November 1837 Emma Sharrow; she may have died about 1860, for at this time he went to live in Calais to be near his son, Thomas William Prior ('b'. 1838). He taught drawing at one or two of the schools in Calais, which considerably slowed down the rate of his own work. The large plates of his 'Dido' and 'Apollo', produced during these years, were considered to be his best works. It was Prior's custom to visit England annually, to oversee the proving of his plates. In September 1886 he completed his large engraving of 'The Fighting Temeraire'. Its publication drew admiring comments in 'The Times', which noted that Prior was 'one of the last surviving masters of the now obsolete method of line engraving' ('The Times', 2 Nov 1886, 8a). A few days later the same newspaper reported his death at Calais on 8 November 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 22817


Prysot, Sir John (d. 1461), justice, was the son of John Prisot of Haslingfield, Cambridgeshire; suggestions that his family came from Kent appear to be unfounded. The early stages of his career are unknown, but from the late 1430s he is recorded as active in Cambridgeshire and Hertfordshire -- his marriage brought him the manor of Wallington in the latter county. He was a JP in Cambridgeshire from 1437, escheator in that county and Huntingdonshire in 1438, and a JP in Hertfordshire from 1443 (presumably in consequence of his marriage), as well as in other counties in the south midlands and East Anglia from the late 1440s. In July 1443 he became a serjeant-at-law, and he was promoted king's serjeant at the following Michaelmas. His contributions to courtroom debate at once begin to be recorded in the year-books. Between 1445 and 1447 he was retained by the duchy of Lancaster, while in 1448 he was a justice of assize and gaol delivery for the liberty of Ely. 
On 16 January 1449 Prysot was appointed chief justice of the court of common pleas, even though he had not previously been a puisne justice, and was granted $93 6's'. 8died per annum and additional sums for his robes. He was soon active away from Westminster in the service of the crown, as a commissioner of oyer and terminer in Kent in 1451, after Jack Cade's uprising, in the same capacity in Lincolnshire in 1452, in the aftermath of the duke of York's demonstration at Dartford, and at York in 1454 'for execution of justice uppon such as hafe offended yn cause creminall' ('Paston Letters', 1.290). He was a trier of petitions from Gascony and overseas territories in the parliaments of 1453 and 1455. In the latter year he was a member of the Hertfordshire commission for raising funds for the defence of Calais, while in 1459 he became a feoffee to the use by the crown of various duchy of Lancaster estates. He appears to have been knighted in that year. He was frequently employed as a commissioner by the king, and was also engaged in private business as a feoffee and arbitrator. 
Prysot was known as a learned judge -- he is recorded as citing a law book of Edward I's time which was probably 'Britton'. His opinions are frequently recorded in the law reports, for instance in his argument for statute as the only 'positive' law, taking precedence over prescription. He was said to have assisted Sir Thomas Littleton (died 1481) in the preparation of the latter's 'Tenures', and his opinions were still being referred to over a century after his death. Ordinances issued on 1 July 1457 for the behaviour and fees of the officials of the court of common pleas are described as having been drawn up under his direction. A complaint of his partiality in the conduct of business at Norwich in July 1451 should be regarded with scepticism, as emanating from a disappointed litigant. Prysot died early in 1461, probably shortly before 17 May, when the parson of Clothall, Hertfordshire, near Wallington, was granted administration of his will. He may have been buried in the north chapel of St Mary's Church, Wallington, where stained glass survives bearing his arms. He was outlived by his wife, Margaret, who was still living in 1475, and by their daughter, Anne, who married George Dallyson. 


@@@@@


doc= 22818


Pritchard, Andrew (1804-1882), microscopist, eldest son of John Pritchard of Hackney, and his wife, Ann, daughter of John Fleetwood, was born in London on 14 December 1804. He was educated at St Saviour's Grammar School, Southwark, and was afterwards apprenticed to his cousin, Cornelius Varley, a patent agent and brother to the artist John Varley. On the expiration of his apprenticeship he started in business as an optician, from 1827 to 1835 at 18 Pickett Street, Strand (on the corner of 312 Strand), from 1836 to 1838 both there and at 263 Strand, and from 1839 to 1858 at 162 Fleet Street. Afterwards he had a business address at 49 Coleman Street in the City, shared with one of his sons, Andrew Goring Pritchard, a solicitor. On 16 July 1829 he married Caroline Isabella Straker. 
Pritchard was brought up as an Independent. Later in life he associated with, though never actually became a member of, the sect known as Sandemanians, and it was in connection with that body he first made the acquaintance of Michael Faraday. Pritchard finally became a Unitarian, and in 1840 joined the congregation at Newington Green, a connection which lasted throughout his life. He was greatly interested in all the institutions of his religion, and was treasurer of the chapel from 1850 to 1872. 
Pritchard early turned his attention to microscopy, and in 1824, while still with Varley, at the instigation of Dr C. R. Goring, he ground a single lens out of a diamond. He also fashioned simple lenses of sapphire, ruby, garnet, and spinel, but later sold rather old-fashioned microscopes. He is much better known for his microscope slides, which had their edges filled with red sealing wax. He mounted some of his specimens in a gum and isinglass mixture, a very early and innovative use of such a medium. His practical work on the microscope, however, was less important than his books on the applications of the instrument. His 'List of 2000 Microscopic Objects' (1835) is very important in the history of microscopy, as it described the use of Canada balsam for mounting for the first time; his 'History of the Infusoria' (1841) was long a standard work, and the impetus it gave to the study of biological science cannot be overestimated. 
Pritchard wrote several other books on aspects of natural history as seen through the microscope, on optical instruments, and on patents. He also wrote four papers on microscopical optics between 1827 and 1833 in the 'Quarterly Journal of Science', the 'Edinburgh Philosophical Magazine', and the 'Philosophical Magazine'. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1873. He retired from business about 1852, and died at 87 St Paul's Road, Islington, on 24 November 1882. Profits from his writing contributed to the nearly $40,000 left at his death. 


A prolific author, Pritchard wrote travel books illustrated with his photographs and works of fiction. He died at Charlton, Kent, on 11 May 1884. 


@@@@@


doc= 22819


Pritchard, Charles (1808-1893), headmaster and astronomer, the fourth son of William Pritchard (died 1859), a hatter of Shrewsbury, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Lloyd, was born at Alberbury, Shropshire, on 28 February 1808. He and his brothers were baptized on 18 December 1808 at Christchurch, Southwark, after the family moved to Brixton in south London. Pritchard went to school first near Uxbridge, then as a day boy at Merchant Taylors' School (1818-19), and for a year he walked to Suffolk Lane in the City of London, a distance of 4 miles, every morning before seven. In 1822 he was sent to John Stock's academy at Poplar, where he benefited from Stock's inspired teaching of mathematics and learned to use surveying and astronomical instruments. His last school was Christ's Hospital, Newgate Street, in the City, and for twelve months there he utilized the long walk in learning by rote passages from classical authors. Financial difficulties at home, however, compelled his removal, and for two years he worked alone, chiefly at mathematics, though he also attended some lectures on chemistry. In 1825, when only seventeen, he published an 'Introduction to Arithmetic', and in 1826 he was enabled, by the help of friends and relatives, to enter St John's College, Cambridge, whence he graduated as fourth wrangler in 1830. He proceeded MA in 1833, having been elected a fellow of his college in March 1832. 
In 1833 Pritchard accepted the headmastership of Stockwell proprietary grammar school, but his relations with the proprietors were always strained, as they opposed his desire to include science in the curriculum, and he left in June 1834. The parents of many of his pupils did, however, wish him to teach their sons in a modern manner, and the Clapham grammar school was founded to give him a freer hand in carrying out much-needed educational reforms. In the interim he had married, on 18 December 1834, Emily, the daughter of J. Newton; they had several children, including Sir Charles Bradley Pritchard, before her early death. 
Pritchard packed the Clapham school with scientific apparatus and equipped it with an observatory and, eventually, a swimming pool. He presided over this establishment with remarkable success from 1834 to 1862. His system of teaching was wide and accommodating, his zeal indefatigable. Many of the boys who followed him from Stockwell achieved fame in later life. In 1866 nearly 100 men turned up for a banquet given in Pritchard's honour by the old boys of Clapham; a further 100 apologized for absence -- a unique tribute to the manner of his rule there. 
Pritchard married second, on 10 August 1858, Rosalind (died 1892), the daughter of Alexander Campbell; they also had children. On leaving Clapham in 1862 he retired with his family to Freshwater, on the Isle of Wight. He had been ordained in 1834, and earnestly desired to devote himself to pastoral duties, but failed to obtain a curacy. He nevertheless delivered addresses, generally on the harmony between science and scripture, at various church congresses, and preached so often before the British Association that he came to be known as its 'chaplain'. His discourse at the Nottingham meeting in 1866 led to his appointment as Hulsean lecturer at Cambridge in 1867. He was, besides, one of the select preachers at Cambridge in 1869 and 1881 and at Oxford in 1876 and 1877. 
Pritchard joined the Royal Astronomical Society on 13 April 1849. He contributed to their proceedings, made some photometrical experiments on the annular solar eclipse of 15 March 1858, and joined the expedition in SS 'Himalaya' which sailed to Spain for the total eclipse of 18 July 1860. He served continuously on the council of the society from 1856 to 1877, and again from 1883 to 1887, and came under fire for championing the aged Sir George Airy against the reformers seeking to end Airy's domination of the council. As president in 1866, Pritchard delivered two admirable addresses when presenting gold medals to Huggins and Leverrier in 1867 and 1868 respectively. 
Early in 1870 Pritchard succeeded William Fishburn Donkin as Savilian professor of astronomy at the University of Oxford, where it was hoped that his teaching would revitalize the post. The family moved into 8 Keble Road, Pritchard's home for the remainder of his life. Although just sixty-two, he entered upon his new duties with the ardour of youth. A new observatory was erected in the university parks; a 12 inch refractor was purchased from Sir Howard Grubb, and Warren De La Rue gave other instruments, including a 13 inch reflecting equatorial telescope that he had constructed. The 'New Savilian Observatory for Astronomical Physics' was completed in 1875. 
Pritchard was well aware of the advantages of photography, and adopted De La Rue's suggestion of investigating in this way the moon's libration. He next undertook the micrometric determination of forty stars in the Pleiades, with a view to ascertain their relative displacements since F. W. Bessel had measured them more than fifty years earlier; his results, however, were later questioned. To standardize the various estimates of the brightness of these stars, Pritchard adapted the wedge photometer, designed by W. R. Dawes, and vigorously defended it against all criticism. With it, he determined, in 1881-5, the relative magnitudes of 2784 stars from the pole to 10 degrees south of the equator. Early in 1883 he travelled to Egypt, where he hoped to obtain a better value for atmospheric absorption. He was accompanied by his wife and his assistant, Jenkins. After completing the observations from the khedive's observatory for the resulting photometric catalogue, entitled 'Uranometria nova Oxoniensis' (1885), he received in 1886 jointly with the American astronomer Edward Charles Pickering, whose catalogue had been produced using the rival method of photometry, the Astronomical Society's gold medal. 
Pritchard was a pioneer in the photographic measurement of stellar parallax. From 200 plates of the star 61 Cygni exposed in 1886 he derived a parallax of 0.438 seconds of arc. Later measurements of twenty-eight stars, mostly of the second magnitude, yielded an average parallax of 0.56 seconds of arc, corresponding to a distance of 58 light years, a project which earned him, in 1892, the Royal Society's royal medal. 
In 1886 Pritchard contributed to the Royal Society lengthy descriptions of his researches in stellar photography, and a second account was published by the Royal Astronomical Society in 1891. He never observed at Oxford; all the observations were undertaken by his able and loyal assistants Plummer and Jenkins, to whom he always gave full credit. In 1887 he committed his observatory to participate in the Carte du ciel, the first large international co-operative programme in astronomy. De La Rue donated the regulation 13 inch astrograph, and in 1890-91 Pritchard made lengthy experiments and tests and cajoled Sir Howard Grubb in order to ensure that the overseas observatories received satisfactory and standardized apparatus, a task for which his mathematical abilities were ideally suited. At the time of his death some progress had been made in photographing the zone of sky assigned to the Oxford observatory. 
Pritchard was elected FRS on 6 February 1840, and was a member of the council in 1885-7. He was also a fellow of the Cambridge Philosophical Society and, from 1852, of the Geological Society. He proceeded MA by decree from New College, Oxford, on 11 March 1870, and DD in 1880, and, as Savilian professor, became a fellow in 1883. To his great delight, he was elected to an honorary fellowship of St John's College, Cambridge, in 1886. He was placed on the Solar Physics Committee in 1885. 
Pritchard's enthusiasm for teaching never left him. He would instruct up to fifteen students at a time in practical matters in the subsidiary observatory fitted up for their use. Taking full advantage of De La Rue's benefactions, he made Oxford's the most active university observatory in the country, and the gold medals established it among the first rank in Europe. In his later years his eyesight failed and he was unable to walk, but he was conveyed to the observatory in a bath chair. He was full of plans for future work, and had, at the time of his death, fully prepared for a further photographic investigation of the Pleiades. He died at his home on 28 May 1893 and was buried in Holywell cemetery. 
During the last twenty years of his life Pritchard sent fifty astronomical papers to learned societies; wrote many excellent popular essays, including a series in 'Good Words'; and contributed several articles to the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and to Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible'. His 'Occasional Thoughts of an Astronomer on Nature and Revelation' (1889) gathered his miscellaneous addresses and discourses, though many of his sermons were printed separately. Next to the stars, Pritchard loved flowers. He practised floriculture as a fine art, and had at Clapham one of the finest ferneries in England. Yet he would have preferred parish work to his scientific accomplishments. 'Providence', he used to say, 'made me an astronomer, but gave me the heart of a divine.' 


@@@@@


doc= 22820


Pritchard, Edward William (1825-1865), surgeon and poisoner, son of Captain John White Pritchard RN, was born at Southsea, Hampshire, on 6 December 1825. He was educated in London and Paris, and apprenticed in September 1840 to Edward and Charles Scott, surgeons, in Portsmouth. On completing his apprenticeship he entered King's College as a hospital student of surgery in October 1843, although this was later denied by the hospital authorities. Much of the information about his medical career derives from an entry supplied by himself in the 'Medical Directory' of 1865; the dates are variously given by several writers on his life and should all be viewed with some scepticism. 
Pritchard was admitted a member of the College of Surgeons on 29 May 1846 and was at once gazetted assistant surgeon serving on board the 'Collingwood', the 'Calypso', and the 'Asia', going to Egypt and other countries bordering the Mediterranean, as well as to the Pitcairn Islands on the steam-sloop 'Hecate'. He resigned from the navy in 1847 and became private physician to a gentleman traveller with whom he visited the Holy Land. He passed the examinations for licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries in the same year. Pritchard decided to settle in England, and on 19 September 1850 married Mary Jane, daughter of Michael Taylor, a retired silk and lace merchant of Edinburgh, whom he met at a ball in Portsmouth. They had five children. With his father-in-law's help he established himself in a general practice in Hunmanby, Yorkshire, in 1851, and moved to Filey in 1854. In 1857 he purchased the degree of MD from the University of Erlangen in Germany, and moved to Edinburgh in 1859. In 1860 he moved to Glasgow, where he lived at 11 Berkeley Terrace, applying unsuccessfully for the chair of surgery at the Andersonian University in October of that year. He was not popular with his medical colleagues and was considered 'ignorant, daring and reckless'. Nevertheless, he published articles in reputable medical journals, and became a director of the Glasgow Athenaeum and an examiner in physiology under the Society of Arts. 
Late on the night of 5 May 1863 there was a fire at Pritchard's house in which a servant, Elizabeth McGirn, perished. The fire insurance was unpaid, and Pritchard was suspected of raising the fire to cause McGirn's death as it was likely that she was pregnant, but the matter was not pursued. In May 1864 he purchased the practice of Dr Corbett and his house in Clarence Place, 131 Sauchiehall Street, Glasgow, with a loan of $500 from his mother-in-law, Mrs Jane Cowper Taylor. He had by now seduced a fifteen-year-old servant, Mary McLeod, and procured an abortion for her. In November 1864 his wife became ill and went to stay with her mother in Edinburgh to recover, but became ill again on her return. Her mother came to Glasgow to nurse her. In December of that year, and in January, February, and March 1865, Pritchard bought Fleming's tincture of aconite. Mrs Taylor died on 25 February 1865 after eating a tapioca pudding; Pritchard signed a death certificate attributing the death to a stroke. Mrs Pritchard died on 17/18 March, and Pritchard registered the death as caused by gastric fever. The procurator fiscal received an anonymous letter accusing Pritchard of causing the two deaths, and he was arrested on a charge of murder soon afterwards. 
The trial began on 3 July 1865 at the high court of justiciary in Edinburgh before John Inglis and lasted for five days. Both bodies were exhumed and autopsies showed that both contained large quantities of antimony. The defence suggested that the murders had been committed by Mary McLeod, who testified that Pritchard had promised to marry her on the death of his wife. It was proved that Pritchard was in debt and expected a large sum of money on the death of the two women, and that he administered antimony to his wife over some months and aconite to Mrs Taylor in a sedative which she took regularly. Pritchard confessed to his guilt on the day of sentencing, exonerating Mary McLeod, and was sentenced to death. He was hanged by William Calcraft in front of Glasgow gaol on 28 July 1865; 100,000 people attended what was the last public execution in Glasgow. 
Pritchard had some reputation as a lecturer on such subjects as 'Egypt and its climate' and, in addition to his medical papers, published works including 'A Visit to Pitcairn Island' (1847), 'Observations on Filey as a Watering Place' (1853), which ran to three editions, and 'Coast Lodgings for the Poorer Cities' (1854). He was described as being a plausible liar, vain to a degree, 5 feet 11 inches tall, well proportioned, with a pleasing face, regular features, and aquiline nose, bald but with a lock of light brown hair adjusted to cover his head, and with a flowing beard. 


@@@@@


doc= 22821


Pritchard, George (1796-1883), missionary and diplomatist, born in Birmingham on 1 August 1796, worked from childhood with his father, a journeyman brass-founder, and showed great mechanical skill. In his youth he and his family attended the Congregational chapel in Carr's Lane, and he became a local preacher in villages around Birmingham. He entered a boarding-school in Stafford in 1820, to prepare for further study at the mission seminary at Gosport, from 1820 to 1824. He was ordained as a Congregational minister in 1824, and on 25 July of the same year he married Elizabeth Ayllen (1799-1871), of West Meon, Hampshire. Two days later, on 27 July, they left on a cargo ship bound for Tahiti, in the Society Islands of the Pacific Ocean, where Pritchard was to undertake missionary work for the London Missionary Society. 
Pritchard and his wife were welcomed on their arrival by Queen Pomare. On 21 November 1836 the queen refused to admit two French priests, Honore Laval and Francois d'Assis Caret, from the Catholic mission already established on the Gambier Islands, into her territories, and there followed a long quarrel with the French government, which ended in the islands being placed under French protection in 1842, and temporarily annexed by France in 1843. Pritchard, appointed in 1837 as British consul at Tahiti, with nominal jurisdiction in the other Society Islands and also Tonga and Samoa, advised the queen throughout this critical period, and he helped to pay an indemnity of 2000 Spanish dollars summarily demanded by the French admiral, Abel du Petit-Thouars, in 1838. In 1841 Pritchard went to England to lay the case of the dispossessed queen before the British government, and to describe the outrages that the French had allegedly inflicted on British subjects; but he returned in February 1843 without obtaining any genuine guarantee of security. On 5 March 1844 he was seized by the French authorities on the pretence that he encouraged disaffection among the islanders. Captain Gordon, of HMS 'Cormorant', negotiated his release, on condition that he should leave the islands and never return. 
Pritchard sailed in the 'Cormorant' to Valparaiso, and then on to London. The British government demanded that the French apologize and make financial reparations: Pritchard claimed that his property had suffered damage to the amount of $4000. Eventually, in the queen's speech of 1845, an announcement was made that the difficulty had been satisfactorily adjusted. 
Pritchard returned to the south Pacific in 1845, as Britain's first consul in Samoa. His term of office was marked by controversy about his commercial activities and by quarrels with Samoan chiefs. Even during his missionary days in Tahiti, Pritchard had been involved in private trading ventures, and now, from his consulate at the port of Apia, he began dealing openly in alcoholic liquor and in weapons. The area around Apia was embroiled in civil war for most of Pritchard's tenure, creating a demand for firearms and ammunition, and occasionally leading to the destruction of buildings or livestock. Pritchard forwarded a deluge of complaints to London from British traders and Samoans demanding redress for property damage, while pursuing his own escalating compensation claims. His dispatches also demanded better support from the Royal Navy: visiting captains tended to sympathize more with the Samoans than with Pritchard and the Europeans. A series of these captains, seconded by missionaries and Samoan chiefs, complained to the Foreign Office about Pritchard's unsuitability, and requested the appointment of a consul more sympathetic to Samoan culture, along with instructions to forbid consular trade. Accepting the inevitable, Pritchard resigned his post and returned to England in 1856. 
Pritchard subsequently lived in retirement in England. His first wife died in 1871; his second wife, Charlotte Annie, and several of his children survived him. He died from bronchitis at his home, 1 St Andrews Terrace, Hove, Sussex, on 6 May 1883. His son William Thomas Pritchard had become Britain's first consul in Fiji in 1857. Pritchard published 'Queen Pomare and her Country' (1878), and left in manuscript an account of French activities in the south Pacific, which was published in 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 22822


Pritchard, Hannah (1709-1768), actress and singer, was born in London on 28 October 1709, the second of the five children of Edward Vaughan ('b'. 'c'.1680, died before 1736) and his wife, Judith Dun ('b'. 'c'.1680, died after 1758). She was baptized on 15 November at St Martin-in-the-Fields, and grew up in Holford's Alley, in the close vicinity of Drury Lane theatre. Her father was a staymaker and may have supplied stays and related accessories to the theatres. 
On 4 October 1730 Hannah married William Pritchard (1708-1763), then an 'Ingraver in prints', at The Globe tavern, Hatton Garden. William later became, briefly, an actor and then undertook a variety of administrative jobs in the theatre. Hannah and William had three daughters: Judith, baptized on 13 July 1731 at St Martin-in-the-Fields; Tamara (or Tamary) Elizabeth, baptized at St Clement Danes on 24 January 1738; and Hannah Mary, baptized on 13 April 1739, also at St Clement Danes. Eleven years later Hannah gave birth to a son, John (baptized on 17 June 1750), who appears to have died in infancy. By the time of his birth the Pritchards were living at 67 Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields (before that they had lived at 8 Craven Buildings in the parish of St Clement Danes, 56 Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, and Duke's Court, where they leased a house from the duke of Bedford). Little is known about Hannah Pritchard's private life except that she seems to have been a devoted wife and mother. In addition to their stage careers, the Pritchards ran a thriving dressmaking business which included the provision of theatrical costumes. 
The date of Hannah Pritchard's first theatrical engagement is uncertain. Benjamin Victor claimed, in his 'The History of the Theatres', that she was engaged by the managers of Drury Lane theatre in 1732. Thomas Davies, however, in his 'Memoirs of the Life of David Garrick', states that her first appearance was at the Haymarket Theatre in one of Fielding's farces. Her first recorded role was the First Phillis in Edward Philips's ballad opera 'The Livery Rake', at Drury Lane on 5 May 1733 (though it is possible, according to 'The London Stage', that the cast list could be for a revival later that year). On 23 August 1733 she played Loveit in a ballad opera, 'A Cure for Covetousness', at Fielding and Hippisley's booth at Bartholomew fair. The company performed at the fair until 4 September, on which date the management responded to the public's enthusiasm for a duet entitled 'Sweet, if you love me, smiling turn', sung by Mrs Pritchard and the actor and tenor Salway, by providing free copies of the song to be given away daily at the booth. A contributor to the September issue of the 'Gentleman's Magazine', one 'R. S.' (possibly the poet Richard Savage), praised her grace and wit in verse and looked forward to her translation to 'some nobler stage' where she would her 'rival actresses outshine' ('GM', 3, 1733, 490). 
Shortly after her appearance at Bartholomew fair Mrs Pritchard joined Theophilus Cibber's new company, the Comedians of his Majesty's Revels, at the Haymarket Theatre. Over the next few seasons she appeared, mostly at the Haymarket and Drury Lane, in a variety of roles. In 1740 she achieved her first major triumph, when, on 20 December, at Drury Lane, she played Rosalind in a revival of 'As You Like It', a play 'Not Acted these Forty Years' (Scouten, 2.875). In 'The Actor', John Hill wrote that 'the first speech that ever obtained Mrs Pritchard a loud applause' was Rosalind's 'Take the cork out of thy mouth, that I may drink thy tidings'. She was 'applauded throughout [the speech] and for ever after'. If it had not been for this performance of Rosalind, Hill suggests, it is possible that 'the best actress of the British stage would have perished in oblivion' (Hill, 195). Her other roles that season included Nerissa in 'The Merchant of Venice'. It was in this production that Charles Macklin first enacted his legendary portrayal of Shylock. 
On 5 October 1742 Mrs Pritchard acted for the first time with the young David Garrick, then a rapidly rising star. The venue was the Drury Lane theatre, and Garrick and Mrs Pritchard played Chamont and Monima in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan'. In the same season, on 16 November, Mrs Pritchard was Gertrude to Garrick's Hamlet. The two actors continued to appear together in a variety of roles over the next few seasons. Then, in 1747, the Pritchards joined Garrick and James Lacy, who had bought the patent of the Drury Lane theatre. Hannah was engaged as a leading actress and William as treasurer. 
On 19 March 1748 Garrick and Mrs Pritchard appeared together in 'Macbeth' for the first time, and the excellence of their performances was the subject of immediate acclaim. In the opinion of Thomas Davies their portrayal of events immediately before and after Duncan's murder could not be equalled. The 'merits of both were transcendent' (Davies, 'Dramatic Miscellanies', 2.148). Johann Zoffany's portrait of David Garrick and Hannah Pritchard in 'Macbeth' (now at the Garrick Club), in which the tall, statuesque figure of Hannah Pritchard -- particularly in contrast to the smaller, slighter Garrick -- holds the dagger in one hand while pointing towards Duncan's chamber with the other, captures something of the physical power of her performance. Its thrilling intensity is suggested by Henry Fuseli's more atmospheric version of the scene. Mrs Pritchard was generally recognized as the greatest Lady Macbeth of her day. After her retirement Garrick acted the role of Macbeth only once (on 22 September 1768 before the king of Denmark, with Mrs Barry as Lady Macbeth), out of respect, it was believed, for the brilliance of Mrs Pritchard's performance. 
Mrs Pritchard was a gifted actress, excelling in both tragedy and comedy, though, for a number of her contemporaries, her greatest skills were in comedy. Her performance of Beatrice in 'Much Ado about Nothing', when teamed with Garrick's Benedick, was highly acclaimed. She was slender and attractive as a young woman, though later in life she became very stout. She had a good voice and excellent timing. Her greatest strength, on the evidence of a number of her contemporaries, was her versatility. Whereas other actors, John Hill wrote, were immediately recognizable in every role they played because of one overriding characteristic (Garrick's 'spirit', Mr Barry's 'softness', Mrs Cibber's 'melancholy'), 'Mrs Pritchard, having no distinguishing mark of this kind, carries with her nothing that is peculiar to herself into the character' (Hill, 60-61). Her focus was primarily on the part she played, rather than on herself. 
The fact that Mrs Pritchard identified strongly with the characters she played (occasionally to their detriment) is evident from her performance of the eponymous character in John Delap's 'Hecuba' on 11 December 1761, in the course of which, according to the play's author, she sobbed so much that she spoiled the play. She had other detractors too. Samuel Johnson told Sarah Siddons, who asked his opinion of Mrs Pritchard's acting (which she had never seen), that she 'was a vulgar idiot' (Manvell, 95), and claimed that she had read only her own part in 'Macbeth'. Johnson appears, however, to have blamed Mrs Pritchard for the hostile reception of his play 'Mahomet and Irene', in which she played Irene, and this probably clouded his view. This was the opinion of Mrs Thrale, who considered Mrs Pritchard 'incomparable', and noted that 'her Intelligence pervaded every Sense' ('Thraliana', 2.726). 
By the 1764-5 season Mrs Pritchard's health had begun to suffer. On 25 April 1768 she gave her final performance, in the role of Lady Macbeth. Garrick, who played Macbeth, wrote a farewell epilogue for her to speak, which Davies writes that she delivered 'with many sobs and tears' (Davies, 'Life of David Garrick', 2.190). Following this she retired and moved to Bath, where she died on 20 August 1768, 'of a mortification in her foot' (ibid.). She was buried on 28 August at St Mary's, Twickenham. In 1772 a white marble memorial tablet was erected in Westminster Abbey, next to Shakespeare's monument in Poets' Corner. O'Keeffe, who often saw Hannah Pritchard act, noted in his 'Recollections' that she 'well deserve[d]' this recognition (O'Keeffe, 1.107). The memorial was later moved to the triforium. 
The chief beneficiaries of Hannah Pritchard's will were her daughters. Her property in Twickenham (Ragman's Castle) was left, in common, to the three of them, and Tamara Elizabeth and Hannah Mary inherited the lease of her house in Tavistock Street, London (with thirty years still to run). Tamara Elizabeth received, in addition, $700, in stocks or a house purchased with that sum, along with a variety of household and personal effects belonging to her late mother. Judith received a mourning ring (which had originally been her mother's wedding ring and which Hannah had had transformed into a mourning ring on the death of her husband), and Hannah's two portraits by Francis Hayman. 


@@@@@


doc= 22823


Henry Baden Pritchard (1841-1884), chemist and writer, the third son of Andrew Pritchard, was born in Canonbury on 30 November 1841, and sent to Eisenach and University College School, going afterwards to Switzerland to complete his education. In 1861 he obtained an appointment in the chemical department at the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich, and for some years before his death conducted the photographic department there. He was also proprietor and editor of the 'Photographic News' from 1878 to 1884. On 25 March 1873 he married Mary, daughter of Matthew Evans of Shropshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 22824


Pritchard, John Langford (1799-1850), actor, the son of a captain in the navy, was born, it is said, at sea, in February 1799, and, adopting his father's profession, became a midshipman. Inspired by the performances of Edmund Kean and other actors, he took to the stage, and after some practice as an amateur joined a small company in Wales. In May 1820, as 'Pritchard from Cheltenham', he made his first appearance in Bath, when he took the part of Captain Absolute in 'The Rivals'. In August he played Lord Trinket, Sir Benjamin Backbite, and other parts under Alfred Bunn at the New Theatre, Birmingham. He reappeared in Bath in October as Irwin in Elizabeth Inchbald's 'Everyone has his Fault'. In the summer of 1821 he joined the York circuit under Mansell and made his first appearance as Romeo. Parts such as Jaffier, Pythias, Iago, Edmund in 'King Lear', and Richmond were assigned him. 
Pritchard then joined W. H. Murray's company in Edinburgh, where he remained for eleven years. He played a variety of Scottish characters, including Edward Waverley in a new version of 'Waverley' and Rob Roy, a difficult part in Edinburgh for an Englishman. He also took on historical characters such as Richard I in 'The Talisman', George Douglas in 'Mary Stuart (The Abbot)', and Oliver Cromwell in 'Woodstock, or, The Cavalier'. In 1830-31 Pritchard went with Murray to the Adelphi Theatre. He appeared there through the summer season of 1832 and then left Edinburgh. While he was there he won very favourable recognition, both artistic and social, and took a prominent part in establishing the Edinburgh Shakespeare Club, at the first anniversary dinner of which Scott owned himself the author of 'Waverley'. During his vacations he had played in Glasgow, Perth, Aberdeen, and other leading Scottish towns. 
In October 1833 Pritchard made his first appearance in Dublin, playing Bassanio and Petruchio, followed by Wellborn to the Sir Giles Overreach of Charles Kean. He was hospitably entertained in Ireland, where he also appeared as Jeremy Diddler, Mark Antony, and Meg Merrilees, and established a club similar to that in Edinburgh. He made his debut in London on 16 November 1835 at Covent Garden, as Alonzo in 'Pizarro'. He played Macduff, and was popular as Lindsay, an original part in Edward Fitzball's 'The Inheritance'. During W. C. Macready's tenure of Covent Garden in 1838 he reappeared as Don Pedro in Susannah Centlivre's 'The Wonder'; Macready himself played Don Felix, which was held to be Pritchard's great part. He took a secondary role in the performance of Bulwer-Lytton's 'The Lady of Lyons', and was the original Felton in Sheridan Knowles's 'Woman's Wit, or, Love's Disguises'. Macready, justifiably it seems, was charged with keeping him back. Pritchard retired ultimately to the provinces and became the manager of the York circuit, where he continued to act. He died on 5 August 1850. He was a sound, careful, and judicious actor, but only just reached the second rank; his best parts appear to have been Don Felix and Mercutio. 


@@@@@


doc= 22825


Pritchard, Sir William (1631/2-1705), politician, was probably born in Horsleydown, Surrey, the second son of Francis Prichard, rope maker, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Edward Eggleston. Apprenticed to a Southwark merchant tailor in 1647, Pritchard became free of the Merchant Taylors' Company in 1655. By the time of the Restoration he had succeeded to his father's trade, which he continued at Eltham, Kent; and after 1663 he was the supplier of rope and match to the Ordnance office. The diarist Samuel Pepys encountered him in 1662 and again in 1668, mistaking him on the first occasion for a theatre musician and demanding a song from him. About 1669 Pritchard married Sarah (died 1718), daughter of Francis Cook of Kingsthorpe, Northamptonshire. 
By the late 1670s Pritchard had made a fortune supplying cordage and match to the navy during the second and third Dutch wars. In 1671 he sold the manor house of Tower Place in Woolwich to the king, receiving royal wharves and storehouses in exchange, properties that he subsequently leased back to the crown. After relocating his business to Heydon Yard in the Minories, near the Tower of London, he quickly became prominent in the corporation of London. Knighted and chosen alderman of Broad Street in 1672, he was also elected sheriff of London and Middlesex in 1672-3 and master of the Merchant Taylors' Company in 1673-4. He served as a London assessment commissioner in 1673-80 and 1689-90, as a London militia colonel in 1676-87, 1690-94, and 1702-5, as a London lieutenancy commissioner in 1677-87, 1688-94, and 1702-5, and as president of the Honourable Artillery Company in 1681-90 and 1703-5. In 1678 he purchased the manor of Great Linford, Buckinghamshire, from Richard Napier for $19,500. He also established an additional London residence in Highgate. 
In September 1679, in the midst of the Popish Plot furore, Pritchard was reportedly among the aldermen who refused to kiss the hand of James, duke of York. But as the contest over the royal succession spawned whig and tory parties in London, his Anglican loyalist convictions and his business interests aligned him with the court. Pritchard was a steward for a feast for loyalist apprentices in August 1682; and as the senior alderman beneath the chair, he was the loyalist candidate for lord mayor for 1682-3. The mayoral election of 1682 was overshadowed by the protracted contest for the shrievalty that preceded it; but Pritchard's election was just as much a part of Charles II's campaign to recover London from the whigs, and his mayoralty was memorable. The court-sponsored tory sheriffs for 1682-3, who were sworn just before the mayoral election of 29 September and who were the presiding officers in common hall, declared that a majority of the electors preferred Pritchard. But this result was contested on behalf of two whig candidates by Thomas Papillon and John Dubois, whose claim to the shrievalty was recognized by the London whigs and who had also attempted to preside. When both whigs topped Pritchard in the ensuing poll, the loyalist-dominated court of aldermen adjusted a scrutiny in favour of Pritchard. But the aldermen's declaration of Pritchard as lord mayor was rejected by the whigs, who boycotted the mayoral show and sued for the offices of sheriff and lord mayor in the court of king's bench. In Pritchard's first days as lord mayor, whig crowds commemorating the Gunpowder Plot mobbed him when he sought to disperse them with the trained bands, and broke his windows. 
Pritchard laboured throughout his mayoralty to reduce whig influence in the corporation and to enforce the 'Conventicle Acts'. When he and the tory aldermen ignored a mandamus the whigs had secured from king's bench to show why they should not invest Papillon and Dubois with the shrievalty, the lord mayor was threatened with impeachment by William Williams, former speaker and chief whig legal adviser. When king's bench accepted the aldermen's eventual reply to the mandamus, the whigs brought individual suits against Pritchard and his predecessor for accepting false sheriffs. Legal and extra-legal whig strategies converged in April 1683, when Pritchard and several aldermen were arrested by the city coroner for their failure to respond to writs on behalf of Papillon and Dubois that were taken out by Richard Goodenough, one of their counsel. Goodenough and some of the coroner's associates were already involved in a plot to assassinate the king, and they also planned to murder the lord mayor in their intended insurrection. 
What exactly was intended in Pritchard's arrest is unclear; but after the subsequent disclosures about whig plotting, the government claimed that it was intended to provide cover for an uprising. While the privy council panicked, Pritchard outmanoeuvred his captors, eventually suing Papillon and Dubois for false arrest, and winning $10,000 in damages from Papillon. Pritchard's mayoralty nevertheless ended in personal embarrassment. When the crown, which had won its 'quo warranto' suit against the corporation charter, gave the corporation the opportunity to surrender its charter voluntarily, the whigs managed to carry a common council vote against the surrender, and Pritchard was said not to have 'answered expectations' ('Dartmouth MSS', 3.125). The charter was declared forfeit, but Pritchard continued as lord mayor, by royal commission, until the end of the customary term. He transferred as alderman to Bridge at this time and became a JP for Kent (1683-8). 
Pritchard was among the Anglican loyalists chosen in 1685 to represent London in James II's parliament, but he became uneasy in 1687 as James reconstructed his regime on the basis of toleration. When James sought to mend fences with his former enemies, Pritchard agreed to legal relief for Papillon, who had fled the country; but the king discharged him from all his London offices when he refused to support an address on behalf of liberty for conscience. In October 1688, when James restored the London charter upon news of an impending invasion from the Netherlands, Pritchard turned 'Knave', in royal eyes, by declining to reaccept office as lord mayor without a writ of error in the 'quo warranto' case (DWL, Morrice, Ent'ring book, Q. 303). After some hesitation, he did resume his aldermanic position, returning to Broad Street; and he was among the city representatives who presented an address to the arriving prince of Orange in December. He was also chosen president of St Bartholomew's Hospital at this time, serving for the remainder of his life. 
As the whigs gained the initiative in civic affairs during the revolution of 1688, Pritchard became politically vulnerable as one of those who had co-operated in the crown's take-over and suppression of the corporation in 1682-3. He had 'but a very few hands' when put up in common hall for city MP for the convention in January 1689; and his political behaviour, as well as that of the other leading civic tories, was investigated in the House of Lords in May 1690 (DWL, Morrice, Ent'ring book, Q. 419). By that time, however, William III had broken with the whig leadership in parliament and signalled his new favour for the church party in an alteration of the London lieutenancy, which promptly reappointed Pritchard and other tories as militia colonels. Pritchard and three tory colleagues were also chosen city MPs for a new parliament in March 1690. They promoted passage of a Commons bill to require fresh civic elections as part of a statutory reversal of the 'quo warranto'. When the court of aldermen, now dominated by the whigs, responded by continuing the sitting whig lord mayor, despite a slight common hall majority for a tory opponent, Pritchard borrowed a legal leaf from the whigs. He took out a king's bench mandamus for the office himself, claiming that he should return to the position he held when the charter was forfeited. 
Although this device failed, Pritchard remained involved in party wrangling for the remainder of William's reign. He was defeated as a church tory candidate for city MP in 1695 and January 1701; but he returned to his seat in July 1702, after the succession of Queen Anne. Although a marginal figure in parliamentary affairs, Pritchard became a leading investor in the Royal African Company and (after initial association with its critics) in the 'old' East India Company, in which he eventually owned $15,000 in shares. He served on the governing court of committees of the East India Company in 1696-7 and 1698-1703 and as a Royal African Company assistant in 1699-1700 and 1704-5. In 1698-1701 he acted as a delegate of the East India Company in negotiations with the 'new' company that had been launched in 1698. Pritchard also served as a commissioner for the construction of Greenwich Hospital and for the national land bank scheme of 1696. In 1701 he was a founding member of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. 
Pritchard died on 20 February 1705 at his Heydon Yard residence, aged seventy-three. He was buried in the church at Great Linford, Buckinghamshire, after a procession from Highgate. Lewis Atterbury, Highgate parson and brother of the high-flying Francis Atterbury, preached his funeral sermon. Because his only son had died twenty years earlier, Pritchard left most of his estate to two kinsmen, after first providing a $1200 annuity for his wife, who died in 1718. He also endowed almshouses at Great Linford and provided for a charity school there. 


@@@@@


doc= 22826


Pritchett, James Pigott (1789-1868), architect, was born at St Petrox, Pembrokeshire, on 14 October 1789, and baptized there on 4 January 1790. He was the fourth son of Charles Pigott Pritchett, fellow of King's College, Cambridge, rector of St Petrox and Stackpole Elidor, Pembrokeshire, prebendary of St David's, and domestic chaplain to the earl of Cawdor, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Roger Rogers of Westerton in Ludchurch, Pembrokeshire; Delabere Pritchett, sub-chanter of St David's Cathedral, was his grandfather. He first married, at Beckenham, Kent, on 22 October 1813, Peggy Maria, daughter of Robert Terry, with whom he had three sons and one daughter, Maria Margaret. The latter married John Middleton (1846-1896), her father's pupil. Pritchett was articled to James Medland, an architect in Southwark, and in 1809 he submitted at the Royal Academy a design for a villa. After completing his articles he worked for two years in the office of Daniel Asher Alexander, architect of the London Dock Company. During this time he was engaged on the construction of Maidstone county gaol. 
Pritchett set up independently in London in 1812, but in the following year he moved to York, where he entered into partnership with Charles Watson ('c'.1770-1836). Watson, who had been a pupil, and from 1792 to 1800 a partner, in the Doncaster office of William Lindley, had first set up in practice on his own account in Wakefield about 1800. He was, for a time, the leading architect in Yorkshire, working in a neat Grecian style, as in the court houses in Beverley (1804-14), Wakefield (1807-10), Pontefract (1807-8), and Sheffield (1807-8). With Lindley he designed St John's Church, Wakefield (1791-5), and the square and terrace related to it. In 1807 Watson moved to York, and in 1813 he took Pritchett into partnership. Their first joint major work was the Pauper Lunatic Asylum, Wakefield, which was designed according to the reforming ideas of Samuel Tuke as well as paying attention to heating, air circulation, and fire precautions. In York they built Lendal Chapel and the Friends' meeting-house (both started in 1816); these were neo-classical in style, but the later Ramsden Street Chapel, Huddersfield (1824), marked a change to a Gothic style which they developed in the Nether Chapel, Sheffield (1827), and in the deanery, York, which was designed in the same year. After the death of his first wife, Pritchett married, on 6 January 1829, Caroline, daughter of John Benson, solicitor, of Thorne, near York; they had three sons and two daughters, of whom the eldest son, James Pigott Pritchett (1830-1911), adopted his father's profession at Darlington. 
In their public buildings Watson and Pritchett continued to be faithful to a neo-classical taste. In 1828 they completed a new elevation to Lord Burlington's famous assembly rooms in York, and in the same city they built the savings bank in St Helen's Square (1829). By this time Watson was taking less part in the firm's affairs, and the partnership was dissolved in 1831. On his own account, Pritchett designed the cemetery chapel (1836-7) and Salem Chapel (1838-9), both in York and Grecian in style, but he also used a Gothic design for other churches, such as that at Meltham Mills (1845). 
Pritchett's most important work is at Huddersfield, where he built one of the great monuments of railway architecture. The station was designed to serve two companies, and it is a symmetrical classical composition in which the central pedimented block contains offices, meeting-rooms, and refreshment rooms, while the flanking wings and pavilions were intended originally to serve the two companies. It is a noble design, bold and sculptural in its massing. It was completed in 1850. Another of his additions to the town is the Lion Arcade (1852-4). 
Pritchett had various professional interests. For a while he was architect to the dean and chapter of York Minster, and for fifty years he was surveyor and architect to three successive earls Fitzwilliam at Wentworth Woodhouse. He was a prominent Congregationalist in York and he played an active role in the affairs of the York Cemetery Company. He died at York on 23 May 1868, and was buried in the cemetery there on 27 May. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22827


Pritzler, Sir Theophilus (d. 1839), army officer, was in 1793 appointed ensign in an independent company in the British army, and on 18 March 1794 he became a lieutenant in the 85th foot. He exchanged, on 27 August 1794, into the 5th dragoon guards, went to the Netherlands, and served through the two unsuccessful campaigns of 1794 and 1795, in the Netherlands and Germany. He then took part in an expedition to San Domingo (1796-8). On 21 September 1796 he transferred to the 21st light dragoons, in which regiment he remained until 21 September 1804, when he was appointed major in the Royal Fusiliers. He acted as major of brigade at Portsmouth from 1800 to 1804, and from 1807 to 1809 held the post of assistant adjutant-general at the Horse Guards. He received the brevet of lieutenant-colonel on 16 April 1807, and on 4 June 1813 was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the 22nd light dragoons. He had the brevet of colonel in the army on 4 June 1814. 
Pritzler then went to India with his regiment. On the outbreak of the Third Anglo-Maratha War in 1817, he was given the rank of brigadier-general, and ordered to pursue the peshwa on the latter's flight from Poona on 16 November 1817. On 8 January 1818, with a force partly European and partly Indian, he came upon a large enemy force close to Satara, where they had been left to cover the peshwa's retreat. Pritzler attacked and dispersed them, and continued his pursuit, marching rapidly southwards in co-operation with Brigadier-General Smith. He came up with the peshwa's rearguard on 17 January, near Meritch, and severely defeated them. 
Pritzler was for a time employed in the movement against the smaller fortresses in the southern Maratha districts. He was ordered to press the siege of Sinhgarh, which surrendered, after a short resistance, on 2 March 1818. He was then ordered to reduce to obedience the country in the vicinity of Satara. His chief achievement in this district was the capture of Vasota, a fort situated in an almost impregnable position of the Western Ghats. The siege began on 11 March, and ended in unconditional surrender on 5 April. Pritzler then marched south and joined Colonel Thomas Munro on 22 April at Nagar-Manawali. The united British force now moved across the Sena River to the siege of Sholapur, the peshwa's last great stronghold in the southern districts. On 10 May two columns, under Colonel Hewitt, advanced to the assault. Pritzler, with a reserve force, stood by to offer support. The Maratha commander, Ganpat Rao, moved round to the east side of the town with the object of taking the assailants in flank. The Marathas were checked and driven back in disorder by Pritzler, which contributed to the speedy capture of the town that day. The Maratha garrison, about 7000 strong, tried to escape. Pritzler, however, pursued, came up with them on the banks of the Sena, and inflicted upon them so crushing a defeat that they ceased to exist as an organized force. Pritzler was made a KCB on 3 December 1822. He died suddenly at Boulogne on 12 April 1839. 


@@@@@


doc= 22828


Probert, William (1790-1870), Unitarian minister, was born on 11 August 1790 at Painscastle, Radnorshire, where his parents farmed a small freehold. He was brought up by two bachelor uncles who intended that he take orders in the Church of England, but he became a Wesleyan Methodist, serving as a local preacher in Bolton, Leeds, and Liverpool, and in Staffordshire. In 1814 he married Margaret Carr (1790/91-1866) of Broxton, Cheshire, with whom he had six children. 
In 1815, while stationed at Alnwick in Northumberland, through the influence of William Turner (1761-1859), minister at Newcastle, Probert adopted Unitarian views. He was appointed in 1821 to the Unitarian chapel at Walmsley, near Bolton, Lancashire. Probert found the place encumbered with debt and the people disheartened and scattered. He succeeded in gathering around him a loyal congregation, to which he ministered for nearly fifty years; Walmsley Chapel was commonly known in the district as 'old Probert's chapel'. He often went on foot to conduct Sunday evening services at other chapels in the neighbourhood. 
Probert was a man with a good sense of humour and eccentric habits. He noted that, for reasons of conscience, he had sacrificed the prospect of attending Oxford and proudly avowed that he was self-educated. His knowledge of Hebrew was extensive: he published a favourably noticed grammar (1832), a lexicon (1850), and 'The Laws of Hebrew Poetry' (1860). But his greatest interest and mastery lay in the Welsh language. He published 'The Godolin, being Translations from the Welsh' (1820) and 'The Ancient Laws of Cambria' (1823), and his historical essay on Flintshire castles was awarded a medal at the Denbigh Eisteddfod in 1828. He also wrote a history of Walmsley Chapel, which appeared in the 'Christian Reformer' in 1834. He died at Dimple, Turton, on 1 April 1870 and was buried on 7 April in the graveyard attached to his chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 22829


Probus (fl. 9th-11th cent.), writer, was the author of a life of St Patrick, which has been attributed to various dates in the period between the mid-ninth century and the eleventh. About eighty per cent of the text of the life is based on that by Muirchu, plus material from Patrick's own 'Confessio' and the 'Collectanea' of Tirechan (though neither of these works was necessarily known to Probus). The author names himself as Probus in the final chapter of the life, in which he also mentions a 'frater', Paulinus, who seems to have requested the writing of the work. Although long known only through the sixteenth-century edition by Johann Herwagen of Basel (based on a lost manuscript), two copies have more recently come to light: an Italian manuscript of the eleventh or twelfth century in the Capitular Archives of the cathedral of Pistoia, near Florence; and the 'Passional' of Boddeken in Westphalia, dated to between about 1454 and 1459, now known only through later copies. Also, some eleventh-century glosses on Muirchu's life in Vienna, Nationalbibliothek, MS ser. nov. 3642, seem to attest to an indirect tradition of parts of that by Probus. 
The identity, date, and context for Probus have all been matters of uncertainty. Father John Colgan (died 1658) suggested that Probus was an Irishman; and, having identified his friend Paulinus with Mael Poil mac Ailella (died 922), abbot of Int Ednen, near Slane in Meath, he suggested that Probus himself was Coenechair (Coinecan), lector at Slane, who was killed by vikings in 950. However, the manuscript tradition of the life may suggest that the author was based on the continent, and Jean Mabillon, the seventeenth-century founder of modern diplomatic, identified Probus with the Irish monk Probus Scottus of Mainz (and perhaps previously at Rheims), whose death is recorded for 25 June 859. This Probus is addressed in a poem by Walahfrid Strabo of Reichenau, from whom he had requested various Latin texts via an intermediary called 'Chronmal' (or Cronmael in Irish), and his scholarly pursuits (including a liking for Virgil and Cicero) are mentioned in two letters by Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres. However, the number of errors in the life may indicate that the Mainz scholar could not have been the author, and the relative ignorance of Irish topography may indicate that the author was not an Irishman. Indeed, the change of Muirchu's phrase 'our sea' for the Irish Sea into 'the western sea' suggests that he was from Britain, either a Briton or an Anglo-Saxon; and the apparent use of the name Scottia for Scotland, not attested before 'c'.975, may indicate a date in the late tenth or, probably, the eleventh century for the work, if the relevant passage is not a later interpolation. Accordingly, it has even been suggested that Probus and his friend Paulinus were English monks associated with Glastonbury Abbey, which had a strong interest in the cult of St Patrick. However, the matter remains uncertain. 


@@@@@


doc= 22830


Proby, Granville Leveson, third earl of Carysfort (1781-1868), naval officer, was the third son of John Joshua Proby, first earl of Carysfort (1751-1828), and his first wife, Elizabeth (died 1783), only daughter of Sir William Osborne, bt, of Newtown, co. Tipperary. He was educated at Rugby School (1792-8), and was aged seventeen, somewhat older than was usual, when he entered the navy in March 1798 on the 'Vanguard', with Captain Edward Berry, and Rear-Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson. He was at the battle of the Nile, and following Berry to the 'Foudroyant', took part in the blockade of Malta and in the capture of the 'Genereux' on 18 February 1800, and of the 'Guillaume Tell' on 31 March 1800. In 1801, still in the 'Foudroyant', then the flagship of Lord Keith, he was at the operations on the Egyptian coast. He afterwards served in the frigates 'Santa Teresa' and 'Resistance', and in 1803-4 in the 'Victory', Nelson's flagship in the Mediterranean. On 24 October 1804 he was promoted lieutenant of the frigate 'Narcissus' and in May 1805 was appointed to the 'Neptune' and took part in the battle of Trafalgar. On 15 August 1806, through his father's friends' influence, he was promoted to command the sloop 'Bergere', and on 28 November 1806 was posted to the 'Madras' (54 guns). In 1807 he commanded the frigate 'Juno' (32 guns) in the Mediterranean; in 1808-9 the 'Iris' (32 guns) in the North Sea and the Baltic; in 1813-14 the 'Laurel' (38 guns), at the Cape of Good Hope; and in 1815-16 the 'Amelia' (38 guns) in the Mediterranean. 
On 5 April 1818 Proby married Isabella (died 1836), daughter of Hugh Howard, a younger son of the first countess of Wicklow. They had four sons and four daughters. From February 1816 to June 1829 he was whig MP for co. Wicklow, where his family had a significant interest. Supported by the dominant interest of William, fourth Earl Fitzwilliam, Proby was elected 'in absentia' and unopposed, while at sea. He reportedly did not speak in the house and voted with the Grenvillite opposition and for Roman Catholic relief. 
Proby had no further service afloat, but became in due course rear-admiral on 23 November 1841, vice-admiral on 16 June 1851, and admiral on 9 July 1857. He succeeded as third earl of Carysfort on the death, on 11 June 1855, of his brother John, second earl ('b'. 1780). Proby died on 3 November 1868 at his seat, Elton Hall, Huntingdonshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 22831


Proby, John, first Baron Carysfort (1720-1772), politician, was born on 25 November 1720 in Stamford, Lincolnshire, the eldest son of the six children of John Proby (died 1762), politician, of Elton Hall, Huntingdonshire, and his wife, the Hon. Jane Leveson-Gower (died 1726), the younger daughter of John Leveson-Gower, first Baron Gower. He was educated at Westminster School in 1736 and the following year entered Jesus College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1741 and MA in 1742. At the general election in June 1747 he was returned on the Sandwich interest to the House of Commons for Stamford. He married, on 27 August 1750, the Hon. Elizabeth Allen ('bap'. 1722, died 1783), the elder daughter and coheir of Joshua, second Viscount Allen, and his wife, Margaret Du Pass; they had two children. On 23 January 1752 he was created Baron Carysfort of Carysfort in the county of Wicklow, in the Irish peerage. 
In May 1754 Carysfort was elected MP for Huntingdonshire, and he continued to represent that county until the dissolution in March 1768. He was also the grand master of freemasons from 1752 to 1754. He took his seat in the Irish House of Lords on 7 October 1755 and was subsequently admitted to the Irish privy council. He was one of the lords of the Admiralty from April to July 1757. In 1758 he was chosen chairman of the two select committees appointed to inquire into the laws relating to the standards of weights and measures. He was invested a knight of the Bath on 23 March 1761, and was installed on 26 May following. He moved the address in the House of Commons at the opening in November 1762, and on 1 January 1763 was reappointed a lord of the Admiralty, a post which he resigned in August 1765. 
Carysfort's final years were tainted by rumours of debts and sexual philandering. It was reported that he had wasted an 'enormous expense in kept women' ('Mrs Montagu', 1.150). He died at Lille, France, on 18 October 1772, aged fifty-one, and was buried at Elton, Huntingdonshire. His widow died in March 1783. They were survived by both their children: John Joshua Proby (1751-1828) also pursued a political career and was created earl of Carysfort in August 1789; and Elizabeth (1752-1808) married Thomas James Storer (died 1792). 


@@@@@


doc= 22832


Proby, John Joshua, first earl of Carysfort (1751-1828), politician, was born on 12 August 1751, the only son of John Proby, first Baron Carysfort in the peerage of Ireland (1720-1772), politician, and his wife, the Hon. Elizabeth Allen ('bap'. 1722, died 1783), elder daughter of Joshua Allen, second Viscount Allen, and Margaret Du Pass. He was educated at Westminster School ('c'.1764- 'c'.1767) and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated MA in 1770. He succeeded his father as second Baron Carysfort on 18 October 1772, and took his seat on 12 October 1773 in the Irish House of Lords, where he soon became a prominent debater. On 19 March 1774 he married Elizabeth Osborne (died 1783), daughter of Sir William Osborne, eighth baronet, MP, of Newtown, co. Tipperary, and Elizabeth Christmas. They had three sons and two daughters. 
On 2 March 1780 Carysfort joined Lord Charlemont and others in protesting against the address, and in February 1780 he wrote a letter 'to the gentlemen of the Huntingdonshire committee', which was subsequently printed and distributed by the Society of Constitutional Information, advocating the shortening of parliaments, a fuller representation of the people, and 'a strict oeconomy of the public treasure'. He intended to contest the University of Cambridge at the general election in that year, but he did not go to the poll. He was elected a knight of St Patrick on 5 February 1784, and installed in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, on 11 August 1800. Carysfort opposed the Fox-North coalition in 1783, even though he had previously been leader of the administration in the Irish House of Lords. He rejected a peerage from the Foxite whigs, but accepted an offer from the duke of Rutland, Pitt's viceroy in Ireland. His political allegiance was confirmed by his second marriage, on 12 April 1787, to Elizabeth Grenville (1756-1842), daughter of George Grenville and Elizabeth Wyndham (died 1769) and sister of the marquess of Buckingham, the new lord lieutenant, and of William Grenville, Pitt's foreign secretary. Henceforward, he was a steadfast supporter of Pitt and Grenville. On 16 February 1789 he protested against the opposition address to the prince of Wales requesting him to exercise the royal authority in Ireland during the king's illness. As a reward for his support of the lord lieutenant's policy he was appointed, on 15 July, joint guardian and keeper of the rolls in Ireland, and was sworn a member of the Irish privy council. On 20 August 1789, in fulfilment of an engagement by the previous viceroy, the duke of Rutland, he was created earl of Carysfort in the peerage of Ireland at his wife's insistence, after Buckingham had persuaded him to withdraw his pretensions. 
Carysfort was ambitious to follow his father as member for Huntingdonshire, but the representation of the county was monopolized by Lord Sandwich and the duke of Manchester and he had to settle for the purchase of a seat at East Looe, Cornwall, in 1790 on the recommendation of Buckingham. When parliament was dissolved at the end of the session, he was nominated by Lord Exeter for the borough of Stamford as a compensation for not 'disturbing the peace' of Huntingdonshire by challenging the predominant interests (HoP, 'Commons'). He continued to represent Stamford until he was made a peer of the United Kingdom. In April 1791 he supported Wilberforce's motion for the abolition of the slave trade, and he opposed Fox's amendment to the address on 14 December 1792, declaring that, though a friend to moderate reform, he would have no truck with French extremism. He warmly advocated the claims of the Irish Roman Catholics, who had 'the same interests as the protestants, and ought to have the same privileges', as a reward for their loyalty to the existing orders (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 30.78-9). He supported the address to the king in November 1797, and maintained that the French government was founded on a system of 'monstrous ambition and exorbitant pretensions' which were 'hostile to the re-establishment of tranquillity' (ibid., 33.1017-18). 
Carysfort was in Ireland when the rising broke out in 1798. He declared that the time was ripe for a union of Great Britain and Ireland, and on 21 April 1800 he described Pitt's measure as 'wise, politic, and advantageous to the two countries' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 35.83). He expected a British peerage in return for his support, and he duly received a United Kingdom barony as Baron Carysfort of Norman Cross, Huntingdonshire, on 21 January 1801. He took his seat in the Lords on 27 November 1802. Meanwhile, Grenville had sent him as envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to Berlin on 24 May 1800, a post which he retained until October 1802. He supported Grenville after the latter's resignation from office with Pitt and continued to do so for the remainder of his career. On 20 January 1805 he attacked the foreign policy of Pitt's second ministry, and moved an amendment to the address, but was defeated by fifty-three votes. 
On the formation of the 'ministry of all the talents' in February 1806 Carysfort was sworn of the privy council (12 February) and became joint postmaster-general (20 February). On 18 June he was further appointed a member of the Board of Trade, and on 16 July, a commissioner of the board of control. He resigned these three offices on the accession of the duke of Portland to power in the spring of the following year. He signed a protest against the bombardment of Copenhagen on 3 March 1808. He retained his interest in Ireland and on 31 January 1812 he spoke in favour of Lord Fitzwilliam's motion for the consideration of the state of Irish affairs. He supported the second reading of the 'Preservation of the Peace in Ireland Bill', but spoke at length against the Irish 'Seditious Meetings Bill' in July 1814. He spoke for the last time in the House of Lords on 23 November 1819. 
Carysfort, who wrote a pamphlet on parliamentary reform, published in 1783, and a collection of poems and dramatic works, was 'esteemed a good and elegant scholar', but as a speaker 'his utterance is disagreeably slow, tedious and hesitating, perpetually interrupted by the interjections Ah! Ah!' (GEC, 'Peerage', 3.71). He died at his house in Upper Grosvenor Street, London, on 7 April 1828, aged seventy-six. He was buried in Elton church, Huntingdonshire, where a tablet was erected to his memory. His second wife survived him and died at Huntercombe, near Maidenhead, on 21 December 1842, aged eighty-six. Of the five children from his first marriage, his eldest son, William Allen, Viscount Proby, MP for Buckingham from 1802 to 1804, was a naval captain and died of yellow fever at Surinam on 6 August 1804 while commanding the frigate 'Amelia'. His second son, John Proby, a general in the army, succeeded as second earl of Carysfort, and died unmarried and insane on 11 June 1855, when the title passed to his younger brother, Granville Leveson Proby, third earl of Carysfort (1781-1868), a naval officer. 


@@@@@


doc= 22833


Probyn, Sir Edmund (1678-1742), judge, was born at Newland, in the Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire, and was baptized there on 16 July 1678. He was the elder of the two sons of William Probyn of Newland and his wife, Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Edmund Bond of Walford, Herefordshire, and widow of William Hopton of Huntley, Gloucestershire. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 23 April 1695, entered the Middle Temple on 27 November 1695, and was called to the bar on 15 May 1702. In 1720 he married Elizabeth (died 1749), daughter of Sir John Blencowe, justice of the common pleas. They had no children. 
Probyn was appointed second justice of the Brecon, Glamorgan, and Radnor circuit in 1721, and became a serjeant-at-law on 27 January 1724. It was he who defended the lord chancellor, Thomas Parker, first earl of Macclesfield, when he was impeached for embezzling chancery funds, but despite his able defence, Macclesfield was found guilty and sent to the Tower until he paid his $30,000 fine. Probyn succeeded Sir Littleton Powys as judge of the king's bench on 3 November 1726, was knighted on 8 November, and succeeded Sir John Comyns as lord chief baron of the exchequer on 24 November 1740. 
Probyn died on 17 May 1742, and was buried in Newland church. He left his estates in Gloucestershire to his nephew, John Hopkins, of Lincoln's Inn, provided that he took the name of Probyn. 


@@@@@


doc= 22834


Procter, Adelaide Anne (1825-1864), poet and women's activist, the eldest daughter and first child of the poet Bryan Waller Procter (1787-1874) and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Skepper (1799-1888), was born on 30 October 1825 at 25 Bedford Square, London, where her parents lived with Basil Montagu and his wife, Anna, Ann's stepfather and mother. She grew up in a household where 'everybody of any literary pretension whatever seemed to flow in and out' of her mother's literary salon (Belloc, 162). She was close to her father; Jane Brookfield wrote of Bryan Procter's attachment to his 'bright, enthusiastic daughter', and of father and daughter 'with critical approbation' admiring each other's work (Brookfield and Brookfield, 460-61). According to Charles Dickens, Adelaide Procter showed an early appreciation of poetry, and also a great facility for learning languages (French, Italian, and German), and for Euclidean geometry, music, and drawing. Nathaniel P. Willis described her as 'a beautiful girl, delicate, gentle, and pensive', looking as if she 'knew she was a poet's child' ('Pencillings by the Way', 1835). 
Adelaide Procter's first published poem was 'Ministering Angels', which appeared in 'Heath's Book of Beauty' in 1843, but her poetical career was established in 1853 when she began a long connection with Charles Dickens's periodical 'Household Words'. She submitted her poems under the pseudonym Mary Berwick, lest Dickens, who was a friend of her father's, print them 'for papa's sake, and not for their own' (Dickens). Dickens, however, admired the poems, and in December 1854, after he had shown Adelaide's mother a proof of the poem 'The Sailor Boy', Adelaide revealed her true identity. She became Dickens's most published poet, with seventy-three poems published in 'Household Words' and seven in 'All the Year Round'. In 1858 a first series of her 'Legends and Lyrics' was published by Bell and Daldy, and was followed in 1861 by a second series. Both series were posthumously published in a single volume in 1866, with an introduction by Dickens. According to Coventry Patmore, demand for her poetry was greater than for any other English poet with the exception of Tennyson. Some of her poems were widely sung as hymns in the latter half of the nineteenth century; undoubtedly the most famous of her lyrics was 'A Lost Chord', set to music by Sir Arthur Sullivan in 1877. Her poetry was translated into German and published in America. Individual poems appeared in the 'Cornhill Magazine', 'Good Words', and the 'English Woman's Journal'. 
The first series of 'Legends and Lyrics' was dedicated to Matilda Hays (1820-1897), at this time living in a 'female marriage' with the American actress Charlotte Cushman and for whom Adelaide Procter cherished an intense friendship. The friendship with Hays reflected Procter's involvement with the Langham Place circle ['see 'Langham Place group] which was dedicated to improving conditions for women. Procter had been one of the original students at Queen's College in Harley Street in 1850, and had been a childhood friend of Bessie Rayner Parkes, a leading figure among the Langham Place group. At the end of the decade she was involved in the foundation of both the 'English Woman's Journal' (1858) and the Society for the Promotion of the Employment of Women (1859). Her work for the society, which sought to create employment for middle-class women, involved visiting work places, including a watchmaking factory in Christchurch, Dorset, where women dominated the workforce. In 1861 she edited 'Victoria regia', a collection of poetry and prose intended to demonstrate the work and skills of the Victoria Press, which was run by Emily Faithfull to provide work for women as compositors. In the following year her collection of religious lyrics, 'A Chaplet of Verses', was published for the benefit of the Providence Row night refuge for women and children, a Catholic organization in east London founded by Daniel Gilbert; Procter had converted to Roman Catholicism about 1851, and Gilbert was her confessor. Adelaide Procter had always been delicate, and in 1862 her health began to fail as tuberculosis developed. She tried the cure at Malvern, but after some fifteen months bedridden she died on 2 February 1864 at 32 Weymouth Street, London, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Dickens wrote in his tribute in the 1866 edition of her poetry that 'she was a finely sympathetic woman, with a great accordant heart and a sterling noble nature', also noting that 'she was exceedingly humorous, and had a great delight in humour'. Procter's poetry, which often reflected the concerns of the Langham Place circle with the position of the single woman, was much neglected in the twentieth century until the 1980s, when her work began to receive critical attention, and several of her poems were anthologized. Isobel Armstrong drew attention to her 'magnificently humane lyrics on the Crimean War', and to some of her finest verses, including 'Unexpressed', 'Words', and 'A Lost Chord'. Commentators have applauded the originality of Adelaide Procter's poetry, while some have noted her unconventional treatment of women's sexuality in lyrics such as 'Three Roses' and in 'A Legend of Provence', a narrative poem concerning a nun who leaves her convent with a knight, but who is totally absolved of her sins and received back into her religious community. Some of the narrative poems, for example 'The Angel's Story', 'A Legend of Bregenz', 'A Tomb in Ghent', and 'The Story of a Faithful Soul', provide poignant, dramatic, and disturbing accounts of homelessness, exile, and displacement. She also wrote 'Adventures of your Own Correspondents in Search of Solitude', a humorous and ironic account of a journey to the Lake District made by herself and a woman friend identified as 'A' (possibly Annie Leigh Smith), and a life of the French 'saloniere' Juliette Recamier ('English Woman's Journal', 4-6, 1859-61). 


@@@@@


doc= 22835


Procter, Bryan Waller (1787-1874), poet and lawyer, the eldest child of Nicholas Procter (died 1816) and his wife, Amelia (died 1837), was born on 21 November 1787 and named after a great-uncle from whom an inheritance was expected. His ancestors were small farmers in Yorkshire or Cumberland, but his father moved to London and set up in trade. He may have been the Nicholas Procter who dealt in wine and brandy at 241 Piccadilly between 1799 and 1804; he was certainly a man of leisure and property when he died in 1816 at Gloucester Place, Camden Town. The Procters' other children were Margaret (died in or before 1867) and Nicholas ('b'. 1802), who inherited the landed estate in Yorkshire of their great-uncle Bryan Waller and changed his surname from Procter to Waller in 1816. 
Procter was educated at, successively, a dame-school in Finchley, a small boarding-school perhaps at Acton, and Harrow School. He entered Harrow in Lent term 1801, spent about three years there, and acquired some skill at football, cricket, fives, and marbles alongside a modicum of classical education. He was then articled for about three years to a solicitor, Nathaniel Atherton of Calne, Wiltshire, before moving to London about 1807 and concluding his law studies. He was admitted to chancery as a solicitor in summer 1811 and practised in various partnerships in Brunswick Square (1812-19) and in Gray's Inn Place (1819-23). By his father's will, proved on 23 February 1816, he obtained about $500 per annum as a share of the rentals of four houses in Jermyn Street, whereupon he briefly became a dandy; he also took boxing lessons from Tom Cribb, though a lightweight. Procter had a 'slight neat figure, vigorous for his size' and a 'fine genially rugged little face' (Carlyle, 1.223). 
From 1815 Procter contributed poems to many journals using various pen-names but eventually fixing upon Barry Cornwall. He became a close friend of Leigh Hunt, Charles Lamb, and William Hazlitt, and over the years became acquainted with most of the best writers in London. He had a genius for friendship, being a man of great kindness and generous appreciation, 'a man whom everybody loves' ('Henry Crabb Robinson', 2.548), and an excellent host. He was a good talker, but in five volumes published over four years he never found a poetic voice of his own. His pseudo-Jacobean playlets in 'Dramatic Scenes and other Poems' (1819) are modelled on Lamb's 'Specimens of the English Dramatic Poets'. In 'A Sicilian Story, with Diego de Montilla, and other Poems' (1820) the first title-poem imitates Hunt and the second unwisely attempts to imitate Procter's old Harrovian schoolfellow Lord Byron. 'Marcian Colonna, an Italian Tale, with Three Dramatic Scenes, and other Poems' (1820) mostly echoes Hunt. Procter's only full-length play, the blank-verse tragedy of 'Mirandola', is Jacobean pastiche again, but it ran for sixteen nights at Covent Garden in 1821, and, with three printed editions that year, earned $630 for the author. A third volume of mostly Huntian narrative verse, 'The Flood of Thessaly, The Girl of Provence, and other Poems' (1823) was damned by 'Blackwood's' as Greekish cockney. 
Marriage and financial need, probably more than bad reviews, stemmed the flood of poetry. On 7 October 1824 Procter married Ann Benson Skepper (1799-1888), the daughter of Thomas Skepper of York (deceased), and his wife, Anna Dorothea, 'nee' Benson, now married to the distinguished lawyer and legal writer Basil Montagu (1770-1851) and hostess to a brilliant literary salon at 25 Bedford Square. The newly-weds had a cheese-paring honeymoon, lived for some months at 14 Southampton Row, and then moved in with the Montagus at Bedford Square; they remained there for seven years with their growing family (four daughters and two sons) while Procter, with Montagu's help, cultivated a practice in conveyancing and read for the bar. He entered Gray's Inn on 5 May 1826 and was admitted barrister on 4 May 1831. He continued to write occasional poems and prose essays for journals and published 'English Songs, and other Small Poems' (1832), a collection of melodious but trite lyrics mostly written ten or more years earlier, but otherwise was 'altogether abandoned to law', as he complained to Leigh Hunt in 1826 (Mayer, 561). In 1832 he was appointed a metropolitan commissioner of lunacy with a stipend of $800 per annum (increased to $1500 with a greater workload in 1845), and removed his family from the Montagus' grand house to a little Gothic cottage at 5 Grove End Road, St John's Wood. His young son Edward died of scarlet fever in 1836 and his mother died in 1837, leaving Procter nearly $800 in bank annuities. 
Apart from revised and enlarged editions of 'English Songs' and 'Dramatic Scenes', Procter's new books after the creative burst between 1819 and 1823 were all in prose, some of them little better than hack work. They included letterpress for engraved portraits in 'Effigies poeticae' (1824) and 'Tableaux of National Character' (1837), a preface to 'Melanie and other Poems' (1835) by the flamboyant American Nathaniel Parker Willis, and memoirs of Ben Jonson and Shakespeare in editions of their works (1838 and 1843). Procter's longest prose work, 'The Life of Edmund Kean' (1835), was justifiably damned in 'Blackwood's' and the 'Quarterly Review'. His circle of friends expanded to embrace many younger writers, notably Thomas Lovell Beddoes, Charles Dickens, William Makepeace Thackeray, Coventry Patmore, and, especially, Robert Browning and John Forster. Among the dedications he received were those of Browning's 'Columbe's Birthday' (1844) and Thackeray's 'Vanity Fair' (1848). 
Procter continued his conveyancing business at 4 Gray's Inn Square, where Alexander Kinglake, Patmore, and Eliot Warburton were among his pupils, and as lunacy commissioner expended much time and energy inspecting asylums all over England, attending meetings, and making reports. Mary Lamb, the sister of his dear, dead friend, was one of the patients he helped. He wrote to Leigh Hunt in 1840 of 'being stupid and exhausted, as I am nine nights out of ten, owing to my sitting up (at work) till three or four o'clock in the morning' (Mayer, 562), and it was during journeys between asylums that he acquired the habit of sleeping in company. 
In 1843 the Procters moved to 13 Upper Harley Street and in 1853 to 32 Weymouth Street. At both houses Procter's sociable and talented wife's 'tremendous energy and genius for gossip made her a hostess of distinction' ('Letters and Private Papers of... Thackeray', 1.cliii), so that the Procters' parties became a long-lived institution of literary London. Procter received a legacy of $6500 from his friend John Kenyon (died 1856), but it seems that he lost heavily on some American state loan that was repudiated at the time of the civil war and had to sell a much admired collection of Italian masters. In February 1861 he relinquished office as lunacy commissioner and was awarded a pension of $625 per annum. His close friend John Forster succeeded him as commissioner and helped him complete two last tributes to literary friendships, 'Selections from Robert Browning' (1863) and 'Charles Lamb: a Memoir' (1866). 
Procter was now in the 'dark desert' of old age (Chorley, 2.241). His eldest child, Adelaide Anne Procter, died in 1864, having eclipsed his poetical reputation with her 'Legends and Lyrics', and his only surviving son, Montagu, was an army officer in India. By 1867 Procter was suffering from the prostate gland; by 1868 his speech was impaired, he was partly paralysed by a stroke, and could venture out only in an invalid's chair, but he could still read without spectacles. He died of 'paralysis' (presumably a stroke) on 4 October 1874 (three days short of his golden wedding anniversary) at 32 Weymouth Street and was buried two days later in St Marylebone cemetery, East Finchley. 
Procter's widow continued the literary salon until she died in 1888, having survived all her children but one daughter. With Coventry Patmore she edited Procter's 'An Autobiographical Fragment and Biographical Notes' (1877). It was prefaced by verse tributes from Walter Savage Landor ('b'. 1775) and Algernon Swinburne (died 1909), testifying to the range and endurance of Procter's friendships. 


@@@@@


doc= 22836


Procter, Richard Wright (bap. 1816, d. 1881), author, son of Thomas Procter (died 1823), of Paradise Vale, Salford, and his wife, Isabella Wright (died 1825), was born at Paradise Vale and baptized in Salford on 19 December 1816. His parents were poor and his education sporadic. After his father's death in 1823 his mother made a vain attempt to gain him entrance to Chetham Hospital school. Shortly afterwards he was orphaned at the age of nine. He was apprenticed to a barber, David Dodd of Angel Meadow, and later set up in business as a barber at 133 Long Millgate, Manchester, where he was to remain for the rest of his life. In 1845 he purchased a circulating library which he ran from his shop. In 1840 he married Eliza Waddington; they had five sons. 
During his youth Procter acquired a great hunger for literature and bought many books in spite of his poverty. His early attempts at poetry were published in the 'Manchester and Salford Advertiser'. He adopted the 'non de plume' of Sylvan. In 1842 he was associated with Samuel Bamford, J. C. Prince, J. B. Rogerson, and other local poets in meetings held at an inn, afterwards called the 'Poet's Corner'; he contributed to a volume of verse entitled 'The Festive Wreath', which was based on these gatherings. Several of his poems were also published in 'City Muse' (1853), edited by William Reid. His other contributions to poetry include a volume of poetical selections published in 1855, of which the first and last poems are by himself, and 'Literary Reminiscences and Gleanings' (1860), devoted mainly to Lancashire poets. He published two works based on his own experiences at work, 'The Barber's Shop' (1856) and 'Our Turf, our Stage and our Ring' (1862), written from knowledge gained from his customers during his apprenticeship. His most important works were, however, historical in nature: 'Memorials of Manchester Streets' (1874) and 'Memorials of Bygone Manchester' (1880), which were originally published as serials in the 'Manchester Guardian'. 
By nature a shy man, in later years Procter became a literary recluse, yet he was said, when his shyness was overcome, to be full of geniality, curious information, and gentle humour. He died at home at 133 Long Millgate, Manchester, on 11 September 1881, and was buried at St Luke's, Cheetham Hill. 


@@@@@


doc= 22837


Proctor, John (1521-1558), schoolmaster and author, was born in Somerset and matriculated as of that county at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in January 1537, being described as sixteen years and nine months old. He graduated BA on 20 October 1540 and was immediately elected to a fellowship at All Souls College, suggesting a successful undergraduate career. He proceeded MA on 9 February 1545 and resigned his fellowship in 1546. This may have been on account of a reluctance to take orders, connected with a desire to marry. It is not known what Proctor did after leaving Oxford. He would have found the regime of Edward VI distasteful, and may well have served as tutor in some conservative household. In 1549 he published an attack on certain aspects of the protestant programme, entitled 'The Fall of the Late Arrian'. 
In 1553 Proctor was appointed as the first master of the newly founded Tonbridge School, and he continued to hold that post until his death in October or early November 1558. His will, which is dated 23 October, is a most interesting document. In it he requested burial in the chancel 'dyrectly where I use to sytt', and bequeathed vestments, a crucifix, and a corporas case to the church. At the same time the preamble bequeathed his soul 'unto almightie god thorough the passyon of whose deare sonne Jesus Chryst I do assuredly beleve that I shall enioye the merittes of heaven' -- which would normally be described as a protestant formula (CKS, MS DR6/pwr 12, fols. 328-9). His wife, Elizabeth, was named as sole executrix and residual legatee, and he made modest bequests to his sister, his brother William, and his godchildren. Twenty shillings were also set aside for a dole at his funeral, in the traditional manner. He was buried in the parish church at Tonbridge, probably on 3 November. According to the parish register, Elizabeth married Henry Stubberfield on 12 July 1559, two days before John's will was proved. There is no mention of children, but perhaps Elizabeth was pregnant at the time of his death, thereby accounting for the delay of probate. The poet Thomas Proctor is usually identified as his son. The John Proctor who was presented to the rectory of St Andrew's, Holborn, in 1578, and who died in the autumn of 1584, was clearly a different man. 
Proctor's chief claim to notice is his authorship of 'The Historie of Wyates Rebellion' (1554; 2nd edn, 1555). He was hostile to the rebels, representing them as covert heretics masquerading under a concern about the Spanish marriage. He was also very close to the events which he described, and his work has always been accepted as an informed source about the events of late January and early February 1554, particularly in Kent. If he wrote with any expectation of reward from the government, however, he seems to have been disappointed. In 1554 he also published a work of Catholic piety, entitled 'The Way Home to Christ and Truth', but this was not an original composition, being a translation of the fifth-century 'Liber de catholicae fidei antiquitate' by Vincent of Lerins. Although this is described as 'by the Queenes highnes authorised to be sette forthe', he seems to have received no reward for this work either. 


@@@@@


doc= 22838


Proctor, Richard Anthony (1837-1888), astronomer and science writer, was born on 23 March 1837 in Cheyne Row, Chelsea, London, the youngest of two sons and two daughters of William Proctor (died 1850), a successful solicitor, and his wife, Mary (died 'c'.1857). A delicate child, Richard was educated by his mother and 'lived much in his father's library' until his father's death when he was thirteen (Willard, 319). Proctor spent 1855 at King's College, London, graduating in 1856 with a BA in theology. He entered St John's College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in 1856, won a scholarship in 1857, and read mathematics and theology. Shortly after his mother's death during his second year there he met Mary Mills (died 1879), from near Dublin, and on 26 March 1860 they married in the parish church of St Mary Magdalene, Richmond. This was held responsible for his graduating below prediction as twenty-third wrangler that year. 
From soon after his marriage, for some years Proctor practised Roman Catholicism, but in 1875 he publicly declared that religion was irreconcilable with scientific facts. Meanwhile he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn. However, it was the life (and death) of his eldest son that shaped Proctor's career. J. P. Nichols's 'Architecture of the Heavens' and O. M. Mitchell's 'Popular Astronomy' had inspired him to equip himself to teach his son mathematics and astronomy and, in 1863, distraught at his son's death, Proctor abandoned law and immersed himself in astronomy. He made his own 3.5 inch refracting telescope, and in 1865 his first article was published. At his own expense he published 'Saturn and its System', an exhaustive monograph that had taken four years' work. Although commercially unsuccessful, those publications immediately established his reputation in astronomy. Then in 1866 he lost all his savings and incurred $13,000 of debt in the failure of a New Zealand bank, which left him dependent upon writing and teaching mathematics to support his family of three children. It took five years of grim struggle and entrepreneurial publishing risks to establish himself as a writer. 
Proctor had concluded that the only way to interest the public in astronomical research was to link the latter to their curiosity regarding the broader religious and intellectual debate about the plurality of life upon other worlds. His first major success was 'Other Worlds than Ours' (1870) which went to twenty-nine editions by 1909. This and subsequent works discussed the probability that the mixture of familiar and unfamiliar conditions and temperatures revealed by spectroscopic observations of planets and stars, and hence upon myriad unseen worlds, could support many forms of life. By 1875 he believed that life was much scarcer, as worlds evolved or depleted with time. Two lecture tours in America consolidated his success and influence. 
The death of Proctor's wife in 1879 left him with six children. Returning through America from a lecture tour of Australia and New Zealand, in 1881 Proctor met and married Sallie Duffield Crawley, 'nee' Thompson (1856-1941), the widow of Robert J. Crawley of Missouri, and keenly interested in astronomy, who had two young daughters. They lived at Kew until 1884, but lost their two infant sons. While living in Kew, in 1881 Proctor established a scientific weekly periodical, 'Knowledge and Illustrated Scientific News'. 
A man of unbounded energy and wide interests, Proctor's gifts of vivid clarity, lecturing style, and scientific exactness in writing on many subjects gained him renown. He wrote at least 500 essays, 83 technical astronomy papers, and 57 books. His 'Old and New Astronomy', a systematic work embodying his studies over a quarter century, was completed by his friend Arthur Cowper Ranyard in 1892. Between 1870 and 1914 'the impact of his publications was immense; thousands were introduced to astronomy by them' (Crowe, 548). 
Proctor was held in high esteem by contemporaries as an original investigator. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1866, to its council in 1868, was a secretary in 1872, and was a prolific contributor to its 'Monthly Notices'. Among papers on the distribution of stars and nebulae, perhaps his greatest scientific work resulted from the 400 hours copying Argelander's 324,198 stars on to an equal surface chart. By this, and well illustrated papers in 'Monthly Notices', contemporaries credited him with demolishing Sir William Herschel's theory of the stellar universe. Proctor showed that the aggregation of stars in the Milky Way was real, not merely optical. He urged others to study structure by observing small areas to fainter magnitudes, a precursor of Jacob Kapteyn's later work. In 1869 he was among the first to advocate the theory of the solar corona and inner solar envelope, although the trajectory of prominences which he explained by a resisting medium or ether is now known to be due to magnetic fields. His research deriving the rotation period of Mars within an error of 0.005 seconds was highly regarded, and is within 0.25 seconds of what later became the accepted value. Adept at charting, in 1870 he discovered the phenomenon of star drift. Proctor rightly dismissed the canals of Mars as an optical effect. Although prone to speculate, his wide knowledge and exact investigations gained him influence. 
Contemporary obituarists barely hinted that Proctor was one of several activists seeking reform of the Royal Astronomical Society council. He could not abide dogmatists, and was 'determined to oppose all cliquery and jobbery' ('Astronomical Register', 1873, 98). He made bitter enemies of Colonel Alexander Strange and J. Norman Lockyer by siding in 1872 with the astronomer royal George Airy in opposing their manoeuvres for a solar observatory at government expense. In November Lockyer resigned from council rather than sit at the same table as Proctor, who constantly attacked him in journals. Proctor had no hand in his own nomination in December 1873 for the society's gold medal, perhaps made partly to block Lockyer's third nomination. Despite his having obtained a simple majority of six to four council votes, Proctor bore Airy no animosity for vetoing him in January. In 1869 Proctor had questioned arrangements for the December 1874 transit of Venus. Lacking Airy's reply, in February 1873 Proctor used an article in the 'Spectator' and a letter in 'The Times' to criticize arrangements. Airy's reply to the Admiralty, printed in 'Monthly Notices' (1873), conceded nothing. In the same issue Proctor's exact calculations and clear charts in 'Monthly Notices' exposed errors, omissions, and neglect by Airy, the new KCB and president of the Royal Society, in planning for the transit. The Admiralty hydrographer supported Airy in 'The Times'. Unfortunately Proctor responded witheringly in a supplementary 'Monthly Notices' -- of which he was temporarily editor. Airy criticized him, and council viewed it as misuse of office. Proctor resigned his secretaryship in order to lecture in America. Through zeal and politics he had overreached himself. On his return, in May 1874, Proctor read a semi-apology to the society while Airy was in the chair. Proctor took no further active part in the society, but in 1880 did not hesitate to support the group led by William Noble in opposing Airy's nomination of William Huggins for the society medal; he ended a scathing attack in the 'Newcastle Weekly Chronicle' with 'to do the bidding of the Astronomer Royal is not the purpose for which the Astronomical Society has been established' ('Newcastle Weekly Chronicle', 28 Feb 1880). In 1887 Proctor predicted that the 36 inch Lick refractor was likely to prove a disappointment. Unwisely, the new director, E. S. Holden, extended his defence to a personal attack. Proctor exposed Holden's observing mistakes in Washington, with lasting damage to his reputation. 
A family man with many friends, Proctor in 1884 moved to Orange Lake, Florida, but isolation motivated the family's return to London. While travelling from Florida to England to give a lecture tour, on 10 September 1888 Proctor booked into a New York hotel. Suddenly taken violently ill, he was diagnosed as having yellow fever, then epidemic in Florida, and for fear of contagion he was removed on a windy and wet night. Twelve hours later, on the evening of 12 September 1888, Proctor died alone and unconscious at the Willard Parker Hospital. His friends later asserted that he had received little attention and had died of malarial fever compounded by a cold. Proctor was buried in an unmarked and unkept part of the undertaker's lot in Greenwood cemetery, Brooklyn. He had been unable to leave provision for his family. In 1893 a benefactor helped the family re-inter Proctor in the same cemetery, with a memorial. 
On hearing of her husband's death Sallie Proctor hurried to New York. She courageously fulfilled his English tour by reading his lectures to such effect that by the influence of many scientists she was awarded a civil-list pension of $100. Proctor was survived by two daughters and three sons. 


Sometimes known as the children's astronomer, Mary Proctor did little observing, but gained lasting reputation by her books (Creese, 238). From 1894 until about 1920 she lived in New York. Her first book, 'Stories of Starland' (1898), was used as a reader in New York schools; two more books followed in 1906 and 1911. Living in London after the First World War, she lectured and published thirteen books between 1922 and 1939. From January 1916 women were eligible for election as fellows of the RAS. Proctor was elected in February and her stepmother Sallie in May 1916. Proctor was also a fellow of the Royal Meteorological Society. She died at Nazareth House, East End Road, Finchley, Middlesex, on 11 September 1957 aged ninety-six; a crater on the moon bears her name. 


@@@@@


doc= 22839


Proctor, Thomas (fl. 1578-1584), poet, has usually been identified as the son of John Proctor, first master of Tonbridge School. But all that can be proved definitely about him is that he became apprenticed to John Allde, the printer, and was made a freeman of the Stationers' Company on 17 August 1584. 
The most important publication with which Proctor was involved is 'A gorgious gallery of gallant inventions... first framed and fashioned in sundry forms by divers worthy workemen of late dayes, and now joyned together and builded up by T.P.', a quarto printed by Richard Jones in 1578. Jones's entries in the Stationers' register show that this project had a complicated gestation, since 'R. Williams' was seemingly named as the compiler in an entry of 5 June 1577, and the book's title was changed from 'A Handful of Hidden Secrets' to 'Delicate Dainties to Sweeten a Lover's Lips Withal', before taking on its final form. As it is, the anthology begins with an address and a poem by Owen Roydon, an experienced compiler of miscellanies, and Hyder E. Rollins has plausibly argued that Proctor was called in to take over the project after Owen Roydon's death during the period when the book was being developed. The miscellany continues with unsigned poems from several hands, including Thomas Churchyard and Jasper Heywood, until page 100. The heading 'Proctor's Precepts' introduces another fifty-two pages of poems, of which ten are signed 'T. P.' As a poetical miscellany, it takes its place in the line that starts with Richard Tottell's in 1557: to modern readers, its most interesting individual item is 'The History of Pyramus and Thisbie Truly Translated', a translation which may possibly have given Shakespeare material for 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. 
Anthony Munday, who like Proctor was an apprentice of John Allde, wrote commendatory verses for 'A Gorgious Gallery', and in the following year, 1579, Proctor repaid the compliment in contributing commendatory verses to Munday's 'The Mirror of Mutability'. In the same year, both writers also provided commendatory verses for 'Newes from the North', by 'T. F.' 
Also probably by Proctor is a poem entitled 'The Triumph of Trueth, Manifesting the Advancement of Virtue and the Overthrow of Vice', published by T. P. This publication is not dated, and survives only in one incomplete fragment now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. A 'T. P.' also wrote a prose tract 'Of the Knowledge and Conduct of Warres, Two Bookes, Latelie Written and Sett Foorthe', licensed to Tottell in 1578. The tract is a collection of general and rather abstract advice on military matters, and once again it seems possible that its author was Proctor. 
Strangely, apart from the records above, there is no trace of Proctor having been involved in the printing of books. His career after 1584 remains obscure. It is possible, but unlikely, that he was the Thomas Proctor who wrote three Jacobean pamphlets, 'A Profitable Worke to the Whole Kingdome' (1610) and 'The Right of Kings' and 'The Righteous Man's Way' (both 1621). 


@@@@@


doc= 22840


Proctor, Thomas (1753-1794), history painter and sculptor, was born at Settle, Yorkshire, on 22 April 1753. His impoverished father apprenticed him to a tobacconist in Manchester, but he afterwards moved to London, and for a time worked in a merchant's counting-house. In 1777 he enrolled as a student at the Royal Academy Schools. Inspired by the works of James Barry, he painted a large picture, 'Adam and Eve', and in 1780 began to exhibit, sending a portrait to the Royal Academy, and another to the Incorporated Society of Artists. In 1782 he gained a premium at the Society of Arts, and a medal at the Royal Academy for life drawing. This early success continued when in 1783 he was awarded a silver medal at the Royal Academy for a model from life, and in 1784 the gold medal for history painting, the subject being a scene from Shakespeare's 'Tempest'. He then turned to modelling, and produced a statue, 'Ixion', which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1785, and was so highly praised by Benjamin West that it was bought by the art patron Sir Abraham Hume. He next modelled a group entitled 'The Death of Diomedes, King of Thrace', which was greatly admired at the academy in 1786, but not purchased. Bitterly disappointed, Proctor broke his work in pieces and abandoned sculpture. 
Proctor reverted to painting, but did not again exhibit until 1789, and then sent only a portrait; but in 1790 he contributed to the exhibition of the Society of Artists 'Coronis', a subject from Ovid's 'Metamorphoses', and to the Royal Academy 'Elisha and the Son of the Shunammite', and 'The Restoration of Day after the Fall of Phaethon', a sketch. In 1791 he exhibited at the academy 'Hannah Declines Accompanying her Husband to the Yearly Sacrifice', and in 1792 two portraits and a group in plaster, 'Peirithous, the Son of Ixion, Destroyed by Cerberus'. Three portraits and 'The Final Separation of Jason and Medea' were his exhibited works in 1793, and 'Venus Approaching the Island of Cyprus' in 1794. After 1790 Proctor exhibited without giving an address, and his abode was unknown to his contemporaries. West, then president of the Royal Academy, discovered that he had been living in London in miserable circumstances at Clare Market. West brought his case to the notice of the council of the Royal Academy, and in 1793 it was resolved that he should be sent to Italy as the travelling student, with a grant of $50 for preliminary expenses. Unfortunately the generous help came too late. Before he could leave England he was found dead in his bed, worn out by mental anguish and privation. He was buried in Hampstead churchyard on 13 July 1794. 


@@@@@


doc= 22841


Proud, Joseph (1745-1826), Swedenborgian preacher and hymn writer, was born at Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, on 22 March 1745, the son of John Proud (died 1784), a General Baptist minister, and his wife. He quickly entered the ministry, assisting his father at Wisbech, Cambridgeshire, in 1767, then at General Baptist churches at Knipton, Leicestershire (1772-5), and Fleet, Lincolnshire (1775-86). In 1786 he was called to a chapel in Ber Street, Norwich. By conviction a universalist, he was hostile to the growing evangelical New Connexion. Perhaps in search of a belief structure as appealing as the new Calvinism, he swung dramatically when he heard a Swedenborgian, J. W. Salmon, preach. 
Proud was expelled from the General Baptist conference in 1791, but in June 1790 he had moved to Birmingham to commence a Swedenborgian congregation there, occupying himself in the meantime by writing the first Swedenborgian hymnbook. In May 1791 he was ordained into the ministry of the New Jerusalem church, and in June a grand temple was opened with a flourish and some puzzled attention from Priestley and the Unitarians, but it was saved from burning in the church and king riots a month later only when Proud insisted on the patriotism of the congregation. This indeed was Proud's view; he was far from the radical experimentation of other early Swedenborgians, lacking the interest in the intricacies of Swedenborgian thought of other devoted followers, and feeling uneasy enough to abandon extemporaneous preaching on joining the sect. He wore robes to officiate as minister, but the grand temple had to be abandoned a year later when the society's sponsor defaulted. He was on friendly terms with the Unitarians and preached at their chapel in Warwick in 1792. After a brief ministry in Manchester in 1793-4 and a period of ministry in a humbler chapel in Paradise Street, Birmingham, he was invited by the 'high-church' Swedenborgians to form a London congregation for them in a chapel erected in Cross Street, Hatton Gardens, and then, after a dispute with the proprietors, moved to York Street, St James, drawing large and fashionable crowds with his blend of evangelical rhetoric, high-church ritual, and simplified Swedenborgian ideas. After 1813 his success faded. A much humbler chapel was hired in Lisle Street, Leicester Square, but soon after this in 1814 Proud retired to Birmingham. 
Proud was married twice; first on 3 February 1769, from which marriage he had eleven children, only two of whom survived, and second in 1785 to Susannah, a widow, who died on 21 November 1827; none of the three children from his second marriage lived beyond childhood. Proud died at Handsworth, Birmingham, on 3 August 1826, and was buried in St George's churchyard, Birmingham, on 20 August, when his funeral sermon was preached by Edward Madeley. Proud's success was typical of idiosyncratic preachers in the protestant world of London, the equivalent of the contemporary televangelists. 


@@@@@


doc= 22842


Prout, John (1810-1894), agriculturist, was born on 1 October 1810 at South Petherwin, near Launceston, Cornwall, the son of William Prout, farmer, and his wife (also his cousin), Tomazin Prout. John was educated at a school in Launceston. He gained practical experience of farming by working for his father. Dissatisfied with the position of a tenant farmer on the smallholdings of his native land, and with the antiquated restrictions of land tenure, he emigrated to Canada and purchased land at Pickering, Ontario, which he farmed from 1832 to 1842. Having married, about 1841, Sophia (died 1893), niece of Colonel Thomson of Aikenshaw, Toronto, Prout returned to England, and joined his uncle, Thomas Prout, a medicine vendor and performer, in business at 229 Strand, London. On the death of his uncle, Prout carried on the business. In 1861 he bought Blount's Farm, Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire, which he cultivated until June 1894. 
Prout helped to pioneer the adoption of scientific farming by his thirty-three years' successful cultivation of Blount's Farm, and his experience was valuable to agriculturists not only in Britain but also in other countries. His system was based on his Canadian experience and his study of Sir John Lawes's experimental plots at Rothamsted, Hertfordshire. He demonstrated that successive crops of cereals could be produced on land of heavy clay with the use of artificial fertilizer, if the soil was adequately drained and cultivated. In 1881 he published a report of his methods, entitled 'Profitable Clay Farming under a Just System of Tenant Right', which ran to several editions and was translated into French and German. His text helped to popularize the adoption of a more scientific approach to the problems of arable farming, particularly on heavy soils. 
Prout died while living with his married daughter at Wimbish vicarage, Saffron Walden, Essex, on 7 December 1894. His wife had died the previous year. 


@@@@@


doc= 22843


Prout, John Skinner (1806-1876), watercolour painter, was born at Plymouth in 1806, perhaps the son of Thomas Prout. Although a nephew of Samuel Prout (1783-1852), whose style he began by emulating, he was largely self-taught, perhaps because his uncle was then building his career in London. He was educated at Plymouth grammar school. In early life Prout moved to Bristol and produced topographical watercolours and architectural lithographs, notably the sets of the 'Antiquities of Chester' and 'Castles and Abbeys of Monmouthshire' (1838). In June and July 1833 he toured Wales and visited Dublin with Samuel Jackson and William James Muller, fellow members of the newly founded Bristol sketching club. Towards the end of the 1830s, however, he found himself in 'continued difficulties and harassment of mind' (Bonyhady, 44). He was elected to the New Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1838, but his membership lapsed after his departure for Sydney two years later. 
In Australia Prout shone as a painter, printmaker, teacher, and promoter of the fine arts, his greatest success coming after his move to Hobart, Tasmania, in 1843. There he built up a considerable teaching practice, and was on friendly terms with John Glover and his family: his sketch of the older artist asleep in a chair was used in Glover's obituary in the 'Art Journal' in July 1850. He also produced three volumes of lithographs of scenery around Sydney, Melbourne, Geelong, and Hobart, and he gave lectures and mounted exhibitions. In April 1848, after a farewell concert attended by the governor, he left Hobart for England. 
Prout was re-elected associate and member of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1849 and 1862 respectively, and he lived off Australian subject matter for a number of years. In 1850 his 'Dioramic Views Illustrative of Convict and Emigrant Life', accompanied by a publication with the same title, was shown in London, and two years later he produced a panorama, 'A Voyage to Australia and a Visit to the Gold Fields'. He had not himself visited the goldfields, and his two collaborators on the project had never even been to Australia. Probably his most notable works, in Tasmania and later, were of tree ferns, especially in the Valley of Ferns, near Hobart, which for picturesque effect he peopled with the Aborigines who had already been exiled to Flinders Island. His later style perhaps owes more to J. M. W. Turner, J. D. Harding, and his fellow members of the Bristol school of artists, than to his uncle. 
Prout returned to Bristol, but later moved permanently to London, where he died of kidney disease on 29 August 1876 at his home, 4 Leighton Crescent, Kentish Town; his brother Thomas, who lived in Plymouth, was with him. The date of his marriage and wife's name are unknown, but they had two daughters, Agnes and Mary, who each exhibited a sea-shore subject at the Society of British Artists in 1869. There was a studio sale at Christies on 26 February 1877. Sixty-three of Prout's paintings were used in E. C. Booth's 'Australia Illustrated' (1873-6), and in 1893 some of his Bristol drawings with letterpress descriptions were published as 'Picturesque Antiquities of Bristol'. In Australia the New South Wales and Tasmanian state galleries, the Mitchell Library and Dixson Gallery, Sydney, and the National Library, Canberra, have examples of his work. In Britain there are watercolours in the British and Victoria and Albert museums, and in provincial galleries at Bristol, Cambridge, Chester, Exeter, Leeds, Leicester, Newport, and Reading. 


@@@@@


doc= 22844


Prout, Samuel (1783-1852), watercolour painter, was born on 17 September 1783 at Trevil Street, Plymouth, Devon, the fourth of the fourteen children of Samuel Prout (1747-1823), a shopkeeper and naval outfitter, and his wife, Mary Cater. He was baptized at the Old Tabernacle in Plymouth but by 1810 had joined the Church of England, and he is recorded as a devout attender at St Mary's, Hastings, in the 1840s. Prout was educated at Plymouth grammar school, where he and the painter Benjamin Robert Haydon were encouraged to sketch by the headmaster, Dr Bidlake. He had some drawing lessons at this time from T. H. Williams, who anticipated an early speciality of west country cottage and village scenes. Thereafter he received no formal artistic training. 
In 1802 Prout moved to London, where he learned his trade in the circle of the antiquarian publisher John Britton. As one of Britton's team of illustrators, Prout contributed to the first volume of 'Architectural Antiquities of Great Britain' (4 vols., 1807-18). He formed his earliest drawing and tinted-wash style in the ambience of his fellow illustrators J. C. Smith, Frederick Nash, T. R. Underwood, Frederick Mackenzie, and George Shepherd. Britton stated that, from about 1803, he also employed Prout to copy sketches by Thomas Hearne, William Alexander, J. M. W. Turner, J. S. Cotman, and Mackenzie. Prout was particularly indebted to Hearne and never abandoned the picturesque, antiquarian tradition. His characteristic, mature, broken-line drawing technique can be traced back through Thomas Girtin and Joseph Farington to Canaletto. Henry Edridge was a later influence, and around 1820 Prout's drawings are sometimes indistinguishable from those of Edridge. 
Prout married Elizabeth Gillespie (1788-1863) in Brixton, London, on 27 December 1810; they had four children, born between 1813 and 1822. From 1811 to 1835 the Prouts lived in Brixton, though their last years in London were spent at 5 De Crespigny Terrace, Camberwell. Ill health twice drove Prout from the city, first back to Plymouth from 1805 to 1808 and then to Hastings between 1836 and 1844. He suffered from disabling headaches and from congestion of the lungs throughout his life; the headaches have been linked to an attack of sunstroke in childhood. 
Among Prout's west country artist friends were Haydon, John Jackson -- who depicted Prout at his most confident in an oil portrait of 1823 (NPG) -- Francis Chantrey, Charles Eastlake (a pupil), and William Brockedon -- whose 1826 portrait drawing (NPG) suggests a more brittle personality. At least from 1828 to 1833 Prout regularly attended the Artists' Conversazione, an evening social gathering in London to which young artists brought recent work. There he met friends such as Clarkson Stanfield, David Roberts, Cotman (who exhibited some of Prout's watercolours at the Norwich Society of Artists in 1831), David Cox, and T. S. Boys. R. P. Bonington and Prout sketched together at St Omer in northern France about 1822, as recorded by an oil painting by Bonington (Nottingham Castle Museum) and two fine drawings of the ruined abbey church by Prout (V&A). Prout's connections with the Paris art world were with the dealers John Arrowsmith, Claude Schroth, and Baron Taylor, through whom he showed watercolours of Augsburg, Cologne, and Utrecht at the Salon of 1824. He also contributed some lithograph views to the third volume (1825) of Nodier and Taylor's 'Voyages pittoresques et romantiques dans l'ancienne France'. 
Among Prout's London friends were art collectors such as John Allnutt and Francis Broderip and aristocratic patrons such as the dukes of Bedford and Newcastle and the marquess of Stafford, to whose families he gave drawing lessons at a guinea a time. From 1809 to 1821 Prout also taught at Dr Glennie's school, Dulwich Grove; two of his pupils, the Revd J. D. Glennie and W. H. Harriott, later became amateur artists and travel writers. J. D. Harding, the only artist with whom Prout had a serious professional disagreement, is said to have been a private pupil about 1811. 
For most of his career a significant proportion of Prout's income came from the print trade; among his publisher friends were Rudolph Ackermann -- whose son Richard travelled with him in Germany in 1821 -- George Cooke, E. W. Cooke, and Charles Turner. Prout's account book for 1811-16 (North Devon Athenaeum, Barnstaple) lists more than 1330 watercolours and sepia wash drawings bought for a total of $800 by Thomas Palser (his first important client after John Britton) and Rudolph Ackermann. Prout was a prominent author of 'teach yourself' watercolour painting books. 'Rudiments of Landscape in Progressive Studies' (1813) demonstrated how to draw and to add sepia wash, lessons illustrated through soft-ground etching and aquatint; the colour for the final lessons in 'A Series of Easy Lessons in Landscape Drawing' (1820) was added by hand. Later art manuals such as 'Hints on Light and Shadow, Composition etc.' (1836) and 'Prout's Microcosm: the Artist's Sketchbook' (1841) were illustrated in the new technique of lithography, of which Prout was a pioneer. His first lithograph was published by Ackermann in 1817, and he contributed to Alois Senefelder's 'A Complete Course of Lithography' in 1819. He used this technique for a volume of sixteen 'Marine Sketches' (1820) and for the first of his next and celebrated speciality, the old towns of Europe, 'Picturesque Buildings in Normandy' (1821), printed by Charles Hullmandel. He made his first foreign tour, to Normandy, in 1819, following in the footsteps of Edridge and Cotman and, by a small margin, was the first to publish his Normandy views in print form and the first to make a substantial show of them, exhibiting ten such subjects at the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1821. In the same fashion Prout can be said to have explored the old towns of France (Loire), the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany (Rhineland, Saxony, Bavaria, Bohemia), and Italy, all of which he toured between 1819 and 1829. From these visits came often repeated views of Rouen, Tours, Ghent, Strasbourg, Cologne, Nuremberg, Dresden, and Verona, to name but a few. 
Prout's finest work in lithograph, 'Illustrations of the Rhine' (1822-6), displaying wide and spacious river landscapes, was untypical and was followed by more restricted and characteristic urban 'close-ups' in his nevertheless splendid 'Facsimiles of Sketches Made in Flanders and Germany' (fifty plates, 1833), executed in tinted (two-toned) lithograph. This ambitious book was published independently by subscription and from it Prout made some $2000 over three years. 'Facsimiles of Sketches Made in France, Switzerland and Italy' (twenty-six tinted lithographs) was published by Hodson and Graves in 1839 in the usual way. 
Among Prout's most impressive early landscapes of panoramic coastal and cottage scenes were the 'Picturesque Delineations in the Counties of Devon and Cornwall', published by Palser in 1812. The breadth and freedom of these etchings was matched only by the 'Illustrations of the Rhine'. Both are a far cry from the small-scale copper- or steel-engravings after Prout that appeared in Britton's antiquarian publications such as the 'Beauties of England and Wales' (1803-15) or later in the new, popular travel books and annuals. The 'Landscape Annual', for which Prout provided all the illustrations in 1830 and 1831 following a tour to the Alps and Italy in 1824, was printed in large numbers and reached a very wide audience. 
The sight of 'Flanders and Germany' prompted John Ruskin's father to make a tour of the Rhine in 1833 and to buy a watercolour of Lisieux, Normandy, in 1834. Ruskin's critical championing of Prout began in the 1846 edition of 'Modern Painters', where he wrote: 'There is 'no' stone drawing, 'no' vitality of architecture like Prout's' ('Works of John Ruskin', 3.217). Ruskin wrote an appreciation of Prout for the 'Art Journal' in 1849 and further praised the artist in 'The Stones of Venice' in 1851-3, in which he coined the term 'Proutism'. In 1879 he arranged an exhibition of Prout's drawings, alongside those of their mutual friend W. H. Hunt, 'to illustrate the outgoing course of an old-fashioned Continental tour, beginning at Calais, and ending at Rome' ('Notes by Mr. Ruskin', 39). These 'Notes' contain Ruskin's most detailed analysis of Prout as a draughtsman, and the autotype illustrations to the catalogue, mostly of drawings made on site on tour, demonstrate not only his broken line but also a vigorous use of the lead pencil, with tone added with the finger or stump (an implement for spreading pencil or chalk) and touches of white highlights, both emphasizing lights and shadows, a subject much dwelt on in his drawing manuals. 
Ruskin was less admiring of Prout's watercolours, which he criticized for occasional patches of strong or hot colour, probably executed with non-transparent gouache or bodycolour, creating an imbalance often exaggerated by the fading of the more transparent pigments. Prout never took on the more fluid and highly charged style developed by Cotman and the younger generation of Harding, Boys, and William Callow, and his use of warmer colouring was never fully absorbed into his otherwise picturesque manner. His general method, unchanged from his early maturity, was to establish a warm, brown tone in the foreground set off against the blue and white of naturalistic skies. Prout's characteristic drawing with the reed pen, which he used to emphasize structure in finished watercolours, also remained as a survival of the antiquarian picturesque and was regarded by some critics, other than Ruskin, as mannered. 
Prout's contemporary reputation was at its height by 1830. His first major notice, in the 'Magazine of the Fine Arts' in 1821, featured a seascape (251/2 in. x 381/2 in.), 'A Man-of-War Ashore', similar perhaps to a smaller watercolour now in the Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester. This was the first major subject in watercolour that Prout developed after his cottage scenes. Large trading ships or naval relics in harbour or on the beach also go back to his west country origins. For his most characteristic subject, the old towns and streets of Europe, Prout broke new and foreign ground which first gained critical notice in 1824: 'There are some views of towns, and some river scenes, of large dimensions, by Mr Prout, which, for pictorial character, originality of effect, depth of tone, and general energy of style, excel all his former works, and may be regarded as wonders in water-colours. (E. Hardcastle [W. H. Pyne], 'Somerset House Gazette', 2, 1824, 477-8)' Prout was appointed 'Painter in Water-Colours in Ordinary to His Majesty' in 1829, an honour renewed by William IV and Queen Victoria. In 1830 he became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He was then among the top half-dozen watercolour painters exhibiting in London, and known to a wider public as an illustrator of drawing manuals and travel books. 
After 1830 ill health prevented Prout from making more than the occasional foreign or home tour, and his subject matter therefore became highly repetitious. 'Porch of Ratisbon Cathedral', for example, was exhibited at the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1824, 1826, 1828, 1844, and 1849, and perhaps more often, since a fine version of the same view (V&A) was listed in 1832 as 'At Ratisbonne'. Sometimes a watercolour is based so loosely upon the original site-drawing as to be a capriccio or imaginary landscape and can be regarded as a response to Prout's inability to add to his stock. Friends and rivals such as Roberts out-travelled him, visiting destinations such as Spain and the Holy Land, and the novelty of Prout's subject matter faded. He lost the commission in 1832 for a third Italian volume of the 'Landscape Annual' to Harding. 
The focus of Prout's professional activity from 1815 to 1851 was the annual exhibition of the Society of Painters in Water Colours. Prices for his leading exhibits there rose from $42 for 'Malines, Flanders' and 'Louvain' in 1823 to $52. 10's'. for 'Indiaman Dismasted' and 'Munich' in 1824, to a maximum $63 for 'Ponte di Rialto, Venice' in 1827. Half of Prout's most expensive exhibits from the 1820s to the 1840s featured Venice. However, his income fell from a high point in 1833-4 as he became more dependent on dealers and publishers, and by the end of his career he was selling much of his work to dealers outside London, such as John Hewett in Leamington and J. C. Grundy in Manchester. 
Prout died at his home in Camberwell, London, on 10 February 1852 from an apoplectic fit, after a birthday party given for John Ruskin by his parents, neighbours in Denmark Hill. He was buried in Norwood cemetery. His widow and family moved to Ilfracombe, Devon. Later that year a sale of his drawings at Sotheby and Wilkinson raised $1788. The contents of his studio and drawings that failed to sell later, in 1880 at Christies, were given after the death of Prout's only son and last surviving child to the North Devon Athenaeum, Barnstaple. Samuel Gillespie Prout (1822-1911) painted in his father's manner but by the 1870s was occupied primarily as a popular religious writer and philanthropist at home and abroad. John Skinner Prout (1806-1876), Samuel's nephew, a professional watercolour painter, like many other amateur and professional artists of the time, was also influenced by his uncle's style. 
Ruskin's critical support raised Prout's posthumous reputation to a peak by the 1880s, and it is symptomatic that twenty-one of Prout's watercolours were included in the Manchester Royal Jubilee Exhibition of 1887. Thereafter Prout's reputation as a watercolour painter declined, and it reached a low point in the mid-twentieth century. A partial recovery, based upon greater recognition of his importance in introducing the subject of the European picturesque, took place in the last quarter of that century. The qualities of Prout's best work in watercolour remain obscured by his numerous repetitions of subject and by the large body of work by imitators or contemporaries influenced by his style. He has not yet been recognized as the principal English promoter of lithography as a reproductive method for landscapes in the 1820s, although notice has increasingly been given to his etchings, lithographs, and drawings. His watercolours are well represented in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, the City Museum and Art Gallery, Birmingham, and the City Art Gallery and Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester. Sketchbooks by Prout are in the National Maritime Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, the North Devon Athenaeum, Barnstaple, and the Cleveland Museum of Art, Ohio. 


@@@@@


doc= 22845


Prout, William (1785-1850), physician and chemist, was born on 15 January 1785 at Horton, Gloucestershire, the youngest son of John Prout (1745-1820), a farmer and copyholder of Horton, and Hannah Limbrick ('b'. 1756). Although he learned to read and write at a dame-school at Wickwar, attended a charity school at Badminton, and probably had access to the fine library formerly belonging to the Paton family at Horton Manor, his early teenage years appear to have been occupied in farming. In 1802, however, he joined the Sherston Academy managed by the Revd John Turner, vicar of Horton, in order to master Latin and Greek. In 1805 he advertised locally for advice on the further educational prospects for a man of twenty. When a helpful reply came from the Revd Thomas Jones (1758-1812), Prout joined Jones's classical seminary at Redland, Bristol, where, between 1805 and 1807, he taught pupils in exchange for private tuition. A pupil's inquiry concerning Humphry Davy's electrochemical work stimulated Prout's interest in chemistry. In 1808, on Jones's recommendation, he began medical studies at the University of Edinburgh, boarding with Jones's friend, Dr Alexander Adam, rector of Edinburgh high school, whose daughter he was to marry; Prout graduated MD on 24 June 1811 with a thesis on intermittent fevers. 
After failing to establish a medical practice in the west country, Prout moved to London in 1812, walking the wards of St Thomas's and Guy's hospitals before being admitted LRCP on 22 December 1812. (Fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians came on 28 June 1829.) Ambitious to gain the summit of the medical profession, Prout set up practice in Arundel Street, near the Strand, where he delivered a course of advertised lectures on animal chemistry between February and April 1814. These lectures, which contained speculations on the nature of matter and metabolism, as well as a remarkable observation on the distinction between taste and flavour, ensured his election to the Medical and Chirurgical Society on 10 May 1814 and brought him the friendship of Astley Cooper, John Elliotson, and Alexander Marcet. The latter reported favourably on Prout's researches to the great Swedish chemist Jons Berzelius, and ensured Prout's election as FRS in March 1819. 
On 22 September 1814 Prout married Agnes Adam (1793-1863); their honeymoon was spent in Paris. There were six children: John William (1817-81), a lawyer; Alexander Adam (1818-54), an army doctor; Walter Robert (1820-57), a soldier; Thomas Jones (named after his father's former teacher, 1823-1909), who took holy orders and taught classics at Christ Church, Oxford; and two daughters, Elizabeth (1825-1918) and Agnes (1826-78). From 1815 to 1821 Prout practised as a specialist in stomach and urinary diseases from his home at Southampton Street, Bloomsbury, and from 1821 until his death from 40 Sackville Street, Piccadilly. The fruits of his clinical studies of private patients were first published in 'An inquiry into the nature and treatment of gravel, calculus and other affections of the urinary organs' (1821; 2nd edn, 1825). This was revised and enlarged as 'On the Nature and Treatment of Stomach and Urinary Diseases' (1840; 5th edn, 1848). 
In 1815 and 1816, in two anonymous articles on the 'relation between the specific gravities of bodies in their gaseous state and the weights of their atoms', Prout suggested that there were grounds for believing that the atomic weights of all the elements were whole number multiples of the atomic weight of hydrogen; and he tentatively identified hydrogen with the 'prote hyle', or basic matter, of the ancient Greeks. Prout was influenced towards these views both by Humphry Davy's speculations that the so-called elements were probably undecompounded bodies, and by his reading while a student in Edinburgh of the 'Philosophical Arrangements' (1775), a commentary on Aristotle by James Harris. 'Prout's hypothesis', as it was labelled by Berzelius, was supported by Thomas Thomson and others, but dismissed on experimental grounds by Berzelius, and later J. B. Stas. In 1831 Prout suggested privately that hydrogen itself might be formed from 'some body lower in the scale' (Daubeny, 'Atomic Theory', 129). The hypothesis remained an experimental and theoretical stimulus to chemists and physicists throughout the century, and, following the concept of isotopes, it received a justification from Francis Aston in 1920. 
Prout was a consummate analytical chemist. He published elaborate self-experiments on carbon dioxide output in 1813-14 and a pioneering study of the chemical changes in an incubating egg (1822). He spent years attempting to perfect an accurate method of analysing organic compounds. Although he developed a technique in 1827, it was costly and difficult, and could not compare with the cheap and easy method introduced by Liebig in 1830. Between 1815 and 1827, however, he published a series of important papers on urine and digestion that began to open up questions about metabolism. In 1824 he showed brilliantly, but controversially, that the gastric juices of animals contain hydrochloric acid. The point demonstrated, contemporaries were quick to adopt his 1827 classification of the components of food into water, saccharinous (carbohydrates), oleaginous (fats), and nitrogenous (proteins), a balanced diet containing all of these foodstuffs. Prout, who was not a reductionist, was firmly convinced that the four aliments (food groups) were transformed into blood and tissues ('primary assimilation') by a vital principle that also organized and controlled the destruction and removal of unwanted parts from the system ('secondary assimilation'). Full details of his highly speculative metabolic theory were expounded in 'Chemistry, Meteorology, and the Function of Digestion' (1834), the most curious of the eight 'Bridgewater Treatises' intended to demonstrate the existence of God from design that had been sponsored by the will of the earl of Bridgewater in 1829. The meteorological section is notable for his coinage of the word 'convection' to describe one method of heat dissemination. 
Although he was a brilliant experimentalist and stimulating theoretician, Prout's later life was marred by deafness that led him to avoid contact with the scientific and medical communities. Significantly he did not join the Chemical Society on its foundation in 1841. He died at his home in Sackville Street, Piccadilly, London, on 9 April 1850 from gangrene of the lung following a burst abscess. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. A simple memorial tablet was laid in Horton church. 


@@@@@


doc= 22846


Prowse, William (1751/2-1826), naval officer, was born in Stonehouse, Devon, and was probably raised as a child on a trading vessel. From November 1771 to February 1776 he was an able seaman in the 'Dublin', guardship in Hamoaze; and from November 1776 to August 1778 he was in the 'Albion', one of the ships which sailed for North America in June 1778, under the command of Vice-Admiral John Byron. Early in 1778 Captain George Bowyer was appointed to the 'Albion', and on 31 August he rated Prowse a midshipman, in which capacity, or as master's mate, he was present at the actions off Grenada on 6 July 1779, and near Martinique in April and May 1781. On 17 January 1782 he passed his examination; afterwards he served in the 'Atlas' and 'Cyclops', and on 6 December 1782 he was promoted lieutenant. 
Prowse continued in the 'Cyclops' on the coast of North America until March 1784, after which, for several years, his service was intermittent, much of the time being probably spent in command of merchant ships. During the armament of 1787 he served for a couple of months in the 'Bellona' with George Bowyer, and in 1790 he was in the 'Barfleur' and 'Stately' with Captain Robert Calder. From August 1791 to January 1793 he was in the 'Duke', carrying the flag of Lord Hood at Portsmouth; in March 1793 he joined the 'Prince' with Bowyer, now a vice-admiral, and Captain Cuthbert Collingwood, whom in December he followed to the 'Barfleur'. With them Prowse took part in the action of 1 June 1794. From July 1794 to October 1795 he was with Calder in the 'Theseus', and later he went to the Mediterranean with him in the 'Lively'. From her he joined the 'Victory', carrying the flag of Sir John Jervis. On 20 October 1796 Prowse was promoted to the command of the 'Raven', in which he was present in the action off Cape St Vincent on 14 February 1797. On 6 March he was promoted by Jervis to the command of the 'Salvador del Mundo', one of the prizes, which he paid off in the following November. 
From August 1800 to April 1802 Prowse was flag-captain to Calder in the 'Prince of Wales', and in August 1802 he commissioned the frigate 'Sirius'. For the next three years he was attached to the fleet off Brest and in the Bay of Biscay, and especially during 1804 and 1805 with Calder off Rochefort and Ferrol. After involvement in the action off Cape Finisterre on 22 July 1805, the 'Sirius', with Calder, joined the fleet off Cadiz, and, remaining there on Calder's return to England, was present at the battle of Trafalgar. The 'Sirius' continued in the Mediterranean under Collingwood's command, and on 17 April 1806 attacked a flotilla of French armed vessels near Civita Vecchia, capturing the corvette 'Bergere'. For his conduct on this occasion the patriotic fund voted Prowse a sword of the value of $100. The 'Sirius' was paid off in May 1808, and from March 1810 to December 1813 Prowse commanded the 'Theseus' in the North Sea; in 1813 he brought the East India Company's fleet home from St Helena, for which he received a piece of plate from the commanders. He had no further service afloat, but was nominated a CB on 4 June 1815, made colonel of marines on 12 August 1819, and promoted rear-admiral on 19 July 1821; he died on 23 March 1826, aged seventy-four, at his home, 3 Tonbridge Place, New Road, London. 
Prowse was considered a worthy man, and his career offers a good example of how it was possible for someone of humble origins to rise to flag-rank through consistent, if not remarkable, service. He was apparently unmarried, and was able to leave his five sisters $2000 each. 


@@@@@


doc= 22847


Prowse, William Jeffery (1836-1870), humorist, was born at Torquay, Devon, on 6 May 1836, the son of Isaac Prowse (died 1844) and his wife, Marianne Jeffery, who had known Keats and who had a volume of her poems published. Upon the death of his father in 1844, he was taken charge of by an uncle, John Sparke Prowse, a notary public and shipbroker, of Greenwich. At Greenwich he attended the school of Nicholas Wanostrocht, a well-known writer on cricket under the pseudonym of Nicholas Felix, who inspired him with his own enthusiasm for the game. 
Prowse was from youth deeply interested in all forms of sport and was devoted to the sea. Before he was twenty he developed a talent for humorous verse, and soon drifted into journalism. About 1856 he obtained a position on the 'Aylesbury News', and in subsequent years he contributed tales, descriptive articles, and verses to 'Chambers's Journal', the 'Lady's Companion', the 'National Magazine', and 'The Porcupine'. In 1861 he was appointed a leader writer on the 'Daily Telegraph', writing mainly on sporting topics. In 1865 his friend, Tom Hood the younger, became editor of 'Fun'. Prowse contributed each week, under the signature of 'Nicholas', a rambling article on horse-racing, into which he introduced much good-humoured satire on other subjects. 
In 1865 Prowse's health began to fail. He returned to Torquay, and passed the winters of 1867, 1868, and 1869 at Cimiez, near Nice. He died of tuberculosis at Cimiez on Easter Sunday 17 April 1870 and was buried in the protestant cemetery there. Prowse was known for his witty verse, the most famous example of which is his satire on Coleridge's 'The Rime of the Ancient Mariner'. His 'The City of Prague' has been described as 'a clever defense of Bohemianism' (Kunitz and Haycraft, 509), and his 'My Lost Old Age, by a Young Invalid', written in 1865, has been anthologized in collections of Victorian verse (Burnham, 10). 


@@@@@


doc= 22848


Prujean, Sir Francis (bap. 1597, d. 1666), physician, was the eldest of at least four children of the Revd Francis Prujean (died 1624), curate of Widford by Chelmsford, Essex, in 1596, and rector of Boothby, Lincolnshire, from 1596 to 1622, and his first wife. The younger Prujean was baptized at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, on 21 February 1597, and educated at home by his father. He matriculated in 1610 as a sizar at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, his father's former college. The family seems to have been under some financial constraints, as Prujean's father took out three episcopal licences in 1605: to teach as a schoolmaster; to preach; and to practise medicine. He was, in addition, a writing clerk and notary. Some of the financial burden was eased in 1613, when Francis gained a scholarship at Caius. Prujean gained his BA in 1614 and MA in 1617. By 22 December 1621 he was a licentiate of the College of Physicians, but his movements between 1617 and 1621 are unclear. He met and married Margaret Legatt (died 1661), daughter of Thomas Legatt of Hornchurch, Essex, probably towards the end of this period; they had a son, Thomas ('c'.1622-1662). Prujean may possibly have still been at Cambridge at the time of his marriage, as he received a grace for an MD in 1621, though he did not receive the degree until 1625. The puritan John Gee suggested in 1624 that popish sympathies caused this delay. 
Prujean was clearly in London, practising medicine, from 1621 to 1626, when he was elected to a fellowship in the College of Physicians. Soon after his election he returned to Lincolnshire, where he practised until 1638, gaining a great reputation among his patients. 
In 1639 Prujean returned to London, took up residence in the parish of St Martin Ludgate and was elected censor at the College of Physicians. He was re-elected in 1642 and held the office until 1647, also serving as college registrar from 1641 to 1647. A stalwart of the college, Prujean was its president from 1650 to 1653. In 1654 the college elected William Harvey president, but he declined and Prujean was re-elected on Harvey's recommendation. It was through Prujean in 1651 that Harvey first conveyed a proposal to build a library for the college; it was finally completed and opened on 2 February 1654, the last year of Prujean's presidency. Prujean continued to serve the college as its treasurer from 1655 to 1663, and as consiliarius from 1656 to his death in 1666. He was knighted by Charles II on 1 April 1661 and was credited with curing his queen of typhus in 1663. 
Prujean was a man of many talents and interests. John Evelyn described a visit to Prujean's London home on 9 August 1661: 'I went to that famous Physitian Sir Fr: Prujean who showed me his Laboratorie, his other Workhouse for turning and other Mechanics, also many excellent Pictures, especially the Magdalen of Carrachio: some incomparable paisages don in distemper: He plaied to me likewise on the Polyphone, an instrument having something of the Harp, Lute, Theorb & c: it was a sweete Instrument, by none known in England, or described by any Author, nor used but by this skillful & learned Doctor. (Evelyn, 294)' It was perhaps Prujean's talent, tastes, and keen appreciation of art and beauty that led to recurring suspicions that he was a papist. In 1643 his house in London was ransacked, with a loss of goods valued at $500. In 1658 he was brought before a London quarter session court, charged that he was 'a Papist or popishly affected', a charge he repeatedly denied. 
Prujean married for a second time on 13 February 1664. His second wife, also named Margaret, was the widow of Sir Thomas Fleming and the wealthy daughter of Edward, Lord Gorges. Prujean died in London on 23 June 1666 and was buried with his first wife and son at Hornchurch, Essex. Samuel Pepys noted his death in his diary: 'Sir Francis Prujean is dead, after being married to a widow about a year or thereabouts. He died very rich, and had, for the last yeare lived very handsomely, his lady bringing him to it. He was no great painstaker in person, yet died very rich; and, as Dr. Clerke says, was of very great judgment, but hath writ nothing to leave his name to posterity. ('Diary', 318-19)' In accordance with Prujean's wishes, Baldwin Hamey composed an epitaph for Prujean, his wife, and son. Prujean disbursed a great deal of money in his will and named his grandson, Robert, as his principal heir (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/321/122). Prujean's home was near the Old Bailey, and the place where he lived was named after him Prujean Square. 


@@@@@


doc= 22849


Pryce, George (1799-1868), historian and librarian, born on 2 October 1799, was largely self-educated. He was at first a schoolmaster, but subsequently became an accountant at Bristol. He devoted his leisure to the study of archaeology and the early history of Bristol. In April 1856 he was appointed city librarian in Bristol. The city library, founded in 1613, was possibly the oldest municipal library in the country, but was run by a private library society, which severely restricted public access. Its premises were taken over and the holdings reformed by the city council. It reopened in 1856 with Pryce as its first librarian. Through his efforts the collection of local literature in the library was assembled: some 4000 volumes were added during his term of office. 
Pryce was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 30 April 1857. He published many papers on archaeology and local history. His chief work, the 'Popular History of Bristol' (1861), is, like his earlier 'Fact versus Fiction' (1858), very severe on Bristol historians, especially William Barrett, Samuel Seyer, and John Corry; yet it draws heavily on their work, and has not lasted as well as they have. Pryce was described as 'cocksure' (Wells) for his dismissiveness of other historians. His other works include 'Notes on the ecclesiastical and monumental architecture and sculpture of the middle ages in Bristol' (1850) and 'Memorials of the Canynges' Family' (1854). His unpublished works relating to Bristol history are in the Bristol Municipal Library collection in the central library. 
Pryce died of paralysis on 15 March 1868, at the city library, leaving a widow, Elizabeth. 


@@@@@


doc= 22850


Pryce, William (bap. 1735, d. 1790), surgeon, mineralogist, and antiquary, was born at Redruth, Cornwall, and baptized there on 14 June 1735. He was the only son (there was also a daughter, who died in infancy) of surgeon Samuel Pryce (died 1741) and his wife, Catherine (died 1744), daughter of William Hill and his wife, also Catherine, who was sister of the antiquary William Borlase (1695-1772). Orphaned at an early age, Pryce was cared for by the prominent Falmouth attorney Philip Webber, a kinsman who became a lifelong friend. 
In 1751 Pryce was apprenticed to the Redruth surgeon Philip Tingcombe. Following an additional period studying dissection under a Dr Hunter (probably either John or William Hunter of London), Pryce himself set up as a surgeon in Redruth. About this time, he also bought shares in local mines (and managed some small-scale mining operations). On 17 August 1758 he married Catherine Michell ('bap'. 1733, died 1813) in Redruth. The couple had two sons, Samuel Vincent (1761-1817), who became a surgeon and banker, and William, a surgeon, and a daughter, Catherine (1764-1765), who died in infancy. 
With commercial interests in local mining, Pryce appreciated the advantage of bringing coal more cheaply to the local tin and copper mines. As a result, he initiated a scheme to build a quay at Portreath in 1763 but failed to meet his part of the costs; his shares were sold in 1767. Some time thereafter Borlase encouraged Pryce to develop his notes on mining into a book. He drew on manuscripts on the history of mining in Cornwall, adding information obtained from his own observations and from local experts, as well as from such diverse characters as Cookworthy (on the divining rod) and Matthew Boulton (on Watt's improvements to the steam engine). Pryce's 'Mineralogia Cornubiensis' was published by subscription in 1778. 
A freemason, in 1773 Pryce proposed that the Redruth lodge should be known as the Druids Lodge of Love and Liberality. It proved an inappropriate name, as in 1779 relations between the brethren became far from loving and he set up an irregular lodge. 
Pryce was awarded the degree of MD by the University of St Andrews in 1781. Two years later, on 26 June 1783, Pryce was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. The society's vice-president, Daines Barrington, knew that Pryce was the owner of a manuscript on Cornish by Tonkin and that he intended to publish a Cornish grammar and dictionary. 'Archaeologia Cornu-Britannica' was finally published in 1790. In it, Pryce collated the manuscripts of Tonkin, Hals, and others and added information gained by interviewing old people who claimed to speak Cornish. Although accused at the time of plagiarism, he referred to himself as editor and fully acknowledged his sources in the work's preface. He died at Redruth in December 1790 and was buried there on the 20th of that month. 


@@@@@


doc= 22851


Gwilym ap Phylip Brydydd (fl. 1222-1268), court poet, took his sobriquet from his occupation ('prydydd', 'poet') and from his relation ('bychan', 'little, minor') to his father, assumed to be Phylip Brydydd; the two are mentioned together (the son by his baptismal name, Gwilym), in an elegy for Trahaearn Brydydd Mawr by Gwilym Ddu o Arfon, as coming from Ceredigion (Cardiganshire), a fact confirmed by the references to places in his poems (Llannarth, Rhystud Barth, and so on) and the location of the lordship of his chief patron, Maredudd ab Owain. More of his poems have survived than of any other court poet of south Wales: in all, nineteen complete poems and fragments of another two. The earliest seems to be his elegy for Rhys Ieuanc (died 1222), the latest his elegy for Goronwy ab Ednyfed (died 1268). This suggests an exceptionally long poetic career. His patrons were drawn from all parts of Wales, but the majority of them were among the descendants of Rhys ap Gruffudd (died 1197) of Deheubarth. His major sponsor was Maredudd ab Owain of Ceredigion, a great-grandson of Rhys; he was the subject of six of the poet's odes. Y Prydydd Bychan's poems are valuable for the light they throw on the minor princes and their courts, including their developing bureaucracy, in south-west Wales. They are mostly traditional in style, but reflect the increasing popularity of the 'englynion' metres and greater awareness of continental culture, including the spread of the Arthurian legend. 


@@@@@


doc= 22852


Pryme, Abraham (1671-1704), antiquary, was born on 15 January 1671 in the parish of Hatfield, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, the eldest child of Mathias Pryme (1645-1694), yeoman, and Sara (1649-1729), daughter of Peter Smagge or Smaque, a Parisian Huguenot. Born in a house on the broad levels that had been drained by Dutch engineers in the early part of the century, Abraham Pryme descended from a family that had come over from Ypres to take part in the enterprise. He was baptized in the Dutch congregation at Sandtoft in Lincolnshire on 15 or 22 January. In 1680 the family moved a short distance to Crowtrees Hall, a large house built by one of the Valkenburgh brothers who had been prominent in the drainage scheme. 
Despite the dissenting inclinations of the Dutch settlers and his own family, Pryme received schooling from William Eratt, the Church of England incumbent at Hatfield and a friend of his father. In childhood he began to keep, albeit inconsistently, a diary in which he recorded contemporary political chatter and his own antiquarian activities. In adult life this became a more regular activity, supplemented by letters received and sent, with other free-standing insertions, but there are large gaps in the early years and parts of it were clearly written up later. Published by the Surtees Society in 1870, it constitutes an interesting record of his studies, with much entertaining anecdotal detail, although it is not greatly informative about his major projects. 
His father hoped he would go to Glasgow University but on 2 May 1690 Pryme was admitted pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge, becoming Cardinal Morton scholar on 7 November following. In addition to his prescribed work he pursued, in his first year, private botanical studies, and in February 1692 his diary discloses a practical interest in magic. In this Pryme was not, apparently, alone; esoteric pursuits may have contributed, at any rate, to the suicide of his friend Humphrey Bohun later that year, which affected him deeply. He none the less continued the study of magic until, the following January, he received a severely worded letter from Bohun's father dissuading him. Thereafter he reverted to botany and natural sciences, which remained an interest all his life. 
Pryme graduated BA in January 1694. In July his father died, leaving most of his property to Abraham's younger brother Peter, though Abraham received $100 and certain occupied copyhold tenements near Epworth in Lincolnshire. He was ordained deacon in September 1694, and the following June was appointed curate of Broughton near Brigg, in Lincolnshire, due east across the Trent from his native area. Situated near the northern terminus of Ermine Street, this region is rich in Roman remains, particularly coin hoards and the traces of rural settlements. Chance finds of this sort -- such as the mosaic floor of a villa at Roxby -- and the documentary and architectural remains of the area's medieval past focused Pryme's antiquarianism. Apart from a rather weak history of the nearby parish of Winterton, dated 1703 (and published in 1866), he produced several papers on the antiquities and natural phenomena of the area that later appeared in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions'. 
Pryme resigned his curacy in November 1697 and returned to Hatfield, 'the better to carry on my history of that place', as he says in his diary. The resulting 'Historia universalis oppidi et parochiae Hatfieldensis', a substantial work in thematic sections, survives in Lansdowne MS 897 in the British Library. Section 7 ('Belgicus') is doubtless the history of the Dutch drainage of Hatfield Chase referred to in a letter of March 1703 as begun more than six years earlier. Probably in connection with the section entitled 'Ecclesiasticus', he discovered that some of his land had belonged to a religious house before the dissolution. Genuinely distressed, he made it over to the parish of Hatfield. 
In September 1698 Pryme was ordained priest and appointed curate and reader at Holy Trinity Church, Kingston upon Hull, at the invitation of the rector. It was to Hull's history that he now turned his attention, compiling a detailed analytical index of the records of the city corporation and applying the method already used for Hatfield to produce the 'History, antiquities and description of the town and county of Kingston upon Hull'. This work, surviving in various manuscript copies both in Hull and in the British Library, is thorough and intelligently done, displaying a close and laborious application to the documentary evidence. It is still of great value for those writing on Hull. Again, he made an unwelcome discovery, namely that his appointment as curate was irregular, leave not having been given by the corporation. The mayor and aldermen, themselves previously unaware of the technical requirement, were happy to confirm him in the position. 
In his years at Hull, Pryme built up a wide correspondence with other antiquaries including Nathaniel Johnston, Thomas Gale, Ralph Thoresby, and Hans Sloane. On 18 March 1702, proposed by Sloane, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He also used his contacts to collect manuscripts, coins, and other antiquities, which placed his income under severe strain and required him to seek a benefice. On 1 September 1701 he was presented to the living of Thorne, near Hatfield, by the duke of Devonshire. Visiting the sick in his parish, however, he caught a fever and died, unmarried, on 12 or 13 June 1704; he was buried near his father in Hatfield church on 14 June. On 18 October his brother Peter was admitted heir to his copyhold lands in the manorial court of Epworth. From Peter descended the family who later regularly called themselves de la Pryme, a form which was in retrospect firmly attributed to the antiquary, but was only rarely used by him. His collections were dispersed, many manuscripts passing to the herald John Warburton, thence being subsumed in the Lansdowne collections now in the British Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 22853


Pryme, George (1781-1868), economist, was born at Cottingham, Yorkshire, on 4 April 1781, the only surviving child (an elder brother had died in infancy) of Christopher Pryme, merchant of Hull, and Alice, daughter of George Dinsdale of Nappa Hall, Wensleydale. He was a descendant of Peter, the younger brother of Abraham Pryme, an antiquary. After his father's early death, George Pryme and his mother moved to Nottinghamshire, where he attended several private schools. In 1796 he went to Hull grammar school, where the headmaster was the Revd Joseph Milner, and he was later tutored by John Dawson. 
In October 1799 Pryme entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he won a scholarship in the following year; he became sixth wrangler and graduated BA in 1803. Before 1805, when he was elected a fellow of his college, he won no fewer than five prizes for Latin, Greek, and English, and earned himself the nickname of Prize Pryme. Having already begun studying law in Lincoln's Inn in October 1804, he was called to the bar in 1806. He practised in London until his health broke down, and on medical advice he returned two years later to Cambridge, where he won a prize in 1809 for an English poem. He then worked as a provincial barrister, being dubbed Counsellor Pryme. On 30 August 1813 he married Jane Townley (1788-1871), daughter of Thomas Thackeray (1736-1806), a Cambridge surgeon. A son and a daughter were born to them. 
In 1816 Pryme began to lecture on political economy in Cambridge, the first lectures specifically on that subject to be delivered in any British university. Requiring from his audience no prior knowledge, these were elementary and eclectic, a popularization -- in the best sense -- of a subject that could then be mastered only with great perseverance. Although he gained the vice-chancellor's permission, the college heads, suspicious of such innovations, would not allow his lectures to begin before midday, so as not to interfere with college teaching. That year he turned his lectures into a book, 'Syllabus of a Course of Lectures on Political Economy', which reached its fourth (revised) edition in 1859. The courses were well attended, and in 1828 the senate granted him the title of professor. 
Unusually for a don, Pryme involved himself in town affairs. He was appointed a paving commissioner and, as a reforming whig, in the 1820s he opposed the parliamentary candidates sponsored by the duke of Rutland. After the 'Reform Bill' was passed, the duke's nominees faded away, and Pryme stood for Cambridge in the general election of 1832 as a whig and headed the poll. In the House of Commons his speeches were heard with respect and attention, and he was soon a member of several committees. Later he was entrusted with steering through minor but useful bills, for example, one that enabled a sect called separatists to affirm. In 1836 he took an active part in the discussion of the 'Tithe Commutation Act'. He favoured shorter parliaments and the admission of dissenters to Oxford and Cambridge universities. 
Pryme's efforts to become a university reformer were not all that successful. In 1834 he spoke in favour of a petition to the house for abolishing subscription on graduation, and three years later (on 4 May 1837) introduced a motion to appoint a commission of inquiry into the state of Oxford and Cambridge universities. The chancellor of the exchequer, Thomas Spring-Rice, stymied him with the reply that that was a matter for the crown, and university reform languished for another decade and a half. Characteristically, he very seldom left the house until it rose, and he voted in practically every division of importance. He so ran down his health that his family compelled him to retire from parliament in 1841. 
Back in Cambridge, Pryme continued to deliver his lectures and practised from time to time as a barrister. He became interested in the Norfolk estuary scheme and other local improvements. In 1847 he and his family moved to Wistow in Huntingdonshire, where he had bought a 500 acre estate; having absorbed the elements of chemistry, he applied them to the cultivation of his land, which made a profit in most years, except just after the repeal of the corn laws, a measure which he supported. He gave up his Cambridge lectures in 1863, when the senate voted to continue his chair. He died in Wistow on 2 December 1868 and was buried there a week later. 
Pryme crammed a great amount into his long life, but the range of his interests denied him the chance of becoming as celebrated as his abilities warranted. An early riser, he never wasted a moment of the day. When not writing at his desk, he was reading; he often held a book in his hand while driving himself in his open carriage. He helped to nourish his retentive memory by meditating on a book for some time after closing it. He bequeathed his books and pamphlets on political economy to the University of Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 22854


Prynne, William (1600-1669), pamphleteer and lawyer, was born in Upper Swainswick, near Bath, Somerset, the son of Thomas Prynne, farmer, and his second wife, Marie, daughter of William Sherston (the first mayor of Bath under Elizabeth I's charter). He attended Bath grammar school from 1612, and from 1616 Oriel College, Oxford, owners of the land which his father farmed. He graduated BA on 22 January 1621 and was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn in the same year. He was called to the bar in 1628, and by then had produced the first of his more than two hundred pamphlets. 
Prynne was tried twice, in 1633 and 1637, in Star Chamber for sedition. In his pamphlet against stage plays, 'Histriomastix' of 1633, he had indeed denounced female actors at the same time as Queen Henrietta Maria was participating in a court masque. But Prynne's defence was that this huge work had been long in gestation (which was true), and even then it had been published a month before the queen's performance. This defence is not as impressive as it might seem. Prynne had inserted additional criticisms of female actors in an appendix while Henrietta Maria was rehearsing for the event. But, to the main charge, Prynne was not guilty. He had not attacked the crown, even if he had been rude about amusements patronized by it. 'Histriomastix' is a crime against literature, not against the state. Samuel Butler rightly said that Prynne's real weakness was to cast holy things, not unto dogs, but into doggerel (S. Butler, 'Posthumous Works', 1732, 84). Another contemporary also had the wit to see that soured misanthropy on so generalized a scale robbed the attack of particular application: 'it was fitter to be called 'Anthropomastix' than 'Histriomastix', the scourge of mankind rather than the Kings sacred person' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 173, fol. 14). He was nevertheless found guilty of sedition, sentenced to have his ears cut off, fined $5000, and sentenced to life imprisonment. With the connivance of a friendly gaoler, he continued to smuggle pamphlets out of the Tower of London. Four years later, in 1637, he came for a second time before Star Chamber. Once more he was accused (and found guilty) of sedition, along with a divine (Henry Burton) and a doctor (John Bastwick). His ears, lightly cropped in 1633, now received the full treatment, his nose was slit, and the initials 'S. L.' burnt into his cheeks. They stood for 'Seditious Libeller'; to Prynne they stood for 'Stigma of Laud'. He described his sufferings in a pamphlet in 1641. The executioner had heated the iron very hot, and burnt one of his cheeks twice. After this he cut one of Prynne's ears so close that he cut off a piece of cheek, and cut him deep in the neck near the jugular vein. Then, hacking the other ear until it was almost off, he left it hanging and went down from the scaffold. He was called back by the surgeon, who made him perform a complete amputation. Smiling up to heaven, said Prynne, he responded with 'this heavenly sentence' (his own evaluation): 'The more I am beat down, the more am I lift up' (W. Prynne, 'A New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny', 1641, no pagination). The events of 1637 made an impact upon public opinion that those of 1633 had failed to do: Prynne's exile to the Channel Islands became a triumphant progress, as no less was the return journey in 1640 when the Long Parliament was called. 
Throughout his writings in the 1630s, Prynne assailed Laudianism as a betrayal of his sentimentalized (but sincerely held) perception of what the Elizabethan church had been. The answer to the take-over of the church by semi-papists, led by Archbishop Laud, was not therefore separatism (which he abhorred) nor even presbyterianism (in which he showed no interest before 1641, and which he actively opposed after August 1645). What he advocated instead was a return to the Elizabethan principles of another archbishop, Whitgift, whom Prynne quaintly saw as a 'Puritane' (W. Prynne, 'A Breviate of the Prelates Intollerable Usurpations', 1637, 123), while Whitgift's presbyterian opponent, Cartwright, was on the other hand now viewed by Prynne as an 'Opposite' (W. Prynne, 'A Vindication of Four Serious Questions', 1645, 7). Until 1641 Prynne had not lost faith in those episcopalians who were seemingly untarnished with the Laudian brush: bishops like Joseph Hall and John Williams, who were seen by him as custodians of Elizabethan values. But in 1641 he lost his faith in these non-Laudian bishops. Hall's defence of divine right episcopacy aligned him with Laud, not Whitgift. The pamphlet which Prynne wrote in 1641, 'The Antipathie', is a watershed in his career. For the first time in his writing he attacked all bishops, and argued for a 'root and branch' destruction of episcopacy. This did not make him, or his fellow 'root and branchers' for the most part, necessarily card-carrying presbyterians. But he was won to their view that a 'New Jerusalem' was possible, and the millenarian views of Thomas Brightman carried more weight with him and his fellows than the more conservative readings of the book of 'Revelation' by John Foxe. In 1641 Prynne had presented Foxe's 'Acts and Monuments' to his Swainswick parish church (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 69, fol. 1). But by then he had already implicitly rejected Foxe's legacy by his conversion to a belief in 'root and branch' destruction of all bishops (and that included even Foxe's martyrs). 
Central for Prynne, as for many fellow puritans explaining the origins of the civil war, was the suspicion that Charles I had secretly commissioned the Irish rebels of October 1641. Prynne defended Sir John Hotham's refusal to yield Hull to the king in 1642, not on Calvinist resistance grounds (with which he had no sympathy) but on the self-preservative grounds which he had learned from the anti-Calvinist Hugo Grotius: 'That a King who aliens and would actually deliver up possession of all or any part of his Realm to another forraign power without the peoples consent, may lawfully be resisted with force by his subjects' (W. Prynne, 'The Soveraigne Powers of Parliaments', 1643, 1.103). 
Prynne opposed both Calvinist Independency and presbyterianism in the civil war. The Presbyterian Scot, Robert Baillie, knew the contingent nature of Prynne's interest in their cause when he instructed his London agent in 1640 to 'try the present estate' of Prynne ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 226). The Presbyterians' alibi for the subsequent delay in reform in the 1640s was that they had been thwarted by Independents. In 1644 Prynne went along with this explanation. He attacked Independency as an anti-social force which denied man's dependence upon his neighbours, church, and country for the fulfilment of his nature. Against such ideas he quoted Aristotle's view of man as a social animal. But a year later (in common with other English puritans from an Erastian tradition) he saw the enemy no longer as Laudian crypto-popery but presbyterian theocracy. 'A speedy reformation in our Church', he now recognized, could not by its nature come from that 'strict discipline which really reforms very few or none' (W. Prynne, 'A Vindication of Four Serious Questions', 1645, 57-8). An exasperated Presbyterian, Robert Baillie, on 5 September 1645 conceded that 'Mr. Prin and the Erastian lawyers are now our 'remora'' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 315). 
Although Prynne's was the officially commissioned defence by parliament of its sovereignty (and he had read, and quoted, Jean Bodin on sovereignty), it is no landmark in political theory. Rather, 'The Soveraigne Powers of Parliaments' is a series of 'post hoc' justifications of actions taken by the parliamentary army during the campaign itself. The full title of the work reflects Prynne's priorities: 'The Treachery and Disloyalty of Papists to their Soveraignes, in Doctrine and Practise'. Charles I had been deceived by his advisers (principally Laud and Henrietta Maria) into the betrayal of his own royal supremacy. Prynne's 'The Popish Royall Favourite' of 1643 is the most bitter personal attack upon Charles I; only Charles's martyrdom in 1649 wiped out his previous faults, and that crime too had been perpetrated by papists. After 1649, and until the end of his life, Prynne reverted to the royalism of his earlier years, maintaining that he had been consistent even in the period from 1642 to 1649, since (in his view) it was Charles I, not himself, who had lapsed from his imperial principles. Prynne's record of Archbishop Laud's trial, 'Canterburies Doome' (1646), was constructed with one end in view: to show that Laud's crime lay not in advancing royal absolutism, but in subverting it. He was impenitent about rigging the record to fit the conclusion: 'no indifferent person can justly taxe me with partiality or injustice for inserting into the History, [materials] for the fuller discovery of his Popish intentions in this kinde' ('Canterburies Doome', dedicatory epistle). In 1647 he looked back upon the lessons of the archbishop's trial and execution: 'the late Archbishops familiarity, correspondence and confederacy with Priests and Jesuits to introduce Popish Superstitions, and subvert the established Protestant Religion, was charged against him by the whole House of Commons, as a Treasonable and Capitall Offence' (W. Prynne, 'The Sword of Christian Magistracy', 1647, 68). By 1647 the papist menace had taken a different form, however. The Jesuits by then had given up working through the monarchy by a fifth column in the church, and now (according to Prynne) were working directly against the monarchy through Leveller soldiers. Pride's Purge, Charles I's trial, and then his execution were all seen by Prynne as part of an orchestrated 'popish plot'. Hence the important symbolism to him of Henrietta Maria's Jesuit confessor waving his sword in triumph as the king's head was cut off (W. Prynne, 'A True and Perfect Narrative', 1659, 60-63) -- a canard with wide currency in the literature of the 1650s. The 'Popish Royall Favourite' of 1643 had metamorphosed into the royal martyr of 1649. No wonder the Independent minister, John Goodwin, accused Prynne of 'melting down' the 'mountain' which he had first set up in 1643 ('Right and Might well Met', 1649, 4, 8, 9). Prynne 'had' changed his mind about Charles I (whatever he protested to the contrary), but he had not -- in this he was correct -- changed his mind about monarchy. Nevertheless he had changed his mind about another institution (the House of Commons) by 1648, and he did so for scholarly reasons. Sir Robert Filmer published his 'The Freeholders Grand Inquest' in January 1648. A contemporary wrote across his copy of Filmer's work this shrewd observation: 'in a considerable degree an answer to the exceptionable doctrines in Prynne's 'Sovereignty of Parliament''. So it was, and this makes it all the more remarkable how Prynne responded to it. In two works in 1648 Prynne answered Filmer (in February and March respectively): 'The Levellers Levelled to the Very Ground' and 'A Plea for the Lords'. Up to that point, Prynne's mentor on constitutional matters had been Sir Edward Coke. But Filmer -- drawing upon antiquarian researches -- revealed the sketchiness of Coke's history. He drew upon election writs to show that the Commons had not been historically part of the common council. He denied the antiquity of the Commons: 1265 was the first extant summons of knights by the sheriff's writs. Filmer used these points to make a royalist case; Prynne did not go quite that far, but he accepted the main findings of Filmer's scholarship. However, he fashioned them to a different end from Filmer's: to subordinate the Commons not to the king merely (as Filmer had done), but to subordinate it to the ancient law of England, which required the co-operation of king and Lords. He was wholly receptive, however, to Filmer's means of reaching his conclusion, and this would fashion Prynne's career for the rest of his life. Coke had put his trust in commentaries on the records, not upon a study of the records themselves. This was the lesson that Prynne drew in 'A Plea for the Lords'. Henceforth ancient parliamentary rolls and journals should be transcribed and published to preserve them from the threat of fire or war ('A Plea for the Lords', dedicatory epistle). His conviction of the need to study the primary sources made him quarrel with contemporaries who still lived in the land of historical make-believe, and who still saw Sir Edward Coke as an oracle (W. Prynne, 'The First Part of a Brief Register', 1659, 422). 
From February 1644 Prynne had been a member of the committee of accounts; on 1 May 1647 he had been appointed one of the commissioners for the visitation of the University of Oxford; in November 1648 he was MP, for the first time, for Newport in Cornwall. He emerged as the great champion of a negotiated settlement with Charles I, and vigorously opposed Pride's Purge and the trial and the execution of the king. For nearly three years after these events he was imprisoned without trial for opposing the Commonwealth. It was a cavalier who now called him 'the Cato of his Age'; Clarendon's papers abound with testimonies to Prynne's contribution to the royalist cause in the interregnum; Charles II himself recognized Prynne's worth. He subsequently served both in the Convention Parliament and the Cavalier Parliament as MP for Bath, and from 1660 onwards as recorder of Bath. Bath council formally thanked him 'for his readiness to promote the advantage of this City' as its recorder (Bath council minutes, vol. 2, fol. 89). 
It was a master stroke for Charles II to appoint Prynne as keeper of the records in the Tower of London after the Restoration: he called it 'most suitable to my Genius'. This is how he described the work in a letter to Sir Harbottle Grimston: 'whilst you are sucking in the fresh country air, I have been almost choked with the dust of neglected records (interred in their own rubbish for sundry years) in the White Tower; their rust eating out the tops of my gloves with their touch, and their dust rendering me, twice a day, as black as a chimney sweeper. ('Verulam MSS', 58)' F. W. Maitland called this aspect of Prynne's career 'heroic' (Holdsworth, 'Eng. law', 5.407). There was a double heroism: the physical labour that Prynne described, but also the intellectual rescue of a historical feudal law from the myth of an ancient constitution (to which Prynne in the 1630s, as a disciple of Coke, had himself subscribed). The Commons' claim to sovereignty could not stand up to the scrutiny of sources; the king's imperial powers, on the other hand, were given a heightened vindication. Prynne called his 'Aurum reginae' of 1668 a minor contribution to the defence and assistance of 'all Jurisdiction, Priviledges, Preheminencies and Authorities granted to or belonging to the IMPERIALL CROWN of the REALM' (BL, Add. MS 71534, fol. 14). The major contribution, he believed, were the volumes which he published after the Restoration under the title, 'An Exact Chronologicall Vindication... of our Kings Supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction'. In the introduction to the fourth volume, he argued that the king embodied the patriarchal authority of Adam; the king was God's viceroy to implement his rule on earth; the distinction between church and state is a popish invention; all church power derived its authority from the crown (W. Prynne, 'The First Tome of the Exact Chronologicall Vindication', 1666, 4.1, 2, 7, 77). These were the four principles, it could be argued, not of his dotage, but of his entire career. 
Not all royalists appreciated that fact. They remembered the man twice convicted for sedition in the 1630s, and who had built a 'mountain' (in John Goodwin's words) of invective against Charles I between 1643 and 1648. Sir Thomas Bridges, for instance, wrote to Secretary Nicholas on 20 March 1661 to argue that Prynne should at all costs be prevented from continuing to serve as MP for Bath in the Cavalier Parliament ('CSP dom.', Charles II, '1660-61', 564). The minutes of Bath council record the lengths to which opponents would go to silence Prynne. In September 1661 Prynne's supporters were even kidnapped in a mayoral election to prevent them from voting (Bath council minutes, vol. 2, fol. 68; Peach, 43-5). At Archbishop Juxon's funeral in 1663, Robert South delivered a gratuitous swipe at the 'famous and Scurillous' Prynne (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 1.481). As late as 18 March 1668, when Prynne pressed for the exemption of an opponent from the royal pardon, Sir Thomas Littleton sourly reminded him that 'if Prynne had not had his, he might have been in the same predicament' (A. Grey, ed., 'Debates of the House of Commons from the year 1667 to the year 1694', 1769, 118). 
If unforgiving royalism was one problem for Prynne in his life after the Restoration, another surely ought to have been the gap between Prynne and the unpuritan court which he now served. He has even been accused of cowardice in not emphasizing that gap (Murch, 31-2). The criticism is not fair. Prynne went on attacking his enemies of the 1630s -- duels, taverns, and the drinking of healths ('The Second Part of the Signal Loyalty and Devotion of Gods True Saints', 1660, dedicatory epistle; 'Letter and Proposals to our Gracious Lord and Sovereign King Charles', 1660). He even had his pamphlet, 'Healthes Sicknesse' (1628), reprinted after the Restoration. Always, though, his criticisms went in tandem with professions of loyalty to Charles II; the Baptist, Henry Jessey, borrowed the criticisms but left out their royalist accompaniment (H. Jessey, 'The Lords Loud Call to England', 1660, 32). Moreover, Prynne attacked the 'Corporation Act' of 1661, not only legally and futilely in the Commons ('JHC', 8.282, 291) but by an extra-constitutional anonymous printed plea to the Lords ('Summary Reasons, Humbly Tendred to the most Honourable House of Peeres'). When his cover was blown, he apologized, unexpectedly abjectly. This was hailed as a 'conquest' by an opponent ('Beaufort MSS', 50-51). But his standing in the Commons did not seem to have been diminished. Certainly a fortnight later he was managing a conference with the Lords on restraining unlicensed printing (of which he was now something of an expert). He described himself, in another context, in February 1661 as 'quite tyred out' (W. Prynne, 'Brevia parliamentum rediviva', 1661, 515). Was this the explanation for his 'conquest' in that year? At times he could seem a more mellow figure after the Restoration. Anthony Wood recalls how, in 1667, as a young historian furnished with letters of commendation from the provost of Prynne's old college, Oriel, he went to Prynne in the Tower of London to be introduced to the study of historical records. Wood says that Prynne 'received him with old fashion compliments, such as were used in the raigne of King James I'. He seemed 'to be glad that such a young man as he was (for so he called him) should have inclinations towards venerable antiquity' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, l.lix). Wood has left an unforgettable picture of the aged antiquarian scholar, with his 'black taffaty-cloak, edg'd with black lace at the bottom' (ibid.), conducting his young pupil through the smoking ruins of London after the great fire, and unable to resist the chance of a yarn on the way with acquaintances before getting down to the documents. This later Prynne must not, however, be sentimentalized. He had opposed the readmission of Jews into England; he saw the Quakers as masked papists; he blamed the great fire of London on the papists; he commented upon impeachment proceedings against Clarendon: 'I pray God this be not a foreigner's plot' (A. Grey, ed., 'Debates of the House of Commons', 1765, 65). Pepys was no prude, but recorded his discomfiture at being seated next to Prynne at a dinner table: 'who, in discourse with me, fell upon what records he hath of the lust and wicked lives of the nuns heretofore in England, and showed me out of his pocket one wherein 30 nuns for their lust were ejected out of the house. (Pepys, 'Diary', 3.93)' At the time of the great fire one public servant complained about receiving a long and tiresome letter from a person called William Prynne, 'a stranger to him speaking of fears and jealousies, of plots and designs of Jesuits and Romanists against the Church and Religion' ('CSP dom.', Charles II, '1660-67', 318). He feared that it would 'stir up hornets'. Prynne would go on stirring up hornets until his death on 24 October 1669 at Lincoln's Inn, where, according to Wood, he was buried 'in the walk under the chapel' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 3.876). 
John Aubrey records that Prynne worked to a set routine. He wore a long quilt cap, 2 or 3 inches over his eyes, to protect them from the light. A servant would bring him a roll and pot of ale every three hours to revive his spirits, and he would study and drink into the early hours ('Brief Lives', 413). Prynne's profuse citations of sources in the margins of the text earned him his contemporary nickname, 'Marginal' Prynne. Contemporaries did not rate him highly. One critic thought it a pity that his parents were not German, since he then 'might have outdone the reputation of the greatest of their Authors, who are commonly valued at the rate of their boldnesse and prolixity' ('A Serious Epistle to Mr. William Prynne', 1649, 6-7). But a fellow critic, while deploring their superficiality, conceded that his arguments 'take with the people' (H. Woodward, 'Inquiries into the Cause of our Miseries', 1644, 11). Indeed parliament would not have commissioned Prynne to write its official defence in the civil war, nor its official record of the trial of Archbishop Laud, without a similar belief that his words would 'take with the people'. Prynne has a claim to scholarly attention not through the originality of his writings or the depth of his insight (although he made a significant contribution to the study of the past), but because he was involved in most of the great events of the time, and his public writings offer a continuous commentary upon them. Ideally there would be a private archive to complement this public history, but this is not the case. Prynne never married: waggishly he remarked in the Commons in November 1660, on his support for measures to punish women who refused to cohabit with their husbands, that he himself had 'never had a good or bad wife in his life' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 4, 1660, 145). The executors of his will were a brother (Thomas) and a sister (Katherine Clarke, mother of the physician William Clarke). The importance of gaining access to his private papers was grasped by two fellow antiquarian scholars, Anthony Wood and Sir William Dugdale. They lamented the obstacles placed in their way by Prynne's executors (W. Hamper, ed., 'The Life, Diary, and Correspondence of Sir William Dugdale', 1827, 390-91). Gilbert Sheldon, then archbishop of Canterbury, wanted Prynne's papers for another reason: to get his hands upon the papers relevant to Prynne's prosecution of Archbishop Laud. Jonas Moore suggested to Sheldon that the ideal middleman in the quest was the husband of one of Prynne's executors, George Clarke, who had once been a contact link with Charles II in the interregnum ('Portland MSS', 1.594). This too drew a blank. His private papers have never been recovered. In their absence, historians as much as contemporaries have been over-reliant on the message seemingly conveyed by the violence of the language of his pamphlets. Thus the great twentieth-century historian of puritanism, William Haller, offers the picture of Prynne as a Bakunin-like anarchist ('The Rise of Puritanism', 1938, 393, 219), which is not very different from what opponents of the time had said about him: 'a constant opponent of all governments' ('Mercurius Democritus', no. 5, 31 May - 7 June 1659); 'the Spirit of Contradiction' ('Democritus Turned Statesman', 1659, 6). 
When the spectre of a 'Laudian' revival (without Laud) appeared a real possibility at the Restoration, Prynne's response was to revert to his moderate episcopalianism of 1628-40, and not to champion his 'root and branch' principles of 1641-5. The appointment in 1663 as preacher to his own Lincoln's Inn of John Tillotson was a hopeful sign; to this future archbishop of Canterbury, Prynne later bequeathed one of his unreadable tomes in his will. Tillotson was seen by Prynne as the heir to Whitgift's legacy, not Laud's. What Prynne admired in both Whitgift and Tillotson was their defence of the royal supremacy: a recognition that bishops owed their office to the king (which was incompatible with Laudian claims for divine right sanction). Recent researches on Prynne, and many of his fellow puritans, have corrected the 'fanatic' stereotype. His claim in his last will and testament to have had as his aim 'to doe my God King and Country all the best publick service I could' is one that is now taken more seriously than it once was, and one which was wholly compatible, in his mind at least, with loyalty to the Church of England. 
The violence of Prynne's language misled contemporaries, as it misled historians later. He was in truth no more an egalitarian than he was a separatist. He had proudly flourished his grandfather's sword when he entered the recalled Long Parliament of February 1660. Farce mingled with triumph -- it usually did with Prynne -- even at such a high point in his career. The sword got entangled with the short fat legs of Sir William Waller 'and threw him down which caused laughter' ('Brief Lives', 414). The very fact that the sword in question had belonged to an Elizabethan mayor of Bath, his grandfather, was a source of intense pride to Prynne. An opponent hit a shrewd blow at Prynne's social pretensions when he claimed the real motive for Prynne's hostility to the readmission of Jews into England in 1656: 'surely the party who writ so furiously against the Jews coming in, was afraid his chamber in Lincolnes-Inn should have been for their habitation, or else his Mannour of Swainswicke, or Swainswick, of which he writes himself Esquire' (D. L., 'Israels Condition and Cause Pleaded', 1656, 70). Similarly, for an acute observer like Henry Parker in 1641, it was the authorities' paranoid failure to see how 'moderate' a puritan like Prynne really was (and he could equally well have added the epithets 'snobbish', 'hierarchical', 'conservative'), which would seal their subsequent doom ('A Discourse Concerning Puritans', 7). 


@@@@@


doc= 22855


Pryor, Alfred Reginald (1839-1881), botanist, was born at Hatfield, Hertfordshire, on 24 April 1839, the eldest son of Alfred Pryor, brewer, and Jane Anne ('nee' Pryor). He was educated at Tonbridge School and at University College, Oxford, whence he graduated BA on 26 June 1862. While at Oxford, in 1858, he converted to Catholicism. He was interested in botany by 1873 when the first of his papers appeared in 'The Journal of Botany, British and Foreign'. In the following year he began work, with R. H. Webb, on a supplement to Coleman's 'Flora Hertfordiensis' (1849), but this soon gave way to a plan for a new county flora. He worked on this for several years, before being compelled by bad health to winter abroad in 1879-80. His health never really recovered and he died, unmarried, at Baldock, Hertfordshire, on 18 February 1881. He left his herbarium, books, and manuscript flora to the Hertfordshire Natural History Society, with a small sum of money to enable the society to print the manuscript, which appeared as 'A Flora of Hertfordshire, edited... by B. Daydon Jackson, with an introduction... by John Hopkinson and the editor', in 1887. However, the residue of his estate was to go (after supporting his mother until her death) to Cardinal Manning. 


@@@@@


doc= 22856


Prys, Edmwnd (1542/3-1623), Church of England clergyman and Welsh poet, was the son of Sion ap Rhys ap Gruffudd ap Rhys and Sian, daughter of Owain ap Llywelyn ab Ieuan. Long thought to have been a native of Merioneth, he is now known to have hailed from Llanrwst, Denbighshire: both his father and grandfather feature among Llanrwst taxpayers in a 1543-4 subsidy roll, and genealogies place his mother's family also in the locality. His Llanrwst kinsmen included the humanist William Salesbury, a possible early influence. It is not certain where Prys received his early education, but an association with the Wynn family of Gwydir, Llanrwst, seems likely. Sir John Wynn of Gwydir claimed that William Morgan, translator of the 'Bible' into Welsh, received his early education at Gwydir, where there is evidence that the family employed a tutor. In 1565 both Prys and Morgan enrolled in St John's College, Cambridge; significantly perhaps, John Gwynn, Sir John Wynn's uncle, had served as fellow there from 1548 to 1555. 
Prys graduated BA from St John's in 1568, and MA in 1571. Elected fellow there in 1570, he was later elected college preacher (1574) and chaplain (1575); in 1575-6 he served as university preacher. His prominence in university circles led to his inclusion in the 'Cockolds Kallender', a scurrilous Cambridge satire by Stephen Valenger. Prys's long stay at St John's familiarized him with humanist culture and provided him with a formidable linguistic armoury. He claimed to know eight languages: these would have included the three classical languages in addition to his native Welsh and acquired English, and probably also some of the modern continental vernaculars. His friend William Morgan is credited with a knowledge of French; it may be significant that the Frenchman Antoine Chevallier, said to have been Princess Elizabeth's French tutor, was Hebrew lecturer at St John's during the two Welshmen's time there. 
Prys was ordained deacon in 1567 and priest in 1568 and was licensed to preach by John Whitgift in 1570. Having served a curacy at Harlton near Cambridge from 1568, he obtained his first living -- the rectory of Ffestiniog and Maentwrog in Merioneth -- in 1573, being at first an absentee incumbent. Appointed both rector of Ludlow and archdeacon of Merioneth in 1576, he probably still resided to some extent at Cambridge until 1577. He relinquished Ludlow in 1579, settling in Merioneth, at Tyddyn Du, Maentwrog (his popular association with Gerddi Bluog in nearby Llanfair is spurious). He served as archdeacon of Merioneth and rector of Ffestiniog and Maentwrog for the remainder of his life, serving also from 1580 as rector of Llanenddwyn and Llanddwywe. By virtue of his office as archdeacon he held the sinecure rectory of Llandudno. He also served as a canon and prebend at Bangor Cathedral, and in 1602 was appointed a canon at St Asaph's Cathedral by Bishop William Morgan, another indication of their close association. 
Prys combined his clerical duties with the life of a country gentleman -- he acquired land in Ffestiniog and Maentwrog -- and he served as a justice of the peace for some thirty years. Charges of illegal acquisition of land, cattle stealing, assault, bribery, and perjury were brought against him in the court of Star Chamber (1594, 1607), but their outcome is unknown. It is credible, however, that Prys -- a man of very large physical stature who sometimes displayed an arrogant disposition in his poetry -- could have been capable of overbearing and aggressive behaviour. Prys married twice. His first wife, Elin, daughter of Sion (John) ap Lewis of Pengwern, Ffestiniog, bore him three children, John, Robert, and Jane. His second wife, whom he had married by 1588, was Elin's cousin Gwen, daughter of Morgan ap Lewis and widow of Rhys ap Robert of Llanfair Talhaearn. She bore him three sons, Ffowc, Morgan, and Edmwnd. Like their father, both John and Ffowc Prys wrote poetry. 
Prys, the finest Welsh amateur poet of his day, produced a considerable body of strict-metre poetry (i.e. featuring 'cynghanedd'). Much of it consisted of debates with other poets, Sion Phylip, Huw Machno, Thomas Prys, and Wiliam Cynwal. Of these, the debate with Cynwal, extending to some fifty-four poems (1581-7), was easily the most significant. In this exchange Prys voiced a humanist critique of professional bards such as Cynwal, drawing on a wide range of reference derived from both classical and Welsh learning. Prys pursued a dual line of attack. First, he criticized Cynwal and his ilk for the mendacity of their eulogies -- the staple product of professional bardism -- echoing the criticism of the fifteenth-century poet Sion Cent. In Prys's view this mendacity was compounded by an attachment to discredited medieval lore, exemplified by Cynwal's references to Mandeville's travels and the story of Merlin. Second, he attacked Cynwal for his poetry's lack of substance, a fault Prys attributed to a lack of learning. Dismissing Cynwal's bardic degrees and training, he urged the bards to resort to the universities, asserting that a poet should be both a philosopher and a linguist. As alternatives to eulogy Prys championed both divine poetry based on the 'Bible' and scientific poetry, genres popular in contemporary humanist circles; a passage advocating scientific poetry suggests that he knew the then much admired 'La Sepmaine' (1578) of Guillaume Du Bartas. 
Prys's other poetry included elegies to his friends Richard Vaughan, bishop of London (a contemporary at St John's), and the poet Sion Phylip, religious and moral poems such as 'An Ode on our Redemption' and 'A Carol on Conscience', an allegorical poem of social criticism, 'The Misgovernment of the Mighty', and a satire on football. His poem employing the English song-metre 'About the Bank of Helicon' anticipated the seventeenth-century vogue of deploying 'cynghanedd' in metres other than the canonical ones of classical bardism. Prys wrote in Latin as well as Welsh. Latin quatrains by him occur in manuscripts, and a Latin hexameter poem he composed in praise of the author was prefaced to Dr John Davies's grammar, 'Antiquae linguae Britannicae... rudimenta' (1621). 
In a prefatory epistle to his 1588 'Bible' William Morgan cited Prys, with Dr David Powell and Richard Vaughan, as ones who had given him aid which was 'not to be discounted'. The extent of this contribution is unknown, but modern scholars doubt if it amounted to actual translation. Interestingly, Prys, in an elegy to Cynwal which concluded their debate, claimed that he chose him as an adversary in order to become acquainted with bardic linguistic usage and thus facilitate the provision of scripture in Welsh. Morgan may have sought his advice concerning the classical literary language of the bards, the medium adopted for the translation. 
Prys's masterpiece, his Welsh metrical psalms, was composed in old age. The London stationer Thomas Salisbury referred as early as 1610 to Prys's promise to produce them, but they did not appear until 1621 when they were published as a supplement to an edition of the Welsh 'Book of Common Prayer'. In a preface Prys justified his decision to compose the work in free metre, citing the danger of distorting scripture had he used the restrictive medium of 'cynghanedd'. Although Prys knew Hebrew, modern scholarship has demonstrated -- contrary to earlier claims -- that he was more indebted to the earlier Welsh translations of the psalms by William Salesbury and William Morgan than to the Hebrew originals. This does not diminish his achievement, however, for his work is noteworthy for its felicitous phrasing and copious Welsh and for its versatility in conveying the psalms' wide range of emotions. Prys's psalms were the staple of Welsh congregational praise until a more subjective hymnody evolved in the wake of the eighteenth-century evangelical revival. Over 100 editions of them have been published; some have continued to feature in Welsh hymn collections in the early twenty-first century. 
Prys died aged eighty in September 1623 and was probably buried in Maentwrog parish church. His wife survived him, Ffowc Prys inheriting Tyddyn Du. 


@@@@@


doc= 22857


Pryse, Sir Carbery, fourth baronet (d. 1694), mine owner and landowner, was the son of Carbery Pryse (Price), landowner, and his wife, Hester, daughter of Sir Bulstrode Whitelocke. His family owned Gogerddan, one of the major estates in north Cardiganshire, close to the county town of Aberystwyth, and had jealously guarded their mineral rights throughout the seventeenth century. Pryse succeeded to the estate and baronetcy in 1682, following the death, without issue, of his two uncles, Richard and Thomas. He was elected as knight of the shire for Cardiganshire in March 1690 (and held the seat until 1694), but the controversy over his election did not endear him to many members of parliament and may help to account for the lengthy proceedings against him during his battle to secure his mineral rights. 
Although British landowners had previously enjoyed the right to minerals on their estates, the crown in the sixteenth century sought to encourage mining in Britain by bringing over various German mining experts and granting chartered status in 1568 to two monopoly companies, the Company of Mines Royal and the Society of Mineral and Battery Works. The former was granted the right to minerals containing gold and silver, but since these metals were frequently found mixed with other metals, landowners found their mining rights severely compromised. This was especially true in Cardiganshire, where the lead which was mined all over the county was often very rich in silver. Lessees of the mines royal challenged various landowners over their mines, particularly after one of the lessees, Thomas Bushell, gained the establishment of a mint in Aberystwyth in 1638. 
In the late 1680s a shepherd discovered a rich vein of lead ore at Bwlch-yr-esgair-hir on the eastern boundary of the Gogerddan estate. Pryse decided to work the vein himself, and on 1 January 1690 established a company, dividing the capital required into twenty-four shares. Of these, he kept twelve himself and sold the other twelve to shareholders who included the earl of Danby. He was then challenged by Anthony Shepherd, lessee of the mines royal in Cardiganshire, who claimed that the lead ore at Esgair Hir was argentiferous and therefore came within the mines royal monopoly. Pryse refused to surrender his mines, and eventually the case was tried before the House of Lords. Samples of the ore were assayed, and whereas that brought by Shepherd was rich in silver, the specimen submitted by Pryse himself was not. Moses Stringer, a noted mineralogist, believed that the sample came from Derbyshire and was provided by William Waller, Pryse's notorious mine manager, in a deliberate attempt to mislead the court. However, many members of parliament, as landowners themselves, were sympathetic to Pryse's case and the verdict was finally delivered in his favour. The outcome was an 'Act to Prevent Disputes and Controversies concerning the Royal Mines', which received royal assent in February 1693 (Shiers, 3), and thereafter landowners could work their own mines, even if they contained gold or silver, so long as the crown could purchase the ore from the mine owner -- a right that was rarely exercised. A contemporary report noted that 'upon the passing of this Bill, Sir Carbery Pryse, anxious to communicate the glad intelligence to his mining friends, rode from London to Esgair Hir in forty eight hours' (Hunt, 646). 
Sir Carbery did not live long to enjoy his victory. The cost of draining the mines proved beyond the slender resources of the company he had set up, and in 1693 the capital was redivided into 4008 shares, Pryse retaining half and the remainder divided among the original members of the company. He had already engaged William Waller, a mine agent from the north of England, to run the company, though he remained chairman. To promote investment at Esgair Hir, Waller drew up an encouraging estimate of the profit of the mines at $70,500 and later likened the mines to the rich silver mine of Potosi in Bolivia -- hence its name of Welsh Potosi. Pryse had intended to be an active chairman, but after his death in 1694 his heir, Edward Pryse, did not pursue the same policy and the company suffered from weak management. Waller eventually persuaded Sir Humphrey Mackworth, an industrialist from south Wales, to take over the company, and it was eventually worked by the Company of Mines Adventurers, founded in 1698. 
Pryse, like his immediate predecessors, died unmarried, and the baronetcy, which had been created in 1641, expired with him. His vigour in pursuing his right to work his mines at Esgair Hir had, however, guaranteed the freedom of the British landowner to exploit the mineral resources on his estates, which was an important factor in Britain's early lead in industrialization. 


@@@@@


doc= 22858


Psalmanazar, George (1679-1763), impostor and author, was born in southern France under a name that is now unknown and to parents whose names, like that of his place of birth, he does not mention in his 'Memoirs' (published posthumously in 1764), the only source of information about his early life. For an important and lengthy period of his life he claimed to be a native of Formosa (Taiwan), but his confessional 'Memoirs' make it clear that he was born of Roman Catholic parents in southern France. This is affirmed in the advertisement to the first edition of the 'Memoirs' in the testimony of an acquaintance of twenty years: 'He was a Frenchman. His pronunciation had a spice of the Gascoin accent, and in that provincial dialect, he was so masterly, that none but those born in the country could equal, none though born there could excel him' ('Memoirs', i-ii). The little Psalmanazar says about his background in the 'Memoirs' indicates that his was a family of slender means, and that his 'father was of an ancient, but decayed family, and had been obliged to leave my mother before I was five years old, and to live near five hundred miles from her' in Germany (ibid., 71). Psalmanazar left his mother's house to visit his father at the age of sixteen, but the visit was brief, and there is no indication that he ever saw either of his parents in later life. 
By his own account, Psalmanazar's 'more than common readiness at learning' ('Memoirs', 73) in childhood gained him admiration and special treatment from teachers. At six he went to a 'free-school taught by two Franciscan monks' (ibid.), where he immediately started Latin. He then attended a Jesuit college, where he proceeded through the forms to 'Humanity', rhetoric, and philosophy. In the 'Memoirs' Psalmanazar makes much of his precocity, especially in learning languages, and of the over-indulgent treatment he received from his teachers. After the Jesuit college, he went on to study philosophy and theology in a Dominican university in a nearby town, 'too young quite, in all appearance, to herd among the rest of the students, some of whom were twice my age, and none by many years so young as I' (ibid., 98). Finally, disenchanted with the Dominican teachers' Thomism and with his studies in general, he left his university and went to nearby Avignon as a tutor. By this time, aged about sixteen, he was fluent in Latin and knew a good deal of philosophy and theology. Because of one teacher's special interest, he was also knowledgeable about military fortification, but otherwise his education was not very broad. 
In his first professional appointment, Psalmanazar was undone by his attractiveness to his superiors. The mother of his tutees, he says, made sexual overtures to him, and when he did not respond he was dismissed. In poverty in Avignon, he explained his ragged appearance and soothed his pride by pretending he was 'a sufferer for religion for too great attachment to the church' ('Memoirs', 113). Finally out of funds, he resolved to return home, and as a 'means of facilitating [his] long journey' he obtained a certificate signifying that he was a 'student in theology, of Irish extract', a religious exile on a pilgrimage to Rome (ibid., 117). He stole a cloak and staff for the purpose and set off first to his mother and then to his estranged father. 
Finding his father's circumstances very uninviting and the neighbouring towns and universities inaccessible, Psalmanazar decided to return home but was persuaded by his father to tour northern Germany and the Netherlands first. In order to gain alms on this journey, Psalmanazar decided to make his identity more exotic, and posed as a Japanese convert to Christianity. To facilitate the project, he revised the certificate that he had had drawn up to prove that he was Irish, and devised an alphabet and many words of a language that he thought might be taken for Japanese. Aware that Hebrew was written from right to left, he imagined that other 'oriental' languages would follow that pattern. He invented twenty letters with shapes, names, and pronunciations that resemble some Greek and Hebrew letters. By his own account, he also added 'many other particulars equally difficult, such as a considerable piece of a new language and grammar, a new division of the year into twenty months, a new religion, &c. and all out of my own head' ('Memoirs', 137). 
Destitute and scabrous after travelling, Psalmanazar enlisted in a military regiment camped near Bonn. Taking to swearing and profligacy, he pretended then to be an 'unconverted or heathenish' Japanese ('Memoirs', 162). He soon joined another regiment (under the duke of Mecklenburg) in Cologne, and this time used the name of Salmanazar (ibid., 169), which he took from the name of a biblical king of Assyria and captor of the Israelites, Shalmaneser ('2 Kings' 17). Later he began spelling the name with an initial P to make it more exotic, and he began claiming he was from the island of Formosa, a place he described as politically and culturally dependent upon Japan. 
Changing regiments once again, Psalmanazar enlisted at Sluys, Holland, and there met the British chaplain Alexander Innes, who saw in him an opportunity for his own advancement. First, Innes revealed the fraud. 'His stratagem', wrote Psalmanazar: 'was to make me translate a passage of Cicero de natura deorum, of some length, into my (pretended) Formosan language, and give it to him in writing; and this I easily did... But, after he had made me construe it, and desired me to write another version of it on another paper, his proposal, and the manner of his exacting it, threw me into such visible confusion, having had so little time to excogitate the first, and less to commit it to memory, that there were not above one half of the words in the second that were in the first. ('Memoirs', 184-5)' To his great shame in later life, Psalmanazar then allowed Innes to baptize him in the Church of England with the name of George Lauder, the governor of the regiment. For this deed Innes received commendation from the bishop of London, Henry Compton, and Psalmanazar received an invitation to come to England with the hope that he would teach Formosan at Oxford to Christian missionaries (ibid., 192). 
Psalmanazar earned fame in England within a year of his arrival when he published 'An Historical and Geographical Description of Formosa' (1704). He dedicated the work to Henry Compton, to whom he had earlier given drafts of 'Formosan' material: a translation of the Lord's prayer, a table of the alphabet, and drawings of the dress of the Formosans. The history, which Psalmanazar wrote in Latin over several months, was concurrently translated into English. (Judging from the French translation of 1705, R. M. Swiderski suggests that Psalmanazar may have written originally in French.) The fulsome dedication to Compton, the description of his conversion, and his high praise of the Church of England as a 'true Apostolical Church' helped Psalmanazar earn a loyal following. However, his fanciful account of Formosa, which occupies little more than half of the book's 327 pages, raised doubts about his veracity in several quarters at the same time as it excited many readers. Among his entertaining but suspicious claims were that Formosa was Japanese rather than Chinese; that the state religion, founded by an avatar named Psalmanaazaar, required the annual sacrifice of 18,000 boys under the age of nine; and that the production of children was facilitated by the encouragement of polygamy, although adultery was absolutely forbidden. 
Although Psalmanazar took a few descriptions out of Bernhardus Varenius's 'Descriptio regni Japoniae et Siam' (1649), his work is mostly pure fiction. In his 'Memoirs' he claimed to have borrowed more than he had done from Varenius and also from the fabulous account of Formosa by George Candidius in his 'Collection of Voyages and Travels' (1704). Despite the paper-thinness of its research, Psalmanazar's book was an instant success, and Henry Compton sent him to Christ Church, Oxford, where he remained in residence for three months. There he wrote an expanded and more daring second edition, which included sensational new claims about cannibalism and the subordination of Formosan women. In fact the two topics are sometimes conflated, as when Psalmanazar describes men devouring sinful women or discarded wives. It appears from some of the letters from Richard Gwinnet to Elizabeth Thomas (1731) that Psalmanazar claimed to have eaten human flesh himself (Foley, appendix C). 
At Oxford Psalmanazar was fortunate to have as his tutor the sympathetic (or gullible) Samuel Reynolds (father of the painter Joshua Reynolds and principal addressee in Psalmanazar's extant correspondence). The admiration of Reynolds notwithstanding, much of the learned community knew of Psalmanazar's fraud even before his book was published, as evidenced in the correspondence of John Locke, Anthony Collins, and Thomas Hearne, as well as in Samuel Parker's journal 'History of the Works of the Learned'. On 2 February 1704 Psalmanazar was invited to attend a meeting of the Royal Society along with Father Jean de Fontenay, a French Jesuit who had spent time in China. According to Psalmanazar's account in his 'Description', he defeated Fontenay's arguments that Formosa was Chinese rather than Japanese. Psalmanazar did not mention until the second edition (1705) the probing enquiry by Edmond Halley about the duration of twilight in Formosa, which revealed the fraud, according to a note on the flyleaf of a second edition of the 'Description' in the British Library (Foley, 19). Further notes in the 'Journal of the Royal Society' show that fellows were convinced of the fraud by 13 June 1705, when they received letters concerning Formosa from a traveller there (ibid., 20). But the society made no pronouncement against Psalmanazar, and to the extent that its opposition was known it helped Psalmanazar to portray himself as a defender of revealed religion hounded by the rationalistic freethinkers of the Royal Society. In a lengthy review of his 'Memoirs', the 'Monthly Review' confirmed that he profited from the Royal Society's opposition (p. 447). 
Psalmanazar received 10 guineas for the first and 12 guineas for the second edition of the 'Description', 'besides such presents as were made me by the generous few to whom I presented them' ('Memoirs', 220-21). With the support of these 'few', in 1706 and again in 1707 Psalmanazar published defences of himself that emphasize his allegiance to revealed religion. About 1710 he made a final attempt to defend himself in print with the publication of two more pamphlets. Nevertheless, credulity was growing thin. By 16 March 1711 Psalmanazar's fraud was well enough known for 'The Spectator' to make a joke at his expense by printing a false advertisement, claiming that '
'On the first of April will be performed at the playhouse in the' Hay-market 'an Opera call'd' The Cruelty of Atreus. N. B. 'The scene wherein' Thyestes 'eats his own children, is to be performed by the famous' 'Mr. Psalmanazar'', lately arrived from' Formosa: 'The whole Supper being set to Kettle-drums'. ('The Spectator', ed. D. Bond, 5 vols., 1965, 1.65)' 

After five or six years in England, Psalmanazar made his last public attempt to capitalize on his feigned origins: he conspired with a man named Pattenden to promote a kind of lacquer called white Formosan work. The project failed, and until 1715 Psalmanazar lived on the small income he earned as a tutor. In that year he became clerk to a regiment of dragoons fighting against the Jacobites, and after the defeat of the rising he stayed for a time in Lancashire, where he advised the newly established Manchester College Library on the expenditure of its gift funds for books. 
Back in London about 1717, Psalmanazar began painting ladies' fans for a living, until friends took up a subscription for him to study divinity. Feeling guilty about this generosity, however, he earned an income as a translator. 'It was then I began to perceive, with no small joy, how God blessed my endeavours in proportion to my diligence and honesty... From translating of other people's works, I came at length to print some of my own, and... bless the Divine mercy, for the wonderful and undeserved success I have since met with. ('Memoirs', 249)' For the rest of his life Psalmanazar was a pious and productive member of Grub Street. The principal works to which he made significant contributions are Samuel Palmer's 'The General History of Printing' (1732), which he took over after the death of the first author; Emanuel Bowen's 'A Complete System of Geography' (2 vols., 1744), to which he contributed articles on thirty countries including a confessional piece on Formosa; and 'An Universal History from the Earliest Account of Time' (8 vols., 1736-50). To this last, immense folio work and its twenty-volume octavo second edition (1747-54) Psalmanazar contributed articles on at least twelve vast subjects, including a history of the Jews to the present, as well as on ancient Greece, the ancient Spaniards, the Gauls, and the Germans. The quality of Psalmanazar's known work is less impressive than the indomitable energy and considerable linguistic skill he displayed to complete it. 
Soon after becoming a writer, Psalmanazar resolved to overcome his vanity and confess his impostures. Several books of practical divinity were important to his salvation, he said, but the decisive experience was his reading of William Law's 'A Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life' (1728), which was also read at this time, and with similar effect, by the future lexicographer Samuel Johnson. Later Johnson identified Psalmanazar's devotion as one of the reasons why he 'sought after' him 'the most' of any of his London acquaintance (Boswell, 'Life', 3.314). According to Sir John Hawkins, Johnson: 'was very well acquainted with Psalmanaazar, the pretended Formosan, and said, he had never seen the close of the life of any one that he wished so much his own to resemble, as that of him, for its purity and devotion... asked whether he ever contradicted Psalmanaazar; -- 'I should as soon', said he, 'have thought of contradicting a bishop'; so high did he hold his character in the latter part of his life. When he was asked whether he had ever mentioned Formosa before him, he said, he was afraid to mention even China. ('Johnsonian Miscellanies', ed. G. B. Hill, 2 vols., 1897, reprinted 1970, 2.12-13)' In 1753 Psalmanazar published anonymously his 'Essays on the Following Subjects', which purport to offer a defence of revealed religion from the attacks of Viscount Bolingbroke, Anthony Collins, and especially David Hume, whose essay on miracles had recently been published. For the most part, Psalmanazar relies here on the old argument of Lactantius and others that human ignorance disqualifies man from passing judgement on the miracles of revelation. However, his engagement with the details of his opponents' thinking is minimal. 
In 1752 Psalmanazar wrote to Thomas Birch of his failing health. In the same year he also made his will and named his executor and residuary legatee as Sarah Rewalling, 'my pious and worthy friend... of this parish of St. Luke, in Middlesex' ('Memoirs', 3-4). She is named as the publisher of the 'Memoirs', but nothing further is known of her or of their relationship. In the preface to his 'Memoirs' Psalmanazar provided 'some account of that vast quantity of laudanum I have been known to take for above these forty years' to which he attributed his good health (ibid., 57). Although 'quite sound in mind', Psalmanazar described himself as 'weak in my body' when he ratified his will on 1 January 1762 (ibid., 9). He died on 3 May 1763 at Ironmonger Row, St Luke's parish, London. Then, according to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', aged eighty-four, Psalmanazar was 'known for many ingenious performances in different parts of literature' ('GM', 33.257). His will was printed in several magazines, and also in his 'Memoirs'. Perhaps most striking in this document are his directions for a humble burial 'without any kind of coffin... but only a shell of lowest value, and without lid or other covering which may hinder the natural earth from covering it all around' ('Memoirs', 4). 
The obvious cultural milieu in which to place Psalmanazar is the impostors and forgers of the eighteenth century, including William Lauder, Thomas Chatterton, James MacPherson, and Richard Savage. In these and many other cases of forgery and assumed identity in the period, the impostor imagined he had access to hidden information and that he himself was in touch with a deeper or older, often more 'natural', tradition of knowledge than that accepted by the current establishment. The flourishing of such forgers at this time may have been a response to the increased professionalization of knowledge during the period. Psalmanazar's quarrel with the Royal Society, his defence of revelation in religion, and his immersion in ancient Hebrew may be all regarded as a rebellion against modern forms of knowledge. Psalmanazar's work, despite its fabrication, also has a place in the history of ethnography. Unlike his fellow impostors, Psalmanazar outlived his impersonation by several decades and became an admired penitent and an industrious, if not brilliant, contributor to the productions of Grub Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 22859


Pucci, Francesco (1543-1597), theological writer, was born on 11 February 1543 in the via Ghibellina, Florence, the eldest son of Antonio Pucci ('b'. 1496) and Lisabetta Giambonelli (died 1590). He came from the junior branch of a patrician Florentine family. He was educated in the Accademia dei Lucidi in Florence, and took minor orders. His uncle, Mariotto Giambonelli, a rich Roman jeweller, made him his heir and decided in 1564 that he should be apprenticed to a Florentine banker in Lyons. The death of his uncle in 1570 enabled Pucci to leave the bank and recommence his education, and he enrolled in 1571 as a student of theology at the University of Paris. He witnessed the massacre of St Bartholomew's day there in 1572, and this persuaded him to leave Paris and become an undergraduate at the University of Oxford. He graduated MA on 18 May 1574. His quarrelsome and enquiring disposition led him into theological difficulties at Oxford and by 1575 he had been expelled from the university. He spent two years in London, where he became a member of the Huguenot church and quarrelled with its leading figures, arguing that each individual had the authority to decide on theological matters for himself. He left England in 1576, and went by way of Paris to Basel, where he began the first of his debates with the Unitarian theologian Fausto Sozzini. Pucci developed the idea that Adam before the fall was immortal. After just over a year Pucci was expelled from Basel for publishing a provocative list of his beliefs, and he returned to London, where he is to be found by early 1579. 
While on this second visit to London, Pucci wrote two important theological pamphlets. In the 'Informazione della religione Christiana', which was printed in London in 1580, he outlined his humanist theology, called for a general council to reunite Christendom, and launched a vigorous attack on the Roman Catholic church. The following year Pucci produced his most ambitious and fanciful work, which seems to have circulated only in manuscript, the 'Forma d'una republica catholica'. He advocated the creation of an underground secret society uniting those of goodwill throughout Christendom to prepare the way for the hoped-for general council. He described the structure of his secret utopia: it would consist of cells or 'colleges' each run by a provost, chancellor, and censor elected for four years by universal manhood suffrage, who would regulate the marriage, education, and morals of its members, and tax them. Discipline would also be maintained by the use of spies and informers. The colleges dispersed throughout Europe would send delegates to a central diet, which would have supreme legislative and judicial authority. The members of this 'republic' would, until the general council had pronounced, be Nicodemites, attending the local religious services enforced by law to a sufficient degree to avoid punishment, and then at home would practise a simple religion based on those beliefs which were accepted by all Christians. In June 1582 Pucci left London for Antwerp and then in 1583 he migrated to Cracow, partly to resume his debates with Sozzini who was presently ensconced in that city. Two years later (1585) he had removed to Prague, to meet the English alchemists John Dee and Edward Kelley. Pucci's thought was already increasingly millenarian and occultist, and in Dee and Kelley he found kindred spirits. He made the mistake of lending Kelley money at a time when his own financial position was increasingly precarious since he had nearly exhausted his inheritance. 
By 1585 Pucci was trying to arrange for a return to Florence, negotiating through Florentine and Roman channels, although the Inquisition had already taken an interest in him. He wrote penitent letters to the pope and formally abjured his heresy at Prague. However, at the same time he continued to write and distribute as widely as possible works of speculative theology which were certainly heretical. All his works were placed on the 'Index' in 1592, after the publication in that year at Gouda of 'De Christi servatoris efficacitate', dedicated to the pope, in which he maintained that Christ had saved the whole of humanity. He continued to drift from European city to city until at last in 1593 at Salzburg, where he was confined to bed having broken a leg in a carriage accident, he was arrested by agents of the Roman Inquisition who took him in chains to Rome. Here he was imprisoned, stripped of his property, and forced (at the insistence of his relatives) to change his surname. He was a relapsed heretic and hence liable to suffer the supreme penalty. He was saved from the stake by a second abjuration, but was killed instead by being beheaded at the Tor di Nona prison on 5 July 1597. His remains were burnt in the campo dei Fiori. 


@@@@@


doc= 22860


Puckering, Sir John (1543/4-1596), administrator and speaker of the House of Commons, was the eldest son of William Puckering of Flamborough, Yorkshire, and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Ashton of Great Lever Hall, near Bolton, Lancashire. Admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 10 April 1559, he was called to the bar in 1567. On 21 February 1569 he married Jane (died after 1599), daughter of Nicholas Chowne of Aldenham, Hertfordshire, and Fairlawn, near Wrotham, Kent, and his second wife, Elizabeth Scott. They had a son, Thomas ['see below'], and four daughters. 
Under-treasurer of Lincoln's Inn in 1569, Puckering was a governor of the inn by 1575, and in that year became a justice of the peace in Hertfordshire. He was Lent reader of Lincoln's Inn in 1577, and became in the same year a member of the council in the marches of Wales and a justice of the peace in Welsh and border counties. On 7 September 1577 he was appointed justice of the Carmarthen circuit, becoming chief justice when Richard Atkyns was associated with him on 15 September 1578. Puckering retained his London practice, though his letters patent to act by deputy in Wales caused discord with Atkyns. A close ally of Robert Devereux, earl of Essex, in building up Essex's influence in south-west Wales, Puckering was created serjeant-at-law in October 1580. In 1582 he bought the priory of St Sepulchre, Warwick, from Edward Fisher, whose fraud necessitated an act of parliament confirming Puckering's title. 
Of the 'quorum' of the commission of the peace in Hertfordshire in 1583, on 19 November 1584 Puckering was returned to parliament for Carmarthen, but chose instead to sit for Bedford, where the government had had him returned on 2 November. The parliament was relatively inexperienced, and as a newcomer Puckering was chosen as speaker. A 'very able member of the... House' (D'Ewes, 333), he acted as the government's agent, relying upon Burghley for assistance. In the parliament of 1586-7 he was returned for the borough of Gatton, near Reigate, Surrey, and again elected speaker. He had been appointed queen's serjeant-at-law on 3 July 1585, and in 1586 he prosecuted at the trial of Edward Abington and other Babington plot conspirators. In 1587 he resigned his place as counsel to the town of St Albans, and appeared for the crown at the trial of Secretary Davison for his conduct in sending off the death warrant for Mary, queen of Scots. In 1589 came the trials of Philip Howard, earl of Arundel, for treason, and of Sir Richard Knightley and others for sedition. In the following year, in which he became recorder of Warwick, Puckering presided with Mr Baron Clarke over the trial for sedition at the Surrey assizes of the puritan minister John Udall. Puckering's last appearance at a state trial was at the prosecution for treason in 1592 of Sir John Perrott, late lord deputy of Ireland. 
On 28 May 1592 Puckering was knighted, sworn of the privy council, and appointed lord keeper of the great seal, succeeding Sir Christopher Hatton since whose death in November 1591 the seal had been in commission. Lacking Hatton's accomplishments, and despite his reputedly extraordinary knowledge of the real actions, Puckering was not an automatic choice for the lord keepership. Almost all his chancery orders date from after Sir Thomas Egerton's appointment as master of the rolls in April 1594, though Puckering launched a broad offensive against lesser equity courts, much in keeping with his hostility towards the earls of Pembroke and Huntingdon, presidents respectively of the councils in Wales and in the north. Never certain of royal favour, Puckering solicited reassurance from the court, and entertained Elizabeth lavishly when she visited him at Kew in Surrey in 1595. Despite such expenditure, and while petitioning the queen for a grant of land in 1595, Puckering complained that as speaker he had lost $2000 from his practice, and that the lord keepership cost him $1000 a year. But like lord keepers Bacon and Egerton, Puckering bought land on a large scale, acquiring the manor of Weston, Hertfordshire, in 1593, and further Warwickshire lands in 1596. It was said that he had abused the lord keeper's ecclesiastical patronage, though Camden assigned the responsibility to his servants. He died intestate of apoplexy on 30 April 1596, aged fifty-two, according to his memorial inscription, leaving 'no regret of him' (BL, Lansdowne MS 982, fol. 194); he was buried in St Paul's Chapel, Westminster Abbey where his widow erected a substantial monument. 
His son, 


@@@@@


doc= 22861


Sir Thomas Puckering, baronet (1591/2-1637), was aged four at his father's death. Educated at the King's School, Warwick, under John Owen the epigrammatist, and admitted to the Middle Temple in 1605, he was for some years a companion to Henry, prince of Wales, before completing his education in Paris, having left England in September 1610 in the company of Thomas Lorkin with whom he was to maintain a regular correspondence. Created baronet on 25 November 1611 and knighted on 3 June 1612, on 2 July 1616 he married Elizabeth (died 1652), daughter of Sir John Morley of Halnaker, Sussex, and his wife, Cicely Carryll. They had three daughters, of whom two died as children. A member of the North West Passage Company, he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 20 February 1621; represented the borough of Tamworth, Staffordshire, in the parliaments of 1621, 1625, 1626, and 1628; and was sheriff of Warwickshire in 1625. Living mainly in Warwick, he founded there a hospital for poor women and a charity to provide houses for tradesmen. He died on 20 March 1637 and was buried in St Mary's, Warwick. Jane, his surviving daughter, died childless in 1652, the Puckering estates passing to Sir Henry Newton, son of Sir Thomas's sister Katherine. 


@@@@@


doc= 22862


Puckle, James (b. in or before 1667, d. 1724), writer and inventor, was the son of James Puckle ('bap'. 1633, died 1690), a merchant trading with Amsterdam, whose brother Thomas (1638-1724), a London merchant, took out patents in 1693 for plastic wood and for a screw-wheel device for lifting heavy weights, thus perhaps encouraging his nephew's bent for invention. His mother's name is unknown and nothing is known of the younger James Puckle's life until he was married to Mary Francis at St Vedast, Foster Lane, on 22 January 1688. They had at least eight children before Mary died at some time between 1702 and 1714. 
By 16 June 1690, when he obtained letters of administration for the estate of his father, who had died a widower overseas, Puckle was a notary public in partnership with one Jenkins in Pope's Head Alley, Cornhill. Puckle was also a stockjobber. Between 1696 and 1700 he published three pamphlets demonstrating the importance of the English fishing industry and advocating the purchase of shares in the company of the Royal Fishery of England (incorporated 1676), which it seems he was selling on commission. About 1707 he attempted to float a joint-stock company to be called 'The Merchant Adventurers of Great Britain' which would trade on the Pacific coast of South America, and which sank with little trace. 
In 1711 Puckle published 'The Club', a series of prose dialogues in which a young man describes members of his club to his father, who follows each description with appropriate moralisms. This device provides an alphabetical sequence of Theophrastian characters, from Antiquary and Buffoon to Youth and Zany. 'The Club' was dedicated to two London tobacco importers, Micajah Perry and Richard Perry, and to the memory of a third, Thomas Lane, who had married Puckle's cousin Mary. Its third edition (1713) included a portrait of Puckle engraved by George Vertue after J. B. Closterman. 
On 21 February 1715 Puckle was married at New Brentford to Elizabeth Fownes, 'nee' Cabell ('b'. 1675), widow of Richard Fownes, apothecary. Puckle and his new wife lived in the parish of St Stephen, Coleman Street, and had no children. There was apparently a family quarrel because Puckle signed a will on 30 June 1715 leaving 1's'. to each of the four surviving children, aged thirteen to twenty-five, of his first marriage. The rest of his estate went to his new wife, who was named sole executrix. 
On 15 May 1718 Puckle took out a patent for a portable breech-loading machine-gun that could be swivelled and elevated on a collapsible tripod, while its six-chambered breech could be turned by hand and replaced by others which enabled it to fire grenades, or either round or square bullets according to whether the enemy was Christian or Turk. Puckle's flotation of a joint-stock company to market this invention was satirized (along with many other 'bubbles') in prints and on playing cards. Prints and playing cards at this time also satirized the Royal Fishery. Undeterred, Puckle invented a patent sword, which, he wrote to James, first Earl Stanhope, on 11 April 1720, 'was worth a victory to the army first has it' (TNA: PRO, SP 35/21/10). Though the 'London Journal' on 31 March 1722 reported a successful trial of the machine-gun, asserting that 'one man discharged it 63 times in seven minutes' despite continuous rain, though two of Puckle's guns were included in the armament of the second duke of Montagu's disastrous expedition to St Lucia that year, and though shares offered at $4 rose at one point to $8, the satirists were correct in saying that 'Puckle's Machine' was dangerous only to investors. More reliably, Puckle revised 'The Club', now subtitled 'a grey-cap for a green-head', for a subscription edition in 1723, with a re-engraving of the Closterman portrait by J. Cole. 
Puckle was interred in the burial-ground of St Stephen, Coleman Street, on 26 July 1724, the day after his contentious will was proved. 'The Club' was reprinted in London, Dublin, and Philadelphia several times between 1733 and 1795, and came to wider notice in 1817 when it was republished with wood-engravings by John Thurston, John Thompson, and others, and became one of the works that significantly raised the prestige of wood-engraving in the early nineteenth century. The last reprint of the illustrated edition appeared in 1900 with an introduction by Austin Dobson, shortly after Sidney Lee observed that 'The Club's' 'long lease of popularity seems to exceed its literary merits' ('DNB'). There is a Puckle machine-gun in the Royal Armouries, Leeds. 


@@@@@


doc= 22863


Pugh, Ellis (1656-1718), Quaker minister in America, was born in August 1656 at Penrhos, near Tyddyn-y-garreg, Dolgellau, in Merioneth, to unknown parents. His father died before his birth, and his mother a few days after he was born. He received only a limited education and became a stonemason at Brithdir. In his early years Pugh was inclined to indulge in 'the heedless haste of youth, in the paths of folly' ('Biographical sketches', 28.284), but in 1674, under the ministration of the Quaker itinerant preacher John ap John, he became a convinced Friend, and in 1680 he became a minister. 
Pugh married Sina, a widow with nine small children, but there is no further information relating to this marriage. In 1686 Pugh and his family emigrated to America, but before he set sail Pugh caught a fever. During this period he received a visitation from God whereby he was warned that he would 'meet with trouble and exercises... and that he had work for him in that country (Great Britain), and that he must return, after a time, to his native land' (Evans and Evans, 4.338). The winter voyage to the West Indies was particularly turbulent, and Pugh was grateful to reach Barbados in March 1687. The following summer Pugh continued his journey to America, and at first settled at Schuylkill, near Haverford, where he was 'a faithful and zealous labourer of the gospel, preaching fervently in his native tongue' ('Biographical sketches', 28.284). He later bought land near Plymouth township, Montgomery county, Pennsylvania. There he was 'a serviceable instrument in the Lord's hand, to cherish and instruct many, in meekness and tenderness' (Evans and Evans, 4.339), and his missionary endeavours drew many converts to Quakerism. 
In 1706 Pugh returned to Wales and conducted a missionary tour around the country 'to the benefit and acceptance of many' ('Biographical sketches', 28.292). On 29 December 1706 John Kelsall, a Montgomeryshire Friend, noted Pugh's visit to the Dolobran meeting: 'he was concerned wholly in Welsh, there was much innocency with him & he had many pretty openings and advice to Friends' (RS Friends, Lond., MS 193/4). In 1708, shortly after his return to America, three of his children died within a month. This naturally caused him severe anguish, but with divine help he was able to overcome this tragedy and stated that 'If he could bear his affliction acceptably in the sight of God, it would be marrow to his bones' (Evans and Evans, 4.339). During the last fifteen months of his life Pugh suffered from a prolonged illness, but did not neglect his missionary work for Friends. During the last Quaker meeting for worship he attended, the following was said of him: 'he was weak of body, but fervent in spirit, as one taking his last leave in a great deal of love and tenderness.... He was fitted to counsel others, because his life and conversation were answerable to his testimony; and amongst his family he was tender, and careful to counsel them to live in the fear of God. (ibid., 4.340)' On 3 December 1718 Ellis Pugh died in Pennsylvania aged sixty-two. According to Friends he was 'of a meek and quiet spirit, considerate and solid in his judgement, of few words, honest and careful in his calling, honourable among his Friends, and of a good report among people generally' (Bowden, 2.259). 
In 1721 Pennsylvania Friends posthumously published Pugh's 'Annerch ir Cymru', which was subsequently translated by Rowland Ellis and David Lloyd as 'A Salutation to the Britains', published in Pennsylvania in 1727 and reprinted in London in 1739. The first version, it has been suggested, was the first Welsh printed book in America. The preface to this edition encouraged 'craftsmen, labourers and shepherds, men of low degree, of my own quality', and sought that they would become 'wiser than their teachers' ('DNB'). This text offered 'encouragement and instruction of them that were seeking the way to Sion, the New Jerusalem' (Pugh, 'A Salutation', xi). During his life Pugh also wrote 'On Baptism and the Lord's Supper', which offered an insight into his theological beliefs. 


@@@@@


doc= 22864


Pugh, Herbert (fl. 1758-1788), landscape painter, was born in Ireland, and moved to London about 1758. He contributed to the first exhibition of the Society of Artists in 1760, sending 'Landscape with Cattle'. In 1765 he gained a premium at the Society of Arts, and in 1766 was a member of the newly incorporated Society of Artists. He continued exhibiting with them up to 1776. He tried his hand at some pictures in the manner of Hogarth, but without success, although some of these pictures were engraved. Pugh lived in The Piazza, Covent Garden, London. His death in London soon after 1788 was hastened by intemperate habits. Two views of London Bridge by Pugh were contributed to the 'Century of British art' exhibition at the Grosvenor Gallery in 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 22865


Pugh, Philip (1679-1760), Independent minister, was born at Hendre, Blaenpennal, Cardiganshire, the eldest son of Philip Pugh and Ann, daughter of David Jones of Coedmor Fawr, Llanbedr. Unusually for a Welsh nonconformist minister, he was the scion of a landed family. He was educated for the ministry at Samuel Jones's academy at Brynllywarch and, after Jones's death in 1697, at that of Roger Griffiths at Abergavenny. He was received as a church member at Cilgwyn, Cardiganshire, in 1704, and in October 1709 was ordained joint minister, with David Edwards and Jenkin Jones, of several churches in the area. He married about 1705 Elizabeth Morris, daughter of John Morris of Carrog, Llanddeiniol; she brought further property to augment Pugh's inherited estate. They lived at Blaen-gwern, in the parish of Llanfair Clydogau, and had two sons. 
Pugh's power as a preacher and his piety, together with his social status, gave him widespread influence, and he became the leading Independent in north Cardiganshire. His success was such that, according to the John Evans list, the churches could claim 1000 'hearers' by 1715. Between 1709 and 1760 he baptized 680 children. At his own expense he built a chapel at Llwynpiod, and paid Morgan Williams to keep school at three separate places. 
Pugh remained a staunch Calvinist, and though he avoided controversy he was greatly perturbed by the spread of Arminian and Arian doctrines in his churches. However, he and other Independents longed for a revival, and he sympathized with the Calvinistic Methodist movement under Daniel Rowland of Llangeitho, to whom he was a friend and counsellor. After Pugh's death, some of his former churches went over to either Arianism or Methodism. Pugh published 'Darluniad y gwir Gristion' (1748), being a translation of John Shower's work, and a collection of his own communion hymns. He died at Blaen-gwern on 12 July 1760, aged eighty-one, and was buried on 15 July in the parish churchyard of Llanddewibrefi. 


@@@@@


doc= 22866


Pugh, Robert (c.1610-1679), Roman Catholic controversialist, was born in Wales; Wood claimed that he had been born at Penrhyn in the parish of 'Eglos-Rosse' (Llan-rhos) Caernarvonshire. In 1628 he entered the noviciate at the English College at Watten and by his ordination, on 20 March 1638, he was in Liege. In 1639 he returned to Watten and after two years at the English Jesuit college at St Omer in 1641-2 -- where he entered under the name of Robert Phillips -- he returned to England, where he is said to have served in Charles I's army taking the rank of captain. However, this led to his dismissal by the Jesuits on 8 May 1645 for, according to Wood, accompanying the royalist army 'without the consent of the superiors of his order' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.829). He bore the Jesuits no ill will following his dismissal and is said to have desired to be readmitted to the society when on his deathbed. 
Following his dismissal from the society Pugh went on to study civil and canon law (probably at Paris) and became a doctor of both disciplines. He apparently acted as tutor to Henry, duke of Gloucester, the fourth son of Charles I. Pugh's reputation as a theologian grew rapidly, and in 1655 he was created 'protonotarius publicus apostolicus' by Pope Alexander VII. He was known to Walter Montagu, the secret agent and friend of Henrietta Maria, who was later made abbot of the Benedictine monastery of Nanteuil by the queen-dowager of France. Pugh was a prominent opponent of Blackloism and with Montagu's aid he attacked the philosophical views of Thomas White (alias Blacklo) in a pamphlet entitled 'De Anglicani cleri retinenda in apostolicam sedem observantia' (1659). In this he claimed, in opposition to White, that the regular clergy should be exempt from the jurisdiction of the Catholic chapter in England. White's views on purgatory, hell, and the infallibility of the pope were seen by many of the Catholic clergy as unsound and exception was also taken to his politico-religious views, especially his teaching in favour of passive obedience to any established government. Several of White's theses were censured by the inquisition in decrees of May 1655 and September 1657, and many of his friends and former students publicly rejected his principles. Eventually he withdrew those opinions which had been censured and submitted himself and his writings to the Holy See. White's reply to Pugh's repudiation, 'Monumentum excantatus' (1660) was in turn answered by Pugh in 'Excantationis amuletum' (1661). Using another alias, Petrus Hoburgus (an anagram of Robertus Pughus), which he had used in a letter to Cardinal Francesco Barberini in November 1661, Pugh published another attack on White in 1662 as 'Animadversiones in Thomae Albii'. Pugh is also said to have written a life of White, which is not known to be extant. 
Following the Restoration Pugh settled for part of the year in London and the rest in Redcastle, Wales, with the family of the marquess of Powis. In 1664 there appeared from the pen of 'a royal veteran' 'Elenchus elenchi, sive, Animadversiones', a response to George Bates' 'Elenchus motuum' (1650; 'Elenchus elenchi', title-page). It was initially credited to Pugh, but it has since been accepted that although it was not his work he probably had a hand in its production. With Roger Palmer, earl of Castlemaine, with whom he was closely connected, Pugh wrote 'The Catholic Apologie' (1666). This text was answered by William Lloyd, later bishop of Lichfield, and was later defended in 'A Reply to the Answer of the 'Catholic Apologie'' (1668). Pugh's 'Bathoniensium et aquisgranensium thermarum comparatio' (1676) was dedicated to his patron, Palmer. A series of manuscripts, reputedly by Pugh, entitled 'Unpublished works', from the Gillow Library, are to be found in the library of Downside Abbey. Pugh is also credited with the authorship of a Latin ode to the memory of Sidney Montagu, who died in the sea battle with the Dutch in June 1672, entitled 'In nobilissimi juvenis Sidnaei Montacuti' (1672). 
During the furore of the Popish Plot from 1678 onwards Pugh, 'having been betrayed by a wicked miscreant when paying a visit of charity to the Catholic gentry confined in a London prison' (Foley, ser. 7, 5.34), was himself committed to Newgate. Pugh died, while still incarcerated, on 22 January 1679. He was buried in Christ Church churchyard, Newgate, the next day. The following year the Jesuit John Warner published a cache of letters by White and several of White's associates (including Sir Kenelm Digby and Henry Holden) that Pugh had collected through the agency of Walter Montagu and had deposited at the English Jesuit college at Ghent; the work accused White of opposition to the regulars and to episcopal authority, and of disloyalty to the pope. 
Wood, who appears to have known Pugh personally, described him as a 'person of a most comely port, well favour'd, and of excellent parts, and therefore he deserved a better end'; however, Wood seems to confuse him with Robert Philips, the oratorian, who was confessor to Henrietta Maria (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.830). 


@@@@@


doc= 22867


Pughe, William Owen (1759-1835), antiquary and lexicographer, was born William Owen at Tyn-y-bryn in the parish of Llanfihangel-y-Pennant, Merioneth, on 7 August 1759. He was the son of John Owen (1712-1800) of Rhiwywerfa, near Abergynolwyn, and his wife, Anne Owen (1733-1811). His father was a skilled singer to the harp, and he thus acquired at an early age an interest in Welsh poetry, which was deepened by the study of 'Gorchestion beirdd Cymru', when that collection appeared in 1773. Some biographers claim that he received his education at Altrincham, Cheshire, but there is no definite proof to support this. In 1776 he went to live in London. About 1782 he made the acquaintance of Robert Hughes (Robin Ddu yr Ail o Fon) and Owen Jones (Owain Myfyr), through whom he became in 1783 a member of the Gwyneddigion, a society of London Welshmen founded in 1770. Owen thereupon began to collect materials for a Welsh-English dictionary. The first section appeared ten years later, on 27 June 1793. Its publication proceeded slowly until 1803, when it was completed and issued in two volumes, with a grammar prefixed to the first. It contained about 100,000 words, with English equivalents, and, in a large number of cases, illustrative quotations from early Welsh literature. Its erroneous etymology is based on the assumption that all Welsh words can be resolved into monosyllabic elements of abstract signification, a notion first put forward with regard to English and other languages by Rowland Jones in his 'Philosophy of Words' (1769). An abridgement of Owen's dictionary appeared in 1806, a new edition (revised by the author) in 1832, and a further edition, extended by Robert John Pryse, in 1866. 
Meanwhile in 1789 Owen, together with Owain Myfyr, edited the poetry of Dafydd ap Gwilym (reprinted 1873), adding in English a sketch of the life and writings of the poet. On 9 August 1790 he married Sarah Elizabeth Harper (1771-1816), with whom he had a son, Aneurin Owen (1792-1851), and two daughters, Isabella and Ellen. Ellen later married John, the son of the antiquary Richard Fenton. In 1792 Owen published 'The Heroic Elegies and other Pieces of Llywarc Hen', with a translation and a prefatory sketch on bardism, probably written by Edward Williams (Iolo Morganwg). Owen had become dissatisfied with the orthography of the Welsh language, and throughout this work uses 'c' for the sound usually written 'ch', and 'v' for Welsh 'f'. In his dictionary a third innovation appeared -- the use of 'z' for 'dd'. In 1800 Owen translated into Welsh 'A Cardiganshire Landlord's Advice to his Tenants', a treatise on agriculture, by Thomas Johnes of Hafoduchtryd. The next year saw the publication of a far more important work, the first volume of the 'Myvyrian Archaiology of Wales', an enterprise for which Owen, Owain Myfyr, and Iolo Morganwg were all nominally responsible, though the main literary work was probably done by Owen, while the cost (above $1000 for the three volumes) was defrayed by Owain Myfyr. The first volume was an attempt to give from the manuscripts the text of all Welsh poetry to 1370 (excluding that of Dafydd ap Gwilym, already printed). The design of supplementing this with a selection of later poetry (general advertisement of 1 January 1801) was never carried out. Volume two, which also appeared in 1801, contains the text of the 'Trioedd, the Brutiau', and other prose documents of a historical nature; volume three (didactic literature, laws, and music) followed in 1807. The three were reprinted, with some additions, in one volume at Denbigh in 1870. Owen was the editor of the 'Cambrian Register', a periodical devoted to Welsh history and literature, of which three volumes appeared, in 1795, 1799, and 1818. In June 1805, together with Thomas Jones (Y Bardd Cloff), Owen started the 'Greal', a Welsh quarterly of a similar character, which was issued under the patronage of the Gwyneddigion and Cymreigyddion societies of London. Its orthographical peculiarities proved an obstacle to its success, and it was discontinued in June 1807. 'Cadwedigaeth yr iaith Gymraeg', a Welsh grammar published by Owen in 1808, was printed at London in the same orthography, but an edition in ordinary spelling also came from a Bala press. Owen's concise 'Cambrian Biography' appeared in 1803. 
About 1803 Owen became a follower of Joanna Southcott, the religious fanatic. He remained a member of her intimate circle and often acted as her amanuensis until her death in 1814. In 1806 he inherited an estate at Nantglyn, near Denbigh, from a distant relative, Rice Pughe, whereupon he assumed the surname of Pughe. During the rest of his life he spent much of his time in Wales, and his literary activity diminished. Pughe's wife died on 28 January 1816, and to divert his mind from the loss he undertook to translate 'Paradise Lost' into Welsh. 'Coll gwynfa' appeared in 1819: its ponderous and artificial diction made it unintelligible to the ordinary Welsh reader. Pughe was no doubt the anonymous translator of Dodsley's 'Life of Man' ('Einioes dyn', 1821). In 1822 he published a Welsh poem in three cantos about Hu Gadarn, and in the same year he issued a volume of translations from English, which included Gray's 'Bard' and Heber's 'Palestine'. Most of his poetry appeared under the pseudonym Idrison. During his later years Pughe was chiefly occupied in preparing an edition of the 'Mabinogi', the Welsh romances; but although the Cymmrodorion Society in 1831 voted $50 for the publication of this work at Denbigh, it never appeared. 
Pughe died of apoplexy on 3 June 1835 in a cottage near Dol-y-cae, in the neighbourhood of his birthplace, where he had gone for the sake of his health, and was buried that month at Nantglyn. He had been elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1793, and on 19 June 1822 received from the University of Oxford the degree of DCL. Pughe's contribution to scholarship must be regarded as a product of its own age, and it was the Romanticism of that age which clouded his linguistic approach. Many of his idiosyncrasies remained in the Welsh orthography and vocabulary until the early years of the twentieth century, when Sir John Morris Jones did much to rid the language of his influence. However, Owen did lay the foundations for later scholars, and his dictionary shows a very profound knowledge of early Welsh texts. His main faults were his fanciful orthographical experiments and his lack of critical power. 


@@@@@


doc= 22868


Pugin, Auguste Charles (1768/9-1832), artist and architectural draughtsman, was born in the parish of St Sulpice, Paris, one of the seven children of Francois Joseph Pugin ('fl'. 1765-1794), who was probably in the service of a German aristocrat resident in Paris, and of Marguerite Duchene ('fl'. 1768- 'c'.1800). Most of what is known of Pugin's French origins is in the form of uncorroborated notes collected from Madame Antonia Molineux, Pugin's only niece, by Benjamin Ferrey, in preparation for his biography of Pugin and his son, A. W. N. Pugin. 
Pugin's father was apparently the youngest of a large family in Switzerland, probably Fribourg. He came to France 'c'.1765 and was, according to Madame Molineux, 'first gentleman to the Prince de Selm', who was probably Frederick John Otto, prince de Salm-Kyrbourg (1745-1794), who served in the French army. Pugin is described as 'fils de laboureur' on the certificate of his first marriage, but the family's claim to nobility relates to their presumed descent from a noble medieval Fribourg family, one of whom, Louis De Corbieres, fought at the battle of Morat in 1477, an incident recounted by Ferrey and corroborated in the 'Dictionnaire historique et biographique de la Suisse' (2, 1924, 579). His father's second marriage, to Pugin's mother, seems to have brought some prosperity, which was lost under the French Revolution, during which period he appears to have died and the prince de Salm-Kyrbourg was guillotined. How many of Pugin's six brothers and sisters survived is unknown, but only two sisters, Jeanne Adelaide Lafitte and Sophie Bernard, are mentioned in family papers. The family clearly prospered in France under the restoration and by 1827 was reusing the family coat of arms, which had been taken from that of the De Corbieres family. The arms also appear as Pugin in the early nineteenth-century 'Armorial combaz' (Bibliotheque cantonale et universitaire de Fribourg, fol. 43). Pugin does not appear to have used the arms but his son, A. W. N. Pugin, made them widely known in his publications, with slight changes and the addition of the motto 'en avant', which he no doubt intended to be provocative. It seems clear that Pugin believed himself to be a gentleman, though always an impecunious one. 
Also nothing is known of Pugin's education, but among his lifelong friends were Louis Lafitte (1770-1828), a neo-classical painter who became his brother-in-law, and C. P. J. Normand (1765-1840), a neo-classical architect, both of whom studied at the Academie Royale. It has been suggested that he may have been the artist of illustrations signed 'Pugin' which appeared in the magazine 'Le Cabinet des Modes' between April 1776 and November 1789 (Hill, 12-13). This seems a reasonable conjecture, suggesting a struggling young artist seeking to make a little money in such a way. 
On 27 March 1792 Pugin entered the Royal Academy Schools in London, when his age was given in the register as twenty-four. His reasons for leaving France have not been established although various glamorous stories circulated among his pupils. He did not remain in London long, however, but soon had a position as a draughtsman to the architect John Nash. Nash was then working in Wales, where he developed his picturesque style. Pugin acknowledged his debt to Nash in the dedication of his first volume of 'Specimens of Gothic Architecture' (1821), where he wrote: 'Soon after my arrival in this country, I was fortunately introduced to you, and prosecuted my architectural studies in your office with much gratification and advantage to myself'. Signed drawings of this period show Pugin's style to be typical of late eighteenth-century topography, with a heavy outline and a somewhat naive approach. 
Nash returned to London 'c'.1796 and it must be presumed that Pugin came with him and continued to work for him. By this time Pugin felt himself to be a qualified architect and in 1799 he exhibited at the Royal Academy an 'Intended Villa in the North of England', but in the same year he was also listed as a member of the Royal Academy life class. It seems that he quickly gave up the attempt to establish himself as an architect, unlike the eldest son of Humphry Repton, J. A. Repton (1775-1860), who had also been with Nash in Wales, and concentrated on improving his artistic skills. In London Pugin found companions among the artistic emigre community, such as J. Merigot, Pierre Conde, and J. C. Nattes. During this period his style and technique, in particular his handling of watercolour, developed a long way from its previous stiffness. As importantly, on 2 February 1802 he married Catherine Welby ('c'.1772-1833), an interesting and intelligent lady who was related to a prominent landowning family in Lincolnshire. She set about the organization and promotion of her easy-going husband, which proved to be a slow process at first. They began their married life in her father's house, 3 Pullens Row, Islington. 
The turning point in Pugin's career was the forming of a connection with Rudolph Ackermann, the German publisher who played such an important role in the formation of the taste of the Regency period, particularly with his shop on the Strand and his magazine, both called the 'Repository of the Arts'. The most famous joint production of Pugin and Ackermann, 'The Microcosm of London', appeared between 1808 and 1810. The project seems to have originated in an idea of the Pugins (Hill, 16): a draft prospectus survives for a publication entitled 'Views of London and Westminster', which was to contain plates combining 'the most interesting public edifices... with the characteristics peculiar to each part of the town' (Yale Center for British Art, Pugin 176). Perhaps they intended the text to be by Catherine Pugin, but the work was realized in all its editorial and technical complexity by Ackermann, who used professional writers for the text and for the coloured aquatints crucially brought in the artist Thomas Rowlandson, whose rumbustious figures were the perfect foil to Pugin's clear and accurate architectural settings. The result was an acknowledged masterpiece and was followed by Ackermann's 'History of Westminster Abbey' (1812), to which Pugin contributed eighteen plates, the 'History of the University of Oxford' (1814), with thirty plates by Pugin, the 'History of the University of Cambridge' (1815), with twenty-two plates by Pugin, and finally the 'History of the Colleges of Winchester etc.' (1816), with fourteen plates by Pugin. These books, widely held to be among the most beautiful illustrated books of the first half of the nineteenth century, established Pugin's reputation and in 1809, helped by a bequest from Catherine's father, they were established at 39 Keppel Street, Bloomsbury, where, in March 1812, their only child, Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin, was born. 
This period marks the high point of Pugin's skill as an artist. He had been elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1807 and had a great mastery of that medium, in which he liked to explore the effects of light. He became a full member in 1812 and was a regular contributor to their exhibitions. He also continued to exhibit occasionally at the Royal Academy. Among his best pictures are the 'View of Louth' ('c'.1817, Louth Naturalists' Antiquarian and Literary Society, Lincolnshire) and 'View from the Excavated Ground of the Highgate Archway' (1812, Highgate Literary and Scientific Institute, London). His architectural interests at this period seem to have been concentrated on helping friends, particularly with Gothic details, in which he was by then considered an expert. An important example, which may be attributed to Pugin in 1817, was the gothicizing of a garden building at Claremont, Surrey, as a mausoleum to Princess Charlotte, a work which was executed by J. B. Papworth, the acknowledged architect. 
As well as these two activities, Pugin carried out a number of miscellaneous commissions, no doubt to make ends meet, including in 1810 the supervising of the erection of a Coade stone statue of George III at Nocton, Lincolnshire. From 1814 his French connections were revived: immediately following the peace treaty with France, Louis Lafitte, his wife, and daughter, joined the Pugins in London. Lafitte had been a court painter to the Empress Josephine and then to Napoleon, and no doubt felt that a period of absence from France would benefit his career. Pugin was able, principally through Nash, to help Lafitte obtain commissions to provide decorations for the victory celebrations. The family stayed in England until the battle of Waterloo had clarified the political situation, and 'the visit established a pattern of mutual assistance and co-operation between the brothers-in-law which continued until Lafitte's death' (Hill, 18). It is not known whether Lafitte ever returned to England, but from that time onwards the Pugins made regular visits to Paris, where Lafitte soon held another court position under Louis XVIII. This connection must have helped him set up a minor cross-channel business dealing in prints, books, and probably antiques. 
Pugin continued to work for Ackermann, for whom in the 'Repository of the Arts' he produced a series of remarkable designs for Gothic furniture, first published between 1825 and 1827, and then gathered into a book, 'Gothic Furniture', published by Ackermann with no date but presumably 1828. Pugin's major occupation became his production of illustrated architectural books, which were overwhelmingly devoted to medieval architecture. In his obituary in 'Arnold's Library of the Fine Arts' it was acknowledged that he had 'performed for gothic architecture services similar to those which [James] Stuart and his fellow-labourers effected for that of Greece' ('Arnold's Library', 323). 
It is not surprising that with all his experience Pugin soon attracted the attention of the antiquary and topographer John Britton (1771-1857) in his enormous publishing enterprises, and in 1818 Pugin was in Lincoln making illustrations for Britton's fifth volume of the 'Architectural Antiquities of Great Britain' (1826). Pugin went to Lincoln often, perhaps to visit Welby relations, and frequently exhibited paintings of the city and its surroundings. Here he was approached by a local Catholic architect, E. J. Willson (1787-1854), with the idea of producing a book useful to builders and architects, with measured drawings of details of the different parts of Gothic architecture. The scheme was taken up swiftly and the two volumes of 'Specimens of Gothic Architecture' were published in 1821 and 1823, with the text by Willson. Britton said: 'I declined to place my name in the title-page' but 'I soon found that nearly the whole of the business department devolved on me' ('The Builder', 13, 1855, 5). These volumes were successful and widely recognized as a new departure. In contrast to Britton's earlier enterprises, which were illustrated with densely hatched etchings, this one used steel-engravings. This new technique, combined with an emphasis on practical construction, by showing a large number of mouldings and other details, and with Pugin's own genius for creating an attractive plate, produced architectural drawings of unrivalled elegance, clarity, and accuracy. The absence of picturesque views and dedicated plates must have added to the impression of modernity. The publication was not a commercial success, and in order to undertake 'Specimens' Pugin took on pupils and established a flourishing school of architectural drawing in his own house at 105 Great Russell Street. Among his first pupils were Charles Moore ('fl'. 1820s) and Charles James Mathews (1803-1878), who left an affectionate account of his time in Pugin's office. His father, the actor Charles Mathews, who had met Pugin in Wales, is supposed to have based his character of M. Mallet on his knowledge of Pugin and his experiences as a newly arrived foreigner in England. Pugin and his pupils made extended tours in Britain, and also to Paris and in Normandy to find the material for his books. After 'Specimens', Pugin and Britton used the same formula to produce 'Specimens of the Architectural Antiquities of Normandy' (1827), with text by Britton. At the same time they were working on 'Illustrations of the Public Buildings of London', which appeared in two volumes in 1825 and 1828. The books were modelled on a French prototype, 'Description de Paris et de ses edifices' (1806-9), by J. G. Legrand and C. P. Landon. They are not pretty books in the sense that the 'Microcosm' volumes were, but they are invaluable to architectural historians and 'nearly one and a half centuries later, Britton and Pugin are still our most reliable guides to Regency London' (Crook, 117). Sadly, the collaboration came to an unhappy conclusion and Pugin and Taylor (the printer) involved Britton in a lawsuit. Britton wrote to Soane: 'I am now endeavouring to seperate ['sic'] all accounts and connection with Pugin and Taylor, both of whom have acted meanly and dishonourably towards me. The Normandy and London Buildings being finished, I shall never again have connection with either. (John Britton to John Soane, 22 Nov 1828, London, Soane Museum, III B.1.68)' An alternative point of view is hinted at in Pugin's obituary ('Arnold's Library', 324). 
The 'London' volumes actually recorded a loss of $460, but Pugin and his pupils continued with his schemes undaunted. The next books to appear were 'Paris and its Environs', in two volumes (1829 and 1831), with the text by L. T. Ventouillac, and a series of attractive books, aimed for a different market, which imaginatively explored the new medium of lithography. These were: 'A Series of Views Illustrative of Pugin's Examples of Gothic Architecture' (1830), with the text by W. H. Leeds and lithography by Joseph Nash; 'Gothic Ornaments from Ancient Buildings in England and France' (1828-31), with lithographs by J. D. Harding; and 'A series of ornamental timber gables from existing examples in England and France of the sixteenth century' (1831), with text by E. J. Willson and lithographs by B. Ferrey. These works were brought out with the second wave of Pugin's pupils, who were approximately the same age as Pugin's son. Among the best-known are T. T. Bury, Benjamin Ferrey, Joseph Nash, and James Pennethorne. In his account of Pugin's drawing school, Ferrey gave a particularly unfair description of Mrs Pugin's management of the household. 
Of other important commissions that came Pugin's way during this period, one was from John Nash for the splendid plates for his book, 'The Royal Pavilion at Brighton' (1826), on which Pugin worked between 1819 and 1824. He also continued to practise occasionally as an architect: in 1823 he designed the interior of the Diorama in Regent's Park, together with James Morgan ('fl'. 1806-1834). Between 1826 and 1827 he exhibited three designs for cemeteries, and early in 1830 he was associated with Sir Marc Isambard Brunel in the layout of the cemetery at Kensal Green. Pugin's knowledge and advocacy of the Gothic styles were continued in his final publication, the first volume of 'Examples of Gothic Architecture' (1831), in which the examples were taken from 'habitable' buildings, 'civil architecture being much less understood than ecclesiastical'. The text was once more by E. J. Willson, whose late delivery delayed the publication. Pugin was working on the second volume at the time of his death in his home at 105 Great Russell Street on 19 December 1832. He was buried on 27 December in St Mary's Church, Islington. 
Pugin's character was clearly delightful, charming, and relaxed, appealing to all kinds of people, from his pupils to his aristocratic patrons. He also seems to have enjoyed a happy family life with his clever wife and precocious son, whose spectacular early successes and failures must have caused him considerable uneasiness from time to time. A. W. N. Pugin paid an affectionate tribute to his father in the frontispiece to the second volume of 'Examples' which, again greatly delayed by Willson, eventually appeared in 1836, although it was one of his pupils, Thomas Larkins Walker, that Pugin made his literary executor, and it was he who wrote the text and supervised the third volume of 'Examples'. Pugin was never affluent at any period of his life and always had to husband his income. After his death his extensive library of architectural books was sold at Wheatleys on 4 June 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 22869


Pugin, Augustus Welby Northmore (1812-1852), architect, writer, and designer, was born on 1 March 1812 at 39 Keppel Street, Russell Square, London, the only child of Auguste Charles Pugin (1768/9-1832), architect, and Catherine Welby ('c'.1772-1833). 
Pugin was a precocious child and grew up in a household full of pupils attending the school of architectural draughtsmanship run by his father. His formal education was minimal; he attended school at Christ's Hospital, London, briefly, but from an early age he was fascinated by medieval architecture and drawing. These interests he must have inherited from his father; from his mother he gained his energy and his ability with words. From 1819 the family made several visits to Paris and Normandy, both to see their French relations and to gather material for his father's books. The young Pugin's career as an independent designer began in 1827 with two very grand commissions. Benjamin Ferrey (1810-1880), a pupil of A. C. Pugin, who wrote the first biography of A. W. N. Pugin, tells the story of how he was discovered by a member of the firm of royal goldsmiths Rundell and Bridge in the print room of the British Museum, where he was copying the prints of Durer. This connection resulted in the production for George IV of a Gothic standing cup now in the Royal Collection and known as the Coronation Cup, and unexecuted designs for a set of church plate, probably intended for St George's Chapel, Windsor. His next commission was also for George IV, as one of the craftsmen engaged by the upholsterers Morel and Seddon to furnish the new apartments at Windsor Castle. A considerable amount of Gothic furniture, very much in his father's style, survives in the castle. 
After this glamorous start there followed a restless period for this lively and highly talented youth. As well as medieval architecture, Pugin was passionate about both the sea and the stage. He had his own boat, and began to make theatrical friends, one of whom was George Dayes, son of the artist Edward Dayes (1763-1804), and it was through him, Pugin wrote, 'that I first imbibed the taste for stage machinery and scenic representation to which I afterwards applied myself so closely' ('Autobiography', fol. 20, V&A, National Art Library). 
In 1829 Pugin became a stage carpenter at Covent Garden, and he later designed stage sets for William Grieve (1800-1844) at the King's Theatre, including one for the ballet 'Kenilworth' in 1831, which was much praised. Also in 1829 he set up his own business, designing and making interior decorations and furniture, but, as a result of his inexperience and impracticality, it failed in 1831. At the same period he was introduced to James Gillespie Graham (1776-1855), the Scottish architect, and began to help him with his work. Pugin married in 1831 Anne Garnet ('c'.1811-1832), a connection of George Dayes, whom his parents thought to be socially beneath him and who died on 27 May 1832, a week after the birth of a daughter, Anne (1832-1897). This was the first of a number of personal tragedies: Pugin's father died in December the same year, followed a few months later by his mother, and finally his aunt Selina Welby, who left him a legacy which gave him some independence. He seems always to have needed female companionship and married in 1833 Louisa Burton ('c'.1813-1844), who also seems to have had theatrical connections. 
These events encouraged Pugin to concentrate on becoming an architect, though his training for the profession was highly unusual. His knowledge of architecture was based on his detailed sketches and observation of many medieval buildings, both in Britain and in northern Europe. This study, which he continued throughout his life, was for him an essential activity and gave authority to his style. He also designed a series of imaginary Gothic buildings, all with medieval themes, in the form of little books with titles such as 'The Hospital of St John' (1833), 'The Deanery', and 'St Marie's College' (both 1834). These ideal schemes were presented fully furnished. During these years he continued to produce designs for furniture and metalwork and this aspect of his work culminated in three books that were published by Ackermann in 1835 and 1836. 
In 1835 Pugin became a Roman Catholic, a turning point in his life. From then on he devoted himself to the furtherance of his faith and of Gothic architecture. His father, nominally a Catholic, was uninterested in religion but his mother, who fell under the influence of the preacher and theologian Edward Irving (1792-1834) and took her son to listen to Irving's lengthy sermons in the 1820s, brought him up a protestant. It seems clear that Pugin was drawn to Catholicism originally by the beauty of medieval architecture. The principal human influence was probably that of E. J. Willson (1787-1854), a Catholic architect in Lincoln and a collaborator of his father, to whom he wrote on 6 November 1834: 'I have long seen the fallacy of the new sects, and trust ere long I shall be united in the original true and apostolick church which suffers no variation. I trust no man will attribute my motives 'solely' to my love for antient architecture. For although I will allow the change has been brought about in me owing to my 'studies of antient art' yet I have still higher reasons which I can satisfactorily account for if required for my belief. (A. W. N. Pugin to E. J. Willson, Fowler collection, Johns Hopkins University)' From 1835 Pugin's diaries survive, which give much information about his life. In that year he built himself a house, St Marie's Grange, Alderbury, near Salisbury, and was working for the established architects James Gillespie Graham and Charles Barry (1795-1860), both of whom found Pugin useful in providing Gothic internal decoration and furnishing for their buildings. In the autumn of that year he drew for both men their competition entries for the new houses of parliament. His draughtsmanship, with its flowing lines and sureness of touch, always impressive, was then at its height. At the end of January 1836 Barry was declared the winner. Pugin continued to help him for a further year with the drawings needed for the preparation of the estimate. 
In August 1836 Pugin published his most famous book, 'Contrasts, or, A parallel between the noble edifices of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and similar buildings of the present day; shewing the present decay of taste: accompanied by appropriate text'. The text explains the 'decline' of architecture following the Reformation and was influenced by the work of the sixteenth- and seventeenth-century English historians, particularly William Dugdale (1605-1686), and also by the more recent Roman Catholic bishop John Milner (1752-1826). The major interest of the book lies in the 'contrasts', drawings of satirical comparisons between splendid types of medieval buildings such as parish churches, chapels, episcopal residences, town halls, public inns, and so on, and their meagre early nineteenth-century counterparts. In his championship of Gothic and his criticism of Regency architecture, Pugin was in many ways following the ideas recently expressed with equal force by the writer and antiquary John Carter (1748-1817). The book stirred up considerable interest and controversy and contributed greatly to Pugin's growing reputation, particularly among Roman Catholics. 
Pugin's career as an independent architect began in 1837 and expanded rapidly. His first commission was for Charles Scarisbrick (1801-1860) at Scarisbrick Hall, Lancashire, where he made substantial alterations between 1837 and 1845 to the existing sixteenth-century manor house, including the addition of a clock tower. Here he was able to draw together his knowledge of medieval architecture and decorative arts with ideas from his own ideal schemes, to create splendid and inventive interiors. In the same year of 1837 he had an introduction to St Mary's College, Oscott, Warwickshire, the Roman Catholic school and seminary, which became a centre for his influence in the Roman Catholic church. He provided the college, particularly the chapel, with fittings and furnishings, established a museum for medieval religious artefacts, and gave lectures to students on the history of medieval architecture. At the same time, and probably in the same place, he met John Hardman (1811-1867), the Birmingham button maker and medallist, who became his closest friend and colleague, manufacturing metalwork to his designs from 1838 and stained glass from 1845. Finally, in this year he made his first visit to Alton Towers, Staffordshire, the seat of John Talbot, sixteenth earl of Shrewsbury (1791-1852), who became his chief patron. His work at Alton Towers, an immense early nineteenth-century house around an earlier core, has been demonstrated to be much greater than originally thought (see Fisher). 
Pugin quickly became a leading architect for new Roman Catholic churches. He found Salisbury inconvenient for his work and in 1837 moved to London, where he took lodgings in Chelsea. His first important commissions were for St Mary's Church, Derby (1837-9), and St Alban's, Macclesfield (1839-41). Both of these are in a Perpendicular style with good fittings and stained glass. The church at Macclesfield also contains a rood screen, separating the nave and chancel, which became an essential feature in all Pugin's churches. In 1840 he began the hospital of St John, Alton, for the earl of Shrewsbury, which was intended as an ideal religious community, modelled on medieval examples. Built gradually around three sides of a quadrangle, it has principally been used as a parish church, priest's house, convent, and school. 
The Roman Catholic cathedral of St Chad, Birmingham (1839-41), was unusual in Pugin's 'oeuvre' both in style (that of the fourteenth-century Baltic churches) and in material (the red brick of industrial Birmingham), but it is a most successful building. In the interior, space is handled very effectively under the steeply pitched roof, which has a continuous slope over both nave and aisles. Opposite the cathedral stood the bishop's house (1840-41), now destroyed but an influential red-brick courtyard house. The builder was George Myers (1804-1875), who from 1838 erected most of Pugin's buildings. Pugin never had an office, unlike most successful nineteenth-century architects, but worked by himself, relying on a close group of colleagues who understood his swiftly drawn designs. 
In 1841, when he published 'The True Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture', Pugin felt confident about both the progress of the Gothic revival and the growth of the Roman Catholic church in England. In 'True Principles' his message is directed at the architect. He begins by stating his two great principles for design: '1st, that there should be no features about a building which are not necessary for convenience, construction or propriety; 2nd, that all ornament should consist of enrichment of the essential construction of the building' ('True Principles', 1). This theory closely follows that expounded by the Abbe Laugier (1713-1769) in his 'Essai sur l'architecture' (1753), and later French rationalist writers, who, however, interpreted it in classical terms. It has also led some to consider Pugin as a forerunner of twentieth-century functionalism. He strongly believed in his own principles, and the clarity of his style, where ornament never overwhelms the essential construction, is an important characteristic. In the rest of the book Pugin demonstrates practical examples of good medieval architecture, and ridicules both the symbolism and the methods of construction of neo-classical architecture in a Christian northern country. He also considers the decorative arts with many forceful remarks in favour of appropriate Gothic patterns. As usual, he reinforces his argument with attractive and witty illustrations. In the same year he published a second edition of 'Contrasts' with a substantially revised text in which he altered his admiration for late Gothic architecture to that of the fourteenth-century Decorated period and his blame for the 'decline' from the Reformation to the Renaissance. He also emphasized the social context of the superiority of the medieval Catholic world with two new contrasts, of towns and poorhouses. He had probably been influenced in this direction by a leading French liberal Catholic, Charles-Forbes-Rene, comte de Montalembert (1810-1870), whom he met in 1839, and who added a long appendix in French to this edition. It was titled 'Account of the destructive and revived pagan principle in France'. 
The early 1840s was a period of great activity and success for Pugin. During this time he met the two other men who became his close colleagues, Herbert Minton (1793-1858), the Staffordshire pottery manufacturer, and J. G. Crace (1809-1889), the London interior decorator. He worked with great energy and speed, and was inundated with commissions for Roman Catholic churches throughout the United Kingdom, including Ireland. Among the most important were the Roman Catholic cathedrals of St George, Southwark, London (1841-8), St Barnabas, Nottingham (1841-4), and St Mary, Newcastle upon Tyne (1841-4), and Mount St Bernard's Abbey, Leicestershire (1839- 'c'.1844), the first monastery in England since the Reformation. These cathedrals, along with twenty-two other ecclesiastical buildings by Pugin then under construction or already built, are shown in the frontispiece to 'An Apology for the Revival of Christian Architecture in England' (1843). It is an immensely impressive display, shown as the new Jerusalem against the rising sun, but it illustrates Pugin's most sanguine hopes rather than facts. The great towers and spires with which Pugin hoped to crown his buildings, for example that of St George's, Southwark, in the centre of his picture, were often not built, or built only after years of struggle. Moreover, Pugin's churches frequently suffered from a lack of funds, or were built for poor urban communities in unattractive settings, such as the Roman Catholic churches of St Mary, Stockton, co. Durham (1840-42), St Wilfrid, Hulme, Manchester (1838-42), and St Oswald, Old Swan, Liverpool (1839-42). 
In 1843 Pugin started to build his own house, St Augustine's (now The Grange), on the edge of a cliff looking out to sea at Ramsgate, Kent. In the same year he experienced his first major reverse when his designs for rebuilding Balliol College, Oxford, were rejected, principally because he was a Roman Catholic. At the beginning of 1844 he completed his most magnificent and scholarly book, the 'Glossary of Ecclesiastical Ornament and Costume', which explained the symbolism and use of vestments and church furnishings with a scholarly text and beautiful illustrations, including seventy-three chromolithographs (then a new technique). Many of the objects which Pugin described were no longer in common use, but after the publication of this book they were frequently revived by both Anglican and Roman Catholic communions. On 22 August 1844 Louisa, his second wife, with whom he had had five children, died suddenly. Following this personal tragedy Pugin received a letter from Charles Barry on 3 September, asking for his help with the fittings for the House of Lords. He therefore returned to work at the houses of parliament, which became one of his major occupations until his death. 
From the end of 1844 the character of Pugin's work started to change. He received far fewer architectural commissions and his position as the leading architect to the Roman Catholic church was challenged by others such as M. E. Hadfield (1812-1885) and Charles Hansom (1816-1888). He was also attacked by critics, for example in 'The Ecclesiologist' in January 1846, and some prominent priests, such as Nicholas Wiseman (1802-1865) and John Henry Newman (1801-1890), questioned his exclusive attachment to Gothic architecture and his devotion to rood screens in particular. He was, however, commissioned by the government in 1845 to build the Roman Catholic college of St Patrick, Maynooth, Ireland. His time was taken by work for the houses of parliament, and supplying endless designs for ecclesiastical plate, memorial brasses, and stained glass for John Hardman and of furniture, wallpaper, and textiles for J. G. Crace. By the beginning of 1845 John Hardman Powell (1827-1895), John Hardman's nephew, came to stay at Ramsgate to help Pugin with designs for stained glass and metalwork. He became Pugin's only pupil and in 1850 married his eldest daughter, Anne. Throughout this last period Pugin continued to write, mostly on polemical themes, but he also produced 'Floriated Ornament' (1849), with its enchanting plates. 
Pugin's collaboration with Barry at the houses of parliament produced some of his best-known and greatest achievements. Barry realized that he needed Pugin's knowledge of medieval detail and his ability to work swiftly and to make rich and vivid designs to give life to the interior of his great building. Barry retained control and Pugin would revise his designs to meet Barry's ideas. Barry protected Pugin's position by preventing the Treasury from putting the decorative work out to tender. He thus enabled Pugin to work with his friends who could interpret his hasty sketches: Hardman, who manufactured the metalwork and stained glass, Crace, whose firm executed the decorative painting and supplied wallpapers plus some furniture, and Minton, who manufactured the encaustic tiles. Barry and Pugin started with the interior of the House of Lords, which was planned as the climax of the building and forms their masterpiece. Here all the fittings, with the exception of the frescoes and statues, are Pugin's work and survive largely unaltered except for the stained glass, which was destroyed in the Second World War. The setting for the throne is particularly magnificent: the immense amount of ornament is always secondary to the construction, a triumph for Pugin's 'True Principles'. The House of Lords was opened in 1847, after which Pugin continued to work on other interiors, including the House of Commons (which was finally opened in 1852), the libraries, and committee rooms. He designed great numbers of objects, both large and small, drawing on his experience to create a whole range of items, such as umbrella stands and gas lamps, which had no medieval precedent. For once Pugin was able to work with sufficient funds at his disposal to produce sumptuous results. 
Although Pugin's work, other than the metalwork, was limited to the interiors, it seems probable that Barry habitually asked his advice and in this way he suggested his clock tower at Scarisbrick Hall, with its projecting clock storey and ornate steeply sloping roof, as the prototype for the clock tower at Westminster. Barry valued Pugin greatly and the two men worked together in harmony, a splendid combination of Barry's judgement and Pugin's imagination. After the deaths of both men the sons Alfred Barry (1826-1910) and E. W. Pugin (1834-1875) quarrelled over their fathers' respective contributions. 
From 1845 Pugin built lovingly and slowly, at his own expense and next to his own house, the Roman Catholic church of St Augustine, Ramsgate, one of his most successful and individual churches. It lies beyond a cloister, with the east range of which building began. The plan is unusual, with nave and chancel of almost equal length, divided by a central tower, a south aisle almost as wide as the nave, south-east lady chapel, a south transept (the Pugin chantry), and a south porch. The exterior is of knapped flints and narrow bands of Whitby stone, the interior of Whitby stone with excellent woodwork, all in a strong early fourteenth-century style. Pugin also fitted it out generously. In 1846 there opened another of the few buildings with which Pugin himself was really satisfied, his beloved Roman Catholic church of St Giles, Cheadle, Staffordshire. It was built at the expense of the earl of Shrewsbury, who agreed with Pugin's aim to make it a model parish church in the Decorated style. Started in 1840, it is built of the local red sandstone with a magnificent west tower and spire, which dominates the town and surroundings. The interior is amazing: J. H. Newman described it shortly before it opened as 'the most splendid building I ever saw. It is coloured inside every inch in the most sumptuous way.... the windows are all beautifully stained. The Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament is, on entering, a blaze of light -- and I could not help saying to myself 'Porta Coeli'. ('Letters and Diaries', 11.210)' Pugin's private life remained troubled after the death of his second wife. In November 1844 he proposed to Mary Amherst (1824-1860), the sister of the future Roman Catholic bishop of Nottingham and a relation of the earl of Shrewsbury. Mary accepted him, though her family disapproved, feeling that Pugin was socially inferior, but in May 1846 she entered the convent of the Sisters of Providence at Loughborough. Following this rebuff he met Helen Lumsdaine, the daughter of the rector of Upper Hardres-with-Stelling, Kent, at a neighbour's house. He proposed to her in November 1847 and they became engaged in January 1848, but this attempt also ended in disaster in April, following her father's implacable opposition to her becoming a Roman Catholic. Amid this personal turmoil Pugin's friends persuaded him to make a longer than usual continental sketching tour: he left London on 27 March 1847 and made his only visit to Italy, going to Rome, Florence, Venice, and Milan before arriving home on 17 June. Fortunately, in July 1848 he became engaged to Jane Knill (1825-1909), the youngest daughter of Thomas Knill, and they were married on 10 August. She brought order and tranquillity to his final years and they had two children. Pugin spent more time at home, conducting much of his work by post. 
Pugin had both an entrepreneurial spirit for business and a propagandist zeal for promoting the Gothic style. In 1849 he wrote to Crace: 'I am so anxious to introduce a sensible style of furniture of good oak and constructively put together that shall compete with the vile trash made and sold. These things are very simple and I am certain that with a little practice can be made to pay and sell well. (A. W. N. Pugin to J. G. Crace, PUG 6/19, RIBA)' It must have become obvious, however, that the greatest publicity would come from participation in the Great Exhibition of 1851. His close colleagues combined to produce striking examples of their work, designed by Pugin, for an exhibition stand which they called 'The mediaeval court'. Hardman showed much metalwork, both domestic and ecclesiastic, and stained glass; Myers's display included the tomb of Bishop Thomas Walsh, furniture and the font, tabernacle, and statue which Pugin subsequently placed in his own church at Ramsgate; Minton showed ceramics and encaustic tiles, and Crace showed textiles, wallpaper, and furniture. These pieces formed an excellent demonstration of the high quality of craftsmanship, the understanding of medieval techniques, and the strength and clarity of Pugin's designs and his 'true principles', and they stood out among the many fussily ornate objects in the exhibition and were generally acclaimed. Pugin's desire, however, to improve the general standard of interior design was prevented by illness. After his death Hardman, Minton, and Crace all continued to use and adapt his designs. 
Aggravated by constant overwork and the application of mercury, Pugin's health finally broke down by the end of February 1852 and he was certified insane. He was first placed in a private establishment in Kensington and then moved to the Bethlehem Pauper Hospital for the Insane. He returned to Ramsgate a few days before his death there on 14 September 1852; he was buried on 21 September in the Pugin chantry in St Augustine's Church. The cause of death was recorded on his death certificate as 'insane 6 months: convulsions followed by coma' (d. cert.). He left a young widow and eight children. His eldest son, Edward Welby Pugin, took over some of his practice. His estate was valued at $10,000, but his widow received a government pension and sold his library and fine collection of medieval artefacts in 1853. 
The best-known portrait of the mature Pugin is that by J. R. Herbert (1810-1890) in the Palace of Westminster collection, but he has been vividly described by J. H. Powell: 'Pugin was only just middle height but very strong, broad chest, large hands, massive forehead, nose and chin, well curved flexible mouth, and restless grey eyes, the expression of which turned inwards when in deep thought. His hair was darkest brown, thick, not crisp, and he shaved clean like a sailor. All his movements were rapid, full of mental and bodily energy, shewing a nervous and choleric temperament. His sight was 'like a hawk's': he never used or needed glasses either in making sketches from clerestory stained glass or working minutely, and most of his early designs were on a very fine scale, probably from having etched much. 
His memory was the marvel of all who knew him for long; the mind seemed to receive its impressions without a particle of mist or shadow, keen, definite and lasting, to be recalled at will unchanged. He was thorough and earnest in doing all he undertook with all his might, and not resting till it was accomplished. He was passionate, but believed his anger was always another's fault, honest rages with no malice in them, blowing over without leaving resentment. (Wedgwood, 'Pugin in his home', 176)' Pugin's open and direct character were defining qualities, as Rosemary Hill has described: 'Pugin was no respecter of persons. He used very nearly the same tone to everyone and was often tactless, but he had no spite or rancor. This directness made his friends and workmen love him, his opponents dread him, and more subtle temperaments, such as John Henry Newman, shudder with embarrassment. (Atterbury, 33)' Pugin was completely uninterested in London society, enjoying his quiet family life at Ramsgate. In this he was the opposite of Barry, and his one attempt to become a member of the Royal Academy was unsuccessful. He was very methodical in his ways: as J. H. Powell put it, 'a rare thing for a genius to be orderly, but he was' (Wedgwood, 'Pugin in his home', 178). As a result there exists a large amount of documentation about him. His immediacy and his humour are evident in all his writing, most particularly his letters, many of which have survived and an edition of them, 'The Collected Letters of A. W. N. Pugin, Volume 1: 1830-1842', by Margaret Belcher, was published in 2001. 
Pugin's influence on the course of the Gothic revival throughout northern Europe and the English-speaking world was great, spread principally by his writing. His central idea, the equation of Christianity with Gothic, triumphed, so that the visible symbol of church architecture for the rest of the nineteenth century became the pointed arch. He always had bitter critics, however, one of the first of whom was John Ruskin, who might have been expected to be in sympathy with many of his aims. It seems, however, that Ruskin's early hatred of Catholicism blinded him to Pugin's importance; he denied his influence and famously criticized St George's Cathedral, Southwark, for its 'eruption of diseased crockets' (J. Ruskin, 'The Stones of Venice', 1, 1851, 373). At the end of the nineteenth century, with a return to fourteenth- and fifteenth-century styles in the work of such architects as G. F. Bodley (1827-1907) and Thomas Garner (1839-1906) and such decorative artists as the stained-glass designer C. E. Kempe (1837-1907), there was renewed interest in Pugin's work. This lapsed again for the first half of the twentieth century, but in the 1960s there began a renewed appreciation of Victorian architecture which has grown steadily and, in Pugin's case, has led to several important books, the designation of a 'Pugin room' in the houses of parliament in 1981, an exhibition in the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1994, and the foundation in 1995 at Ramsgate of the Pugin Society, which has a newsletter entitled 'True Principles'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22870


Pugin, Edward Welby (1834-1875), architect, was born on 11 March 1834 at Ramsgate, the eldest son of Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin (1812-1852) and his second wife, Louisa Burton ('c'.1813-1844). He was trained by his father and at the age of eighteen found himself in charge of his father's practice, which he developed with many pupils and various partnerships, most importantly with his brother-in-law George Coppinger Ashlin in Ireland (1859-69) and his brother Peter Paul Pugin (1851-1904). 
Edward Pugin's practice was overwhelmingly Roman Catholic. He worked initially in his father's preferred Decorated Gothic style, at St Mary's, Crook, co. Durham (1853), Oulton Abbey, Staffordshire, for Benedictine nuns (1853), and Belmont Abbey church, Herefordshire (1854-85). From 1856 his style became more elaborate but his church plans simpler by widening the span of the arcades, diminishing chancel arches, and abolishing rood screens, so as to achieve ample sightlines to his elaborate altars with towering reredoses set in shallow apses. Examples are St Vincent de Paul, Liverpool (1856-7), St Hubert's, Great Harwood, Lancashire (1858-9), Our Lady, Eldon Street, Liverpool (1859-60), All Saints', Barton upon Irwell, Lancashire (1863-8), his richest English church, Stanbrook Abbey church, Worcestershire (1869-71), and English Martyrs, Prescott Street, Tower Hamlets, London (1873-5). His most important churches are Our Lady, Dadizeele, Belgium (designed 1857; built 1857-67 in partnership with Baron Jean Baptiste Bethune), and, in Ireland, Sts Peter and Paul, Cork (1859-66), Sts Augustine and John, Dublin (1862-93), and St Colman's Cathedral, Cove, co. Cork (1859-1916), all with Ashlin. He designed much school, monastery, and convent architecture, notably the Franciscan Recollect Priory (1863) and the church of St Francis of Assisi (1866-72; completed 1878-85), Gorton, Manchester. E. W. Pugin was a talented draughtsman and watercolourist; his drawings are characterized by a frenetic, nervous line and his attenuation is reminiscent of his father's early work. He is at his most characteristic in the elaborate architectural carving, sculpture, and varied materials of his altars and chantry chapels such as the Knill chantry, St George's Cathedral, Southwark (1856), and the de Trafford chantry, Barton-on-Irwell, Lancashire (1863). He failed to keep up his father's close relationship with George Crace, John Hardman, and George Myers, instead commissioning his designs for metalwork and stained glass from Hardman & Co. (but he was not the chief designer); for architectural sculpture he preferred Farmer and Brindley. He set up a furniture manufacturing business for the large speculation the Granville Hotel, Ramsgate (1869-73); earlier domestic furniture also survives. Important interiors and additions are at Scarisbrick Hall, Lancashire (after 1866), and the castle of Loppem, Belgium (designed 1856; built from 1859 by Pugin and Bethune). 
Reconciling the Roman Catholic clergy to the use of the Gothic style in the wake of the 'rood screen controversy' provoked by A. W. N. Pugin, E. W. Pugin yearned for his father's commanding position in architectural matters for the Roman Catholic church in England. His claims were taken very seriously in Belgium, and in Ireland, where he was made a papal knight in 1858. He visited the USA in 1873, and at least one church was begun there. 
The Pugin family moved back to The Grange, Ramsgate, in 1862, where Edward made extensive additions to his father's house and to St Augustine's Church, where he had designed his father's tomb in the Pugin chantry (1853). He added the Digby chantry (1857) and the north (1857) and west (1859) cloisters, and fitted out the lady chapel (1862). He also built St Augustine's Monastery, Ramsgate (1859-60), for the Benedictines. Although he inherited his father's papers, he did not authorize a biography (certainly not B. Ferrey's 'Recollections of A. N. Welby Pugin, and his Father, Augustus Pugin', 1861). Having earlier claimed that Sir Charles Barry refused to give him a pupilship, he subsequently initiated a pamphlet war with 'Who was the art architect of the houses of parliament: a statement of facts, founded on the letters of Sir Charles Barry and the diaries of Augustus Welby Pugin' (1867). 
Edward Pugin died unmarried, at his home, Victoria House, 111 Victoria Street, Westminster, of syncope of the heart, on 5 June 1875. He was buried in St Augustine's Church, Ramsgate, Kent, five days later. As an architect, he was less important than his father; however, his style and plans became normative for Roman Catholic churches in the British Isles in the second half of the nineteenth century. The firm continued as Pugin and Pugin. 


@@@@@


doc= 22871


Puiset, Hugh du, earl of Northumberland (c.1125-1195), bishop of Durham, was the younger son of Hugues, lord of Le Puiset, and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Stephen, count of Blois, and Adela (died 1137), a daughter of William I. 
Le Puiset, 38 kilometres south-east of Chartres, was the site of a strong castle, first built in the eleventh century, which enjoyed a strategic position covering the route from the Ile-de-France to Orleans. Its lords had over several generations acquired a reputation as violent and aggressive exploiters of feudal power. Hugues seems to have gone to the Holy Land in 1129, following what had become a family tradition of crusading activity. In the same year Hugh's brother-in-law Henry de Blois (died 1171), one of the younger brothers of Count Theobald (son and successor of Count Stephen), was given the rich bishopric of Winchester by Henry I, having already been abbot of Glastonbury for three years. It was natural that a younger son of the Le Puiset family, directly descended from William the Conqueror, should look for preferment in the English church. And when Count Theobald's next youngest brother, Stephen, count of Mortain, gained the English throne at the end of 1135, the prospects for a nephew of the new king must have seemed bright indeed. 
By 1139 Hugh du Puiset had become archdeacon of Winchester, the right-hand man of his uncle Henry. The archbishop of York, Thurstan, died in 1140 and the Blois family interest was mobilized to secure the archbishopric and as much influence as possible in the northern province. In this Blois campaign, Hugh du Puiset co-operated with William Fitzherbert (died 1154), the treasurer of York and a leading figure in the chapter there, whom, despite what many regarded as his personal unsuitability, the king wished to make archbishop. Before Fitzherbert was driven from his see by the party of church reform, he had obtained for du Puiset ('c'.1143) the important offices of cathedral treasurer and archdeacon of the East Riding. The period from 1147 to 1153 was occupied by open hostilities or uneasy truces between Archdeacon Hugh and the Cistercian Henry Murdac, abbot of Fountains, who through the influence of Abbot Bernard of Clairvaux and Pope Eugenius III ('r'. 1145-53) was consecrated archbishop of York at Trier in December 1147. During most of Murdac's troubled pontificate Blois influence in northern England waned, but it recovered strongly, though briefly, before the death of King Stephen in October 1154. In November 1152 the bishop of Durham, William de Ste Barbe, died. Partly because the two strongest local aspirants for the succession, the prior and the archdeacon, were evenly poised, the clergy and people of the diocese (that is, the monks of the cathedral priory and the leading barons of the bishopric) on 22 January 1153 chose Hugh du Puiset, although he was still not twenty-eight years of age, and as such under the canonical age for becoming a bishop. 
For some nine months Archbishop Murdac bitterly opposed the election, declaring it null because it was carried out without his consent, as metropolitan, and also because of the elect's youth and scandalous lifestyle. He excommunicated the electors, who appealed to the papal curia, to which they dispatched a delegation accompanied by the bishop-elect himself. Luckily for du Puiset Pope Eugenius died in July 1153 and his more sympathetic successor Anastasius IV ('r'. 1153-4) consecrated du Puiset on 21 December. Meanwhile Archbishop Murdac had died (14 October), and the way was clear for the new bishop of Durham to return to his diocese and be enthroned in his cathedral on 2 May 1154. He was supported by the now restored Archbishop Fitzherbert who, however, died a month later. The window of opportunity for the Blois family interest had been opened barely long enough for Hugh du Puiset to become established in his see. It closed decisively with King Stephen's death on 25 October and the accession of Henry of Anjou (Henry II) on 19 December 1154. Already the see of York had been refilled: Roger de Pont l'Eveque, a clerk and protege of Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury, was consecrated in October 1154. Since Bishop AEthelwold of Carlisle died 'c'.1156 and his see was not filled again until 1204, the north of England was dominated ecclesiastically for nearly thirty years by two prelates bent on self-aggrandizement and the exploitation of both spiritual and secular authority. And since York had no consecrated archbishop for a decade after Roger's death in 1181, du Puiset enjoyed a virtual monopoly of episcopal and palatine power in northern England until his own death in 1195. 
The diocese of Durham comprised what became in the twelfth century the counties of Northumberland and Durham, with the addition of the district of Alston at the head of the south Tyne and (just north of the Tweed and therefore in Scotland) the tiny parish of Wester Upsettlington. Within certain parts of this extensive area the bishop, inheriting a long series of grants of privileges and immunities by kings of the eleventh century and earlier, enjoyed a wholly exceptional position of quasi-royal authority and military power. The rationale behind this 'palatine' liberty was defence of England against the Scots, but the real roots of St Cuthbert's Land (or Haliwerfolc -- 'the Saint's people' -- as it was known) derived from Durham's jealously guarded possession of the body and relics of St Cuthbert, the most renowned and venerated of all English saints. Since the time of Bishop Ranulf Flambard (died 1128) the actual custody of these relics and the responsibility for serving the great cathedral church, begun in 1093 and by 1154 well on the way to completion, lay with the Benedictine monks of the cathedral priory. Nevertheless the bishop as successor of Cuthbert was recognized as effectively abbot of the monastery, and the position into which du Puiset stepped in 1154 was one of the grandest, richest, and most magnificent in the English kingdom. 
Hugh du Puiset was determined not to allow the grandeur, wealth, or magnificence to be abated one jot. Untouched by either the clerical zeal of the Gregorian reformers or the humility beloved of the Cistercians and their admirers, he pursued the life of an old-fashioned late-Frankish aristocrat. His relationship with the most prominent of his mistresses, Alice de Percy, was so public and of such long duration that it almost amounted to a marriage. With Alice Bishop Hugh had at least two children, Henry the knight and Hugh, who rose to become chancellor of Philip Augustus, king of France, and perhaps two others, William, archdeacon of Northumberland, and Burchard, archdeacon of Durham and treasurer of York. Hugh du Puiset lived in great style, maintaining a large household, taking with him wherever he went a private chapel richly furnished with liturgical ornaments and vessels of gold and silver. Surviving inventories show that his vestments were of velvet and other expensive cloth, profusely embroidered with pearls and other precious gems and elaborately worked with birds, animals, and motifs drawn from romance and chivalry. At Stanhope in Weardale the bishop's hunting lodge was provided with a new kitchen and larder every year by the local peasantry. When he proposed to undertake a crusading expedition in 1189 a great ship was built, stuffed with so many furnishings and utensils that a house had to be hired to contain them all when the ship was laid up. 
Du Puiset was an indefatigable builder, carrying out large-scale work at the castles of Durham, Northallerton, and Norham. He undertook the erection of Elvet Bridge in Durham (some remains of its chapel came to light in 1995) and co-operated with the king of Scots in building the earliest known bridge over the tidal Tweed at Berwick. He founded one hospital, Sherburn, and refounded another, Flambard's hospital of Kepier, both of them near to Durham itself. The crowning glory of his building activity is the Galilee Chapel which in the 1170s he caused to be built against the west front of the cathedral. Although now sadly altered and damaged, it is still possible to appreciate how splendid the chapel must have been originally, consisting of five parallel aisles supported on freestone shafts each provided with a pair of columns of black Purbeck marble. The interior was evidently richly painted and decorated, and the centrepiece was a magnificent altar to the Blessed Virgin. As well as being a great patron of masons and craftsmen, du Puiset, although not himself learned or even especially well educated, formed a considerable library and commissioned the making of two great bibles, one of which, in four large volumes still treasured at Durham (Durham Cathedral Library, MS A. II. 1), is one of the masterpieces of twelfth-century English book production. The bishop was lord of one of England's most extensive estates, reaching from the Tweed to Lincolnshire, and including a palace in London. In 1183 du Puiset caused a detailed survey to be made of much of this lordship, especially the vills in what later became co. Durham and in Northumberland (Bedlingtonshire and Norhamshire), recording the numbers of unfree tenants with their rents and services, the universal royal tributes, such as cornage, which the bishop levied in place of the king, and the obligations of a handful of boroughs and freeholders, for example thegns and drengs. This important record is known as 'Boldon Buke', from a manor on the episcopal demesne taken to be typical, and survives in several manuscripts ranging in date from the thirteenth to the fifteenth century. 
It was entirely in character that du Puiset was engaged over many years in disputes with his own cathedral chapter, where his success in litigation stimulated the production by the priory's monks of numerous forgeries designed to demonstrate that earlier bishops had given them immunity from many episcopal demands. The bishop also quarrelled, from the later 1160s, with his own metropolitan, Roger de Pont l'Eveque. A fruitful source of conflict was the existence in York diocese of privileged estates such as Northallerton and Howden, which belonged to the bishops of Durham, and in Durham diocese of a similar estate (Hexhamshire) belonging to the archbishops of York. Such long-drawn-out disputes were a commonplace of twelfth-century ecclesiastical politics and in no way inhibited du Puiset from serving as a judge or investigator in numerous other legal conflicts, including the notoriously never-ending argument between Canterbury and York over the limits of their primatial and metropolitan privileges. 
Another 'cause celebre' in which du Puiset was involved arose from the unwise action of the cathedral chapter of St Andrews in electing Master John the Scot (died 1203) as their bishop in 1178 in succession to Bishop Richard. Master John was a nephew of an earlier bishop, and as an experienced and educated clergyman might have been judged a suitable candidate. But William the Lion was determined to appoint his chaplain Hugh, and drove John the Scot and his supporter, the bishop of Aberdeen, into exile. The canons of St Andrews appealed to the papal curia, and since Bishop Hugh attended the Third Lateran Council in 1179 it was natural that he, along with Archbishop Roger of York, should have been commanded by the pope to bring the king of Scots to heel, if necessary by means of excommunication and interdict. Neither of the northern English prelates was allowed into Scotland, although Bishop Hugh met the king of Scots at Redden in August, 1181, and vainly argued the case for John the Scot. The dispute was settled in 1183, inevitably by a compromise. The bishop of Durham must have been well known to the officials of the papal curia, for apart from figuring frequently in litigation he had attended Alexander III's Council of Tours in 1163, the sole suffragan of York to be present in person. 
The kings of Scots, Malcolm IV ('r'. 1153-65) and especially William the Lion ('r'. 1165-1214), were almost hereditary enemies, ever since the Scots had favoured Anjou against Blois in 1136. The building of Berwick Bridge is almost the sole instance of du Puiset's co-operation with the Scots, who saw his massive rebuilding of Norham Castle on the border in the 1160s as an act of provocation. Yet in the great rebellion instigated by Henry II's eldest son, Henry, the Young King, in 1173, the bishop of Durham displayed such caution in the face of King William's invasions of Northumbria in support of the rebels as to incur a suspicion of collusion and certainly the wrath of the English king. Not only did du Puiset enter into truces with the Scots that allowed their armies safe passage through the bishopric and were obviously designed to minimize the damage which Scottish raids might do to St Cuthbert's Land; but at one point, in the summer of 1174, the bishop's nephew and namesake, Hugues du Puiset, count of Bar, landed at Hartlepool at the head of a sizeable military force, ostensibly to defend the bishopric against rebel attacks but widely suspected of being du Puiset's contribution to the hoped-for overthrow of Henry II. Only the prompt surrender of the castles of Norham, Durham, and Northallerton and the payment of heavy fines could, after some interval of time, bring about a reconciliation between bishop and king. The same inclination to be neutral at times of major crisis had shown itself in the Becket dispute, where it has been said by David Knowles that for reasons that do not appear du Puiset kept entirely clear of the controversy, although he had collaborated with Archbishop Roger in the fatal coronation of the Young King on 14 June 1170. Between 1175 and the end of Henry II's reign relations between du Puiset and the king seem to have been reasonably harmonious. The bishop helped to settle the Galloway dispute in 1186, and two years later went to the Scottish border to demand that the Scots contribute to the 'Saladin tithe' raised by Henry II throughout his dominions as his contribution to the campaign to recover Jerusalem for the Christians. Although the bishop negotiated with the Scots, King William's reply was that his barons flatly refused to pay the tithe; the Scottish contribution towards the third crusade came only after Richard I had succeeded his father, and was willing to give William the Lion his independence for a payment of 10,000 marks of silver. 
Du Puiset's greatest show of loyalty to the house of Anjou came in the first five years of Richard I's reign, and even there it may be argued that the bishop's motivation was essentially the enhancement of his own power and authority. Taking advantage of his own wealth and of the king's need for money, he was able to buy from Richard the wapentake of Sadberge -- the largest territory between Tees and Tyne not yet in episcopal hands -- and also the much prized earldom of Northumberland, hankered after for many years by the king of Scots. He also became joint justiciar of England, though this was reduced to a justiciarship of the north in 1190. Du Puiset was completely outmanoeuvred by the king's chancellor, William de Longchamp (died 1197), who put the bishop under virtual house arrest at Howden in the summer of 1190 and stripped him of his offices. On Longchamp's fall the next year du Puiset made some recovery, but although he retained the earldom of Northumberland until 1194, he was now too elderly to get the better of such astute and persistent opponents as the king's brother and heir, John, count of Mortain, and their half-brother Geoffrey Plantagenet (died 1212), who to the fury of du Puiset had been given the archbishopric of York in September 1189, following an election to which du Puiset formally objected. There ensued a most unseemly dispute, which involved not only the clergy and people of York but also the papacy and the regents governing for the king, now absent on his crusade. Eventually in the autumn of 1192 the bishop and his metropolitan (consecrated in August of the previous year) were formally reconciled. Nevertheless du Puiset's last two years were hardly peaceful. From the end of 1192 until early in 1194 the king was a prisoner in Austria and Germany. Against a background of John's treachery and the unremitting enmity of Philip of France, a huge ransom had to be raised in England to secure the king's release. Du Puiset's share in the events of this difficult time included a successful siege of John's castle at Tickhill and a payment of $2000 towards Richard's ransom to escape having his cathedral plate and ornaments confiscated. The return of the king in March 1194 should have meant peace for the north of England and rewards for the bishop of Durham. But even in the atmosphere of rejoicing the bishop could not resist the temptation to insult King William of Scotland, gravely displeasing King Richard who was William's friend. Du Puiset was prompted to surrender the earldom of Northumberland, and although he had the satisfaction of seeing King William's demand for it refused, he never recovered it for himself. He died at Howden on 3 March 1195 aged about seventy. 
The combination of a royal and princely family background and a position of immense wealth and potential power made this imperious and quarrelsome nobleman a major figure of the English, and indeed of the European, twelfth century. Tall, handsome, and -- when he chose to be -- affable, Hugh du Puiset was clearly capable of impressing his contemporaries with his personality. To judge from the witness lists of Henry II's 'acta' he was often at court, especially at meetings of what may be called the great council. He took part in many weighty decisions affecting both secular and ecclesiastical politics. He was no scholar, still less a spiritual leader. For fifty years he was a force to be reckoned with in the life of northern England. Yet he is chiefly remembered in the great castles of Norham and Durham, and above all in the splendid Galilee Chapel which still adorns his cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 22872


Puleston, Hamlet (1632-1662), writer, was born at Old Alresford, Hampshire, in 1632, the son of Richard Puleston ('b'. 1591), and Mary Marshall ('fl'. 1622-1632), and nephew of John Puleston. Hamlet's father was born at Burcott in Oxfordshire, but was descended from a Flintshire family. He graduated from Hart Hall, Oxford, BA in 1611, MA in 1613, BD in 1620, and DD in 1627. He obtained a fellowship at Wadham College, Oxford, which he resigned in 1619, and was a prebendary of Winchester in 1611-16 and rector successively of Leckford, Hampshire (1616), Kingsworthy (1618), and Abbotsworthy. He was moderator of philosophy in 1614, and humanity lecturer in 1616 at Oxford. 
Hamlet, admitted a scholar of Wadham on 20 August 1647, graduated BA on 23 May 1650 and proceeded MA on 25 April 1653. He at first declined to subscribe to the ordinances of the parliamentary visitors, but subsequently became a fellow of Jesus College, and was nominated 'moderator dialecticae' on 19 May 1656. Wood says also that he became 'a preacher in those parts', presumably Oxfordshire (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.544). He ultimately settled in London. He published in 1661 'Monarchiae Britannicae singularis protectio, or, A brief historical essay tending to prove God's especial providence over the British monarchy'. A slight piece, its ambitions confined to a brief history of the monarchies of England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales and the conjunction of the royal lines in the person of Charles II, it was reissued as the 'Epitome monarchiae Britannicae' in 1663. 
Puleston died in London at the beginning of 1662 'in a poor condition and in an obscure house' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.544). The administration of his estate was granted on 27 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 22873


Puleston, John (1583?-1659), lawyer, was born at Kingsworthy, Hampshire, eldest son of Richard Puleston ('b'. 1548), a clergyman from Emral in Flintshire who was later rector of Kingsworthy, and his wife, Alice, daughter of David Lewis of Burcot, Oxfordshire; his younger brother was Richard Puleston ('b'. 1591), later also rector of Kingsworthy and father of the political writer Hamlet Puleston (1632-1662). On 22 May 1601 he matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, from where he went to Clifford's Inn before being admitted to the Middle Temple on 24 May 1606. He was called to the bar on 8 July 1614 and confirmed on 3 February 1616. A 'devout Puritan' (Prest, 386), in 1619 he was fined for serving flesh on St Matthew's day in the Middle Temple hall. At an unknown date he married Elizabeth (died 1658), daughter of Sir John Woolrych of Dudmaston, Shropshire, 'an earnest Presbyterian' ('DWB'); they had two sons, Roger and John. 
In 1634 Puleston became a reader and bencher of his inn. The same year, his religious stance notwithstanding, he accompanied Richard Cartwright on a visit to advise Archbishop Laud on ecclesiastical law. Also about this time he inherited from his childless uncle, George Puleston, the family estate at Emral. In 1641 Puleston petitioned parliament against the chief justice of Chester, accusing him of 'taking of the presents money'. About September 1642 his wife and children were evicted from Emral by royalist troops under the command of Sir John Hammer. The Commons recommended him in February 1643 for the post of baron of the exchequer, but the king declined to appoint him. Puleston became treasurer of his inn in 1646 and was created serjeant-at-law by parliament on 12 October 1648. After seven of the existing fifteen common law judges had declined to continue under the Commonwealth, in 1649 parliament made Puleston a judge of common pleas, in which capacity he rode the home, midland, Oxford, and northern circuits. He served on the commissions that tried and convicted the governor of Pontefract Castle, Colonel John Morris, at York in August 1649 and that acquitted the Leveller leader John Lilburne at the Guildhall later that year. He was named under a proposed act for the establishment of a new high court of justice in April 1650 and to a commission for trying offenders at Norfolk in December 1650. He also served on the north Wales composition committee (1649), on the commission for the propagation of the gospel in Wales (1650), and, between 1647 and 1657, on numerous parliamentary commissions for Denbighshire and Flintshire. 
Oliver Cromwell did not reappoint Puleston to the bench in 1653. At about this time his family re-occupied the Emral estate and, on 30 September 1653, Philip Henry, later an eminent nonconformist minister, was appointed tutor to Puleston's two sons there, accompanying them to Oxford the following year. His wife died in 1658, and Puleston died at Emral on 5 September 1659, and was buried there three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 22874


Pulleyne, John (c.1517-1565), preacher and Church of England clergyman, was reputedly born in Yorkshire. He was educated at Oxford, graduating in 1540 and proceeding MA in 1544, and ordained successively deacon on 20 November 1550 and priest on 29 March 1551 to the title of Christ Church. His evident enthusiasm for protestantism won him patronage at the heart of the Edwardian regime: in 1553 he was appointed rector of St Peter Cornhill, an important posting in an influential London city church. He was also at some point serving as chaplain to the duchess of Suffolk, a stalwart of the protestant inner circle during Edward's reign who would become a beacon of constancy during the Marian reaction. 
After the accession of Mary, Pulleyne remained in England. He was forced to vacate his living at St Peter Cornhill early in 1554 (though formally deprived only in February 1555), but departed only as far as Essex. Here, it was reported to Edmund Bonner, bishop of London, a considerable congregation of protestants had gathered, served by a number of ministers including 'Master Pulleyne, otherwise called Smith' (Byford, 29). It was alleged that Pulleyne and another minister, 'William, the Scot' (probably Pulleyne's former curate at St Peter Cornhill), often travelled to the continent to see the duchess of Suffolk. No doubt assisted by such strategic intervals abroad Pulleyne was able to maintain his clandestine ministry for much of Mary's reign, both in Colchester and in London, where he is recorded as conducting Easter communion at his house in Cornhill using the Edwardian prayer book in both 1555 and 1556. But soon the dangers of such high-profile service to the protestant community became too great, and in 1557 Pulleyne was forced to withdraw abroad more permanently; the arrival of a child may also have played a part in this decision. With his wife, Joan ('nee' Wilbore), and their daughter Faith he made for Geneva, where he arrived, via Strasbourg and Basel, in June. He received a warm welcome in Knox's congregation, which elected him in December a deacon of the church -- a sure sign of the high respect in which he was held even in this distinguished company. In Geneva Pulleyne became heavily involved in the project to develop an English metrical psalter, and the eleven new psalms added for the second edition of the 'Psalms in English' (1558) contained two by Pulleyne. He was also reputed to have been a collaborator on the English 'Geneva Bible'. 
On Mary's death Pulleyne lingered in Geneva long enough to sign the letter of December 1558 urging the exiles to avoid contention over superfluous ornaments. By spring 1559, though, he was back in Colchester: there, with local encouragement, he soon began to preach. His sermons were outspoken and uncompromising, and at a time when unauthorized preaching was still forbidden, and he himself was unbeneficed, they soon attracted official disapproval. In April 1559 Pulleyne was arrested and brought to face the privy council in London. The charge revealed that his sermons had included an inflammatory denunciation of those who compromised with Catholicism under Mary, and had taken a tough Calvinist line on swearing, fornication, and other moral offences. Notwithstanding this unhelpful precipitancy, Pulleyne had friends both locally and at court, and this assured him an important role in the new Elizabethan regime. He was sufficiently well thought of for Cecil to have included him on a list of those marked for high office in July 1559: that this was only weeks after his arrest and appearance before the privy council indicates the radicalism of Cecil's thinking in these months. Equally important, local Colchester opinion was firmly behind him. In August 1559 the electors of Colchester's north ward voted for Pulleyne to be their headsman -- an important gesture of support, given that the Yorkshire-born Pulleyne was technically not qualified for the post. These expressions of local opinion may have been decisive in the decision to name Pulleyne as archdeacon of Colchester, rather than the episcopal rank for which he had first been considered. Pulleyne was, in effect, to be the superintendent of a region known for its precocious loyalty to protestantism. This was a decision in which the new bishop of London, Edmund Grindal, seems heartily to have concurred, although the initiative was probably Cecil's: Pulleyne was instituted by royal visitors before Grindal's formal enthronement. 
In Colchester Pulleyne proved an enthusiastic leader of the town's reformation, though apparently somewhat to the detriment of his wider responsibilities in the deanery. In 1561 thirteen of the fifteen livings in the deanery were vacant, a position substantially unaltered two years later. His outspoken sermons continued to inspire and provoke in equal measure. He was not afraid either to address mundane moral issues (one complainant grumbled 'he did love to make many sermons of beerpots') or to publicly shame individual offenders; a meeting in the house of the apothecary Simon Smyth in January 1562 heard their host complain that Pulleyne 'made his last sermon... against him and none other' (Byford, 41). But Pulleyne was also an innovator. Colchester's livings were poor, and it proved difficult to replenish the ranks of the parochial ministry after the last of the Marian incumbents had resigned in September 1559. To make good this deficiency Pulleyne appointed 'readers' from among the ranks of the protestant godly. From this beginning he harassed the mainly conservative town aldermen into voting funds for the maintenance of the preaching ministry. A further reflection of his experiences in Geneva was the institution of twenty-five overseers of church attendance, charged with keeping the streets free of unlawful work or play on the Sabbath. Pulleyne died in 1565, some time before 16 July, and was survived by his wife, Joan. In addition to his archdeaconry he was also a prebendary of Wenlocksbarn in St Paul's (12 September 1561) and rector of Copford, Essex (8 March 1560), a valuable crown living to which he had been advanced on the recommendation of Grindal. His wife was granted letters of administration in the archdeaconry on 16 May 1566; these she renounced, so on 6 February 1568 letters were regranted to her brother Nicolas Wilbore (a prominent Colchester citizen) during the minority of her children. 


@@@@@


doc= 22875


Pullan, Richard Popplewell (1825-1888), architect and archaeologist, was born on 27 March 1825 at Knaresborough in Yorkshire, the son of Samuel Popplewell Pullan ('b'. 1796), solicitor, and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Dewes. He was educated at Christ's Hospital, became a Grecian, and was afterwards a pupil of Richard Lane, architect and surveyor, of Manchester, along with Alfred Waterhouse. At Manchester, Pullan studied old missals and illuminated manuscripts in Chetham's Library, and became interested in medievalism. He developed a passion for heraldry, and amused himself by producing coloured pedigrees. In 1844 he submitted a design for the royal robing-room of Queen Victoria at the House of Lords. This was praised for its richness of colour, though Pullan was considered too young to be awarded the commission. Subsequently he produced stained glass designs and retained a lifelong interest in the study and practice of polychromy. He wrote extensively on architectural matters and read a number of papers at meetings of the Royal Institute of British Architects. 
On 24 February 1859 Pullan married Mary Leschallas Burges, the sister of William Burges, the architect. They had no children. Mary Pullan later travelled throughout Asia Minor with her husband, and on the death of her brother, William Burges, in 1881 she and Pullan moved to the house Burges had built for himself in Melbury Road, London. During a visit to Italy Pullan studied church architecture. On his return he helped Sir Digby Wyatt with the polychrome decoration of the Byzantine and medieval courts of the Crystal Palace, which were opened by Queen Victoria on 10 June 1854. In October of that year Pullan went to Sevastopol and made sketches and models of the contours of the district which was under siege. When he returned home he exhibited a model of the country and the fortifications about Sevastopol. 
In 1856, in conjunction with (Charles Emmanuel?) Evans, he entered the Lille Cathedral competition and won a silver medal. In 1857 the Foreign Office appointed him as architect to the expedition which was being sent to survey the mausoleum at Halicarnassus, which Charles Newton had excavated in 1856. Pullan arrived at Bodrum on 25 August 1857. He not only measured the architectural remains, but attempted a restoration of the mausoleum, in accordance with the descriptions of Pliny the elder, Hyginus, and Guichard. 
On Newton's instructions Pullan then went to Cnidus, where he discovered a gigantic figure of a lion, 10 feet long and 6 feet high, weighing, with its case, 11 tons. This he sent to Britain, and it is now in the Elgin room of the British Museum. He made a restoration of the tomb which the lion had crowned, a survey of the principal sites in the island of Kos, and drawings of the remains. All these restorations are recorded in 'A History of Discoveries at Halicarnassus, Cnidus, and Branchidae, by C. T. Newton, M.A., Assisted by R. P. Pullan' (1862-3). 
After this the Society of Dilettanti employed Pullan on further similar investigations. In April 1862 he began excavations on the site of the Temple of Bacchus at Teos, where he found the temple to be hexastyle (as described by Vitruvius in 'De architectura', vol. 3, chap. 3), with eleven columns on the flanks, rather than pseudodipteral, and so proved that it was not the one built by Hermogenes. Instead he believed that it had been erected in Roman times. 
In 1862 Pullan visited the remains of the Temple of Apollo Smintheus, or the 'mouse-queller', near Kulakli, in the Troad, which had been discovered by Thomas Spratt in 1853. In 1864 he published, with Charles F. Texier, 'Byzantine architecture, illustrated by examples, with historical and archaeological descriptions' and in 1865 they published 'The Principal Ruins of Asia Minor Illustrated and Described'. He returned to Smyrna on 5 August 1866, and completed the excavation and drawings on 22 November 1866. He found sufficient remains to show that it was an octastyle pseudodipteral temple, with only fourteen columns on the flank, being superior to the Temple of Minerva Polias at Priene, and probably of about the same date. In 1869 Pullan, under an order from the society, excavated the site of the Temple of Minerva Polias at Priene, which had hitherto been encumbered with ruins. Accounts of Pullan's work on the three temples were published in the fourth part of 'The Antiquities of Ionia' (1881). 
At the same time Pullan visited most of the Byzantine churches in Greece and Asia Minor, and published an account of the examples of Byzantine and classical work that had been accumulated by himself and Charles Texier in two volumes, entitled respectively 'Byzantine Architecture' (1864), and 'Principal Ruins of Asia Minor' (1865). On Pullan's advice Lord Savile, the British ambassador at Rome, undertook excavations on his property at Civita Lavinia, on the Alban hills (Lanuvium), where the ruins of the imperial villa of Antoninus Pius were discovered, and magnificent fragments of sculpture, as well as some archaic terracottas. Pullan's other publications include: 'The Altar, its Baldachin and Reredos' (1873); 'Eastern Cities and Italian Towns: with Notes of their Architecture' (1879); 'Studies in Architectural Style' (1883); and 'Studies in Cathedral Design' (1888). 
Pullan managed to combine a good London-based architectural practice with his archaeological explorations. He became a fellow of the RIBA in 1861. He competed for the memorial churches at St Petersburg and Constantinople, for Truro and Lille cathedrals, the War and Foreign offices, the Liverpool exchange buildings, the Natural History Museum (South Kensington), the Glasgow municipal buildings, the Dublin Museum, and the Hamburg town hall. His principal executed works were churches at Pontresina and Baveno in Italy, and the conversion of Castel Aleggio, between Lake Maggiore and Lake Orta, into an English Gothic mansion. The church at Baveno is octagonal in plan, and of the Lombard type, and was built for the numismatist Henry William Henfrey in the grounds of his villa. The whole of the coloured decoration was designed by Pullan -- much of it was also executed by him -- and a drawing of it was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1882. On the death of Pullan's brother-in-law William Burges, in 1881, he completed all Burges's unfinished works, and edited his posthumously published works. 
Pullan was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and a member of the Royal Archaeological Institute. A long-term sufferer from bronchitis, he died at 1 Oriental Place, Brighton, on 30 April 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 22876


Pullen, Josiah (1631-1714), Church of England clergyman and university teacher, was possibly the son of John Pulleyn. He matriculated at Magdalen Hall on 15 November 1650, graduated BA on 26 May 1654, and proceeded MA in 1657. His MA was incorporated at Cambridge in 1659. In 1657 he was elected vice-principal of Magdalen Hall, a position he held until his death. Among his pupils were Robert Plot, the Oxfordshire naturalist, Richard Stafford, a Jacobite pamphleteer, and Thomas Yalden the poet. Under Henry Wilkinson (principal from 1648 to 1662), Magdalen Hall was renowned as a puritan house; in 1661 Clarendon refused an invitation to dine in hall, acknowledging Pullen alone as an 'honest man' among 'a company of factious people' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 1.415). 
Pullen was ordained priest at Lincoln Cathedral in September 1662, and became domestic chaplain to Bishop Robert Sanderson. He gave the sermon at Sanderson's funeral in 1663. In 1675 he was appointed minister of St Peter-in-the-East, Oxford, and in 1684 rector of Blunsdon St Andrew in Wiltshire. Also in that year Pullen became one of the original members, and signatories to the rules, of the Philosophical Society of Oxford. 
In the company of Alexander Padsey, a fellow of Magdalen, or Richard Steele, the essayist, Joe Pullen was often out walking, an activity which, according to Hearne, kept him 'very healthy and vigorous' ('Remarks', 5.8). An elm tree which he planted at the top of Headington Hill, and which in 1832 came to mark the limit of the parliamentary borough of Oxford, carried his name even after it was cut down to a stump in 1894. Pullen's Lane in Headington continued his memory. 
Pullen officiated at services until his death, refusing to wear his spectacles, which made him 'guilty of great Blunders at Divine service' ('Remarks', 5.8). He died, unmarried, at Oxford on 31 December 1714, aged eighty-three, and was buried, on 7 January 1715, in the lady chapel of St Peter-in-the-East, where a slab with an epitaph by Thomas Wagstaff was erected. In his will, proved in the chancellor's court at Oxford on 11 May, Pullen bequeathed his estate to his nephew, John, for the education of John's son, James. 


@@@@@


doc= 22877


Pullen, Robert (d. in or after 1146), theologian and cardinal, derived his surname from Latin 'pullus', meaning either 'dingy' or 'small animal'. It is very unlikely that he is the Master Robert called Amiclas ('Poor Man') who appears in the contemporary poem 'Metamorphosis Goliae episcopi', as well as in the 'History' written by William of Tyre. Pullen may have come from Sherborne in Dorset and he may also have studied in a school for clerks in northern France, perhaps at Laon or Paris, in the early years of the twelfth century. He should not be confused with Robert, archdeacon of Exeter, who studied at Laon and became bishop of Exeter in 1138. But he probably taught for a time in Exeter before 1133, where he may have had Gilbert Foliot (died 1187) among his pupils. He then moved to Oxford, and from 1133 to 1138 (in the words of the Osney annalist) 'he began to lecture at Oxford on the holy scriptures, which had been neglected in England' ('Ann. mon.', 4.19). Several of his sermons of this period have survived, and he must also in these years have begun work on his 'Sentences', which systematically treat of the main areas of theology. He was not, as has been suggested, a canon of Osney Abbey. 
According to the chronicler John of Hexham, Pullen refused a bishopric offered him by Henry I; he would seem an unlikely choice, and anyway in his lectures he expressed his belief in free elections. He soon moved to Paris where he taught, supported by the revenues of the archdeaconry of Rochester which he obtained possibly before 1137. John of Salisbury (died 1180) describes him as a man 'of joyful memory', and as 'commendable alike in his life and his learning' ('Ioannis Saresberiensis Metalogicon', 21, 72), who taught him theology at the cathedral school of Paris as the successor of Gilbert de la Porree, who had left to be bishop of Poitiers in 1142. Bernard of Clairvaux wrote, probably in 1142, to apologize to Ascelin, bishop of Rochester, for detaining Pullen at Paris 'on account of the wholesome doctrine that is in him' ('Sancti Bernardi opera', 64). The revenues that supported Pullen were hotly disputed by the monks of Rochester. Ascelin tried to force Pullen to return and appealed to Rome. He obtained a judgment from Celestine II allowing him to appoint a new archdeacon unless Pullen were to successfully appeal by 14 May (Pentecost) 1144. Pullen did appeal and Bernard reproached Ascelin for 'stretching out his hand upon the goods of the appellant after his appeal was made' (ibid.). Bernard also mentioned that Master Robert had many friends in the curia. 
This action must have brought Pullen to Rome. His creation as cardinal-priest of St Martin, certainly by 4 January 1145, represents an unusual promotion, for no Englishman had hitherto become a cardinal, and Pullen was a teacher apparently lacking administrative experience. Gilbert Foliot wrote to congratulate his 'dearest master' ('Letters and Charters', 84) but did not quite conceal his surprise before going on to beg for favours. John of Salisbury, too, gives a hint of surprise in writing that the pope 'made a chancellor out of a scholastic doctor' ('Ioannis Saresberiensis Metalogicon', 22): Pope Lucius II, who succeeded Celestine II in March 1144, appointed Pullen chancellor of the Roman church, in which post he appears between 31 January 1145 and 22 September 1146. Lucius allowed Pullen to nominate his successor at Rochester; the bishop recorded his disappointments in a letter. Pullen appointed his nephew. This was Paris (Parisius), who is found as archdeacon between 1145 and 1190; he also held a prebend in London. 
On the accession to the papacy in 1145 of Bernard's friend, Eugenius III, Bernard wrote to Pullen warmly commending the new pontiff to him, and inviting him to become 'our Eugenius's consoler and counsellor' ('Sancti Bernardi opera', 309-10). Pullen disappears from papal documents after 22 September 1146, probably through death or ill health. He had probably been responsible for an increase in the number of Englishmen working in the curia, including his pupil John of Salisbury, Nicholas Breakspear (who later became Pope Adrian IV in 1154), and (perhaps) Boso, who became Adrian's biographer. He illustrates the growing interaction between scholastic and administrative activity during the second quarter of the twelfth century. He used his position in Rome to promote the interests of his relatives, including his cousin Joseph, prior of Sherborne Abbey, who brought a complaint against the bishop of Salisbury to Rome by June 1145, and obtained thereby confirmation of a substantial list of privileges and rights for his abbey. 
Pullen's 'Sentences' are a synthesis of theology in eight books, beginning with God's existence and the work of creation, and closing with the last judgment and the final state. They are characteristic of the early scholastic period, being comprehensive in scope but not as long as later collections were to become. They were presumably finished before 1144, as they arise from classroom teaching, which included carefully structured discussions of questions and of varying opinions about the teachings of the 'Bible'. They are not as systematic as Peter Lombard's, which were completed by 1158, but they left a mark on the latter work. Pullen was remembered, and his opinions recorded, to the end of the twelfth century. 
Nineteen sermons ascribed to Pullen are found in Lambeth Palace Library, MS 458, and Hereford Cathedral Library, MS O.viii.2. They were evidently addresses delivered to clerical scholars ('fratres carissimi') as an integral part of Pullen's teaching of the 'Bible'. The line of division between theology lectures and sermons was thin, but the link between both and the exposition of the 'Bible' was strong: a selection of biblical books and of passages within them underlies Pullen's teaching of both the 'Old' and 'New' testaments. His style in both his 'Sentences' and his sermons is discursive and homiletic, and also moralizing and admonitory. He also left an ascetical treatise on conversion and amendment of life entitled 'Sermo de contemptu mundi' or 'De omnibus humane vite necessariis'. A further twenty-six sermons ascribed to one Master Robert Pulo in Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 2945, are not in fact Pullen's. 


@@@@@


doc= 22878


Pullen, Samuel (bap. 1598, d. 1667), archbishop of Tuam, was baptized on 2 July 1598 at Ripley, Yorkshire, the first child, in a family of five sons and one daughter, of William Pullen (died 1631), rector of Ripley, and his second wife, Johan (died 1622), daughter of George Sheffield. He matriculated as a sizar from Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1615, graduated BA in 1620 and proceeded MA in 1623, and was ordained deacon in York in December 1624 and priest in March 1625. In 1624 he was appointed the first headmaster of the re-endowed Leeds grammar school, minister of the New Chapel, and lecturer in St Peter's parish church, of which his father was a trustee. He married Ann (died 1631), daughter of the Revd Robert Cooke, vicar of Leeds, in Leeds parish church on 8 June 1624, and they had three children -- Samuel (1625-1656), Alexander ('b'. 1626), and William (1629-1668). His wife died on 17 November 1631 and he married second, on 20 December 1632 in Pontefract parish church, Elizabeth (died in or after 1667), daughter of Peter Bramhall of Carlton near Pontefract, the sister of John Bramhall, later bishop of Derry and archbishop of Armagh. 
In 1632 Pullen accompanied the marquess (later James, first duke) of Ormond, as his private chaplain, to Ireland and there he gained preferment in the Church of Ireland. On 5 June 1634 he was installed as prebendary of Killamery in St Canice's Cathedral, Kilkenny, where in 1636 he was appointed to the chancellorship which he held with the rectory of Knockgraffon in co. Tipperary. To these preferments, in 1638 he added the deanery of Clonfert, co. Galway. He was residing in Cashel, co. Tipperary, at the outbreak of the Irish rising of 1641, in the course of which he lost goods and property to the value of $4652, escaping to England only after a period of three months during which he was sheltered by a Jesuit, James Saul (or Sall) 'who had received from the Dean several favours which caused James Saul to preserve the Dean from being murthered' (Nalson and Ware, 2.98). While in England Pullen was chaplain to Aubrey de Vere, earl of Oxford, whose wife, a Roman Catholic, introduced him to a shoemaker who was a much admired preacher. Pullen recognized the preacher as James Saul, whom he thanked 'for preserving his life in Ireland... and as you saved mine, I shall save yours' (ibid., 2.100). He prevailed on the earl and countess of Oxford to do Saul no harm providing he left Oxfordshire, and thereby the countess was said to have returned to the Church of England. 
After returning to Ireland, in 1642 Pullen was awarded the degree of DD by the University of Dublin, and in October of the same year was collated to the prebend of Swords in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, which he held until the Restoration when, on the recommendation of the duke of Ormond, he was appointed archbishop of Tuam and bishop of Kilfenora. Pullen was one of twelve bishops who were consecrated by his brother-in-law, the archbishop of Armagh, John Bramhall, in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, on 27 January 1661. His sojourn as archbishop of Tuam was unremarkable and short, for he died on 24 January 1667 at about five or six in the evening and was buried on 27 January in St Mary's Cathedral, Tuam, 'iuxta thronum archiepiscopalem' ('next to the archiepiscopal throne') under an inscribed stone which was subsequently removed from the cathedral and inserted in a boundary wall. Under the terms of his will, dated 10 January 1667, in which the principal legatees were his wife and son, William, he left houses in Patrick Street, Dublin, leased from the dean and chapter, rents of lands in co. Galway, furniture, coaches, and $600 to buy land, while his books were left to his nephew Tobias, later bishop of Cloyne and bishop of Dromore. Despite his pedagogical background and his ownership of books, he left no writings. Likewise as priest and bishop he left no permanent mark on the life of the Church of Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 22879


Pullen, Samuel (1713-1784?), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born at Dromore, co. Down, Ireland, the son of the Revd William Pullen ('c'.1655-1726). He was educated at Newry, then obtained a scholarship at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1730; he graduated BA in 1734 and MA of Trinity in 1738. He translated from the Latin of Marcus Hieronymus Vida, bishop of Alba (died 1566), 'The Silkworm: a Poem in Two Books' (1750), for which the Royal Dublin Society awarded him the Madden prize of $50 as the best-written book of the year. 
Pullen's father had been born in Jamaica, and a relative, William Pullen, was governor of Jamaica, which fuelled Pullen's interest in the introduction of silk cultivation into the American colonies. He wrote 'The Culture of Silk, or, An Essay on its Rational Practice and Improvement' (1758), and two papers on the same subject were published by the Royal Society. Pullen was rector of Skryne, co. Meath, in 1765-84 and vicar of St Catherine's, Dublin. He probably died in the early part of 1784; administration of his estate was granted to his sister on 13 July 1784. 


@@@@@


doc= 22880


Pullen, Tobias (1648-1713), Church of Ireland bishop of Dromore, was born at Middleham, Yorkshire, the son of Joshua Pullen (died 1657), dean of Middleham, and Hester Stannicliffe, and was the fourth child in a family of four boys and one girl. Owing, it is said, to the interest of his uncle, Samuel Pullen (bap. 1598, d. 1667), archbishop of Tuam, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 11 March 1664 at the age of sixteen and was elected to a scholarship in 1668. While still a student he was appointed in 1666, by his uncle, as a vicar-choral of St Mary's Cathedral, Tuam, and while he was permitted to enjoy the emoluments of the post he was granted leave of absence for six years to continue his studies in Dublin. It is uncertain if he was ordained at this time as he was below the canonical age, but he had been ordained by 1671, when he was elected a fellow of Trinity College. In May 1667 he was appointed to the college living of Tullyaughnish in the diocese of Raphoe, to which he added, in September of the same year, the treasurership of Armagh Cathedral and the appropriated rectory of Creggan. Having resigned his fellowship in May of the previous year on 16 May 1678 he married Elizabeth (died 1691), daughter of alderman Robert Leigh of Drogheda, co. Louth, with whom he had five children: Thomas ('b'. 1679), Samuel ('b'. 1682), Isabella ('b'. 1683), Elizabeth ('b'. 1684), and Joshua (1687-1767), who became chancellor of Dromore Cathedral in 1727. Pullen resigned his Raphoe and Armagh livings in 1682 when he was appointed dean of Ferns, but retained an interest in Armagh with his appointment as rector of Louth and Bewley and vicar of St Peter's, Drogheda, where he resided. He also retained his links with Trinity College, Dublin, from which he graduated BD and DD in 1688. 
In January 1689 Pullen fled to England before the advancing Jacobites, abandoning in Drogheda his books and manuscripts, which were seized by an Irish Roman Catholic, Nicholas Fitzgerald. He was attainted of treason by the Irish parliament in 1689, but, following the accession of William and Mary, Pullen returned to Ireland, where by February 1691 he was attempting to recover his stolen property. Later in the same year his wife died and was buried in St Peter's Church, Drogheda, on 4 October 1691. On the recommendation of Thomas Tenison, bishop of Lincoln, Pullen was appointed by letters patent of 13 November 1694 to the bishopric of Cloyne, with which he was permitted to continue to hold the rectories of Louth and Bewley. However, in the following year he was translated to the see of Dromore, where he built an episcopal residence at Magheralin. 
In 1695 Pullen published, anonymously, 'An Answer to the Case of the Protestant Dissenters of Ireland', which sought to refute the arguments of Joseph Boyce, a presbyterian minister, who advocated toleration for dissenters in Ireland. Pullen was one of twenty-one bishops in the Irish House of Lords who in the same year voted down a bill which would have eased the position of dissenters, and his loyalty to the establishment was further demonstrated in November 1695 when he preached in Christ Church, Dublin, on 'the happy deliverance of James I from the gunpowder plot and the happy accession of his present majesty King William' ('A Sermon Preached in Christ Church'). He returned to the theme of religious toleration in 1697 when he published, again anonymously, a defence of his 'Answer'. To him also is attributed the anonymous publication 'A vindication of Sir Robert King's designs and actions in relation to the late and present Lord Kingston', which appeared in 1699. That his time as bishop of Dromore was not devoted solely to politics is suggested by the gift in 1703 of a silver flagon to Dromore Cathedral, where it is still used. Pullen died on 22 January 1713 and was buried on 18 April in St Peter's Church, Drogheda, where he is memorialized as 'an able and faithful minister of Christ... honoured and beloved in every station' (Leslie, 239). 


@@@@@


doc= 22881


Pullen, William John Samuel (1813-1887), naval officer, was the son of Lieutenant W. Pullen RN. After serving for some years in the navy he left it in 1836, and went out under the auspices of the South Australia Company to assist in the establishment of the colony, afterwards becoming marine surveyor under the colonial administration. Returning to the navy in 1844, he was appointed to the paddle surveying vessel 'Columbia', working on the Atlantic coast of Canada under Lieutenant P. F. Shortland. He was promoted lieutenant on 9 November 1846, but continued in the 'Columbia' until she was paid off in 1848. He was then appointed to the 'Plover' with Captain Thomas Moore for a voyage to the Pacific and the Arctic through the Bering Strait. In the summer of 1849 he and Hooper were ordered by Captain Kellett of the 'Herald' to search the coast from Point Barrow to the mouth of the Mackenzie by boat, for signs of Sir John Franklin's expedition. After wintering on the Mackenzie, at Fort Simpson, in the following summer they searched the coast as far as Cape Bathurst, before returning to winter at Fort Simpson. They travelled overland to New York, and arrived in England in October 1851. Pullen had been promoted to the rank of commander, on 24 January 1850, and in February 1852 was appointed to the 'North Star' for service in the Franklin search expedition under the orders of Sir Edward Belcher. The 'North Star' spent the next two winters at Beechey Island, and returned to England in October 1854, having brought out Kellett and the crew of the 'Resolute'. In the following January Pullen was appointed to the 'Falcon', attached to the fleet in the Baltic during the summer of 1855. On 10 May 1856 he was advanced to post rank, and in September 1857 was appointed to the 'Cyclops' paddle steamer on the East India station. In 1858 he bombarded Jiddah and ran soundings down the Red Sea, with a view to laying telegraph cable from Suez to Aden; and throughout 1859 and 1860 he was employed on the survey of the south and east coasts of Ceylon. The 'Cyclops' returned to England early in 1861, and from 1863 to 1865 Pullen was stationed at Bermuda, where he carried out a detailed survey of the island. From 1867 to 1869 he commanded the 'Revenge' coastguard ship at Pembroke, and on 1 April 1870 was retired. He became rear-admiral on 11 June 1874, vice-admiral on 1 February 1879, and was granted a Greenwich Hospital pension on 19 February 1886. He had married a daughter of G. D. Berton, sheriff of Fredericton, Scotland; she predeceased him. He died at his residence, Vue Charmante, Torquay, Devon, on 11 January 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 22882


Puller, Sir Christopher (1774-1824), lawyer, was the grandson of Christopher Puller (died 1789), and the son of Richard Puller (1747-1826), merchant, of London and afterwards of Painswick Court, Gloucestershire. His father, a director of the South Sea Company, has been suggested as a possible identification of the pseudonymous Piercy Ravenstone, author of works on population and political economy (1821) and the funding system (1824). Puller was educated at Eton College and Oxford University, where he matriculated from Christ Church on 4 February 1792; he gained the Latin verse prize in 1794. He graduated BA in 1795, and was subsequently elected fellow of Oriel College. In 1800 he was called to the bar at the Inner Temple. On 9 August 1804 Puller married Louisa (1772-1857), daughter of Joseph King of Taplow and niece of Daniel Giles of Youngsbury, Hertfordshire, to which estate she succeeded in 1840. They had one son, Christopher William Giles Puller (1807-1864). 
In 1812 Puller transferred to Lincoln's Inn, where he was elected a bencher in 1822. He was associated as a law reporter with Sir John Bernard Bosanquet, with whom he wrote five volumes of common pleas cases (1796-1807), which were highly regarded and influential. In 1823 he was knighted on succeeding Sir R. H. Blossett as chief justice of Bengal. He died on 25 May 1824 in Calcutta, five weeks after arriving in India. 


@@@@@


doc= 22883


Puller, Timothy (bap. 1637/8, d. 1693), Church of England clergyman, was baptized on 17 January 1637 or 1638 at the parish of All Saints, Hertford, the eldest of five children of Isaac Puller ('bap'. 1612, died in or before 1693) and his wife, Elizabeth Barber, daughter of Gabriel Barber of Hertford. He came from a family with puritan and parliamentarian sympathies. The conformist vicar of All Saints was deprived of his living by the House of Commons in 1642 because he had refused to admit Timothy's grandfather Abraham as lecturer there. Timothy's father was joint author of the account sent to the Derby House committee of the taking of the earl of Holland at St Neots after the failure of his attempt to raise a force for the king, and served as JP and trier in Hertfordshire and as MP for Hertford in all three protectorate parliaments. 
Timothy Puller was admitted pensioner and matriculated at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1653, graduating BA in 1657 and MA in 1660 (in which degree he was incorporated at Oxford on 9 July 1661); he proceeded BD in 1667 and DD in 1673. On 12 February 1658 he was admitted student of Gray's Inn, but any intention he may have had to take up the law was soon abandoned: elected a fellow of his college in that year, he remained on the fellowship until 1673. He was ordained priest by the bishop of Ely on 24 September 1664; he is recorded as preaching a funeral sermon at All Saints', Cambridge, in April 1668. On 11 July 1671 he was presented to the rectory of Sacombe, Hertfordshire, to which was added on 23 September 1679 the rectory of St Mary-le-Bow, London: both these livings he held to his death. On 23 December 1676 he took out a licence to marry Alice Codrington ('bap'. 1646, died 1723?), spinster, then of Kingston, Surrey, the daughter of William Codrington, citizen and draper of London. They were married in King Henry VII's chapel at Westminster Abbey five days later. 
Puller was the author of 'The Moderation of the Church of England' (1679). In this work he argued that no further measures to comprehend dissenters within the Church of England were necessary as the Anglican church already offered a middle way between popery and puritanism. He believed that royal indulgences had been offered to dissenters not because the constitution of the church was oppressive but out of consideration 'of the weakness of the people' (T. Puller, 29). In fact, because of the intransigence of the dissenters he felt that the censures of the church should be imposed 'in full and free vigour for their seasonable reducement and emendation' (ibid., 520). None the less the work remained a popular statement of Anglican theology and was reprinted several times in the nineteenth century. A book whose frontispiece showed the Church of England as the mother church threatened by popish traitors (Guy Fawkes guided by a Jesuit), by puritans who tore and trampled upon the liturgy and 'Thirty-Nine Articles', and by Jesuit wolves in sheep's clothing was appropriated by a rather different tradition of what constituted the Anglican 'via media' as 'a calm and argumentative statement of the views of the church as conclusively set forth in her liturgy, articles and homilies' ('DNB'). 
Puller died in his parish of St Mary-le-Bow, where he was buried on 27 November 1693. His will, made on 9 October 1693 and proved by his widow on 23 January 1694, made provision for her and their two sons, William and Timothy, and two daughters, Elizabeth and Mary. Puller bequeathed property in Rugeley, Staffordshire, Tottenham High Cross, Middlesex, and Shrewsbury which was to pass to his sons after the death of their mother, while the daughters were to be provided with marriage portions of $400 apiece. His parishes of Sacombe and St Mary-le-Bow each received 40's'. for their poor. Puller's widow is probably the Alice Puller whose body was taken from St Paul's, Shadwell, to be buried at St Mary-le-Bow on 25 September 1723. His younger son, Timothy, followed him to the grave four years later; his elder son, William, graduated BCL from Hart Hall, Oxford, on 29 November 1704, aged eighteen, and was presented to the rectory of Yattendon, Berkshire, which he held until his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 22884


Pulling, Alexander (1813-1895), serjeant-at-law and legal writer, was born on 1 December 1813 at the Court House, St Arvans, Monmouthshire, the fourth son of George Christopher Pulling, a naval officer, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Moser of Kendal, Westmorland. He was educated at a private school at Llandaff before entering the Merchant Taylors' School in April 1829. On 30 October 1838 he was admitted to the Inner Temple, where he was called to the bar on 9 June 1843. He practised first on the western and afterwards on the south Wales circuit, where he became a leader. While still in his pupillage he published 'A Practical Treatise on the Laws, Customs, and Regulations of the City and Port of London' (1842), in which he concentrated a vast amount of previously inaccessible legal and antiquarian lore and sketched a bold scheme of metropolitan municipal reform, which in essence anticipated the 'Local Government Act' of 1888. In November 1853 he gave evidence before the royal commission on the state of the corporation of London ('Parl. papers', 1854, 26); and in 1855 he was appointed senior commissioner under the 'Metropolitan Management Act' of that year. He frequently represented the city both in court and before parliamentary committees. On 30 August 1855 he married Elizabeth, fourth daughter of Luke Hopkinson of Bedford Row, Middlesex; they had two sons. 
Pulling was an energetic member of the Society for Promoting the Amendment of the Law and of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, and a principal promoter and original member of the Incorporated Council of Law Reporting. He advocated the payment of jurors. He called for the relief of parliament by the transference of private-bill business to local authorities, writing an article on that subject in the 'Edinburgh Review' in January 1855 and publishing 'Private Bill Legislation' in 1859 and a 'Proposal for Amendment of the Procedure in Private Bill Legislation' in 1862. He favoured the supersession of election petitions by a system of routine scrutiny. In 1857 he was appointed revising barrister for Glamorgan, and in 1864 was made a serjeant-at-law. From 1867 to 1874 he resided at Newark Park, near Wotton under Edge, was in the commission of the peace for Gloucestershire, and took an active part in local administration, acting frequently as deputy county court judge and commissioner of assize under the Welsh circuit commission. He died on 15 January 1895 at home at 68 Redcliffe Gardens, South Kensington, London. He was survived by his wife. 
Pulling was one of the last surviving members of the ancient order of serjeants-at-law, of which he wrote a history. He was an active writer on a broad range of legal concerns, including law reporting, mercantile law, and parliamentary procedure. 


@@@@@


doc= 22885


Pulman, George Philip Rigney (1819-1880), antiquary, was born at Axminster, Devon, on 21 February 1819, the son of Philip Pulman (1791-1871) and his wife, Anne Rigney (1788-1855). In early life he was organist at Axminster parish church and wrote for local newspapers. On 12 December 1848 he married at Cattistock, Dorset, Jane, third daughter of George Davys Ewens of Axminster. 
In 1848 Pulman bought a printing and bookselling business at Crewkerne, Somerset, where he settled. For some years he was editor of the 'Yeovil Times', and on 10 March 1857 he instituted 'Pulman's Weekly News and Advertiser', which for over twenty years he owned and edited. It was the first paper to be established at Crewkerne and soon attained a large local circulation. 
In June 1878 Pulman sold his newspaper and business and retired to The Hermitage at Uplyme, between Axminster and Lyme Regis. He died there on 3 February 1880, and was buried at Axminster cemetery on 7 February. His wife and his son, G. B. Pulman, a solicitor at Lutterworth, both survived him. 
Pulman was a keen fisherman. At the Great Exhibition of 1851 he won a bronze medal for artificial flies. He wrote the popular work 'The Vade-mecum of Fly-Fishing for Trout' (1841; 2nd edn, 1846; 3rd edn, 1851), and 'The Book of the Axe', published initially in numbers and later, in 1841, as a book. Other editions followed in 1844, 1853, and 1875, the last being 'rewritten and greatly enlarged'. It was a piscatorial description of the district along the course of the Axe, and contained histories of the towns and houses on the river's banks. Pulman's interest in language and dialect was reflected in 'Rustic Sketches, Being Poems on Angling in the Dialect of East Devon' (1842; repr. 1853 and 1871), 'Local Nomenclature: a Lecture on the Names of Places, Chiefly in the West of England' (1857), and a version of 'The 'Song of Solomon' in the East Devonshire Dialect' (1860). Under the name John Trotandot he published 'Rambles, Roamings, and Recollections' (1870), which described the country around Crewkerne, and 'Roamings Abroad' (1878). He used the pseudonym Tickler for 'Devonshire Sketches' (1869), and also wrote under the pseudonym Elias Tozer. 
In the 1840s Pulman published 'The Western Agriculturist', a magazine for west-country farmers; he also published 'United Counties Miscellany' from 1849 to July 1851. He supplied the music for songs entitled 'The Battle of Alma' (1854) and 'I'll love my love in the winter', with words by W. D. Glyde, and composed a 'Masonic Hymn' and 'Psalms, Hymn-Tunes, and Twelve Chants' (1855). 


@@@@@


doc= 22886


Pulteney, Daniel (bap. 1682, d. 1731), politician, the son of John Pulteney (died 1726), commissioner of customs and MP, and his wife, Lucy, 'nee' Colville, was baptized on 26 September 1682 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. His grandfather Sir William Pulteney represented Westminster for many parliaments, and his first cousin was William Pulteney, later earl of Bath. He was educated at Westminster School and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 15 July 1699 but left without a degree. In 1700 he contributed a series of Latin verses to the university collection commemorating the death of the young duke of Gloucester. Between 1704 and 1706 he toured the Dutch republic and the German states, and was then appointed envoy-extraordinary to Denmark, a position he held until 1715. From 1717 until 1720 he served as a commissioner of trade in France, and produced notably informative reports for the Board of Trade in England. Pulteney married, on 1 December 1717, Margaret (1699-1763), daughter and coheir of Benjamin Tichbourne, and sister-in-law of Charles Spencer, third earl of Sunderland. The earl was a leading opponent of Robert Walpole, and proved a significant influence on the development of Pulteney's political views. 
On 23 March 1721 Pulteney was elected MP for the Cornish borough of Tregony, and in October was appointed a lord of the Admiralty. At a by-election the following month he was returned in the interest of his cousin William Pulteney as a member for Hedon, near Hull. In the following year he exchanged this seat for that of Preston borough, where he remained for the rest of his political career. Sunderland's death on 19 April 1722 came as a severe blow to Pulteney who now, according to Arthur Onslow, intensified his criticism of Walpole 'who had been the chief opponent of his friend and patron' (HoP, 'Commons'). At first covertly, and then openly after relinquishing his government office, Pulteney became a leading figure in the emerging country whig opposition to the Walpole ministry. According to Onslow it was Daniel who did most to encourage William Pulteney to oppose the administration. 
On the death of his father in 1726 Pulteney inherited a considerable fortune and the clerkship to the council in Ireland under a reversion granted by Queen Anne. From this date he had no further need of patronage and was unimpeded in his opposition to Walpole, against whose ministry he made his first recorded speech on 9 February 1726. Other strategies included his provision of financial support, along with his cousin and Lord Bolingbroke, for 'The Craftsman' journal, to which Pulteney was also an occasional contributor. Ultimately his failure to bring down the ministry had a deep impact; in Onslow's view 'he fell at last a martyr... for his not succeeding preyed upon his spirits'. Otherwise he was a 'very worthy man, very knowing and laborious in business, especially in foreign affairs, of strong but not lively parts, a clear and weighty speaker' (HoP, 'Commons'). 
Pulteney's private life was also blighted by the early deaths of six of the couple's children, two of whom were commemorated in odes by Ambrose Phillips. Only one daughter, Frances (1728-1782), reached maturity; she later married William Johnstone ['see 'Pulteney, Sir William, fifth baronet], politician and property developer. In 1767 Frances inherited the Pulteney estate belonging to her great-grandfather Sir William Pulteney and the considerable wealth accrued by her father's cousin William, and she and her husband adopted the Pulteney surname. Daniel Pulteney died on 7 September 1731 and was buried at St James's, Westminster, on 14 September 1731. His remains were moved on 17 May 1732 to the east end of the south cloister at Westminster Abbey, where a fine monument by James Leoni, lauding his independent spirit, was erected. 


@@@@@


doc= 22887


Pulteney, Sir John (d. 1349), merchant and mayor of London, was probably the son of Adam Neale, or Neel, of Clipston in Leicestershire, rather than of Clipston in west Sussex, as has been suggested. His mother was Matilda Napton, daughter of a Warwickshire landowner. Pulteney was probably married twice, on both occasions to a wife called Margaret. He had married first by 1333, when he was granted permission to choose a confessor for himself and his wife, of whom little is otherwise known. He had married his second wife by 1341, when their son William was born. The second Margaret was the daughter of John St John of Lageham; within a year of being widowed she had married Sir Nicholas Loveyn. It is possible that Pulteney had a son of his first marriage, also named William, who predeceased him. He had a brother and a sister; the latter, Ellen, married William Owen and their son, Robert, inherited the family lands. Both his brother and sister predeceased him. 
Pulteney was not a Londoner. Although the extent of the family lands suggests that the Pulteneys were among the substantial minor landowners of Leicestershire, he moved to the city from his family lands, probably in search of higher social status through the opportunities that trade afforded for enrichment and land purchase. He was established in London by 1316, when he was appointed attorney with Simon Swanlond, mayor from 1329 to 1330, for Ralph Walecote, a London merchant who was travelling overseas on pilgrimage; and he stood surety for Richard Bluntesham and William Flete, merchants of London, who were supplying corn to the royal fortresses of Berwick and Newcastle. He had achieved citizenship by May 1322. 
Pulteney became a wealthy merchant who dealt in wool and wine and traded overseas. He was a draper and moneylender with extensive business dealings among the foreign merchants in London. He supplied the king's wardrobe and the royal army overseas in 1338. He lent money to merchants, clerics, minor gentry, knights, and nobles, including Sir William Zouche, the earl of Huntingdon, the earl of Kent, and the prior of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem in England. Throughout the 1330s and 1340s, moreover, Pulteney had a close financial involvement with the crown, making twenty-six loans between 1332 and 1347 to the exchequer of receipt. Many of these loans, which ranged from a few pounds to $1100, were termed 'for the King's secret affairs'. Often he acted as a guarantor for royal repayment of debts. It is not surprising that these close links with the crown benefited him. He was knighted in February 1337, and granted an annuity of 100 marks to support this knighthood. After 1326 he was regularly granted exemption from taxation and from royal and civic offices, and in 1341 he obtained a licence to crenellate his manor houses in Cambridgeshire, Kent, and London. Such closeness also had its dangers. In 1341 he was arrested when Edward III returned from France, and his conduct investigated for corruption or mismanagement. He was imprisoned in Somerton Castle, Lincolnshire, and only released in 1343. 
Pulteney was alderman of Coleman Street ward (1327-34), of Candlewick Street ward (1334), and of Vintry ward (1335-8), and he may have been alderman of Farringdon ward in 1334 also. Mayor in 1331, 1332, 1334, and 1337, he represented the city at royal councils in 1328 and 1345; and in January 1329 he was appointed by the city to meet the king to assure him of London's loyalty in the aftermath of the rebellion of Henry, duke of Lancaster. In 1335, 1336, and 1340 he acted on behalf of the city in its dealings with the crown. He was appointed to array troops for the campaign in Scotland in 1335, and for the campaign in France in 1337, and in 1338 he was one of those entrusted with the organization of the city's defences. Pulteney was also frequently employed by the crown. Thus he was commissioned in 1332 to investigate the establishment of a wool staple at Bruges, in 1339 to investigate complaints concerning taxation and the decline in business at Westminster, and in 1343-4 to audit the accounts of Italian merchant houses in England. For almost every year between 1332 and 1345 he was a commissioner of oyer and terminer. He was a royal envoy overseas in 1334, 1336, and 1338, and collector of customs and subsidies in London in 1343-4. 
At his death Pulteney held land in Cambridgeshire, Hertfordshire, Kent, Leicestershire, Middlesex, Northamptonshire, Suffolk, and Warwickshire. The great hall of his manor house at Penshurst Place in Kent is arguably the finest surviving example of mid-fourteenth-century domestic architecture. In London he held a number of small properties and two major ones: Pulteney's Inn, later called the Manor of the Rose, in St Lawrence's parish, which his wife and son inherited; and The Coldharbour in the parish of All Hallows-the-Great, which was sold at his death and became the residence of Edward, prince of Wales, until 1359. Pulteney died during the black death on 8 June 1349, although the cause of his death is unknown. Nor is it certain where he was buried, although Stow states that he was buried in the chantry chapel that he had endowed in St Paul's Cathedral. C. L. Kingsford argues that Pulteney was buried at St Lawrence's, Candlewick Street, as he requested in his will, and which the dean and chapter of St Paul's confirmed in 1439. Both in his will and during his lifetime Pulteney made many religious benefactions; these included the establishment of the chapel of Corpus Christi in St Lawrence's Church, Candlewick Street, the building of the church of All Hallows-the-Less, Thames Street, and his chantry at St Paul's Cathedral. The supervisors of his will were the earl of Huntingdon and the bishop of London. His son having died in 1367 without heir, the family property passed to his sister's family from whom William Pulteney, earl of Bath (died 1764), the earls of Harborough, and the barons and earls of Crewe, were descended. 


@@@@@


doc= 22888


Pulteney, Richard (1730-1801), botanist and physician, was born on 17 February 1730 at Loughborough, Leicestershire, the sole survivor of the eleven children of Samuel Pulteney (1674-1754), a prosperous tailor, and Mary Tomlinson (1692-1759), a native of the nearby village of Hathern. The family belonged to a sect known as Old Anabaptists. As a pupil at the Old Free School, Loughborough, he already displayed an enthusiasm for botany and natural history, encouraged by the example of his uncle George Tomlinson. At the age of fifteen he was apprenticed for seven years to an apothecary of Loughborough. In 1752 he settled as a surgeon and apothecary in Leicester, but as a dissenter he met with a degree of hostility and prejudice which compromised the success of his practice. 
More encouraging was Pulteney's increasing acceptance as a respected botanist by a widening circle of friends and correspondents. Prominent among these was William Watson, who became an influential friend and mentor, and by the loan of books such as the 'Flora Anglica' of Linnaeus enabled the young apothecary to further his study of botany. In 1750 Pulteney began to publish articles in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', mainly on botanical topics such as the new Linnaean system of botanical classification. With typical modesty he left these early writings unsigned or merely initialled. These papers were sent for correction and comment to Watson who then passed them on to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' or to the Royal Society for publication in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. In 1756 Pulteney was thanked by Lord Macclesfield, president of the Royal Society, for his 'Account of the More Rare Plants Observed in Leicestershire'. 
A turning point in Pulteney's career came in 1764, when, in spite of his natural diffidence, he was persuaded to take a medical degree at Edinburgh University. Although he had already been elected FRS in 1762, he realized that a medical qualification was vital to his advancement. Accompanied by his friend Maxwell Garthshore he took the necessary examinations and graduated in May 1764. His inaugural dissertation, on the medicinal properties of Peruvian bark ('Cinchona officinalis') enabled him to display both his medical and botanical knowledge. The graduation of Pulteney and Garthshore after barely three months' residence aroused deep resentment among less favoured students, particularly Americans and fellow botanists. Their protest caused Pulteney much anguish, but friends rallied round, notably John Hope, professor of medicine and botany at Edinburgh University. That same year also brought disappointment to hopes of aristocratic patronage with the death of Lord Macclesfield, to whom Pulteney had intended to dedicate his thesis. A further setback came with the death in July of William Pulteney, earl of Bath, who had acknowledged Pulteney as a relative and appointed him as his domestic physician; Pulteney then had the task of finding a new situation, for absence had destroyed his prospects in Leicester. Financial considerations made his ambition to live in London and travel to Leiden or Paris impossible, but in 1765, assisted by letters of recommendation from Watson and George Baker, he secured the practice of physician in Blandford, Dorset, a position he vainly hoped would be temporary. 
After initial difficulties, Pulteney established himself as a successful and popular physician but he regretted that he could not devote himself wholly to the study of botany. In an undated letter to John Hope written shortly after the move he commented bitterly on the low esteem in which botany was held; display of any knowledge of it, he claimed, would harm his reputation as a medical man. In spite of this intellectual exile, however, he found it possible, through an expanding network of correspondents such as Thomas Martyn and William Withering, to keep up with developments in medicine and natural science. In 1767 he became acquainted with Margaret Cavendish Bentinck, dowager duchess of Portland, an enthusiastic conchologist, who would visit him on her way to collect shells at Weymouth. He sent the duchess plants and she provided him with shells for his own collection, some brought over in 1771 from New Zealand on Captain James Cook's ship 'Endeavour'. 
In 1779 Pulteney married Elizabeth Galton of Blandford (1739-1820); they had no children. Three years later he published his most significant work, 'A General View of the Writings of Linnaeus', which contained the first biography of Linnaeus in English. In his memoir of Pulteney in Rees's 'Cyclopaedia' (vol. 23, 1813) Sir James Edward Smith stated that this book 'has contributed more than any work, except perhaps the 'Tracts of Stillingfleet', to diffuse a taste for Linnaean knowledge in this country'. The Royal Academy of Sciences of Stockholm presented Pulteney with two medals struck in honour of Linnaeus as a mark of appreciation and a French translation of the book by L. A. Millin de Grandmaison (1789) drew favourable comments on the continent. His second book, 'Historical and Biographical Sketches of the Progress of Botany in England' (1790), was less popular, but it was still valued by historians two centuries later. 
In 1790 Pulteney was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society which had been instituted by Smith, its first president, in 1788. He published several papers in the 'Transactions' and bequeathed his herbarium and collections of shells and minerals to the society. 
Pulteney is remembered as a zealous promoter of the methods and nomenclature of Linnaeus and as a historian of botany in Britain. His benevolence, integrity, and tolerance endeared him to his contemporaries. His papers, preserved in the archives of the Linnean Society library, incorporate a lifetime's correspondence with most of the eminent botanists and physicians of his day and provide an important and fascinating commentary on the history of natural science in the latter half of the eighteenth century. He died of pneumonia at Langton near Blandford on 13 October 1801 and was buried in Langton churchyard. His wife placed a memorial tablet to him in Blandford church engraved with a sprig of 'Pultenaea stipularis', an Australian shrub named by J. E. Smith in his honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 22889


Pulteney, William, earl of Bath (1684-1764), politician, was born on 22 March 1684 and baptized in London on 28 or 29 March 1684, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Trafalgar Square, the eldest son of Colonel William Pulteney ('b'. in or after 1655, died 1715) and his first wife, Mary Floyd. His grandfather Sir William Pulteney (1624-1691), a descendant of the Pulteneys of Misterton, in Leicestershire, was a substantial London landowner and MP for Westminster (1679-81 and 1689-91); his aunt Anne married Charles Fitzroy, second duke of Cleveland, natural son of Charles II and Barbara Villiers. Pulteney was educated at Westminster School and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 31 October 1700. He was a noted classical scholar and was chosen to deliver the congratulatory speech to Queen Anne on her visit in 1702. In parallel to his classical scholarship he developed a skill in sports, excelling particularly at horse riding and fencing. The earliest known portrait of him depicts him as a boy with a hawk on his arm. 
Following Oxford, Pulteney made the grand tour in 1704-5, his presence recorded in Padua in October 1704, Rome in 1705, and Venice and Augsburg in August 1705. While visiting Hanover in the summer of 1705 he was called home to take his seat as MP for Hedon, in Yorkshire, which he had won in the 1705 general election, at the age of twenty-one. He owed this seat to the patronage of Henry Guy, former secretary to the Treasury, who was a close friend of the family and a trustee of the will of Sir William Pulteney. On the death of his sister in 1692 Guy had settled his estates for the ultimate benefit of Pulteney. 
From the outset of his parliamentary career Pulteney was a whig, and voted in October 1705 for John Smith, the whig candidate for the speakership of the House of Commons. The presence of his uncle John Pulteney in the Commons makes identification difficult for Pulteney's early years in the House. However, he supported the court in February 1706 over the place clause promoted by the country whigs as an amendment to the 'Regency Bill'. Pulteney's political gifts saw him earmarked as a rising whig star; Thomas Wharton, first earl of Wharton, had him in mind in 1708 as his secretary following his appointment as lord lieutenant of Ireland. About this date Pulteney fell into the orbit of another rising whig, Robert Walpole, with whom he was to be associated for most of his political career, first as an ally, then as a deadly political foe. It may have been Walpole who introduced Pulteney to the Kit-Cat Club, the centre of the whig elite's social activities. Pulteney's active social life occasionally caused him trouble; in January 1709 it was reported that: 'the Pulteney which is distinguished as Henry Guy's heir -- he had a quarrel with a gentleman at the Playhouse, and they went outside to decide it, but before he got out of the passage there came two more and drew their swords upon him, but the footmen and chairmen prevented any mischief that night. ('Wentworth Papers', 71)' However, the next morning Pulteney met the man again and knocked him down with his cane, leading to another fracas and to fears of a vendetta. In parliament Pulteney continued to toe the whig line, voting in February 1709 for the naturalization of the Palatines and in March 1710 for the impeachment of Dr Henry Sacheverell. 
Following the installation of a tory ministry under Robert Harley (later earl of Oxford) in autumn 1710 Pulteney faced a rare challenge at Hedon in the ensuing general election, held in October. He defeated his tory rival with ease and survived a subsequent petition against his return. The death of Henry Guy, in February 1711, left him independently rich. He inherited from Guy an estate at Stoke Newington, Middlesex, another at Muswell Hill, and money and other property, eventually realizing some $20,000, which was to be invested in land. Guy also left Pulteney his property at Hedon, which included the town hall, where portraits of both of them hang and which formed the basis for his political control of the borough. In parliament Pulteney continued to support the whigs, possibly with sufficient effect to ensure that his uncle John lost his government post on the Board of Trade in June 1711. On 7 December 1711 he voted for the 'No peace without Spain' motion. In January 1712 he defended first Walpole and then John Churchill, duke of Marlborough, against charges of corruption relating to government army contracts. Pulteney kept in close touch with Walpole when the latter was incarcerated in the Tower, although intemperate language in a debate on 28 May 1712 on the restraining orders issued to James Butler, second duke of Ormond, in which he described the ministry as 'weak and treacherous' (Hanham), angered the tories so much that he was in danger of being sent to join him. At the opening of the 1713 session Pulteney spoke and voted against the address, and was soon a key debater in the campaign against the peace made at Utrecht and the commercial treaty with France. Nor was Pulteney's opposition confined to the debating chamber; in 1713 he penned the satirical dedication to Lord Treasurer Oxford affixed to Walpole's 'Short History of a Parliament' and he was a subscriber to a fund designed to enable Emperor Charles VI to continue the war following the Utrecht settlement. In the parliamentary session of 1714 Pulteney was again at the forefront of whig critics of the ministry, particularly their attempt to expel Richard Steele from the Commons in March. Pulteney was also one of the first to allude publicly to the widening fissure in the tory ministry between Oxford and Bolingbroke in June 1714, noting that 'he did not know who the ministry was, or whether we had any, or how such as are reckoned can be relied on, seeing they cannot trust one another' (ibid.). Not surprisingly Pulteney was one of those whigs courted by Bolingbroke in late July 1714 in a desperate attempt to shore up his crumbling political position. 
The short parliamentary session following the accession of George I, in August 1714, saw Pulteney support provision of a reward of $100,000 for the capture of the Pretender. Pulteney's own prize for his steadfast support of the whig cause in the latter years of Queen Anne's reign was his appointment as secretary-at-war in October 1714. One account has Pulteney taking the post at the old salary -- $1000 less than usual -- 'that his majesty might have $1,000 a year to gratify somebody else', adding that 'this story he [Pulteney] tells himself' ('Wentworth Papers', 425). On 27 December 1714 Pulteney married Anna Maria (1694-1758), one of three daughters and coheirs of John Gumley (died 1728) of Isleworth, a mirror-glass- and cabinet-maker, who provided her with a portion of $6000. Through his son-in-law's influence Gumley became deputy commissary-general of the army in 1716, MP for Steyning in 1722, and commissary-general in 1724. The new couple set up house in Arlington Street, Piccadilly. Pulteney's wife was acknowledged as very good-looking but she had attracted a reputation for having been free with her favours, at least before their marriage, and this was later to be used to punishing effect by satirists intent upon attacking her husband. Thus she appears in one print with her bare backside being used as a desk by a secretary and later she was branded 'Mrs Pony' and 'Bath's ennobled Doxy'. Like Pulteney she was also perceived to be interested in the accumulation of wealth, and she was notable for successfully managing her own separate fortune. Both Pulteneys were reputed to have sharp tongues, Horace Walpole later referring to 'my Lord and Lady Bath who live in a vinegar bottle' ('Letters', 16). A son and a daughter lived beyond infancy, but neither survived their father. 
The death of his father, in 1715, saw Pulteney inherit a life interest in the London estates settled by the will of his grandfather. This property primarily comprised part of Cleveland Row opposite St James's Palace, together with a large part of the western side of Soho and two pieces of land on the northern side of Piccadilly, at that time undeveloped. Pulteney immediately began to plan developments and improvements across the whole estate. The development in Soho is today represented by the area bounded by Wardour Street and Carnaby Street, with Great Pulteney Street at its heart. In Piccadilly the eastern portion extends from Piccadilly Circus to Sackville Street, and the western area covers Bolton Street to Down Street. It was on this portion that Pulteney built his London home -- known after his elevation to the peerage as Bath House -- to the designs of Giacomo Leoni in 1735. Surviving records show that in spite of the Pulteneys' reputation for parsimony the house was furnished and equipped expensively and in the fashionable taste of the period. The house was demolished and rebuilt in 1821. 
In April 1715 Pulteney served on the committee of secrecy appointed to investigate the conduct of the recent peace negotiations that had led to the treaty of Utrecht and to the impeachment of the earl of Oxford. On 9 January 1716 he moved the impeachment of Lord Widdrington for his involvement in the 1715 rising, and later opposed a motion to the king requesting clemency for Jacobite recantors. He was sworn of the privy council on 6 July 1716. In the split in whig ranks in 1717 he sided with Charles, second Viscount Townshend, and with Walpole, and, following the dismissal of the first and the resignation of the second, he and Sir Paul Methuen resigned on 11 April 1717. For the next three years Pulteney was a whig in opposition to the whig ministry. As early as 4 June 1717 he made a long speech attacking William, first Baron Cadogan, a mainstay of the Sunderland-Stanhope ministry, charging him with fraud and embezzlement over the costs of transporting troops. However, Pulteney was not an unthinking follower of Walpole, and refused to join him in January 1718 in voting with the tories to reduce the standing army. Pulteney voted against the repeal of the occasional conformity and schism bills in January 1719 and opposed the 'Peerage Bill' in December 1719. 
Pulteney's first real cause for disagreement with Walpole followed the negotiations in April 1720 that saw Walpole return to political favour with a leading role at the Treasury and a promise that those whigs who had resigned with him would be brought back into office. When the other whigs were given office at the end of the session all Pulteney was offered was a peerage, which he refused with some indignation. His reasons for declining this offer were probably political because his estate could certainly bear the burdens of a peerage and he may have felt that Walpole was deliberately sidelining him as a dangerous rival for power. Pulteney's recent foray into the South Sea Company had increased his wealth, as he had sold out before the 'bubble' burst and incidentally enhanced his reputation for understanding public finance. Further, from the resultant profits he purchased the Bathwick estate, comprising 600 acres of agricultural and nursery-garden land on the east side of the River Avon opposite Bath. Although he improved the management of this estate he did not develop it beyond providing land for the creation of pleasure gardens for visitors to the increasingly fashionable spa. It was left to another generation to build the major extension to Bath known as the Pulteney estate and exploit its valuable sources of pure spring water. Concurrently Pulteney used his own and his wife's money to purchase the Wrington estate, of about 4000 acres, in north Somerset. This completed his major acquisition of income-producing land. 
Pulteney showed his resentment at his omission from the ministry through a series of speeches in the Commons criticizing Walpole, most notably on 14 July 1721, when he accused him of changing his mind according to whether he was in or out of office, and again, on 16 February 1722, when he spoke of Walpole's attitude to financial questions being influenced by his investments in the Bank of England. Nevertheless he was given the prestigious lord lieutenancy of the East Riding of Yorkshire in December 1721, and the Pulteney estates in London were converted from a lease from the crown into a freehold. Pulteney remained a whig, taking charge of, and reporting from, the committee appointed to examine the relevant papers, and leading the examination of Christopher Layer and other Jacobite conspirators. His extensive parliamentary work on the Layer case between January and March 1723 was rewarded in May 1723, when he was appointed cofferer of the household. These favours may have helped to keep Pulteney loyal to the ministry but they were inconsiderable when compared to a major office of state. When John, second Baron Carteret, was replaced as secretary of state in April 1724 Pulteney expected to be given the office, which instead went to Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle. In the following parliamentary session Pulteney openly opposed Walpole's proposal for discharging a civil list debt in April 1725, even accusing Walpole of increasing his fortune 'by indirect means and corruption' and of squandering public money on bribing MPs. After criticizing the proposal at every stage Pulteney eventually voted for the bill, claiming that he did so at the personal request of the king. However, this did not prevent his dismissal from the cofferer's post at the end of the parliamentary session in May 1725. 
Pulteney may have led only a small group into opposition, possibly as few as seventeen, but he was soon to make clear his opposition to the Walpole ministry, speaking on the address on 20 January 1726 'not to oppose it, only to show in what a sad condition we were in to go to war' (Sedgwick, 'Introductory survey', 35). This was a precursor of the motion of 9 February 1726 for a committee of investigation into the management of the public debts. Although this initiative was defeated it did allow an opposition group to begin to coalesce around Pulteney, and this included some tories, such as Sir William Wyndham. Foreign policy proved to be another fruitful area of co-operation for the opposition, and on 16 February 1726 Pulteney attacked the treaty of Hanover (1725) for having been solely intended to serve the interests of Hanover and for reversing Britain's traditional alliance with Austria. Pulteney continued his opposition in the following session, asking on 21 February 1727 for an account of the money spent on secret service payments. However, he resisted the intrigues of Charles VI, who hoped that a change of foreign policy could be effected by a change of ministry, even going so far as to back the address of 13 March 1727 supporting the treaty of Hanover. 
As a vehicle for their burgeoning campaign against the Walpole ministry, on 5 December 1726 Pulteney, his cousin Daniel (son of his uncle John Pulteney), and the recently returned exile Henry St John, Viscount Bolingbroke, launched 'The Craftsman', initially as a weekly single-sheet publication. It soon developed into a twice-weekly paper that achieved a circulation estimated at 13,000 at its peak, in 1731. The anonymous articles were collated by Nicholas Amherst, and not all the authors were identified, so that some pieces remain unattributable. Pulteney was a major contributor, and his scholarship, literary background, and journalistic versatility set him apart from other contributors, so that it is probable that the majority of his articles have been correctly attributed. Most of Pulteney's literary output was in the form of anonymous pamphlets that were attributed to him at the time on the grounds of a recognizable style. His ability to communicate in an approachable manner, however complex the matters of state under discussion, allowed him to win a wide range of public support and understanding. He was considered a humorous writer but his attacks on his enemies in parliament and at court were sometimes vicious, lacking in subtlety, and over-fond of intemperate language. He was able to slip quickly from the reasoned argument into the heights of passion, and in speeches he was sometimes openly abusive. No doubt his wit in particular benefited from the friendship of Jonathan Swift, John Gay, and Alexander Pope, all of whom penned anti-ministerial material. Indeed, together with Pulteney, all of them seemed to have been involved in the good-humoured banter that arose from the publication of a series of satirical verses to be sung to the tune of 'Molly Mogg', which ran for several weeks in 'Mist's Weekly Journal' in 1726. To such a well-qualified commentator on literary merit as Philip Dormer Stanhope, fourth earl of Chesterfield, Pulteney had: 'lively and shining parts; a surprising quickness of wit; and a happy turn to the most amusing and entertaining kinds of poetry, epigrams, ballads, odes, etc, in all which he had an uncommon facility. His compositions were sometimes satirical, often licentious, but always full of wit. ('Miscellaneous Works', 25)' The death of George I, on 10 June 1727, provided Pulteney with a significant chance of displacing Walpole, because he had been careful to cultivate the prince of Wales, now George II. However, the new queen, Caroline, was a strong supporter of Walpole, and this defeated Pulteney's attempts to undermine him by pressing for an increase in the civil list to $800,000 per annum, which Walpole was able to obtain from parliament in any case. Pulteney was even rebuffed when he was refused leave to stand for Westminster on the court interest, which when added to being 'never consulted in the closet and always very coldly received in the drawing room' (Sedgwick, 'Pulteney', 1.375) led him back into opposition. He duly renewed his attack on the government's financial policy in a pamphlet entitled 'A State of the National Debt' (1727), in which he examined the worsening situation between 1716 and 1725. This challenge to Walpole's financial competency led to a debate on 22 February 1728 in which the workings of the sinking fund were laid before the Commons. On 29 February Pulteney undertook to prove the allegations contained in his pamphlet, but in the resultant debate on 8 March he was defeated by a large majority. After the end of the session, in July 1728, he was even replaced as lord lieutenant of the East Riding. 
At the beginning of the 1729 session Pulteney refused to vote against the address on 21 January in case it was seen as 'a want of respect to his Majesty' (Colley, 209). This had the added advantage of allowing Pulteney to exploit any openings at court caused by the growing rift between Walpole and Viscount Townshend. Indeed on 31 January 1729, when Pulteney was disparaged in the Commons for opposing the ministry merely to return to office, he responded that: 'he was so far from desiring employments that he took pains to get rid of that he had, and, should any be offered him again, his refusal would show that he did not accuse the administration out of any such view. (Sedgwick, 'Pulteney', 1.375)' In November 1729 Richard Franklin, the publisher of 'The Craftsman', was prosecuted by the government, but a sympathetic jury acquitted him. The public rejoicing following this verdict no doubt prompted Pulteney to celebrate in print himself with the ballad 'The Honest Jury, or, Caleb's Triumphant'. 
Pulteney continued to harass the Walpole ministry, particularly its foreign policy. In the debate on the address on 13 January 1730 he attacked the treaty of Seville, and on 6 February he criticized the continued employment for a further year of 12,000 Hessian troops, although his public pronouncements were considerably less inflammatory than his private comments. Further criticism followed on 10 February, over allegations that the ministry had allowed the fortifications at Dunkirk to be rebuilt by the French in contravention of the treaty of Utrecht. Pulteney was true to his word about not taking office when, following Townshend's dismissal in May 1730, Walpole offered him the vacant secretaryship coupled with a peerage. His refusal led to an ever more bitter pamphlet exchange between ministerial supporters and their opponents. One of the government's leading protagonists was Pulteney's erstwhile ally John, Lord Hervey, who penned an anonymous preface to an unsigned pamphlet entitled 'Sedition and Defamation Display'd: in a Letter to the Author of The Craftsman'. Later, in January 1731, Pulteney replied with 'A Proper Reply to a Late Scurrilous Libel Intitled Sedition and Defamation Display'd', in which, under the mistaken belief that Hervey had written the whole pamphlet, he launched a virulent and openly offensive attack on Hervey, which included scarcely veiled accusations of homosexuality. The result of this exchange was a duel on 25 January 1731 in what later became Green Park, in which both combatants were slightly wounded. The duel was commemorated in a series of prints that show a smirking Walpole in the background. Pulteney and Walpole continued to attack each other in pamphlets in 1731, most notably following a piece by Bolingbroke in 'The Craftsman' that defended his own and Pulteney's political conduct. This prompted a ministerial riposte, 'Remarks on the Craftsman's Vindication of his Two Honourable Patrons', which heaped personal abuse on Pulteney. In response Pulteney published 'An Answer to One Part of a Late Infamous Libel', which dealt with the years of the Pulteney-Walpole co-operation. So bitter had the exchanges become that an enraged Walpole had the printer of the tract arrested, and George II personally struck Pulteney's name off the list of privy councillors on 1 July 1731. He was also removed from the commission of the peace. Neither could Pulteney expect much succour from the church, Bishop Gibson informing Newcastle in July 1731 that 'the clergy look upon Mr P[ultene]y and his friends to be their greatest enemies' (Sykes, 145), following opposition whig support for the 'Tithe Bill'. 
Pulteney was a leading opponent of Walpole's excise scheme, which was introduced into parliament in 1733. He took part in a formal consultation at Cassiobury House at Christmas 1732 with Sir William Wyndham, lords Bolingbroke and Gower, and others to plan the opposition's tactics. However Pulteney was less comfortable with the use of 'instructions' and popular political devices for pressurizing MPs. In debate he branded the excise as a plan for arbitrary power, noting that 'this scheme is absolutely inconsistent with a free election of members of parliament' (Langford, 74) and coining the phrase 'that monster the Excise' (Wright, 21). This sobriquet was perfect for the pamphleteers and the cartoonists, who weighed into the debate against the government. With Walpole forced to withdraw his proposal and his hold on power seemingly weakening, one opposition plan for a new ministry made Pulteney both first lord of the Treasury and chancellor of the exchequer, a sure sign of his pre-eminence among the opposition. However, Walpole recovered his political poise, purged his enemies within the court, and retained power with a convincing majority following the 1734 general election. Pulteney had taken this opportunity to stand, and gain election, for Middlesex in a joint candidature with a tory, Sir Francis Child, and incidentally thereby freeing a seat at Hedon. The disappointment of the election defeat and the prospect of more years in opposition led to some recrimination among the leaders of the opposition, which Lord Hervey gleefully recorded: Pulteney and Lord Bolingbroke 'hated one another; Lord Carteret and Pulteney were jealous of one another; Wyndham and Pulteney the same; whilst Lord Chesterfield had a little correspondence with all, but was confided in by none of them' (Hervey, 1.305). 
Pulteney was involved in the litigation following the death, in December 1734, of Henry Newport, third earl of Bradford, an old travelling companion during his years on the grand tour. Bradford had disinherited his brother Thomas (died 1762) as heir of his unentailed estate in favour of his mistress Ann Smyth, whose illegitimate son, known as John Newport, he acknowledged as his own. It is said that Ann Smyth was contemporaneously the mistress of Pulteney, who acted as guardian of John Newport in the litigation between Ann Smyth and the Newport family after Bradford's death, in which she successfully defended her inheritance. On her death, in 1742, she left the reversion of her inherited estates to Pulteney in the event that her son died without lawful issue. John Newport was a lunatic but lived in Chelsea until his death, in 1783, whereupon Pulteney's heirs inherited the property. After Ann Smyth's death Pulteney was a supporter of the successful bill to prevent the marriage of lunatics, which thereby safeguarded his family's future inheritance. Such stories gave credence to Pulteney's reputation for being fascinated by money, which was characterized by Chesterfield: 'his breast was the seat of all those passions which degrade our nature' and 'avarice, the meanest of them all, generally triumphed' ('Miscellaneous Works', 25). 
In November 1734 Pulteney had suffered another political blow, with the retirement of his main ally at court, Henrietta Howard, countess of Suffolk, who had been groom of the stole to the queen. Exhausted and depressed, Pulteney was absent from the parliamentary session of 1735, spending most of the time in the Netherlands attempting to recover his zest for politics. New opportunities for the opposition arose when Pulteney began to exploit the reversionary interest to the throne centred on Frederick, prince of Wales, who was on bad terms with his father. In this, however, he faced stiff opposition from the young 'patriots' grouped around Richard Temple, first Viscount Cobham, and distrust between these elements of the opposition constantly bedevilled their attempts to dislodge Walpole from power. Following the marriage of Prince Frederick, on 29 April 1736 Pulteney moved an address of congratulation in the Commons. On 22 February 1737 he moved the Commons for an address to settle $100,000 out of the civil list on Prince Frederick, backing it up with a host of precedents, but it failed to win much support from the tories and was defeated. However, Pulteney did not support the prince in his quarrel with the king that led to his expulsion from St James's in September 1737. 
Pulteney returned to the fray with renewed vigour in 1738 in support of British merchant interests in their dispute with Spain. He exploited the affair of Captain Robert Jenkins's ear, which led to clamours for war with Spain, beginning in October of the following year. In February 1739 Cobham was again worrying that Pulteney and Carteret were working 'to get the Prince of Wales into their hands, by which they might make a property out of him' (Gerrard, 43). The opposition again found itself in disarray when they decided to secede from the Commons 'en bloc' following the debate of 9 March 1739 on the convention of Pardo. When the new parliamentary session opened on 15 November 1739 Pulteney gave his full support to the war effort, in effect reminding the tories that he was an indispensable part of the opposition. However, on 21 November he moved for an address in which the king was not to enter into negotiations with Spain unless the rights of British ships in the American seas were recognized. On 21 February 1740 Pulteney signalled an attack on Walpole by asking for the papers relating to the convention of Pardo to be presented to the Commons, preparatory to an investigation that he hoped would launch impeachment proceedings, as had occurred in 1715. The government's conduct of the war saw a rise in support for the opposition and a rise in Pulteney's popularity. In January 1741 Walpole sent a perceptive missive to George II on the need to destroy Pulteney's popularity by inviting him to court and persuading him to accept a peerage as a mark of royal appreciation, for then 'the bee will have lost his sting, and become an idle drone, whose buzzing nobody heeds' (Graves and Cronin, 27). Pulteney supported Samuel Sandys's motion on 13 February 1741 for an address to the crown for the removal of Walpole from office. However, Pulteney was determined to be seen as supportive of the war effort, approving of the address of 8 April 1741 that provided a vote of credit to allow British obligations to be fulfilled towards Austria. At the fiercely contested general election of May 1741 Pulteney again secured election for Middlesex, but two Walpolian whigs captured Hedon, although they were later unseated on petition, for bribery. The general election was followed by an extensive progress by Pulteney from July to October in England and Wales aiming at a united opposition in the new parliament. In September Lord Chesterfield bemoaned Pulteney's preference for a negotiated entry into power and peculiar power as a party politician: Pulteney 'has a personal influence over many, and an interested influence over more. The silly, half-witted, zealous Whigs consider him as the only support of Whiggism, and look upon us as running headlong into Bolingbroke and the Tories' (Owen, 17). 
Walpole's parliamentary majority in the new house was now precarious, and Pulteney pressed home his advantage by moving for a secret committee on the proceedings surrounding the convention of Pardo, which suggested that the war with Spain was being mismanaged and which the ministry defeated by only three votes, on 21 January 1742. During this debate Pulteney 'declared very explicitly and peremptorily, that he never would accept of any share in any administration but would always employ his influence in parliament to support the present royal family and constitution' ('Tory and Whig', 175). The defeat of the government on an election petition for Chippenham, on 2 February 1742, heralding as it did the ministry's imminent loss of control of the lower house, saw parliament adjourned on 3 February to facilitate a change of ministry. Walpole accepted a peerage on 6 February 1742. 
Even before Walpole's resignation pressure had been building up on Pulteney regarding the future composition of the ministry. A particularly heated meeting took place at the Fountain tavern on 12 February 1742, in which Pulteney faced severe questioning as to his negotiating stance with John Campbell, second duke of Argyll, arguing for a 'broad-bottom' administration. With Walpole out of office George II instructed Newcastle and Philip Yorke, first Baron Hardwicke, lord chancellor, to invite Pulteney to form an administration, with the condition that Walpole be shielded from any inquiry into his conduct. Pulteney declined at first, in order to have the condition removed, and then, on accepting, declined major office in favour of a seat in the cabinet and readmission to the privy council, which was effected on 20 February 1742. Pulteney also played a key role in reconciling Prince Frederick to the new administration, acting as a messenger between the opposition assembled at Carlton House and the ministers meeting at Lord Wilmington's. Having played the patriot country whig for so long Pulteney no doubt feared an adverse reaction should he take a position at the head of the Treasury. Instead Pulteney put his long-term ally Lord Carteret forward for that post, but the king declined to follow his suggestion and made Spencer Compton, earl of Wilmington, first lord. Pulteney's absence from court and the Commons following the death of his fourteen-year-old daughter, Anne, in March 1742 further weakened his influence in the new ministry, packed as it was with colleagues of Walpole. When he returned to the Commons he supported, on 23 March 1742, the establishment of a committee of inquiry into the last ten years of the Walpole administration (a motion for a twenty-year inquiry having been lost in his absence) but refused to serve on it and spoke little thereafter in the chamber. He successfully opposed the repeal of the 'Septennial Act' on 31 March, a long-time objective of the opposition, and on 15 April he introduced a limited place bill, dismissed by one tory as 'a sham bill and of no use' ('Tory and Whig', 58), which was the only reform measure to pass into law. 
On 13 July 1742 Pulteney was created earl of Bath. According to Chesterfield his acceptance was a deliberate act and not an error of judgement, as some have suggested. Nevertheless it did unleash a torrent of hostile commentaries and satire, as, far from heralding a new dawn in which political reform would be achieved and Walpole's corruption punished, the ex-minister went unpunished and the new Lord Bath looked on benignly from the Lords. In particular the anonymous cartoon and vindictive writings of Sir Charles Hanbury Williams did more damage to Bath's reputation than twenty years of 'The Craftsman' had done to his enemies. Bath revealed his anger and distress in letters to his close friend Zachary Pearce, dean of Westminster, and he became enraged when the pamphlet justifying his position -- 'Faction Detected', now believed to have been written by John Perceval, first earl of Egmont -- was falsely attributed to Bath himself by Hanbury Williams. Nevertheless Pulteney's defence, that he was pushed into a deal with the old corps whigs because patriot politicians like George Lyttelton, William Pitt, and the Grenvilles had entered into negotiations before Walpole had resigned, appears to have had some basis in fact. This was little consolation for what Thomas Birch described as 'the abuse of my Lord of Bath both in prose and verse fills our daily as well as our weekly papers' (Harris, 'Patriot Press', 60). 
Bath spoke infrequently in the Lords, but the death of Wilmington, on 2 July 1743, saw him make an attempt to become head of the Treasury. He sent a message to Lord Carteret, who was in Hanau with George II, but despite Carteret's support the king preferred the Pelhams, and Bath seems to have acquiesced in the decision. He served as a lord justice in 1743 and 1745, and on 15 November 1744 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. When George II attempted to escape from the domination of his government by the Pelhams he turned to Bath, who accepted the Treasury, received the seals of office, and kissed hands on 10 February 1746. Such was the parliamentary strength of the Pelhams that within two days Bath had relinquished the seals on finding insufficient support to carry an administration. The anonymous satirist of the 'History of the Long Administration' referred to him as, 'the minister having to the astonishment of all wise men, never transacted one rash thing, and what is more marvellous, left as much money in the Treasury as he found in it' (Speck, 248). He now left the cabinet. In November 1746 his brother-in-law Samuel Gumley was returned in a by-election for Hedon, but he was unseated on petition in February 1747 because it was said that the ministers 'wanted to show the king that Lord Bath had not the interest he boasted' of in the House of Commons (Sedgwick, 'Introductory survey', 1.358). 
Bath continued to attend the Lords, although with declining vigour in debate, which he explained as a desire not to rock the boat. His most important contribution probably lay behind the scenes as an adviser to John Stuart, third earl of Bute, and the Leicester House court of the young Prince George. Bath's wife died on 14 September 1758, apparently leaving her estate to her husband. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, commenting on the recent demise of both Lady Bath and Lady Burlington, thought that 'they have long been burdens (not to say nuisances) on the face of the earth' (Jenkins, 165) and Horace Walpole pictured the two countesses making 'such an uproar that... St. Peter himself turned the key [of the gates of heaven] and hid himself' (ibid.). In his widowhood Bath spent much time in the company of such bluestockings as Elizabeth Carter (1717-1806), daughter of the Revd Nicholas Carter, and Elizabeth Montagu (1720-1780), wife of Edward Montagu. He continued to travel with such respectable and cultured women, including a trip to Spa, in the Austrian Netherlands, and the Rhine in June-September 1763, when he was described as being the life and soul of a party of very fashionable people. Bath made his last recorded speech in the Lords in 1760. Following the accession of George III he was made lord lieutenant of Shropshire on 13 March 1761. His son and heir, William, Viscount Pulteney, a soldier and MP, predeceased him, having died of an infectious enteritis while returning from a campaign in Spain in 1763. 
Bath died at Bath House, Piccadilly, at 10 p.m. on 7 July 1764, following the effects of a chill. His body was taken in grand procession from Bath House to Westminster Abbey, where it lay in the Jerusalem Chamber before being buried on the night of 17 July in the Islip Chapel, in the north aisle. The remains of his immediate family had already been removed from St Martin-in-the-Fields to be interred with Viscount Pulteney under a slab of blue stone finely cut with the family arms. Public rioting attended the funeral, resulting in damage to neighbouring tombs. Later Bath's brother caused to be erected close by a substantial monument designed by Joseph Wilton. 
It is difficult to be sure of Hanbury Williams's statement that written on the door of Bath House was an epitaph, 'Here, dead to fame, lives patriot Will; his grave a lordly seat; his title proves his Epitaph; his robes his winding sheet' (Wheatley, 30). Horace Walpole wrote that 'grass grows before my Lord Bath's door who nobody will visit' ('Letters', 16). Such venomous shafts may have reflected Pulteney's lack of political friends in later years or the fact that the domestic arrangements were poor in Bath House, then occupied by two elderly gentlemen. Such friends as Pulteney did have at the end he largely offended by the terms of his will, in which he made no provision for those in financial difficulties and made only very modest gifts to those most close, such as the jewellery he left to Elizabeth Montagu. 
The London estate of the Pulteneys was entailed in the absence of issue on his brother, General Harry Pulteney (1686-1767). Bath left the remainder of his landed and personal estate to his brother as well. This consisted of his estates at Bathwick and Wrington, Burrington and Ubley, in Somerset, and the reversion of the Bradford-Newport property in Shropshire, Monmouthshire, Staffordshire, and Northamptonshire. His personal estate in the form of cash and investments was estimated variously at between $600,000 and $1.2 million at the time. He was certainly one of the richest men in Britain at his death, so far as disposable capital was concerned. The fortune remained intact by inheritance until the death of his kinswoman Henrietta Laura Pulteney, 'suo jure' countess of Bath, in 1808, when it was dispersed for lack of Pulteney heirs. 
Bath ordered the destruction of his personal papers after his death, which denied posterity a full text of his speeches, but they are often described as brilliant both in reasoning and in wit and playing heavily upon members' emotions. Contemporaneous transcripts of some of them, particularly about the time of Walpole's fall, show them to be of great length, and for years Bath was by far the most frequent speaker in parliament. His resort to vulgarity was an unattractive weakness that manifestly represents a character flaw. He was clearly hurt by unfounded attacks on him in the press, but was unwavering in his support of its freedom -- in a letter to Zachary Pearce he wrote: 'all our liberties depend on preserving the liberties of the press' (Zachery Pearce papers). 
Pulteney's personal relationships were soured from time to time and he seems to have had only a handful of long-term friendships. The rift with Lord Hervey exemplifies his loss of good friends through his lack of self-control in matters relating to his parliamentary struggles. Hervey's desertion to Walpole was punished by Pulteney with public humiliation in outrageous personal terms, impugning Hervey's sexual habits and laying him open to prosecution for libel. 
In contrast letters to Zachary Pearce show Pulteney as a tender, caring man capable of sustaining a long and successful marriage undoubtedly founded on love and a deep respect for his wife, the end of which caused him deep distress (his first letter on her death being penned to Pearce). Despite the relish with which Horace Walpole reported on family disagreements Pulteney's concern for his children is apparent, although they seemed to have lived in some awe of him. His refusal to countenance the marriage of his son to Frances Catherine, daughter and heir of Sir Charles Gunther Nichol, reputedly because of arguments about marriage settlements, caused some estrangement with his son and ultimately left Pulteney with no direct heirs, and hence somewhat isolated in later life as his political friends died or drifted away. His only close relative, his brother Harry, latterly lived with him at Bath House. 
Pulteney was, however, an intensely sociable man given to enjoying being at centre stage. In his early days he raked around London with Swift, Gay, and other literary friends. Later accounts survive of some grand entertainments at Bath House when his fine collection of plate, recorded in an inventory on his brother's death, was clearly a source of great pride. He was not a collector of pictures on the scale of some of his contemporaries but, to judge by the quality of those surviving at Raby Castle, the seat of Lord Barnard, whose family ultimately inherited many of the Pulteney heirlooms, he was well advised in his modest purchases. Pulteney's library was of a significant scale but was broken up at auction in 1811. He particularly treasured two volumes of Cicero's works given to him by Pearce, which appear in the portrait of Bath now at Yale University. 
Pulteney sat for portraits on at least seven occasions -- always in formal pose, increasingly overweight, and latterly appearing somewhat unapproachable and disgruntled, leaning heavily on his walking-stick, which he needed because of increasing lameness following a fall. On one occasion he returned to Reynolds's studio, after sitting for the portrait given to Mrs Montagu, to have him 'mend my sickly looks', although Mrs Montagu does say that the artist had captured the great intensity of Pulteney's dark brown eyes ('Correspondence', 28). 
Pulteney was also a man of broad interests. He was a director of the Royal Academy of Music and a patron of his wife's nephew George Colman in promoting that playwright's first works in the early 1760s. His interest in the designs for his own London residence was matched by his role in chairing the committee for designing the new London Bridge. Philanthropic gestures included donating funds for the construction of a hospital at Bath, which now houses the Royal National Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, and the provision of a market cross at Hedon. The latter was of course his original parliamentary constituency, making the point that above all Pulteney was a political figure. 


