@@@@@


doc= 22890


Pulton, Andrew (1654-1710), Jesuit, was born on 20 January 1654 in Northamptonshire, the second son of Ferdinand or Ferdinando Pulton of Desborough and his wife, Mary Giffard. His younger brother, Thomas ('b'. 1668), also became a Jesuit, and the legal writer Ferdinando Pulton was probably related. He was educated at St Omer in 1669-74 and entered the Society of Jesus on 31 October 1674. He studied at Watten (1674-5), Liege (1676-9), and St Omer (1680-83), and again at Liege (1684-6), and was ordained priest on 3 May 1685. In 1682 he apparently converted Charles, the son of John Manners, the first duke of Rutland, to Catholicism. 
Pulton was sent to London at Whitsuntide 1687 to teach at the college the Jesuits had established in the Savoy. On 29 September he held a debate with the rector of St Martin-in-the-Fields (and later archbishop of Canterbury), Dr Thomas Tenison. According to 'A true and full account of a conference held about religion between Dr Tho. Tenison and A. Pulton' (1687) Pulton had not intended to publish an account, but was forced to do so when Tenison printed his own favourable description of the event. Tenison had mocked Pulton's poor command of English; Pulton responded by claiming that: 'having been Eighteen years out of his own Country, pretends not yet to any Perfection of the 'English' Expression or Orthography; wherefore for the future he will crave the favour of treating with the 'Dr.' in 'Latine' or 'Greek', since the 'Dr.' finds fault with his 'English'. ('A True and Full Account', sig. A1'v')' ('Send Pulton to be lashed at Busby's school / That he in print no longer play the fool' declared a contemporary satire over Pulton's linguistic errors; Gillow, 'Lit. biog. hist.', 5.351.) Further printed exchanges followed over the following months, drawing in Edward Meredith in support of Pulton as well as a number of others taking Tenison's part. During this time Pulton also published 'A Full and Clear Exposition of the Protestant Rule of Faith', a critique of the Anglican church. 
Following the destruction of the college by a protestant mob during the events of late 1688 Pulton fled London but was arrested at Canterbury on 11 December 'en route' for the continent. He was released the following year, and was at the college at St Omer in 1689. He rejoined the exiled Stuart court at St Germain and became socius to John Warner, confessor to James II. Pulton accompanied James to Ireland in 1690 as an army chaplain. After his return Pulton remained at St Germain until his death there on 5 August 1710. A court sermon of his was included in 'A Select Collection of Catholick Sermons, Preach'd before their Majesties King James II' (1741). 


@@@@@


doc= 22891


Pulton, Ferdinando (1536-1618), legal writer, was born in Desborough, Northamptonshire, the son of Giles Pulton of Desborough. The Pulton family was well established in the county. Pulton matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, on 23 November 1552, graduated BA in 1556, and was a fellow from 25 March 1556 to 25 March 1557. 
On 28 June 1556 Pulton was admitted a commoner at Brasenose College, Oxford. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 5 June 1559 and, although a Roman Catholic, he was called to the bar in May 1609. A legal researcher and compiler, he lived at Desborough and had a house at Bourton, near Buckingham, in addition to his quarters at Lincoln's Inn. He married Katherine (died in or after 1618), with whom he had four sons -- Francis, Giles, Thomas, and Ferdinando -- and two daughters. 
A Catholic who supported Elizabeth I and James I, his interest in theology, Roman and biblical law, and the strict execution of the criminal law allowed him to retain the critical support of James and Thomas Egerton, Baron Ellesmere, the lord chancellor. He wrote in his prefaces that the purpose of publishing the law was to educate the people in it. He believed that the criminal law must be firmly implemented and that knowledge of it would deter unlawful acts. His Catholicism affected his posthumous reputation. Two of his sons became Catholic priests, and Thomas Pulton, using the alias Underhill, was among the Jesuits discovered in March 1628 at the house of George Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury and earl of Waterford, in Clerkenwell. 
Pulton's chief occupation was producing an edition of the statutes for publication. Robert Bowyer, clerk of parliament, and Henry Elsing, keeper of the records in the Tower of London, contracted him as the first private person to research the records of parliament. His patrons Sir William Cordell and Ellesmere gave him further assistance. Bowyer and Elsing were unhappy at seeing an outsider producing a comprehensive edition that gave the full text of statutes still in force and an abridged text of the remainder, pointing out that these had been published in their original language before. They did not believe he had the technical skill to read the old documents without their assistance and were concerned that he could disclose deficiencies in the state of the archive, including the fact that some important statutes were no longer extant. Both men were also concerned that Pulton would make money, while they went without. The situation was resolved when it was agreed that the proceeds be shared. Pulton's compilation of statute law consisted of five major works: 'An Abstract of All the Penal Statutes which be General' (1577), 'A kalender, or table, comprehending the effect of all the statutes that have been made and put in print' (1606), 'Collection of Statutes Repealed and Not Repealed' (1608), 'A Collection of Sundry Statutes Frequent in Use' (1618), and 'The Statutes at Large' (1618). He was also the author of 'De pace regis et regni' (1609), a major treatise on criminal offences. His literary interests included theology and medieval history, works on which were prominent in his extensive library. Shortly before his death he presented to Christ's College a copy of Robert of Gloucester's chronicle. 
Catholicism did not curtail Pulton's life in the community. Living in both Desborough and Bourton, he acquired additional land, orchards, and mills in Buckingham, Maidstreet, and Stowe. His eldest son, Francis, was admitted to his father's inn as a gentleman in 1569, and called to the bar, but died young. Francis Pulton's sons were raised by Katherine Pulton. Ferdinando Pulton was considered a very compassionate man by the Catholic playwright and poet John Beaumont. Pulton's will provided generous allowances and bequests for his servants, for the poor of the parishes in which he held land, and to various hospitals in Buckinghamshire and Northamptonshire. He made his wife his sole executor, and warned his sons to leave her in completely peaceful possession of the Bourton estate for the remainder of her life. Pulton died on 20 January 1618 in his house at Bourton. He was buried in Desborough parish church, and had a brass plate memorial erected at Bourton church. 


@@@@@


doc= 22892


Punshon, William Morley (1824-1881), Wesleyan Methodist minister and public lecturer, born at Doncaster on 29 May 1824, was the only child of John Punshon (1793-1840) and his wife, Elizabeth (1800-1838), who married in 1823 at Cantley, near Doncaster. His father was a member of the firm of Wilton and Punshon, mercers, at Doncaster. His mother was the eldest daughter of William Morley, a freeman of the same town. His maternal uncle Isaac was knighted in 1841, and was twice mayor of Doncaster. William Punshon was taught at Doncaster grammar school, and afterwards at a boarding-school at Tadcaster. In 1837 he entered his grandfather Morley's counting-house in Hull, and began to learn the business of a timber merchant. He employed his leisure time in reading. 
His mother's death, and the influence of the Revd Samuel Romilly Hall, led Punshon to consider religious questions; he was converted and joined the Methodist society in Hull in May 1839. At the age of sixteen he began to preach, his first sermon being at Ellerby, near Hull. With like-minded friends he formed a society for mutual improvement, and soon displayed remarkable powers of oratory. In 1840 he moved to Sunderland, the place of origin of his father, where he had work with an uncle by marriage and became an accredited local preacher. Abandoning business pursuits, he prepared for the work of the Wesleyan Methodist ministry under his uncle the Revd Benjamin Clough, in Woolwich. After spending four months at the theological college at Richmond, he was sent into circuit work early in 1845; two years of probation were passed in Whitehaven and two more in Carlisle. Ordained at the Manchester conference of 1849, he spent three years in each of Newcastle upon Tyne, Sheffield, and Leeds. From 1858 to 1864 he was stationed in London (Hinde Street and Islington circuits); subsequently, until 1867, he was in Bristol. 
After his ordination Punshon married, on 22 August 1849, Maria Ann Vickers of Gateshead. She died in 1858, leaving him in a depressed state of health. This, and his decision to marry her sister Fanny, occasioned a removal from Britain to Canada, where such a marriage was legally possible, turning his back, it seemed, on a promising career in British Methodism. They were married on 15 August 1868, but Fanny died in 1870. In the five years Punshon spent in Canada, he presided over each annual conference, and helped to consolidate the Methodists of the dominion in the wake of confederation. He was fraternal delegate of the British conference to the General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal church in the United States in 1868 and 1872. In June 1872 the Victoria University of Cobourg, Canada, conferred on him the degree of LLD. 
Punshon returned to England in 1873, and was married a third time, on 17 June of that year, to Mary, daughter of William Foster of Sheffield. He lived in London until his death -- for two years as superintendent of Kensington circuit, and from 1875 as one of the general secretaries of the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society. 
Punshon's refinement and eloquence gained for him a reputation, not only among the Methodists but with the general public, as one of the greatest pulpit orators of his age. His lectures covered the prophet of Horeb; John Bunyan; the Huguenots; Wilberforce; science, religion, and literature; and Daniel in Babylon. Delivered with a powerful voice, animated action, and rich rhetoric to crowds at the Exeter, St James's, and other halls in London, and to delighted audiences in the provinces, they greatly enhanced his popularity. Through his efforts he raised more than $10,000 to support the building of churches in watering places such as Bournemouth, where a memorial chapel bearing his name was erected, and in London. His lecture on the Huguenots raised more than $1000 for the chapel at Spitalfields. After his death the lectures were published. 
Punshon also developed a great administrative talent. At the Manchester conference, July 1859, he was elected into the legal hundred, a rare distinction for one so young. Despite his absence in Canada he was elected president of conference on his return in 1874. To the mission cause at home and overseas Punshon devoted great energy throughout his life. He took a prominent part in the jubilee celebrations of missions in 1863. He also published a popular imitation of Keble's 'Christian Year' entitled 'Sabbath Chimes, or, Meditations in Verse', in 1867. His last years were spent in presenting and enforcing the claims of the work of the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society, in superintending the society's missions, in administering its funds, and in directing its agents. He died at Tranby, Brixton Rise, London, on 14 April 1881, and was buried in Norwood cemetery five days later. Punshon had four children, and was survived by his third wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 22893


Purcell, Daniel (c.1670-1717), organist and composer, was long thought to be the son of Henry the elder (died 1664) and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1699), but was in fact probably the youngest son of Thomas Purcell (died 1682), Henry's brother, and his wife, Katherine. Born probably in London, he was a chorister in the choir of the Chapel Royal, where payments are recorded for his attendance at Windsor from 14 August to 26 September 1678, 22 April to 30 June 1682, and 8 July to 10 September 1682, after which his whereabouts and the source of his musical training are unknown. He was appointed organist of Magdalen College, Oxford, at some time about 1689-90, and was well known as a musician and socialite. Although his earliest published compositions predate this appointment, it was while in this post that he wrote most of his early music, including an ode for Oxford's St Cecilia's day celebrations in 1693, 'Begin and Strike th'Harmonious Lyre', and a number of anthems. 
When Henry Purcell fell ill in 1695, Daniel seems to have moved to London and taken over most of his work in the theatre. Here he wrote music for Cibber's 'Love's Last Shift', Behn's 'The Younger Brother', the anonymous 'Neglected Virtue', the unfinished 'The Indian Queen', and Manley's 'The Lost Lover' before finally resigning his post at Magdalen College (probably at Easter 1696) and moving to London permanently. He kept his Oxford connections, though, writing music for St Cecilia's day odes in 1698, 1699, and 1707. However, it was in the London theatre that Purcell worked most during this hectic period, contributing music to over forty plays between 1696 and 1707, the bulk of them (over thirty) being in the first five years. The largest of these productions were Nahum Tate's 'Brutus of Alba' and Thomas D'Urfey's 'Cynthia and Endymion' (1696), Elkanah Settle's 'The World in the Moon' (1697), and Peter Anthony Motteux's immensely popular 'The Island Princess' (1699), on which he collaborated with Jeremiah Clarke and Richard Leveridge. Of his large-scale productions, only John Oldmixon's 'The Grove' (1700) and an adapted version of Nathaniel Lee's 'The Rival Queens' (1701) date from the eighteenth century, as Purcell suffered because of the growing vogue for Italianate opera. His only contribution towards this genre, the advertised setting of an adaptation of Philippe Quinault's 'Orlando Furioso' (1707), was never produced and possibly never even written. 
Purcell's setting of William Congreve's Musick Prize masque 'The Judgment of Paris' (1701) was awarded third prize, behind John Weldon and Jeremiah Clarke, although Gottfried Finger (who finished fourth) claimed it was the best work after his own. In London, he also wrote odes for the return of William III from Flanders (1697), a St Cecilia ode ('Begin, begin the noble song', with words by Samuel Wesley the elder) for 1698, and two odes for the celebration of Queen Anne's birthday, 'Welcome, Welcome, Glorious Day' (1698) and 'Again the Glorious Morn' (1700). His collection of Italian-style cantatas with English words, published in 1713, was one of the first of its type. 
Soon after Purcell moved to London he became organist at St Dunstan-in-the-East. The surviving records suggest that he played for no pay from 1696, but he was certainly in the post by November 1698, where the churchwardens' accounts record the first payment: 'Mr Purcell 1/2 years salary $10'. He seems to have kept this job throughout all of his time in London, as his final payment is dated 11 November 1717, only days before his death. He was also organist at St Andrew's, Holborn, where in 1713 Dr Henry Sacheverell (formerly his colleague at Magdalen College) was appointed to the living. Sacheverell found the organ shut up and unpaid for, and so arranged for the money to be raised and appointed Daniel as organist. This may have been an unpopular move, as future organists were democratically elected, comments being recorded about the previous appointment procedures at these subsequent elections. Purcell's association with Sacheverell and the high-church party contributed to the suspicion that he had nonjuring sympathies. He also wrote instrumental music, his numerous sonatas for one or two flutes being published in 1708-10 and performed in a number of concerts at the York Buildings and at Stationers' Hall. 'The Psalms Set Full', which demonstrates the genre of psalm organ interludes, was published posthumously in 1718. Autograph manuscripts of his anthems can be found in the British Library (Add. MSS 17841, 31461) and in the Bodleian, Oxford (T 310). 
Daniel Purcell was also famous as a punster and socialite. While at Magdalen College, he was threatened with summons to the university court owing to non-payment of debt, and his payments of college battels were sporadic, to say the least. 'Joe Miller', the collection of jokes and puns first published in 1738, contains many examples of his celebrated wit, some of which were reproduced by Sir John Hawkins. 
On 9 May 1705, at St Anne Blackfriars, a Daniel Purcell married Elizabeth Tozer. In the vicar-general's marriage licence application, the couple are described as from the parish of St Paul's, Covent Garden, and are stated to be aged 'about 35 years' and '27 years' respectively. If this was Daniel Purcell the composer, then a birth date of 'c'.1670 must follow. This places his birth considerably after the death of his supposed father, Henry the elder, in 1664. It appears that Franklin B. Zimmerman, in his major biography of Henry Purcell, suppressed this information for some reason, transcribing the entire document apart from the reference to Daniel's age. While some doubt may be cast on this person's identity, as Daniel Purcell the composer is described as 'Celibis' in a record relating to his will, the existence of a wife would explain the appearance of a portrait miniature depicting a female in a portrait putatively thought to be of Daniel. 
The date of Purcell's death is unknown, but he was buried at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 26 November 1717. Although some of his music was performed throughout the eighteenth century, he has remained in the shadow of his illustrious relative ever since. 


@@@@@


doc= 22894


Purcell, Henry (1659-1695), organist and composer, was born in London or Westminster, possibly on 10 September 1659, the third or fourth of six children of Henry Purcell (died 1664), musician, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1699), and perhaps a cousin of Daniel Purcell. No record survives of his baptism, and his year of birth is inferred from the ages given on his memorial tablet in Westminster Abbey and the frontispiece portrait of his 'Sonnata's of III Parts' of 1683. Both memorial and portrait incorporate a coat of arms used in the seventeenth century by the Purcell family of Shropshire and Staffordshire, but any relationship must have been distant. 
Henry Purcell the elder established himself as a leading musician in London during the Commonwealth, being named as a performer in the 1656 edition of William Davenant's musical drama 'The Siege of Rhodes'. At the Restoration he became a gentleman of the Chapel Royal; on 16 February 1661 he was installed as a singing man and master of the choristers at Westminster Abbey, moving into a house in the Great Almonry which had been occupied before the civil war by the singing man James Try. His daughter Katherine was baptized in the abbey in March 1662. He died on 11 August 1664, and the administration of his estate, which amounted to $32 3's'., was granted to his widow, Elizabeth, in the court of the dean and chapter of Westminster on 7 October. A few months later she left the Great Almonry, perhaps for a house in Tothill Street in which she certainly lived from 1666 until 1680. Some part in the upbringing of her six children may have been played by their uncle Thomas Purcell (died 1682), who held a number of musical and other appointments at court and was in a position to exercise influence on their behalf. A letter written by Thomas to the singer John Gostling in 1679 which refers to 'my sonne Henry' has led to speculation that the composer's parents were really Thomas and his wife, Katherine, though other evidence, such as Thomas Ford's manuscript history of music ('c'.1710) and the will of Purcell's godfather John Hingeston (died 1683), unequivocally points towards the elder Henry and Elizabeth. 
At the age of eight or nine Purcell must have been admitted as a child of the Chapel Royal under Henry Cooke, who was master of the children until his death in 1672. Cooke's successor was Pelham Humfrey (1647-1674), and an early Purcell autograph, a score of Humfrey's 'By the waters of Babylon' with the string sections abbreviated and clumsily arranged for keyboard, may have been copied while Purcell was still a choirboy. On 10 June 1673 he was appointed unpaid assistant to John Hingeston, keeper of the 'regals, organs, virginals, flutes and recorders and all other kind of wind instruments whatsoever', to take up the salaried position when Hingeston died or retired. Warrants dated 17 December the same year provide for the issue of clothing and annual maintenance of $30 customary after a chorister's voice had broken (Ashbee, 1.126, 131-2). 
The musicians named in early sources as Purcell's teachers, with whom he probably studied after he left the choir, are John Blow (1649-1708), master of the children from 1674, and Christopher Gibbons (1615-1676), son of the great Orlando Gibbons and a distinguished keyboard player and composer in his own right. Matthew Locke (died 1677) is not known to have taught Purcell formally but was undoubtedly a significant influence: there is some evidence that Purcell inherited Locke's consort music scorebook (BL, Add. MS 17801) and 'What hope for us remains now he is gone', Purcell's elegy for Locke published in John Playford's 'Choice Ayres' of 1679, is one of the most striking of his early works. 
Purcell composed more music before 1680 than was once thought, and a number of surviving autographs date from the 1670s. Some instrumental bass parts (Yale University, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Osborn MS 515) include a movement entitled 'The Stairre Case Overture', featuring hurrying scale passages, which may have been inspired by Locke's famous 'Curtain Tune' for 'The Tempest' (1674), and the earliest version of Purcell's funeral sentences (BL, Add. MS 30931, fol. 81'v') may have been composed in 1674 for the interment of Pelham Humfrey in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey. A payment at the abbey of $10 'To Mr Tucker for Coppying out some Musick bookes for the use of the Church' in the year ending at Michaelmas 1677 (WAM 33712, fol. 5'v') almost certainly refers to the partbooks of Triforium set I, which include six Purcell anthems: a few notes of 'Let God arise' are corrected in Purcell's own hand (alto cantoris book, fol. 58'v'). In the mid-1670s Purcell seems to have been closely involved with the abbey, where his teacher Blow was organist, as he received a number of payments for tuning the organ and, in 1676, for writing out organ parts. About Michaelmas 1679 he took over from Blow, receiving an annual payment of $10, equivalent to that of a singing man, and an additional $8 for house rent. 
On 10 September 1677 Purcell succeeded Matthew Locke in his first adult court appointment, that of 'composer in ordinary... for the violin' (Ashbee, 1.173). It is likely that this was simply a vacancy available on (or shortly after) Purcell's eighteenth birthday, and he does not seem to have had to write the music for the royal violin band which the post nominally required. Two incomplete violin suites which may have been composed for this purpose (BL, Add. MS 30930; BL, Royal Music MS 20.h.9; Yale University, Filmer MS 8) date from the early 1680s, after he had acquired other interests, and the theatre suites later published in 'A Collection of Ayres, Compos'd for the Theatre' (1697) were in fact drawn from stage works written towards the end of his life. The main focus of Purcell's work in the late 1670s seems, instead, to have been sacred music in a variety of forms, including the elaborate symphony anthem for antiphonally spaced solo and chorus voices and a solo string group. By December 1677 three such anthems, which were performed in the king's presence, had been copied by William Tucker in the Chapel Royal bass partbook (BL, Add. MS 50860): one, 'My beloved spake', survives complete in autograph score (BL, Add. MS 30932, fol. 87) and is a highly accomplished work. Despite this achievement, however, Purcell drew back from the most prestigious forms of composition for the next two or three years, instead subjecting himself to a rigorous course of advanced musical study and carrying out some editorial tasks in the existing repertory of the Chapel Royal. 
In September 1677 Purcell took possession of a major scorebook (Cambridge, Fitzwilliam Museum, MU MS 88) from its previous custodian, John Blow, who had made beautiful calligraphic copies of symphony anthems by Pelham Humfrey and himself. At the reverse of the book Purcell now began to copy full and verse anthems without strings, not only by his contemporaries but also by earlier composers including Thomas Tallis, William Byrd, and Orlando Gibbons. He worked from separate partbooks, sometimes demonstrably the printed parts of John Barnard's 'First Book of Selected Church Musick' (1641), and his objective was apparently to arrive at corrected, edited scores with regular barring and properly underlaid texts. Purcell later added some works of his own, extended the original series of symphony anthems with a few more works by Blow and Locke, and wrote on the reverse flyleaf the inscriptions 'God bless Mr Henry Purcell 1682' and 'September the 10th 1682', an entry which suggests this as a date for his birthday. Towards the end of the 1670s Purcell also composed most or all of the devotional partsongs (such as 'Jehova quam multi sunt hostes') found in his autograph score BL, Add. MS 30930; most of the extant partsong autographs are revisions of earlier versions transcribed by John Blow in Christ Church, Oxford, Mus. 628. 
The sacred partsongs are vocal chamber music rather than anthems, and whereas Fitzwilliam MS 88 is essentially a document of Purcell's working life, Add. MS 30930 contains mainly music composed at least to some extent for his own interest or self-improvement. The most remarkable aspect of the latter manuscript is its inclusion of a series of fantasias for three to seven instruments, music in an old-fashioned polyphonic genre which Purcell re-created rather than slavishly imitated. Twelve four-part works bear dates showing that they were written in a short period over the summer of 1680, and most of the remaining fantasias are more or less contemporary. The two works in six or seven parts are 'In nomines', employing a slow-moving 'cantus fermus' derived from a plainchant, and the five-part 'Fantazia upon One Note', as its title suggests, carries the same compositional principle to its logical extreme, the second tenor part consisting simply of a middle C breve repeated forty times. Add. MS 30930 also contains seven complete sonatas for two violins, bass, and organ: probably composed at different times between about 1677 and about 1685, they were eventually published by Purcell's widow in 1697. Like the sacred partsongs, the sonatas were substantially revised by Purcell and the surviving autograph does not necessarily represent their original version. 
Although the next official change in Purcell's status at court, his appointment as an organist of the Chapel Royal, did not take place until 1682, he seems to have been accepted as a fully-fledged royal composer about the time of his twenty-first birthday in the late summer or autumn of 1680. In that year he wrote 'Welcome Vicegerent of the Mighty King', which was not only his own first royal ode but also the first of a series of 'welcome songs' to be performed on the king's return to Whitehall from his summer progress. The late summer or autumn welcome song appears to have been an innovation intended to provide a showcase for Purcell's talents without disadvantaging Blow and other senior composers, and Purcell provided one each year until 1687. A second indication of Purcell's changed status at court was his acquisition of the great scorebook (BL, Royal Music MS 20.h.8) in which he copied symphony anthems from one end and secular court music from the other, beginning with the 1681 welcome song, 'Swifter Isis Swifter Flow'. Between 1680 and 1685 Purcell had few musical interests outside the court and Westminster Abbey: after his music for Nathaniel Lee's 'Theodosius', performed at the Dorset Garden Theatre in the first half of 1680, he wrote no more extended works for the public stage until 1690. 
Some time in 1680 Purcell married Frances Peters (died 1706), daughter of John Baptist Peters (died 1675), a naturalized Flemish immigrant, and his wife, Amy. No record of the marriage or documentary evidence of Frances's maiden name exists, but members of the Peters family were closely involved with the Purcells in later years and on Purcell's memorial his own arms impale those used by the Peters family. Amy Peters appears to have kept a tavern in Thames Street in the City of London parish of All Hallows, and there can be little doubt that a child named Henry, son of Henry and Frances Purcell, baptized at All Hallows-the-Less on 9 July 1681 and buried there on 18 July, was the composer's son. Purcell's mother, Elizabeth, paid poor rates on the Tothill Street house only until midsummer 1680 and perhaps left on the marriage of Henry and Frances, with whom she may thereafter have lived. The years 1680 to 1682 form the first of two short periods in Purcell's adult life in which his place of residence is unknown. It would not have been unusual for Frances to return to her own mother's home in Thames Street for her first confinement, but Purcell could hardly have lived permanently so far from Whitehall. By Easter 1682 he had taken a house in Great St Ann's Lane, Westminster, where his son John Baptista, baptized on 9 August and buried on 17 October 1682, must have been born. 
Further advancement in Purcell's career came on 14 July 1682 when he was admitted as a gentleman of the Chapel Royal to serve as one of the three organists in place of Edward Lowe. Close examination of his handwriting in one of his scorebooks (BL, Royal Music MS 20.h.8) suggests that several of the symphony anthems in it were composed fairly soon after this new appointment, and Purcell's new status was proudly announced in 1683 in his first major publication, 'Sonnata's of III parts... composed by Henry Purcell, composer in ordinary to his most sacred majesty, and organist of his Chappell Royall'. The parts of the twelve trio sonatas were printed 'for the Author', at Purcell's own risk, and beautifully engraved by Thomas Cross rather than set in the moveable type normally employed for English music publications of this period. They were first available to subscribers from Purcell's house in Great St Ann's Lane and thereafter were sold by John Playford, John Carr, and Henry Rogers. Purcell's intention was to consolidate his reputation as a serious composer. Written, according to his introduction, in 'just imitation of the most fam'd Italian masters', the sonatas are related to the complex Italian instrumental music exemplified by the sonatas of Colista and Lonati and reveal a strong native influence in their harmony and counterpoint. 
Earlier in 1683 Purcell had obtained a sacrament certificate, signed on 4 February 1683 by the minister and a churchwarden of St Margaret's, Westminster, and witnessed by two fellow musicians, Moses Snow and Robert Tanner. As Snow and Tanner received the sacrament on the same occasion, along with another court musician, John Goodwin, the certificate is more likely to represent fulfilment of the requirements of the 1673 'Test Act' -- that all office-holders under the crown possess one -- than to reflect any official suspicion about Purcell's Anglican conformity. He finally succeeded to the court post of instrument keeper after John Hingeston died in December 1683, and the following year his 1683 St Cecilia's day ode, 'Welcome to All the Pleasures', was published by John Playford. In the summer of 1684 Purcell became involved in a competition to select a new organ for the Temple Church, demonstrating the instrument built by Bernard Smith, the court 'organ maker'. 
Despite the publication of the sonatas, and the performance and printing of 'Welcome to All the Pleasures', Purcell's creative life between 1680 and 1685 was essentially dedicated to the court of Charles II, providing anthems for the king's worship in the Chapel Royal, odes for formal occasions, and smaller-scale works for private entertainment in the royal apartments. Although a number of songs appeared in John Playford's publications during the early 1680s, none of the music composed for the court and copied in MS 20.h.8 was printed until after 1685, and the manuscript's contents suggest that, contrary to the impression given by Roger North, the king was an enlightened and sophisticated musical patron. It is possible that Purcell's opera 'Dido and Aeneas', performed in 1689 at Josias Priest's boarding-school for girls at Gorges House in Chelsea, also had its origins at court. Its immediate model, John Blow's 'Venus and Adonis', was certainly presented at Whitehall in the early 1680s and later revived at Priest's school, and 'Dido' fits in well not only with Charles II's interests but also with a court tradition of masques and musical dramas which included, as well as 'Venus and Adonis', Crowne's masque 'Calisto' of 1675 and Rochester's 'Valentinian' of early 1684. 
Charles II's death in February 1685 seems to have taken Purcell completely by surprise: he had apparently begun transcribing a group of anthems into MS 20.h.8, and had listed their titles in the table of contents, but left 'They that go down to the sea in ships' unfinished and did not copy the two following works. At the secular music end of MS 20.h.8 he wrote the solo song 'If pray'rs and tears', headed 'Sighs for our Late Sovereign King Charles the Second', and Fitzwilliam MS 88 contains the opening section of a full anthem, 'Hear my prayer O Lord', which appears from its handwriting to have been copied about 1685, much later than previously recognized. Quite possibly this powerful work is Purcell's funeral anthem for Charles II, for although according to John Evelyn the late king's burial was carried out quietly (Evelyn, 4.415), the 'London Gazette' for 12-16 February 1685 states that the abbey choir was present. The winter of 1684-5 must have involved some disturbance in Purcell's family as well as his working life, as about the beginning of 1685 he moved from his house in Great St Ann's Lane to Bowling Alley East. 
The accession of the Catholic James II inevitably affected Purcell's musical career, though one change in his terms of employment must have been more apparent than real: James reorganized his private musick to form a properly-constituted baroque orchestra of string and wind instruments together with the vocal soloists required to perform a court ode, and Purcell is listed in this ensemble not as composer but as 'harpsicall' (Ashbee, 2.3). He retained his post as organist of the Chapel Royal, but the status of the Anglican chapel was diminished by the fact that the king and queen attended Catholic services and his function as instrument keeper appears for a time to have been forgotten. Early in 1688 he successfully petitioned for back payments and the restoration of his salary for this position, the Chapel Royal organ being then 'so out of repair that to cleanse, tune and put in good order will cost $40' (Ashbee, 8.275-6). 
Purcell's treatment of his scorebook MS 20.h.8 suggests that he did not feel the same commitment to James II as he had to his brother Charles. He composed 'My heart is inditing' for the coronation of James II and Queen Mary of Modena on 23 April 1685 but thereafter no sacred music was added to MS 20.h.8 until about 1689, even though Purcell continued to write symphony anthems during this period. The fact that he did not transcribe the new works into his scorebook, or even complete the series of fair copies he was making at the time of Charles II's death, points to a conviction that a permanent repertory of Anglican symphony anthems was no longer required. Even the secular contents of MS 20.h.8 show signs of changing circumstances, the welcome songs for 1685 and 1686 being substantially in the hand of an assistant. Possibly this copyist was Purcell's pupil Robert Hodge from Exeter, about whose debts to local tradesmen he had to complain to the dean of Exeter in November 1686. The dedicated character of the Whitehall repertory began to be lost, and a number of songs and vocal ensembles from MS 20.h.8 appeared in print between 1685 and 1688. Purcell seems also to have accepted other kinds of work beyond the court, and on 30 September 1686 was one of a panel of experts who first examined a new organ built by Bernard Smith for the church of St Katharine Cree and then auditioned candidates for the post of organist. 
Meanwhile, the years 1686 and 1687 were also difficult ones for the Purcell family. A son, Thomas, whose baptism is unrecorded, was buried at Westminster Abbey on 3 August 1686 and a second child named Henry, baptized at St Margaret's on 9 June 1687, died in September. However, on 30 May 1688 the Purcells' daughter Frances, the first of their children to survive to adulthood, was baptized at Westminster Abbey. 
With the accession of William and Mary, Purcell's career as a composer primarily dedicated to the court ended. His appointments were perpetuated, and his birthday odes for Queen Mary include some of his finest works, but Whitehall itself was no longer to be the self-contained and cohesive centre of musical excellence it had been under Charles II. As early as 23 February 1689 the use of stringed instruments in the Chapel Royal was forbidden (Holman, 140 n.), and in 1691 it was again decreed that 'the King's Chapel shall be all the year through kept both morning and evening with solemn musick like a collegiate church' (Ashbee, 2.43). There was no prospect of the revival of the elaborate Anglican symphony anthem, although MS 20.h.8 contains evidence that for a time Purcell continued to hope that the chapel would be restored to its former glory. About 1689 an assistant, possibly the Temple Church organist Francis Pigott, added three new symphony anthems, but the third, 'Praise the Lord O my soul', was left incomplete, petering out as though the copyist realized it was never again likely to be performed with stringed instruments, and most of Purcell's late anthems exist only in versions accompanied by organ alone. 
A misunderstanding over incidental proceeds from the coronation of William and Mary on 11 April 1689 may have caused some friction at Westminster Abbey, though its significance has almost certainly been exaggerated. The organist and choirmen were permitted to sell places for spectators to view the coronation from the organ loft or from scaffolds erected at the choir's own expense within the church, but on 25 March 1689 it had been decreed that all money raised in this way at the forthcoming coronation should be paid to the treasurer and redistributed by the dean and chapter. For some reason Purcell had not handed over his takings by 18 April and was peremptorily ordered to do so within two days on pain of dismissal. He complied promptly with the chapter's instruction, being allowed to deduct 'his poundage & other things' before passing on the sum of $78 4's'. 6died, and in the distribution received $35, much more than the $24 received by the precentor, Stephen Crespion, and almost twice the sum of $18 paid to each of the minor canons. There is no evidence that this incident sullied Purcell's reputation or caused any lasting ill feeling between himself and his colleagues or superiors. 
Quite apart from the coronation, 1689 appears to have been a very busy year for Purcell. He contributed several pieces to Playford's 'The Second Part of Musick's Hand-Maid', a collection of easy keyboard music of which he was also the editor, and the opera 'Dido and Aeneas' was presented at Josias Priest's boarding-school for girls in Chelsea. Purcell composed two odes influenced by the up-to-date Italian style recently exemplified in 'From Harmony, from Heavenly Harmony', Draghi's ode for St Cecilia's day performed on 22 November 1687. 'Now Does the Glorious Day Appear' (30 April 1689) was the first of a series of annual 'birthday songs' for Queen Mary which culminated in 'Come Ye Sons of Art Away' of 1694, and 'Celestial Music' (5 August) was written for Lewis Maidwell's progressive academy in King Street, Westminster. The year also saw the baptism at the abbey on 6 September of the second of Purcell's children to survive to adulthood, his son Edward. 
After 1690 the public theatre assumed the place previously occupied by Whitehall at the centre of Purcell's creative life. Between 1690 and 1695 he contributed music to over forty theatrical works produced by the United Company, until 1695 the only company licensed to perform plays in London. Often the music consisted of a single song or a suite of incidental instrumental movements, but some plays, such as 'Oedipus', involved long and elaborate passages of music as part of the action. The 'dramatic operas' 'Dioclesian' (1690), 'King Arthur' (1691), 'The Fairy Queen' (1692, revived 1693), and 'The Indian Queen' (1695) consist of a succession of musical scenes linked together by dialogue spoken by actors who did not normally sing even though they might nominally be central characters. The annual sequence of dramatic operas was broken in 1694 by the first two parts of Thomas D'Urfey's trilogy 'The Comical History of Don Quixote', a less extravagant production with songs by Purcell and John Eccles. 
Although Purcell was mainly concerned with theatre music in the last five years of his life, he had other important commitments. On 27 March 1690 the 'Yorkshire Feast Song', 'Of Old when Heroes Thought it Base', was presented at the annual festival of the Yorkshire Society in London at Merchant Taylors' Hall, in 1692 Purcell produced his second St Cecilia's day ode, 'Hail Bright Cecilia', and in 1693 he edited and contributed to a second book of 'Harmonia sacra' issued by Henry Playford. In 1694 he revised the twelfth edition of John Playford's 'Introduction to the Skill of Music', the standard musical instruction book of the time, updating the section on composition, 'The art of descant'; on 20 July he was one of three Westminster Abbey officials who signed a contract with Bernard Smith for a major overhaul and extension of the abbey organ, and for the Cecilian celebrations in November he composed the 'Te Deum' and 'Jubilate in D'. Considering the number of major works he produced in this period together with his other activities it is little wonder that he did not manage to compile orderly fair-copy autographs of his theatre music and late odes comparable to the anthem scores in MS 20.h.8. 
In addition Purcell had several pupils. In 1693 and 1694 his former Chapel Royal colleague John Walter, now master of the choristers at Eton College, sent the talented John Weldon to study with Purcell, and aristocratic female pupils included Annabella Howard, fourth wife of the elderly Sir Robert Howard, Sir Robert's granddaughter Diana, and Rhoda Cavendish. Two of Purcell's late autograph manuscripts, a keyboard book (BL, MS Mus.1) and the 'Gresham' songbook (Guildhall Library, London), seem to have been compiled for teaching or coaching, in the case of the Gresham book for an advanced performer rather than a young pupil, and are thus quite different in character from his archival volumes of earlier years. Other late autographs show that Purcell sometimes worked in great haste: the score of 'The Fairy Queen' (Royal Academy of Music, MS 3) is largely the work of a very competent professional scribe but contains a few sections in Purcell's own hand, as though he did not finish composing them until the last minute. 
The Westminster poor rate assessments suggest that in 1691 Purcell acquired a second property adjoining his house in Bowling Alley, but in 1692 and 1693 he disappears from the Westminster rate books, his name being replaced by 'Ann Peters'. The highway rate for Christmas 1693 correctly identifies this householder as Amy Peters, Purcell's mother-in-law, and in 1694 the rates were paid by Frances's sister Amy Howlett. Purcell's absence is difficult to explain, as he still held his court offices and his post as organist of Westminster Abbey. Possibly he lived temporarily outside London in some location more convenient for the palaces of Hampton Court and Kensington, preferred by William and Mary, as well as for Windsor and Eton, or perhaps he wanted to move his family to a healthier location. At least one of the Bowling Alley houses was let to tenants, and when the Purcells returned to Westminster about Christmas 1693 they moved into a house in Marsham Street. Their youngest child, Mary-Peters, who does not appear to have been living when her mother made her will in 1706, was baptized at Westminster Abbey on 10 December 1693. 
The beginning of 1695 was overshadowed by the death of Queen Mary from smallpox on 28 December 1694. For her state funeral on 5 March 1695 Purcell provided a march and canzona for 'flat trumpets', instruments with slides to permit them to play in minor keys, and an old-fashioned setting of one of the Anglican funeral sentences, 'Thou knowest Lord the secrets of our hearts'. The service to be sung was that by Thomas Morley, used at the funeral of James I, from which this section had been found to be missing. After the period of mourning, however, Purcell's life seems to have proceeded normally. As well as 'The Indian Queen' he wrote music for several other dramas, including 'Timon of Athens' and 'Bonduca', and for 24 July 1695 he composed his last court ode, 'Who Can from Joy Refrain', for the sixth birthday of Princess Anne's son the duke of Gloucester. 
In the London theatre 1695 was a year of upheaval. A group of experienced actors led by Thomas Betterton deserted the United Company to set up a rival theatre of their own and Purcell's 'The Indian Queen' was therefore performed by the remnant of the company, 'for the most part Learners, Boys and Girls, a very unequal match for them who revolted' (Wells, 7). Fortunately the 'remnant' included Jemmy Bowen, Letitia Cross, and other talented singers, and a successful production apparently took place in the early summer of 1695. For subsequent revivals an 'Additional Act' for a concluding masque was provided by Daniel Purcell, 'Mr Henery Purcell being dead' (BL, Add. MS 31453, fol. 69). 
'From rosy bowers', 'the last Song that Mr. Purcell Sett, it being in his Sickness' ('Orpheus Britannicus', 1, 1698, 90), was Purcell's only contribution to the third part of D'Urfey's 'Don Quixote', performed in November 1695. The fact that Purcell wrote no more music for this production may indicate that he was unwell for some weeks before his death, but there is no evidence in his working life up to September 1695 to indicate a more protracted illness. 'Lovely Albina', 'The last Song Mr Henry Purcell set before his Sickness' (ibid., 133), alludes to the reconciliation of a quarrel between Princess Anne and King William, and cannot have been composed before William's return to London from the continent on 12 October 1695. The story referred to by Hawkins (Hawkins, 2.748) that Purcell caught a cold which suddenly turned to something much more serious is probably essentially correct, though Hawkins himself questions the further detail, lacking any independent corroboration, that Purcell was taken ill after Frances locked him out when he came home late and drunk from a tavern. Purcell seems not to have realized the seriousness of his condition until the day he died, on 21 November 1695 at his home in Marsham Street, when he made his will bequeathing all his possessions to his 'Loving Wife Frances Purcell'. The witnesses were his Marsham Street neighbour John Capelin, William Eeles, an apothecary from Bowling Alley who had perhaps been attending him, and his brother-in-law John Baptist Peters, whose signet ring was used to seal the will. Arrangements for the funeral, which took place in Westminster Abbey on the evening of 26 November, were described in that day's issue of the 'Flying Post': Purcell was to be buried near the organ without charge to his widow, the entire chapter attending along with the choirs of Westminster Abbey and the Chapel Royal. According to the 'Post Boy' of 28 November 1695 the funeral was conducted 'in a magnificent manner' and the composer Thomas Tudway states that Purcell's new setting of 'Thou knowest Lord' was performed with its accompaniment of 'flat Mournfull Trumpets' (BL, Harleian MS 7340, fol. 264'v'). 
Purcell died at the height of his powers, and his music was evidently in great demand. Frances Purcell herself published 'A Choice Collection of Lessons for the Harpsichord or Spinnet' in 1696 and three works in 1697 -- the 'Ayres, Compos'd for the Theatre', 'Ten Sonata's in Four Parts', and the 'Te Deum & Jubilate for Voices and Instruments Made for St Caecelia's Day, 1694'. The two books of 'Orpheus Britannicus', which contained songs and vocal ensembles by Purcell, including movements extracted from longer works, were issued in 1698 and 1702 by Henry Playford: further editions of books 1 and 2, with altered contents, were issued in 1706 and 1711 respectively, and a third edition of both books in 1721. Frances Purcell's dedication of book 1 of 'Orpheus Britannicus' to Annabella, Lady Howard, discloses that Lady Howard was responsible for Purcell's monument in Westminster Abbey and for 'gracing it with an inscription which may perpetuate both the Marble and his Memory'. Some of the verses printed in the two volumes seem to pass beyond the conventional to express sincere affection, and surviving musical tributes include two outstanding works -- John Blow's 'Mark how the Lark and Linnet Sing' and Jeremiah Clarke's 'Come, Come Along for a Dance and a Song', in which celebration turns to despair at the news of the composer's death. 
Frances Purcell left Marsham Street for a house in Dean's Yard, Westminster, at which address the third edition of 'A Choice Collection' (1699) was advertised for sale, and in 1705 she moved to Richmond, where she died in February 1706. Her nuncupative will, witnessed by her sister Amy Howlett, Ann Eeles, probably the wife of William Eeles, the Bowling Alley apothecary, and Ann Pendleton, refers to an organ and two spinets left to her son Edward along with 'the books of music in general'. These certainly included the scorebook Royal Music MS 20.h.8, inscribed on the reverse flyleaf 'Anthems and Welcome Songs and other Songs all by my father'. Frances was buried near her husband in Westminster Abbey on 14 February 1706. Their son Edward (died 1740) became organist of St Clement, Eastcheap, and St Margaret's, Westminster; his sister Frances, who administered her mother's will, married the writer Leonard Welstead and died in 1724 at the age of thirty-six. 
Although Purcell was one of the greatest and most individual of English composers, his music was as much a product of the age in which he lived as of his nationality. He belonged to a vigorous but by no means insular English musical tradition and himself responded both to the French influence favoured by Charles II and to Italian music. His musical knowledge demonstrably extended from English polyphony of the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries to contemporary Italian vocal and instrumental writing, and his works draw upon a wide variety of stylistic resources. He excelled in the setting of English words, in his last years coming close to establishing a form of music drama distinct from Italian opera and acceptable to English audiences. 
Purcell has never been without admirers, but the exalted reputation he enjoyed in the two decades following his death did not last, and many mid-eighteenth-century musicians compared his works unfavourably to those of Corelli and Handel. His gradual recovery of the classical status earlier implied by 'Orpheus Britannicus' began towards the end of the eighteenth century, and in the 1780s Benjamin Goodison unsuccessfully attempted to bring out a complete edition, a project finally carried out over many years by the Purcell Society, founded in 1876. By the mid-twentieth century Purcell's independent part-writing and sometimes astringent harmony had perhaps become more congenial to performers and listeners than they had been for more than 200 years. Developing interest in early music and historically informed performance of music and drama means that Purcell's work can again be judged in its proper context as the culmination of almost a century of baroque music in England rather than merely as part of the background to the international baroque style of the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 22895


Purcell, John (c.1674-1730), physician, was born in Shropshire. In 1696 he became a student of medicine in the University of Montpellier; there he attended the lectures of Pierre Chirac, then professor of medicine, for whom he retained a great respect throughout his life (Purcell, 48). After taking the degrees of bachelor and licentiate, he graduated MD on 29 May 1699. 
Purcell practised in London, and in 1702 published 'A Treatise of Vapours or Hysteric Fits', a second edition of which appeared in 1707. The book is dedicated to 'the Honourable Sir John Talbott, his near relation' and gives a detailed clinical account of the symptoms of hysteria, mixed with pathology drawn from the ideas of Thomas Willis. Purcell moved away from traditional humoralism and wrote that 'Raving is produc'd by a Mixture of Hetrogeneous Particles with the Spirits, which fermenting with them, make their Motion violent and irregular in the Emporium of the Brain, where they do at once irritate a great many Nervous Fibres, and renew many confus'd Ideas of things past. (Porter, 47)' Purcell makes a number of original comments, and points out that there are no grounds for the ancient belief that the movement of the uterus is related to the symptoms of hysteria. He supports Sydenham's statement that similar symptoms are observable in men, while recognizing that the malady had a particular 'gusto for the tender sex' (Porter, 84). Its greater frequency in women Purcell attributes to their menses being more likely to cause an obstruction to digestion. He recommends crayfish broth and Tunbridge Wells waters, among a variety of prescriptions, including seeing plays, merry company, and airing in the parks. 
In 1714 Purcell published 'A Treatise of the Cholick', dedicated to his relative, Charles, duke of Shrewsbury; a second edition appeared in 1715. This work shows less observation than his former book, but contains the description of an autopsy which he witnessed at Montpellier, giving the earliest observation in any English book of the irritation produced by the exudation in peritonitis on the hands of the morbid anatomist. 
On 3 April 1721 Purcell was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, London. He died on 19 December 1730. 


@@@@@


doc= 22896


Purcell, Richard (fl. 1746-1766), engraver, was born in Dublin and was a pupil of John Brooks. After Brooks went to London in 1746, Purcell remained in Dublin working for the printsellers and probably assisting Andrew Miller. Twelve mezzotints of portraits, signed R. Purcelle or R. P., date from the years 1748-55, at which point he moved to London, following in the footsteps of his fellow pupil James Macardell. 
Purcell displayed some talent, but he had a marked weakness for drink and never established an independent career. He worked for the printsellers -- chiefly for Robert Sayer -- and a large part of his output consisted of copies of prints by other artists, notably his more reliable and successful compatriots Macardell and James Watson. Many of his prints are signed with the aliases Chas. Corbutt and C. Corbutt. Five prints are signed Philip Corbutt, which Strickland has tentatively identified as a son, but is more probably just another alias. Many unsigned plates published by Sayer are probably by him. Purcell probably died about 1766. 


@@@@@


doc= 22897


Purchas, John (1823-1872), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, eldest son of Captain William Jardine Purchas RN (1779-1848), sometime mayor of Cambridge, and his wife, Jane Hills, a niece of the novelist Frederick Marryat (1792-1848), was born at Cambridge on 14 July 1823, and educated at Rugby School from 1836. He was admitted to Christ's College, Cambridge, on 8 July 1840, and graduated BA in 1844. He served as curate at Elsworth, Cambridgeshire, from 1851 to 1853, at Orwell in the same county from 1856 to 1859, and at St Paul's, West Street, Brighton, from 1861 to 1866. He was appointed perpetual curate of St James's Chapel, Brighton, in 1866, and there he introduced practices that were denounced as ritualistic. On 27 November 1869 he was charged before Sir Robert Phillimore, dean of the court of arches at Canterbury, with infringing the law of the established church by using a cope (otherwise than during the communion service), chasubles, albs, stoles, tunicles, dalmatics, birettas, wafer bread, lighted candles on the altar, crucifixes, images, and holy water. He was also accused of standing with his back to the people when consecrating the elements, mixing water with the wine, censing the minister, leaving the holy table uncovered during the service, directing processions round the church, and giving notice of unauthorized holidays. Purchas did not appear, claiming that he was too poor to pay for legal assistance and too infirm to defend the case in person. On 3 February 1870 Phillimore ruled against him on eight points. This decision was not satisfactory to the promoter of the suit, Colonel Charles James Elphinstone, who appealed for a fuller condemnation of Purchas to the queen in council, but died on 30 March 1870 before the case was heard. Henry Hebbert of Brighton, a retired judge of the high court at Bombay, was then permitted to revive the appeal. The privy council decided against Purchas on 16 May 1871, declaring that eucharistic vestments, the eastward position, the mixed chalice, and wafer bread were all illegal. Purchas, however, had made over all his property to his wife, and he neither paid the costs, amounting to over $2096, nor discontinued the illegal practices. On 7 February 1872 the privy council consequently suspended him from the discharge of his clerical office for twelve months. 
The 'Purchas judgment' gave rise to much controversy but proved virtually impossible to enforce, since most bishops were reluctant to take the ritualists to court. Although a copy of the order of suspension was affixed to the door of St James's Chapel on 18 February 1872, Purchas continued his services as usual for the last months of his life. He died at his home in Montpellier Villas, Brighton, on 18 October 1872, and was buried in the churchyard of St James's on 23 October. He left a widow and five sons. 
Purchas's best-known work was the 'Directorium Anglicanum' (1858), a standard manual on Anglican ritual. In his youth he had published a comedy, 'The Miser's Daughter' (1839), and several volumes of poetry, but his later works were exclusively ecclesiastical. 


@@@@@


doc= 22898


Purchas, Samuel (bap. 1577, d. 1626), geographical editor and compiler and Church of England clergyman, was baptized on 20 November 1577 at Thaxted, Essex, the sixth of the ten children of George Purcas ('c'.1549-1625), who was in the cloth trade, and his wife, Anne ('c'.1544-1619). He matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1594 (probably December), and graduated BA by 1597 and MA in 1600; he received a Lambeth BD on 14 March 1615 and was incorporated as an Oxford BD on 11 July 1615. He sought a bishop's licence to marry Jane Lease ('bap'. 1573) of Westhall, Suffolk, on 2 December 1601. They had three children: Mary (1603/4-1619); Samuel (1605/6-1658/9), author of 'A Theatre of Politicall Flying-Insects' (1657); and Martha. 
Purchas spent his professional life in the Church of England. He was ordained deacon (1 May 1598) and then priest (25 January 1601) in Witham church, Essex. In Essex he became successively curate of Purleigh (before 23 April 1601), vicar of Eastwood (24 August 1604), and rector of Snoreham (1615); then in London he was appointed chaplain to Archbishop George Abbot in 1613 or 1614, rector of St Martin Ludgate (1614), and finally rector of All Hallows, Bread Street (22 April 1626). From 1621 to 1624 he was also a fellow of King James's College at Chelsea, the major arsenal of anti-Catholic polemic, where he composed his one published sermon, 'The Kings Towre' (preached at Paul's Cross on 5 August 1622), and compiled much of his major work, 'Hakluytus Posthumus, or, Purchas his Pilgrimes' (1624-5). 
Purchas was admitted to the Virginia Company on 22 May 1622, and attended six meetings of the company court in 1622-4 (Kingsbury, 2.20, 26, 103, 485, 498, 512, 518, 533). His first published compilation of travel literature was 'Purchas, his Pilgrimage' (1613); he dedicated the second, expanded edition (1614) to his ecclesiastical patron Archbishop Abbot. By this time Purchas had already become acquainted with Richard Hakluyt, his great predecessor in the memorializing of English travel narratives, who lent books and some manuscripts for the second edition of the 'Pilgrimage'. Two further editions appeared in 1617 and 1626. His only independent original works, 'Purchas his Pilgrim: Microcosmus, or, The Historie of Man' (1619) and 'The Kings Towre' (1623), referred to travel accounts, but were primarily works of speculative theology characteristic of the Calvinist consensus of their time. Purchas was no traveller himself: as he confessed, 'Even I, which have written so much of travellers & travells, never travelled 200. miles from 'Thaxted' in 'Essex', where I was borne' (Purchas, 'Pilgrimes', I. i. 74). 
The 'Pilgrimes' (as it is usually known) was the culmination of almost twenty years' collecting oral and written accounts of travels in Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Americas. It was based in part on Hakluyt's remaining manuscripts, which Purchas had acquired about 1620. (Their subsequent history is unknown.) The result was a four-volume folio that took more than three years to print; at the time of its publication it was the largest book ever seen through the English press. The 'Pilgrimes' combined editing with editorializing to comprise the bulkiest anti-Catholic tract of the age and the last great English work of geographical editing for almost a century. Its four volumes traversed the world from the ancient Near East to the latest English colonies. The first volume comprised the travels of ancient kings, patriarchs, apostles, and others; comparative histories of languages, religion, church government, and 'letters'; circumnavigations of the globe; and English voyages to Africa, Persia, India, and Asia. The second volume extended the collection of travel narratives to encompass Africa and the Near East, while the third covered China, Russia, 'Tartary', Iceland, Greenland, the north-west passage, and the Arctic. Purchas's coverage of European exploration and settlement in the Americas began at the end of the third volume, but made up the bulk of the fourth, which treated South and North America, and ended with English settlements in Bermuda, Virginia, New England, and Newfoundland. Purchas edited oral accounts and manuscripts (many from Hakluyt's papers), translated texts in classical and foreign languages, and reprinted previously published works. His only original contributions came in the form of various editorials scattered through the volumes on, among other things, Solomon's voyage to Ophir, Pope Alexander's bulls of donation of 1493, the 'iniquitie' of papal power, the history of Europe, and 'Virginia's Verger', an ideological justification for English settlement in Virginia in the wake of the Powhatan uprising of 1622 ('Pilgrimes', 4.1809-26). 
Since the nineteenth century Purchas's editorial methods have always been contrasted unfavourably with Hakluyt's, though his influence (and the European dissemination of his works) were arguably much greater. Unlike Hakluyt, Purchas attempted to construct an argument upon geographical and historical evidence that was cosmopolitan, pan-European, global, and transhistorical. The militantly theological purpose of his works may partly account for the contempt and neglect into which he largely fell in the centuries after John Locke even-handedly advised in 1703 that for 'books of travel... the collections made by our countrymen, Hakluyt and Purchas, are very good' (Locke, 353). Purchas made final alterations to his will (originally composed on 31 May 1625) on 9 September 1626. His exact death date is unknown, though it was before 29 September 1626, when the rectory of All Hallows, Bread Street, fell vacant. His burial at St Martin Ludgate was recorded on 30 September 1626, and his will was proved on 21 October 1626. 


@@@@@


doc= 22899


Purdon, Edward (bap. 1729, d. 1767), writer, the son of the Revd Edward Purdon and his wife, Elizabeth, was baptized at St Mary's Cathedral, Limerick, on 17 September 1729. In 1744 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he became friends with Oliver Goldsmith. After dissipating his inheritance he enlisted. Subsequently Purdon settled in London and became a 'scribbler in the newspapers'. While working for Ralph Griffiths he translated for him Voltaire's 'Henriade', which appeared in the 'British Ladies' Magazine'. Probably Purdon had a share also in the 'Memoirs of M. de Voltaire', by Goldsmith, which accompanied the poem. In 1759 Purdon was compelled to publish an apology in the 'London Chronicle' for an abusive pamphlet, in the form of a letter to David Garrick, against Henry Mossop and other Drury Lane performers (Lowe, 140, 273). Purdon fell dead in Smithfield on 27 March 1767. Goldsmith's epitaph on him, for the Wednesday Club, has preserved his memory: '
Here lies Poor Ned Purdon, from misery freed, 

Who long was a bookseller's hack; 

He led such a damnable life in this world, 

I don't think he'll wish to come back. 
('Goldsmith: Interviews', 29)' 



@@@@@


doc= 22900


Purdy, John (1773-1843), hydrographer, was born on 14 August 1773 at Norwich, the eldest of four known children of John Purdy, a tailor and freeman of the city, and his wife, Sarah Cady. While John was still young the family moved to London, where in 1795 he entered an apprenticeship with David Steel, nautical publisher and bookseller, of Little Tower Hill. In 1806 he drew his first known charts; these were of English Channel harbours, published by Steel's widow and successor, Penelope Mason, and of the North Sea, published by Laurie and Whittle of 53 Fleet Street. Within a few years he was working exclusively for Laurie and Whittle and by 1812 had become its principal hydrographer. He compiled charts and wrote the accompanying sailing directions for Laurie and Whittle and its successor, R. H. Laurie, until his death. 
Purdy's greatest contribution was to the knowledge of the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean Sea. In his 'Memoir... to Accompany the New Chart of the Atlantic Ocean' (1812, with eight editions in his lifetime) he made available to ordinary navigators James Rennell's work on ocean currents. Rennell had 'a high opinion of his talents', and in 1832 his daughter, Lady Rodd, entrusted Purdy with editing her father's 'Wind and Current Charts'. Purdy's other works included 'Tables of the Positions...' (1816), to accompany Laurie and Whittle's 'Oriental Navigator'; 'The Columbian Navigator' (1817); and works on the south Atlantic, northern European waters, and the Mediterranean. Most of these went through several editions in his lifetime and continued in print after his death under the editorship of his successor, Alexander George Findlay. 
Purdy exchanged information with leading hydrographers of the day, both British and foreign. He was respected as the foremost authority in private chart publishing, where he was exceptional for the care with which he acknowledged the many varied sources on which his work was based. His work and letters give the impression of a meticulous, modest, and industrious man; however, nothing is known of his private life. He died of gangrene of the leg at his home at 29 Gloucester Street, Clerkenwell, London, on 29 January 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 22901


Purefoy, William (c.1580-1659), politician and regicide, was born at Caldecote, Warwickshire, the son of Francis Purefoy (died 1613), and his wife, Eleanor, daughter of John Baskerville of Curdworth, Warwickshire. He was briefly at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1598 and Gray's Inn in 1599; in 1622 he was granted leave to travel abroad for three years. 
The Purefoys were a long-established family from the Warwickshire-Leicestershire border with branches also in Lincolnshire and Berkshire; kinsmen still co-operated over political and financial affairs in the seventeenth century. The marriage of William's grandfather to an heir of the Wigstons of Wolston, Warwickshire, had added to the family's status and wealth, while his aunt Magdalen Purefoy (1572/3-1653) was the wife of Anthony Grey, earl of Kent (1556/7-1643). The Purefoys of Caldecote were none the less on the fringes of the county elite; William served as sheriff of Warwickshire in 1630-31 and was an active justice of the peace from 1632. He was added to the quorum only in 1649, however, by which time he was among the most influential politicians in England. 
William Purefoy was a consistent and early opponent of Charles I's policies. He was summoned before the privy council for his refusal of the forced loan in February 1627, and his election, in a disputed contest, to the parliament of 1628 as member for the nearby city of Coventry was attributed by some newsletter writers to his status as a loan refuser. In 1630 he gave the defiant answer 'that he believeth himself not legally liable to be fined' (TNA: PRO, E 178/7154/186) to the commissioners for distraint of knighthood, but he paid up in the following year (during his shrievalty). Purefoy was already close to Robert Greville, second Lord Brooke (and was indeed credited by some with an undue influence on the younger man) and a patron of godly clergy in Warwickshire, especially Richard Vines, rector of Caldecote and the adjacent parish of Weddington. Through Brooke Purefoy was elected as MP for Warwick in both the Short and the Long parliaments, having failed to become knight of the shire. He was an active and determined opponent of the personal rule. He argued for the removal of popish commanders from the English army, and in a famous and stormy session on 15 December 1641 moved that the grand remonstrance be printed, 'that so we might satisfy the whole kingdom' ('The Journal of Sir Symonds D'Ewes', ed. W. H. Coates, New Haven, 1942, 294-5). 
From the start of the civil war Purefoy worked tirelessly to defeat the royalists, both as a military leader and administrator in Warwickshire and as a conscientious MP in Westminster. With Brooke he raised troops in the summer of 1642 under the authority of parliament's militia ordinance; the two men were indicted at the Warwickshire assizes by a royalist gentleman for opposing the king's commission of array. Purefoy had married, in 1609, Joan, the daughter of Aleyn Penkeston and widow of George Abbott -- both minor Yorkshire gentlemen. There were apparently no children of the Purefoy marriage, but her son George Abbott the younger was a close political associate of his stepfather in Warwickshire's civil war administration. Joan Purefoy was a plucky woman, praised in the London press in the autumn of 1642 for defending Caldecote from Prince Rupert's forces. 
Purefoy held command in the association army of Staffordshire and Warwickshire under Lord Brooke in 1642-3; when these forces were dispersed on their commander's death Purefoy was commissioned by the earl of Essex as colonel of a regiment of cavalry to be raised in Warwickshire. Despite his advanced age, Purefoy did see some military service in 1643-4, contributing to the relief of Gloucester, and for the rest of his life was known as Colonel Purefoy. More broadly, however, he cemented a position as the archetypal 'county boss', with a tight political and administrative hold on Warwickshire parliamentarianism. He was named to every parliamentary committee established for Warwickshire from 1642 until 1659; throughout the 1640s his stepson Abbott, his cousin Gamaliel Purefoy, and three of the latter's sons were also prominent in Warwickshire's war effort. Purefoy's dominance was not popular with the more moderate, established county gentry, who in 1644 mobilized behind the attempt of Basil Feilding, second earl of Denbigh, to establish a military association independent of the Warwickshire county forces. An ally of the earl claimed Purefoy's 'estate being inconsiderable, his actions so harsh and resolutions so disconsonant to the welfare of the country that he hath wholly lost himself in his reputation there' (Parl. Arch., Main papers, 8 Nov 1644). None the less, Purefoy's national political connections and his military and financial dominance in Warwickshire sabotaged Denbigh's association, and he survived also the later challenges to his local administration by moderates on the local subcommittee of accounts. 
Purefoy lost his military command with the self-denying ordinance and in the summer of 1645 he resided with the unpopular Scottish army while it was in the midlands. In parliament he supported a determined prosecution of the war and a stern peace settlement. He was hostile alike to 'prelacy' and to sectarianism. He led local iconoclasm, tearing down Warwick's market cross and offensive monuments in the Beauchamp chapel in 1642; but unlike many of his closest associates he favoured a strict presbyterian church settlement. In October 1647, for example, he was on the opposite side to Cromwell as he attempted (unsuccessfully) to have a permanent presbyterian settlement written in to the peace propositions to be sent to the king. 
In January 1649 Purefoy was named to the commission to try Charles I and signed the death warrant with no apparent hesitation, but he was clearly unhappy about the military purge of the Commons and the abolition of the House of Lords ['see also 'Regicides]. It was as an indefatigable MP during the Rump or Commonwealth regime (1649-53) that Purefoy reached the apex of his political power. He served on the council of state throughout and was on all the important committees of the Rump, particularly concerned with religious affairs. Purefoy was predictably opposed to the dissolution of the Rump and to Cromwell's assumption of rule as a 'single person', but he was not an irreconcilable enemy of the protectorate. He continued to be active in local government and as member for Coventry in the first protectorate parliament he acquiesced in the demand that all MPs recognize Cromwell's authority. Purefoy's close links with Coventry were emphasized when he turned down the more prestigious Warwickshire county seat, to which he had also been elected. He sat on several committees, including, characteristically, one charged with revising the religious liberty granted under the 'Instrument of government' and enumerating 'damnable heresies' ('JHC', 7.399). 
Purefoy was also elected for Coventry in 1656 and protested, unsuccessfully, against the council of state's exclusion of republican MPs. He played a full role in the parliament himself, however, sitting on the crucial committee for privileges, a committee to reform alehouses, and the committee that oversaw the trial and punishment of the Quaker James Nayler. He turned up in a thin house on 25 December 1656 for a debate on the decimation tax and sat on several heavyweight committees concerned with the 'Humble Petition and Advice'. Purefoy was clearly hostile to the offer of the crown to Cromwell, and his sympathies were vividly revealed when he was one of the few members willing to take the oath of the provocative Commonwealthman Arthur Hesilrige, who attempted to enter the Commons in January 1658 despite being nominated to the upper house by the protector. 
Purefoy was elected yet again for Coventry for Richard Cromwell's parliament, but his health was clearly failing, as he was one of the elderly MPs excused at the end of a long debate on the 'other house' in March 1659. His status as an elder statesman ensured his nomination to important committees such as that for elections. The old man rallied quickly to the restored Rump in May 1659, but he was not active after August when he made his will. His wife was dead by then and his lands were settled, apparently reluctantly, on his nephew and namesake who had married a distant relative, Dorothy, daughter of George Purefoy of Wadley, Berkshire. Those with whom Purefoy had the closest ties -- his trustees, executors, and witnesses to his will -- were all veterans of Warwickshire's civil-war administration, minor gentlemen and tradesmen of Coventry. The veteran parliamentarian and puritan trusted to 'be taken into those blessed mansions of everlasting happiness prepared for and predestined to the elect' (will). At the very end of his life William Purefoy kept Coventry secure during the scare of Sir George Booth's presbyterian-royalist rising in the August in which he made his will, and died in Warwickshire shortly afterwards, spared the collapse of his political hopes in the restoration of Charles II. His unloved nephew seems to have recovered the estates confiscated for regicide. 


@@@@@


doc= 22902


Purnell, Robert (1606-1666), Baptist leader and author, was born on 15 October 1606, probably in Bristol. He was a carpet weaver and freeman of the city, and lived with his wife in St James's Back; their son John (died 1686) was an ironmonger in Maryport Street, Bristol. 
Purnell was a member of the separatist Broadmead congregation, known as 'a Church of Christ', in Bristol from its inception in 1640. Baptism was first considered by the congregation when it migrated to All Hallows, London, in 1643 following the capture of Bristol by the royalists but was not formally adopted. 'I lost mine estate by siding with them [parliament]', commented Purnell in 1651, 'I was in a banished condition one hundred and forty miles from home, for the space of two full years' ('No Power but of God', 166-7). In a brief pamphlet, 'Englands Remonstrance' (1649), which he later expanded, Purnell vigorously complains that parliament, with all the power in its own hands, neglected those who supported it and feathered their own nests. 
Purnell's works, written between 1649 and 1663, confirm he came to a Baptist position only slowly. In 1649 he commended Baptists for performing 'a right ordinance to right subjects', their 'sin' was 'idolizing it', but disagreed with those who made 'Baptisme a ground of your communion and so disorder what God hath ordered; for the ground of communion should arise first from that union you have with Christ your head; and secondly from that near relation you have to each other, as being one in the same Spirit.' He believed a time would soon come when all Christians will be 'ashamed to own one another by their fleshly titles but look upon and love one another as Christians, members of the same body... [whose] love of each other shall arise from union in the Spirit. Against this church-state the gates of hell shall not prevail. ('Good Tydings for Sinners', 57-8)' His books advocate religious toleration on the basis of a common love of Christ, and he shared Cromwell's dismay at parliament's desire to enforce religious uniformity. In 1653 Purnell, not yet a Baptist, considered contemporary disputes 'about the garment of religion' while 'the power thereof is much abated' futile: 'a true communion of saints according to the Gospel institution' comes about when 'a saint comes to see that everyone in whom the Lord Jesus appeareth, is a member together with him in the same body whereof Christ is Head' ('The Way to Heaven Discovered', sig. B4r, p. 156). 
Purnell's move towards baptism was paralleled by developments in the Broadmead congregation. In 1651 the first questions about 'Sprinkleing of Children' arose and the following year 'the Lord awakened some... to consider there was noe ground for Baptizing children, much less for Sprinkleing them' and they joined 'the other Church in Bristol that were all Baptized' (Hayden, 103, 105). In 1653 a member of Broadmead, Thomas Cattle, was sent to London for baptism by the Baptist minister Henry Jessey, and in 1654 when Purnell, already a deacon, was elected 'Eldest Ruleing Elder', he also sought baptism from Jessey, having for sometime been 'convinced of his duty therein, but omitted ye practice thereof' (Hayden, 111, 122). By now, Broadmead had become an open communion baptized congregation. 
Purnell advocated toleration between all Christian communities, pleading for a third way as advocated by Henry Jessey, John Bunyan, and others between particular and general baptist beliefs; and in his own congregation Purnell never allowed believers' baptism to create a barrier between Christians of a different persuasion. However, he faced the opposition of another founding member of Broadmead, Dennis Hollister, who had served as MP for Somerset in Cromwell's nominated parliament of 1653 and, while in London, had begun to espouse Quaker views. Hollister ridiculed the 'Baptized-Independent people' of Broadmead for becoming 'imitators of water baptism... a practice disowned by those I joined' (Hollister, 2). Thomas Ewins, 'an open professed Dipper', spoke for Purnell and Broadmead when he claimed many supported him in administering the Lord's supper to all: 'though some of them mis-baptised, yet none of them deny the ordinance of Christ, onely some of them have not the light to see the right administration of it, but reckon that infant baptism is sufficient; yet as further light comes in, they are prepared to walk up to it, in the mean time we can bear with them in love, as we desire them and others to bear with us in other things. (Purnell and others, 59)' However, Purnell found himself on the same side as Hollister in voting for John Haggatt, one of two unsuccessful Independent candidates who stood against presbyterian and royalist sympathisers in the controversial 1654 parliamentary election in the city. 
By 1657 Purnell was asserting baptism was 'an ordinance of the 'New Testament' by the washing of water... representing the powerful washing of the blood of Christ... and so sealing our regeneration or new birth, and entrance into the covenant of grace, our grafting into Christ and into the Body of his Church. ('A Little Cabinet Richly Stored', 255)' But he still warned his co-religionists: 'You that have taken up this ordinance, beware of laying a greater stress upon it than ever God appointed you, viz, it was never appointed to break love and communion, and to quench the Spirit, and to jostle out some other ordinances, nor to shut out the weak in Faith' (ibid., 261). 
Purnell published only one work, 'A Serious Exhortation to an Holy Life, or Conversation' (1663), after the Restoration, and died in Bristol in November 1666. 


@@@@@


doc= 22903


Purnell, Thomas (1834-1889), theatre critic and writer, was born in Tenby, Pembrokeshire, the son of Robert Purnell and his wife, Ann, and was baptized on 13 March 1834 at Narberth, Pembrokeshire. He matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1852 and afterwards went to London and began a career in journalism. In 1862 he was, on the recommendation of Thomas Duffus Hardy, appointed assistant secretary and librarian of the Archaeological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, and retained the post until 1866. In 1870-71 he contributed to 'The Athenaeum', under the signature Q, a series of severe and incisive dramatic criticisms to which Charles Reade and Tom Taylor published aggrieved replies. 
Purnell was popular in literary society and founded a club known as the Decemviri, of which A. C. Swinburne, J. A. M. Whistler, R. E. Francillon, and Joseph Knight were members. He also came to know Giuseppe Mazzini, to whom he introduced Swinburne and others. In 1871 he edited Lamb's 'Correspondence and Works' and organized the Charles Lamb centenary dinner. Purnell's collected 'Athenaeum' theatre reviews were reprinted in 'Dramatists of the Present Day' (1871). He also wrote literary essays and 'The Lady Drusilla: a Psychological Romance' (1886), and edited (1868) Dr John Herd's 'Historia quatuor regum Angliae' for the Roxburghe Club. 
After a long illness Thomas Purnell died on 17 December 1889 at Lloyd Square, Pentonville, London, where his sister kept house for him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22904


Pursglove, Robert (1503/4-1580), prior of Guisborough and bishop-suffragan of Hull, was the son of Adam and Mudwina Pursglove of Tideswell in the Peak District of Derbyshire; he was said to be forty-four years old in 1548. His mother dispatched her son at a young age to her brother, William Bradshawe, a London merchant who lived in the parish of St Michael, Cornhill. Bradshawe placed his nephew at St Paul's School, founded by Dean Colet in 1509, where he was one of the earliest pupils of William Lily, the first headmaster. After studying at St Paul's for nine years Pursglove entered the neighbouring Augustinian priory of St Mary Overie, which after a short time sent him to continue his humanist education at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. He remained at the university for fourteen years. 
Until the mid-1530s Pursglove (who on entering religion had taken the name Silvester) had not been directly involved in religious politics but in 1536 everything changed. In February of that year Cromwell's officials visited Guisborough Priory, the richest Augustinian house in the north of England, where they discovered sufficient evidence of immorality to justify the enforced resignation of the prior, James Cockerill. As his replacement Cromwell imposed Pursglove upon the community, which had no choice but to elect him prior on 25 April 1536, when his disgruntled predecessor retired to a mansion in Guisborough called Bishop's Place. During the Pilgrimage of Grace Sir Francis Bigod attempted to restore Cockerill, who publicly commended Bigod's book condemning the royal supremacy. In December Pursglove was very concerned about discontent among his canons, but he succeeded in retaining control, and Cockerill's subsequent imprisonment in London on a charge of treason in the spring of 1537 removed his chief opponent from the scene. 
Used by Cromwell in 1538 to oversee the election of a candidate acceptable to the government as abbot of Whitby, Pursglove accepted Archbishop Lee's nomination to become suffragan bishop of Hull in 1538 only after he had secured the vicegerent's approval. In 1539 and 1540 he was particularly active in conducting ordination ceremonies, mainly at York Minster, but on two occasions in September and December 1539 in Guisborough Priory church. On 1 October 1538 he was also collated to the prebend of Langtoft in York Minster, which he exchanged for the more valuable prebend of Wistow on 2 May 1541. 
By the autumn of 1539 Pursglove must have realized that the dissolution of his priory could no longer be delayed. On 22 December 1539 he and his convent surrendered Guisborough Priory, one of the last of the Yorkshire monasteries to be suppressed, receiving the very large sum of $166 13's'. 4died as his pension. Pursglove also accumulated a considerable amount of church preferment at this period. On 26 June 1544 he became provost of Jesus College, Rotherham, and held this office until the suppression of the college at the beginning of Edward VI's reign. In 1548, besides his stipend of $13 6's'. 8died and other perquisites as provost, he was reported to have his pension of 250 marks and a prebend in York Minster worth $58 a year. In September 1549 he acquired the living of his home village of Tideswell, and on 29 January 1550 he was installed archdeacon of Nottingham in succession to Cuthbert Marshall. 
Pursglove's tenure of the bishopric of Hull continued without interruption during the protestant regime of Archbishop Holgate and the Catholic restoration of Archbishop Heath, the successors of Archbishop Lee. As a former Augustinian canon he was reconciled to the Catholic church on 18 March 1555, and in September 1558 received the prebend of Oxton in Southwell Minster. In 1559, however, he felt called to make a stand, and lost all his offices for refusing to take the oath of supremacy. Commissioners in 1561 informed the privy council that he was 'very wealthy, stiff in papistry and of estimation in the country', and confined him to within a 20 mile radius of his manor house at Ugthorpe near Whitby ('CSP dom.', '1601-3', 521). 
In November 1559, the year of his deprivation, Pursglove obtained letters patent from Elizabeth to found a grammar school at Tideswell, dedicated to the child Jesus, with lands to the yearly value of $20. Some of his statutes contain provisions resembling those devised by Colet for St Paul's. Then on 5 June 1563 he gained permission from the crown to found a similar school, bearing the same name, and also a hospital, or almshouse, for six poor men and six poor women at Guisborough. In his deed of foundation, probably in his own hand, dated 11 August 1563, he placed both institutions under the visitatorial power of the archbishop of York. 
Pursglove lived in his last years partly at Tideswell and partly at Dunston in Derbyshire, from which he made a number of further donations to his school and hospital at Guisborough, including a gift of Greek grammars, the works of Plutarch, Sallust, Cicero, Horace, Ovid, Juvenal, and Erasmus, and other books for the school library. He made his will on 31 March 1580, setting aside the huge sum of $40 to be distributed to the poor at his funeral. He left his plate, his half year's pension from Guisborough due at Lady day, and most of the rest of his possessions to various members of the Eyre family of Dunston, into which his sister Alice Pursglove had married. He died on 2 May 1580 and was buried in Tideswell church, where a fine brass of a bishop in eucharistic vestments (noteworthy as one of the last of its kind), together with a long verse inscription, marks his resting place. 


@@@@@


doc= 22905


Purton, William (1784-1825), schoolmaster and teacher of stenography, is of unknown parentage and education. At the time of his death, about Christmas 1825, he was married to Mary Gimler Purton and resided at Pleasant Row, Winchester Street, Pentonville, London. He was buried at Elim (Baptist) Chapel, Fetter Lane, Holborn. 
At his school near Pentonville, Purton taught to a few selected students a system of shorthand, possibly of his own invention, that, as later practised by two of those students and their own pupils, became one of seven systems used in parliament and the Supreme Court of Judicature in the nineteenth century. Purton's system, unmentioned in nineteenth-century histories or bibliographies of shorthand and unpublished until 1888, should perhaps be called 'the Purton system as improved by Oxford and Hodges' (Hodges, 26), after the two students who developed it for their own use in the law courts, Thomas Oxford and John George Hodges. Apparently Hodges never divulged the name of their teacher; his son, also John George Hodges, himself an adept practitioner of the Purton system in the law courts, gave credit to Alexander Tremaine Wright for 'extracting' this information from the elderly Thomas Oxford (Hodges, 25). 
On 16 October 1843 the elder John George Hodges, aged thirty-six, was sent to Dublin as a government shorthand writer during the repeal agitation, to record meetings of and speeches made by members of the Loyal National Repeal Association. He also recorded the trials of Daniel O'Connell, William Smith O'Brien, Thomas Francis Meagher, and John Mitchel. The accuracy of his transcribed notes was praised by both sides of the bench. The facility and accuracy with which John George Hodges senior employed the Purton system were also displayed by his son, who recorded the celebrated cases 'Small v. Attwood' and 'Swinfen v. Lord Chelmsford', as well as complicated cases involving patent infringements and the Metropolitan Board of Works. 


@@@@@


doc= 22906


Purver, Anthony (1702-1777), biblical translator and Quaker preacher, was the son of a farmer at Hurstbourne Tarrant, Hampshire. He was a promising pupil at the village school. While apprenticed to a shoemaker, he read 'Rusticus ad academicos' by the Quaker Samuel Fisher. Fisher's argument that scripture is 'corrupted, vitiated, altered and adulterated in all translations' (S. Fisher, 'Rusticus ad academicos', 1660, fol. A4'v'), contributed to Purver's belief 'that he was called and commanded' by the divine spirit to translate the scriptures (Coleridge, 717). At twenty he opened a school. Three or four years later he went to London. He became a Quaker, and preached at meetings in London, Essex, and elsewhere. John Wesley, who met him several times in 1739, described him as 'one of much experience in the ways of God' ('Works of John Wesley', 25.637). About 1739 he married Rachell Cotterel, mistress of a girls' boarding-school at Frenchay, Bristol. There he lived, taught, and was clerk to the meeting until returning to Hampshire in 1758. Besides his 'Bible', he published 'Youth's Delight' (1727), a popular verse broadside, 'Counsel to Friends' Children' (6th edn, 1785), and 'Poem to the Praise of God' (1748). 
Purver studied Hebrew during his apprenticeship, and also learnt Aramaic, Syriac, Greek, and Latin. He read voluminously in biblical criticism (including rabbinic commentary), in the earlier English translations and in literature. All this finds its way into his translation and the accompanying notes. He began the 'Old Testament' about 1733, often shutting himself up for days seeking inspiration for difficult passages. About 1742, when 'Ester', 'the Poem of Solomon' and some of the minor prophets were complete, the Bristol printer, Felix Farley, issued the work in parts as 'Opus in sacra Biblia elaboratum'. Dr John Fothergill recommended it in an advertisement in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1746), but the venture was unsuccessful and only a few numbers appeared. Wesley was much disappointed in his 'old friend's' work, finding 'the text flat and dead -- much altered indeed, but commonly for the worse -- and the notes merely critical, dull, and dry, without any unction, or spirit, or life' ('Works of John Wesley', 20.81-2). In 1763 the work, including important 'introductory remarks' and appendices criticizing the scholarship and English of the King James 'Bible', was complete. Fothergill paid Purver $1000 for the copyright and published it at his own expense as 'A new and literal translation of all the books of the Old and New Testament; with notes, critical and explanatory' (2 vols., 1764). 
In its renderings and its language, the 'Quaker's 'Bible'' sometimes anticipates later versions, but it was rarely appreciated. Not only was the language constantly unlike that of the King James 'Bible' but it was often decidedly colloquial. However, the 'Monthly Review' did note 'no small share of erudition. This is a work to which we should have thought very few individuals equal, however great and extensive their abilities; and we cannot help admiring the man who hath intrepidity enough to attempt it' ('Monthly Review', 1st ser., 32, 1765, 194). 
Purver died at Andover in July 1777, and is buried in the Quaker burial-ground there. 


@@@@@


doc= 22907


Purves, James (1734-1795), Universalist preacher, was born on 23 September 1734 at Blackadder, Identown (Edington), Berwickshire, the son of a shepherd who died in 1754. After only a quarter of a year at school he was taught writing and arithmetic by his parents. In 1756 he apprenticed himself to his uncle, a wheelwright at Duns. According to his own, now lost, account he was raised in the Church of Scotland. Then from reading the books of seceders he 'discovered that the revolution settlement was erroneous in doctrine and government'. In 1755 he joined a covenanting society at Chirnside connected with the minority Reformed Presbytery. The minority in 1753 had sided with the theory of universal atonement in James Fraser Brea's 'Treatise on Justifying Faith' (1749) and split off when the majority condemned it. In 1755 the minority presbytery itself divided when some members relaxed their loyalty to the Scottish covenants. The Chirnside society remained loyal. In spring 1756, after reading Isaac Watt's 'Dissertation on the Logos' (1726), Purves adopted an Arian position that Christ, with a pre-existent human soul, was first born of all creation. By 1763 he had achieved sufficient prominence for the society to send him to Coleraine, Ireland, to consult with Irish dissenters of similar doctrine. Then, six years later, on 27 July 1769, the society chose him by lot to become a preacher among them. The society sent him to Glasgow to gain competence in the biblical languages but he proved unable to disengage himself from secular affairs because of 'an increase in disastrous occurrences'. Purves later interpreted these disastrous occurrences as the start of the final half day of the apocalyptic three and one half days ('Revelation', 11: 11) which ended when the American War of Independence began. 
In the spring of 1771 the Universalist societies published an account of their faith. No copy survives, but it was denounced by other members of the minority Reformed Presbytery for following the Socinian doctrine of John Taylor of Norwich. The denunciation occasioned some correspondence between Purves and Alexander Fortune, and members of the Reformed Presbytery, and in 1778 Purves published the Arian side of the correspondence in his 'Observations on the Conduct of... the Reformed Presbytery'. 
In 1776 some members moved from the Merse to Edinburgh and, according to their minute book, 'formed a new society, with a member who was there before'. Having consulted with their friends in the Merse, they asked James Purves to join them, and on 15 November of that year invited him to take pastoral charge. He had special responsibility for administering the sacraments, but leading worship was shared with others who were inclined to do so, and who were encouraged to pray and give exhortation in public meetings. The society may have strayed from Westminster orthodoxy, but these Universalist Arian dissenters remained faithful to the covenanting tradition of the Reformed Presbytery for their original minute begins: 'The successors of the Remnant who testified against the corruption of the Revolution Constitution of the Church of Scotland as settled about the year 1689' (NA Scot., CH 15/1/1). 
The society consisted of eight or nine families, mainly tradesmen and craftsmen, who met in the Broughton area of the city. Purves had correspondence addressed to him in Broughton Loan and was described as a teacher. From 1777 he was living at Wright's Houses, Bruntsfield, Edinburgh. Between 1785 and 1787 he exchanged letters and books with the Unitarian Thomas Fyshe Palmer, who hoped to move Purves on from a pre-existent Arian christology to a fully humanitarian Unitarian (Socinian) one by lending him books by Nathaniel Lardner, Joseph Priestley, and Theophilus Lindsey. But neither Palmer nor Purves would move from their respective positions. Purves set out his views in 'Some Observations on Socinian Arguments' (1790), which on its title page bears the text from 'Colossians' 1: 17 'he is before all things, and by him all things consist'. 
On 21 June 1792, after the society had moved into the Barber's Hall, Todrig's Wynd, High Street, Edinburgh, they resolved to publish a 'Declaration of Religious Opinions of the Universalist Dissenters', written by Purves, in which they adopted the name Universalist dissenters. The 'Declaration''s christology accords with Purves's high Arianism. Christ the first created of God was born of a virgin, died on the cross for the sins of humankind, rose on the third day and is seated on the right hand of the Father, 'angels authority and powers, being made subject to him' (Purves, section 2.4). Humankind is in a state of rebellion but God's kingdom is universal and 'all things shall be finally reconciled and gathered together' (Purves, section 4.4). Copies were sent to friends in Dalkeith, Dunbar, Chirnside, and Dundee. 
Purves, according to a descendant who possessed copies of his works, was a prolific writer of some twenty titles, many of which he typeset himself and sold at his bookshop in St Patrick's Square on Edinburgh's south side. Several of these titles can no longer be traced. Among the lost works were two treatises on civil government, a Hebrew grammar, and 'Observations on the Visions of the Apostle John' (1789), where Purves predicted that Christ would manifest his priestly and kingly power about 1811. Among works which have survived is 'An humble attempt to investigate the scripture doctrine concerning the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit' (1784) which was reprinted by American Universalists in 1819. This upholds the doctrine of universal restoration and defends the Arian remodelling of the Trinity against Socinian Unitarianism. 
Purves was married three times: first to Isabel Blair about 1765, second, on her death, to Sarah Brown, about whom no details are known, and finally to Lilias Scott. For many years Purves suffered from asthma. He became seriously ill in the autumn of 1794 and died on 1 February 1795. He was buried in the old Calton cemetery, his remains being removed to its new site when Regent Road was built. His widow continued his book-selling business before emigrating to America. His daughter Elizabeth (1766-1839), by his first marriage, married Hamilton Dunn and this family remained associated with the Universalist society which in 1813 changed its name to Unitarian. In 1835 Purves's society became St Mark's Unitarian Church, Castle Terrace, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 22908


Purvey, John (c.1354-1414), Wycliffite heretic, is usually identified with the John Purvey of Lathbury, Buckinghamshire, who was permitted to enter all priestly ranks on 13 March 1377 or 1378 (Lincoln reg. 12, fol. 161); he may have been a member of the Buckinghamshire family of Purefoy. No direct contemporary evidence establishes his education, though it is possible (and has usually been assumed) that he gained his acquaintance with Wyclif's ideas in Oxford. Purvey's name appears with those of Nicholas Hereford, John Aston, William Swinderby, and John Parker in the mandate of 10 August 1387 issued by Henry Wakefield, bishop of Worcester, to prevent their preaching. A commission of 1388-9 apparently sent to all bishops, some copies of which are recorded in the patent rolls, ordered a search for heretical books by Purvey himself, by Hereford, Aston, and the late John Wyclif. 
Purvey, according to Knighton, about this time preached heresy in Bristol. The next firm record is of Archbishop Arundel's investigation of Purvey on seven heretical views between 28 February and 5 March 1401; on 6 March Purvey recanted at Paul's Cross in London. The articles follow the main outline of Wyclif's teaching on the eucharist, sacerdotal absolution after confession, the preaching obligations of the clergy, the invalidity of wrongful excommunication, the ineffectuality of papal law, including that of clerical celibacy, unless founded expressly in scripture, and proclaim the priesthood of all believers. The number and rank of the clerics and lay persons assembled for the trial and for the recantation suggest that Purvey was viewed as an important suspect. On 11 August 1401 he was admitted as rector of West Hythe in Kent, close to the archbishop's residence at Saltwood Castle; the living was vacant by October 1403. Immediately preceding the list of the six errors abjured by Purvey in March 1401, 'Fasciculi zizaniorum' lists eleven subdivided errors headed 'libelli Purvey Lollardi, collecti per reverendum magistrum fratrem Ricardum Lavynham Carmelitam' ('Fasciculi zizaniorum', 399). Their proximity with the errors of 1401 may not be significant, since some undoubtedly heretical views concerning clerical temporalities and the pope are not replicated in the charges before Arundel. 
Purvey's whereabouts, and his theological opinions, are then unknown for a further period of years; in 1407 William Thorpe stated that he 'schewith now himsilf to be neithir hoot ne coold' (Hudson, 363). Purvey, though not described as a local man, was named as one of the instigators of the Oldcastle rebellion in Derbyshire and Warwickshire. He was present at the confrontation between the king's forces and the rebels at St Giles's Field on 9 January 1414, evaded capture for a few days, but by 12 January had been arrested. He was held in Newgate prison until his death, apparently from natural causes, on 16 May of that year. By the time of his arrest Purvey was resident in London, and a list survives of the property that had been confiscated by the escheator from his residence following his imprisonment. It was valued at $12 18's'. 8died This list contains among other effects nineteen books; though the details given do not establish any as certainly Wycliffite in origin, they include biblical and patristic texts, canon law, and sermons. 
Knighton in his 'Chronicon' under 1382 described Purvey as the 'quartus haeresiarcha' ('fourth arch-heretic') following Wyclif, Hereford, and Aston, and claimed that Purvey lived in the same house as Wyclif (probably after the latter's retirement in 1381 to Lutterworth), and that he worked tirelessly to forward the master's views. Thomas Netter in his 'Doctrinale', written between 1421 and 1427, mentions Purvey a number of times. He quotes from a 'De compendiis scripturarum, paternarum doctrinarum et canonum', a copy of which he claims was taken from Purvey in prison; the book defended the right of all priests, laymen, and laywomen to preach, alleging support from canon law, Augustine, and Gregory. The second work, his 'Libellus de oratione', seems to have used the same method in regard to the length of prayers and the reason for them; this second is, however, slightly dubious, since it resembles in title and opinions a work elsewhere ascribed by Netter to William Taylor (correctly, to judge by parallel quotations given in the record of Taylor's 1423 trial before Archbishop Chichele). Netter's descriptions of Purvey as 'doctor eximius' ('excellent doctor'), 'glossator Wicleffi' ('commentator on Wyclif'), and 'librarius Lollardorum' ('librarian of the Lollards') encouraged extensive later speculation about Purvey's writing. Purvey is listed, along with William Swinderby, William Taylor, Sir John Oldcastle, and the Londoner John Claydon, as known to the Lollard suspect John Walcote, shepherd of Hasleton, Gloucestershire, when questioned in 1425. 
Nothing that can firmly be attributed to Purvey survives. John Bale lists nineteen works in all, most of whose titles were extracted by Bale from the 1401 and Lavenham's listings of Purvey's views in the 'Fasciculi zizaniorum' and from Netter. To this was added 'Commentarius in Apocalypsim', with the incipit of the work printed at Wittenberg in 1528 with a preface attributed to Luther; this was an abbreviated version of the 'Opus arduum', a work written in England between Christmas 1389 and Easter 1390 by an imprisoned Lollard, but there is no evidence before Bale to connect it with Purvey. In 1729 Daniel Waterland conjectured that Purvey was the writer of the so-called general prologue to the Wycliffite 'Bible' and, through the contents of that, deduced that Purvey had a hand in the entire translation; John Lewis, who published Waterland's suggestion without indication of its conjectural nature, associated Purvey particularly with the later, more idiomatic version. This attribution has been repeated as established fact without question almost to the present day. To Purvey, following this, was also assigned a large number of other English Wycliffite texts, again without medieval supporting evidence. 


@@@@@


doc= 22909


Puseley, Daniel (1814-1882), writer, was born at Bideford, Devon, on 9 February 1814, the son of Henry Puseley, maltster, and was educated at Bideford grammar school until the age of fifteen, when, having been left 'without parental protection and guidance' (Puseley, 'Faith, Hope, and Charity', 1863, 21), he took up a clerkship at a large wholesale establishment in London. For several years thereafter he attended evening classes at a literary and scientific institute near the General Post Office in order to supplement his elementary education. 
On 27 July 1844, after a period as a commercial traveller, Puseley married Mary Anne, daughter of John Darlington, a London builder, and in the same year he set up as a hosier and silk merchant in Gutter Lane. He was soon, however, 'compelled to close his shutters' (Puseley, 'Dependence or Independence', 16), finding that a successful business career was incompatible with literary ambition. His first book, a moralistic novella entitled 'Harry Mustifer' (1847), sold only twelve copies in its first year and Puseley thereafter interspersed creative projects (such as 'Five Dramas', 1854, a forlorn attempt to purge the English stage of foreign influence) with the compilation of solidly factual handbooks such as 'The Commercial Companion for the United Kingdom' (1858; 3rd edn, 1860), and 'The Traveller's Assistant' (1867). He also produced, often using the pseudonym Frank Foster and, later, An Old Author, a long succession of pamphlets on a wide range of topical themes and, encouraged by the success of his acquaintance Albert Smith, he established a reputation as a comic lecturer at the Royal Polytechnic Institution and elsewhere. By these means, Puseley contrived to build up a modest competence with which to support his growing family (he and his wife had four sons: Herbert John; Berkeley Edward, a journalist who assisted his father in some of his later work; Percy Daniel; and Sydney George). 
In 1854 Puseley travelled to Australia and New Zealand for his health, making a second trip in 1857. These journeys resulted both in his most interesting poem, a narrative of high society entitled 'The Wave of Life' (1857), and in his most commercially successful book, 'The Rise and Progress of Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand' (1857), which quickly went through five editions. In addition to the usual barrage of practical information, Puseley provided an opinionated account of his own reactions. He found New Zealand 'the finest colony in the world' (p. 232), but Australia he pronounced 'the most objectionable of all British dependencies' (p. 231) and he took especial exception to Melbourne ('a little hell upon earth'; p. 4). 
After his second return to England, Puseley's industry continued unabated, but his career as a lecturer was cut short by failing health and his attempts at fiction; 'Our Premier' (1867), for example, a would-be sensation novel, and the rambling 'All Round the World' (1876), met with scant success. In 1866 he lost a large part of his savings through injudicious investments, but efforts to procure a civil-list pension failed with the resignation of Lord Derby in 1868. He died on 18 January 1882 at 21 Rochester Road, Camden Town, London, where he had lived for many years and from which he had published much of his own work; he was buried in Highgate cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 
Puseley devoted much of his time to charitable causes and was a lifelong champion of education for the poor. His greatest practical achievement in this field occurred on 18 December 1868, when he co-ordinated a ragged schools festival in St James's Hall, at which 600 selected children were presented with prizes. Although Puseley's writings seldom rise above the level of hack work, he exemplifies, in his industry and independence, the virtues of self-help he so strenuously championed. 


@@@@@


doc= 22910


Pusey, Edward Bouverie (1800-1882), Church of England clergyman and theologian, was the second child of Philip Pusey (1746-1828), landowner, the youngest son of Jacob Bouverie, first Viscount Folkestone, who took the name Pusey when he inherited extensive property at Pusey, a small village in Berkshire, and Lady Lucy Sherard (1770-1858), the daughter of the earl of Harborough and widow of Sir Thomas Cave. Philip Pusey was his elder brother; their sister Charlotte married Richard Lynch Cotton. 
Pusey was born at Pusey House, Pusey, on 22 August 1800 and attended a preparatory school at Mitcham in Surrey run by a clergyman, Richard Roberts, who grounded him well in the classics. In 1812 he went to Eton College under 'Flogger' Keate. A shy, rather weakly boy, not much interested in sport though a good chess player, he made few close friends there. Then, after fifteen months with a private tutor, Edward Maltby, later bishop of Durham, in January 1819 he went up to Christ Church, Oxford, where he was tutored by Thomas Vowler Short (later bishop of St Asaph). He graduated with a first class in 1822, and in 1823 successfully competed for an Oriel fellowship, then one of the most coveted distinctions in the university. 
Aspiring to ordination, Pusey attended the lectures of Dr Charles Lloyd, regius professor of divinity and later bishop of Oxford, whom he described as 'a second father' to him. Lloyd, conscious of the disturbing developments in German biblical scholarship and theology, urged Pusey to learn the language and to study in Germany. Pusey responded willingly, as he was already aware of the threat of rationalism to the Christian faith through his attempts to counter the scepticism of Julian Hibbert, a friend from Eton. He spent the long vacation of 1825 and a whole year, 1826-7, in Germany at the universities of Berlin, Bonn, and Gottingen studying theology, most notably under Schleiermacher. Realizing that the 'Old Testament' was the most vulnerable area to attack, he also learned Hebrew, Arabic, and other cognate languages, with Freytag and Kosegarten. 
Already he showed the immense capacity for work which was characteristic of him throughout his life, studying from fourteen to sixteen hours a day. Soon after his return to England, in May 1828, he published his first book, 'An historical enquiry into the probable causes of the rationalist character lately predominant in the theology of Germany'. He was encouraged to do this by his German friends who were very critical of the recently published lectures by Hugh James Rose on the same subject. Pusey consequently wrote more sympathetically. This, coupled with his rather obscure style, led to his being widely misunderstood. Whereas Rose had attributed the condition of German theology to the lack of credal formularies and episcopal government which protected the English church, Pusey attributed it to what he confusingly called 'dead orthodoxism', the aridity of Lutheran scholasticism, a phenomenon which he also detected in the Church of England. He consulted Newman and produced a 'Second part' in 1830, defending himself against suspicions of rationalism. Dissatisfied with the work himself, he withdrew it from sale a few years later. This did not prevent charges of early liberalism being made from time to time in his later life, and in his will he directed that the book should never be reprinted. It did not, however, damage his prospects. 
On 1 June 1828 Pusey was made deacon, and the following November he was appointed by the prime minister, the duke of Wellington, regius professor of Hebrew at Oxford; to the chair was attached a Christ Church canonry, so Pusey had to be ordained to the priesthood. On 12 June 1828 he had married Maria Catharine Barker (1801-1839), the daughter of Raymond Barker of Fairford Park, with whom he had fallen in love at their first meeting ten years earlier. Neither father had approved of the match; Pusey's consequent unhappiness and frustration partly accounted for his burying himself in work. They had one son, Philip Edward (1830-1880), and three daughters: only his youngest daughter, Mary Amelia (Mrs Brine), survived him. His wife died of consumption, aged thirty-eight, on 26 May 1839. On 23 November 1828 he was ordained priest by Bishop Lloyd at Cuddesdon and on 9 December was installed canon of Christ Church. 
As Pusey understood it, his work was as much theological as linguistic. All cathedrals, indeed, had a responsibility for the education of those intending to be ordained, as he argued in his pamphlet 'Remarks on the Prospective and Past Benefits of Cathedral Institutions' (1833). The German system of clerical education provided a model which cathedrals could adopt. Meantime the two ancient universities were the only institutions for such education in England and Pusey intended to use his position to improve it. The university statutes envisaged only one lecture twice a week, but, with the help of a deputy, he provided three courses of lectures, three times a week. He treated the study of Hebrew as a religious subject and aimed to impart a full idiomatic knowledge so that students might 'enter more fully into the simple meaning of God's Word' ('DNB'). Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, who attended his lectures in 1845, said 'the whole atmosphere of [them] breathed the spirit of Germany to a degree' (E. G. W. Bill, 'University Reform', 1973, 252). In 1832 Pusey, together with his elder brother, Philip, and a friend, Dr Ellerton, founded the three Pusey and Ellerton Hebrew scholarships. For some years he gave board and lodging to students in his house so that they could study theology and, when his wife was ill, rented a house nearby for them. Later he accommodated non-graduates to help prepare them for ordination. He also founded a Theological Society, mostly for young fellows, which met in his lodgings, where papers were presented and discussed. He supported the establishment of theological colleges, giving, for example, $2500 towards the founding of Salisbury Theological College (1861). 
Pusey felt obliged to complete the catalogue of the oriental manuscripts in the Bodleian Library begun by his predecessor, Alexander Nicoll. The laborious task took him nearly six years. The only work he published in direct connection with his chair was 'Lectures on Daniel the Prophet' (1864). He chose the subject because 'disbelief in Daniel has become an axiom in the unbelieving critical school' (p. vi). It is usually dismissed as a monument of conservatism but his successor, Dr S. R. Driver, who was far from sharing Pusey's views, acknowledged it as 'extremely learned and thorough' (Butler, 'Pusey Rediscovered', 111). His 'Minor prophets, with a commentary, explanatory and practical and introduction to the several books', which appeared in parts between 1860 and 1877, was the only published part of a projected popular commentary on the whole 'Bible' planned by Pusey. 
Pusey's Hebrew scholarship was widely acknowledged and is also attested by his astute purchases of Hebrew manuscripts for the Bodleian, of which he was a curator. He was invited to take part in the revision of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible' in 1870 but, although he had himself made an abortive attempt at a revision of the 'Old Testament' on his return from Germany, he declined. 
Pusey occupied the chair of theology for over fifty years and faithfully fulfilled the duties of his office, but his name will always be associated with the Oxford Movement, the Catholic revival in the Church of England. His election to a fellowship at Oriel had brought him into close contact with John Keble and John Henry Newman who, together with Richard Hurrell Froude, were the real originators of the movement, but he had not immediately joined them. His other commitments, to his work on the catalogue of manuscripts, to his growing family (four children between 1829 and 1833), and a period of ill health diverted his energies. His political liberalism, too, had led him to support Peel and Catholic emancipation in 1829, which they had opposed. Initially he had wondered whether he 'could not best aid the plan by separate action with the same end' (Trench, 80). Eventually, however, he threw himself into the movement, to use his own words, 'as an effective means of bringing to the vivid consciousness of members of the Church of England, Catholic truths, taught of old within her, presupposed in her formularies, but unhappily overlaid or watered down in the meagre practical teaching of the 18th century' in order to realize the ideal God had set her, 'to represent in life and in doctrine the teaching of the undivided Church' ('University Sermons, 1859-72', 1872, v-vi). He agreed to write a tract on the value of fasting, which was published at the end of 1833 as 'Tract 18', on condition that his initials were attached to it. Since the earlier tracts were anonymous the unintended result was that his name became synonymous with Tractarianism and the movement was popularly known as Puseyism. As Newman acknowledged in his 'Apologia', 'he at once gave to us a position and a name'. This was due as much to his character as to his status. 'He had a vast influence in consequence of his deep religious seriousness, the munificence of his charities, his Professorship, his family connexions, and his easy relations with University authorities.... He was a man of large designs, he had a hopeful sanguine mind; he had no fear of others; he was haunted by no intellectual perplexities. ('Apologia', ed. M. Svagelic, 1967, 646)' Pusey's adherence to the movement changed the character of the 'Tracts'. They became weighty theological treatises, none more than his own. In 1835 he contributed a major study, 'Scriptural Views of Holy Baptism', which was published in three parts as 'Tracts' '67', '68', and '69'. In it he sought to demonstrate the biblical and patristic basis of the doctrine of baptismal regeneration. In 1839 he produced an enlarged edition of the first part, 'Tract 67', expanding it from 48 pages to 400, incorporating in it material from some very original lectures he had given on types and prophecies. He also wrote a tract, '81', on the other great sacrament, the eucharist, 'Testimony of writers of the later English church to the doctrine of the eucharistic sacrifice, with an historical account of the changes made in the liturgy as to the expression of that doctrine' (1837). Pusey wrote the historical account, although the catena of quotations was largely the work of Benjamin Harrison. The doctrine was widely forgotten in the Church of England and Pusey's exposition of it was much vaguer than his later teaching. 

'Tract 81' shows the importance Pusey attached to the Caroline divines as witnesses to the teaching of the Church of England. One of the great projects of the Oxford Movement was the 'Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology' (1841-63), which republished many of their works, but, according to Newman, neither he nor Pusey was 'warm' about it. Pusey, however, was the driving force behind the other great literary project, the 'Library of Fathers of the Holy Catholic Church, Anterior to the Division of East and West' (1838-85). This made available in translation the works of thirteen writers, mostly of the fourth century, notably Athanasius, Chrysostom, and Augustine. The burden of organizing the translators, revising their work, negotiating with the publishers, and raising subscriptions fell on Pusey. He provided the first volume, a revised translation of St Augustine's 'Confessions', with a preface on the need and value of patristic study. There were forty-eight volumes in all, the last ones appearing after his death. 
Pusey's position in Oxford made him the obvious spokesman and apologist for the Tractarians. In 1836 he wrote 'An Earnest Remonstrance', published as 'Tract 77', in response to an anonymous attack on their teaching on prayers for the dead. Three years later Richard Bagot, the bishop of Oxford, puzzled by the refusal of Pusey and the other Tractarians to subscribe to a memorial to the protestant martyrs, asked him to explain their attitude to the Reformation. This he did in an open 'Letter to the Bishop of Oxford' (1839). It was Pusey's most explicit exposition of his understanding of the Church of England as the 'via media', treading 'a broad and tangible line, not verging towards, or losing itself in Romanism', and 'distinct from the bye-ways of Ultra Protestantism' (4th edn, 1840, 22), a line which was moreover 'the 'old path' of the Primitive Church' (ibid.). In 1841 he defended Newman when he was attacked for trying, in 'Tract 90', to demonstrate that the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' were patent of a Catholic interpretation. He persuaded the bishop not to censure the tract and published another open letter, this time to his Etonian friend and fellow canon of Christ Church Dr R. W. Jelf, in which he claimed significantly that Newman's interpretation was not 'only 'an' admissible, but 'the' most legitimate interpretation of them' ('Letter to Jelf', 1841, 148f.). In the autumn Archbishop Howley sent for Pusey to ascertain the state of things in Oxford and, at the suggestion of his chaplain, Pusey wrote an open letter to the archbishop defending the movement against the criticisms levelled at it in many bishops' charges and urging that the church 'be what she is in theory and in her prayer book' ('Letter to the Archbishop', 3rd edn, 1842, 119). 
Pusey was becoming increasingly prominent in the leadership of the movement. Newman was on his Anglican 'deathbed' and retired to live at Littlemore in 1842, while Keble was resident in his country parish and no longer professor of poetry. In 1843 Pusey was attacked for his teaching in a university sermon, 'The Holy Eucharist: a Comfort to the Penitent'. Six doctors of divinity were appointed to examine it and, without his being allowed to speak in his own defence, he was condemned for preaching unspecified doctrines 'dissona et contraria' to those of the Church of England and suspended from preaching before the university for two years. Many sprang to Pusey's defence, including W. E. Gladstone and Lord Coleridge. Pusey took the advice of Newman, whom he feared would be further unsettled by the condemnation, and published the sermon with supporting quotations from the Caroline divines and notes from the fathers. 
Newman's submission to Rome on 9 October 1845, 'one of the deep sorrows of my life' (letter to 'The Guardian', 9 Oct 1865) as Pusey described it, left him exposed as the reluctant leader of the party. Almost immediately he had to face a storm of hostility over the consecration of St Saviour's, Leeds, on 28 October. He had built the church anonymously after the death of his wife to further the work of his friend W. F. Hook in evangelizing the city and as an act of penitence. Hook was fearful and did not even want him to come to Leeds, and the bishop of the diocese, C. J. Longley, raised repeated objections to its furnishings, even, most hurtfully to Pusey, to the inscription on the communion plate given by Pusey's daughter, Lucy, on her deathbed the previous year. Pusey wished the octave of the consecration to be kept as a kind of retreat, and there were sermons every day, mostly preached, though not all written, by him, which were subsequently published. The early death of Maria Pusey in 1839 after only eleven years of marriage was but one of the tragedies in Pusey's private life. Of their four children, one died in infancy, one, the only son, Philip, became deaf and lame after an illness in 1838, and a third, the eldest, Lucy, who was particularly close to him because she shared his hopes for the revival of the religious life, died, like her mother of consumption, in 1844. He outlived most of his closest friends, even some of the younger ones such as Bishop Forbes, news of whose death in 1875 caused him to go deaf, and Miss Sellon in 1876. Affectionate and sensitive by nature, he felt these losses deeply. He retired from society after his wife's death and became reclusive. He was also wounded by the misrepresentations and criticisms of his theological position and the questioning of his loyalty to the Church of England. He regarded his personal losses and the obloquy he endured as chastenings, or even punishment, by God for his sins. He lived the life of a penitent, rather like a desert father and, in his private papers, expressed self-loathing. He had practised systematic fasting from about 1835 but after 1839 he adopted other traditional ascetic practices, such as wearing hair cloth and using the discipline, the extent of which are revealed in the rule of life he showed Keble, whom he asked to be his confessor and director (Liddon, 3.104-8). Rumours of his own asceticism and the advice he gave to others, particularly nuns, both fascinated and repelled people. By some he was regarded as a saint, by others as unbalanced or worse. For those who agreed with his beliefs, his sufferings and reputation for holiness gave him great moral authority. 
For the rest of his long life Pusey acted as the stabilizing force of the Catholic revival, steadfast in his loyalty to the Church of England, quietly persistent in his teaching about the meaning of the sacraments and their value in practice, dogged in his fight against rationalism and liberalism. 
Pusey's personal spirituality increasingly centred on the eucharist. He urged more frequent celebrations, and himself, in middle age, used to celebrate every day in his own house at four in the morning. He was concerned, however, that increased communions should be accompanied by more disciplined lives. In 1853 he preached another university sermon, 'The Presence of Christ in the Holy Eucharist', 'to set forth to young men the greatness of the mystery, that they should be more careful to live as they should, to whom such gifts are vouchsafed' (Liddon, 3.424). The prosecution of Archdeacon Denison for preaching the same doctrine, though rather unwisely expressed, led Pusey to produce notes to his sermon setting out the patristic evidence. They constituted a volume of 724 pages, published in 1855. The following year he drew up a declaration in protest against a church court's condemnation of Denison, which was signed by most of the leading high-churchmen. In 1857 he wrote another volume of minute scholarship, 'The real presence of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, the doctrine of the English church', defending their teaching from the Anglican formularies. The prosecution of another friend, W. J. E. Bennett, vicar of Frome, for his eucharistic teaching, expressed in an open 'Letter to Pusey' in 1868, drew Pusey once more into the defence of eucharistic doctrine. He felt himself to be on trial as, except for two careless expressions which he persuaded Bennett to retract, the language of the letter was largely his. He even tried to get the Church Association to prosecute him instead. The court of arches acquitted Bennett in 1870 and its judgment was upheld by the privy council in 1872. In the interval Pusey published his last statement on the eucharist, a university sermon, 'This is my Body' (1871). He always claimed to have no interest in eucharistic ceremonial, although he invariably used a mixed chalice and even wore vestments in places where it was the custom, but when 'ritualist' priests were prosecuted under the 'Public Worship Regulation Act' of 1874 he came to their defence on the grounds that they were 'setting before the eyes', giving outward expression to what he believed. It was in response to the bishops' first attempt to restrain the ritualists that he declared that 'if it should be decided by competent authority, that either the real Objective Presence, or the Eucharistic Sacrifice, or the worship of Christ there present... were contrary to the doctrine held by the Church of England, I would resign my office. (E. B. Pusey, 'Will ye also go away', 1867, 28, 'University Sermons, 1864-1879', 1880)' 

Pusey's name will always be associated with the revival of auricular confession: he became a kind of confessor extraordinary to the Church of England. In a letter to 'The Times' on 13 November 1866 he said, 'I have been applied to to receive confessions from persons in every rank, of every age, old as well as young, in every profession, even those which you would think least accessible to it -- army, navy, medicine, law'. His first university sermon after his suspension, in 1846, was on the spiritual and practical value of confession, 'The Entire Absolution of the Penitent'. He followed it up with a second sermon, defending his interpretation of the Anglican formularies which had been questioned, and two days later made his own first confession to Keble. In 1850, having been criticized for hearing confessions outside his home diocese, he defended his practice in an open letter to W. U. Richards, 'The Church of England Leaves her Children Free to whom to Open their Griefs'. He was also criticized for hearing confessions of young persons without parental knowledge and consent. For this and other practices which, it was alleged, 'tended to the spread of Romanism amongst us' (Liddon, 3.302), his own bishop, Samuel Wilberforce, secretly inhibited him from preaching in the diocese of Oxford. The unwise petition of 483 clergymen to convocation for the 'licensing of qualified confessors' in 1873 roused a furore. Pusey, T. T. Carter, and one or two others drafted a 'Declaration on Confession and Absolution, as Set Forth by the Church of England', a concise and careful statement of their understanding. In 1878 he published an edition of a French 'Manual for Confessors', by the Abbe Gaume, adapted for the use of Anglicans, with a lengthy historical and apologetic preface. Later that year the second Lambeth conference passed a resolution which appeared to condemn detailed confessions and the practice of habitual confession. Pusey responded by publishing a letter to the archbishop, 'Habitual Confession not Discouraged by the Resolution Accepted by the Lambeth Conference', minimizing the resolution and asking whether he should consider himself censured by the resolution. 
Pusey first began thinking about the revival of the religious life in 1834, partly for practical reasons (for evangelism and for relief and educational work among the poor) and partly for spiritual reasons (to meet the desire for a more devout life on the part of some who might otherwise have become Roman Catholics). He collected information about the rules, work, devotions, and discipline of Roman Catholic communities, and even visited several convents in Ireland in 1841. Independently of him a group of laymen led by Lord John Manners decided to establish a sisterhood in memory of the poet Southey, and a house was opened in Park Village, London, on 26 March 1845. The external work was under the direction of the parish priest, William Dodsworth, but Pusey was the spiritual superintendent, and in fact had to take on more and more responsibility for its direction and finances. A similar experiment was started in 1848 in Plymouth by Priscilla Lydia Sellon, and after a few years the two communities joined together to form the Society of the Most Holy Trinity. Pusey had no official connection with the society, although he became adviser to, and intimate friend as well as spiritual director of, Miss Sellon. He also heard the confessions of many of the sisters and was a great benefactor of the community. He gave most of the money he inherited from his mother in 1858 towards the building of a priory for the sisters and a convalescent hospital at Ascot. He often spent part of the long vacation there with Miss Sellon and went abroad with her on more than one occasion. Their relationship caused much gossip and her brother eventually published a formal denial of any engagement between them. In 1841 Pusey had received the vows of Marian Rebecca Hughes, who eventually started the Society of the Holy and Undivided Trinity in Oxford some ten years later, after what she called 'a sort of novitiate', in Pusey's house in Christ Church. He also influenced another early community, the Sisters of Bethany, through its founder and first superior, Ethel Benett, who was one of his penitents. Pusey had hoped to establish a college of celibate priests living under a rule at St Saviour's, Leeds, but this ambition was never realized. Father Ignatius (Joseph Leycester Lyne) claimed the support of Pusey in reviving the Benedictine life in the Church of England but, although Pusey initially encouraged him, he had little to do with his later experiments. Pusey presided at the first meeting which led to the foundation of the Cowley Fathers, the Society of St John the Evangelist, in 1866, but his influence on the community was only indirect, through Father Benson, the first superior, who owed much to him both intellectually and spiritually. 
Pusey must also be regarded as one of the leading ecumenists of the nineteenth century. He early appreciated that unity was of the essence to the church and that reunion involved not only the search for truth but also prayer and penitence and the pursuit of holiness. In 1844 he published the first of a series of Roman Catholic devotional books mostly by the French affective writers Jean Baptiste Avrillon and Jean Joseph Surin, adapted for use in the Church of England, in order to encourage and deepen holiness of life. He was much criticized for the project, although there were precedents for such adaptations. He justified it on the grounds that 'whatever the Holy Spirit has anywhere given to the Church, He has given to the whole Church. It belongs to us as a portion of that Church' (J. B. Avrillon, 'Lent', 2nd edn, 1844, xiii). 
Newman's secession to the Roman Catholic church was a crushing blow to Pusey, but within a few days he published his prophetic view that it might help to bring about reunion between Roman Catholics and Anglicans: 'If anything could open their eyes as to what is good in us, or soften in us any wrong prejudices against them, it would be the presence of such an one, nurtured and grown to such ripeness in our Church and now removed to theirs. (Liddon, 2.461)' Henceforth he adopted a neutral position towards the Roman Catholic church. In 1850, in the face of mounting hostility towards Rome in the wake of further defections over the Gorham judgment and rumours of the establishment of a Roman hierarchy in England, he resolutely resisted the attempts of some in the Catholic movement to make any formal anti-Roman declaration to defend themselves against the accusation of being a fifth column. He spoke powerfully at meetings of the Church Unions in both Bristol and London and carried the day. 
In 1865, stung by a taunt of Manning and perhaps stimulated by a reunion with Newman and Keble at Keble's vicarage in Hursley, Pusey published what was to be the first part of an 'Eirenicon', an open 'Letter to Keble'. There were two further parts, in the form of 'Letters to Newman', published in 1869 and 1870, on the eve of the meeting of the first Vatican Council. Pusey was motivated by the belief that the two communions could be reconciled by mutual explanations of their formularies. From the Anglican side, he was convinced they were 'kept apart much more by that vast practical system which lies beyond the letter of the Council of Trent, things which are taught with quasi-authority in the Roman Church, than by what is actually defined' ('Eirenicon', 1, 1865, 98). In the 'Letter to Keble' he set out the difficulties of Anglicans over the cult of the Virgin Mary, particularly the doctrine of the immaculate conception, and over the position of the papacy. The fact that he did not make his purpose clear led to Newman's accusing him of 'discharging his olive branch as if from a catapult' ('Letter to Pusey', 1866, 9). 
Pusey also tried to explain the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' which, he admitted, 'made negative statements to show against what she [the Church of England] protested, but set down no positive statement to explain what on the same subjects she accepted' ('Eirenicon', 1, 1865, 267). First, in 1865, he reprinted Newman's 'Tract 90' together with a historical preface by himself, and an essay by Keble, which had only been privately circulated earlier, 'Catholic Subscription to the 39 Articles'. All through 1867 he worked closely with his friend Alexander Forbes, bishop of Brechin, on a lengthy volume entitled 'Explanation of the 39 Articles'. Although it was published under Forbes's name alone in 1867, parts of it are by Pusey. 
Spurred on by rumours of an imminent council, Pusey went to France in the autumn and again in the winter of 1865 to meet bishops and theologians, to get a hearing with 'the non-extreme party' as he put it. He was greatly encouraged, particularly by the response of the archbishop of Paris, Darboy, and the bishop of Orleans, Dupanloup. Both offered to lay any propositions he might make before the council. Pusey and Forbes also entered into a correspondence with a Belgian Jesuit, Victor De Buck, who suggested that Forbes should go in person to the council with Pusey as his theologian. Pusey was cautious. He preferred his own idea of written propositions and actually drafted some in Latin which he sent to Newman for comment. In the end, no propositions were submitted. The climate of opinion at Rome became increasingly unfavourable, and any interest in the question of reunion was overwhelmed by the mounting pressure to define the infallibility of the pope. The definition crushed his hopes. 'I have done what I could', he told Newman, 'and now have done with controversy and 'Eirenica'' (Liddon, 4.193). 
Pusey was not solely concerned with the possibility of reunion with Rome, although he came to think of it as a priority. He had, in fact, originally looked to Orthodoxy. He withdrew his initial support for the proposal in 1841 to establish a bishopric in Jerusalem for Anglicans and Lutherans when he discovered that Anglican and Lutheran missionaries were proselytizing among the Orthodox. He joined the Eastern Church Association at its foundation in 1864 and had discussions with various Orthodox dignitaries when they visited England. In 1867 he was largely responsible for altering the draft of a memorial on reunion, which was to be presented to the First Lambeth conference, so that it commended attempts to approach both the Orthodox and Roman Catholics. However, 1870 saw the dashing of his hopes for reunion with the Orthodox as well as with the Roman Catholics. Conversation with a visiting bishop, Archbishop Lycurgos of Syria and Temos, convinced him that the filioque controversy was insoluble. He subsequently elaborated his views in a long historical essay in the form of a letter to H. P. Liddon, 'On the Clause 'and the Son'', in 1876. He was convinced that the Orthodox view that it involves heresy was 'invincible prejudice', although he was willing that the Western church should anathematize that heresy so long as it had the right to retain the clause in the creed. Dr Dollinger, the leader of the Old Catholics, claimed that 'the mischief' done by Dr Pusey in the line which he took on the filioque was one of the reasons for there being no third Bonn conference on reunion between Anglicans, Orthodox, and Old Catholics. Pusey, convinced that he was being eirenic, characteristically ended his essay hopefully, speaking of it as his 'last contribution to a future which I shall not see' ('On the Clause', 1876, 181). 
Pusey had little to do with protestantism, although he was always charitable in his dealings with individual protestants. In the preface to the volume 'Essays on the Reunion of Christendom' edited by F. G. Lee in 1867, however, he wrote against a proposal for reunion with the Lutherans in Scandinavia on the grounds that they had a 'radically different' doctrine of the fall and redemption, were 'in error' as regards the eucharist, and that for them to receive Episcopal consecration or ordination would only be 'a concession to our supposed prejudices'. With Lord Ashley (later Shaftesbury), 'a Protestant of the Protestants' (Hodder, 325), he had a fluctuating relationship. They were cousins and Christ Church contemporaries, disagreed over the Jerusalem bishopric and other religious issues, but were reconciled in 1864 in opposition to 'neology'. After Pusey's death Shaftesbury wrote that, despite their disagreements, 'I... reverenced his profound piety' (ibid., 735). 
Another of Pusey's lifelong interests was his fight against rationalism and secularism, liberalism as he and Newman called it, or the 'strong tide of half-belief, misbelief, unbelief, which so largely occupied every sort of literature' as he once characterized it in a sermon (Liddon, 4.77). The experience of failing to win back to Christianity his sceptical Eton friend Julian Hibbert haunted him. He referred to it at the last meeting which he attended of the governing body of Christ Church in 1882. His opposition to Dr Hampden's being made regius professor of divinity in 1836 was motivated by his fear of rationalism, 'the assumption that uncontrolled human reason in its present degraded form is the primary interpreter of God's Word' (ibid., 1.373). When a royal commission revealed its plans for the reform of Oxford University in 1852, Pusey was foremost in defending it as a place of moral and religious education rather than as 'a forcing house for intellect'. His lengthy evidence, informed by his first-hand knowledge of university education in Germany on which the commissioners' proposals were modelled, was the largest contribution to the volume produced by the university authorities in opposition to them. He backed it up in 1854 by a pamphlet entitled 'Collegiate and Professorial Teaching and Discipline'. When, in spite of the opposition, an act reforming the university on the basis of the commission's report was passed, Pusey was elected to the new hebdomadal council and proved a hardworking and effective member. His influence softened the impact of the reforms, slowing down the process of change so that the ethos of the university remained predominantly Anglican in spite of the abolition of subscription to the articles and the admission of nonconformists. 
One of the most influential liberals was Benjamin Jowett, the master of Balliol and regius professor of Greek. He was one of the contributors to 'Essays and Reviews', a volume published in 1860 which became a 'cause celebre' for its perceived heterodoxy. Pusey opposed a very reasonable proposal to increase Jowett's salary on the grounds that it would express the university's approval of his theological views. He even went to the lengths of prosecuting him for those views before the court of the vice-chancellor of the university, although he eventually had to drop the case as there was doubt about the court's jurisdiction. The attempt outraged the liberals, and Pusey's subsequent support for increasing the endowment of the Greek chair in a different way alienated some of his friends. 
Meanwhile two other contributors to 'Essays and Reviews' had been prosecuted for heresy in the church courts. In 1864, however, the judicial committee of the privy council, the then final court of appeal, reversed the lower court judgment and ruled their statements were not contrary to the formularies of the Church of England. Pusey was prominent in trying to neutralize the effects of this. He was one of a group that drew up a declaration on the inspiration of scripture which was eventually signed by 11,000 clergymen. He published a pamphlet, 'Case as to the Legal Force of the Judgment of the Privy Council' (1864), and preached a series of powerful university sermons countering the essayists' views on the atonement, prophecy, everlasting punishment, and the ground of faith. His lectures on 'Daniel' also come from this period. 
In 1869 an attempt was made to drop the use of the Athanasian creed in accordance with the rubrics of the 'Book of Common Prayer', largely because of the misunderstanding of the damnatory clauses. Much of Pusey's correspondence, both public and private, over the next few years was occupied in agitating against this attempt and in defending and explaining the creed. He also delivered a fine university sermon in Advent 1872, 'The Responsibility of the Intellect in Matters of Faith', expounding its teaching. His public threat to retire from his teaching office if the use or the wording of the creed were altered led to the abandonment of the project, although he agreed to the publication of an explanatory note and, indeed, suggested various versions of it. A few years later his views on everlasting punishment were attacked by Dr Farrar in a series of sermons in Westminster Abbey, subsequently published in 1887 under the title 'Eternal Hope'. After a delay of two years, largely due to his prostration after the death of his only son, Philip, Pusey answered this in a book which was very influential at the time: 'What is of Faith as to Everlasting Punishment?'

Pusey was rigid in his stance on doctrinal orthodoxy and very conservative in biblical criticism, but he encouraged the introduction of natural science into the university and supported the setting up of the University Museum. In a paper to the church congress in Norwich in 1865, he tried to reconcile the supposed antagonism between the 'Bible' and the physical sciences, claiming that there was no need to fear scientific research and asserting that 'the right interpretation of God's Word will never be found in contradiction to the right interpretation of His works' (Liddon, 4.80). In his penultimate sermon to the university in 1878, 'Unscience, not Science Adverse to Faith', which had to be read by his disciple and biographer H. P. Liddon, he reaffirmed his view that Christianity need have no fear of true science. He even allowed a place for evolutionary theories. 'Theology does not hold them excluded by 'Holy Scripture', so that they spare the soul of man' (ibid., 334). 
The list of Pusey's published writings occupies over forty pages in an appendix to Liddon's biography. Most are works occasioned by some controversy, some, such as the incomplete 'The Royal Supremacy not an Arbitrary Authority' (1850) and 'The Councils of the Church' (1857), so substantial as to be works of reference. The most widely read were his collections of sermons, nine in all. He preached not only in the university and cathedral but also in London and Bristol, and places where he holidayed. He was no orator. He spoke 'in a low, deep, rather monotonous voice, which in his later years was thick and husky'. His style was crabbed and quaint, his sentences long and involved, full of neologisms and archaic words. His sermons were packed with references to the fathers and Anglican divines, but he delivered them with intense earnestness 'as from a man inhabiting his message', and conveyed an 'overwhelming impression of personal saintliness'. He preached ecstatically on the joys of heaven and the union of God and man, but he was also outspoken on the social evils of the day and the hypocrisy of the rich. He taught a very practical form of holiness, especially to the country people of Pusey, 'in short pithy sayings which stuck in their minds'. At the end of his weighty university sermons, his manner would change: 'He would lift his eyes from his manuscript to the Undergraduates' Gallery, and, addressing us as 'My Sons' would give us a quarter of an hour of directly personal appeal; searching the hearts' secrets, urging repentance, and exhorting to a way of life more consistent with our Divine vocation. (Russell, 97, 170f.)' 

Pusey would never sit for his portrait or allow a photograph to be taken of him, probably because he had refused his wife's request but also out of humility. He told Newman it was 'utterly unfitting that any likeness should be taken of me, who have so sorely injured the likeness of God in me' ('The Letters and Diaries of John Henry Newman', ed. C. S. Dessain and others, 31 vols., 11-31, 1961-77, 11.36). After his death a death mask was taken. George Richmond sculpted a bust of him, and also painted a portrait, as did Rosa Corder. The personal feature most often remarked on was 'his gentle winning smile'. Pusey died at The Hermitage, Ascot Priory, Berkshire, on 16 September 1882, and was buried, in the same grave as his wife and two eldest daughters, at Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, on St Matthew's day, 21 September. After his death his friends purchased his theological library and endowed the Dr Pusey Memorial Library (the 'Puseum'), later Pusey House, St Giles', Oxford, both a library and a 'house of sacred learning', providing pastoral care and theological instruction to members of the university. Pusey Street, Pusey Lane, and Pusey Place, Oxford, were later named after him. 
Pusey devoted his life to the recovery and reaffirmation of the Catholic inheritance of the Church of England. To this end he threw in his lot with the Oxford Movement, seeing himself as one strand in the 'triple-cord', together with Newman and Keble. When Newman seceded to Rome he kept the movement on a steady course, in spite of the defections to Rome. Frederick Oakeley, one of the converts, described him as the 'St Barnabas of the movement' ('Historical Notes', 1865, 49). His role was to reconcile and explain, which he did with singular reasonableness and charity. His last public intervention in controversy, the publication of the pamphlet 'Unlaw in Judgements of the Judicial Committee and its Remedies' (1881), was a plea for peace in the church and the reform of the court of appeal. Pusey was a man of great learning and patient scholarship, so that it was appropriate that his library was preserved as his memorial in Pusey House. He was also a man of profound spirituality, the 'doctor mysticus' of the Tractarians, as Brilioth called him ('The Anglican Revival', 1925, 296). This is apparent in his 'Spiritual Letters' and published prayers, but above all in his sermons, where his theology and scholarship, his personal sufferings and wrestlings in prayer, his eucharistic devotion and love of God come together. 


@@@@@


doc= 22911


Pusey, Philip (1799-1855), agriculturist, was born at Pusey, Berkshire, on 25 June 1799, the eldest of the three sons of Philip Bouverie Pusey (1724-1828) and his wife, Lucy (1772-1858), daughter of Robert Sherard, fourth earl of Harborough, and widow of Sir Thomas Cave. His father was the youngest son of Jacob Bouverie, first Viscount Folkestone, whose sister married the last male member of the Pusey family; the Pusey sisters bequeathed the Pusey estates to their brother's nephew by marriage, Philip Bouverie, on condition that Bouverie took the name of Pusey, which he did in 1784, inheriting the estates of some 5000 acres in Berkshire in 1789. Philip Pusey's next brother was Edward Bouverie Pusey, and a sister, Charlotte, married Richard Lynch Cotton, provost of Worcester College, Oxford. Philip was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford (where he matriculated in 1817, though he left without taking a degree), becoming great friends with Henry John George Herbert, Lord Porchester and later third earl of Carnarvon, to whose sister Lady Emily Herbert he became engaged in 1818. The marriage took place on 4 October 1822, no doubt postponed because of the youth of the couple, and in the interval Pusey went on tour with Porchester, both tourists being captured by rebel guerrillas near Montserrat in Catalonia, who temporarily mistook them for constitutionalists or soldiers in the army of the Cortes. Pusey and his wife settled for six years in Rome, at the Palazzo Aldobrandini, and became friendly with Chevalier Christian Bunsen (later German ambassador in London). In memory of his time in Rome, Pusey presented a pedestal for the font in the German chapel at Rome, with groups in relief by Thorwaldsen. 
In 1828 Pusey inherited the family estate and at once began to build a reputation as a progressive and practical farmer, taking the management of the home farm of between 300 and 400 acres into his own hands. The rise in reputation was meteoric, and in 1830 he was elected FRS. The development of his farming was more measured, and it was not until the late 1840s that he laid out the water meadows at the Faringdon farm which secured him a permanent place in agricultural history through the detailed and laudatory notice by James Caird in 'English Agriculture in 1850 and 1851' (1852). Pusey's fully developed farming system, hinging on the lush, and early, feed furnished by the water meadows in order to support a very large flock of ewes and early-maturing lambs, was similar to the Hampshire and Wiltshire sheep-and-barley farming with water meadows (somewhat oddly, Pusey apparently brought in experts from Devon to level his fields and construct the irrigation works), and the system was notable for close attention to detail rather than for radical innovation. His own farm had a 'fine dry easy-working soil... excellent corn and turnip land' (Caird, 107-8), and was naturally well-drained. Pusey kept himself fully informed of all the latest developments in agriculture, however, and was an early enthusiast for the advantages of field drainage using the recently invented earthenware drainpipes. Convinced that the future prosperity and efficiency of agriculture depended on effective dissemination of information on good farming practice and reliable developments in technology, he played a prominent part in the formation in 1838 of what became, from 1840, the Royal Agricultural Society of England. He was a member of the original committee of management, and chairman of the committee for establishing a journal for the diffusion of agricultural information. He was thus the first editor of the 'Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society of England', until 1854, and contributed forty-seven articles to the 'Journal' on such subjects as drainage, fertilizers, the breeding and feeding of sheep, water meadows, and agricultural machinery, as well as on surveys of the state of agriculture and the progress of agricultural knowledge. His contributions were informed by practical experience: the first trial of Cyrus Hall McCormick's reaping machine, for instance, was held on his farm in August 1851. He was president of the society in 1840-41, and was again elected president in 1853. He was unable to attend the annual meeting and show at Lincoln in 1854 because of his wife's last illness; she died on 13 November 1854, only eight months before her husband. 
An obituary of Pusey in 1855 justly noted that 'by a rare union of endowments he did much to win for agriculture a worthy place among the intellectual pursuits of the present day' (Acland, 608). By virtue of his social and political position he was also well placed to become one of the leading agricultural authorities in parliament. Already in 1828 he had published two political pamphlets on public finance, and in 1830 he was elected as MP for the Treasury borough of Rye, but was unseated on petition. Later in 1830 he was elected as one of the two members for Chippenham, but he lost that seat in the general election of April 1831, whereupon he migrated to Cashel. In 1832 he was an unsuccessful candidate for one of the two Berkshire county seats; he became one of the Berkshire MPs in 1835, and continued to be one until the 1852 election, when he withdrew after his re-election was opposed by George Henry Vansittart, an ultra-protestant protectionist; Pusey recorded, 'I hear that, among electioneering tricks, some call me a Puseyite. I am no more than Lord Shaftesbury is; but I will not consent to find fault with my brother in public'. 
As an MP Pusey spoke sparingly, but he was active on committees concerned with agriculture and in the 1840s was an adviser on agricultural matters to Peel and Gladstone, with whom he had a close political relationship. He provided Gladstone with a long memorandum in the early 1840s containing a programme of what needed to be done for agriculture (Spring, 140), and he stayed at Drayton in 1844 to talk to Peel's tenantry about scientific farming. In February 1846 Peel wrote to Pusey, 'I know of no one who has done more than yourself to enable the Country to enter into successful competition with other Countries in respect to agricultural produce' (ibid., 140). Pusey, however, who had come to the conclusion that the corn laws could not be retained, broadly on Caird's grounds that high farming was the best substitute for protection, voted against repeal on the first reading later that month, in deference to the strong feelings of his county constituents. He then absented himself from parliament so as not to obstruct Peel's policy -- conduct which caused Peel to take a more jaundiced view of his character, noting, 'Mr Pusey's letter is a good specimen of an agricultural leader -- I never saw such an avowal under a Senator's own handwriting' (Gash, 614). 
Pusey's parliamentary services to agricultural interests centred on his conviction that the productivity, and hence the international competitiveness, of British farming could be vastly improved by more intensive capital investment, especially in field drainage, and that investment was being significantly held back by the legal inability of many of the larger landowners to find the money. This was because strict settlements, which governed the estates of most of the aristocracy and gentry, normally prevented the owner for the time being, or the life tenant, from mortgaging the family estate in order to invest in its improvement. Accordingly Pusey's chief aim was to obtain legislation that would enable these 'limited owners' to borrow in order to invest in improvements, and his efforts became the origin of a whole strand of Victorian land-law reforms designed to raise the economic efficiency of land ownership without undermining or destroying its social and family structure. His direct legislative achievement was modest. In 1840 he piloted a bill 'to enable Owners of Settled Estates to defray the Expenses of draining the same', which became 3 and 4 Vict. c. 55, known as 'Pusey's Act', which was very little used because it required resort to the great delays and expense of chancery. As he later explained, he regarded his Act as tactical rather than practical; its scope was restricted to drainage, to the exclusion of other types of investment: 'because of the extreme difficulty of carrying it in the House of Commons I had to be content with just the principle, for it was so much guarded as to make it too expensive for persons to use' ('Select committee... entailed estates', 12.1372). The crucial point was that Pusey had carried onto the statute book the principle of overruling family settlements in the interests of encouraging borrowing to make productive investments; thereafter other hands devised less costly and more efficient administrative machinery for the practical application of this principle. 
Pusey soon extended his concern about the adequacy of the supply of capital to agriculture so as to embrace tenant farmers as well as landowners, arguing that tenants would not invest in the latest developments in farming techniques, such as the use of artificial fertilizers or feeding stuffs, unless they could be certain of reaping the full returns on their outlays. Thus was initiated the campaign to provide outgoing tenants with compensation for unexhausted improvements, a concept which Pusey called 'tenant right', much to the alarm of many landowners, who resented the interference with their property rights and anticipated the later cry of 'tenant right' becoming 'landlord wrong'. For this reason he achieved even less on this front, obtaining a select committee on agricultural customs in 1848, which he chaired, but being humiliated by having his chairman's conclusions and recommendations rejected by his committee in favour of the less radical version proposed by Edward Pleydell-Bouverie; this roundly repudiated any idea of compelling landlords to compensate their tenants and relied instead simply on voluntary agreements. Bills did pass the Commons in 1849 and 1850, but were rejected by the Lords: there the matter was left, until the first 'Agricultural Holdings Act' was passed in 1875 (itself a largely ineffectual measure). Nevertheless, as Disraeli observed when moving the second reading of the 1875 bill, 'Mr Pusey was the first person to introduce into this House the term 'tenant rights'' ('DNB'). 
Pusey's friend Bunsen called him 'a most unique union of a practical Englishman and an intellectual German, so that when speaking in one capacity one might think he had lost sight of the other' (Bunsen, 1.522). Pusey was that rare being, a country gentleman who understood ideas and mingled with the leading thinkers of the time. He breakfasted with Samuel Rogers and Monckton Milnes, and he entertained Lord Spencer, Sir Robert Peel, Gladstone, Carlyle, Whewell, Grote, Galley Knight, Bishop Wilberforce, and Lord Stanhope. In 1840 he became a member of the original committee of the London Library, and in 1851 he was chairman of the agricultural implement section of the Great Exhibition; he brought 500 of his labourers to London to see the exhibition, a visit commemorated by the presentation to him of a silver snuffbox. Thereafter in almost every cottage on the Pusey estate there hung an engraving of Pusey's portrait with a picture of the snuffbox underneath. Many of these cottages had been improved or rebuilt, to designs by the architect George Edmund Street; and as a model landlord Pusey provided his labourers with allotments, and organized works to keep them in constant employ. He was fond of sport, and was one of the best whips in England, once driving a four-in-hand over the Alps. In 1834 he wrote the hymn 'Lord of Our Life, and God of Our Salvation', which referred to the contemporary threats to the Church of England both from within and without. 
Pusey and his wife Emily had three children: an only son, Sidney Edward Bouverie-Pusey (1839-1911), who succeeded to the family estate, and two daughters; the elder, Edith Lucy, died unmarried in 1904, whereas the second daughter, Clara, married Francis Charteris Fletcher in 1862, and their son, Philip Francis Bouverie-Pusey (whose name was changed from Fletcher), inherited the Pusey estate when her brother died in 1911 without children. After the death of his wife in 1854 Philip Pusey went to live with his brother at Christ Church, Oxford, and within a week he was paralysed by a stroke; after a second stroke he died there on 9 July 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 22912


Putta (d. c.688), bishop, appears as the first bishop in the Anglo-Saxon episcopal lists for Hereford. It is uncertain whether the see serving the Anglo-Saxons west of the Severn (the kingdom of the Magonsaete) was already at Hereford in Putta's day; Lidebiri (either Ledbury or Lydbury North) is mentioned as a former site by Gilbert Foliot (died 1187), bishop of Hereford. This western Putta should not be identified with Putta, bishop of Rochester, who, according to Bede, resigned in 676 and found refuge with Seaxwulf, bishop of Lichfield, as a peripatetic music teacher. It must be the western Putta, on his first known appearance, who attests as 'Putta gratia Dei episcopus' in an authentic charter, to be dated to 680, in the Bath cartulary ('AS chart.', S 1167). Here he attests alongside Bosel, bishop of Worcester, and together with their spiritual and temporal overlords, Theodore, archbishop of Canterbury, and AEthelred, king of the Mercians. Putta's see, like Bosel's, was then a very recent creation by Theodore, who had divided up Seaxwulf's greater Mercian diocese after the Synod of Hertford (672 or 673) and probably by 679. Bosel and Putta head the Anglo-Saxon episcopal lists for their respective sees 'after Seaxwulf'; the theory that Putta's name is an interpolation inspired by Bede's account of Putta of Rochester is possible but unnecessary. The next bishop in the 'Hereford'list, Tyrhtil ('fl'. 688?- 'c'.709), succeeded Putta in 688, according to John of Worcester. Putta's fourth successor, Bishop Cuthbert (736-40), composed an epitaph on a tomb which he constructed for his three immediate predecessors, but Putta's name is absent from the epitaph. The inference should probably be, not that Putta was never bishop, but that he had been buried at another site. His see may have moved more than once before reaching Hereford, and perhaps had not got there even in Cuthbert's time. 


@@@@@


doc= 22913


Puttenham, George (1529-1590/91), writer and literary critic, was the second son of Robert Puttenham of Sherfield upon Lodon, Hampshire, and his wife, Margery, daughter of Sir Richard Elyot and sister of Sir Thomas Elyot. He matriculated from Christ's College, Cambridge, in November 1546, aged seventeen, but took no degree. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 11 August 1556. In late 1559 or early 1560 Puttenham married Elizabeth, Lady Windsor (1520-1588/9). She was the daughter and coheir of Peter Cowdray of Herriard, Hampshire, and widow of Richard Paulet (will proved on 6 February 1552) and William, second Baron Windsor (died 20 Aug 1558). Most of what is known about Puttenham's subsequent career derives from court records centring on the dissolution of his marriage with Lady Windsor and his efforts to wrest ownership of Sherfield from Francis Morris and his wife, Anne, the daughter of George's elder brother, Richard Puttenham ['see below']. 
Puttenham deposed in 1578 that he made his first trip abroad about 1562-3 to purchase Sherfield from Richard, who had fled to the continent in 1560. George certainly resided at the manor house during the autumn of 1562 when he charged Lady Windsor's brother-in-law Thomas Paulet with inciting others to steal a goshawk from his mew at Sherfield. Paulet admitted that he confronted Puttenham at his home, wounded him in the head with his dagger, and 'then agayne with the blade of the said dagger gave unto the said complainant one other little Stroke' (TNA: PRO, STAC 5, P66/2). Puttenham continued to occupy Sherfield until 1567, when his brother returned secretly to England and gave the property to Anne and Francis Morris. Thereafter, Morris seized the house from Puttenham by force, initiating the quarrel with George that lasted nearly a decade. 
Meanwhile, one Richard Hartilpoole had secured a ruling against Puttenham in the court of requests on charges that Puttenham withheld bedding and other furnishings that Hartilpoole had conveyed to Puttenham's house in Trinity Lane, London, in autumn 1565. Puttenham ignored this judgment, and on 24 July 1569, the court ordered the sheriffs of London and Middlesex to arrest Puttenham on sight 'to Aunswere not only unto his said contemptes' against Hartilpoole but for other crimes as well (TNA: PRO, REQ 2 219/25). At about the time of Hartilpoole's suit, John Bardolph, parson of Shalden, just 3 miles south and east of Herriard, sued Puttenham, Richard Aprice, clerk, John Marriner, and others in Star Chamber. Bardolph charged that he was assaulted in the church and again in his parsonage in July and August of 1566 at Puttenham's instigation. In July 1565 Puttenham had obtained a lease to the parsonage from the former parson, Giles More. But More was then deprived of the living on a charge of non-residence, after which Bardolph apparently occupied the parsonage despite Puttenham's claim to it. No outcome to this case is recorded, but in conjunction with the Hartilpoole business it probably influenced Richard Horne, bishop of Winchester, to react with alarm early in 1569 on learning that Puttenham was to be appointed a justice of the peace. Horne wrote to Secretary Cecil praying 'that it be not true for his evil life is well known, and also that he is a 'notorious enemye to God's Truthe'' ('Salisbury MSS', 1.392-3, Horne to Cecil, 21 Jan 1569). 
By June 1570 Puttenham was lodged in the Fleet prison, apparently in response to one Julio Mantuano's deposition of 7 April that Puttenham had both slandered the queen and incited him to murder the bishop of London. The divorce records mention that George 'was comytted to the Flete uppon matter of highe Treason' (Hants. RO, 44M69/F2/14/1). He was released from prison on 15 June on $200 bail and under guard to attend to his other legal problems at the Winchester assizes. Thereafter he must have thoroughly exonerated himself from Mantuano's charges, for he not only regained his freedom but in 1574 won a court judgment of $20 against Brian Annesley, warden of the Fleet, the sum Annesley had failed to disburse in payment of Puttenham's debts during his imprisonment. 
Neither the court cases nor this imprisonment caused Puttenham lasting inconvenience. Early in 1571 he resumed his efforts to regain control of the family home. In April, Puttenham's men seized the mill at Sherfield which Morris reclaimed by force. Puttenham was by this time residing in Sherfield at the house of a Margaret Marriner, probably the widow or mother of the John Marriner who had joined Puttenham in the assault on Parson Bardolph. For her pains, Margaret claimed that Morris's men evicted her and pulled down the house, which she and Puttenham rebuilt only to have Morris and his cronies pull it down again. 
Meanwhile, Puttenham's conflict with his wife served to widen his circle of opponents. According to Lady Windsor's son John Paulet, his mother had sued Puttenham for divorce within five or six years of the marriage; she may have separated from him as early as 1566. George was bound to provide $100 annually to support his estranged wife but his failure to make the required quarterly instalments after 1572 led to his confinement in the Wood Street compter in the autumn of 1575 when the court of arches ordered him to begin paying Lady Windsor $3 weekly. By this time the privy council was involved on Lady Windsor's behalf. The council ordered George to resume the payments in so far as all of his income derived from resources she had brought to the marriage. On 24 June 1576 the privy council accused him of unlawfully conveying the manor of Herriard to his brother-in-law Sir John Throckmorton. In July, Puttenham was served with a writ of 'excommunicatio capiendo', formally excommunicating him from the Anglican church for non-payment of his wife's alimony. 
On 9 June 1578 the sentence of divorce became final, whereon Lady Windsor resumed her appeals for redress to the council which issued an order for George's arrest on 23 June. As late as October, however, Puttenham wrote to the council that he would not appear before them for fear of his wife's children, and he accused Thomas Paulet and Katherine Paulet of twice assaulting him. On 26 October the council issued letters of protection for George's appearance before them and they ordered Throckmorton to ensure that Puttenham did not manage his affairs to the detriment of Lady Windsor's interests. On 20 December George was arrested 'with some difficulty' ('Salisbury MSS', 2.222), sent to the court the next day to answer to the privy council, but was released by mistake from the Gatehouse at Westminster on 23 December. 
The Paulets had, in fact, taken matters into their own hands for on 3 February 1578 John Paulet's son Richard, with his mother, Katherine, and other members of the family confronted Puttenham at his lodgings in the Whitefriars, London, in search of legal documents. According to George's suit in Star Chamber, the Paulets broke open the doors to his rooms, allowing one John Hall to serve him with another writ of excommunication. They then carried 'away the said Puttenham by force without any cappe, hatt or carchiffe bare heded' to a prison in Middlesex, after rifling his chests and desks where bonds and indentures to the value of $11,000 or $12,000 were allegedly deposited (TNA: PRO, STAC 5 P9/4, P3/3). Whether or not the privy council succeeded in returning Puttenham to prison, he had by 13 July 1579 agreed to provide his former wife with six servants, four suits, a coach, and $20 yearly. By November, however, he had again defaulted and the council was pressuring Throckmorton to make George comply with the terms of the settlement. 
Puttenham's contention with Lady Windsor plagued him for the next eight years. His conflict with Francis Morris over Sherfield ended in 1581 when Morris was arrested for harbouring the Jesuit Edmund Campion. Francis died in prison in 1584, but Puttenham did not gain title to the property. In the same year, Lady Windsor sued George again in the court of arches, an action that earned him another confinement in the Wood Street compter. He was served with a third writ of excommunication in November 1586, and was once more imprisoned for failing to honour the court's decree in favour of Lady Windsor. A fourth writ was sworn out in November 1588, followed by yet another imprisonment, but this is the final episode in his dispute with his former wife. Puttenham's 1589 bill associated with these matters refers to Lady Windsor as 'deceased' (TNA: PRO, STAC 5 P33/22). 
George Puttenham the fugitive excommunicant is not easily reconciled with Puttenham the author, whose writings in prose and verse secure his place in English literary history. His rhetorical skills were attested by witnesses for Morris in 1571 who deposed that George was 'full of brables of subtyll practyses and slanderous devyses... overconnynge in defacinge of truthe by wordes & speache eloquente and in invencon of myscheiffe verie perfytte' (TNA: PRO, STAC 5 P5/10). A single autograph leaf of his translation of Suetonius's 'Lives of the Caesars' (''in vita Tiberii'', chaps. 58-61, TNA: PRO, SP 12/126/67) bears faint witness to his literary interests. More persuasive is the autograph 'inventory of all my bookes and library' for 10 November 1576 (Hants. RO, 44M69/E19/4, fol. 16'v'). This list of more than ninety titles is weighted toward law, rhetoric (including Aristotle, Erasmus, and Ramus), French history, and politics (from Aristotle to Machiavelli). The Latin poets are well represented (among them Ovid, Catullus, Juvenal, Tibullus, and Horace), along with a few vernacular authors, notably Pierre Ronsard, Luigi Alemanni, and two copies of Jacopo Sannazarro's 'Arcadia'. What Puttenham's catalogue omits is any reference to English poetry such as Richard Tottel's 'Songs and Sonnets' or the works of George Gascoigne and George Turberville, all drawn on heavily in the 'Arte', and all in print by 1576. Puttenham's inventory does, however, reinforce his claim to 'A justificacion of Queene Elizabeth in relacion to the affaire of Mary queene of Scottes'. This prose defence of Mary's execution presents sophisticated legal and political arguments in support of the government's decision to condemn Mary to death. The tract, edited for the Camden Society in 1867, is assigned to Puttenham in two contemporary manuscripts (BL, Add. MS 48027, Harley 831), and there are no conflicting attributions. To reward Puttenham for this work, which circulated widely in manuscript, Thomas Windebank, Lord Burghley's protege and a clerk of the signet, secured the queen's signature to a gift of two leases in reversion for Puttenham in May 1588. 
On 9 November 1588 'The Arte of English Poesie' was entered in the Stationers' register for the first time. It was published anonymously in 1589 with a dedication to Burghley subscribed 'R. F.' by the printer, Richard Field. Although 'The Arte' has been claimed for both Richard Puttenham and John, Baron Lumley, the case for George Puttenham's authorship of this important work of literary criticism is strong if not indisputable. About 1590 John Harington requested that Field set forth portions of Harington's translation of Ariosto 'in the same printe that Putnams book ys' (BL, Add. MS 18920, fol. 336). In his 'Hypercritica' (1610), Edmund Bolton cited the rumour that one Puttenham, gentleman pensioner to Queen Elizabeth, wrote 'The Arte'. Neither George nor Richard served as pensioners or in any other capacity under Elizabeth, yet clearly someone named Puttenham wrote 'The Arte'. Its author claimed to have written at the age of eighteen the lost 'Elpine', dedicated to Edward VI. Richard Puttenham was eighteen in 1538, but George turned eighteen about 1547 just as Edward came to the throne. Moreover, the praise of Sir John Throckmorton in 'The Arte', including a verse elegy in his honour, also points to George rather than Richard. Throckmorton was very much involved with George's affairs, especially during the 1570s, but there is no record of Richard's connection with him. Other aspects of 'The Arte', such as its author's claim to have studied at Oxford and to have been brought up in foreign courts, fit neither of the Puttenhams. On balance, however, George Puttenham's claim trumps that of any other candidate. 

'The Arte' is an ambitious work of literary history and criticism as well as a rhetorical handbook for the practising poet; Ben Jonson carefully annotated his copy of the book. Yet no second edition appeared, perhaps because 'The Arte' was somewhat out of fashion by 1589, drawing most of its examples from early to mid-sixteenth-century writers. In his 'Brief apology for poetrie' prefixed to his translation of 'Orlando Furioso' (1591), Harington asserted that poetry was a divine gift rather than an art to be learned, and he ridiculed Puttenham's own poetic talent. 
In 'The Arte' Puttenham refers to at least eleven of his works in prose and verse, only one of which can now be identified. More than a dozen verse quotations in 'The Arte' can be traced to his 'Partheniades', a collection of seventeen poems dedicated to Queen Elizabeth which exists in a single manuscript text, BL, Cotton Vesp. MS E.8, fols. 169-78. While some or all of the 'Partheniades' were supposedly written as a new year's gift for the queen, about 1579-81, the work's absence among the Royal manuscripts in the British Library argues that it was either not delivered or not accepted, for that collection preserves new year's gifts addressed to the queen by such poets as George Gascoigne and Thomas Churchyard. In addition, Puttenham mentions in 'The Arte' his interludes 'Lustie London' and 'The Woer', his comedy 'Ginecocratia', a verse romance entitled the 'Isle of Great Britain', and the prose tracts 'De decoro', 'Ierotekni', and 'Originals and pedigree of the English tongue'. In September 1590 Puttenham made out his will leaving all his goods (unspecified) to widow Mary Symmes, his servant. He was buried at St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, on 6 January 1591. 


Richard enjoyed little more matrimonial success than his brother George. He termed Mary a 'clamorous strumpet' who demanded exorbitant maintenance from him although she had brought nothing to their marriage (Stretton, 191-2, 220). He had been imprisoned for debt in the king's bench for four years by May 1587 when he petitioned the masters of requests to reduce the $20 to $30 he had paid his wife annually for more than twenty years. Richard is almost certainly not the Richard Puttenham of Amersham, Buckinghamshire, yeoman of the queen's guard, who was buried at St Clement Danes on 2 July 1601, leaving a widow, Mary. George's brother was more likely the Richard Puttenham, prisoner in the king's bench, who signed his will on 22 April 1597. In it he designated as his executor and sole heir 'my verilie reported and reputed daughter Katherin Puttinham' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/89/39). Richard's uncertainty about his relationship to Katherine suggests that she is his illegitimate daughter, perhaps an outcome of the rape of 1560. 


@@@@@


doc= 22914


Richard Puttenham (b. 1520, d. in or after 1597) neither attended university nor can be certainly connected with any work of a literary nature. He inherited the property of his uncle Sir Thomas Elyot in 1546, while his father conveyed Sherfield upon Lodon to him in 1550. He married Mary, daughter of Sir William Warham and his wife, Elizabeth; Lady Warham lived in Sherfield during her widowhood and is mentioned several times in George's lawsuits. Richard was convicted of rape in April 1561, a crime that had probably motivated his flight to the continent the year before. He may have returned to England on occasions other than that of 1567, but he was certainly abroad in 1572-3. He apparently was back in England towards the end of 1578 and in February 1579 petitioned to receive certain payments that Francis Morris was making annually to the exchequer in connection with his tenure of Sherfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 22915


Pycroft, James (1813-1895), writer on cricket, was born at Geyers House, Pickwick, Wiltshire, the second son of Thomas Pycroft, barrister, and his wife, Mary. His elder brother was Thomas Pycroft. He was educated at King Edward VI Grammar School in Bath, matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, in 1831, and graduated BA in 1836. After four years (1836-40) studying law at Lincoln's Inn he was ordained into the Church of England in 1840. On 8 July 1843 he married Ann, the widow of F. P. Alleyn; she later predeceased him. He taught at the collegiate school, Leicester, for five years, held a curacy (1845) at Chardstock, Dorset, and was perpetual curate -- a technicality giving him freehold -- of St Mary Magdalen, Barnstaple, Devon, from 1845 to 1856. He held no other clerical preferments, and lived for the rest of his life at Bathwick, Bath, and then Brighton. 
At Oxford, Pycroft was partly responsible for the revival in 1836 after a lapse of seven years of the cricket match between Oxford and Cambridge, and opened the batting at Lord's himself. A month earlier he had made his own highest recorded score, 85 not out, for Non-Wykehamists against Wykehamists at Oxford. He made one further appearance at Lord's, in 1838, for Left-Handed Batsmen against the MCC. He described himself as having as much right 'as anyone' to be a founder of the Lansdown club in Bath, and in his last match for them he countered some gentle barracking from the fielders for his slow batting by remarking 'I'll tell you what, gentlemen; I am here to guard three stumps and claim to play accordingly'. 
Pycroft's career as a writer began while still an undergraduate at Oxford. In 1835 he published anonymously 'The Principles of Scientific Batting'. This contained a formal set of rules on how to bat, together with some dietary advice for cricketers: 'Ale and porter render the eye dull'. But it was through his 'The Cricket Field' (1851) that his reputation as a cricket writer became established. It ran to nine editions (1851-1887), including one published in Boston (1859) to coincide with the game's period of popularity in the United States in the ante-bellum era. The book was both a historical essay on the game's origins and a manual of instruction. Soon after leaving Oxford, Pycroft had visited the Surrey and Hampshire villages associated with cricket in the eighteenth century, such as Hambledon. He had met William Beldham, the last survivor of that era; and John Mitford had given him his own notes, containing the reminiscences of William Fennex, another Hambledon player, while Pycroft himself had 'man and boy played and watched the game'. The instructional pages were a development of his earlier book. 
Pycroft's other cricket writing consisted in his regular contributions to the journal 'Cricket' and to the 'Cricketers' Companion' and 'Cricketers' Annual', issued regularly by the publishing family of Lillywhite. There was some repetition of material from the earlier years, a feature of his conversation as well. Nevertheless, to the end of his life people, especially the young, were attracted to hear what he might have to say while attending some match at Lord's or Brighton. 
Pycroft also wrote five novels, of which 'Twenty Years in the Church' (1859) and 'Elkington Rectory' (1860) are semi-autobiographical. Where cricket is mentioned, it is seen as a vehicle of social cohesion 'to encourage sympathy between man and man however wide their ranks might be set asunder'. The novels illustrate Anglican optimism and clerical paternalism, and contain parallels with the novels of Anthony Trollope. They were well received by reviewers but had no lasting appeal. During his schoolmastering years he also published textbooks on Greek and Latin grammar and the reading of English. His 'Oxford Memories' (2 vols., 1886) provide a fascinating -- even colloquial -- account of the university in his day and of his later cricketing associations. 
Pycroft saw cricket 'as a standing panegyric on the English character' and a test of mental ability and manly fibre. In this he was at one with Charles Wordsworth, one of the early exponents of the concept of muscular Christianity, who established the first university cricket match in 1827. The essayist E. V. Lucas remembered seeing Pycroft in old age, 'a tall, erect and clerical figure, clad always in black, with a cape and a silk hat, pure white hair and a fringe of white whisker' ('The Hambledon Men', 1907, xvii). Pycroft died of influenza at his home, Dudley Mansions, Lansdown Place, Brighton, on 10 March 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 22916


Pycroft, Sir Thomas (1807-1892), East India Company servant, was born on 4 December 1807, probably in the parish of St John, Hampstead, Middlesex, the eldest son of Thomas Pycroft, of Pickwick, Wiltshire, a barrister practising at Bath, and his wife, Mary. James Pycroft, the writer on cricket, was his brother. Educated first at Bath grammar school, and then under private tutors, he matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, on 13 May 1826. In early 1829 he competed successfully for an East India Company writership presented to the university in the previous year by Charles Wynn, president of the Board of Control, and thus thirty years before it became the norm was the first of the 'competition wallahs', men appointed to the Indian Civil Service as the result of competitive examination. On his success the honorary degree of MA was conferred upon him by the university. 
Pycroft arrived in Madras in August 1829 and served in that presidency in various subordinate posts in the revenue and judicial administration of the 'mofussil', principally in South Arcot, until 1839, when he returned to England on three years' furlough. While in England he married in 1841 Frances Susannah, second daughter of Major H. Bates RA, with whom he had two sons and four daughters. 
On his return to India in 1843 Pycroft was transferred to the secretariat, or headquarters, of the Madras government and never again returned to district appointments. He was first appointed sub-secretary, and then in 1845 secretary, to the board of revenue. His Tamil was sufficiently good for him also to be appointed in 1845 acting Tamil translator to the government. In 1850 he was appointed secretary to the Madras government in the revenue and judicial departments and finally in 1855 chief secretary to the government. The governor of the time, Lord Harris, praised him (as had Harris's predecessors) as an able man, careful and painstaking, but did not think him brilliant or comprehensive in his views. 
In October 1862 Pycroft was appointed a member of the legislative council of Madras, in which post he remained for the standard term of five years, before taking his retirement in October 1867. He had been made a KCSI in 1866. With thirty-eight years' experience behind him, he was viewed by Madras civilians as one of the gentleman officials of the old pre-1857 school of company servants, skilled in the art of genial and expansive hospitality. At the time of his retirement he was an 'ex officio' fellow of Madras University and a member of the faculties of arts and medicine, chairman of the managing committee of the Madras Literary Society, and, by virtue of his membership of the Madras council, one of the governors of the Military Male Orphan Asylum at Egmore, Madras. Lady Pycroft was a vice-patroness of the Military Female Orphan Asylum. After his departure Pycroft's memory survived in Madras, for thirty years at least, in the name both of his palatial residence and of a road in the suburb of Nungumbaukum, where he had lived. 
Upon his return to England, Pycroft settled in west London and devoted considerable time to philanthropic ventures. In particular he took a leading role in the government of St Mary's Hospital at Paddington. He died from influenza at 13 Eversfield Place, St Leonards, Sussex, on 29 January 1892, and was survived by his widow and their six children. 


@@@@@


doc= 22917


Charles Pye (bap. 1776-1864), engraver, elder brother of John, was born in Birmingham and baptized at St Philip's, Birmingham, on 2 December 1776. He was apprenticed to James Heath ARA in the 1790s, becoming specialized in line engraved illustrations for books and pocket annuals. Typical of these is his 'Luxembourg Palace' (after a drawing by Frederick Nash) in J. Scott and P. B. de la Boissiere, 'Picturesque Views of the City of Paris and its Environs' (London, 1823). On 11 May 1809, at St James's Chapel, St Pancras, London, he married Alice Hughes (died 1841). Pye retired to Leamington Spa by 1840 and died at his home on Church Street, Leamington, on 14 December 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 22918


Pye, Henry James (1745-1813), poet, was born on 20 February 1745 in London and baptized on 24 February at St Anne's, Soho, the eldest of four children of Henry Pye (1709-1766), MP for Berkshire from 1746 to 1766, and Mary (1717/18-1806), daughter of the Revd David James. His father's ancestors included Sir Robert Pye (1585-1662) and John Hampden (1594-1643). Henry James Pye was educated at Magdalen College, Oxford, from 1762 to 1766 (honorary MA 1766, DCL 1772). In 1766 he married Mary (died 1796), daughter of Colonel William Hook(e) (died 1761). There were two daughters from this marriage: Mary Elizabeth (died 1834), later the wife of Captain Jones, 35th regiment, and Matilda Catherine (died 1851), later the wife of Samuel James Arnold (1774-1852), playwright and portrait painter. 
When his father died in 1766 Pye inherited large debts; he was obliged to sell ancestral estates at Knotting, Bedfordshire, and at Great Faringdon, Berkshire. He was a keen field sportsman, and a Berkshire magistrate and militia officer. Nathaniel Hone painted him (1775) in militia uniform, holding helmet and musket with fixed bayonet. Pye's election as MP for Berkshire in 1784 was assisted by the unusually large disbursement of $2500 from the government's secret service fund, and consequently he always supported Pitt in the Commons, but he retired from parliament at the dissolution in 1790. His residences after Faringdon were in Queen Square, Westminster, and Pinner, Middlesex, but he maintained an interest in field sports: his 'improved and enlarged' edition of 'The Sportsman's Dictionary' appeared in 1807. From 1792 he was a police magistrate for Westminster; he wrote a useful 'Summary of the Duties of a Justice of the Peace' (1808; 4th edn, 1827). 
Pye said he was 'a rhymer for life'. His earliest publication was an ode in an Oxford congratulatory volume on the birth of the prince of Wales (1762); it was followed by a stream of descriptive and didactic poems in heroic couplets: 'Beauty, a Poetical Essay' (1766), 'The Triumph of Fashion, a Vision' (1771), 'The Art of War' (1778, translated from the French of Frederick the Great when Pye was at militia camp), 'The Progress of Refinement: a Poem in Three Parts' (1783), 'Faringdon Hill: a Poem in Two Books' (1774, a 'local poem'), 'Shooting' (1784, a georgic), and 'Amusement: a Poetical Essay' (1790). These poems conventionally praise the pleasures of gentlemanly rural life, but Pye extended the range of didactic verse with his 'Aerophorion' (1784) on hot-air ballooning. There were lyrics too: most of Pye's 'Elegies on Different Occasions' (1768) are love-sick effusions addressed to 'Delia' but one refreshingly hails the opening of the partridge-shooting season. Some of the above, with songs, odes, pseudo-Spenserian stanzas, translations, and other new pieces, reappeared in 'Poems on Various Subjects' (2 vols., 1787). 
On Pye's retirement from the Commons, his support of Pitt was rewarded on 28 July 1790 with the award of the poet laureateship, vacant on the death of Thomas Warton. As well as his annual salary of $100, a laureate received a pension of $27 in lieu of the tierce (42 gallons) of canary wine which had once been part of the stipend; this exchange was made well before Pye's time, though Pye has often mistakenly been blamed for it. The laureateship was an office of little profit (Pye badgered Pitt unsuccessfully for other posts) and in Pye's hands it became one of little credit too. Of the odes that he conscientiously wrote, year by year, for the new year and for the king's birthday (4 June), the best that can be said is that their rhymes and regular stanzas made them easier to set to music by the master of the king's band, Sir William Parsons, than the irregular odes of Pye's successor Robert Southey. 
Pye's term of office coincided with a long war against France, so his odes dwell on 'Gallic perfidy', 'Peace by Victory led', the 'golden beams of Freedom', the benefits of commerce, and Britannia's rule of the waves. The same unreflective patriotism fills Pye's longer wartime poems, such as 'Naucratica, or, Naval Dominion' (1798), dedicated to George III, 'Carmen seculare for the Year 1800' (with a preface arguing that the new century really begins on 1 January 1801), and the ambitious 'Alfred, an Epic Poem in Six Books' (1801). In quieter vein Pye celebrated his friendship with the writer John Penn (1760-1834) in 'Verses on Several Subjects, Written in the Vicinity of Stoke Park' (1802). 
Laureate odes were sometimes sung as entr'actes in London theatres, but Pye, like his sister-in-law Henrietta Pye (author of a farce 'The Capricious Lady', 1771), had a more sustained flirtation with the stage. His solemn blank-verse historical tragedies on medieval subjects, 'The Siege of Meaux' (1794) and 'Adelaide' (1800), were printed and were given enough performances (three nights) to secure an author's benefit for each. Pye was also joint author of 'The Inquisitor, a Tragedy' (from the German, 1798) and 'A Prior Claim, a Comedy' (1805). A prologue he was persuaded to write for the 1796 production of 'Vortigern', a Shakespeare forgery by William Henry Ireland, was so dubious in tone that, happily for Pye, it was not used. Pye also tried his hand at prose fiction: his epistolary novel 'The Spectre' (1789) is conventionally sentimental and sensational; his two later anti-Jacobin novels, 'The Democrat' (1795) and 'The Aristocrat' (1799) mildly satirize sentimentality. His 'Sketches on Various Subjects: Moral, Literary, and Political' (1796) collected miscellaneous thoughts on novels, the army, gardening, Shakespeare, field sports, and many other topics. He enlarged his Shakespeare 'sketch' into a nit-picking volume, 'Comments on the Commentators on Shakespeare' (1807), attacking the editorial labours of George Steevens, Edmond Malone, Francis Douce, and others. Douce hit back in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (October 1807, 921-7) and in the heavily annotated copy of 'Comments' now in the Bodleian Library, in which Douce has altered the author's name to 'Goose-Pye'. 
In addition to all the above Pye translated verse from French, Italian, German, Latin, and Greek. His translation in 1775 of six Olympic odes of Pindar and his revision in 1812 of Philip Francis's version of Horace's 'Odes' found a place in standard English reprints of those authors, but his translations of the 'War Elegies' of Tyrtaeus (1795), and the hymns and epigrams of Homer (1810), were less durable. His version, in 1796, of Burger's 'Lenore' was eclipsed by those of William Taylor and Sir Walter Scott. His most interesting piece of intertextual scholarship is a bulky 'Commentary' (1792) on a translation of Aristotle's 'Poetics' he had published four years earlier: his illustration of Aristotle by examples from modern literature is often original, shrewd, and learned. 
Pye's original verse is never distinctive enough to be really bad: his odes, elegies, and seemingly interminable heroic couplets are mechanically competent, but he rarely has anything interesting to say. His novels, plays, miscellaneous prose, and even his somewhat more highly regarded translations soon sank, like his poems, without trace. However, his conspicuous public position as poet laureate exposed his meagre talents to the gaze of satirists, especially those such as John Wolcot (Peter Pindar) and Lord Byron who wanted to attack George III through his laureate. 
Pye wisely did not reply to the wits who attacked him, but he greatly curtailed his writing, so that after 1802 he published no original new verse other than twice-yearly laureate odes. In November 1801 he married his second wife, Martha Corbett (1769/70-1861); their children were Henry John (1802-1884) and Jane Ann, who married Francis Willington of Tamworth. In May 1813 an edition of Pye's 'Select Writings' in six volumes was announced in the press, but it never appeared. Pye died at Pinner on 11 August 1813. 
Pye's portrait, painted about 1800 by his son-in-law S. J. Arnold, shows a bullet-head, firm mouth, large nose, hazel eyes, ruddy complexion, and sparse white hair: more sportsman than poet. Henry Crabb Robinson wrote in his diary (13 October 1812) that Pye had 'a singular diseased affection: the sight of any extended plain, either the sea, or a heath, throws him into a nervous disorder amounting to convulsion'. William Thomas Fitzgerald (like Pye a butt of Byron's) was 'once with him when they were crossing Blackfriars Bridge by moonlight. Pye caught a glimpse of the water with the reflection of the moon upon it, and sank down into the carriage pretending to look for his glove in order to conceal the trouble the sight gave him. ('Henry Crabb Robinson', 110-11)' 



@@@@@


doc= 22919


John Pye (b. 1746, d. after 1789) was a pupil of Thomas Major and won first prize in the competition for drawing the human figure at the Society of Arts in 1760. Between 1769 and 1773 he exhibited engravings with the Society of Artists, giving addresses at Lincoln's Inn Fields, Fenchurch Street, and finally 19 Cornhill. He enrolled as a student at the Royal Academy Schools in March 1777, giving his age as thirty-one. Pye specialized in landscape etchings, and for Boydell in the mid-1770s he produced plates after Cuyp, Claude, and Rembrandt and prints after Vernet and Kauffmann. Pye is said to have used the talents of 


@@@@@


doc= 22920


Pye, John (1782-1874), engraver, was born in Birmingham on 7 November 1782, the sixth child of Charles Pye, writer, and Ann, daughter of William Radclyffe. He was baptized on 24 January 1783 at St Philip's, Birmingham. His father had, in expectation of a sizeable inheritance, seen no need to practise any trade. A lawsuit, however, dashed his hopes, and obliged him to support his family by writing works on local history and antiquities -- subjects he had already explored as a gentleman amateur. His son did not receive any extensive schooling beyond basic instruction in engraving gained from his father, who had engraved illustrations for his works himself. 
Pye moved to London in 1801 to become a paid assistant of James Heath ARA, to whom his elder brother Charles Pye ['see below'] was already apprenticed. On 29 May 1809, at St Marylebone, Westminster, he married Mary, daughter of the engraver Samuel Middiman; they had an only child, Louisa Eliza (1818-1904). Much of Pye's work at this period consisted of engravings of historical buildings and landscapes for topographical works such as Thomas Dunham Whitaker's 'History of Richmondshire' (1823). He also produced vignettes for various pocket-sized ladies' annuals such as 'The Amulet'. Throughout his career Pye remained fiercely loyal to the line engraving medium. 
J. M. W. Turner had praised Pye's skill in rendering subtle light effects when the latter engraved 'Pope's Villa' in 1809 (Rawlinson, 1.xxv-xxvi, lxvi); in later years Pye engraved several other Turner landscapes. Despite Pye's strong reciprocal admiration for Turner, his large engraving of the latter's 'Ehrenbreitstein' (1845) was the only instance in which the painter and engraver entered into a direct contractual relationship to engrave, print, and publish a specific work. In contrast to the eagerness with which younger engravers courted popular painters such as Edwin Landseer for engraving contracts in the 1840s, Pye remained largely aloof. He produced only one engraving after a work of Landseer, 'All that Remains of the Glory of William Smith' (1836). This is surprising given Landseer's respect for Pye, whom he was to call in 1854 'the head of a particular school of art which had taught all who followed him' (Dyson, 'Images interpreted', 33). Although Pye had his admirers, his position as leader of and spokesman for his fellow engravers was not justified by any superior quality appreciable in his work. It was rather his organizational skills and seniority relative to his somewhat younger colleagues that gained him their respect. 
Pye hoped to raise the fortunes, status, and public profile of engravers by means of professional association and co-operation. He was active at the birth of the Artist's Joint Stock Fund in 1819. Despite much internal wrangling, the fund grew and was chartered in 1827, when Pye was its president. It was at the fund's annual dinner on 23 January 1823 that Pye made an address urging engravers to associate and publish their own prints. In this way, he argued, engravers would cut out manipulative printsellers and receive a larger proportion of the revenue from prints. Pye's friend the painter William Mulready offered the copyright of his popular playground scene, 'The Wolf and the Lamb', to facilitate this endeavour. The print (1824) realized a profit of over $1000 for the associated engravers. 
Emboldened by this success, Pye went on in 1827 to propose a series of engravings after paintings in the National Gallery, which had opened to the public in 1824. He gathered together a group of engravers including George Doo, William Finden, and others for this purpose. Pye found his hopes for the project, which he believed could have been 'a monument honourable to the country', shared by the well-known collector of contemporary British art John Sheepshanks (Pye Papers, National Art Library, fol. 50). Sheepshanks advanced $3000 towards the venture, which, largely owing to Pye's efforts, had 870 subscribers by the end of 1831. Difficulties financing loans and the dilatory progress of several engravers, however, eventually terminated the project. Seven instalments in all appeared between 1832 and 1840; among them was Pye's engraving (1834) of Gaspar Dughet's 'Abraham and Isaac'. Despite its failure, Pye's 'Engravings from Pictures in the National Gallery' is noteworthy for being one of the earliest attempts to engrave paintings from a European public art gallery. 
Parliamentary select committees on the arts and manufactures (1835-6) and on art unions (1844) both questioned Pye in his capacity as the outspoken advocate of the engravers. In the 1844 art union select committee Pye was at pains to point out as 'a fact... not generally known, that the arts of this country have risen principally on engraving' ('Select Committee on Art Unions', 224). The Royal Academy should, he argued, recognize the debt they owed to engravers as the creators of an open art market. Pye had been leading efforts to end the Royal Academy exclusion of engravers for election to full membership of the academy by means of petitions since 1812, when a memorial was sent to the prince regent. Although engravers could be elected to associate membership of the Royal Academy, Pye believed that to stand for election under these terms was both personally and professionally demeaning. In 1826 he and other leading engravers vowed never to do so; further petitions were to follow in 1836 and 1837. In 1836 and 1859 Pye was to publish pamphlets attacking the Royal Academy. 
Pye's pamphlets echoed earlier jeremiads by other engravers, such as Robert Strange's 'Conduct of the Academicians' (1771) and John Landseer's 'Lectures on the Art of Engraving' (1807). The Royal Academy had insisted in 1812 that engravers were beyond the pale of art; even if they gained election, engraver associates were not allowed to vote on academy business or hold any office. To Pye this exclusion was conclusive evidence that the academy's principles were diametrically opposed to those of engraving, 'whose very essence is expansion and diffusion' (Pye, 'Patronage', 296). The Royal Academy's stance contrasted sharply with the compliments paid to Pye by foreign academies: he received a gold medal from the French government in 1846 and was elected to membership of the Paris and St Petersburg academies in 1862 and 1863 respectively. 
Pye's most important publication was a history of the relationship between the visual arts and the state in Britain: his book 'Patronage of British Art' (1845). This well-researched book traces the development of public, rather than noble, patronage from the middle of the eighteenth century onwards. Pye's history describes how Hogarth and other eighteenth-century figures made engraving into the profitable catalyst of a public sphere for art: 'the mass of the people became the first source of patronage open to native talent; hence, too, a new and vast channel of enterprise was opened to the commercial speculator; and the various powers of the painter's mind were applied, through the art of engraving, to advance the interests of trade, by cultivating and feeding the taste of the million, both at home and abroad. (ibid., 141)' A profile drawing of Pye by William Mulready engraved by J. H. Robinson and reproduced in his 'Patronage of British Art' records his high forehead, furrowed brow, and slightly ironic smile, which together evoke a probably characteristic expression of wry amusement. 
Although he was uninvolved with the project, Pye was an important collector of rare states and proofs of Turner's engraved 'Liber Studiorum', which he held an indispensable resource to training the eye of professional artists and amateurs alike. Pye sold his collection to the British Museum in 1869. His death at his home, 17 Gloucester Crescent, Regent's Park, London, on 6 February 1874 deprived engravers of an individual who had been their best spokesman, albeit one whose faith in public taste and belief that commercial and aesthetic considerations could coexist in harmony often seem more at home in the late eighteenth-century world of Josiah Boydell. His leadership, however, was instrumental in encouraging engravers to associate for their mutual benefit and in forwarding projects which sought to make the relationship between engravers and their public closer and more aesthetically improving. 




@@@@@


doc= 22921


Pye, Sir Robert (c.1622-1701), army officer, was the son of Sir Robert Pye (bap. 1585, d. 1662) of Faringdon Manor, Berkshire, and his wife, Mary Croker. His father was a remembrancer of the exchequer from 1618, MP for Woodstock in the Long Parliament, and a parliamentarian advocate of peace with the king at the beginning of the civil war. At that juncture, his son, who had married Anne Hampden ('b'. 1625), daughter of John Hampden, raised a troop of horse for the earl of Essex, and his parliamentarian military career began: he was wounded when Cirencester was captured in September 1643. In the February 1644 reorganization of Essex's army Pye's was designated one of the six cavalry regiments, and in June of the same year he was in command of the surrender of Taunton Castle to parliament. In February 1645 he was sent to Buckinghamshire to suppress expected disorder, and by March he was commanding three troops under Cromwell to march on Coventry and assist Sir William Brereton. In that month, however, Pye's military career began to run into the political shoals of intra-parliamentarian conflict. Despite his bellicose record, he was politically associated with moderate and Presbyterian parliamentarianism, and his father attached to the peace party. Hence the action of parliament, during debates over the formation of the New Model Army, of securing a regimental command for Pye in place of the radical Nathaniel Rich was a setback for the party of all-out war with the king. 
In May 1645 the committee of both kingdoms regrouped 900 troops in Buckinghamshire under Pye's command. The recipient of warm commendations from the committee ('very ready to go upon the service... very great readiness and much affection to prefer the public service to any particular interest of his own' ('CSP dom.', '1644-5', 503, 504), he was ordered northwards, with a group of cavalry commanders, to assist the Scots against the king. That was how he became involved, displaying 'great valour' ('VCH Leicestershire', 2.115) in a parliamentarian disaster, the failed defence of Leicester, which fell to crown forces in May 1645. Pye was captured on 31 May, though subsequently paroled, on 4 June, and exchanged for a royalist officer on the 20th. His reputation with the committee of both kingdoms reached new heights, arrangements were made to reimburse him for losses, he was entrusted with the conveyance of money and recruits to Portsmouth, and brought reinforcements from Reading to assist Fairfax in the siege of Sherborne in August 1645. He led his regiment in the siege of Bristol in September, and in May 1646 was sent by Fairfax to command the siege of Faringdon, Berkshire, which fell on 24 June. 
In 1646 with peacetime legal conditions returning, soldiers such as Pye were losing immunity from prosecutions for damages done during the hostilities and he was sued for a horse he had commandeered in Reading. However, a further high point in his career came in 1647, when a section of his regiment kept guard on Charles I at Holdenby House. If a malicious story from Edmund Ludlow has any credit, the full extent of Pye's political conservatism became evident when he 'supplied the place of a querry, riding bare before [Charles I] when he rode abroad' ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 1.151). Given his conservative political profile as a 'moderate Presbyterian' (Kishlansky, 162-3), it is not surprising that Pye was targeted as an ally in the programme of the Presbyterian politician Denzil Holles to disband the regiments not needed for service in Ireland, thereby neutralizing the army radicals. Creating division in his own regiment, the bulk of which mutinied and joined the main body of the army, Pye was vilified by the majority of the forces for willingness to accept, without redress of grievances, the proposed package of large-scale demobilization, with Irish service. Pye's personal regimental following were the first units to arrive in Westminster in June 1647, having resolved to volunteer for Ireland. In August they were instructed to prepare the defence of the capital against the threatened army takeover. When the army took possession of the capital, involving the deaths of seven of Pye's men at Deptford, he secured a pass from Fairfax to go into exile, probably in Holland. This, for Pye, was the low point of a career in which the complexities of politics tended to prove his downfall. The pamphlet 'A Speedy Hue and Crie' of 1647, attacking him and other refugee officers as renegades, added vilification to his defeat. 
Nevertheless, with the gradual return of civilian government in the 1650s, Pye represented his native Berkshire in the parliaments of 1654 and 1658. When, on 25 January 1660, he presented a petition, which arose out of a Berkshire county meeting, for the return of the 1648 'secluded members' (of whom his father was one) who were thought likely to favour a royal restoration, his political judgement was faulty in moving too far ahead of events. He was imprisoned, and his case awoke a constitutional issue over parliament's refusal to dispute the judgement of a lower court, the upper bench, in favour of his habeas corpus. By February, however, as George Monck's ascendancy nudged developments towards a restoration and with the secluded members admitted on 21 February, Pye was freed, and on 2 March his prosecution was expunged from the record. He was a member of the convention and, although he can be classed with the 'Presbyterian' grouping, he played no recorded active role. 
Although his contribution to the Restoration was courageous rather than creative, Pye won royal gratitude for his role. By August 1661 he was an auditor of the exchequer under the lord treasurer Southampton, and on 22 December 1662 a royal warrant was issued to give him a baronetcy, though this does not seem to have resulted in the assumption of that honour. Further evidence of Charles II's favour, however, came on 22 June 1670, when, 'of assured loyalty and faithfulness', he was exempted from the order of 10 June expelling all officers 'of the late usurped power' from London ('CSP dom.', '1670', 267, 292). Pye was otherwise out of public life until the revolution, when, in December 1688, he accompanied William of Orange on his way to London. Recognition came towards the end of his life when, in 1700, he acted as deputy lieutenant for Berkshire. He and his wife, Anne, had two sons, Hampden and Edmund. Pye died in 1701 at Faringdon. He was a brave and able soldier, a military man passionately, even rashly, attached to civilian government but sometimes out of his depth in politics and for the last forty years of his life generally keeping clear of their currents. 


@@@@@


doc= 22922


Pye, Thomas (d. 1609/10), Church of England clergyman, was born at Darlaston near Wednesbury in Staffordshire. According to Anthony Wood, Pye was 'educated for the most part in logicals and philosophicals in Merton college, [Oxford], of which he became one of the chaplains in 1581, being then esteemed among the learned to be one of them'; he graduated BTh on 21 June 1585, winning a reputation as 'an eminent linguist, excellent in sacred chronology, in ecclesiastical histories and polemical divinity' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 59). He translated as 'Solomons Sermon' (1586) a work by the catechist Antonio del Corro, whom he praised highly. 
From 1577 until 1589 Pye was rector of Newton Toney in Wiltshire, from where evidence emerged of his sympathy with puritan positions; in 1584-5 it was reported that he did not wear a surplice and refused to baptize with the sign of the cross. In 1586 he was instituted as rector of Earnley-with-Almodington, Sussex. On 5 December 1587 he was collated to the prebend of Selsey in the diocese of Chichester. About 1590 he became vicar and schoolmaster of Bexhill near Hastings in Sussex. For many years during his mastership, Pye was also rector of nearby Brightling, from where he reported in 1603, that 'there is no man or woman recusant or backwards in religion and there is none that doth not receive the communion orderly' ('VCH Sussex', 9.228). Pye was sufficiently reconciled to the establishment to preface his book 'An Hourglasse Containing a Computation from the Beginning of Time to Christ by X Articles' (1597) to Archbishop Whitgift, but advised the primate of his alarm at the prospects for godly protestantism, during the 'very dogdaies of the church and religion, which now lie together in a desperate paroxism and most dangerous fitte, jointly shaken and assaulted by popery and atheism'. 
In 1602-3 Pye became engaged in a controversy with Bishop John Howson of Oxford. Pye thought it lawful for a man to divorce an adulterous wife, and then to remarry, and in January 1603 he signed 'Epistola ad ornatissimum virum D. Johannem Housonum', a short refutation of theses on such matters which Howson had published the previous year. Pye also prepared a much fuller statement of his position and sent it to John Rainolds, president of Corpus Christi College, who in 1597 had set down similar views on the issue (issued posthumously in 1609). Rainolds replied that he liked Pye's work and wished it could be published, but pointed out that when he had sought permission to publish his own views on the same subject, Archbishop Whitgift had given his opinion that this was inappropriate owing to the dangerous freedoms they encouraged. Rainolds counselled against Pye's explicit defence of his 1597 views, and advised against the violence of some of his strictures against Howson. He proffered detailed and sympathetic suggestions for toning down the book for publication. Whether or not Pye took the advice, his work was refused a licence. A Latin account of the controversy appears, with Rainolds's letter appended, in 'Uxore dissmissa... tertia thesis Johannis Howsoni' (1606). 
In 1606, when Pye returned to Darlaston to visit his family, 'some of his servants went to ring in the old steeple, which was of wood, and much decayed, so that their lives were in danger'; Pye therefore 'proffered the town, that in case they would be at the charge of bringing stone, he would find workmanship, and build them a tower, which accordingly he did' (Plot, 297). On the outside of the tower an inscription was cut -- 'Pietati et Priis. Vive pius, et moriere pius' -- a pun on the benefactor's name, which may be translated 'By piety and pious deeds, Pious live and pious die'. Pye died three years later at Bexhill. In his will dated 20 December 1609 he desired that his body might be buried in the schoolhouse at Bexhill, which he had recently had repaired and repaved. He mentioned three sons, Nicholas, George, and Hennege, all under age, and a brother, Richard Pye of Porlaston, Staffordshire. The inclusion of Sir Nicholas Parker and Thomas Pelham esquire among his overseers hints at his patrons. The will was proved by his widow and executor, Ellynor or Elianore ('nee' Hennege?) on 20 March 1610. 


@@@@@


doc= 22923


Pye, Sir Thomas (1708/9-1785), naval officer, was the son of Henry Pye (1683-1749) and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Bathurst. Through his mother he was related to Allen, first Earl Bathurst, a political strength which ensured peacetime commands and steady promotion during a long and undistinguished career. Pye passed his lieutenant's examination on 12 June 1734, his age then being given as twenty-five (TNA: PRO, ADM 107/3, p. 252), and on 18 April 1735 he was promoted third lieutenant of the 'Preston' (48 guns, Captain Charles Cotterell), cruising in home waters. He transferred with his captain to the 'Ripon' (60 guns), based at the Tagus. For the next three years he served in the 'Warwick' (60 guns) in the Mediterranean before, on 13 April 1741, he was given command of the newly built 'Seaford' (24 guns). Stationed in home waters for a year, the ship then went to the Mediterranean under Admiral Thomas Mathews, who sent her to the Adriatic to disrupt supplies going to the Spanish army in Italy. In August 1744 Mathews appointed Pye to the 'Norfolk' (80 guns), which remained on the station under Vice-Admiral Henry Medley, supporting the Austrian army off the south of France. Pye brought the ship home in March 1748. At the peace he was given the 'Norwich' (50 guns), going to North America, and in the following year he commissioned the 'Humber' (44 guns), cruising to the west coast of Africa. He sailed for Nova Scotia in the 'Gosport' (44 guns) in June 1751, returned the same year, and in February 1752 was appointed to the 'Advice' (50 guns), with a broad pennant as commander-in-chief in the Leeward Islands. 
It was at this point that Pye's hasty temperament caused a dispute which nearly ended his career. In October 1755 he was superseded by Commodore Thomas Frankland but Pye, according to Frankland, 'excessively angry', kept his broad pennant flying (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/306, Frankland to John Clevland, 8 Oct 1755). Frankland, reprimanding Pye for not obeying a senior officer, also charged him with financial irregularities, interfering with the purchase of naval stores, and with damaging the 'Advice' by removing parts of her timbers for an unnecessary survey. Pye returned home, claiming that he would not receive a fair hearing in the Leeward Islands. Since he should have been tried there, the Admiralty at first did nothing, though Pye was eventually tried by court martial in the first four days of March 1758. He was reprimanded for the lesser charges and was lucky to escape the charge of disobeying a senior officer. Lord Anson and Edward Boscawen were at sea at the time, and Pye was able to ensure leniency by bringing political pressure to bear on the civilian members of the Admiralty board (NMM, papers of Sir Gilbert Elliot, ELL/9, Thomas Pye, 'An account of my conduct'). On 5 July 1758 he was promoted rear-admiral, but he saw no active service during the Seven Years' War. 
In 1762 Pye was made commander-in-chief at Plymouth and promoted vice-admiral (21 October). From 1766 to 1769 he was again made commander-in-chief of the Leeward Islands, flying his flag first in the 'Lark' (32 guns) and then the 'Chatham' (50 guns). On his return Pye made a short and unremarkable foray into politics, being elected as government candidate for Rochester on 9 May 1771. He appears never to have spoken in the Commons and was defeated at the election on 7 October 1774. Philip Stephens, the secretary to the Admiralty, remarked to Lord Hardwicke that the voters of Rochester 'had conceived an utter aversion to our Admiral Sir Thomas Pye, and I find they would have taken anybody who offered himself in preference to him' (BL, Add. MS 35612, fol. 114). From 9 May 1771 to 18 May 1774 he had been commander-in-chief at Portsmouth, during which time the king had reviewed the fleet at Spithead. On 24 June 1773 he had knighted Pye on the quarterdeck of the 'Barfleur' (98 guns) and at the same time ordered his promotion to admiral. 
Pye served as commander-in-chief at Portsmouth for most of the American War of Independence, taking up his command on 27 May 1777. He presided at the celebrated court martial of Admiral Augustus Keppel in Portsmouth, in January 1779, which he tried to avoid by pleading ill health. He was made lieutenant-general of marines on 26 September 1780 and retired on 31 March 1783. Pye died on 26 December 1785 at his house on Suffolk Street, London. His wife, details of whom are unknown, had died in 1762; the couple had one daughter, Mary. Pye's will also reveals that for seventeen years he had a mistress, Anna Maria Bennett, wife of Thomas Bennett, customs officer. At his death Pye left his Suffolk Street residence to Anna Maria and forgave the sizeable debt owed to him by her husband; this relationship produced at least two children, including Harriet ['see 'Esten, Harriet Pye]. 
Contemporary opinion of Pye's abilities (he was known by junior officers as Goose Pye) is uniformly harsh, while he has been described by a modern authority as 'something of a naval grotesque who aroused mingled amusement and contempt' (Rodger, 76). He was unable to express himself clearly on paper and his handwriting was awkward: when a vice-admiral he wrote to Lord Sandwich, enjoining the first lord 'not to scrutinize too close either to the spelling or the grammatical part as I allow myself to be no proficient in either. I had the mortification to be neglected in my education, went to sea at 14 without any, and a man of war was my university. ('Private Papers', 1.36)' In this and in many other ways Pye was not a typical mid-eighteenth-century naval officer. 


@@@@@


doc= 22924


Pye, Sir Walter (bap. 1571, d. 1635), lawyer, was born at The Mynde in Much Dewchurch, Herefordshire, and baptized there on 1 October 1571, the first child of Roger Pye (died 1591) and his wife, Bridget (died 1624), daughter of Thomas Kyrle of Walford, Herefordshire. He was admitted a commoner at St John's College, Oxford, in 1585, and entered New Inn in 1589. Transferring to the Middle Temple the following year, he was called to the bar in 1597, was Lent reader in 1618, and treasurer in 1626-7. On 22 July 1602 he married Joan, daughter of William Rudhall of Rudhall, Herefordshire, and his wife, Margaret; they had fifteen children. She died on 10 September 1625 and on 31 October 1628 he married Hester (died 'c'.1643), daughter of John Ireland and widow of Ellis Crispe, alderman of London; she died about 1643. 
The family of Pye or Apie (that is ap Hugh) had been minor gentry in Herefordshire from at least the fifteenth century, but Walter Pye's fortune was small and no match for his appetite for land purchases. He seems first to have sought advancement by attaching himself to Charles Howard, earl of Nottingham: it was probably through his influence as high steward of the borough that he was elected MP for Scarborough in 1597. Afterwards he built up his practice as a lawyer, and it was another twenty years before his next preferment. He and his younger brother Robert Pye (bap. 1585, d. 1662) attached themselves to George Villiers, marquess of Buckingham, probably as legal and financial adviser respectively, and through the favourite Walter Pye was made chief justice in Glamorgan, Brecknockshire, and Radnorshire in February 1617. In February 1621 he was knighted and made attorney of the court of wards and liveries. He sat in parliament for Brecon borough in 1621, 1624, and 1625, and for Herefordshire in 1626 and 1628-9. In both 1626 and 1628 he was also elected for Brecon; on the latter occasion he surrendered his seat to his eldest son, also Walter (1610-1659). 
Pye was recognized by his contemporaries as a learned and ingenious but unscrupulous lawyer, which made his talents both feared and much demanded. In 1607 there were complaints in Herefordshire of his 'underhand dealing' (BL, Add. MS 11042, fols. 11-12) and in 1631 a Welsh victim of one of his judgments tried to run him through with a sword. Criticism of his attorneyship of the court of wards mounted towards the end of his life. In 1633 it was said that he 'does now what he pleaseth' and that a new master of the court was needed to restrain his power (Birch, 2.229). Later there were allegations that he suppressed the evidence of witnesses and overruled and directed juries. Sir Richard Hutton called him 'more than ordinarily covetous' and reckoned that he 'advanced the profit' of the court of wards 'excessively', getting thereby a great estate and preferring his children 'in ample manner' (CUL, MS 6863, fol. 81'r'). Nevertheless, his income was probably never more than $2000 per annum. Pye died on 25 December 1635 and was buried in Much Dewchurch on 9 January 1636; at his death he was mocked as 'the devil's Christmas Pye' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 465, fol. 62'r'). 


@@@@@


doc= 22925


Pyle, Thomas (1674-1756), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born at Stody, Norfolk, the son of John Pyle (died 1709), rector of Stody. He was educated at Gresham's grammar school at Holt, Norfolk, under Mr Bainbrigg, and then at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he was admitted sizar on 17 May 1692, aged seventeen, and elected scholar the following Michaelmas. He graduated BA in 1696 and MA in 1699. He was ordained deacon on 30 May 1697 and priest on 25 September 1698 by Dr Moore, bishop of Norwich; the bishop's chaplain, William Whiston, noted that Pyle was one of the two best scholars that he had ever examined. He was appointed vicar of Thorpe Market in 1698. Following his marriage to Mary Rolfe (1681/2-1748), of King's Lynn, in 1701 he was appointed minister of St Nicholas's Chapel in King's Lynn. He served as lecturer and curate of St Margaret's from 1711, and also held the neighbouring rectories of Outwell (1709-18), Bexwell (1708-9), and Watlington (1710-26). 
Pyle was an eloquent preacher and a strong whig. The accession of the house of Hanover and the representation of King's Lynn in parliament by the prime minister, Robert Walpole, gave him hope of preferment in the church. He was not slow to take advantage of the Bangorian controversy, writing 'A Vindication of the Bishop of Bangor, in Answer to the Exceptions of Mr Law' and 'A Second Vindication' in 1718. He also published two tracts in reply to Henry Stebbing's tracts on the controversy. This flurry of pamphlets proved his talent as a disputant and gained him the friendship of Benjamin Hoadly. After Hoadly became bishop of Salisbury he collated Pyle to the living of Durnford, in that diocese. Pyle had begun to be noticed as a preacher in London, and his 'Paraphrase of the Acts and Epistles, in the Manner of Dr Clarke' (1725) attracted favourable attention from the low-church party and from dissenters such as Samuel Chandler, and John Rastrick of King's Lynn. A further volume of paraphrases helped to strengthen his position with notable latitudinarians such as Samuel Clarke, Arthur Ashley Sykes, and Thomas Herring. But Pyle never received additional preferment, even after Herring became archbishop of Canterbury. Herring explained some of his reservations about Pyle in a letter to William Duncombe of 29 July 1745: 'That very impetuosity of spirit, which under proper government, renders him the agreeable creature he is, has, in some circumstance of life got the better of him, and hurt his views' (Herring, 81). Pyle made no secret of his views on the Trinity, in which he adopted an Arian position, and revelled in 'the glorious prerogative of private judgement, the birth-right of Protestants' (Richards, 1017). His heterodoxy probably cost him advancement in the church. In 1732 he exchanged his old livings for the vicarage of St Margaret's, King's Lynn, which he retained until 1755. 
Despairing of promotion for himself Pyle used his influence with Hoadly and others on behalf of his three sons. The eldest, Edmund (1702-1776), succeeded his father as lecturer at St Nicholas's, King's Lynn, in 1732, became archdeacon of York in 1751, and acted as chaplain to the king and to Hoadly; he left some piquant memoirs of Matthew Hutton, archbishop of York and then of Canterbury. Pyle's second son, Thomas (1713-1807), became canon of Salisbury in 1741 and of Winchester in 1760. Philip, the third son (1724-1799), was appointed rector of North Lynn in 1756. Mary Pyle died on 14 March 1748, aged sixty-six. 
Thomas Pyle retired to Swaffham in 1755, where he died on 31 December 1756. He was buried in All Saints', King's Lynn. Three collections of his religious discourses were published by Philip Pyle, in 1773, 1777, and 1783. 


@@@@@


doc= 22926


Pym, John (1584-1643), politician, was born on 20 May 1584, the son of Alexander Pym ('c'.1547-1585) and his wife, Philippa Colles (died 1620), and was baptized at St Giles Cripplegate, London, on 18 June. 
Pym came from an old Somerset family on the fringe of the magisterial class. He was not a man born to a place in county or parliamentary politics. On the other hand, people from backgrounds much more obscure than his, such as his fellow Somerset man Sir Francis Cottington, could achieve political careers by clinging to a career ladder and cultivating possible patrons as they went up it. It was perhaps Pym's difficulty that he fell rather heavily between these two stools. 
The Pym family appear to have been established in the manor of Brymore, Somerset, since the thirteenth century, but had not had a particularly distinguished sixteenth century. The family entered it under a cloud. In October 1498 Alexander Pym was made to take out a recognizance of $10,000 for aiding Perkin Warbeck. The dissolution of the monasteries passed them by and, in a fluid land market, their holdings remained almost static. It did not help, either, that the family experienced three wardships during the century. The first of these, in 1507, produced the highest valuation of the three, at $56 5's'. 7died per annum. In 1528 Pym's grandfather Erasmus in turn became a ward, and the wardship was sold to Sir Thomas Elyot, author of 'The Boke Named the Governour', who was a distant cousin. The estate was then valued at $41 9's'. 8died per annum. Erasmus Pym lived an unremarkable life on the fringe of the magisterial class. 
In 1575 Erasmus Pym was succeeded by John's father, Alexander, under whom the family fortunes began to look up. He was a JP, a commissioner for musters, and a significant figure in the Middle Temple. In 1584 he was elected MP for Taunton, though there is no evidence that he had taken his seat before he died in January 1585. He seems to have brought enhanced economic status to the family. He was responsible for the family's one substantial purchase of the sixteenth century, Wollavington Throckmorton, sold by Francis Throckmorton of Feckenham, Worcestershire, for $1700 in 1581. The money was to be paid 'in and upon the Fante Stone in the Temple Church in the suburbs of London, or in and upon the place where the Fante now standeth' (Pym MSS, Somerset Archive and Record Service, DD/BW, no. 113). The Middle Temple network was widespread and powerful, and it worked for Alexander. The manor adjoined, and consolidated, the existing manor of Wollavington Pym, and when Burghley gave the accolade of arrival to the Pyms by marking them on his political atlas he put them at Wollavington. 
Alexander's first marriage, in 1576 -- which cannot have lasted more than three or four years -- continued one habit which limited the Pyms' county strength, which was that of marrying outside the county. It was to Elizabeth, daughter of John Conyers of St Botolph Aldgate in London. It was a Middle Temple marriage: Alexander had shared a chamber with her brother. They had one daughter, Catherine, who subsequently married William Cholmeley, foreign apposer of the exchequer. 
Alexander's second marriage was to John Pym's mother, Philippa Colles, daughter of Humphrey Colles of Pitminster, Somerset. She was the sister of John Colles, JP, deputy lieutenant and, crucially for the history of John Pym, county feodary. She had two children: Jane, who subsequently married Richard Rous of Wotton, Cornwall, with whom she had at least seventeen children, and John. On 5 January 1585, seven months after John's birth, Alexander Pym died, and plunged the family into its third wardship of the century. 
The wardship appears not to have attracted the attention of any big speculators. There were two serious contenders for it: John's mother and his uncle William Pym. Since John Colles as feodary acted consistently in the interests of his sister, the wardship in effect became a duel between John's two uncles. That was no contest: John Colles was far the abler operator of the two. The friendship between the families lasted, and John Colles may have been a more important influence in the development of Pym's political sense than is normally recognized. The Colleses were not ideologues: they had made their fortune by favourable leases from Bishop Gilbert Bourne during the reign of Mary, but John Colles put his name to the bond of association in defence of Queen Elizabeth against her Catholic enemies in 1584. The religious clause of John Colles's will, which is unique among all Pym's contacts in its eschewal of hot protestantism, strikes the key note. He expresses belief in the resurrection of the flesh, the life everlasting, 'and all other articles of my faithe whiche a Christyane man oughte to beleeve' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/111, sig. 63). Unlike many other neutral wills, this one was so by studied choice. 
The wardship was duly granted to Pym's mother, Philippa. It was valued at the inquisition post mortem at $52 15's'. 10died and reduced in the feodary's survey to $51 13's'. 10died This is a valuation below that arrived at by Henry VII in 1507. There is no reason to suppose that these figures had any resemblance to what the estate was worth. First, the valuation concealed the newly purchased manor of Wollavington Throckmorton, by lumping the two Wollavington manors, Wollavington Throckmorton and Wollavington Pym, together under the conflated name of Wollavington. If the price had been set at the rate of twenty years' purchase, the value of the suppressed manor would have been $85. The other reason why a rental income was not a credible estimate of the value of the property was the habit of taking much of the income in entry fines in return for long leases. In 1614, in a document designed to be produced in the event of a wardship, Pym estimated his rental at $100 6's'. 8died per annum. His recorded income from entry fines, in a very incomplete collection of estate documents, comes to $158 per annum for the reign of James and $293 per annum for the reign of Charles up to 1640, when the series stops until well after both the war and John Pym's life were over. The late Miss Evelyn Gore, who had access to surveys which do not now survive, estimated Pym's median income from land at the beginning of James's reign at between $400 and $500 per annum, with the mean inflated above the median by occasional very large fines. 
It was a status on which magistracy was possible, but one at which being out of sight very quickly became out of mind. Pym never had the chance to get to know his Somerset contemporaries, since before he reached the age of four his mother married Anthony Rous of Halton St Dominic in Cornwall, and took the boy to live on the Cornish shore of Plymouth Sound. The Rouses were a very large and affectionate family, in which kin counted for even more than it did with the Pyms. John Pym adopted them as his own, and from then on, his career would be more easily understood if he were known as John Rous, younger son of Anthony Rous. 
Anthony Rous, originally from the borders of Sussex and Hampshire, was a rare character who made a success of being an expatriate in another county. In Cornwall he became JP and vice-warden of the stannaries. He was sheriff in the two crucial years of 1588 and 1603 and was knight of the shire in 1604, sitting on the committee to draft an act of thanksgiving for deliverance from the Gunpowder Plot. His committee service was regular, at least for the first session of the parliament, but he was not a frequent speaker. He was executor to Sir Francis Drake, who seems to have been a close personal friend. He was knighted in 1604. 
Both the children of Alexander Pym and Philippa married into the inner Rous circle. Jane married Anthony Rous's son from his first marriage, Robert. John, on 28 May 1604, married Anne Hooke ('bap'. 1586, died 'c'.1620), of Bramshott in Hampshire, daughter of John Hooke and Anthony Rous's sister Barbara. This marriage both cemented Pym into the Rous circle and began his connection with Hampshire. 
Among Rous's other children, Francis Rous was to be John Pym's regular parliamentary colleague, and one of the very few people who ever made Pym's hatred of Arminianism look half-hearted. Philippa married Humphrey Nicoll of Penvose, Cornwall, and their son Anthony Nicoll was an active member of the Long Parliament. Dorothy Rous married John Upton of Brixham, who was repeatedly MP for Dartmouth. John Upton was an active JP in Devon, and an active member of the Providence Island Company. He also created the connection between John Pym and John Clotworthy, since his brother married Clotworthy's sister. This connection was to be vital to relations between the Long Parliament and Ireland. 
Two other people, Charles Fitz-Geffrey, later vicar of Halton St Dominic, and Diagory Wheare, later Pym's tutor at Oxford, are firmly embedded in this circle. On 6 July 1593 Francis, Richard, and Robert Rous, Charles Fitz-Geffrey, and Diagory Wheare all matriculated at Broadgates Hall, Oxford (now Pembroke College), on the same day. Wheare was later named by William Camden as reader of his history lecture in Oxford. He remained in close contact with Pym, and was probably his source for much of his information on Oxford matters. 
According to Anthony Rous's funeral sermon, preached by Fitz-Geffrey in 1622, he showed evident signs of saving grace in his religious course. It was in the Rous circle that Pym imbibed a protestantism far hotter than the conventional Calvinism of his Somerset background. Anthony Rous sustained distressed ministers from Scotland, Ireland, and the Netherlands, and in 1584-5 employed as his domestic chaplain John Cowper, a Scottish minister in exile from the 'Black Acts'. Rous was thought to have died by catching a cold going up the Tamar by boat on a frosty morning to attend the weekly lecture at Saltash. On the sabbath, he made religious notes in a book. The praise in his funeral sermon for his generosity to the poor is on the whole sustained by his administration of John Pym's estates during the wardship. 
Yet trying to make too clear a distinction about 1600 between puritans and Calvinist conformists carries the risk of creating an anachronism: this was a fault line the Laudians had not yet cracked open. Calvinist ideas of predestination and assurance, which Whitgift and Cartwright shared and which members of the Rous circle expressed at every possible opportunity, were, in Dr N. Tyacke's phrase, 'a common and ameliorating bond' between conformist and nonconformist ('Puritanism, Arminianism and counter-revolution', 'The Origins of the English Civil War', ed. C. Russell, 1973, 121). The fact is nowhere clearer than in Pym's circle. The only exception seems to have been Pym's mother, who appears to have been one of those tragic Calvinists who believed they were predestined to damnation. 
In 1599 Pym followed the rest of the Rous tribe to Broadgates Hall. His Oxford loyalty, together with his loyalty to Diagory Wheare his tutor, appears to have been strong. In 1623 he contributed 44's'. to a Broadgates appeal for enlarging the hall, for meeting at disputations, and lodgings for students. He was more munificent in 1630 in reply to a personal appeal from Wheare for subscriptions to Gloucester Hall, of which Wheare had become principal. The total yield of the appeal was $88, of which John Pym contributed $20, and his eldest surviving son, Alexander, another $20. Much the clearest statement of his Oxford loyalties is in his parliamentary diary for 1621. In reporting the debate on whether Oxford or Cambridge should be mentioned first in the subsidy bill, he said: 'All those which had been of either Universitie inclined to that place of which they were. But such as had been of neither remained indifferent and were only swayed by reason. Soe that uppon the question the precedence was appointed to Oxford. (Notestein, Relf, and Simpson, 4.144-5)' That is the true faith.Pym also followed the family path to the Middle Temple, where he was admitted on 5 February 1602, and bound with Francis Rous and William Whitaker of Westbury, later to be his regular lawyer, a parliamentary colleague, and a member of the Rous circle. However, the Middle Temple appears not to have taken as Oxford did, and the records show a succession of absences during readings, for which he was fined. The Middle Temple did, however, produce a friendship with Benjamin Rudyerd which lasted the rest of his life. 
In his thirty-eight years from coming of age to death, Pym had at least five different addresses. Up to the death of his wife about 1620, he lived at his ancestral home at the manor of Brymore, in the parish of Cannington, outside Taunton in Somerset. During most of the 1620s he divided his time between Sir William Boswell's house in the parish of St Clement Danes in London, which he rented jointly with his brother-in-law William Cholmeley, and a house in the parish of Wherwell (or Horwell) in Hampshire, where he tried to turn himself into a Hampshire country gentleman. From 1630 onwards he was usually found in London, in the parish of St Andrew's, Holborn. From about 1636 onwards until parliament met, he was normally living in the house of Richard Knightley in Fawsley in Northamptonshire, in what Clarendon called 'a kind of classis' (Clarendon, 1.145). 
After livery of his estate in 1605, Pym returned home to Somerset with his new bride. He apparently intended to get re-established there, since he had plans to install a new water supply at Brymore. Up to about 1620, when his wife, his mother, his stepfather, and his eldest son, John, all died within a short space of time, Pym seems to have been set on planting himself on the Somerset stage. He was resident reasonably regularly and paid serious attention to the management of his property. What he did not achieve was any entry into Somerset county society. In all this period, only two Somerset gentlemen so much as appear on documents with him. One is Sir John Mallett of Penvose, who was one of his sureties for the office of receiver of crown lands for Hampshire, Wiltshire, and Gloucestershire. The other sureties were Thomas Conyers of East Barnet, his father's old Middle Temple chamberfellow and brother of his father's first wife, and William Cholmeley, husband of his elder sister. It is a clear example of the tendency of the Pyms to rely on kin rather than on neighbourhood, and underlines the point that Sir John Mallett was the son of Philippa Pym's sister. 
The other Somerset gentleman associated with Pym was William Frauncis of Combe Florey, an established but not particularly important JP. He appears in several minor documents, and in the complex uses of 1614, by which Pym attempted to protect his property against wardship in the event of his death. These documents attempted the complex, and legally dubious, arrangement of a use upon a use. The feoffees to the first were William Frauncis, Humphrey Nicoll of Penvose, Cornwall, Robert Rous of Wotton, Cornwall, another of Pym's stepbrothers, and Diagory Wheare. The feoffees for the second were William Cholmeley his brother-in-law, William Whitaker of the Middle Temple, his lawyer, and one new arrival, Sir Edward Wardour of the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, clerk of the pells in the exchequer. Wardour was also an active Middlesex and Westminster JP, and a friend of Francis Russell, fourth earl of Bedford. He may possibly have been the man who established contact between Pym and Bedford. Wardour was a parliamentary colleague during the 1620s, and involved in the draft plans for Pym and Bedford's revenue settlement in 1641. Along with Ralph Brownrigg, master of St Catharine's College, Cambridge, and bishop of Exeter from November 1641, who married William Cholmeley's daughter, he was one of only two people in Pym's circle who became royalists in the civil war. 
The enfeoffments to use secured a descent to three of Pym's sons in order. John, eldest son and heir apparent, was born in 1609, matriculated at Gloucester Hall in 1623 aged fourteen, and appears to have died very shortly afterwards. The second son, Alexander, followed his father into the Middle Temple in 1629, spent time abroad in the service of the states general of the United Provinces in the early 1630s, became a recruiter member of the Long Parliament, and was associated with the radical faction in county politics during the civil war. He died childless and unmarried some time before the Restoration. The third son, Anthony, is known only from a letter he wrote on 29 July 1633, saying: 'Let my miserable example make thee avoid all wicked and prodigal courses. I am now going out of England and doubtful I am whether ever I shall see any of you again' (C. J. Sawyer & Co., catalogue no. 155, no. 71). The striking point about this letter is its recipient. It is not John Pym, but his youngest son, Charles, not yet born in 1614, and therefore still under nineteen in 1633. As their father grew more deeply embedded in the affairs of Providence Island and of parliament, Charles Pym appears to have become the human cement which held the family together. He was the recipient of aching letters from his sister Dorothy, suffering for about two months from toothache, or begging letters from his sister Katherine, who died unmarried in 1649, about the chances of buying second-hand virginals cheap. It was to Charles Pym that she wrote: 'Speake to my father to send me some money... for I want it very much you know there is no living without it' (ibid., no. 69). Such letters may help to understand why Charles Pym was so much more successful in Somerset county society than his father or his elder brother. 
Philippa Pym, the eldest daughter, in 1625 married Thomas Symons of Whittlesford in Cambridgeshire, a cheerful man who ordered his tobacco pipes by the gross. He had a small adventure in the Providence Island Company, and was a member of the Cambridgeshire county committee at the beginning of the civil war, presumably to provide a link with his father-in-law. Dorothy, the middle daughter, was not married until 1641, when she married back into the Rous circle; her husband was Sir Francis Drake of Werrington. Pym, trying to keep up a new-found status, committed himself to paying a dowry of $2300, but in the encumbered state to which Providence reduced him he did not pay it. Alexander Pym later had to mortgage Wollavington for it. 
As Pym's financial difficulties increased during the 1630s, a slow change occurred in the management of the estate. At the beginning of Pym's ownership his manors were still recognizable village communities. The lessees normally lived on their tenements, and appeared at the manorial court with at least reasonable regularity. They might pay high fines and low rents, but they took manageable plots of land for a single occupier, and the level of rents made them still recognizably tenants. 
In the upland manors of Cutcombe Mohun and Cutcombe Raleigh, on the edge of Exmoor, this pattern on the whole persisted. In the lowland country around Wollavington, on the edge of the levels and in cattle country, there was a tendency for some leases to be of very large plots of land, with an enormous fine and derisory rent. These leases necessarily implied subtenants, and the leases confined themselves to insisting that subtenancies must be registered with the manorial court. In return for the high fines, there was bargaining over the identity of the lessees, and one lease bears a note, probably by Pym's steward, 'all three lessees are children' (Pym MSS, Somerset Archive and Record Service, DD/BW, no. 212). In these cases, leases stress with increasing stridency a need to attend the manorial court, and to accept its decisions and pay fines imposed by it. The requirement to notify deaths of lessees to the manorial court is stated in increasingly draconian terms. One of them even invents a manorial version of the doctrine of 'praemunire', in that taking any case to any other court which ought to go to the manorial court leads to forfeiture of the tenement. 
In this high-fine economy, a very fine line separates the lease from the mortgage. A lease of much of Wollavington to James Hayward, yeoman, for a fine of $460 and a rent of 29's'. 6died, with a special clause forbidding Hayward to carry away the manure, comes close to this line. Hayward, presumably a grazier, was an up-and-coming man, and in the civil war he was a captain in the parliamentarian army alongside Pym's sons Charles and Alexander. A lease of 1626 to John Grabham, grazier, illiterate but employing counsel, for a fine of $240 and a rent of 15's'. for three lives, all of them children, is another out of the same stable. By 1634, when John Grabham took a much bigger lease for a fine of $300, he is styled gent., but still illiterate. Such leases are still a minority, but they are the ones which financed Pym's political career, and made the fortunes of his leading tenants. If there was a 'rise of the middle classes' going on during Pym's lifetime, he was not its beneficiary: he was its victim. 
When Pym first came to the attention of the newsletter writer John Chamberlain, in the parliament of 1621, he was characterized as 'one Pym, a Receiver' ('The Letters of John Chamberlain', ed. N. E. MacClure, 2 vols., Memoirs of the American Philosophical Society, vol. 12, pts 1-2, 1939, 2.412). His office as receiver of crown lands for Hampshire, Wiltshire, and Gloucestershire was his only office in the gift of the crown. He was originally granted the reversion to the office on 17 June 1605. Henry Audley, his predecessor, died on 18 November 1606 owing $2000 of arrears to the crown, and Pym took up the office shortly afterwards. He held it until 16 July 1638, when he surrendered it to Bedford's former servant Robert Scawen. Attorney-General Bankes wrote a note on the dorse of the docket: 'Mr Pym hath surrendered his office' (Birmingham Central Library, Birmingham City Archives, Coventry MS, grants of offices, no. 596. What is notable about the placing of Bankes's comment on the dorse, and revealing a note of triumph, is that it was left where a messenger could read it.). As receiver Pym received a fee of $100 per annum, supplemented by portage and poundage at 1 per cent of the money he handled. His income from office was supplemented, from 1608, by appointment as the queen's receiver, at a fee of $149 without portage or poundage, and later by a similar appointment for the prince of Wales, and subsequently for Queen Henrietta Maria. Since this merely required him to collect rents from some of the manors for which he was already responsible, and to pay them to the queen instead of the king, it was a useful device for increasing salaries. His income from office, including occasional windfall payments such as $400 for attending twenty-two meetings of the commission for disafforesting Blackmore and Pewsham Forest, and for keeping all its accounts, may have come to over $300 per annum. 
Pym's main duty was to collect the king's rents. In this task he unusually employed a printed form with blanks, on which he filled in the times at which people were to appear before him (NRA, catalogue of Kingsmill MSS). He was occasionally employed on embarrassing business, as in 1621, when Cranfield sent him to dun William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, to his face for unpaid rent. Pym was regularly employed in delivering timber for the repair of the coastal forts, and knew at first hand what a parlous state of repair they were in. He was frequently employed in special commissions out of the exchequer, and investigated, for example, a remarkable story of waste of wood from Chute Forest and the New Forest. Pym made $133 6's'. 8died out of delivering in to the crown the receipts from massive wood sales conducted by the notorious patentee Sir Giles Mompesson, and exchanged rival memos with Mompesson about exchequer practice. Mompesson wanted to abolish receivers and give the business back to the exchequer, a view with which Pym of course disagreed. Pym had already encountered Mompesson through his patent for the licensing of inns, under which he had given a licence to the Unicorn at Wollavington. After the parliament of 1621, Pym took home one of Mompesson's inn licences, and kept it among his papers as a souvenir. 
By far the most significant business for Pym's own career was the clearance and disafforestation of Blackmore and Pewsham Forest, in Wiltshire. This probably accounted for his first two elections to parliament, at Calne in 1621 and at Chippenham in 1624. Both boroughs had closed corporation franchises. At Chippenham, there were twelve members of the corporation, of whom seven voted for Pym and five for Sir Francis Popham. Of the twelve, six and the father of a seventh had recently taken leases from Pym of disafforested grounds in Blackmore and Pewsham. Moreover, Pym was vehemently defending the tenants in a magnificent row with Lionel Cranfield about terms of their leases. In the absence of a list of members of the Calne corporation, it is impossible to prove that the same thing happened there, but the probability is considerable. At Chippenham, which gave rise to an election dispute, the commoners were unanimously for Sir Francis Popham. They had the usual grievance about loss of rights of common, they had been restrained from taking wood from the forest, and the conversion to arable had closed the old line of the road from Chippenham to Devizes. For the commoners, involvement in the forest clearance is unlikely to have been an electoral asset. The project won Pym his only substantial patron in the government service, Lionel Cranfield, who was responsible for getting him out of prison after the parliament of 1621. In spite of the quarrel over the lease the relationship seems to have lasted until Cranfield's fall. 
The row with Cranfield resulted from the fact that the terms of the leases had been agreed before the agricultural depression of 1620-21, but the leases themselves were not to be signed until after it. On 22 August 1622 the commissioners advised Cranfield that the level of rents in the area had fallen by a fifth, and the ground was less good for agriculture than had been hoped. Robert Treswell, the king's woodward, one of the most active commissioners, wrote a private letter to Cranfield in support of this argument. Cranfield and Weston replied in typical treasury tones that they had been 'over-easy... to his Majesty's great disadvantage' (Sackville MSS, CKS, U269). Pym and Treswell replied that the leases had not been concluded since the treasurer and chancellor of the exchequer had not approved them before the depression, and that the tenants were unwilling to take them on these terms and could not be forced to do so. Cranfield recognized the inevitable and, having evicted one tenant to save face, reached compromises with the others. 
At this stage, immediately after this hectic emphasis on the king's service, the king chose to grant the whole forest, at a rent below its rental excluding fines, to Christopher Villiers, earl of Anglesey. The conversion of what had been supposed to be a major project for increasing crown revenue into a Villiers relief project in favour of the duke of Buckingham's brother enabled Pym to make a substantial personal input into the impeachment of Buckingham. To Pym the need to preserve the king's revenue came second only to the need to combat popery. Indeed, since he regularly thought of combating popery in terms of powder and shot, as befitted one brought up by one of Drake's executors, the two needs were very closely related in his mind. Presenting the eleventh and twelfth articles of the duke's impeachment to the Lords in 1626, dealing with his enrichment of his kindred at the public expense, he said: 'This makes the Duke's offence the greater that in this weaknes and consumcon of the comon wealth he hath not byn content alone to consume the publique comon wealth treasure, wch is the bloode and nourishmt. of the state, but hath brought in others to help him in this worke of distruccion. And that they might do it more eagerly, by enlarging therie ['sic'] honor, he hath likewise enlarged therie necessities and therie appetites. (Hants. RO, Winchester, Jervoise MS O 7)' As a comment on the evidence known to have been in Pym's possession, this cannot be called inaccurate. 
During the 1620s Pym appears to have been trying to establish himself in Hampshire. He was assessed for the second subsidy of 1621 at Whitchurch, in Kingsclere division, at $15 in lands. From 1621 to 1626 he responded to Hampshire assessments for subsidy with a certificate saying he was assessed in the parish of St Clement Danes in London where he ordinarily dwelt. His assessment was $10 6's'. 8died For the forced loan in 1626 he was assessed for two payments of $10 each in the hundred and village of Wherwell, which was the address he gave on the marriage licence for the marriage of Philippa to Thomas Symonds, in February 1626. 
Pym was previously thought to have paid the forced loan. What happened is rather more interesting. On 11 December 1626, his brother-in-law Henry Hooke sent to Sir Thomas Jervoise the money required of 'my brother Pym', and asked Jervoise to send Pym a receipt for it (Hants. RO, Winchester, Jervoise MS O 21). On 26 December Pym wrote to Jervoise from Wherwell: 'though I conceive my brother Hooke payed this mony out of his desire of my safety, yet I fynde my selfe very hartely greved that he should write that I had sent it'. He said he had returned Hooke his receipt, and begged Jervoise, if it was not too late, to get the record of his payment off the file. This letter has the unmistakable note of a seasoned man of business trying to combine the maximum possible trouble-making with the minimum possible discourtesy (Hants. RO, Winchester, Jervoise MS O 12). In 1628 he was reported as defaulting for one horse for the musters at Whitchurch, where he probably no longer lived, and this is the last mention of him in Hampshire save for his work as receiver. 
The certificates showing Pym to be living in St Clement Danes were perfectly genuine. He and William Cholmeley paid the surveyor's rates for Boswell's house in the duchy liberty of the Savoy from 1619-20 until the account of 12 April 1626. In 1627-8 there is a blank against their names, and thereafter they do not appear in the accounts. This lease predates his election to parliament, and it is possible that, being left with young children on the death of his wife, Pym relied on his sister Catherine to help to care for them. From 1621 to 1623 Pym also contributed to the churchwardens' rate and pew rate, and this provides an interesting sidelight on the level of his ecclesiastical tolerance before the rise of Arminianism. He worshipped at a church which kept two surplices. Where churches kept accounts for washing the surplice, the date for which it was washed is something of a thermometer between high and low. St Clement Danes washed the surplice for 5 November, which was about the lowest possible choice of date for which to wash it. The annual bellringings were for 5 November and for the king's delivery from the Gowrie conspiracy, which should have caused no trouble for a protestant conscience. However, the parish beat the bounds and tolled the passing bell for deaths, a habit rejected at neighbouring St Margaret's, Westminster. All this may have been rather high for Pym's tastes, and it does not appear to be the way things were done at Cannington or at Wherwell, but it does suggest, like much other evidence, that the central thrusts of Pym's religious passion were directed at the twin issues of predestination and anti-popery. It tends to lend credence to the report in the Commons journals of a sentence in his maiden speech, saying 'the exception against ceremonies now almost worn out, and scarce appeareth'. It is not something Pym would have said a few years later, and he left it out of the report of the speech in his own diary, but it may for all that be a genuine statement of his mood of the moment ('JHC, 1547-1628', 524). 
Pym was perhaps the first Englishman who acquired a national reputation based on what he did in parliament. Yet like some others of equal stature in parliamentary history (Gladstone and Churchill, for example) he was not a particularly good politician according to conventional criteria. He once dried in a crucial speech at the close of the trial of the earl of Strafford, to the amusement of Robert Baillie. For every major performance he relied heavily on a written script, carefully altered and interlineated to the point where it becomes astonishing that he could read it. He could not respond to a debate, and adjust his position to its ebb and flow: his arguments emerged, like a regiment of tanks, fully armoured from his own head. Where he did not have a script, he usually confined himself to very brief procedural interventions. He was destitute of humour, and lacked the politician's crucial ability to read the mood of the house. On one occasion, unable to accept his failure to do so, he walked out in a huff. On another occasion, speaking on the bill against adultery in 1628, he raised what may have been the biggest belly-laugh of the decade at his expense by concluding his speech with the motion 'that we commit it' (Johnson and others, 3.26, 30). 
What made Pym a successful parliamentary politician was his total inner certainty, and the emotional force this gave to his performances. He benefited from a curious incongruity which combined the meticulous attention to unemotional detail of a skilled accountant with the driving passion of a religious enthusiast. With this, he combined an Aristotelian tendency to philosophize which often enabled him to see far more general implications in a misdemeanour than others could do. It is the classic political ability to see all hell in a grain of sand. He also enjoyed a considerable intelligence, and an exceptional personal force. All this was backed up by a prodigious capacity for hard work. By 1626 his colleagues had learned that he was the man who could be left to write the report, and when he did, it usually contained passages taken verbatim from his own speeches. He also had a serious interest in parliamentary procedure, and put a lot of effort into being on the right side of successive speakers. 
At first Pym was unknown to many of his parliamentary colleagues, and Sir Thomas Barrington once referred to him under the inappropriate name 'Mr Pope' (Notestein, Relf, and Simpson, 3.190). The first sign that he was acquiring a patron came with his return for Tavistock in 1624, the constituency for which he sat for the rest of his career. Since there is no evidence that he ever set foot in the constituency, Bedford's patronage is the only sensible interpretation of that return. What is striking is the effort he put in 1624 in trying to secure the disputed seat at Chippenham, to which he had been elected by his own efforts. 
In 1628 Pym became an executor for Bedford's draft will, and he retained that position so long as there was a risk of Bedford's leaving minor heirs. His patron was not Edward, third earl of Bedford, but Francis, second Lord Russell of Thornhaugh, who had bought his predecessor out of the estates in 1617 and succeeded to the Bedford title in 1627. Pym also attracted the patronage of Robert Rich, earl of Warwick, possibly through Sir Nathaniel Rich, who became a close parliamentary collaborator. In November 1626 he became a feoffee to uses to Warwick, taking on a share of responsibility for managing Warwick's estate during his voyage of 1627, and for payment of his debts, which Warwick calculated at $13,000. To put these debts in proportion Warwick's calculation of his income for 1634 should be considered. His certain rents he put at $6447 17's'. 6died, and casualties at $318 7's'., giving a total income from land of $6766 5's'. 6died This puts his income from land, which was almost certainly smaller than Bedford's, at thirteen times a high estimate of Pym's. 
Early seventeenth-century patrons did not normally operate a political whip, except on personal matters such as private bills or on highly sensitive matters such as the impeachment of Buckingham, where the only possible safety was in numbers. For people such as Pym the usual service was work, and the management of Warwick's estate during his absence, using his special skill as a receiver, was typical of what was wanted. His later post as treasurer of the Providence Island Company grew out of this tradition. It was the connection with Warwick which led Pym into his colonial interests; the beginning of the connection cannot be dated, but was certainly after 18 April 1621, when he proposed a total ban on tobacco ('JHC, 1547-1628', 543). 
Bedford, if he had left a wardship, would have drawn on Pym's same skills of land management. Meanwhile, his chief use for Pym seems to have been to satisfy his voracious appetite for information. Pym's parliamentary diaries for 1621, 1624, and 1625 were all in his possession, and he annotated them. Some of his comments, especially on the treatment of nonconforming ministers and impropriations in 1625, indicate strong disagreement with the line Pym was taking, but there is no evidence that he tried to restrain him. 
In his first parliament, in 1621, Pym was only an occasional speaker, and many of his early speeches were on matters in which he was personally interested. Sir John Bennet had admitted his uncle William Pym's will to probate, and he had crossed swords with Sir Giles Mompesson. In that case, he put his accountancy skills to such good use that he helped to manage the charge, though William Hakewill, whom he was assisting, complained that he was 'no lawyer'. His interest in the parliamentary representation of Ilchester and Minehead must have been obvious, and the case of Morgan, Bowdler, and Meggs was one in which his feoffee Sir Edward Wardour, also a member, was personally concerned. 
The fact that Pym was 'no lawyer', and not attuned to the constitutional concerns, or the sense of honour, of many of the house, accounts for many of the occasions when he hit the wrong note. On 18 April, on the case of Sir John Bennet, he suggested that they should investigate whether he had taken bribes to do justice or to do injustice; Sir Edward Coke bluntly reminded him that it was a bribe in any case. On 21 April he again clashed with Coke and Edward Alford, who were calling for an act of parliament for suppression of a monopoly. Pym said the proclamation against it was good, 'which was not denyed, all the House sayth' (Notestein, Relf, and Simpson, 3.44). He learned, but there is truth in the remark that Pym's attachment to the law always had a certain intermittency about it (Hexter, 194-5). 
Pym also made some remarkably significant contributions. In a speech of 20 April against Sir John Bennet he set out in full what was to become the procedure of impeachment. He said, in a characteristic phrase, 'the high court of Parliament is the great eye of the kingdom, to find out offences and punish them' (Notestein, Relf, and Simpson, 2.303). In his vision, the Commons were to keep control of the prosecution, the Lords of judgment, and the king of execution. On 15 May, in a remarkable anticipation of Rousseau, he said: 'Men accused heear cannot be condemned but by him selfe, all voyces being included heeard' (ibid., 3.264). It took him twenty years to make this vision a reality, but he succeeded. 
Pym gained most notice for his speeches of 27 and 28 November on the foreign policy issue. He favoured war, but thought that without raids on the king of Spain's treasure in the West Indies it could not be financed. Characteristically, he was more interested in the home front, and thought that 'we are not secure enough at home in respect of the enemy at home which groes by the suspence of the lawes at home'. The king received 'no redress by the subordinate ministers that he trusts'. He proposed that every man take an oath of association 'or not be admitted into the commonwealth'. He said papists broke the 'independency upon others' which loyal subjects owed, and that the king, by mistaken lenity towards them, was hazarding the state. He offered a proposal, which looked far into his political future, for the execution of the recusancy laws to be entrusted to a commission including members of both houses of parliament (Notestein, Relf, and Simpson, 3.461-2; Nicholas, 2.238; Notestein, Relf, and Simpson, 4.448). The attitude to the king echoes the remark of Simon de Montfort during the battle of Saintes in 1242: 'The King must be locked up until the battle is over, or we will lose'. Neither king took the attitude kindly. The attitude to Rome might have been more in place in the year of Pym's birth, when Roman Catholics could be legitimately suspected of wanting to put Mary, queen of Scots on the throne, than it was in the year when the speech was delivered. Pym seems not to have seen the peace of 1604 as anything but a temporary truce. It was in this context that he placed his hatred of attacks on 'Puritans', which he thought alienated the king from his only loyal subjects. It was this Manichaean view of the world, concealed under the practicality of a man of business, which made him such a potentially dangerous enemy. In his proposal for a commission to execute the recusancy laws, he showed what was to be his driving conviction twenty years later, that it was the executive power which was in the supreme position, and no amount of parliamentary power could change the situation without getting a handle on it. He was in immediate trouble for this speech, and no doubt made things worse the next day by bravely saying he would ignore 'the whisperings of his own fortune' (ibid., 6.206). The imprisonment which followed the dissolution made him more careful, but more determined. 
In 1624, the year of his quietest parliament, Pym gave full support to the breach of the treaties with Spain, saying that 'we have made one step from the greatest danger that ever threatened us, God grant that we relapse not again'. He supported, almost alone, the king's full request for six subsidies and twelve fifteenths (diary of Sir William Spring, Harvard U., Houghton L., 19 March 1624). He continued his hunt for recusants, including 'those who by their practice show what they are, as well as those that are convicted' (BL, Add. MS 18597, fol. 109b). Legal rights were not for fifth columns. He also began, in attacks on Richard Mountague and Samuel Harsnett, the attack on Arminian clergy which was to become his major theme of the 1620s. 
In the parliament of 1625 Pym gave priority to this religious business. He kept his head down about most of the contentious secular business, and confined himself to supporting Fleetwood's final move for compromise, on 8 August. Much of his time went on the preparation of the petition on religion, managed jointly by him and Sir Edwin Sandys. One of his phrases about the papists, from his offending speech of 27 November 1621, has passed almost unaltered into the petition: 'if they gayne but a connivencye, they will presse for a toleration; then strive for an equallitie, and lastly aspire to such a superioritye as may worke the extermination both of us and of our religion' (Gardiner, 19). He was responsible for most of the work of the committee on Richard Mountague and, though Heneage Finch delivered its report, it is easy to hear Pym's voice in the drafting of it. Unusually, this committee delivered a further report, which was delivered by Pym, to the next parliament, on 17 April 1626. In that, he directly charged Mountague with discouraging the well affected in religion, 'and to incline them, and as much as he can, to reconcile them, to popery'. The two key points in this charge were Mountague's maintaining that Rome was a true church, and that it was possible to fall from grace (ibid., 180). It is likely that Pym meant the charge of popery against the Arminians entirely literally. They were the fifth column in the pulpit. 
For Pym the chief attraction of the rule of law was always that it guaranteed England's true protestant status. The area in which he most wanted to control the executive was always that of religion, to prevent it from either corrupting the doctrine of the Church of England, or subverting it by too much leniency to the popish enemy. When parliament met again, in 1626, Buckingham had just given his support to the Arminians at the York House conference. Pym therefore knew that attempts to subvert the religion of England were continuing with the consent of the chief minister, and the connivance, possibly unwitting, of the king. 
Together with both his patrons, Bedford and Warwick, Pym committed himself wholeheartedly to the impeachment of Buckingham. From the beginning he linked this issue with that of the royal revenue. He supported Sir Nathaniel Rich's motion of 24 February to consider the king's revenue. He asked to consider 'confusion' (no doubt a euphemism) by the king's officers (Bidwell and Jansson, 2.116). Typically, he took the first chance to link the issues of protecting the revenue and of fighting the popish danger. On 1 March he used his accountant's skill to cut through a fog in the debate on the duke's alleged embezzlement of the goods from the captured French ship the 'St Peter'. The issue was in danger of being lost in a difficult dispute about whether the 'St Peter' was a lawful prize. Pym saw that that issue was irrelevant, and asked for the commissioners to be sent for to ask by what warrant they delivered the money of the king or the Frenchmen to the duke. It was the parliamentary question at its best: a straightforward request for information and lethally unanswerable. On 4 March he co-operated with Bedford to avoid a row between the houses about an unwise order of the Commons to send for Buckingham, made without the consent of the Lords. The Commons pretended, with the clerk's consent, that the order had been mistakenly entered, and altered it before there could be an official complaint. 
Pym continued to show awareness of the need to limit executive power. On 14 April he reminded the king of James's promise in 1624 that he would not end the war by making peace without the advice of parliament. On the same day he gave strong support to Digges's proposal for a West India Company. Like the proposal for a commission to execute the recusancy laws, which he had offered in 1621, this was designed to delegate executive power to safe hands. It was in effect a proposal which looked towards the privatization of war, by allowing it to be conducted by a private company for prizes, rather than by the state out of inadequate taxation. The immediate model was clearly the Dutch West India Company, but some of the activities of Wallenstein in Germany, and the move towards funding war by 'asiento', or contract, in Spain, looked in the same direction. War was not merely too important to be left to the generals: it was too expensive to be left to the king. This was becoming an increasingly common note in Pym's thinking. 
Pym's main business continued to be the committee for religion, from which he made fourteen reports. Most of these were part of a drive, on which Sandys had started him in 1625, to hunt down and exclude from teaching all the popish schoolmasters he could find. He also carried on the task of listing office-holders who were recusant, were married to recusants, or had recusants in their households. On 3 May he showed how utterly unpolitical his hatred of popery was by trying unsuccessfully to insist on including Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel, in the list of popish office-holders because he had two recusant servants. Arundel was not merely too big for this sort of treatment; he was also, along with Pembroke, one of the two principal backers of the impeachment of the duke within the privy council. Any attack on Arundel would have unravelled the uneasy coalition which made the impeachment of Buckingham possible, between Arundel's supporters who wanted to impeach Buckingham for being at war with Spain, and Pembroke's who wanted to impeach him for not doing it properly. Pym was overruled. 
Pym's anxieties ratcheted up when the king reacted to the beginning of impeachment proceedings by trying to have Buckingham elected as chancellor of Cambridge University. Pym was clearly well informed on this issue, and probably got his information from his niece's husband Ralph Brownrigg, who was one of the organizers of the Cambridge Calvinists. On 3 June he drew the house's attention to the fact that the duke's campaign was being organized by men such as John Cosin, 'who have bene agents to utter Montagues book', and suggested that 'it may be to perfect a conspiracy to bring in Arminianism' (Eaton Hall, Cheshire, diary of Sir Richard Grosvenor, fol. 148; Bidwell and Jansson, 3.352, 356). From then on, Pym knew that a creed which he regarded as popish was being promoted from within the heart of government, with the full knowledge of the king. 
Among the speeches given in 1628, and to a lesser extent in 1625 and 1626, there is a difficulty in distinguishing Pym's from those of John Pyne, MP for Poole, who too was from Somerset. Even if Pyne is given the benefit of every doubt, 1628 was still Pym's most active session to date, and he made more speeches then than in all of his first three parliaments put together. For the first time he was thoroughly converted to the Cokeian version of the rule of law. On 25 March, right at the beginning, he acknowledged Coke as his source, and added a commitment to the Cokeian doctrine of the ancient constitution. On 25 April he committed himself to the theory of liberty as a birthright. On 26 April he opposed the Lords' proposed amendments to the petition of right, saying that 'for reason of state I desire it may never come amongst laws', and that bare confirmation would not suffice, because 'we have our liberties, but they have been broken by martial law' (Johnson and others, 3.107, 102, 111, 118). He joined in the specific condemnations of arbitrary imprisonment, forced loans, martial law, billeting, and the use of soldiers in England. 
At the same time Pym tried not to block off avenues to any satisfactory compromise. He refused to make an issue of the king's demand that the house sit on Good Friday. As in 1625 he seconded the final motion for a compromise, in this case Rudyerd's motion that the king be asked for a second answer, but this time he was successful. He was not, however, prepared to take an inadequate compromise for form's sake. On 6 May he replied to a request that they should rely on the king's word by saying he was entirely willing to rely on the king's word, but the king had not said the right word. 'If he understood the laws he would not err' (Johnson and others, 3.282, 271, 276, 281-2). 
In a large report of 11 June Pym continued his attack on Richard Mountague. He repeated his charge that Mountague was 'drawing the subjects to popery and reconciling them to the see of Rome'. He accused him of dividing the church in foreign parts from the Church of England, and complained of the rapidly widening meaning he and his allies were giving to the word 'Puritan': 'he layes the name of Puritans upon the King's subjects that are dutifull and honest subjects in trueth at first this word was given to them that severed themselves from the church but he sayes there are Puritans in heart and Puritanes in doctrine and under this name he comprehends some of our bpps.' The house resolved to send the case to the Lords, but adjournment prevented them (Johnson and others, 4.262, 238-240). 
Pym's biggest new contribution was in the attack on Roger Manwaring, vicar of St Giles-in-the-Fields, who had preached in the most arbitrary terms in defence of the forced loan. Pym summarized the case to the house on 14 May, and officially presented it to the Lords on 4 June. He said he 'strikes at the root of all government' by supporting 'an absolute power not bounded by law'. He brought 'spiritual poison offered to the ear of the King, appropriating omnipotency to princes'. This was, more or less fully fledged, the concept of alteration of government which was to be the staple of Pym's Long Parliament impeachments. He said: 'First, that no alteracon of the forme of government in a state can be made without danger of ruyne of the state. Secondly, that these lawes did not growe by graunt of princes, nor by pragmatique sanction, but are fundamentall from the very originall of this kingdome, and are part of the essentiall constitution thereof.' He charged him with 'conspiring with the Jesuits and the Church of Rome, to disturbe the government'. There is no extant proof that Manwaring was an Arminian, but it appears that Pym believed he was, and that he intended to sweep aside law and parliaments because they stood in the way of the introduction of Arminianism (Johnson and others, 3.407-10; Parl. Arch., Braye MS I, fols. 63b, 60b). 
For Pym 1629 was probably his least successful session in parliament. The house's proceedings were dominated by two issues. One was the issue of tonnage and poundage and the customs farmers. The customs farmers had arrested John Rolle, a member of parliament, for not paying tonnage and poundage, which parliament had not yet confirmed, in spite of Pym's attempt to get them to do so before they rose in 1628. The group led by Pym, Rich, and Rous accepted that the king could not be made to punish the customs farmers for obeying his commands, thought that sooner or later he would have to be legally allowed tonnage and poundage, and wanted to give priority to the attack on Arminianism and popery. Sir John Eliot and John Selden, who led the demand for a fight on the question of punishing the customs farmers, had the better of it, and the house slid inexorably towards dissolution. 
At the end of 1629 Pym was definitely not a leader of parliament. He was, perhaps, one of the twenty or so most important members, but he had staked his authority on a course the house would not accept, and shown the same fatal capacity to misjudge the mood of the house as he had shown in his first session, in 1621. His speech of 19 February, saying that 'the liberties of this House are inferior to the liberties of the kingdome, to determine the previledge of this House is but a meane matter, and the mayne end is to establishe possession of the subjects', may have been intellectually perfectly sound, but the phrase 'a meane matter' showed the inability of the bad politician to suffer fools gladly. Rich tried to rescue him, but he was roundly damned by Eliot and Sir Francis Seymour, and comprehensively defeated (Notestein and Relf, 156-7). 
One would not expect, looking at these exchanges, that when the house met again eleven years later this man would be unambiguously recognized as its spokesman and leading figure. It was not a position Pym had come anywhere near during the 1620s. The conclusion seems to follow inexorably that his rise to supremacy inside the house was the result of events which took place outside it. 
Among these events, the founding and development of the Providence Island Company must be one. There has been a long-standing belief that Pym contemplated emigration during the 1630s. The solid evidence on which this rests is Oliver St John's obituary tribute to Pym in the House of Commons. St John referred to him: 'having about 10 or 12 years since gotten up his estate about the town, fearing lest popery would overgrow this kingdom, intending to make some plantation in foreign parts where the profession of the Gospel might have a free course; in wch designe, and in using his best endeavours for the service of the Parlt.; both before the Parlt and since, he hath wasted his estate and his person. (BL, Add. MS 31116, fol. 99b)' Coming from one of Pym's executors, the statement is authoritative in what it says, but it is somewhat lacking in precision. It does not actually say that Pym himself intended to emigrate. He did not sell his estate, though he certainly borrowed heavily on it. Moreover, the statement is self-interested, since it ends with a motion for money for Pym's heir, for whose debts most of St John's friends were bound. 
During most of the early 1630s Pym was living in High Holborn, in the parish of St Andrew, alongside Sir Nathaniel Rich, William Fiennes, Viscount Saye and Sele, Robert Greville, Lord Brooke, Sir John Clotworthy, William Jessop, and, later, Samuel Hartlib. Informal meetings for planning must have been very easy. The Providence Island Company, formed in 1630, involved most of the key figures of the parliamentary leadership of 1640: Saye, Brooke, Warwick, Edward Montagu, Lord Mandeville, Henry Rich, earl of Holland, Sir Thomas Barrington, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir Benjamin Rudyerd, Oliver St John, and Henry Darley. William Jessop, Warwick's servant, was secretary and Pym was treasurer. The conspicuous absentee was Bedford, whether because he was never quite of that political group, or because he was too careful of his money. 
In this group Pym was socially and financially outclassed. He had to make a big effort to distinguish his status from that of William Jessop, Warwick's servant and the other working officer, and underlined the point by writing to him as 'Good Will' (Lancs. RO, Preston, Hulton MS 46/21). In 1630 Sir Thomas Barrington turned down a proposal to allow Pym to stay in Barrington Hall for the summer. By 1633, when he was better established, the Barringtons were using Pym as a feoffee to uses. In 1635 he was bound, along with Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir Benjamin Rudyerd, and Henry Darley, for Lord Brooke's debt to Lord Saye and Sele. 
Such bonds became steadily more frequent. Early reports from Providence were encouraging, talking optimistically of fruit and tobacco, and calling it an island 'like the Eden of God'. By 20 March 1637 the company was being told that it had already spent $10,000 on defence, and another $20,000 was urgently needed. The company was under-capitalized for this sort of debt. Most of its members had borrowed the money for their initial adventures, at $1025 each, and borrowed further for the additional costs. Since they were all sureties for each other's debts, when the bonds were forfeit their debts all redoubled on each other, turning them into a collection of merchants of Venice. In September 1641 the Spanish capture of Providence deprived them of any hope of recovering this money. 
The cat's cradle of debts which resulted can probably never be fully reconstructed. William Jessop in summer 1642 tried to calculate debts owed to the company. He brought out Pym's at $1739 19's'. 3died, second only to the debt owed by Lord Brooke, who could better afford to pay it. This was very far from the total debt owed by Pym, for which the estimate of $10,000 offered to the House of Commons may well have been accurate. Since he no longer enjoyed any earnings from office, this means that he owed something in the region of twenty years' income. By any standard that is an unsustainable debt, and many of those who pressed for the House of Commons to undertake these debts were themselves bound for them. As late as 1652 Katherine Brooke reported that her brother William Greville still feared arrest for Pym's debts. 
Landowners who run up debts of this order tend to quarrel with their heirs, and John Pym was no exception. In November 1634 he discovered that his heir, Alexander, had been borrowing money from Henry Darley, Richard Knightley, and others without telling his father. He instructed Alexander, who was with the English regiments in the service of the states general, not to come home, and not to reveal that they were reconciled, 'for if they ever take notice you are reconciled to me, I shall bring them to no reason'. Alexander had shown his father up before his rich friends, and the resulting fury was to be expected. Alexander, who never married, may have remained angry for longer (BL, Add. MS 11692, fol. 1). 
Other business continued as usual. In July 1632 Pym wrote to the provost of King's College, Cambridge, casually dropping the information that he had just returned from staying with the earl of Warwick at Leighs, Essex and asking for a fellowship for Francis Rous (which he did not get). In 1632 he and Sir Dudley Digges jointly bought the wardship of Dudley Palmer, heir of Sir Anthony Palmer, an old friend and distant relation, for $750. In 1638 Pym's children took refuge from the plague with one of his new friends, Sir Arthur Hesilrige. In 1637 he again enfeoffed his estates to use: his feoffees were Rudyerd, Richard Knightley, John Upton (a member of the Providence Island Company as well as of the Rous circle), Oliver St John, and John Graunt, clerk of the cheque, who combined membership of the company with running the king's messenger service. 
In 1635 Gerrard credited Pym and Sir Nathaniel Rich with influencing the younger Vane towards emigration to New England. This is credible, if uncertain, and if Pym himself contemplated emigration, Saybrooke, where he was a patentee, is as likely to have been a destination as Providence. He was left a ring by Richard Sibbes, and it may have been admiration for Sibbes's preaching which induced him to send his younger son Charles to Lincoln's Inn instead of to the Middle Temple. Pym defaulted on his ship money assessments in Middlesex in 1636-7 and 1637-8, and appears on a list of people selected for distraint, alongside Sir Nathaniel Rich, who was over a year dead, as well as Sir Gilbert Gerrard and Lord Brooke. 
Pym's relationship with Bedford was evidently undisturbed by all these developments. In 1633 Robert Scawen, who had been acting as lawyer for Bedford, drew up a chancery bill describing a massive quarrel with Bedford about the pay the latter had not given him. In a long description of the quarrel he records 'one Mr John Pym' as being repeatedly called in to signify the earl's pleasure to him and to act as go-between in the resulting disputes. Pym, in his attempts to smooth things over, seems to have been acting in something very close to a menial capacity (Alnwick Castle, Northumberland, MS Y III 2(4), envelope 7). It is tempting, but no more, to connect Pym's resigning his receivership in favour of Scawen with a belated conclusion of these negotiations. 
It is easy to underestimate how difficult the requirement to attend church could become during the 1630s for a godly worshipper who did not own his own advowson. Pym is not recorded as ever having been associated with nonconformity, but the conformity he practised seems to have been what one of John Winthrop's correspondents called 'the old conformity', not the newer and more rigorous version required by the Laudians. At Cannington in Somerset the Elizabethan Pyms had had leave to build a pew on the site of the old high altar. That pew seems not to have survived disturbances whose basis was social jealousy, but it was not replaced by an altar. At Wollavington, where Pym probably more often resided, he became involved in 1639 in a chancery lawsuit with his vicar, Richard Prigge, about a glebe terrier and a tithe commutation agreement from the reign of Henry VIII. There is no record of any dispute involving worship, but Prigge had been appointed in 1626 by Sir John Sydenham, a pugnacious ceremonialist highly unlikely to appoint anyone congenial to Pym. Perhaps most ominously for Pym, in the tithe lawsuit the churchwardens, both Pym's tenants, sided with the vicar. At Wherwell, Matthew Nicholas, Sir Edward Nicholas's brother, got the prebend in 1634, and moved in and took the service. He reported trouble about the surplice, which some refractory persons took as the mark of the beast, and about coming to the rails. The vicar, he said, covertly supported the nonconformists, but after 1634 Wherwell was unlikely to remain a safe place for Pym to worship. At St Andrew's, Holborn, there was a lecturership. The previous lecturer had been suspected of seditious preaching, but cleared by Bishop George Mountain. John Wood, the lecturer in 1637, was described by Laud as 'a wild turbulent preacher, and formerly censured in the High Commission Court' (P. Seaver, 'The Puritan Lectureships', 1970, 258). The lights were going out here too. 
This may be why, from about 1636, Pym spent much of his time with Richard Knightley (1593-1639) of Fawsley in Northamptonshire. Fawsley was an ecclesiastical peculiar, wholly owned by Knightley, and the vicar was largely funded by a donation from Knightley which was voluntary and therefore capable of diversion. From about 1626 the vicar was the great Elizabethan veteran John Dod, a survivor of the classical movement who had been deprived by Bancroft as long ago as 1606. In 1630 Knightley entrusted Dod's private endowment to feoffees, who were Saye and Sele, Nathaniel Rich, John Crew, John Pym 'of London', and Christopher Sherland, recorder of Northampton. 
After 1636, when Pym reported that he had been in the country or was going there, Fawsley was, apparently, usually the place involved. In September 1639 he reported to Samuel Hartlib that he intended to stay at Fawsley all term. Much of what is known of him in this period comes from the Hartlib papers. They contain many impressions of sympathy from Pym and, while these are no doubt genuine, Pym's correspondence with Hartlib shows that there were two things he badly wanted from him. One was continental political intelligence: Hartlib wrote a regular newsletter, for which Pym on 30 September 1639 paid Ralph Brownrigg's subscription as well as his own. The other thing Pym wanted desperately was the service of Christopher de Bergh, a Moravian drainage engineer who was a friend of Hartlib: the coalmine, at Bedworth near Coventry, run by Knightley, Pym, and others, was costing $1500 a year or more for drainage, with twelve horses working day and night. Once again Pym had shown skill in making influential friends, and a genius for losing money. That is the story of Pym in the 1630s. 
When parliament reassembled in April 1640 Edmund Rossingham the newsletter writer was asked for a copy of the grievances of the parliament, and replied by sending a text of Pym's opening speech. This is an immediate recognition of a status Pym had been nowhere near on 2 March 1629, when parliament had last sat. There were three important reasons for this change. The first was that there was a remarkably low survival rate among those who had been the most prominent members of the Commons in the 1620s. Sir Edward Coke, Sir Edwin Sandys, Sir Robert Phelips, Sir Dudley Digges, Sir John Eliot, William Noy, and Sir Nathaniel Rich were dead. Thomas Wentworth and Edward Littleton had been promoted in the king's service, the former now earl of Strafford, and William Hakewill had ceased to sit. Of the top twenty of 1629, only Pym and Sir Francis Seymour still sat. 
In 1629 Seymour had probably been the more influential of the two. In the Short Parliament of 1640 this picture was reversed. This is partly because Pym spoke throughout for the group Sir Edward Nicholas described as 'Pym's junto' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/472/45), who were roughly those identified here, with the important addition of Robert Devereux, earl of Essex. The energy devoted to copying Pym's set speeches and distributing copies around the country has left traces in many archives. The third reason was a change in the mood of the house. Pym was always most influential in a house which was thoroughly alarmed, and he experienced this from 1640 in a way in which he had rarely experienced it in the 1620s. 
The opening speech, of 17 April, was made in tandem with Francis Rous. Rous, who came first, made the key charge that 'the roote of all or grievances I thinke to be an intended union betwist us and Rome', and Pym undertook the charge of pulling all the miscellaneous grievances of the 1630s together under this heading (Cope, 146). It was almost certainly the object of Pym's group, as Oliver St John later told the earl of Clarendon, to ensure that the parliament should fail. The king's object was to secure supply to fight the Scottish covenanters. For Pym the prospect of armed foreign help was the only thing which gave him any hope of success against a king he knew to be implacably opposed to everything he wanted. He thus had to prevent an agreement while appearing to be working for one. This meant always introducing a new demand when agreement seemed possible. On 2 May he added a new issue by demanding that any settlement must require an act of parliament giving legal authority to the militia and military charges. Since the Marian 'Militia Act' had lapsed in 1604 the need was a real one, and Pym had addressed it constructively in 1628. However, since Charles was known to believe that the prerogative was a sufficient basis for the militia, the issue was an obstacle to agreement. To make certain, Pym may have been responsible for encouraging a story which spread at the very end of the parliament, that the Commons were about to investigate the grievances of the Scots, which was 'ultra vires' as well as offensive to the king. This may explain the disorderly haste of the king's dissolution on 5 May. 
During the summer of 1640, when there was no parliament in session, the junto seem to have kept communication with the Scots open. Their next public move was the drafting of the petition of the twelve peers, calling for the summons of a parliament and 'uniting of both your realms against the common enemies of the reformed religion'. The petition was drawn up at Bedford House in the Strand, closely watched by the secretary of state, Sir Francis Windebank, who was a near neighbour and Bedford's tenant in Drury Lane. Windebank observed the presence of Pym and Hampden, and the petition is believed to have been written by Pym and Oliver St John. It immediately went to the Scots, who had crossed the Tyne and defeated the English army on the same day. With it went a good deal of political advice from 'N. F.', probably Saye's son Nathaniel Fiennes. The Scottish petition of 4 September, their response to this advice, which survives in a copy in Pym's papers, indicates a close working relationship. That relationship was founded on common interest, and lasted through the winter of 1640-41. The Scottish covenanters had defeated the English twice, and occupied Northumberland and Durham. Yet they knew they could not count on winning a third time, and they needed the English parliament as guarantors of any Scottish peace settlement. Equally, the English knew that without a Scottish army in the field, there would not be a parliament at all. Mutual need could not be much greater. 
This commitment to the Scottish alliance lasted for the rest of Pym's life. He had understood by November 1621 that success in any parliamentary enterprise lay not in the raising of a parliamentary majority, but in persuading the king. The more reluctant the king proved, the bigger the inverted commas needed round the word 'persuading'. By 1640 it was clear that Charles was as reluctant to accept Pym's religion as Mary, queen of Scots, had been to accept the religion of John Knox. The help Scottish protestants had then had from the English, English protestants now needed from the Scots. 
Before the Long Parliament met on 3 November 1640 Pym had also cemented an alliance with the French ambassador, who observed that this parliament would be different from all previous ones, because the king could not dissolve it without risking losing England. It was the Scots' success in depriving Charles of the trump card of the power of dissolution which was the centre of Pym's strategy up to the king's treaty with the Scots of 7 September 1641. On 7 November 1640 Pym again opened serious proceedings with a speech two hours long, claiming there was a design of papists to alter law and religion, which were so necessarily joined, 'that with the one, the other falls' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 19, no. 1448). 
Up to January 1641 the main objective was to bring the king, still punch-drunk after the English defeat at Newburn, to realize that he needed to undertake serious negotiations before he could get the Scottish army to leave England. Between the junto and the Scottish commissioners, who were in London to negotiate the treaty, there was regular social contact. The Scots, even more than the English, were determined to get rid of Strafford as part of a settlement. He was known to want Scotland to be annexed as a province of England, and he was the only councillor who had publicly argued for continuing the war after Newburn. His disappearance from office was necessary as a mark of the king's abandonment of the policies for which he had stood. When impeachment proceedings were begun against him, it was in response to demands from all three kingdoms, with Pym acting as co-ordinator between them. Because they wanted frequent English parliaments as a guarantee of Anglo-Scottish peace, the Scots also joined with Pym in wanting a triennial act for England. 
In terms of serious politics it was necessary to mark time until the middle of January 1641, when the king realized that it was necessary to start serious negotiation if he was ever to change his situation. From the middle of January to the first week of March 1641 politics were dominated by the need to try to negotiate a settlement. For the king it was an obvious chance to try to divide the Anglo-Scottish alliance. For the Scots the two essentials were the abolition of bishops in England, so that pressure for harmonization should no longer lead Charles to press for a Laudian church in Scotland, and a long-term place in the sun for parliaments in England, which would enable them to be guarantors of Anglo-Scottish peace. For the king the essentials were an adequate revenue, the survival of bishops, who were his machinery for governing the church, and the life of Strafford. For Pym the essentials were the abolition of Arminianism and popery, an adequate revenue, and security against a comeback by an angry king some years later. His essentials probably did not include the abolition of bishops if it were possible to ensure that Charles did not appoint them. 
Granted willingness to compromise, there was a serious possibility of a low-level settlement between Charles and the Scots, or of one between Charles and the junto. The chance of a settlement involving all three was always going to be slender because the issues of Strafford and bishops stood in the way. The terms on which Charles negotiated from the middle of January onwards might have been designed to divide the junto from the Scots. 
On money, a good deal of progress was made on paper. The plan was for Bedford to be made lord treasurer, with Pym as chancellor of the exchequer. The plans worked out became the nucleus of the Restoration financial settlement, where they proved to be adequate for a generation. The big problem would have been getting the assent of the House of Commons, and the rest of the settlement never became far enough advanced for that task to be seriously attempted. 
On religion, Charles began negotiations with James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh, who happened to be in London giving a series of lectures in Bedford's parish church at St Paul's, Covent Garden. With Ussher came Richard Holdsworth, vice-chancellor of Cambridge University, and Ralph Brownrigg, Pym's relative and ally. These people could have run a church in which Pym a few years earlier would have been perfectly happy. They were the core of the Calvinist episcopalian cause. They were, on the other hand, utterly unacceptable to the Scots. A deal of this sort could have been had only by giving up the Scottish security which would have made Pym feel safe to adopt it. It would also have alienated the network of London ministers who were the third leg of the junto's political organization. 
During February 1641 many of the Londoners who were lending to finance the Scottish army's stay in England refused to lend further until they had justice on the earl of Strafford. Pym, in desperation, proposed on 20 February to compel them to lend. This was followed by the Scots' paper of 24 February which insisted on abolition of episcopacy in England and the death of Strafford. These were non-negotiable terms for Charles, and the Scottish commissioners in London grew less bold when advised that the Scottish army in Newcastle had not enough money to march south. 
The settlement was probably dead from this moment. If there had been any doubt, it would have been removed by the issue of the queen's Catholic servants. Pym had already been in trouble for the proposal that Catholics should be forced to wear a distinctive mark of dress, which the French ambassador said was rejected by 'tout le monde' (Russell, 'Fall', 177). He and the Commons then proposed that the queen, marriage treaty notwithstanding, should be deprived of all her Catholic servants. Bedford, from the Lords, told them they could not do this. Pym refused to back down, saying 'that we ought to obey God rather than man, and that if we doe not prefer God before man, he will refuse us, with many other good notions' (ibid., 267). This was something with which neither Charles nor Henrietta Maria could live. 
The issue of Strafford became as divisive. As Strafford himself appreciated, the debate became so heated because the king would not let him leave office, and therefore refused to signal his renunciation of the policies associated with him. For the Scots Strafford's survival was incompatible with a secure peace. Pym may have been encouraged to feel the same because he had come into possession of Strafford's letter to Olivares of 18 July 1640, asking for Spanish help to Charles in the second bishops' war. It is interesting that he never used this letter in public. He was also facing strong pressure from behind him in the House of Commons. The switch from impeachment to attainder was introduced against his opposition, and was designed to block the royal power of pardon by specifying the penalty of death in the bill, which the king could not amend. Even more tension was created when, in the last few days before Strafford's condemnation, it emerged that the king had entered into the army plot, designed to rescue Strafford by force and possibly to bring about a forcible dissolution of parliament. It is possible that it was this revelation of the king's readiness to fight rather than settle which finally made Pym irreconcilable. There is no evidence of serious negotiation between Pym and the king after this date. 
The failure of the plans for settlement revealed the intellectual limitations of the junto. Their basic outlook was in line with previous baronial leaderships from Simon de Montfort onwards. They planned to have authority exercised in the king's name by a series of commissions given to people the parliament would have cause to confide in. They freely used precedents taken from royal minorities, but they could not envisage any authority which was not exercised in the king's name. They never contemplated government being carried on by a parliament as a force independent of the king. They were right, since no parliament could sit except by royal writ. They could not turn to the regular recourse of a pretender, since there was none available. Their only hope was, in Lord Brooke's words, 'to reduce the King to a necessity of granting' (Russell, 'Fall', 274-5). 
Without the Scots, whose departure was foreseeable from May 1641 onwards, this was going to be extremely difficult. Pym, as always, was prepared to use money to buy concessions in religion. The two bills he kept linked during the summer of 1641 were for tonnage and poundage and 'root and branch'. The 'Root and Branch Bill' would have abolished bishops, not in order to set up a Scottish church, but to set up one governed by lay commissioners very much along the lines of the triers and ejectors of the protectorate. It would have achieved the key objective of taking control of the church out of Charles's hands, but not the key Scottish objective of a church governed by an assembly of elected ministers. Tonnage and poundage was granted through the summer in temporary bills for a few weeks at a time. It was to be made permanent when they had perfected a new book of rates. The sum at stake was no less than $482,000 per annum. The need for a book of rates was genuine, but it was understood that action would not be taken until the king accepted root and branch. It was a powerful strategy, but Pym did not understand that Charles's religion was no more for sale than his own. In the ten propositions of June 1641 Pym proposed to anticipate the militia ordinance by having lords lieutenant and deputy lieutenants nominated by the parliament, though his own allies refused to back him in this. He also wanted great officers chosen with the approval of the parliament, and the queen to be attended by nobles appointed by the parliament, with 'competent guards'. Not since the insanity of Henry VI had an adult king been so restricted. Yet the dissolution of the parliament, which could not be put off indefinitely, could make all these measures vanish in a puff of smoke. On 10 August 1641 the king's departure for Edinburgh to conclude the treaty with the Scots behind the parliament's back made that event look uncomfortably near. It is true that since the army plot there was an act of parliament requiring parliament's consent to dissolve it. After so long a sitting that was not likely to be difficult to get, and if there had been any doubt, the appearance of plague in London would have removed it. Sir Edward Nicholas was realistic in his expectation that as soon as the Scots returned home, 'those that have depended upon them will... fall flat' (Russell, 'Fall', 304). 
Meanwhile Pym tried to use the moment to change as much as possible. He was largely responsible for the Commons' order of 8 September ordering the destruction of altars, rails, crucifixes, and other monuments of superstition. This put the Commons on a collision course with the Lords, who issued a contrary order to observe the law as it stood. It also involved treating an order of the Commons as if it were an act passed by king, Lords, and Commons. This order did a great deal to export the crisis atmosphere of Westminster to the parishes. 
From 8 September to 20 October the Commons adjourned for an overdue recess, while adopting an innovation Pym had proposed in 1621, that of leaving a standing committee in session during the recess. This was more important than many more headline measures, since it ended the situation whereby parliaments ceased to have any part in politics on the day they adjourned. 
When the houses returned the king, to Nicholas's despair, was still away in Scotland, and no date was fixed for his return. He seems to have overreached himself in the 'incident', a plot to kidnap Archibald Campbell, earl of Argyll, and James Hamilton, marquess of Hamilton. Charles gave his English servants no account of the 'incident', perhaps because there was none he could honourably give. Pym had no such inhibitions. He persuaded the Lords that the 'incident' was likely to be part of a design involving both kingdoms, and that this justified the parliament at Westminster in having a guard. It is easy to underrate how far Pym's policy after the army plot and the death of Strafford was driven by simple physical fear of royal retaliation. He also persuaded the Lords that the peace of the kingdoms was indivisible, and that they should offer their support to suppress any who tried to break the peace of Scotland or the recent treaty between the kingdoms. He was offering to the covenanters to return the favour of 1640, and already looking towards the solemn league and covenant of 1643. 
On 1 November, well before the king returned, dissolution or adjournment ceased to be a practical possibility on the arrival of news of a major uprising in Ireland. This raised the stakes significantly by introducing the issue of raising armed force. This was dangerous not merely because no unquestionably legal method of raising armed force existed, but also because many members, and Pym most of all, were afraid to put armed force into the hands of a king they thought likely to use it to kill them. On 9 November he told the Lords at a conference that the Irish rising was the result of a popish conspiracy, that that conspiracy was favoured by some 'who have been admitted into very near places of counsel and authority' about the king, and that he feared some such attempt by the papists in England. He added that 'diseases which proceed from the inward parts, as the liver, the heart or the brains, the more noble parts, it is a hard thing to apply cure to such diseases' (Russell, 'Fall', 419). The reference to diseases of the brain was not accidental: he repeated it on 25 January 1642. The casting of suspicion on the king was obvious, but impossible to reply to. From then on his objective was to ensure that any forces sent to Ireland should be under either Scottish or parliamentary control. This was pursued first through the additional instruction to the parliament's committee in Scotland, and then through the militia ordinance. Pym's key Irish objective, that popery should never be tolerated there, showed a lack of realism reminiscent of Charles's attempts to enforce the prayer book in Scotland. 
With the drive for the militia ordinance came a drive to win a majority in the House of Lords by excluding the popish lords and the bishops. There was never, all the way through the civil war, any possibility of the Lords' excluding the popish lords: they might be popish, but they were peers. The bishops were a more doubtful case, and over Christmas 1641 the Lords were surrounded by crowds demonstrating against the bishops. When, in February 1642, the king finally agreed to their exclusion, the Commons asked the London ministers to restrain the crowds, and they disappeared immediately. The passing of the grand remonstrance, timed to come immediately before the king's belated return on 25 November, was designed very largely to help in raising the temperature on the London streets. 
The king's response to these escalating threats was to publish articles accusing Pym, John Hampden, Sir Arthur Hesilrige, Denzil Holles, and William Strode, and with them Lord Mandeville, of high treason. Mandeville faced out the accusation in the Lords and offered to stand trial, but the five members of the Commons went to ground. On 4 January 1642 they took their seats in the Commons, and the king, as he was perhaps meant to do, went to the house with an armed guard to arrest them. He had omitted to guard the river, by which the members made a last-minute escape. By a brilliant exercise in propaganda, the Commons turned this attempt on the five members into an armed assault on the whole of the Commons, and Charles's reputation never recovered. Almost at the same moment, the newly elected common council took office in the City, and delivered control of the City trained bands into hands favourable to Pym. Charles had lost military control of his capital, and did not return until he was brought back to stand trial for his life. 
For Pym the victory was pyrrhic, and had led him only into a new stage of deadlock. If he showed any willingness to fight the king, all the support he was enjoying would evaporate, and if he did not, he could only enjoy stalemate until the wheel of fortune turned, as it was almost bound to do. Serious negotiation, which had been unlikely ever since the army plot, was unthinkable now. Pym was not the sort to trust his life to a man he believed intended to kill him if he could. Clarendon is clearly right that after the attempt on the five members he had no thought of moderation. 
What then were Pym's objectives after January 1642? He appears to have had two. One was to provoke Charles further into overreacting, giving Pym himself the excuse of claiming he was fighting in self-defence. This was the only reason for fighting the king a respectable protestant could afford to give in public. Pym almost certainly knew the alternative tradition of protestant resistance theory, but he was far too good a politician to reveal what he thought of it; like adultery, this was something to which no wise man admitted in public. Fortunately, the strategy of provoking Charles into overreacting was one in which Charles could be counted on to co-operate. In his attempt to seize the arsenal at Hull in April, and in raising his standard at Nottingham in August, Charles duly obliged. 
There was still no chance of a pretender. Charles had taken the elector palatine Charles Lewis with him into the Commons to arrest the five members, and took him with him to the gates of Hull. These actions would have made him unacceptable as a pretender, even if he had been willing. There remained outside help. Pym could usually count on discreet sympathy from the French ambassador, who had warned the five members the king was coming to arrest them. Yet at the crisis of the Thirty Years' War, serious help from France or anywhere else on the continent was unthinkable: the crisis of manpower was too serious. There remained only Scotland. 
When Charles had concluded the treaty with Scotland, he had exacted from John Campbell, earl of Loudoun, from Argyll, and probably from others also, promises not to meddle in the internal affairs of England. Almost immediately on his departure from London, Charles wrote to Loudoun, now lord chancellor of Scotland, to remind him of his promise. Loudoun, in reply, reminded Charles that he had already broken the Scottish peace treaty. When he charged the five members with treasonable correspondence with the Scots, Charles had forgotten that he was breaking the 'Act of Oblivion', which had been a key part of the treaty. Loudoun had not. It was impossible to open up that correspondence without threatening those at its Scottish end as much as at the English end. There were already Scottish commissioners in London, involved in the suppression of the Irish rising. Pym, Hampden, and Rous pursued friendship with these commissioners with a dedication they had not shown since the winter of 1640. 
Through the spring and summer of 1642 Pym's efforts were devoted to the measures for further reformation of religion whose absence had dismayed the Scots in the spring of 1641. Francis Rous took up the Scottish proposal for an English general assembly, which was to produce a common confession of faith for the two kingdoms. It was to settle church government, get rid of the 'Book of Common Prayer', ensure discipline, and do all those things which warmed the hearts of Scottish ministers and chilled those of English gentry. It was a risky strategy, for every increase in Pym's Scottish friends was also an increase in his English enemies. It was not until his two declarations of 10 September 1642, after Charles had raised his standard, that Pym burnt his boats for this strategy, assuring the Scottish privy council he agreed with them about prelacy, and the Scottish general assembly that some of their number would be appointed to the Westminster assembly. The Scots had already burnt their fingers trusting English promises, and it took a long time to secure their final agreement to the solemn league and covenant, which arguably turned the course of the English civil war. 
In creating an administrative machine to run the parliamentarian war effort, Pym was at his best. He built up a system of standing committees at Westminster, and of county committees in the country, which worked. He and others succeeded, as he had not in 1641, in introducing the excise. In the politics of war he showed a firm allegiance to the earl of Essex as parliamentarian commander-in-chief. Essex was a man whose political advantages matched his military disadvantages, and the support for him was what might have been expected, not only of a servant of the junto, now much damaged by the strains of war, but of a political ally of the Scots. 
Pym died, presumably in London, on 8 December 1643, before the times which sorted the Scottish sheep from the New England goats among the parliamentarian ranks, but the evidence, such as it is, suggests that his sympathies might have gone with Essex and Holles rather than with St John and Saye. This is thin ice, and no weight should be placed on it. His death, which was attributed to a 'large abcesse or impostume', may have been from cancer of the bowel ('Narrative', 3). 
In being led into civil war, Pym had suffered a defeat. He had bargained for a coercive settlement with Charles I which was not available. There is no reason to think he was any better provided with a strategy for handling victory than his colleagues were. His vision of authority, like that of Saye or the earl of Manchester (the former Lord Mandeville), always depended on the existence of a lawful king as a name in which power could be put into commission. In his crucial failure to appreciate that the king's dedication to his religion was as strong as his own, Pym failed to achieve policies for the situation in which he actually found himself. Longer life could only have exposed this limitation more cruelly than during his life. 
Pym's funeral sermon was preached by Stephen Marshall, who claimed that his mastery of his papers was achieved by regularly beginning work at three in the morning. Pym left a will, which does not appear to survive, but it is known from many other sources that his executors were: Oliver St John, Sir Benjamin Rudyerd, John Crew (who had been Richard Knightley's executor), Francis Rous, Anthony Nicoll, and his heir, Alexander Pym. Their struggle to collect some of the money the House of Commons voted to pay Pym's debts is a story too long to tell here. They saved the estate from major sales, but not from mortgages. By 1670 it was approaching recovery from its former owner's political exploits. Pym was given a ceremonial funeral and was buried in the Henry VII chapel in Westminster Abbey on 15 December 1643. After the Restoration, it was decided that the burial was unauthorized, and the body was dug up and flung into the ditch. 


@@@@@


doc= 22927


Pym, Sir Samuel (1778-1855), naval officer, was the son of Joseph Pym of Pinley, near Henley in Arden, Warwickshire, and his wife, a daughter of Thomas Arnott MD, of Cupar, Fife; his brother was Sir William Pym. In June 1788 Samuel Pym was entered on the books of the frigate 'Eurydice' as captain's servant. After service on the home station, in the Mediterranean, and the West Indies, on 7 March 1795 he was promoted lieutenant of the sloop 'Martin' with Captain William Grenville Lobb, whom he followed to the 'Babet' and the 'Aimable' in the West Indies. In January 1798, in one of 'Babet''s boats, he took 'La Desiree', of 6 guns and 46 men, in a bloody struggle, won at the cost of one man killed, another drowned, and Pym and all the rest wounded. In November 1798 he joined the 'Ethalion', one of four frigates which on 16-17 October 1799, near Cape Finisterre, captured the Spanish treasure ships 'Thetis' and 'Santa-Brigida', with specie worth nearly $700,000. As one of the lieutenants, Pym received over $5,000 in prize money. On Christmas day the 'Ethalion' was wrecked on the Penmarks, off the south-west point of Brittany. On 10 February 1801 Pym was made commander of the 'Swan' on the Portsmouth station, and was posted captain on 29 April 1802. On 25 May he married a daughter of Edward Lockyer of Plymouth: they had at least one child. In April 1804 he was appointed to the 'Mars' in the Bay of Biscay, and in June to the 'Atlas', one of the squadron with Sir John Thomas Duckworth in the battle of San Domingo on 6 February 1806; for this, with the other captains, Pym received the gold medal. 
In October 1808 Pym was appointed to the 'Sirius', in which, under Commodore Josias Rowley, he had an important share in the capture of St Paul's in the island of Bourbon in September 1809, and of the island itself in July 1810. 
Pym was then sent to blockade Mauritius as senior officer of a frigate squadron consisting of the 'Sirius', 'Iphigenia', 'Nereide', and 'Magicienne', with the brig 'Staunch', and suffered the worst British naval defeat of the entire 1793-1815 wars (and the only French naval victory recorded on the Arc de Triomphe, albeit wrongly inscribed as Port Louis). Facing a French squadron of five more powerful frigates, Pym began well by seizing the fortified Isle de la Passe, commanding the approach to Grand Port. Going on to blockade Port Louis, he learned that two enemy frigates and a sloop, with a prize, had been lured into Grand Port, and he snatched at the chance of destroying them before they reunited with their squadron. Haste, however, led to disaster. Trying to attack with 'Nereide' on 22 August, he ran 'Sirius' aground. When the whole squadron attacked next day, 'Sirius' and 'Magicienne' grounded through failing to follow 'Nereide', whose captain alone knew the reef-strewn channel. 'Nereide', isolated, was battered into surrender; 'Sirius' and 'Magicienne', stuck fast, had to be burnt on 25 August; and 'Iphigenia' was captured on 27 August, when the rest of the French squadron arrived. His squadron annihilated, Pym and the survivors were taken prisoner. He was freed when Mauritius was captured in the following December, and a court martial acquitted him of blame for the catastrophe. He was appointed in February 1812 to the 'Hannibal', off Cherbourg, and in May to the 'Niemen', which he commanded for the next three years on the West Indian station. 
Pym was nominated a CB on 4 June 1815; in 1830-31 he commanded the 'Kent' in the Mediterranean. Promoted rear-admiral on 10 January 1837, he was made a KCB on 25 October 1839. From 1841 to 1846 he was admiral-superintendent at Devonport, and in the autumn of 1845 commanded the experimental squadron in the channel. He became a vice-admiral on 12 February 1847 and admiral on 17 December 1852; he died at the Royal Hotel, Southampton, on 2 October 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 22928


Pym, Sir William (1772-1861), military surgeon, son of Joseph Pym of Pinley, Warwickshire, and his wife, daughter of Thomas Arnott MD, of Cupar, Fife, was born in Edinburgh in January 1772. He was the elder brother of Sir Samuel Pym. William was educated at Edinburgh University and then entered the medical department of the army. He served with the 35th and 70th regiments of foot, and from 1794 to 1796 was in medical charge during an epidemic of yellow fever in Martinique, when it is estimated that nearly 16,000 troops died. Pym thus obtained an unparalleled knowledge of yellow fever. He also served in Sicily, Malta, and in Gibraltar, where he acted as medical adviser to the governor, the duke of Kent. He became deputy inspector-general of army hospitals in 1810, and in 1811 was president of the board of health in Malta. 
Pym returned to England in 1812 and lived in London, but in 1813 returned to Malta, where plague was raging. In September 1816 he became inspector-general of army hospitals. In 1815 he published 'Observations upon the Bulam Fever', one of the first comprehensive accounts of the disease now known as yellow fever. In this work Pym maintained: that it was a disease 'sui generis' known by the name of African, yellow, or bulam fever, and was the 'vomito prieto' of the Spaniards, being attended with that peculiar and fatal symptom the 'black vomit'; that it was highly infectious; that its infectious powers were increased by heat and destroyed by cold; that it attacked natives of warm climates in a comparatively mild form; and that it had also a singular and peculiar character, attacking, as in a case of smallpox, the human frame only once. The work attracted considerable criticism, and the ensuing debate was illustrative of the confusion over the nature of tropical diseases at the time. 
In 1826 Pym was appointed superintendent-general of quarantine, and in 1831 he was made a knight commander of the Hanoverian order. During the cholera epidemic of 1832 he served as chairman of the central board of health. In 1845 the ship 'Eclair', paralysed by an outbreak of yellow fever, was refused permission to land at Haslar by the quarantine officer, on the grounds that yellow fever was contagious. This was contested by Sir William Burnett and Alexander Bryson of the navy, who perceived the disease to be non-infectious. In 1848 Pym published an enlarged edition of his book on yellow fever, in which he reviewed Burnett and Bryson's 'Report on the Climate and Principal Diseases of the African Station' (1847), and reiterated his belief in the contagious nature of the disease. 
Pym died of a stroke on 18 March 1861 at his house in Upper Harley Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 22929


Pyncebeke, Walter (fl. 1330-1339), Benedictine monk and archivist, presumably came from Pinchbeck in Lincolnshire. Nothing is known about his early career in Bury St Edmunds Abbey. However, on 2 July 1330 Edward III confirmed the abbey's liberties at his suit. He appears as a visiting monk in the accounts of the chamberlain's manor of Hinderclay (1329-30), and as the receiver in the accounts of the abbot's manors of Worlingworth and Palgrave. Finally in 1338-9 he occurs in a document as infirmarer. His reputation rests on his work on the abbey's muniments. The immediate incentive was undoubtedly the violent revolt of the town against the abbey in 1327, when the rebels seized many of the monks' registers, charters, and other records: as Pyncebeke explains, without such evidences the monks could not protect their rights in the lawcourts. To remedy the loss he compiled a survey of the abbey's rights over the town, in St Edmunds' liberty of the eight and a half hundreds, and in each of the abbey's manors. An early fourteenth-century copy of the survey is in a composite volume (Harley MS 230, fols. 158-69) in the British Library. 
Pyncebeke next produced his principal work, the great register which bears his name, a handsome, arguably partly holograph, volume now in Cambridge University Library (MS Ee 3.60). Pyncebeke states in a colophon that he began composition in 1333, and lists the contents of the proposed five sections: all pleas between the abbey and the town 'from the beginning of the world until the present' (Hervey, 1.57); the abbey's feudal fees; churches in the abbot's collation and their assessments for taxation; all liberties granted to Bury St Edmunds Abbey by various kings; and a register of the eight and a half hundreds and all the abbey's lands. He never wrote the last item, whose subject was covered by his earlier survey, but he added a preliminary section, comprising copies of the abbey's papal privileges. The register's usefulness was recognized in its own time -- its length was more than doubled by later fourteenth-century additions. By 'c'.1400 it was kept in the vestry, and is therefore sometimes called the Vestry register. It remains an invaluable source for the history of Bury St Edmunds Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 22930


Pynchon, William (1590-1662), public official and pamphleteer in America, was born on 26 December 1590 at Springfield, Essex, the son of John Pynchon (died 1610) and Frances Brett ('bap'. 1590). As the child of a wealthy gentry family he was taught Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, but there is no evidence that he attended university. In 1624 he married Anne Andrew (died 1630/31), with whom he had at least four children. Active in the Massachusetts Bay Company since its planning, Pynchon sailed to New England in the Winthrop fleet in 1630, and was the leading citizen of Roxbury at its founding in the same year. His wife died during the winter of 1630-31 and by 1632 he had married Frances Sanford (died 1657), widow successively of men named Smith and Sanford. There were no children from his second marriage. Pynchon had been elected to the office of assistant prior to his arrival in the colony and continued in the post until 1636 and served again from 1642 to 1650. He was also treasurer from 1632 to 1633. 
In 1636, at a time when hundreds of residents of Massachusetts Bay were moving to the Connecticut River valley, Pynchon headed a group of residents of Roxbury and other Bay communities to the site of what would become the town of Springfield. The town was initially considered to be part of the new colony of Connecticut, but in 1641 Pynchon was able to switch Springfield's allegiance back to Massachusetts Bay. As Springfield was the most westerly Massachusetts Bay town, Pynchon could count on little regular oversight from the Bay authorities, and so had far more power in his settlement than did other magistrates in closer proximity to Boston. Active in the fur trade along the rivers near Boston since his time in Roxbury, and with Springfield the northernmost settlement on the Connecticut River for the better part of two decades, Pynchon was able to obtain complete control over the fur trade over a wide swath of northern New England. The account books maintained by his son John are of central importance for our knowledge of the early history of western Massachusetts. Pynchon also acted as magistrate in the courts in this part of Massachusetts, and again the court records kept by William and his son are extremely valuable. In addition to his powerful position in political and economic affairs, Pynchon held very strong religious opinions of the puritan strain, but not in complete agreement with what had become the orthodoxy of New England. In 1650 he published 'The Meritorious Price of our Redemption', a work which controverted the Calvinistic view of the atonement. The general court declared the book heretical and ordered it to be burnt, and Pynchon was made to recant: 'It hath pleased God to let me see that I have not spoken in my book so fully of the prize and merit of Christ's sufferings as I should have done... But now at present I am inclined to think that His sufferings were appointed by God for a farther end, namely as the due punishment for our sins by way of satisfaction to divine justice for man's redemption. ('ANB')' Not surprisingly, he was not elected assistant in 1651, and in 1652 he returned to England, settling in Wraysbury, Buckinghamshire. Making his contribution to the political and religious atmosphere of 1650s England, Pynchon continued his pamphleteering throughout the decade, his next work, published almost immediately upon his arrival in England, being 'The Jewes Synagogue'. In 1654 he wrote a detailed work on the sabbath, describing its ordination and true limits. He died in Wraysbury on 29 October 1662 leaving a substantial estate, which he distributed among family and friends in both old and New England. 


@@@@@


doc= 22931


Pyne, James Baker (1800-1870), landscape painter, was born on 5 December 1800 in Bristol. Following his parents' wishes he entered a solicitor's office but, at the age of twenty-one, abandoned the law and took up painting, which he reputedly taught himself. In 1824 he first exhibited in Bristol and is said to have undertaken picture restoration as well as to have taught. In 1827 W. J. Muller was apprenticed to Pyne. In 1828 Pyne is first recorded as a drawing-master, living at 6 Dove Street, Kingsdown, Bristol; a year later he briefly shared a studio with Samuel Jackson, a fellow landscape painter. However, he enjoyed little of the social life of Bristol's other artists, though their influence upon him was profound ['see 'Bristol school of artists]. The idyllic 'Imaginary Scene' (1828, Anglesey Abbey), for instance, is an original response to Francis Danby's poetic landscapes, and 'View of the Avon from Durdham Down' of 1829 (City of Bristol Museum and Art Gallery) reflects the intensity of observation of Danby's Bristol scenes. 
Pyne probably moved to London in 1835, and in 1837 his 'Clifton, Near Bristol, from the Avon' (City of Bristol Museum and Art Gallery) was shown at the Royal Academy. It was considered 'disagreeably white' by a reviewer in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' for September of that year (p. 341), who wondered 'in what sick fit' (ibid.) it had been painted; such comments as these reflect Pyne's increasingly restricted and light-toned palette which was influenced by J. M. W. Turner, of whose more conventional works Pyne was a rare and sympathetic follower. Pyne exhibited regularly at the British Institution from 1833 until 1844 and almost annually at the Royal Academy from 1836 to 1841, but thereafter his loyalty was to the Society of British Artists, whose vice-president he became. In 1846 he travelled through Germany, Switzerland, and Italy. He returned to Italy in 1851, travelling with the watercolourist William Evans of Bristol (1805-1858) for three years. 
Between 1838 and 1840 Pyne published 'Windsor and its Surrounding Scenery', a volume of lithographs. With the patronage of the picture dealer William Agnew there followed 'The English Lake District' in 1853 and 'The Lake Scenery of England' in 1859. Pyne occasionally collaborated with other artists, including T. S. Cooper and William Shayer who painted the foreground figures and animals in his pictures. From 1840 to 1868 he numbered his paintings and kept related notebooks recording their details. These two volumes are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, where there is also a small but representative collection of his later oils and watercolours. Pyne died on 29 July 1870 at his home, 203 Camden Road, London, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. His sons James Baker Pyne, a photographer, and Charles Pyne, an artist, survived him. His studio sale was at Christies on 25 February 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 22932


Pyne, Valentine (1603-1677), naval officer and soldier, the second son of George Pyne, an ordnance officer of Curry Mallet, Somerset, was the first cousin of John Pyne, the revolutionary MP who was to be notably absent from Valentine's will. A lesser landed family claiming ancient lineage, the Pynes had become established in Tudor times. Valentine's uncle Hugh Pyne had a record of political dissent under Charles I. 
Valentine Pyne served with his father as an officer of the ordnance in the expedition to Cadiz in 1625, and in 1627 in the expedition to the Ile de Re. He was almost certainly the Valentine Pyne serving in the navy in the 1630s, master of the 'Jonas' in 1637, and connected with Sir John Pennington who apparently brought him to the notice of Sir Edward Nicholas. He served with Charles I during the civil war but his activities during the interregnum are unknown. He received royal favour after 1660, probably owing to his loyalty, expertise, and royalist connections, being appointed a gunner in the Ordnance office in 1661 and master gunner of England in 1666. He was praised by Pepys for his conduct in keeping his post at Chatham during the Dutch attack on the Medway in 1667. 
Pyne died, unmarried, on 30 April 1677. His will, made six years before his death, disposed of $2000 among his extended family while recognizing approximately the same amount in debts, reflecting the fact that ordnance gunnery was a genteel but middling occupation. A mural tablet was erected to his memory in the chapel of the Tower of London. 
Pyne's life was one of service and modest profit within the naval-military interface of his time. Loyalty, courage, and humour were his discernible characteristics. He left $40 to his cousin George 'to be spent in idle company in drink and tobacco' and $50 to his cousin Grace 'to be cast away upon the first idle fellow that makes a suit unto her' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/354/52). Pyne has been confused with his naval cousin Captain Valentine Pyne (referred to in the former's will as 'being much at sea') who served in Rupert's fleet during the interregnum, commanded various vessels in the Restoration navy, and fought in the Second Anglo-Dutch War. 


@@@@@


doc= 22933


Pyne, William Henry (1770-1843), artist and writer, was born at 9 Exeter Court, Strand, London, on 21 April 1770, the second son of John Pyne (1727-1794), a leather dresser in Holborn, and Mary Craze (died 1819). He was baptized on 10 May and lived in London throughout his life. His early interest in drawing induced his father to send him for instruction at the drawing school of Henry Pars. At the age of fourteen he was apprenticed to William Sharp. 
Pyne developed quickly a great facility for drawing and at the age of sixteen was inspired by Philippe Jacques de Loutherbourg to introduce into his works realistic groups of figures and animals following some characteristic occupation. Two of his earliest drawings, published as aquatints in 1790, entitled 'A Country Theatre' and 'A Country Church', are similar in style to those of Thomas Rowlandson, while subsequent works were principally landscapes in watercolours in the early tinted style, progressing later to full colour. He was married on 24 July 1792 at St George's Church, Hanover Square, London, to Dorothy Pearse ('b'. 1770), a spinster of the same parish. One of their sons, George, married Esther, daughter of John Varley, and also practised in watercolours. 
Pyne first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1790, sending three watercolours, 'Travelling Comedians', 'Bartholomew Fair', and 'A Puppet Show'. Altogether he exhibited twenty-two works, two of which included animals painted by Robert Hills; his final exhibits in 1811 were portraits. In 1804 he was one of the four artists who originated the idea of founding the Society of Painters in Water Colours; he contributed twenty-six works to its first exhibition in 1805, followed by a further twenty-eight until 1815, despite having resigned in 1809 in protest at the society's exclusivity. 
As a skilful etcher Pyne often made prints of his drawings; he was also among the first artists to draw on stone for lithographic reproduction. He recognized the needs of amateurs to copy and began a long collaboration with Rudolph Ackermann to publish several books for this purpose, the first in 1798 entitled 'Book with Groups of Figures by Pyne for Decorating Landscapes'. He pursued the objective further with a substantial undertaking entitled 'Microcosm' that depicts 'a Series of above Six Hundred Groups of Small Figures for the Embellishment of Landscape' involving 120 plates, which he drew and etched from 1802 until 1807. These plates were published in parts by W. H. Pyne and John Claude Nattes until 1803, when sixty plates were collected together to form the first edition of the work. The completed project was published in 1808 in two volumes with the addition of text by C. Gray. In 1803 Pyne designed and etched the title-page and rustic vignettes for Sebastian Le Clerc's 'Nattes's Practical Geometry, or, Introduction to Perspective', and in 1805 wrote the text to and designed and etched the plates for 'The Costume of Great Britain'. He also contributed the text for the first two volumes of Ackermann's 'Microcosm of London' (from 1808). Thereafter, Pyne's collaboration with Ackermann was considerable, with the publication of 'Rudiments of Landscape Drawing in a Series of Easy Examples' (1812); 'W. H. Pyne on Rustic Figures in Imitation of Chalk' (1813); and 'Etchings of Rustic Figures for the Embellishment of Landscape by W. H. Pyne' (1815), first published in Ackermann's 'Repository'. He also supplied the figures for some of the plates in Ackermann's 'A History of the University of Oxford' (1814) and one drawing to 'A History of the University of Cambridge' (1815). 
Pyne's next major project was a sumptuously illustrated work entitled 'The History of the Royal Residences', for which he wrote the text and commissioned artists and engravers to provide 100 aquatints. He published the first part in 1816 but was forced to dispose of the work at a loss before its completion although he remained its editor. Writing became his principal means of earning a living. Pyne enjoyed gossip and took advantage of his knowledge of fellow artists and their techniques to become an energetic art critic under the pseudonym Ephraim Hardcastle. He supplied a long and historically valuable series of anecdotes to the 'Literary Gazette' and in 1823 the collected papers were published in two volumes entitled 'Wine and Walnuts'. He interrupted his writings in 1822 to provide twelve satirical drawings for 'The Social Club', returning to them a year later when he launched a weekly journal (later renamed 'Somerset House Gazette'), edited under his pseudonym; it was discontinued after just one year. He also contributed many articles to 'Arnold's Magazine of the Fine Arts', the 'Library of the Fine Arts', and 'Fraser's Magazine'. 
Pyne's last book, 'The Twenty-Ninth of May', a novel published in 1825, was not successful. He edited the last four volumes of Ackermann's 'The World in Miniature', completed in 1827, before serious financial difficulties caused him to be confined, in 1828, in the king's bench prison for debtors until his friends obtained his release. Afterwards he painted a few watercolours and in 1831 contributed to a work entitled 'Lancashire Illustrated' before being confined again in the debtors' prison in 1835. Though long popular, Pyne had become an obscure, almost forgotten figure at the time of his death from apoplexy at 2 a.m. on 29 May 1843 at Pickering Place, Paddington, Middlesex, after a long illness. It was the very day he had chosen for the title of his last book. He was survived by his wife. Many of Pyne's watercolours, drawings, and books are held by the British Museum and Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 22934


Pynnar, Nicholas (d. 1644?), military engineer, is of unknown parents and background. Nothing is known of his early life, but he fought in the Low Countries before arriving in Ireland in May 1600 as captain of a regiment of foot to serve as part of the Lough Foyle garrison. His company was disbanded in 1604 and he received a pension. In September 1606 he appears in Venice, probably on government business, and remained in Italy working as a military engineer before returning to London in December 1607. By May 1609 he was in Sweden with Irish troops raised to help the Swedes in their war with Poland, probably having been in Ireland to arrange the levying and transportation of the Irish forces. He was back in Ireland by 1611 to assist the plantation of Ulster and was granted 1000 acres in co. Cavan. However, he appears to have later sold his portion. The same year he appears as a tenant of Sir Richard Boyle in Munster. He left Ireland in 1612 for France and may also have gone again to Venice. 
By March 1617 Pynnar had returned to Ireland. On 27 February 1618 he was appointed director-general and overseer of fortifications and buildings along with Sir Thomas Rotherham, and also became muster-master of the undertakers in Ulster and Connaught in the same year. From 1 December 1618 to 25 March 1619 he surveyed the progress of the plantation in the six counties of Armagh, Donegal, Tyrone, Cavan, Fermanagh, and Londonderry. He also executed surveys on the plantations in Longford, Ely O'Carroll, Leitrim, and King's and Queen's counties. During the early to mid-1620s he was active surveying, repairing, and designing military fortifications across the country. In 1630 he travelled to London to complain that his official salary had been cut off since 1624. Four years later the government agreed to pay him half his arrears ($2000) in return for reducing his salary by half. Up to the late 1630s Pynnar was still engaged in various official surveys. He was appointed surveyor-general of the lands, plantations, and mines in 1643. He probably died in 1644. 


@@@@@


doc= 22935


Pynson, Richard (c.1449-1529/30), printer, was Norman by birth, as attested by a patent in the Rolls Chapel (now lost) describing him as 'in partibus Normand. oriund'. Citing this same patent, Joseph Ames claims that Pynson became a naturalized English citizen about 1493 (Ames, 2.iii). The earliest known reference to Pynson is in 1464, when he appears among a list of students enrolled at the University of Paris (Duff, 55). By 1482 he was working in London, first as a glover (Plomer, 'Richard Pynson'), then, by 1490, as a bookseller, in which year he commissioned Guillaume Le Talleur in Rouen to print two books, both legal texts, for sale in England. In the plea rolls of 1496 Pynson is described as a 'pouchemaker' and 'bokeprynter' in the parish of St Clement Danes (Plomer, 'Some notices'). Pynson was also a bookbinder; bindings featuring a panel stamp with his device have survived. 
It is not known where Pynson learned the art of printing. Over the years scholars have variously speculated that he was apprenticed to Guillaume Le Talleur in Rouen, Jean du Pre in Paris, John Lettou and William de Machlinia in London, or William Caxton in Westminster. The fact that printer's waste from Machlinia's shop has been found in Pynson's bindings suggests he may have taken over his predecessor's equipment, stock, and possibly clientele. Pynson's first dated publication, a grammatical text, appeared on 13 November 1492. However, typographical evidence suggests that among his earliest surviving publications are two yearbooks. 
Pynson moved from St Clement Danes, and by 10 July 1502 was established in his premises at 'the sign of the George' on the north side of Fleet Street, west of the church of St Dunstan-in-the-West. This location, within the Temple Bar, served him well, for legal printing was always to be a mainstay of his trade, and here he remained until his death. Among his early patrons were the lord privy seal, Bishop Richard Fox, who entrusted his edition of the 'Sarum processionale' to Pynson's press in 1501, and Archbishop John Morton and Henry VII, both of whom commissioned from Pynson lavish missals in 1500 and 1504, respectively. 
Pynson's experience in legal printing, as well as his connections at court, made him well qualified to be king's printer, a post which he held from as early as 6 January 1506, when he first styles himself 'regius impressor'. He had already received several government commissions, including 'Ordenaunces of Warre' in 1492 and, in 1500, 'Traduction & Mariage of the Princesse', issued in preparation for Prince Arthur's marriage to Katherine of Aragon. Henry VII had created the post of king's printer in 1504 apparently to coincide with the last parliament of his reign. The crown's first appointee, William Faques, printed the statutes for that parliament as well as the first extant printed proclamation, regarding coinage. The earliest opportunity Pynson had, in his official capacity, to print the original edition of the sessional statutes came with the opening parliament of Henry VIII's reign, in 1510. However, it was not until 1512, when Pynson -- always the shrewd businessman -- secured the exclusive right to print all statutes and proclamations, that the king's printer became the true precursor of HMSO. 
In view of the political agenda for 1512-13, it seems likely that Thomas Wolsey had a hand in consolidating and strengthening the role of king's printer. Wolsey was at this time promoting a war between the holy league and France. Pynson, at Wolsey's instigation, produced a number of publications to justify this 'holy war', including a papal bull declaring Louis XII of France an enemy of the church. Henry VIII and Wolsey continued to use Pynson's office to advance the crown's interests, whether in times of war or peace. Their most sophisticated press campaign centred on religious orthodoxy and Henry's bid for the title 'defender of the faith'. The carefully planned offensive against Martin Luther began in 1521 with the 'Assertio septem sacramentorum', composed in part by Henry VIII. 
Little is known of Pynson's character. He was involved in numerous legal wrangles, either suing or being sued for broken contracts and debts, but this was common in the book trade (Plomer, 'Some notices'). Certainly, he was a pious and respected member of the community. He belonged to the Corpus Christi Guild at Coventry (A. W. Reed, 'Early Tudor Drama', 1926, 8); he was elected churchwarden of St Dunstan-in-the-West; and he was the first printer known to have received commissions from the city of London, in 1517. Through his links with churchmen sympathetic to evangelical humanism, such as John Colet and Christopher Urswick, Pynson published reforming texts, including a Latin sermon by Savonarola. The sermon was one of three books from Pynson's press in 1509 to feature roman type, marking its first appearance in England. But it is in the -- sometimes haphazard -- development of printing as an instrument of state policy that Pynson's importance lies. 
By 17 December 1529, the close of the parliament of 21 Henry VIII, Richard Pynson was either dead or incapacitated. His will, dated 17 November 1529, was probated on 23 February 1530. John Rastell stepped in to print the statutes for that session, and by 15 February 1530 Thomas Berthelet had been appointed king's printer. Pynson was survived by his daughter, Margaret Warde; his son Richard had died in September 1520. Pynson's first wife, whose name is not known, had been dead for nearly thirty years; in his will, Pynson asked to be buried beside her in the churchyard of St Clement Danes. He had buried another wife, Joan, in St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, in 1528. Margaret's third husband, John Hawkins, finished the last book off Pynson's press on 18 July 1530. Robert Redman, Pynson's chief rival in the publication of legal texts, eventually took over his printing house and materials. 


@@@@@


doc= 22936


Pyper, William (1797-1861), classical scholar, was born of poor parents in the parish of Rathen, Aberdeenshire. After matriculating at Marischal College, Aberdeen, he completed his course there with distinction. From 1815 to 1817 he was parochial schoolmaster at Laurence Kirk; he afterwards held a similar position at Maybole, and was a teacher at Glasgow grammar school in 1820. Two years later he succeeded James Gray as headmaster in the High School of Edinburgh, and retained that post for twenty-two years. 
On 22 October 1844 Pyper was appointed professor of humanity at St Andrews University, in succession to Dr Gillespie. He obtained the degree of LLD from Aberdeen University. He died on 7 January 1861 and his assistant, John Shairp (afterwards principal of St Andrews), succeeded him in the humanity chair. 
Pyper was an excellent Latinist and a thorough classical scholar. He proved an admirable professor. He helped to organize and improve the university library, and by a bequest of $500 he founded a bursary. He published a school text book, 'Gradus ad Parnassum' (1843), and 'Horace, with Quantities' (1843). 


@@@@@


doc= 22937


Queally, Malachy (1586-1645), vicar apostolic of Killaloe and Roman Catholic archbishop of Tuam, was born of aristocratic landowning stock at Drinagh, barony of Inchiquin, co. Clare, the son of Donagh Queally (Donnchadh O Caoillaidhe) and his wife, Sive. After studies in local schools he went to Paris, apparently in 1613, for he took his MA degree, usually awarded after two years' study, in 1615. This was the year in which the French clergy adopted the Council of Trent as the pattern for church reform. He went on to study theology, and it was probably at this time that he was ordained priest. He took his baccalaureate in 1617, and taught philosophy at the College de Boncourt while residing in the College de Navarre and studying for his licentiate, which he took in 1622. An academic career was opening up for him, but he had already decided to return to Ireland. There the Roman Catholic church was being reorganized by the appointment to the historic dioceses of vicars apostolic (priests in charge by virtue of papal delegation) or, more cautiously, by the appointment of bishops. Queally had been appointed vicar apostolic of his native diocese of Killaloe on 20 August 1619 and he returned to Ireland shortly after taking his licentiate. 
Queally was a man of commanding presence and of great energy and commitment, and he vigorously promoted church reform as laid down by the Council of Trent. Soon there were requests from many quarters that he be promoted to the episcopate. However, the Roman authorities were slow to multiply bishops, and another candidate, John O'Molony, had the powerful advocacy of the French queen mother, Marie de' Medici. In 1629 Archbishop Conry of Tuam died in exile. Queally was appointed his successor on 12 April 1630 and O'Molony was appointed to Killaloe on 2 August. Queally was consecrated in Galway on 10 October by Archbishop Walsh of Cashel. As archbishop of Tuam he was also metropolitan of the western ecclesiastical province, hitherto only superficially touched by either Roman Catholic or protestant reform. He embarked on a forceful programme, recorded in the provincial synods held in 1632 and 1640, and in his reports to the Roman authorities in 1634 and 1637. He even attempted to extend his authority over his suffragans further than the Council of Trent envisaged, but in this he did not obtain Roman support. He failed too in his attempt to reassert control over the warden of the collegiate church of St Nicholas in Galway, exempted from archiepiscopal jurisdiction since 1488. He opposed the unbridled attacks on the regular clergy made by an extreme faction of the seculars, in this possibly influenced by his close links with the Franciscan order. The wide range of his interests appears from his efforts in 1639 to find priests to replace those who had gone to St Kitt's when it was first settled in 1623 and had since died. Four surviving chalices are associated with him (the existing church plate had passed to the established church). His Gaelic and Franciscan links appear in his formal approbation of the martyrology of Donegal and the annals of the four masters, completed in 1630 and 1636 respectively, and in his list of the churches and antiquities of the Aran Islands, printed by John Colgan in 'Acta sanctorum Hiberniae' (1645). 
An account written by a protestant in 1641 indicates that in Tuam and in the western province generally the Roman Catholic church had prevailed almost to the exclusion of protestantism, but the tensions inherent in this situation were coming to a head. There had been confrontation in 1635, when the refusal of a Galway jury to find land titles for the king had been punished by fines and imprisonments. In consequence there was widespread support in Connaught for the insurrection of 1641. When the principal Catholic nobleman, the marquess of Clanricarde, was reluctant to give active support, leadership devolved on the forceful archbishop of Tuam. In the summer of 1642 Queally raised a troop of 200 foot at his own expense, primarily indeed to maintain order, for though there was no enemy in Connaught there had been a massacre of protestant refugees at Shrule on 13 February. By the end of the year, however, he had gone to Kilkenny, first as a member of the general assembly of the Irish confederates and then of their supreme council or executive. The tortuous negotiations conducted by the confederates with Charles I came to a head in a secret treaty with his representative, the earl of Glamorgan, concluded on 25 August 1645. By now, however, Connaught was threatened because parliamentarian forces under Sir Charles Coote had captured Sligo on 7 July. Queally returned to rally a counter-attack. He did succeed in mustering a sizeable force, but he was killed at Ballysadare near Sligo on 25 October, in a skirmish according to one account, surprised in his tent according to another. A copy of the Glamorgan treaty was found among his effects, and revelation of the great concessions Glamorgan was prepared to make to the Irish confederates on the king's behalf did great damage to his cause in England. Archbishop Queally's mutilated body was ransomed and taken to Tuam Cathedral for burial. 


@@@@@


doc= 22938


Quain, Sir John Richard (1816-1876), judge, was born at Ratheahy, co. Cork, the youngest son of Richard Quain of Ratheahy and his second wife, Margaret, daughter of Andrew Mahoney. Two half-brothers, Jones Quain and Richard Quain, became prominent figures in the medical profession. Quain was educated at Gottingen, and at University College, London, where he won many prizes, graduated LLB in 1839, and was elected to the university law scholarship. He became a fellow of University College in 1843, was for several years an examiner in law to the University of London, and in June 1860 became a member of the senate. Admitted to the Middle Temple on 18 November 1837, he was in the chambers of Thomas Chitty and practised as a special pleader from 1841 until his call on 30 May 1851. He then joined the northern circuit, wrote a book on the 'Common Law Procedure Acts' with Holroyd (1853), and soon obtained a considerable practice. On 23 July 1866 he became a queen's counsel, and later the same year, a bencher of the Middle Temple. In 1868 he was made attorney-general for the county palatine of Durham and he also served on the judicature commission. 
Quain was appointed a judge of the queen's bench in December 1871, took his seat and was made a serjeant on 5 January 1872, and was knighted on 22 April. Adolphus Liddell, author and fellow lawyer, described him as: 'An odd man, outwardly and inwardly. He was short and round, with a large forehead, protruding eyes, and no chin' (Liddell, 130). Rather mercurial in temperament, he was touchy and sensitive of his dignity. Before he could make much of an impression as a judge, his health failed and, after some months of intermittent illness, he died at his house, 22A Cavendish Square, on 12 September 1876, and was buried at Marylebone cemetery, Finchley, on 18 September. He was unmarried. His interest in legal education was attested by a substantial bequest for that purpose and his law library was presented to University College, London, by his half-brother, Professor Richard Quain MD. 


@@@@@


doc= 22939


Quain, Jones (1796-1865), anatomist, born in November 1796, was the eldest son of Richard Quain of Ratheahy, co. Cork, and his first wife, whose maiden name was Jones. His grandfather was David Quain of Carrigoon, co. Cork. He received the name of Jones from his mother's family. Richard Quain (1800-1887) was his full brother, and Sir John Richard Quain (1816-1876) his half-brother. Sir Richard Quain bt, FRS (1816-1898), was his first cousin. He commenced his education in Adair's school at Fermoy. He subsequently entered Trinity College, Dublin, where, in 1814, he obtained a scholarship, then the highest classical distinction. He graduated in arts, and in 1820 he took the degree of bachelor of medicine, though he did not proceed MD until 1833. At the end of his college career he visited the continental schools and spent some time in Paris working on 'Manual of Pathology' (1826), a translation of the work by Louis Martinet. 
Quain went to London in 1825 and joined, as one of its anatomical teachers, the school of medicine founded by Mr Tyrell in Aldersgate Street. The other teacher of anatomy was William Lawrence. While working here Quain prepared and published the 'Elements of Descriptive and Practical Anatomy: for the Use of Students' (1828), which he introduced 'with a Paean of praise for the new French approach' (Desmond, 99). It became the standard textbook on the subject in all English speaking countries. It was also translated into German (1870-72). An attack of haemoptysis occurring while he suffered from a dissection wound forced Quain to take a rest for two years. 
In 1831 Quain accepted the post of professor of general anatomy at University College, then vacant by the resignation of Granville Sharp Pattison; Richard Quain, his brother, acted as senior demonstrator and lecturer on descriptive anatomy, while Erasmus Wilson was his prosecutor. He was also invited to lecture upon physiology. He resigned his post at University College in 1836, and in the same year he was appointed a member of the senate of the University of London. He lived in retirement during the last twenty years of his life, chiefly in Paris, devoting himself to literary and scientific pursuits. Quain died, unmarried, at his home, 103 Stanhope Street, Mornington Crescent, London, on 31 January 1865, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. Quain was an elegant and accomplished scholar, and he was deeply interested in literature as well as science. 


@@@@@


doc= 22940


Quain, Richard (1800-1887), anatomist and surgeon, was born in July 1800 at Fermoy, co. Cork, Ireland, the third son of Richard Quain, of Ratheahy, co. Cork, a gentleman farmer, and his first wife, whose maiden name of Jones became the Christian name of their eldest son, also an anatomist. The subject of this biography (henceforth, Quain) is occasionally mistaken for his half-brother, Sir John Richard Quain, a judge, and very frequently confused (even in contemporary historical literature) with his cousin, Sir Richard Quain, a physician. All four Quains had intimate associations with University College. 
Quain was educated locally at Adairs School, Fermoy, and underwent an apprenticeship with a surgeon in Ireland. He then followed his brother Jones Quain to London, where the latter was associated with the Aldersgate School of Anatomy, one of the private anatomy schools that flourished in London until the late 1820s. Quain then spent some time studying in Paris, where a friend of his father, Richard Bennett, was an extramural lecturer in anatomy. When in 1828 Bennett became demonstrator in anatomy at the new University of London (now University College, London), Quain followed to assist. There was much jockeying for power and position in the new medical school, and Bennett (who had applied for the chair in anatomy) quarrelled from the beginning with the anatomy professor, Granville Sharp Pattison. The students, whose fees counted for much, preferred Bennett's teaching, and Charles Bell, professor of surgery, also gave surgical anatomy lectures. By 1831 the air had cleared somewhat, following Bell's departure to the Middlesex Hospital, Pattison's forced resignation, and Bennett's death. Jones Quain was appointed professor of anatomy, and his brother became (in 1832) professor of descriptive anatomy. By then, relations between the brothers were not cordial. 
Quain held this chair until 1850, during which period he had a number of able demonstrators, including Erasmus Wilson, Viner Ellis, and John Marshall. Quain also produced his major work, 'The Anatomy of the Arteries of the Human Body' (3 vols., 1841-4), a handsome folio, the drawings for which were done by surgeon-artist Joseph Maclise, brother of the Royal Academician. The work was based on more than 1000 dissections, and although essentially descriptive, it dealt with arterial diseases and anomalies as well as normal structure and distribution. Quain also edited (with William Sharpey) the fifth edition (1848) of 'Elements of Anatomy', the earlier edition of which had been written by Jones Quain. Quain had been instrumental in luring William Sharpey to London from Edinburgh, to take over Jones Quain's general anatomy (physiology) teaching when the latter left University College in 1836. 
Quain was also appointed assistant surgeon to the North London Hospital (subsequently University College Hospital) shortly after it opened in 1834. He was promoted to full surgeon in 1850, but was deeply disappointed not to obtain the vacant chair in surgery, which went to Eric Erichsen. Quain was a conservative, even timid surgeon whose active career was over by the time antiseptic techniques revolutionized the discipline. He was methodical in all details of patient care and demanding of his students. Of short stature, he was pompous and authoritarian, quick to attribute bad motives to anyone who disagreed with him. 
Quain's clinical publications were not of lasting importance. 'The Diseases of the Rectum' (1854) was based largely on his own experience with rectal diseases; his 'Clinical Lectures' (1884) gathered together material, much of which had been published in journals long before. Its appearance late in Quain's life probably owed more to vanity than consumer demand. 
A member of the Royal College of Surgeons from 1828, Quain was one of the original fellows when that rank was created in 1843. He sat on the college's council and its court of examiners, represented it on the General Medical Council and served (1868) as its president. He was elected FRS in 1844, and was surgeon-extraordinary to Queen Victoria. 
One of the most attractive aspects of this irascible man was Quain's advocacy of a more liberal education for medical students. The subject of his 1869 Hunterian lecture at the Royal College of Surgeons was defects in the current system of educating doctors, and he had published a variety of pamphlets and articles on the same general theme over many years. True to his principles, he left the bulk of his estate, valued at about $78,000, to University College, London, for the promotion and encouragement of 'general education in modern languages (especially in English language and composition in that language) and in natural science'. The present Quain chairs at University College, London, derive from this bequest. Quain used to list speaking correct English as one of his hobbies. 
Some of Quain's estate had been left to him by his half-brother, Sir John Richard Quain, whose name Quain also wished to be perpetuated. Quain's late marriage, in 1859, to Ellen Brodrick, (died 1886), Viscountess Midleton, widow of the fifth viscount, had produced no children. He died on 15 September 1887 at his last residence, 32 Cavendish Square, London, of cystitis and urinary retention, having refused Sir Henry Thompson permission to attempt to crush the obstructing bladder stone, an operation he had performed successfully on Quain a decade earlier. He was buried in Marylebone cemetery, Finchley, Middlesex, on 21 September. Confusion of the two medical Richard Quains had already begun, his cousin's wife receiving a number of letters of condolence on the putative death of her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 22941


Quain, Sir Richard, baronet (1816-1898), physician, was born at Mallow, on the Blackwater, near Cork, while the clocks were striking midnight on 30 October 1816. He was the eldest surviving child of John Quain, a small landowner at Carrigoon, and his wife, Mary Burke. He was educated at a local dame-school before attending the diocesan school at Cloyne. His apprenticeship to Dr Fraser, a surgeon-apothecary at Limerick, was terminated by the general distress in Ireland. He was set to work in the tannery business of his maternal uncle before resuming his medical studies at University College, London, where his cousins Jones Quain (1796-1865) and Richard Quain (1800-1887) were both established in medical practice. In 1840 he graduated as bachelor of medicine, obtaining a scholarship and gold medals, as well as honours in surgery and midwifery. He proceeded to MD (1842) and FRCP (1851). 
Working as a house surgeon in University College Hospital, Quain's high capacities were widely recognized. From 1845 he was a leader writer for 'The Lancet', and afterwards a contributor to the 'Saturday Review'. He was one of the founders of the Pathological Society in 1846 (secretary, 1852; president, 1869). In 1849 he published two papers on cerebral apoplexy. However, his paper of 1850 on fatty degeneration of the heart established him as an authority on the disease; he later declared that if he had been physician to a great general hospital, fatty degeneration would have been known as Quain's disease. He also wrote on cognate subjects including angina pectoris and heart aneurysms. On 31 January 1854 he married Isabella Agnes (1828-1891), daughter of George Wray, captain in the Bengal army. They had four daughters. 
Quain was assistant physician (1848-55) and physician (1855-75) at Brompton Hospital for Diseases of the Chest. He was also consulting physician to the Royal Naval Hospital at Greenwich and the Royal Hospital for Consumption at Ventnor. But from the 1850s his great success was as a general physician and society doctor practising in Harley Street. Politicians (including Benjamin Disraeli) as well as distinguished authors, painters, and officials consulted him. Such patients introduced him to equally eminent men who became his friends and treated him as a representative exponent of professional opinion. He became the repository of many high professional confidences. A chance remark by Quain at the Athenaeum led to the premature leaking of Lord Northbrook's appointment to the viceroyalty of India in 1872. 
Quain's superior connections ensured many public appointments. In 1860 he was nominated by the queen in council to the senate of the University of London. As such he was a leading figure in establishing the university's pathological research centre called the Brown Institution. Quain gave steadfast support to his friend and patient Robert Lowe, afterwards Viscount Sherbrooke, in his successful campaign of 1868 to become first member for the new University of London parliamentary constituency. 
Quain's influential friends obtained his appointment to the General Medical Council in 1863. He remained a member continuously for thirty-five years until his death. Active on the council's pharmacopoeia committee (initially as secretary and from 1874 as chairman), he was closely involved with the publication of four new editions of the 'British Pharmacopoeia' between 1867 and 1898. He served as treasurer of the General Medical Council for nearly thirty years before his election in 1891 as president; he was re-elected in 1896. Throughout this presidency Quain was active in the council's business, and somewhat despotic in his methods. He curbed prolixity at meetings by a reminder that speeches cost the council 13's'. per minute. From 1896 younger physicians such as Victor Horsley publicly criticized the anachronistic organization of the council under Quain. 
A few bullocks imported from Reval, which were infected with rinderpest and sold in London, caused a national epidemic in 1865. Quain was just leaving on a holiday when he was persuaded to join the royal commission on cattle plague chaired by Earl Spencer. He was convinced that the only way to stop the terrible mortality among herds was the absolute prohibition of moving cattle from infected districts together with the slaughter of all infected beasts, all healthy bovine animals with which they had contact, and all imported animals at their port of debarkation. Through his friendship with John Delane he contributed a series of letters to 'The Times' signed 'Q', which were widely copied in provincial newspapers. Quain's campaign dispelled popular, parliamentary, and journalistic doubts, and overcame the resistance of railway companies and cattle-jobbing interests to the drastic measures that he advocated. In total, 300,000 animals were killed. Quain more than anyone contributed to ridding Britain of rinderpest. (In 1886 he sat on a government committee reporting on Pasteur's treatment for rabies.) 
In 1871 Quain was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and he later received several honorary degrees. His connection with the discovery of the nature of fatty degeneration was beginning to be forgotten by the late 1870s when he accepted the editorship of a 'Dictionary of Medicine'. He toiled ferociously on this project, sometimes through the night after a full day's work, recruiting distinguished contributors and assiduously scrutinizing their efforts. The dictionary, which sold 33,000 copies in its first edition of 1882, revived his professional standing. Having narrowly failed in 1888 to achieve his great ambition, the presidency of the Royal College of Physicians, he was consoled with its vice-presidency in 1889. Appointed physician-extraordinary to Queen Victoria in 1890, he was elevated to a baronetcy in 1891. 
He fell ill in 1897 with a painful and exhausting cancer of the rectum, which required three operations. His herculean constitution astounded his friends: he roused himself to work on council business until his last days. He died on 13 March 1898 at his home, 67 Harley Street, St Marylebone, when his baronetcy became extinct. On 16 March he was buried in Hampstead cemetery. 
'An Irishman of the best type, always genial, always kindly, always amusing, an admirable 'raconteur' and after-dinner speaker, Quain frequented most societies and was welcome in all' ('The Times', 14 March 1898). He had a great power of making and keeping friends. Although never brilliant in medicine, he was endowed with excellent sense. As a diagnostician he was quick and intuitive. He was ready and practical in recommending cures. With patients he was cheerful, sympathetic, and considerate. He worked very hard, and used his time with ruthless efficiency. Though many colleagues relished 'his intense, jovial, pugnacious attitude towards life' it riled those who suspected him of 'selfish designs and motives' ('The Lancet', 19 March 1898). 


@@@@@


doc= 22942


Quare, Daniel (1648/9-1724), maker of clocks, watches, and barometers, is presumed to have been of a strict Quaker family, but nothing is known of his parentage. It has been suggested he was a native of Somerset, perhaps on account of the former existence of a manor named Quarre in that county, coupled with the fact that Besse records a John Quire of Misterton, Somerset, who was fined in the 1660s for his Quaker beliefs. Nor is anything known of his apprenticeship, the earliest record of Quare appearing in the minutes of a Clockmakers' Company quarter court held in London on 3 April 1671 when he was 'admitted and Sworne a Brother of the Company', paying $3. He was also ordered to abandon an illegally recruited and unidentified apprentice; he enrolled the first of his fifteen authorized pupils in June 1673. 
Quare's premises were subjected to a Clockmakers' 'search' in March 1675 when he was working in the 'Middle or Cittie' precinct -- one of three company divisions at that date. He was probably in St Martin's-le-Grand, which was his address when he married Mary, daughter of Jeremiah Stevens, maltster, of High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, on 18 April 1676; the ceremony took place at a Friends' meeting at Devonshire House, Bishopsgate, where Quare was one of the early members. A clock by him is recorded signed with a more precise address -- 'in Martins Neare Alders Gate Londini', -- where he was still living in August 1680. One authority reports, without verifiable reference, that he next had a business at the Plough and Harrow in Cornhill, but by June 1682 he was in the parish of All Hallows, Lombard Street, where, in 1683, he was lodging with one Edward Hoult. By 1686 he was established in Exchange Alley in the parish of St Mary Woolnoth in the heart of the City. Many renowned watchmakers flourished there, and Quare took over the premises vacated by Robert Seignior, who had been appointed in 1682 to succeed Edward East as the king's chief clockmaker, though in the event East outlived him. No business association between Seignior and Quare has been discovered but doubtless Quare inherited a measure of goodwill. Seignior named the shop The Dial but Quare used the King's Arms as his address. The adjoining shops were occupied by a confectioner and a vintner. 
Quare, it may be presumed of one of his faith, was a peace-loving and honest member of the community but he came into conflict with authorities by refusing, in accordance with his beliefs, to pay tithes or to swear an oath; either action could have brought about his disownment. Consequently, goods to the value of $5 were seized from him in 1678 to offset his rate of $2 12's'. 6died 'for the maintenance of the Parochial Priests in London', two clocks and two watches worth $11 5's'. were taken from him in 1679 when he refused to contribute towards the militia, and in 1682-3 Quare and five other Friends had goods to the value of $145 17's'. 6died seized for attending a proscribed meeting at White Hart Court. On 4 June 1686 Quare was summoned, with about fifty other Friends, to appear before the commissioners appointed by James II to hear their grievances. Matters were eased by the 'Toleration Act' of 1689 but plate worth just over $3 was taken from him that year for tithes and priests' maintenance. He subsequently served the parliamentary committee of the meeting for sufferings, disbursing over $350 in expenses in 1700-02. 
Quare's religious leanings did not exclude him from election to parish duties, though he was not keen to serve and twice paid fines to be excused. Nevertheless, he was a member of the vestry committee of St Mary Woolnoth in 1693, a sidesman in 1694, and one of two collectors for the poor in 1696. In September 1698, while away in Flanders, he was chosen to be a member of the court of assistants of the Clockmakers' Company. He later served them in higher office: in September 1705 he was elected junior warden, and he rose through the ranks of renter and senior warden to become master in September 1708. 
In 1695 an ambitious lottery, the proceeds of which were to finance two colleges of science and art, offered 2000 winners the opportunity to learn a chosen trade. Quare and his former apprentice John Marshall, by then working 'against the Royal Exchange', volunteered to teach the art of watch making. The scheme failed through lack of interest but in the following year Quare assisted John Bellers in drawing up his 'Proposals for Raising a College of Industry of All Useful Trades' (1695); although the bill did not succeed before parliament, it led to the establishment of the Quaker workhouse at Clerkenwell, where Quare was said to have been 'responsible for some boys there for many years'. 
Quare worked in relative obscurity until the 1680s and he may well have spent most of the 1670s in the employment of others. His early work is rare and displays no significant contribution to the improvement of mechanical designs. Two events brought him to the fore: first, his move to Exchange Alley between 1683 and 1686 placed him in the centre of London's business quarter (where he was said to have successfully speculated in the shares and funds with which it abounded); second, in 1687, he played a major part in the Clockmakers' Company's opposition to Edward Barlow's patent application for 'pulling or repeating clocks and watches'. James II judged that Barlow's watch, made by Tompion, was inferior to one submitted by Quare because it required two buttons to be pushed instead of Quare's one. This was a tremendous boost to Quare's reputation and secured his place in horological history. The Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, holds a watch believed to be that proffered by Quare and supposedly retained by James. It has been claimed that Quare adapted the concentric minute hand, but examples by several other makers are now recorded to show this was not the case. In the first decade of the eighteenth century he was, however, among the first to use jewel endstones in watches to improve the action and durability of escapements, and to use dust caps to help keep movements clean. 
In August 1695 Quare was granted a fourteen-year patent for 'the sole use and benefit of a Portable Weather Glass or Barometer, by him invented', which could 'be removed and carried to any place, though turned upside down, without spilling one drop of the quicksilver, or letting any air into the tube'. The Clockmakers' Company opposed this application too, and it is questionable whether or not Quare deserved priority; a similar design had already been published in Holland in 1688 and Robert Hooke reported that Thomas Tompion had made an example a year earlier. When William Derham carried out barometric experiments at the Monument in 1696 he used two of Quare's 'best portable barometers'. Several examples have survived but it is unlikely that any has its original tube. 
Quare's influential standing came to be of use to Friends when appealing to the throne. On his petition two Friends imprisoned in Westmorland were released and on 2 May 1695 he introduced four Friends, including George Whitehead and Gilbert Latey, to a private interview with William III when a statement on the sufferings of Friends was presented to the king. Quare and nineteen other Quakers signed a petition to the Commons, presented by Edmond Waller on 7 February 1696. When in Flanders in 1698 upon business Quare distributed Latin copies of Robert Barclay's 'Apologies', reporting upon his return that it was 'much more desired' in French. Such an edition was published in 1702. 
Though Quare was never a clock- or watchmaker to the crown, he certainly enjoyed royal patronage. At Hampton Court an enormous 10 foot-high year-going burr walnut timepiece he made for William III was still standing in his bedchamber at the end of the twentieth century. It has dials to show the times of sunrise and sunset, and the latitude, and it was able to display either solar time or mean time until 1836 when it was altered by Vulliamy. In 1691-2 Quare supplied William with a repeating watch costing $69 17's'. 6died which was reported to be 'still in a good state of preservation' in 1866, though its later whereabouts are unknown. At Windsor Castle a small travelling clock with gilded brass case survives, the movement of which originally provided a choice of balance or pendulum control, a mechanism previously seen only in two clocks by Tompion, also of royal provenance, from whom Quare may have acquired the movement of this clock. It lacks any personal cipher but could have been made between about 1705 and 1715 for either Anne or George I. Quare also supplied at least three barometers, of which two were at Hampton Court in the 1990s. He was held in especially high regard by George I, and at Friends' House is a copy of his paper dated 4 February 1715 refusing George's invitation to be the king's watchmaker for $300 per annum. He declined because he could not swear an oath but begged the king not to appoint anyone else. The king told Quare, then aged about sixty-seven, that he could call to see him at any time and, accordingly, the yeoman of the guard at the back stairs let him 'frequently go up without calling any body for leave as otherwise is usual, tho Persons of Quality'. Quare also mentioned in passing that in forty years he had served 'men of the Greatest Rank of most other Nations in Europe, as well as this Nation'. 
Of Quare's children who survived infancy (and seven did not), Jeremiah was a 'merchant', Anna married John Falconer in 1705, Sarah married Jacob Wyan in 1712, and Elizabeth married Silvanus Bevan, 'citizen and apothecary', in 1715. The weddings were lavish affairs attended by nobility, foreign ambassadors and envoys, and leading Quakers including William Penn and George Whitehead. 
About 1721 or 1722 Quare took into partnership his former apprentice, Stephen Horseman, who was bound in January 1701 and made free in September 1709. Horseman, also a Quaker, in 1712 married Quare's niece Mary Savage, who lived in Exchange Alley with her uncle, who consented to the marriage. Towards the end of his life Quare retired to the country, acquiring a property at Croydon where he died, aged seventy-five, on 21 March 1724; he was buried at the Quaker burial-ground, Bunhill Fields, on the 27th. The 'Daily Post' of 26 March reported: 'Last week dy'd Mr. Daniel Quare, watch and clock maker in Exchange Alley, who was famous both here and at foreign courts for the great improvements he made in that art and we hear he is succeeded in his shop and trade by his partner Mr. Horseman'. Quare's will, dated 3 May 1723, named his son Jeremiah executor and was proved on 26 March 1724. He left $2800 and all his household goods in London and Croydon to his wife, Mary, along with 'the two gold watches she usually wears, one of them being a repeater and the other a plain watch'; six grandchildren received $400 each and Jeremiah inherited $2000 and the residue of the estate. Mary spent her last years with Jeremiah in the parish of St Dionis Backchurch, Lime Street; she died, aged seventy-seven, on 4 November 1728. Jeremiah died in the following year. Horseman continued the Exchange Alley business until he was declared bankrupt, a notice appearing in the 'London Gazette', 1 December 1730; Richard Peckover, present in the alley from at least March 1731, is believed to have then taken over the goodwill. 
Between about 1680 and 1685 Quare began numbering watches in series, and between then and 1724 his business retailed nearly 6500 -- roughly 5000 timepieces, 1150 repeating watches, and 300 clockwatches and alarm watches. He numbered them in two series, the first accommodating all types of watch, the second, begun about 1688, being exclusively for repeating watches. It was not until between 1705 and 1710 that he began to number his clocks in a series which exceeded 300 items, though it is probable the business sold twice that number. These series were continued by Horseman, and Peckover then continued the watch series. Quare also numbered his barometers, that series reaching about 150. Many forgeries of Quare's work were produced both in England and on the continent. 
Aesthetically, much of Quare's seventeenth-century work is indistinguishable from that of many of his contemporaries -- he did not sell standard models with recognizable features as did Tompion and Knibb -- and it was not until the turn of the century that his characteristic designs of clock case and dial developed. He made or retailed most types of clock and watch (though there is no evidence that he ever worked on turret clocks) and the wide range of styles of workmanship found in their movements reflects not only the extent of his employment of others but also the lack of rigid implementation of workshop practices. Quare's own hand is unrecognizable. The daybook of Richard Wright of Warrington, Lancashire, reveals that Quare's business did not rely solely upon London outworkers because in 1721-2 Horseman sent Wright fourteen watches, one at a time, in different stages of production, for finishing. Quare also retailed several table clocks whose movements, far superior to any others bearing his name, were made by Tompion's workmen. In 1720 the London clockmaker Joseph Williamson claimed, probably legitimately, to have made Quare's equation clocks including a 400-day clock showing true and mean time which Quare, 'for whom I wrought mostly', supplied to Charles II of Spain about 1700. Thomas Grignion worked for Quare as a finisher, probably of watches, and John Penkethman also appears to have been associated with him; in 1720 Penkethman advertised from his shop in Exchange Alley for the recovery of a lost, almost new, Quare watch, and a poor tax assessment of 1725 locates him 'under Mr Quares'. Daniel Quare is also likely to have employed the watchmaker Robert Quare, who in 1695 lived with his family a short distance away in Lothbury, lodging with a Thomas Paul, possibly the clockmaker. Robert Quare's relationship to Daniel has not been established. Watches by Robert are recorded, and his son, also named Daniel, was the last of Quare's apprentices. Among Quare's other pupils were Richard Vick, appointed watch- and clockmaker to George I in 1722 and master of the Clockmakers' Company in 1729, Joshua Appleby, who served as master in 1745, and John Marshall, who is recorded as the inventor of the 'Magic Night Watch'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22943


Quaritch, Bernard Alexander Christian (1819-1899), bookseller and publisher, was born on 23 April 1819 at Worbis, a village in Thuringia, Germany. He was the eldest of five children of Karl Gottfried Bernhard Quaritsch (1795-1828), a man probably of Croatian extraction who was a fusilier in the Prussian army and a veteran of Waterloo, latterly an officer of justice at Worbis and Heiligenstadt, and his wife, Eleanore Henriette Amalie, 'nee' Rhan (1795-1875), the daughter of a Nordhausen merchant. Karl is said to have squandered his wife's fortune; he died at Heiligenstadt when Bernard was nine, and in 1831 the widow returned to Nordhausen, where Bernard completed his 'Gymnasium' education, learning Greek, Latin, and French. 
From the age of fifteen to nineteen Quaritch served an apprenticeship with a local bookseller, Koehne, and in 1839 set off for Berlin. There he found work at the publishing firm of Klemann, and in the bookshop of Adrien Oehmigke, mastering various bibliographical manuals, and acquainting himself with the English book world from literary and trade periodicals. Early in 1842 he moved to London, where he persuaded Henry George Bohn, the leading bookseller-publisher of his day, to hire him as cataloguer and general assistant. In 1844-5 he put in a year's stint with Theophile Barrois at Paris, crossing paths with the legendary bibliographer Jacques-Charles Brunet, but returned to London and Bohn for two final years of employment. In April 1847, announcing his ambition to be 'the first bookseller in Europe' (Quaritch), he set up on his own, with a capital of just $70 saved from his earnings, and an income eked out with piece-work for Marx and Engels as correspondent for their 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung' -- an improbable assignment, but one through which he briefly explored English politics, meeting Richard Cobden, Joseph Hume, and the rising bibliophile statesman W. E. Gladstone. 
From 16 Castle Street, Leicester Square, London, Quaritch issued his first catalogue -- a two-page, three-column 'Cheap book circular' -- in October 1847. His first season's sales amounted to no more than $168 10's'., rising to $766 10's'. in 1848, but hard work and tenacity rewarded him, and by 1855 his turnover was up nearly tenfold. His early specialities included literature, theology, law, mathematics, natural history and geography, music, fine arts, and architecture, from the outset distinguished by the linguistic scope of his stock. Catalogues 25 and 26, for instance (1851), listed books in no fewer than twenty-seven tongues, with particular emphasis on the oriental, which few English booksellers of the day could assess, let alone catalogue. 
Most of Quaritch's early stock was, and remained, usefully 'learned' -- second-hand scholarly books at moderate prices -- but the pursuit of fine, rare, and costly materials, for which he became famous, began in the mid-1850s, through connections with private collectors like Alexander, Lord Lindsay, later twenty-fifth earl of Crawford, who initially patronized him for the range of his academic wares. For Lindsay he purchased, in the 1858 Daly sale, a Gutenberg 'Bible' for $595, characteristically exceeding his commission of $525 in his determination to vanquish his rival agents; but Lindsay cheerfully forgave him, and a pattern was established. Over the next forty years Quaritch increasingly dominated the salerooms in London, and often elsewhere, like no other bookseller in history: armed with generous commissions and auction-house credit (which he began to demand, when his non-participation could seriously depress auction results), and counting on rapid turnover, he bought substantially at every major sale from the late 1850s to his death, taking the lion's share of such glamorous dispersals as Perkins (1873), Tite (1874), Didot (1878-9), Sunderland (1881-3), Beckford-Hamilton (1882-4), Syston Park (1884), Osterley Park (1885), Gaisford (1890), Salva-Heredia (1892-3), Ashburnham (1897-8), and William Morris (1898). On several occasions his bids accounted for nearly half the results, though it must be remembered that he sometimes shared purchases with colleagues like Morgand and Techener of Paris and F. S. Ellis of London, and participated, like most of his contemporaries, in post-sale 'settlements'. Commissions from a host of institutions and private collectors also swelled his figures, but in bidding for stock he set individual price records again and again, famously paying $3900 for the Gutenberg 'Bible' in the Syston Park sale (breaking the single-lot benchmark which had stood since 1812) and $4950, four days later, for a 1459 Mainz psalter printed on vellum. By then he had earned his nickname in the press, the Napoleon of Booksellers -- although he himself, perhaps with a thought for his father, held Bonaparte 'in horror and contempt' for 'his extreme selfishness and his cruelty' and 'possess[ed] no books or objects concerning him' (letter to Miss Kett of Bedford, 28 Jan 1893, priv. coll.). 
Quaritch's ever-expanding inventory was housed in London, successively, in shops at 61 Great Russell Street (a false start in 1847), 16 Castle Street (1847-60, retained until 1909 as a warehouse), and 15 Piccadilly (1860-1907, premises reaching back to Vine Street). Although visitors were many and welcome, especially in Piccadilly, the principal method of distribution was by posted catalogues, and for these Quaritch soon became known all over the world. The earliest broadsheets gave way to octavo pamphlets (disguised between 1855 and 1864 as a low-postal-rate periodical, 'The Museum'), then plump miscellaneous and specialist catalogues, and finally the massive 'General catalogues' of 1874 (with supplement, 1877), 1880, and 1887-8 (with index and supplements, 1892-7). The double-decker of 1874-7 contained 44,324 entries, representing about 200,000 volumes, while the 1880 catalogue ran to 2395 pages, measured over 6 inches thick, and weighed nearly 10 pounds -- deliberately surpassing in bulk the 5 inch 'guinea pig' of Quaritch's old master Bohn (1841), and even Bohn's 'enlarged' catalogue of 1847-67, upon which Quaritch himself had once laboured. The final 'General catalogue', long esteemed as a bibliographical reference, extends to seventeen grand volumes, but of course the books listed in such compendia were not always available: the point of Quaritch's enterprise was to set guideline prices for standard copies of antiquarian and out-of-print books, appropriate to his policy in re-purchasing them, and to his customers' expectations. 
Side by side with his more than 400 numbered and unnumbered catalogues (1848-86), Quaritch issued between 1867 and 1899 nearly 200 'rough lists', aimed at clearing new purchases -- often from recent named auctions -- rapidly; he also revived the practice of marketing directly at auction himself, by trade sales at home and abroad of rare books and general stock, including his own publications, and remainders with new 'Quaritch' imprints. The last involved him in 1879 in a dispute with the United States customs authorities, whom he addressed in an aggressively autobiographical essay, 'A Letter to General Starring' (1880); America did not back down, but Quaritch's trade-sale venues at one time spanned the globe from Australasia to Japan, Shanghai to Singapore to Calcutta, Amoy (Xiamen), and Rangoon, Cape Town to Leipzig, Dublin to Valparaiso. 
As a publisher and distributor of books and periodicals, and agent for learned societies, Quaritch at first followed his forte in orientalia, with grammars and dictionaries in Turkish, Arabic, Persian, and Chinese. From 1854 onwards he concentrated almost exclusively on unpopular but meritorious scholarly works, preferring to buy titles outright from their authors, who would have been hard put to find an alternative; and although his manner in negotiating was peremptory, he took genuine interest in the projects he backed, and regarded 'his' writers as feathers in his own cap. He encouraged bibliographers like Charles Sayle, F. C. Bigmore, and C. W. H. Wyman (who prefaced their 'Bibliography of Printing' (1880) with a portrait of Quaritch), J. G. Gray, and H. Buxton Forman, and sponsored W. C. Hazlitt's multi-volume 'Collections and Notes' on English popular literature, as well as the standard 'Works of William Blake', edited by E. J. Ellis and W. B. Yeats (3 vols., 1893), translations by his friends Sir Richard Burton ('The Lusiads', 1880-81) and Gladstone's cousin Lord Lyttelton ('Translations from the Greek', 1861), and numerous facsimiles and reprints. His most celebrated publication was Edward FitzGerald's 'Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam', the first four editions of which (1859, 1868, 1872, and 1879) name Quaritch as publisher, although FitzGerald himself paid for the printing of the earlier two. The history of the rediscovery of the poem in a Castle Street remainder tray, and its subsequent celebrity, is well known, but the later, unedifying struggle over copyright between Quaritch and FitzGerald's estate casts Quaritch himself in a harsh light. His dispute with William Morris, however, whose Kelmscott Press books he contracted to subsidize and distribute in 1890, found him, if anything, the abused party. 
In later life Quaritch was as proud of his clientele as his stock, boasting personal acquaintance with Disraeli and Gladstone, John Ruskin, William Morris, Edward FitzGerald, Sir Richard Burton, Sir Henry Irving, and Ellen Terry, as well as most of the noble and wealthy British collectors of the day. Although he never visited America, he represented and corresponded extensively with New York's James Lenox (falling out with him over a conflict at auction with Lord Crawford) and New England's briefly meteoric William Gibbons Medlicott (1816-1883), whose cause he adopted with uncustomary fervour in 1866. Institutional librarians at home and abroad flocked to his saleroom banner, notably Bodley's E. W. B. Nicolson, Cambridge University's Henry Bradshaw, Harvard's Justin Windsor, and George Bullen and Edward Maunde Thompson of the British Museum, whose agent Quaritch became on the retirement of F. S. Ellis in 1885; while from Athens John Gennadius showered Quaritch with commissions (1885-91), and, in New Zealand, Alexander H. Turnbull began his intensive collecting career with offers and parcels from Quaritch. Literary and press recognition, which Quaritch relished and courted, came in periodical notices, interviews, episodes in Richard Jefferies' 'Amaryllis at the Fair' (1887) and C. J. Wills's three-decker novel of 1891, 'John Squire's Secret', and in recollections by A. C. Swinburne, W. C. Hazlitt, and Oliver Wendell Holmes. Many books and booklets bear Quaritch's own name as compiler or author, but most were largely ghost-written, like the useful 'Dictionary of Book-Collectors' (1892) and various tracts and 'opuscula' of the Sette of Odd Volumes, a dining-club he co-founded in 1878. 
Bernard Quaritch married, in 1863 or 1864, Charlotte (Helen) Rimes (1831/2-1899), with whom he had three children: Charlotte, Gertrude Annie, and Bernard Alfred (1871-1913), who succeeded his father as head of the bookselling firm. Quaritch died of bronchial pneumonia at his home, 34 Belsize Grove, London, on 17 December 1899, in his eighty-first year; he was buried in Highgate cemetery. Physically and mentally he was a powerful man, short but wiry and barrel-chested, irrepressibly forthright, and given to bluff sardonic humour, but convivial and loyal, with a streak of unabashed sentimentality towards friends, and a patriotic devotion to his adopted country. His influence upon the international book trade in his fifty-year career can hardly be overestimated, and he was perhaps the last individual bookseller to unite under one roof major stocks of scholarly and rare works in virtually all fields of knowledge and imagination. In that achievement he was ably seconded by an intelligent staff, long led by the mercurial, multilingual, and polymath Irishman Michael Kerney ('c'.1832-1901), who joined Quaritch in 1857 and spent forty years as his chief assistant, 'literary adviser', and 'eminence grise'. In later years Kerney was joined by Frederic S. Ferguson (1878-1967), the bibliographer whose speciality of early English literature helped to ensure Quaritch's pre-eminence in that field, and Edmund H. Dring (1864-1928), who, with his son Edmund (1906-1990), directed the firm in the century after Quaritch's death, and between them served it for 113 years. The shop moved from Piccadilly to 11 Grafton Street in 1907, and 'Bernard Quaritch' became a private limited company in 1917, remaining in the Quaritch family until 1971. Under new proprietorship, and after one more removal -- to Lower John Street, Golden Square, in 1970 -- it continued into the twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 22944


Quarles, Charles (d. 1727), organist, is of unknown parentage and background, though it is assumed, on account of his profession and unusual name, that he was the son of Charles Quarles (died 1717), organist of Trinity College, Cambridge. He was appointed organist of York Minster on 30 June 1722 with an annual salary of $40 and during his brief period of office was paid on several occasions for copying music into the minster organ books and partbooks. Given that the last (and indirect) payment to Quarles in the York Minster accounts was made on 7 October 1727 and that a Charles Quarles was buried in All Saints', Cambridge, on 21 October 1727, it is probable that the death of the York organist occurred at Cambridge. A sonata for unspecified treble instrument (probably a flute) and basso continuo, attributed to Carlo Quarlesi, can be found in a manuscript in the library of Durham Cathedral. This was copied by Edward Finch, a canon of York Minster, who also copied 'Mr Quarles way of Fingering in Gamut natural', which survives in a manuscript in Glasgow University Library. An anthem, 'Out of the deep', remains in manuscript in the library of Worcester Cathedral; it was printed in 1775 in the 'Cathedral Magazine', where it is ascribed to 'Mr Quarles, late Organist at York'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22945


Quarles, Francis (1592-1644), poet, was born at the family's manor house of Stewards in Romford, Essex, the son of James Quarles (died 1599) and Joan Dalton (died 1606). He was baptized on 8 May 1592 at St Edward's Church, Romford. 
Quarles's godfather was Sir Francis Barrington, head of a prominent Essex puritan family. His father, James, made his fortune by accumulating the posts of clerk of the royal kitchen, clerk of the green cloth, and surveyor-general of victualling for the navy. Francis, who alludes to himself as an 'Essex Quill' ('Threnodes', 1641, sig. A3'v'), was proud of his native county, the ancient lineage of his family, and his father's work for Queen Elizabeth. 
The family lineage is complicated, and Grosart's introduction to Quarles's works requires some correction (Holtgen, 'Two Francis Quarleses', 132-4; also papers deposited by Daisy Quarles in the Library of Congress, no. CS 71. Q 17 1952a). The family originated in the village of Quarles, Norfolk, where Nicholas de Wharfles in 1258 owned the advowson of the church. About 1400, after the black death, the Quarleses withdrew to nearby Gresham. The earliest recorded ancestor of the poet is Thomas Quarles, of Gresham, whose will was proved in 1462 (Norwich consistory court, 75 Betyns). His grandson George, auditor to Henry VIII, settled at Ufford, Northamptonshire. The auditor's son Francis purchased the manor of Ufford in 1555. The eldest son of this Francis with his second wife, Bridget Brampton, was James, the surveyor-general of victualling. The state papers and other records offer glimpses of his important and lucrative activities as purveyor. He was probably a protege of Lord Burghley, a distant kinsman. In 1588 he bought Stewards. Several years before he had substantially increased his wealth by marrying an heiress, Joan, the daughter of Eldred Dalton, of Moor Place, Much Hadham, Hertfordshire. The marriage took place in 1571 at Farnham, Essex (parish register). For a time he was tenant of the crown manor of Farnham (P. Morant, 'History of Essex', 1768, 2.623; Essex RO, crown grant, D/D/Tw/T15, T16). Legal papers submitted by his son Arthur, however, mention Moor Place as 'Mr. Quarles chief seat' in 1580 (Hunt. L., Ellesmere MS 6063). In her will of 1606 (Quarles, 'Works', 1.xv), Joan Quarles left 'my Mansion house' and other possessions at Much Hadham to Robert, her eldest, and Arthur, her youngest son. 
The family at Romford numbered four sons, Francis being the third, and four daughters. Sir Robert Quarles (1580-1639), the heir, became MP for Colchester and married three prosperous ladies in succession. Quarles's mother was a puritan. In 1589 the archdeaconry court dealt with the illegal burial of the family's maidservant, 'without any seremony, and not according to the communion booke', for which Mrs Quarles and John Leech, a schoolmaster and conventicler of Hornchurch, had been responsible (Essex RO, act book 1588-90, fol. 148, D/AEA/13). An account of discussions at the Hampton Court conference between 'Puritanes' and 'Antipuritanes' in 1604 was addressed to Sir Edward Lewkenor, an MP of puritan sympathies, 'att Mistress Quarles in Rumford' (Townshend MSS, BL, Add. MS 38492, fol. 81). 
Quarles was educated initially at a 'schoole in the Countrey' and afterwards at Christ's College, Cambridge (U. Quarles, sig. A3'r'). James and Francis remained at the college from 1605 until their graduation in January 1609 (Cambridge University Archives, liber gratiarum, 1598-1620, p. 112). At Christ's College, Ramism and puritanism were widespread, but government pressure gradually reduced the strength of the latter. In 1610, to complete the education considered necessary for a gentleman, Francis entered Lincoln's Inn. He studied law for some years without aiming at a legal career. 
Quarles very likely took part in the 'Maske of the Middle Temple and Lincolns Inne' arranged by George Chapman and Inigo Jones for the wedding of Princess Elizabeth, the future queen of Bohemia, and Frederick, the elector palatine, in February 1613. The marriage of the Thames and the Rhine had been designed to promote the great protestant anti-papal and anti-Habsburg alliance. On their triumphal progress to Heidelberg the young couple were escorted by four noblemen and a large number of gentlemen. Quarles and Inigo Jones travelled in the entourage of the earl of Arundel, the celebrated art collector. Quarles did not hold the office of cup-bearer to the princess, as his widow suggests, but may have performed this duty on occasion. Three of the four surviving lists show 'Mr. Quarles' in an unspecified honorary position, directly after the earl's steward, Mr Dixe (Holtgen, 'Quarles', 319-23; see also TNA: PRO, declared accounts, E 351/2801-2). Like most of the English gentlemen in the bridal party, Quarles returned from Heidelberg to England in the summer of 1613. As Arundel and his countess went on to Italy, Quarles probably travelled home with Viscount Lisle (Robert Sidney, later earl of Leicester), who, on 12 August, was at Flushing, waiting for passage to England. In 1620 Quarles dedicated his first book to him, a paraphrase of the story of Jonah under the unpromising title 'A Feast for Wormes'. Here he acknowledged 'the love you did beare to my (long since) deceased Father' and the 'undeserved Favours, and Honourable Countenance towards me in your passage thorow 'Germany', where you have left in the hearts of men, a 'Pyramis' of your Worth' (Quarles, 'Works', 2.5). Perhaps he found Lisle, a brother of Philip Sidney, and an experienced diplomat and a poet, more congenial than the aloof Arundel, whom he never mentions. The courtly interlude no doubt led to a deeper understanding of the political and religious cross-currents in Europe on the eve of the Thirty Years' War, but not to any preferment or patronage. In September 1615 he obtained a licence to travel abroad, but whether he made use of it is unknown. 
In the spring of 1617 Quarles bought a house in the parish of St Vedast, near St Paul's Cathedral, and on 26 May 1618 a marriage licence was issued to 'Francis Quarles, Gent. of Romford, about 26, and Ursely [Ursula] Woodgate, of St Andrew's, Holborn, Spinster, 17, daughter of John Woodgate, Gent.' ('Marriage Licences Issued by the Bishop of London', 1887, 2.60). Two days later Quarles married his young bride at St Andrew's. They had eighteen children including the poet John Quarles. In 1620 he bought land in Much Hadham from his brother Sir Robert. With an annuity of $50 and, presumably, further income from the family estates, he could, at least for the moment, settle down in London to the life of a cultivated gentleman of scholarly and literary interests 'to which he devoted himself late and early, usually by three a clock in the morning' (U. Quarles, sig. A3'r'). The fruits of these labours were a succession of biblical verse paraphrases published from 1620 onwards, and in a revised collection entitled 'Divine Poems', from 1630 onwards. Quarles tried to solve the problem inherited from Du Bartas, the French pioneer of a new type of Christian epic, of how to combine narration and devotion, by breaking up the text into sections of 'History' and of 'Meditation'. This crude method and the Ramist habit of exploiting the rhetorical 'places of invention' account for the inordinate length and diffuseness of most of the poems. Despite these shortcomings there was a real demand for such pious light reading in the vernacular. Quarles's insistence, throughout his works, on the need for meditation derives (unacknowledged) from Joseph Hall, who had attempted to reconcile Calvinism with the Catholic meditative tradition (J. Hall, 'The Arte of Divine Meditation', 1606). About 1625 Quarles presented 'The Workes of King James' (1616) to Christ's College, Cambridge. On the flyleaf he wrote in neat calligraphy a flattering poem to the king and the university, 'Rex pater est patriae, mihi clara academia mater'. This is one of the two surviving autographs of the poet. He had read the royal works and in meditation 19 of 'Hadassa' (1621) he seems to echo James's claims for the divine right of kings. His gift was recorded by an elaborate Latin eulogy in the 'liber donationum' (Bb.3.8), a document of Quarles's early reputation (photographs of the poem and the eulogy in Holtgen, 'Two Francis Quarleses', plates 1 and 2). 
At this time Quarles is found in the unlikely role of company promoter seeking, together with Sir William Luckyn and Sir Gamaliel Capell (both prominent in Essex) and one William Lyde, an act of parliament giving them a monopoly in a new method of producing saltpetre, an ingredient of gunpowder. Nothing seems to have come out of this venture. Instead, Quarles became secretary to James Ussher, the great church historian and newly appointed archbishop of Armagh. In 1625 Ussher stayed with 'Sir Gerard Harvy and his lady' in Moor Place, Much Hadham, the former house of Quarles's mother. The archbishop was looking for a qualified research assistant, and it seems that the poet was recommended to him by his godfather, Sir Francis Barrington, and by his friend, Dr Ailmer, rector of Much Hadham, whose death Quarles mourned in 'An Alphabet of Elegies' ('Works', 3.3). When Ussher set out for Ireland in July 1626 he was probably joined by his secretary with his wife and two children who were to live with him in the palace at Drogheda. Quarles returned to London before 20 March 1630 when he addressed a letter to Ussher (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. lett. 89, fol. 69). The men remained on cordial terms. Quarles shared Ussher's anti-Catholicism and anti-Arminianism, his insistence on conformity to the established church, and his royalism. 'Argalus and Parthenia', a long verse romance written in Ireland, dated from Dublin, 4 March 1629 and published in London in that year, marks Quarles's systematic extension of his literary repertoire. The poem is based on a story from the 'Arcadia', a scion 'taken out of the Orchard of Sir 'Philip Sidney', of precious memory' (Quarles, 'Works', 3.240). Its blend of heroic, erotic, and comic elements remained popular throughout the century. A critical edition was published by David Freeman in 1986. Edmond Malone, in a note in his copy of Langbaine's 'English Dramatick Poets' (Bodl. Oxf., Malone 131, s. v. Quarles), observes: 'The original M.S. of his 'Argalus and Parthenia' is in the Library of the College of Dublin, and is dated from his house in Cole Alley in Castle Street in that City, where he kept a School'. This statement lacks confirmation as does another one by John Aubrey, who says that the poet 'lived at Bath at the Katherine-wheele inne (opposite to the market-house), and wrote there, a yeare or two' ('Brief Lives', ed. A. Clark, 1898, 2.176). After petitioning Charles I in May 1631, Quarles received 'a lease in reversion of the impositions on Tobacco and Tobacco pipes to be imported into the Kingdom of Ireland' ('Fourth Report', HMC, 369). This attempt to augment his income failed; the reversion never came his way. About this time he composed the epigrams of 'Divine Fancies' (1632) in which he established his religious and political stance as an Anglican and royalist, vigorously attacking both puritans and papists. He also presented himself as a critic of social and moral abuses. 
By 1632 Quarles and his family were living at Roxwell in his native Essex, perhaps in or near Skreens, a large house then occupied by his friend, Sir William Luckyn. An epitaph for Lady Luckyn in the shape of an hourglass, part of the elegy 'Mildreiados' ('Works', 3.26), survives in the church of Abbess Roding nearby. The years 1632-8 at Roxwell were the most creative and perhaps the happiest period of Quarles's life; his literary reputation and his circle of friends continued to grow. In April 1636 his eldest daughter, Frances, aged seventeen, married Eusebey Marbury, apparently a son of the rector of St James Garlickhythe, London ('Marriage Licences Issued by the Bishop of London', 1887, 2.226). During the 1630s he composed 'The Shepheards Oracles' (published later, in 1646), which deals with autobiographical, political, and religious matters under the thin guise of pastoral allegory. The poem includes satirical attacks on the radical fringe of the anti-episcopal 'Root and Branch' party, also allegorical portraits of his friend, Phineas Fletcher, and an Arminian 'Master Shepheard' who is severely criticized and must be Archbishop Laud (Quarles, 'Works', 3.218-19). 

'Emblemes' (1635), the work which secured Quarles's fame, was dedicated to his young friend Edward Benlowes, a would-be-poet, wealthy virtuoso, patron, and Essex neighbour: 'You have put the 'Theorboe' into my hand; and I have play'd'. On the frontispiece, the theorbo, a type of lute, appears as a symbol of divine poetry (and Quarles was himself a lutenist). What Benlowes put into Quarles's hand were the two Jesuit models for 'Emblemes' which he had brought home from the grand tour, 'Pia desideria' (1624) by Herman Hugo and 'Typus mundi' (1627), compiled by nine clever schoolboys at the Antwerp Jesuit college under the direction of their master. The frontispiece of 'Emblemes' shows a globe in which are inscribed the names of Finchingfield and Roxwell, while an additional name, Hilgay, appears on a globe in emblem V.6. These are the villages inhabited by the three friends Benlowes, Quarles, and Fletcher. All three were involved in attempts to create new forms of allegorical divine poetry. It is Quarles's historical achievement to have established in protestant England the dominant type of the Catholic baroque emblems representing the encounters of Amor Divinus or Divine Love and the Soul. These books were acceptable to moderate Catholics and protestants because they promoted the general tenets of the Christian life, not controversial doctrines. The main figure has sometimes been misunderstood as the infant Jesus, but it is an allegory of Divine Love, God or Christ: 'Let not the tender Eye checke, to see the allusion to our blessed SAVIOUR figured, in these Types' ('Emblemes', 'To the reader'). Quarles uses the forty-five emblems from 'Pia desideria' in the original order, though he draws selectively from 'Typus mundi'. Occasional alterations to individual plates are of no major doctrinal or sectarian significance. His poems are largely independent and new. They exploit the mimetic quality of the pictures and transform them into allegories of spiritual truth. They speak in the different voices of dramatic dialogue, meditative soliloquy, spiritual love song, irony, or flippancy. Conceits, sometimes derived from patristic texts, are often elaborated with semantic precision and dense intertextuality and repay close study. The overall structure of the work preserves patterns of the spiritual pilgrimage and the Ignatian meditation. The plates copied by William Marshall, William Simpson, and two other engravers are mostly accurate and refined but fall short of the artistry of the Antwerp originals. 
When John Marriot, a major literary publisher at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, brought out the first edition of 'Emblemes', it proved such a success that a second edition was called for. The two editions, which can be distinguished by textual variants, are both dated 1635 on the title-page. But there is evidence ('inter alia' from dated emblematic decorations at Caerlaverock Castle, near Dumfries) that the first edition actually appeared in 1634. Four years later Quarles produced what he called 'a second service' of the same dish, 'Hieroglyphikes of the Life of Man' (1638), a shorter book of fifteen emblems. It is the most notable English version of the theme of the ages of man. In 1639 the two works were reprinted and issued in one volume as 'Emblemes and Hieroglyphikes', and it is in this form that they have commonly appeared since. There are about sixty editions or issues, more than thirty of them after 1800. Christopher Harvey's 'School of the Heart' was mistakenly attributed to Quarles and, from the late eighteenth century onward, from time to time included in editions of 'Emblemes and Hieroglyphikes'. 
Quarles's association with New England is recorded by an Essex neighbour, the traveller John Josselyn, who in July 1639 delivered to Governor Winthrop and John Cotton in Boston six metrical psalms (nos. 16, 25, 51, 88, 113 and 137) from 'Mr. 'Francis Quarles' the poet' for Cotton's approbation (Holtgen, 'New verse', 118-41). If there was a chance of a handsome fee for supplying the full number of psalms for the proposed 'Bay Psalm Book', Quarles lost it. His versions would have lacked puritan plainness and were not included in the book. However, scribal manuscripts of hitherto unknown versions of psalms 1 to 8 by Quarles and of his 'Threnode on Lady Masham' of 1641 were published in 1998 (ibid.). Manuscript PwV 358 in Nottingham University surely represents a portion of the 'Psalmes of David' left unpublished at the poet's death and mentioned by his widow in a chancery suit (TNA: PRO, C.2 Chas. I/Q1/23). She also mentions a lost 'Chronicle of the Citty of London', which was written after Quarles's appointment in February 1640, as city chronologer, at the request of the earl of Dorset with an annual stipend of 100 nobles, or just over $33 (CLRO, repertory 54, fol. 86'v'.) For this favour Quarles owed thanks to Lady Dorset to whom he had dedicated two books. In 'Quarleis' (1634), Benlowes had already requested financial support for Quarles from the city fathers. 
Entries in the parish registers suggest that Quarles must have moved from Roxwell to Terling, another Essex village, between May 1638 and January 1640. Here he lived at Ridley Hall, a house which still stands and at the time was owned by the five Frank sisters, to whom he dedicated 'Observations Concerning Princes and States upon Peace and Warre' (1642): 'Sweete Ladies, 'When the' Drum 'beates loud, soft language is not heard'' ('Works', 1.52; Holtgen, 'Quarles', 269). Under the impact of constitutional conflicts and civil war and with an eye to the market, he turned to prose writing and became a literary apologist for Charles I. The years at Terling until his death in 1644 were overshadowed by poverty and the hostility of radical puritans and sectaries. In February 1640, with the help of Marbury, his son-in-law, he obtained a loan of $30 upon handing over the plates and copy of 'Emblemes and Hieroglyphikes' to the stationers Eglesfield and Williams as security. When the loan was not redeemed they attempted to reimburse themselves by preparing a new edition. In a chancery petition Quarles tried to regain the copyright but the court found against him (TNA: PRO, C.2 Chas. I, Q1/84, Q1/10; C.33/182, fols. 235'v', 263'v'). The suit provides useful bibliographical information: Quarles's books were printed in large editions (3000 copies or more) and, as a popular author, he could retain far more control over his copyright than might have been supposed (F. Kellendonk, 'John and Richard Marriott', 1978, 31). 

'Enchiridion' (1640, augmented 1641), a book of aphorisms, rivalled 'Emblemes' in popular appeal and the number of editions. Borrowing from Machiavelli and Bacon, Quarles brings together timeless wisdom tersely expressed, and political advice for a king threatened by civil war. Large portions of these maxims reappeared under the name of King James in a royalist publication, 'Regales aphorismi' (1650); others were translated into Latin by Constantijn Huygens. There were Dutch, Danish, Swedish, and German translations (Holtgen, 'Quarles and the Low Countries', 'Anglo-Dutch Relations in the Field of the Emblem', ed. B. Westerweel, 1997, 148). The main interest in Quarles's posthumous comedy 'The Virgin Widow' (1649), which at times turns into a real romp, arises from its topical allusions. The political and ecclesiastical allegory is somewhat obscure, but the heroine, Kettreena, clearly represents the Christian church and the Church of England as the widowed bride of Christ. It can be argued that the play was originally written and performed in 1640 for the Barrington household at Hatfield Broad Oak, and that further topical allusions and a second personification of the church, Lady Temple, were added about February 1641, when the Long Parliament was negotiating with the Scots. It tells that Lady Temple three years ago suffered from a surfeit of ''Canterbury' 'Duck'' (Dr Arthur Duck was one of Laud's officials), and is now beset by 'a rude rabble of unsanctified Mechanicks' (Quarles, 'Works', 3.309). Comedies were a regular feature in the puritan and parliamentary Barrington family; a 'Messenger that came from Mr Quarles concerneing the Comody' is noted in their household accounts in August 1640 (Essex RO, D/D Ba A2, fol. 57'v'.) Although Quarles was not of a mind with the Barringtons' brand of puritanism he stayed on friendly terms with them. He and Sir Thomas Barrington took an interest in Comenius's plans for educational reform and Ussher's scheme of a moderate or 'reduced' episcopacy acceptable to the puritans; the archbishop had returned from Ireland in 1640 (Holtgen, 'Quarles', 274-6). 
In three anonymous civil war tracts partly written in Oxford and published 1644-5 Quarles sought to create for himself the persona of a moderate protestant patriot and arbitrator. In 'The Loyall Convert' he blames England's troubles on 'a 'viperous' Generation' of 'desperate enemies of all 'Order' and 'Discipline''. He affirms his loyalty to the king, the ''Lords Anointed'' who had by then accepted the reforms of 1641 and the system of mixed monarchy and would defend this constitutional monarchist position against ''undetermined alteration'' ('Works', 1.142-5). David Lloyd claims that Quarles suffered much 'in his Peace and Name for writing the 'Loyal Convert', and for going to his Majesty to 'Oxford'' ('Memoirs of those that Suffered for the Protestant Religion', 1668, 621). In 'The New Distemper' Quarles alludes to his troubles in Terling where he suffered from the hostility of John Stalham, the fanatical puritan vicar and his followers, who had preferred a petition against him and spread a malicious rumour that he was a papist. Such circumstances suggest that he left Terling to join the king's court at Oxford in 1643 or 1644. Remarks in 'The New Distemper' on the activities of royalist writers in Oxford (Quarles, 'Works', 1.156), and the fact that his son John served in the Oxford garrison, support this conclusion. Quarles's defence in 'The Whipper Whipt' of the controversial Dr Cornelius Burges, who was a puritan and a royalist, prompted Anthony Wood's false, but much repeated description of Quarles as 'an old puritanical poet' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 3.648). A posthumous Oxford edition of the three tracts entitled 'The Profest Royalist' appeared in 1645. The poet's last book, 'Barnabas and Boanerges' (1644), which appeared in several versions and in Dutch and German translations, was an ingenious combination of meditation and character essay, and was much in demand. 
Little is known about the last phase of Quarles's life. By May 1644 all unauthorized strangers had to leave Oxford. Quarles died on 8 September 1644, aged fifty-three, in the presence of his wife and friends, probably in Terling or in London and was buried on 11 September at St Olave's Church, Silver Street, London. He died intestate, and is noted as 'pauper' in the entry of the administration granted to his widow (TNA: PRO, PROB 6/20, fol. 29, 4 Feb 1645). Ursula Quarles tried to recover copyrights and unpublished manuscripts from the stationers, but did not succeed and was left in great want. The reasons for Quarles's persisting poverty from the late 1630s onward are not quite clear. It may be that his occasional criticism of abuses in the monarchy prevented the court patronage for which he strove so hard in his numerous dedications. Contemporaries acknowledged the essential goodness of his character and his engaging personality. Quarles was not a puritan but a moderate protestant and royalist with a reverence for the divine institution of the monarchy and who, after 1641, accepted constitutional royalism (I. M. Smart, 'Francis Quarles: professed royalist and 'Puritanical Poet'', 'Durham University Journal', 70, 1978, 187-92). He was probably the most successful English poet of his age. His six major works owed their appeal until about 1700 mainly to the mixture of 'competent Wit with Piety' (Richard Baxter, 'Poetical Fragments', 1681, preface). The change of taste about that time caused all of them except 'Emblemes and Hieroglyphikes' to fall into neglect. This book proved a cultural achievement and a durable success. It brought to protestant England, suitably adapted, the spiritual and emotional qualities of the Catholic meditation on pictures. It survived as a work of edification when the emblem tradition itself had declined and it played an important role in the Victorian emblematic revival. It has been found especially rewarding in recent studies of the interaction of word and image. Nearly all of Quarles's works stand in an interesting relationship to public affairs and serve to enrich the picture of Stuart England. 


@@@@@


doc= 22946


Quarles, John (1624/5-1665), poet, was the son of Francis Quarles (1592-1644), author of the celebrated 'Emblemes' (1635), and his wife, Ursula Woodgate ('b'. 1601). Of the eighteen children born to them, John was the eldest son to survive infancy. Francis Quarles belonged to an Essex family that was prosperous and well connected. At the time of John Quarles's birth his parents were apparently still living in Foster Lane, London, where they had resided since their marriage in 1618. About 1626 Francis Quarles became secretary to James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh, primate of Ireland. Archbishop Ussher preferred to reside at Drogheda, rather than in his palace at Armagh, and it is clear that the Quarles family lived with him. In an elegy on Ussher which John Quarles wrote in 1656 he recalls that he received his education from Ussher alone and that: '
the example of his life did every day 

Afford me Lectures. 
(J. Quarles, 'An Elegie on... James Usher', 1656, 21)' By 1633 the Quarles family had returned to England and were living at Roxwell in Essex, although, within six years, Francis Quarles, no longer prosperous, had moved to a different part of the county and was residing at Ridley Hall, Terling. On 9 February 1643 John Quarles matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, where, according to Anthony Wood, he was a batteler. By 1643 the king had made Oxford his headquarters, and Quarles is believed to have been a captain in one of his armies and to have served in the Oxford garrison. Presumably military duties curtailed Quarles's university career, and there is no record of his taking a degree. 
Quarles was launched on his career as poet at a comparatively early age. He produced twelve or more works -- broadsides, pamphlets, and books -- which appeared in at least twenty-seven editions and reissues over a period of nearly thirty years. His first substantial publication was 'Fons lachrymarum' (1648). When it appeared, Quarles was living in Flanders whither he had been banished, and his 'Farewell to England' of the following year perhaps suggests that he anticipated a lengthy stay. Neither his movements over the next few years nor the date of his eventual return to London have been established. His next considerable work, 'Regale lectum miseriae' (1649), which included his 'Farewell', was principally a lament for Charles I. It was his most successful publication, and had reappeared a further six times by 1679. Perhaps only his 'God's Love and Mans Unworthiness' (1651), 'Divine Meditations' (published with 'God's Love' in 1655), and 'The Historie of the most Vile Dimagoras' (1658), a continuation of his father's immensely popular heroic romance, 'Argalus and Parthenia', have comparable merit. 
In common with a number of writers of the time, Francis Quarles freely acknowledged his indebtedness to Edward Benlowes (1602-1676); John Quarles was to follow in his father's footsteps by dedicating to Benlowes, as his 'much-honoured and Esteemed Friend', 'Gods Love and Mans Unworthiness'. Inevitably John Quarles's work was compared with that of his father. In the lines appended to William Marshall's portrait frontispiece to 'Fons lachrymarum' it is declared that but for the portrait the work would clearly have been taken for that of ''old smooth' Quarles 'himself''. While Richard Love, who, as vice-chancellor of Cambridge University, had written an imprimatur in verse for 'Emblemes' (1635), remarked in the commendatory verse he contributed to 'Fons lachrymarum' that: '

'The' Son 'begins to rise, the' Father''s set': 


'Heav'n took away one' light, 'and pleas'd to le't 


'Another rise'. 
(J. Quarles, 'Fons lachrymarum', sig. A8'r')' Love's sentiments were to be echoed even by those personally unacquainted with John Quarles. Samuel Sheppard, for instance 'consecrated' an epigram to him, hailing him as heir to his father's genius (S. Sheppard, 'Epigrams', 1651, 161). 
Quarles died in London of the plague in 1665. Winstanley believed that he might have been saved had he gone to live with his kinsman William Holgate at Saffron Walden, Essex. Quarles's place of burial has not been traced. He has been confused with John Quarles (1631-1674), fellow of Peterhouse, Cambridge, and John Quarles (1596-1647), merchant of Delft and Rotterdam. 


@@@@@


doc= 22947


Edwin John Quekett (1808-1847), surgeon and microscopist, was born at Langport. He underwent medical training at University College Hospital, becoming a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1830. He practised as a surgeon from 50 Wellclose Square, Whitechapel, and in 1835 he became lecturer on botany at the London Hospital medical college. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1836. A meeting, held in his house in 1839, resulted in the foundation of the Microscopical Society of London (later the Royal Microscopical Society), which was to exert so great an influence on the development of the instrument. He wrote fifteen papers, and had his name commemorated by Lindley in a genus of Brazilian orchids, 'Quekettia'. He died in London on 28 June 1847 of diphtheria contracted during his duties, and was buried at Seasalter, Kent, near the grave of a Miss Hyder to whom he had been engaged before she had died of consumption. 


@@@@@


doc= 22948


Quekett, John Thomas (1815-1861), histologist, was born at Langport, Somerset, on 11 August 1815, the youngest son of William Quekett, master of Langport grammar school, and his wife, Mary, daughter of John Bartlett. His elder brothers were William Quekett (1802-1888) and Edwin John Quekett (1808-1847) ['see below']. 
Quekett was educated by his father at home, where an emphasis was placed on natural history; when only sixteen, John gave lectures on microscopical subjects with the aid of a home-made microscope. He was then apprenticed to a local surgeon, and subsequently to his brother Edwin in London. He entered King's College and worked at the London Hospital medical school, qualifying at Apothecaries' Hall and the Royal College of Surgeons in 1840. He won a competitive three-year studentship in human and comparative anatomy at the latter in the same year, and on its completion in 1843 was appointed assistant conservator to the Hunterian Museum of the College of Surgeons, under Richard Owen, becoming demonstrator of minute anatomy in 1844. He made a collection of 2500 plant and animal microscopical preparations, including many injections, which was bought by the college in 1846. In 1841, on Owen's recommendation, he had been appointed secretary of the recently founded Microscopical Society of London. He retained the post until 1860, when he became president, but by that time he was too ill to contribute anything except his presidential address. 
In 1846 Quekett married Isabella Mary Anne (died 1872), daughter of Robert Scott of the Bengal civil service; they had four children. In 1852 he became the Royal College of Surgeons' professor of histology and resident conservator at the Hunterian Museum, Owen having moved out to reside at Richmond. On Owen's appointment as director of the natural history collections of the British Museum in 1856, the post of conservator was at once offered to Quekett, at $500 per year. 
Quekett's work as a histologist, both practical and literary, was original and prolific. His 'Practical Treatise on the Use of the Microscope' (1848) was the first such work, and gave much encouragement to individual workers at this fruitful period in the use of the instrument in histology. He was a well-connected man of considerable scientific stature (the prince consort was among those who came to him for instruction). He was working with the microscope during the period in which it was becoming established as a serious scientific tool. He applied this tool with vigour, in one of the few places in Europe where his potential could have been realized. 
In addition to his handbook, Quekett wrote two volumes of a catalogue of the histological preparations in the college (1850 and 1853), two volumes of lectures on histology (1852 and 1854), a joint work on fossil plants in the college (1859), and a catalogue of plants and invertebrates (1860). He wrote twenty-two papers, the majority of which were published in the 'Transactions of the Microscopical Society'. In the early 1840s, while still a student and an assistant to Benjamin Travers (1783-1858), he carried out highly original experimental work on the healing of wounds, which was published in Travers's 'The Physiology of Inflammation and the Healing Process' (1844). In this the very eminent Travers pays most fulsome tribute to his young partner. 
Quekett was elected to fellowship of the Linnean Society in 1857, and of the Royal Society in 1860. He had gone to Pangbourne to recover from an illness, and died there on 20 August 1861, of a seizure consequent on chronic Bright's disease. After his death his possessions were auctioned over several days from 10 December 1861. He had a large variety of scientific apparatus, including some important microscopes and scientific books, but also arms and armour, pottery, minerals, and machine tools. The auction realized some $681, but did not include most of his ordinary household effects. The College of Surgeons paid an annuity to his widow, and the microscopical world set up a fund to assist his family. The Quekett Microscopical Club was established in 1865, and named so in his memory. 






@@@@@


doc= 22949


William Quekett (1802-1888), Church of England clergyman, was born at Langport on 3 October 1802; he was the eldest of the three brothers. He entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1822, and in 1825 was ordained curate of South Cadbury, Somerset. In 1830 he became curate of St George-in-the-East, where he remained until 1841 and was instrumental in establishing Christ Church, Watney Street, of which he was the incumbent from 1841 to 1854. On 2 July 1851 he married Mary Bennett, widow of the Revd E. V. Williams. His energy attracted the attention of Charles Dickens, who based his articles 'What a London curate can do if he tries' ('Household Words', 16 Nov 1850) and 'Emigration' (ibid., 24 Jan 1852) on Quekett's work. In 1849 Quekett and Sidney Herbert established the Female Emigration Society. In 1854 Quekett was presented by the crown to the rectory of Warrington, where he restored the parish church, and died on 30 March 1888, just after the publication of his autobiography, 'My Sayings and Doings' (1888). 


@@@@@


doc= 22950


Quesnel, Peter (fl. c.1320), Franciscan friar, canonist, and pastoral theologian, is known only through his popular handbook, 'Directorium iuris in foro conscientiae et juridiciali', where he is referred to in at least one early manuscript as a Franciscan friar. Bale states that a copy of his work was in the library of Norwich Cathedral priory, on the basis of which he was later believed to be a Franciscan of Norwich, but without supporting evidence. The identification of Quesnel with John the Canon (Juan Marbres, canon of Tortosa), made in the colophons of the first and second books of the first edition of the 'Quaestiones super physica' of Canonicus (Padua, 1475), is without foundation. The facts that he used the 'Summa confessorum' of Johann von Freiburg, written about 1300, and that his book was in circulation in England by about 1350, when Master Simon Bredon (died 1372) had a copy (now MS 223 in the library of Merton College, Oxford), show that he must have been at work about 1320. The work was intended to be a practical guide to the administration of the sacraments in the light of up-to-date canon law, and in most manuscripts was accompanied by a full index. Besides Johann von Freiburg's work, Quesnel made extensive use of that of the thirteenth-century canonist Ramon de Penafort. In the fifteenth century, his work became popular throughout Europe; it survives in at least sixteen manuscripts, and was known to the Franciscan bibliographers in five more in Spain, Italy, France, Germany, and Bohemia. 


@@@@@


doc= 22951


Quick, Henry (1792-1857), poet, was born on 4 December 1792 in Zennor, Cornwall, the son of Henry Quick (1754-1805), a miner, and his wife, Margery, 'nee' George (1759-1834). Quick spent his life in Zennor, and from an early age wrote rugged verses for the countryside. He attended school until about the age of eight, and his first work was printed in 1826. From 1830 until his death he commemorated in verse all the local calamities and crimes, usually closing each poem with a religious exhortation. Most of his works were printed as broadsides, which he distributed along with the popular journals procured monthly from Penzance which supplied his income. On 25 October 1835 he married Jane Rowe ('c'.1767-1855), a widow much older than himself, because he 'needed someone to care for him' (Pool, 3). 
In 1836 Quick wrote his 'Life and Progress' in eighty-nine verses. He also printed 'A New Copy, &c., on the Glorious Coronation of Queen Victoria' (1838), 'A New Copy of Verses on the Scarcity of the Present Season and Dreadful Famine in Ireland' (1848), and similar minor works both in verse and prose. 
An engraving by R. T. Pentreath depicts Quick in curious costume, with a printed sheet in his hand and a basket under his arm, distributing his poems and pamphlets. (Millett, 36). He died of tuberculosis at his home, Mill Hill Down, Zennor, on 9 October 1857, and was buried in the local churchyard three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 22952


Quick, John (bap. 1636, d. 1706), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Plymouth and baptized at St Andrew's Church, Plymouth, on 19 June 1636, the son of Thomas Quick and his wife, Ann ('bap'. 1608), who was probably the daughter of John Hunt. He had one brother, Philip, who died at the age of twenty-five. John entered Exeter College, Oxford, as a servitor in 1653, matriculating on 20 July 1654. Both the rector of Exeter College, John Conant, and Quick's tutor, John Saunders, were strong puritans and Quick was undoubtedly influenced by the prevailing climate in the university and the country. He graduated BA in 1657 and began preaching shortly afterwards at Ermington, Devon. He was ordained on 2 February 1659 at Plymouth, having been already presented by the corporation of Exeter on 3 November 1658 to the vicarage of Kingsbridge-with-Churchstow, Devon, for which he undertook to pay $4 yearly to the sequestered vicar Robert Sparke. 
Following the Restoration in 1660, Quick was ejected; he then acquired the curacy of Brixton, Devon, but was again ejected when the 'Act of Uniformity' came into force in August 1662. He resumed preaching, however, when no one was appointed in his place, and on Sunday 13 December 1663, while preaching his morning sermon, he was arrested following action by Bishop Seth Ward. As Ward wrote on 19 December: 'my diocese had not one outed presbyter who dared to preach publicly for these 12 months past (at least wch I have heard of). Till a while since, one Quick, ejected out of Brixton, undertook boldly to preach there. I did what I was obliged to do, and he is now prisoner... in the Castle of Exon, to wch he was brought this week... He saith that after his removal, he stayed some months, to see whether any other would supply his place, but at length finding that no man was put in his stead and that the people went off, some to atheism and debauchery, others to Sectarism (for he is a Presbyterian) he resolved to adventure to gather his flock again... And he had gathered as I am told a flock of 1500 or 2000 upon Sunday last when... he was taken from the pulpit and brought away. ('Calamy rev.')' The justices accepted Quick's counsel's contention that the indictment was flawed and of no legal force, but Quick would not enter into sureties for good behaviour, nor promise to give up preaching. He was sentenced to gaol for three months and a day. Ward then had him prosecuted for preaching to his fellow prisoners, but he was acquitted. At Devon assizes in March 1664 Quick was released and bound in $40 and two sureties to prosecute his traverse; according to Edmund Calamy, though suffering from consumption at the time of his imprisonment he had 'perfectly recovered when he came out' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.247). At an unknown date Quick married Elizabeth (died 1708), daughter of Colonel George Cook, of Essex, and Mary Glover, descended from Robert Glover, the Marian martyr; they had at least three daughters. 
On 11 April 1672 Quick was licensed to preach in Plymouth but the following year he was imprisoned with other nonconformist preachers there. On release he moved to London and took charge of a congregation in Bridge Street, Covent Garden, but on 16 October 1680 he was appointed pastor of the English church at Middleburg in the Netherlands, where he settled on 5 January 1681. However, he ran into trouble with the Zeeland authorities for his refusal to administer the sacraments according to Dutch forms. On 27 April he announced to the consistory that he intended to accept a position as chaplain to the countess of Donegal, and on 23 May he gave them leave to elect his successor. Quick left Middleburg on 6 July 1681 and was back in London by 22 July. There he gathered a presbyterian congregation in a small meeting-house in Middlesex Court, Smithfield, which abutted the church of St Bartholomew-the-Great, and even afforded a view into it. Quick was fined and imprisoned in 1682, but in 1687 he was one of those who took advantage of James I's declaration of indulgence, and was apparently not further troubled in his ministry at Smithfield. He was certified as a preacher there in 1689. 
Quick also maintained contact with the west country for many years. On 10 August 1681 he preached the funeral sermon for Philip Harris of Alston in Devon, and in May 1699 he was present at the Exeter assembly of ministers. His west-country connections may explain his interest in French protestantism, Plymouth being home to an important Huguenot community after 1680; he wrote a substantial two-volume work on French protestantism, 'Synodicon in Gallia reformata' (1692), and in 1700 made arrangements to publish a three-volume work, 'Icones sacrae Anglicanae', containing accounts of many French and English divines, but was too ill to collect the necessary subscriptions. From about this time onwards 'His bodily pains by the stone were frequent for six years, and scarce tolerable for the last three' (Williams, 34). 
John Quick died on 29 April 1706 in London. Funeral sermons were preached by his successor, Thomas Freke, and by Daniel Williams, who recalled that 'Though his temper was sudden, he was a very tender relation, exceeding compassionate to the distressed' (Williams, 36). Quick left money to two French refugee ministers and to the poor of the French church in London, but his most important bequest was the manuscript of 'Icones', now at Dr Williams's Library, Gordon Square, London, a valuable source for west-country nonconformity and used by Calamy for seven of his lives of ejected ministers. Quick was survived by his wife, who died in 1708, and one of his daughters, Elizabeth. 


@@@@@


doc= 22953


Quick, John (1748-1831), actor, was born in Whitechapel, London, the son of a brewer. He allegedly left home when he was about fourteen to become an actor and joined a strolling company run by Oliver Carr. Before he was eighteen he supposedly played Altamont in Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent' at Fulham or Croydon and Hamlet, Richard III, Romeo, George Barnwell, Jaffeir, and Tancred. 
Quick's versatility as an actor recommended him to Samuel Foote at the Haymarket, where he made his first appearance on 18 June 1766, as Folly in Henry Fielding's 'The Miser' and as Jasper in David Garrick's 'Miss in her Teens'. He also acted that season in Barry's company at the King's Theatre, first appearing there on 13 August 1766. Although he returned to Foote's company in the summer of 1767, he came more prominently to notice when he played Beau Mordecai in 'Love a la Mode' for Edward Shuter's benefit at Covent Garden on 9 June 1767. Charles Macklin, who wrote the play, instructed Quick in the part. Subsequently recommended to George Colman, then a patentee of Covent Garden Theatre, Quick commenced an engagement there by playing James, in Fielding's 'The Mock Doctor', on 14 September 1767. A further boost to his career occurred when, on the recommendation of Joseph Younger, he was cast as Mungo, in Isaac Bickerstaff's 'The Padlock', on 23 October 1770. Although he was reluctant to play the part so soon after Dibdin, Quick's success paved the way to future laurels. He subsequently created Tony Lumpkin in 'She Stoops to Conquer' (14 March 1773), winning the praises of both the public and of Goldsmith, and two Sheridan characters, Bob Acres in 'The Rivals' (17 January 1775) and Isaac Mendoza in 'The Duenna' (9 November 1776). Quick became one of the leading performers at Covent Garden, able to choose the characters he played, and a great favourite of George III. 
Quick also appeared in Bristol in 1768 and 1769, playing relatively minor roles, and from 1775 to 1778 he was a shareholder and joint manager of the Bristol theatre. At Bristol, on 16 November 1772, Quick married Anna Parker ('c'.1751-1819), a clergyman's daughter. For his Bristol benefit in September 1776 he played Richard III; although he commenced the role seriously, he soon succumbed to burlesque when he found his audience inclined to mirth. After he had disposed of his share in the theatre he played summer engagements at Liverpool, Richmond, Weymouth, Southampton, Portsmouth, Brighton, Windsor, Cheltenham, and Gloucester, although he frequently revisited Bristol, partly to visit the Hotwells for health reasons. 
When Quick's articles expired at the end of the 1797-8 Covent Garden season, he stipulated that the following season he should not play in both the comedy and the farce on the same night because of poor health. Harris, the manager, objecting to Quick's demand, gave his line of parts to Joseph Shepherd Munden. Thus, says Genest, Quick 'seems to have thrown himself out of a good engagement rather foolishly' (Genest, 7.378). When he later undertook an engagement at Bath and Bristol, where he played in both play and farce, he made sure the bills stated that he was acting by permission of the manager of Covent Garden. Gilliland states that Quick subsequently undertook a number of lucrative engagements in the provinces, visiting Edinburgh, York, Hull, Birmingham, and Liverpool. On 9 May 1799 he made his first appearance on the Drury Lane stage for Elizabeth Leake's benefit. The remainder of his professional career consisted of sporadic appearances in the patent theatres and a number of provincial tours. Quick would, adds Gilliland in 1808, return to the London stage if an adequate offer was made. In fact a manuscript letter to the 'Monthly Mirror' from its Edinburgh correspondent in March 1800 forbears detailing Quick's recent engagement there on the grounds that 'he is still I hope to be considered a London Performer'. His last appearance was at the Haymarket Theatre for Mrs Mattocks's benefit, on 24 May 1813. 
Quick, says Hazlitt, made 'an excellent, self-important, busy, strutting, money-getting citizen; or crusty old guardian, in a brown suit and a bob wig' ('London Magazine', January 1820). He was widely praised for his performances as old men. 'There was a peculiarity in his voice which rendered his old characters exceedingly whimsical' (Jenkins, 2.91). He was also successful in Shakespearian roles, such as the First Gravedigger, Dromio of Ephesus, Launce, and Launcelot Gobbo. For his Covent Garden benefit on 6 April 1790 he again attempted Richard III, in earnest, with slightly more success than at Bristol, but his audience evidently hoped for a comic performance. 
Boaden saw Quick as an actor 'of very great and peculiar merits' (Russell, 211). His squat figure seemed perfect for many of the parts he played: 'The person of Mr Quick', wrote Gilliland, 'is happily formed for a comedian; with features beaming with good humour, he has eyes particularly expressive of mirth, and a facetiousness of disposition' (Gilliland, 2.926). The author of the 'Candid and Impartial Strictures' remembered Quick as: 'long and deservedly a favourite of the town -- his comic talents were purely original -- they were not richly fraught with a mellowness of humour, but still they possessed a certain quaintness and whimsicality which proved an irresistible incentive to laughter... he had not much variety, but his entrances were always the signal for hearty merriment. ('Strictures', 52)' Pasquin refers to Quick '
With his gibes and his quiddities, cranks and his wiles, 

His croak and his halt, and his smirks and his smiles 
(Pasquin, 51)' while Bellamy declares him the 'prince of low comedians' (Bellamy, 23) and a natural successor to Parsons. 
Yet aspects of Quick's acting were also criticized. The 'Strictures' felt his voice, deportment, and action were always the same, whatever the part. Early in his career he was accused of grimacing: 'he is now too apt... to screw the muscles of his face into many ridiculous forms' (Hawkins, 50). That his acting was viewed ambivalently and that his departure from Covent Garden might also have been hastened by changes in fashion is implicit in 'Records of a Stage Veteran': 'his acting went out of fashion when a more intellectual school appeared. Munden knew little, but Quick knew less; noise and extravagance were with him substituted for nature and humour.' (Russell, 210) He was unfavourably compared with William Dowton, 'who rounded off the square corners of Quick's old men, and brought them nearer if not quite to the standard of nature and truth'. As a result he 'quitted the stage in disgust', while still at the height of his powers. According to the same account he was extremely vain: 'He believed in no living actor but himself. The dead he lauded indiscriminately (except Foote of whom he equally disliked to speak or hear), and the mere mention of the name of a new performer playing one of his original characters would make him silent for the evening. (ibid.)' Most accounts of Quick paint a kinder portrait. 'In private life', said Richard Jenkins, he 'was much esteemed; though not extravagant, he was generous; and, though partial to a domestic life, was occasionally a cheerful and facetious companion abroad' (Jenkins, 2.92). John O'Keeffe recalled 'many instances of good will and kindness' (O'Keeffe, 2.333) from him. Ann Mathews, who called him 'Little Quick (the retired Dioclesian of Islington), with his squeak like a Bart'lemew fiddle', refers to him as 'a pleasant little fellow', who had not 'an atom of improper consequence in his composition' (Russell, 210). Fond of punch, he had been warned by his doctors while still at Covent Garden to give it up or it would be the death of him, but he continued drinking it until the end of his life. He was reputedly an early riser and a great walker. Up until the last day of his life he regularly visited the King's Head opposite Islington church, although a newspaper clipping in the Billy Rose collection describes him visiting the Mail Coach. 
Quick died at his home, 122 Upper Street, Islington, on 4 April 1831, at the age of eighty-four. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' referred to him as 'the [John] Liston of his day' and as 'one of the last of the Garrick school' ('GM', 1st ser., 101, 1831, 474). He was buried in the old chapel of ease at Islington church, Lower Holloway Road, beside his wife, who had died in 1819. He had reputedly retired with a fortune of $10,000 and was able to leave significant amounts to both offspring. His will, which was in a very tattered condition -- according to an affidavit from his servant, he had constantly carried it about with him in a side pocket of his coat -- was proved at Doctor's Commons. 


@@@@@


doc= 22954


Quick, Robert Hebert (1831-1891), educationist, was born on 20 September 1831 in London, the eldest son of James Carthew Quick, a prosperous merchant. He had a brother, Frederick James Quick (1837-1902), a tea and coffee importer, who endowed the Quick chair of biology at Cambridge. Delicate health, the result of a childhood attack of measles, interrupted his education. He attended schools conducted by Miss Gutty and by Miss Burrows, and then a private school at Weybridge, before entering Harrow School in 1846. Poor health forced his removal, and he was taught by private tutors before his admission to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1849. Graduating as senior optime in the mathematical tripos in 1854, he was ordained in the following year, becoming unpaid curate to his lifelong friend, J. Llewelyn Davies, at St Mark, Whitechapel, until 1856, and afterwards at Christ Church, Marylebone. Travels in Germany stimulated an interest in modern languages. He returned to England in 1858 and accepted a mastership at Lancaster grammar school, where he taught classics and mathematics. Subsequently he held appointments at Guildford grammar school, at the recently founded Woodard Society school, St John's Hurstpierpoint, and at the Surrey county school, which opened at Cranleigh in 1865, where he gave important assistance to the first headmaster, Joseph Merriman. 
In 1868 Quick published 'Essays on Educational Reformers', which was to prove a classic work of pedagogic theory. Based on practical experience of teaching, it provided a readable approach to the educational ideas of earlier writers, including Locke, Milton, Rousseau, and Pestalozzi, in a way that was relevant to current educational practice. In 1890, after several pirated American editions, a second English edition was published. 
In 1869 Quick's former schoolfriend H. M. Butler offered him a mastership in modern languages at Harrow, which he held until 1874, when severe headaches, depression, and the laborious school routine caused his resignation. From 1876 to 1883 he ran a small preparatory school, at Orme Square, London, and then at Guildford. In 1876 he married Harriet Bertha (died in or after 1891), daughter of General Chase Parr of the Bombay army. They had a daughter, Dora, and a son, Oliver Chase Quick, who became regius professor of divinity at Oxford. 
A strong supporter of training for teachers in secondary schools at a time when the need for this was far from generally accepted, Quick was appointed in 1879 by the newly formed teachers' training syndicate at Cambridge University to give a series of lectures on the history of education. He repeated the lectures in 1881 and 1883, but became dispirited and resigned in 1883. He returned to the ministry and was presented in 1883 by Trinity College to the living of Sedbergh, Yorkshire. The strain of this position proved too much for his sensitive temperament, and he resigned in January 1887. He retired to Earlswood Cottage, Redhill, in Surrey, where he continued his literary activities, writing for 'The Spectator' and the 'Journal of Education', and contributing articles on educational subjects to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. While visiting J. R. Seeley at Cambridge, Quick was stricken with apoplexy, and died there, at 7 St Peter's Terrace, on 9 March 1891. Shortly after his death the educational portion of his library was given to the Teachers' Guild, and later formed the Quick Memorial Library at the University of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 22955


Dorothy Quillinan (1804-1847), writer, the second child of William Wordsworth and Mary Hutchinson, was born on 16 August 1804 at Dove Cottage, Grasmere. She was educated primarily at home and at Miss Dowling's boarding-school at Ambleside, 2 miles from home. She had a gift for friendship and this is revealed in her correspondence: her letters to the Crumps, the Cooksons, to the daughters of Southey and Coleridge, to Mary Stanger, to Maria Jane Jewsbury, and to her own family are lively. Wordsworth celebrated Dora, along with Edith Southey and Sara Coleridge, in his poem 'The Triad', first drafted in 1817. Dora acted as amanuensis for her father, and often travelled with him: in 1828 (21 June-5 August) they travelled with Coleridge into Germany, Dora keeping a journal; in 1831 they visited Walter Scott for the last time; in 1838 they travelled to Northumberland and Durham, when Wordsworth received an honorary degree from Durham University. In 1841 she married Edward Quillinan after surmounting several years of her father's disapproval. In search of health for Dora, the Quillinans travelled in Portugal and Spain. Her one book, published just before her death on 9 July 1847, was dedicated to her parents: 'A Journal of a Few Months Residence in Portugal, and Glimpses of the South of Spain' (2 vols., 1847). It received a complimentary review in 'The Quarterly'. 'It comes too late to give pleasure', wrote Crabb Robinson. Her letters are numerous, and can give valuable insight into the life of her father and their whole circle. Dora was skilful in her pencil drawings and small watercolours (in the manner of Amos Green), and numbers of these (together with a few by Quillinan) survive in the Wordsworth Library, Grasmere. She had a central place in her parents' affections, but was often in ill health, and ultimately died of tuberculosis. Her death was catastrophic to Wordsworth's last years. When he died, Quillinan wrote to Sara, Coleridge's daughter, 'He has, no doubt, now a higher reward: he is gone to Dora' (MS, Wordsworth Library). 


@@@@@


doc= 22956


Quillinan, Edward (1791-1851), poet, was born on 12 August 1791 at Porto, Portugal, the son of John Quillinan, wine merchant, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Ryan. Both his parents were Irish and his father, of good but impoverished family, had become a prosperous wine merchant in Portugal. 
Edward was sent to Catholic schools in England: first, unhappily, to Sedgley Park, Staffordshire; second, happily, to a Dominican school at Bornheim House, Carshalton, near London, where he first wrote poems. 'Being a catholic, I was unfortunately not sent to either of the universities, which I have ever since lamented' (Johnston, 6). From 1807 he worked for some months in Porto -- not happily -- for his father, who by this time had remarried: 'I was heartily sick of the counting-house, for my passion was for books very unlike ledgers' (ibid.). 
The French invasion under Junot of Portugal in 1807 forced the family to leave for England, and Quillinan entered the army, becoming a cornet 'by purchase in the Queen's Bays' (2nd dragoon guards) stationed at Hastings, then at Canterbury: 'the life suited me extremely well, and I had plenty of time to read' (Johnston, 7). In 1809 he went on the Walcheren expedition, watching with the rest of his regiment the British bombardment of Flushing from boats mustered on the River Scheld. In 1810 he published satirical verses, 'The Ball Room Votaries' ('two editions in a month'), and the periodical 'The Whim' (his responsibilities being editorial) -- insults led to duels, and a necessity for Quillinan's transfer to another regiment. He first purchased a lieutenancy in the 23rd light dragoons and then exchanged the commission for one in the 3rd dragoon guards, with whom in 1813 he first saw service at St Sebastian in Spain, and was a part of Wellington's pursuit of the enemy from Spain into France. His diary records his march from Toulouse to Calais, from 13 March to 17 July 1814, and contains notes about a proposed novel, ultimately published as 'The Conspirators' (1841). 
In 1814 Quillinan published 'Dunluce Castle, a Poem', the first of several of his works to be issued by the private and prestigious Lee Priory Press of Sir Egerton Brydges, who, in the same year (15 December) dedicated his 'Occasional Poems' (written 1811): 'To Edward Quillinan Esq these fugitive poems are dedicated as a sincere but unworthy tribute to his pure genius, his brilliant wit, and noble disposition'. Quillinan was abroad when 'Dunluce Castle', an elegant volume with sixty-eight handmade sheets of wove paper, set as large type, well spaced, with only eighteen lines per page, appeared. Quillinan, perhaps through his friendship with his fellow soldier Brydges' elder son, Thomas Brydges Barrett (the last name assumed to inherit the Lee Priory estate from his maternal uncle), came into Brydges' circle in 1813; Brydges had been persuaded in 1813 by John Johnson and John Warwick, formerly compositor and printer, respectively, for Bensley, to set up under his aegis the Lee Priory Press. Colonel Thomas Brydges Barrett provided the premises, Egerton Brydges found the copy, and Johnson and Warwick the equipment and the labour; the press continued until 1823, even though Johnson left in 1817. Typically, the works are printed on cream wove paper, ideal for finely cut engravings; a greyish white Chinese paper was often used for blocks. There were never more than 100 copies of a work printed. Quillinan's contributions continued throughout: 'Stanzas by the Author of 'Dunluce Castle'' (1814) was twenty-six pages of rather more closely spaced text; 'Consolation' (1815) was a five-page poem addressed to Lady Brydges in memory of her son, Grey Matthew Brydges, who had died in Minorca, a midshipman aged fourteen years and four months. Quillinan published 'Elegiac Verses' (1817), again addressed to Lady Brydges, on the loss of another child, Edward William George, in 1816. By this date Johnson had left the press, but for Warwick, Quillinan provided verses for the remarkable 'Woodcuts and verses' (1820) which included all the woodblocks which had been engraved for use at the Lee Priory Press (ninety-eight in all, including forty-one small armorial initials). In his introduction Quillinan commented, with appropriate modesty: 'the embellishments in most books are secondary to the printed composition: in this, with very few exceptions, the reverse is the fact'. Quillinan had also printed with other publishers: Longman brought out 'Monthermer' (1815), a substantial verse romance, and with Bensley 'The Sacrifice of Isobel' (1816); these two were his most substantial poems to date. 
In 1817 Quillinan married his first wife, Jemima Anne Deborah Brydges (1793-1822), the second daughter of Sir Egerton. Not for the first or last time, Quillinan involved himself in controversy. In 1819 'Blackwood's Magazine' had published an attack on 'Dunluce Castle' by Captain Thomas Hamilton, the original Morgan O'Doherty of 'Blackwood's' who ridiculed the poem in a long review entitled 'Poems by a Heavy Dragoon'. In his 'Retort Courteous' (1821) Quillinan, stationed at Hamilton, Edinburgh, and not knowing the true author of the attack, turned on the editors of 'Blackwood's', John Wilson and J. G. Lockhart, coining most of his satire by extracting passages from Lockhart's 'Peter's Letters to his Kinsfolk' (1819). Ultimately, Quillinan and Captain Hamilton were reconciled by Robert Pearse Gillies, a friend and correspondent of Wordsworth, and it was Gillies who encouraged Quillinan, indeed armed him with a letter of recommendation, to visit Wordsworth at Rydal Mount. Quillinan made three journeys to Rydal, but it was only on the third that he summoned up enough courage to meet the poet; and then he was frigidly received because he had forgotten the letter, and was admitted into friendship only through the intervention of the poet's sister-in-law Sara Hutchinson. In that year, 1821, Quillinan retired from the army: 'I was settled with poor Jemima & her little baby name-sake at Spring Cottage, Loughrigg. John Reeves & his Wife whom I took with me out of the 3rd [Dragoon Guards], he having obtained his discharge, were my groom & cook -- the old Irish Nurse and her young assistant Eliza Cooke, with Flora the pet spaniel and my two horses completed my rustic establishment; and never did I pass so happy & satisfactory a summer. De Quinsey ['sic'], the Opium-Eater, was my nearest neighbour, and lent me his coach-house and stables; but I saw very little of him, for he remained in bed, I understood, all day, and only took the air at night, and then was more shy than an owl.' Quillinan's happy manuscript reminiscence does not mention an event recorded in the 'Lancaster lunatic asylum admissions and discharge book' for 1816-24 (Lancs. RO), which suggests that the marriage had a difficulty: Jemima, aged twenty-five, of the parish of Ambleside, was admitted on 17 October 1821 and discharged on 13 February 1822: the entry concludes: 'Cured'. The diagnosis was 'Mania 2nd attack', followed by the mysterious word 'Lactoea'. Dorothy Wordsworth records in a letter of 13 June 1822: 'She was afflicted with mental derangement after the birth of her last child' ('Letters of William and Dorothy Wordsworth', 4.140). The Quillinans by 1822 had moved to Ivy Cottage (now Glen Rothay), not five minutes' walk from Rydal Mount, Wordsworth's home, and it was there, while Quillinan was away on business in London, that his wife, who had been ill, was badly burnt when her dress caught fire. Dorothy Wordsworth nursed her until her death on 25 May 1822, aged twenty-eight, and then arranged the funeral and superintended the nurse and the two motherless children. Wordsworth, godfather of the younger daughter, Rotha (1821-1876), helped Quillinan to write an epigraph that celebrated his wife: '
the tender virtues of her blameless life, 

Bright in the daughter, brighter in the wife, 

And in the cheerful mother brightest shone. 

' The monument, in Grasmere church, was designed by Chantrey. 
Thereafter, Quillinan's life, though based at his London house, 12 Bryanstone Street, Portland Square, or at Lee Priory in Kent, involved travel and writing, and ultimately hopes of marrying Dora Wordsworth. From time to time poems appeared. Some of his elegies to the Brydges family were collected in 'Carmina Brugesiana: Domestic Poems' (1822). Sir Egerton had been based at Geneva since 1818, and Quillinan, in his grief, visited him there in August 1822. 'Shamrock Leaves, or, The Wicklow Excursion', a series of poems celebrating his Irish tour with the Brydges family in 1820, was published by Longman in 1823. In 1829 Quillinan published 'The King: the Lay of 'a Papist'' -- on the relation of church and state; interestingly, though always remaining a Roman Catholic, Quillinan brought up his own children in the Church of England, and attended English services. In 1831 Edward Moxon published the first section of 'Mischief', influenced by Byron's 'Beppo' and J. H. Frere's 'Monks and Giants' (1818), but written in Spenserian stanzas; its light tone is more social amusement than true satire. A second section was published in 1834 with a preface defending himself from the charge of plagiarism from Byron; Wordsworth commented to Quillinan: 'It is written with great spirit and a variety of talent which does the author no small credit' (11 June 1834, 'Letters of William and Dorothy Wordsworth', 5.719). Perhaps Wordsworth's most positive comment on Quillinan came on 20 September 1837: 'it is in your power to attain a permanent place among the poets of England, your thoughts, feelings, knowledge, and judgement in style, and skill in metre entitle you to it; if you have not yet succeeded in gaining it the cause appears to me merely to lie in the subjects wh. you have chosen. (ibid., 6.464)' 

Quillinan was becoming more than a Wordsworth family friend. The relationship was built on a mutual concern for Quillinan's two daughters. Wordsworth, however, from 1837, when the matter was raised, refused to encourage Quillinan in his hopes of marrying Dora ['see below']. Wordsworth's reluctance was neither on the grounds of Quillinan's religion, nor a simple unwillingness to let Dora marry. 
Quillinan was entangled in the disastrous financial affairs of his brother-in-law and friend, Colonel Thomas Brydges Barrett, and his father-in-law, Sir Egerton Brydges; trust monies had been mishandled, and the colonel was ruined and died in a fisherman's hut at Boulogne in July 1834; Anthony, a younger son, was thrown in a debtors' prison, from which he was to be discharged only as a lunatic. Quillinan was not finally acquitted of fraud until March 1842, almost a year after he had married Dora on 11 May 1841, at St James's Church, Bath, in the presence of her mother, her two brothers, John, who performed the service, and William, who gave her away, and Quillinan's half-brother John Thomas. Wordsworth, like his sister in 1802 at his own marriage, was too overcome to attend. Quillinan wrote to his daughter: 'we all, Miss F[enwick] & Mrs W[ordsworth] & Dora herself seeing how much he was moved, requested him 'not' to come; for we had all we wanted from him in the kind & amiable manner in which he had behaved towards us' (MS, Wordsworth Library). The Wordsworths were visiting Isabella Fenwick at Bath, and it was she who had persuaded the poet to set aside his objection that Quillinan had no fortune. John Thomas, who had successfully maintained their father's business in Porto, gave him some support; according to Crabb Robinson, Quillinan was indeed to be completely dependent on Dora in financial matters. The whole party then went on a visit to Somerset, where Wordsworth and Coleridge had, famously, written 'Lyrical Ballads' (1798). 
Quillinan continued to publish. His three-volume novel 'The Conspirators' (1841), a series of tales centring on Philadelphian plots against Napoleon, based on his military services in Spain and Portugal, received some praise from reviewers. He wrote a rhymed defence against the attack on Wordsworth in Walter Savage Landor's 'Imaginary conversation' between Porson and Southey ('Blackwood's Magazine', April 1843). Landor mockingly responded by speaking of Quillinan's writings as 'Quill-inanities', though Quillinan claimed that he himself had given the pun to Landor some thirty years before in Bath. Wordsworth, again, was not impressed and thought the defence indiscreet. Quillinan proved an assiduous husband, and the couple were at their happiest in 1843 and 1844 when they spent their summers on Belle Isle in Windermere, the 'Borow-Me-An Island', as Wordsworth punned, borrowed from the Curwens, but Dora's health grew worse, and, writing and sketching, they travelled in search of health, wandering through Portugal and Spain in 1845-6. On their return via Marseilles and Paris, they moved into a newly built section of Loughrigg Holme, thus sharing the property with John Carter, Wordsworth's man of business. In her final illness, Dora returned to Rydal Mount and died there on 9 July 1847. Wordsworth felt he could not visit Quillinan's house after Dora's death: 'I cannot bear to cross the Bridge and Field that leads to his Abode', Wordsworth wrote to Isabella Fenwick on 6 December 1847, 'and he does not come hither' ('Letters of William and Dorothy Wordsworth', 7.859). Both men, though courteous, were essentially fixed into separate grief. William Johnston does record walking with Quillinan and Wordsworth in the autumn of 1849, with Wordsworth's thoughts that they would not meet again. On 2 January 1850 Wordsworth did visit the other guests, including Matthew Arnold and his bride, but in his depression declared the prospect 'a trial which I feel that I am unable to bear as with due submission to God's Will I ought to do. May He have mercy upon me, and upon the Mother of Her whom we have lost' (ibid., 7.914). 
Even so Quillinan continued to write and translate to the last. Importantly, before Dora's death, it was Quillinan who drafted Wordsworth's one laureate ode, 'Ode on the Installation of His Royal Highness Prince Albert as Chancellor of the University of Cambridge', of 6 July 1847 (two imprints, Cambridge, University Press, 1847, and London, George Bell, undated): 'the plan and composition of this ode was chiefly prepared by Mr. Quillinan, but carefully revised in MS. by Mr. Wordsworth, who, being in a state of deep domestic affliction, could not otherwise have been able to fulfil the engagement with Prince Albert. (MS note by Mary Wordsworth)' Wordsworth had expressed to Miss Fenwick on 19 September 1844 his mortification that Quillinan did so little 'because his talents are greatly superior to those of most men who earn a handsome livelihood by Literature' ('Letters of William and Dorothy Wordsworth', 7.597). Wordsworth was perhaps unfair. In 1845 Quillinan contributed to the first volume of 'The Edinburgh Tales' his fiction 'The Rangers of Connaught'; in 1846 he wrote for 'Tait's Magazine' 'The Bell: Adventures at a Portuguese Watering-Place' (about Porto); and again in 1846 'The Quarterly' published Quillinan's article on Gil Vicente, the Portuguese dramatic poet (Wordsworth read the proof and told J. G. Lockhart: 'It is well done and I think it will be a pleasing variety in the 'Quarterly'' (ibid., 7.817)). His latest literary activity involved his beginning a translation in 'ottava rima' of the first half (or five cantos) of Camoens's 'Lusiad', published posthumously in 1853 by John Adamson, another and admiring translator of Camoens; and he also began a translation (unpublished) of Herculano's history of Portugal. 
Edward Quillinan died at Rydal on 8 July 1851 after a cold caught when fishing. He was buried at Grasmere. 
A memoir by his friend William Johnston was published by Moxon in 1853 with a selection of Quillinan's poems. Johnston rather suppressed Quillinan's social and humorous verses; some of his lyrics are gently sentimental; his letters and diaries supplement an understanding of the literary circle of which he was a part. Matthew Arnold's epitaph of 27 December 1851, 'Stanzas in Memory of Edward Quillinan', speaks of him as 'a man unspoil'd, Sweet, generous, and humane'. Quillinan's friend Johnston, however, twice suggested that Quillinan could be irritable. In his obituary of Quillinan ('Inverness Courier', 21 April 1853) he quotes an exchange of letters between them in which Johnston suggests that 'small men were more irritable than those of larger growth', and Quillinan, in denying it, confirms he was indeed small: 'taller, physically speaking than Tom Moore, and not so tall as Tom Campbell: consequently he is no giant'. In his memoir Johnston quotes John Carter: 'Mrs Wordsworth was much attached to him, and indeed he was a favourite with everyone who knew him, and his society was much courted by every one in this neighbourhood. Probably his failing was an excitability and restlessness which indicated that Irish blood was in his veins. But I believe, upon the whole, that a more noble, generous, and high-minded creature never breathed. (Johnston, 32)' 



@@@@@


doc= 22957


Quin, Edward Turnly (1762-1823), journalist, the son of Henry Turnly Quin of Roscommon, was born in Ireland and entered Trinity College, Dublin, as a pensioner in June 1779, proceeding BA in 1787. On leaving Dublin, according to one account he 'embraced a military life, and distinguished himself in the German service' (Gilliland, 1.511), while another version has it that he went to France 'to teach the pugilistic art' ('A Biographical Dictionary of the Living Authors of Great Britain and Ireland', 285). He married Ann Delhoste at St Pancras old church on 18 September 1793; they had a son, Edward Quin (1794-1828). Having settled in London as a journalist and reporter of debates, in 1803 he became editor of 'The Traveller' (incorporated in 1822 with 'The Globe'), an evening paper which, though intended primarily for commercial travellers, attracted a wider readership and was noted for its advocacy of political reform. As editor, Quin published the earliest of Leigh Hunt's essays (1804). In 1805 he was elected to the common council of the City of London as deputy for the ward of Farringdon Without. Though a protestant himself, Quin was an eloquent defender of civil rights for Catholics, and a speech he delivered in the common council in 1807 against a motion opposing the admission of Roman Catholics into the army was published that year under the title 'Catholic Vindicator'. By 1808 he was also the proprietor of three weekly papers, the 'Mirror of the Times', 'The Englishman', and the 'British Mercury'. Financial difficulties forced him into temporary retreat, but he later returned to journalism as editor of 'The Day', the auctioneers' paper, until its amalgamation with the 'New Times' in 1817. He died at his home in Sheerness, Kent, on 7 July 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 22958


Quin, Edward (1794-1828), cartographer, son of Edward Turnly Quin (1762-1823), a newspaper editor of Irish protestant descent, and his wife, Ann Delhoste, matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 26 November 1812, graduated BA in 1817, and proceeded MA in 1820. He was admitted to King's Inns on 13 June 1817 and was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1823. 
Quin practised as a barrister but is remembered chiefly for his 'Atlas in a Series of Maps of the World as Known in Different Periods', published posthumously in 1830. It consists of an unremarkable text by Quin and twenty-one maps, engraved by Sidney Hall. The maps begin with one of 2248 BC, 'The deluge', and end with one of 1828, 'At the general peace' (after the Napoleonic era). The first map shows the garden of Eden sited in Mesopotamia, and occupies little more than a square inch, geographically isolated near the middle of the plate. It is surrounded by clouds that darken away from the small map to the four edges, making nine-tenths of the plate black. In each successive subsequent map the geographical area gradually extends and the clouds roll slowly back as knowledge of the world increases until at last they disappear. The maps are line-engraved on copper, but the clouds themselves are aquatint. The effect of both the individual maps and of the succession of maps is striking and dramatic, and credit for the innovation, widely attributed to the engraver Sidney Hall, lies in fact with Quin himself. An important technical attribute is Quin's use of the same scale for each map. His aim thereby was to represent the world as known in earlier periods but always in comparison with the world as known in his day. In the revealed portion of the world each empire was differently coloured so that: 'every successive map thus combines, at a single glance, both the Geography and History of the age to which it refers; exhibiting by its 'extent' the boundaries of the known world and by its 'colour' the respective empires into which that world was distributed. (preface)' It is his artistic device of the clouds, however, which marks out the atlas. The critical reception of Quin's work was narrow but positive. Later commentators have noticed that his idea of the world's gradual revelation had a forerunner in two atlases by the Prussian Friedrich Benicken. There is no evidence that Quin knew of Benicken's atlas, though a German connection is possible, as his father is said in some sources to have served in the army in Germany. Whatever the origin of the idea, Quin's execution was far superior to Benicken's and the succession of maps is compelling, though the text plods. Quin has rather simplistically been accused of Eurocentrism (Black), but Goffart points out that his clouds have no moral quality. They do not re-advance if an area is lost to civilization, for example in the dark ages that followed the fall of the Roman empire. 
A second edition with Hall's plates was issued in 1836, and a third edition published in 1846 has plates by William Hughes. This edition contains the atlas only, without the text. Hughes redrew the maps on a hemispherical projection which somewhat undermines the dramatic effect. Fourth and fifth editions (1850 and 1856) also have Hughes's plates. The text was also published separately. Quin's work was copied by the American educator Emma Willard in her educational works but was not directly taken up by any British successor. 
The atlas was Quin's only known cartographic work, and why a barrister should have produced such a striking work is unclear. Quin died, unmarried, at Hare Court, Inner Temple, London, on 4 May 1828. 


@@@@@


doc= 22959


Quin, Edwin Richard Windham Wyndham-, third earl of Dunraven and Mount Earl (1812-1871), landowner and archaeologist, was born on 19 May 1812 in London. He was the only son of Windham Henry Wyndham-Quin, second earl of Dunraven and Mount Earl (1782-1850), and his wife, Caroline, 'nee' Wyndham (1790/91-1870). Their son, known from 1824 as Viscount Adare, graduated BA at Trinity College, Dublin, in the spring of 1833, and represented Glamorgan in parliament as a Conservative from 1837 to 1851. As a member of the House of Commons, his political activity was largely taken up with the attempt to safeguard religious education in Ireland. He became subsequently one of the commissioners of education in Ireland. He was twice married. First, on 18 August 1836, he married Augusta (died 1866), the third daughter of Thomas Goold, master in chancery in Ireland. They had a son and three daughters. He married secondly, on 27 January 1870, Anne (died 1917), daughter of Henry Lambert of Carnagh, Wexford, who, after his death, married the second Lord Hylton. 
Adare succeeded his father as third earl in the Irish peerage in 1850, and retired from the House of Commons in the following year. In 1855 he converted to Roman Catholicism. In 1866 he was created a peer of the United Kingdom, with the title Baron Kenry, of Kenry, co. Limerick. He acted as lord lieutenant of county Limerick from 1864 until his death in 1871. 
Dunraven had a number of intellectual interests. For three years he studied astronomy under Sir William Hamilton at the Dublin observatory, and acquired a thorough knowledge both of the practical and theoretical sides of the science. He became interested in the claims of spiritualism and was convinced of the genuineness of the phenomena which he investigated. His son, the fourth earl, prepared for him minute reports of seances which the fashionable medium Daniel Dunglas Home had conducted with Dunraven's help in 1867-8. The reports were privately printed in 1869 as 'Experiences in Spiritualism with Mr. D. D. Home', to which Dunraven contributed an introduction. But he was best-known for his zealous interest in archaeology. He was associated with George Petrie, William Stokes, and other Irish archaeologists in the foundation of the Irish Archaeological Society in 1840, and of the Celtic Society in 1845. In 1849 and 1869 he presided over the meetings of the Cambrian Society held at Cardiff and Bridgend, and in 1871 was president of a section of the Royal Archaeological Institute. In 1862 he accompanied the French liberal Catholic Montalembert on a tour of Scotland, and five years later he travelled through France and Italy in order to study churches, and particularly campaniles. But his main interest was in Irish archaeology. He was said to have visited every barony in Ireland, and nearly every island off the coast, usually in the company of a photographer. Dr William Stokes and his daughter Margaret McNair Stokes frequently accompanied him on his archaeological expeditions. 
The chief results of Dunraven's studies, which were meant to continue the work of his friend Petrie, were assembled in 'Notes on Irish Architecture', edited and published in two volumes after his death by Margaret Stokes. The work was illustrated with 161 wood-engravings of drawings by Petrie, W. F. Wakeman, Gordon Hills, Margaret Stokes, Lord Dunraven, and others, as well as with 125 plates. The first volume (1875) dealt with stone buildings and the second (1877) with belfries and with Irish Romanesque architecture. 
In 1865 Dunraven compiled, as an appendix to his mother's 'Memorials of Adare', an exhaustive treatise on architectural remains to be found in the immediate vicinity of Adare. The section of this work which discussed the round tower and church of Dysart was reprinted in the second volume of the 'Notes'. Dunraven also contributed generously to the restoration of these buildings for the use of religious services. He also contributed some valuable papers to the Royal Irish Academy. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Archaeological Society in 1831, FSA in 1836, FRGS in 1837, and on 10 April 1834 became FRS. Dunraven died at the Imperial Hotel, Great Malvern, Worcestershire, on 6 October 1871, and was buried at Adare. He was a man of quick perceptions and great power of application, an ardent Roman Catholic and admirer of Montalembert, and a highly popular landlord. His son Windham Thomas Wyndham-Quin, the fourth earl, was an active Irish politician and yachtsman. 


@@@@@


doc= 22960


Quin, Frederic Hervey Foster (1799-1878), homoeopathic physician, was born on 12 February 1799, probably in Ireland. Because of his forenames he was incorrectly regarded as the son of Lady Elizabeth Foster, 'nee' Hervey, mistress and later second wife of the fifth duke of Devonshire; he may have been her godson. He attended a school in Putney run by a Mr Carmalt at what is now Carmalt Gardens. In 1815, after the Napoleonic wars ended, he was sent to France, where he became fluent in French. He attended Edinburgh University from 1817 to 1820 and graduated MD. He was immediately offered, by the prime minister, the post of physician to Napoleon on St Helena. Instead he went to Italy in December 1820 as physician to Elizabeth, by then duchess of Devonshire, and he attended her during her fatal illness in March 1824. Lord Byron invited him to accompany him on his (last) expedition to Greece, but to his regret Quin had to refuse on grounds of ill health. In July 1821 he commenced practice at Naples, and his social gifts made him popular with all the English residents there, who included Sir William Gell, Sir William Drummond, and the countess of Blessington, and with the Comte d'Orsay, upon whom Quin is said to have modelled himself. 
At Naples, Quin met Dr Neckar, a disciple of Hahnemann, the founder of homoeopathy, and was impressed favourably enough to visit Leipzig in 1826, in order to study the system. He returned seriously interested if not converted. On the journey he met in Rome Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, afterwards king of the Belgians, and soon left Naples to become his family physician in England. Quin continued a member of the prince's household until May 1829, either at Marlborough House, London, or at Claremont, Surrey, and he extended his acquaintance in aristocratic circles. From May 1829 to September 1831 he practised in Paris, chiefly but not entirely in homoeopathy. In September 1831, after consulting with Hahnemann as to the treatment of cholera, he proceeded to Tischnowitz in Moravia, where the disease was raging. He contracted the disease himself, but recovered, though he never regained perfect health. He returned to work and under his treatment there were no deaths. 
At length, in July 1832, Quin settled in London and introduced the homoeopathic system into England. He lived first at 19 King Street, St James's, and then removed in 1833 to 13 Stratford Place. His practice rapidly grew, owing as much to his attractive personality as to his medical skill. In 1844 he founded the British Homoeopathic Society (later the Faculty of Homoeopathy) which he served as president until his death. Chiefly through his efforts the London Homoeopathic Hospital (later the Royal London Homoeopathic Hospital) was founded in 1849 in Golden Square, Soho; it moved to Great Ormond Street in 1859. 
Quin was popular in London society. He was an essential dinner guest of Albert Edward, prince of Wales, and his friends included Dickens, Thackeray, the Bulwers, Macready, Landseer, and Charles Mathews. His contribution to homoeopathic literature was not of major importance. His value lay in the social and medico-political fields. His patients included the duchess of Cambridge, to whom he was physician-in-ordinary, the duke of Edinburgh, and many other members of the aristocracy. From these he was able to obtain the funds to endow the hospital. Their support was always available when homoeopathy was threatened by the medical establishment. Quin was frequently referred to as 'the little doctor', but Thomas Uwins's portrait shows him to have been a handsome man. A brilliant wit and a mine of information, he was also gifted with an unusual memory for past events. His welcome in society was not just due to his medical skill, nor his unusual wit; for though aware of the scandals and the secrets, he could also be relied upon as a true friend who kept confidences. 
Throughout Quin's career homoeopathy was repeatedly attacked by the medical institutions and journals and Quin himself was denounced as a quack. In February 1838, when he was a candidate for election at the Athenaeum, he was blackballed by a clique of physicians led by John Ayrton Paris, who publicly attacked Quin with a virulence for which he had to apologize under threat of a duel. Despite chronic severe asthma and arthritis which necessitated his early retirement from practice, Quin ensured that these battles were won. Homoeopathy spread throughout the country and many of its remedies were appropriated by the conventional establishment. 
Unfortunately Quin tended to regard the British Homoeopathic Society and the hospital as his personal property. He showed little patience with homoeopathic colleagues who had different views on policy, but recognizing his merit they tolerated his attitude. 
Quin died of bronchitis at the Garden Mansions, Queen Anne's Gate, Westminster, on 24 November 1878, and was buried four days later at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 22961


James Quin (1620/21-1659), was born in Middlesex, obtained a scholarship at Westminster School, and was elected aged eighteen to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1639. He graduated BA in 1642 and MA in 1646, and was elected a senior student. He contributed to the Oxford University collections of Latin verse issued on the return of the king from Scotland in 1641, and on the peace with the Netherlands in 1654. 


@@@@@


doc= 22962


Quin, James (1693-1766), actor, was born in King Street, Covent Garden, London, on 24 February 1693, in circumstances that have embarrassed some biographers and confused others. His paternal grandfather was lord mayor of Dublin in 1667; evidently worried about money, he committed suicide in 1674. His son, James Quin, studied at Trinity College, Dublin, and then at London's Lincoln's Inn. It was in England that he met and married Elizabeth Grindzell about 1690. This James Quin, an unusually unworldly lawyer, seems to have accepted Mrs Grindzell's word that her first husband, formerly a soldier but now working as a shoemaker in Shrewsbury, was dead. It was not until about 1701 that the news of the bigamy broke, and even then the Quins agreed to maintain their marriage. The young James Quin was their only child, and had hopes of inheriting a considerable estate when his father died in May 1710, but the will was successfully contested by his Irish uncle John Quin and a first cousin called William Whitehead. Quin did not abandon the fight, nor did he lose touch with his Irish roots. His parents had sent him to school in Dublin from about 1700, and he may have attended Trinity College, Dublin, with a view to a legal career, but he enjoyed the company of actors and quite early aspired to the stage. His first appearances probably occurred in Dublin in 1713 or 1714, and by early 1715 he was a member of the company at Drury Lane in London. He made his English debut as Vulture in Charles Johnson's derivative 'The Country Lasses' on 4 February 1715, and followed it with a number of supporting roles in the season's repertory. 
Quin's rise was not a meteoric one. Even as a young man he was stately rather than handsome. His weight would increase with his years, his face grow fat, and his chin double. It was intelligence of phrasing and vocal musicality that distinguished him, placing him in direct descent from Thomas Betterton. It was to these qualities that the Drury Lane audience responded on 7 November 1716, when John Mills was taken ill and Quin stepped in to read the part of Bajazet in Nicholas Rowe's 'Tamerlane'. Despite the warmth of the reception, he had to be satisfied with supporting roles in the well-established Drury Lane company. It was probably financial necessity that led him to perform at Southwark fair in September 1717, and at the end of that year he transferred from Drury Lane to John Rich's company at the Lincoln's Inn Fields playhouse. He would remain with Rich for the next sixteen years, during which he climbed to the head of his profession. 
Witty and socially at ease, Quin did not lack self-belief. To the unknown writer who rushed a racy biography through the presses immediately after Quin's death in 1766, his subject was: 'one of the best actors and most facetious men of his time; who was at once the gentleman and the scholar -- the philosopher and the critic -- the humourist and the moral man, the scourge of knaves and fools, and the admiration of the sensible and good. ('Life', 7)' The portrait was recognizable by those who had known Quin in his maturity, but probably not by those who knew him only in his youth. There was much gossip, then, about drinking bouts, philandering, and intrigue. Things came to a head towards the end of Quin's first season at Lincoln's Inn Fields. On the afternoon of 17 April 1718, during a chance meeting at a Cornhill tavern, he had a fierce quarrel with William Bowen, a notoriously hot-headed member of the Drury Lane company twice Quin's age. It culminated in a scrappy duel in which Bowen was fatally wounded. At his trial Quin was found guilty of manslaughter, but seems not to have been branded on the hand, exonerated perhaps by Bowen's reputation. The theatrical public welcomed him back, but the fiery temper remained. Although Quin had many friendships, including a lifelong one with the actor Lacy Ryan, it was his enmities that made news. Actors were so much in the public eye by the middle of the century that they were hard-pressed to conceal their private quarrels. Given their common sensitivity to provocation, it is hardly surprising that Quin, at various stages of his long career, had noisy spats with Charles Macklin and Theophilus Cibber. His dislike of Peg Woffington and Kitty Clive led him to make cutting observations about both in the semi-public forum of the green room, but this was out of character with his normal chivalry towards women. He never married, perhaps burdened by a fear of his sexual unattractiveness. Lady Mary Coke reported an occasion when the duchess of Queensberry, observing that he rarely played lovers, asked him, 'Pray, Mr Quin, do you ever make love?', to which the actor replied, 'No, Madam, I always buy it ready made' (Nash, 196). His habitual overeating may, of course, have been Quin's compensating response to loneliness. His protective concern for actresses he admired, Susannah Cibber and George Anne Bellamy, for example, was sentimental rather than sexual. They, like the poet James Thomson, benefited from his generosity at crucial periods in their lives. 
During his years at Lincoln's Inn Fields, Quin played leading roles in both tragedy and comedy: Othello, Macbeth, King Lear (in the Nahum Tate version), Brutus in 'Julius Caesar', the title role in Jonson's 'Volpone', Pinchwife in Wycherley's 'The Country Wife', once (for his own benefit performance in 1730) Macheath in Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera': the stately Quin letting his hair down in a singing role. He was, though, generally careful in his choice of parts, knowing himself unsuited to romance and heroism. His comic preference was for the sourer, scowling edges, and he was probably at his finest as the debauched Sir John Brute in Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Wife'. But it was memories of his Falstaff that endured longest, monumentalized in china statuettes put out by Bow, Derby, and Staffordshire and widely sold. This was a part in which he had no rivals. Indeed, between the death of Robert Wilks in 1732 and Garrick's London debut in 1741, Quin was England's leading actor, able to command high salaries wherever he went. Dublin's theatres vied for his favours during the summer closure of London's patent houses, and he seems to have used his visits to the Irish capital to pursue his claims on his patrimony. Given the prosperity in which he lived his last years, it is possible that he reached a settlement with his Irish relations. 
It was a sign of Quin's status that Drury Lane petitioned for his return at the beginning of the season in 1734. Charles Fleetwood, the new patentee, needed help with the management of his troublesome company, and Quin was one of the very few people with sufficient authority to take on the job. He remained at Drury Lane until the early summer of 1741. Despite his brushes with Macklin and Cibber, he merited and earned the respect of his fellows. Whether or not he recognized it, he was the guardian of an old theatrical tradition. But times were about to change. The first major sign came with the Drury Lane revival of 'The Merchant of Venice' on 14 February 1741. Quin played Antonio, just as he had played such parts before, but the Shylock of his old adversary Macklin was revolutionary, no longer a comic villain but a feeling, suffering human being. Beside Quin's measured cadences, Macklin's speaking style was startlingly natural. Audiences, a little bemused, were stirred. Not so Quin. At the end of the season he undertook the longest of his Irish tours, playing mostly at the Aungier Street theatre from June 1741 to February 1742. He was not in London in October 1741, when Garrick's debut at Goodman's Fields carried the Macklin revolution a significant step further. For the rest of his life Quin would always, and generally unfavourably, be compared with Garrick. 
Despite the clamour of the theatrical public, it was some years before the two men acted together. Garrick was still at Goodman's Fields when Quin marked his return to Rich's company at Covent Garden on 25 March 1742 by playing one of his favourite Roman characters, Joseph Addison's Cato. His arrangement with Rich allowed him, now that he had passed fifty, to appear less regularly, and it was in the 1740s that he began to develop his fashionable contacts in Bath. Finally, for the 1746-7 season at Covent Garden, Rich succeeded in bringing Garrick and Quin together. It was a curious misjudgement of Quin's to open his campaign as Richard III, a part which Garrick had made his own, and it was not until 14 November 1746 that the two appeared together, Quin as Horatio and Garrick as Lothario in Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent'. For the fourteen-year-old future playwright Richard Cumberland, the contrast was thrilling: Lothario, 'young and light and alive in every muscle and in every feature', bounding onto the stage to confront a 'heavy-paced Horatio'. 'It seemed as if a whole century had been stept over in the transition of a single scene' (Cumberland, 59-60). Quin measured up better when playing Falstaff to Garrick's Hotspur in 'I Henry IV' on 6 December 1746, but was again at risk on 2 January 1747 when playing Gloster to Garrick's Hastings in Rowe's 'Jane Shore'. Quin had his loyal defenders, but he knew he was outgunned. It is to his credit, as well as Garrick's, that, although they never again acted together, the two men remained friends. Garrick seems even to have envisaged a managerial partnership with Quin when first contemplating a bid for the Drury Lane patent. Susannah Cibber applauded the idea, writing of Quin, 'He is an honest, worthy man, and besides being a great actor he is a very useful one and will make the under actors mind their business' (Nash, 217-18). 
There is no evidence that Quin was interested in so heavy a commitment. He was in Bath when the Covent Garden season opened in September 1747, and there was a widely rumoured correspondence between him and his manager, John Rich. 'I am at Bath', wrote Quin. 'Stay there, and be damned', replied Rich. But if there was a quarrel, it was a short-lived one. Quin remained a regular member of the Covent Garden company from 1748 until his formal retirement on 15 May 1751, when he appeared in the inauspicious role of Horatio in 'The Fair Penitent'. If, as has been claimed, Rich paid Quin $1000 for his final season, it was the highest salary any actor had yet received. Later appearances at Covent Garden were confined to the benefit performances of his old friend Lacy Ryan in 1752 and 1753. But for the loss of front teeth, he would have been there again in 1754. His note to Ryan has appeared in various versions, but it was along the lines of 'There is no person on earth, whom I would sooner serve than Ryan, but by G --, I will whistle Falstaff for no man' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). 
In retirement, Quin was a familiar figure, carrying his vast bulk (he weighed as much as 20 stone) into the assembly rooms. There were even rumours that he aspired to succeed Beau Nash as master of ceremonies, though that seems unlikely. He was content to hobnob with the nobility and to gourmandize. Most summers he would travel north as a house guest of the aristocracy. In June 1762, for example, he amused Garrick and other guests of the duke of Devonshire at Chatsworth House by driving himself about the Peak district in a one-horse chaise, carrying always an umbrella, rain or shine (Oman, 226). It was during a visit to the Garricks' villa in Hampton in January 1766 that one of Quin's hands became seriously inflamed. He returned to Bath in great anxiety, and died there on the 21st. He was buried in Bath Abbey on 25 January, and Garrick composed an epitaph for his monument there. 
Quin's will, drawn up in July 1765, is, in some ways, a surprising document. There were no theatrical beneficiaries, and the only familiar name is that of Thomas Gainsborough, 'limner, now living at Bath'. Bequests to relatives are outnumbered by those to tradesmen -- a London oilman, a publican, a wine merchant (these were his executors). Always a valetudinarian, Quin left $200 to his London doctor and his gold-headed crutch cane to a Bath surgeon, perhaps the one who treated ineffectively his infected hand in January 1766. Particularly touching is the gift of $100 to Mrs Mary Sampson, landlady, with whom Quin may have boarded at Centre House in Bath's Pierpont Street, 'to be paid by my executors into her own hands, independent of all her creditors whatsoever' ('Life', 63-4). It is noteworthy, since Quin's detractors accused him of obsequiousness, that there are no bequests to the nobility. 
Quin was the first actor to be well treated by painters, though surviving portraits all date from his maturity. Most fascinating is a pencil sketch by Hogarth, now in the Royal Collection, comparing the physical proportions of Quin and Garrick. Quin and Hogarth were fellow members of the freemasons' lodge at the Bear and Harrow in London's Butcher Row, and the artist painted the actor at least three times. Gainsborough's portrait of Quin in old age expresses more of the gourmand than the player, but the greatest damage to Quin's standing was committed by the unknown artist who sketched him in ink and wash as Coriolanus. The often reproduced engraving of this sketch shows a mountainous Quin, sporting a ludicrously plumed helmet and a suit of armour rimmed by a flared miniskirt beneath which his knee-breeches are just visible. There were, to be sure, people who accused Quin of walking in blank verse, but he was never as risible as this drawing makes him. 


@@@@@


doc= 22963


Quin, Michael Joseph (1796-1843), journalist and travel writer, was born in Thurles, co. Tipperary, the third son of Morty Quin, distiller. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, as a pensioner on 4 November 1811, was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 26 January 1818, and was subsequently called to the bar. He made a name for himself as a writer on foreign affairs with 'A Visit to Spain' (1823), first published as a series of letters to the 'Morning Herald', which gave an impartial and vivid account of the state of the country at the end of the liberal triennium (1820-23). It was favourably reviewed by Blanco White in the 'Quarterly Review' of 1823 (vol. 29, 240-41). While defending the cause of constitutional liberty, Quin accurately reported the reactionary trend of popular opinion, provoked by anti-clerical extremists. A firm opponent of the Holy Alliance, he published in the same year a 'Secret History of the Council of Verona', exposing the part played by Don Carlos, the comte de Jouffroy, and the duc de Montmorency in plotting French armed intervention against the Spanish constitutional government. His translation, entitled 'Memoirs of Ferdinand VII', of the work by Jose Joaquin de Mora (1823), provided further evidence against the king whom the French restored to absolute power. 
In 1824 Quin took up the cause of the former emperor of Mexico, Agustin de Iturbide, then in London planning a return to power. He tried unsuccessfully to win Canning's backing for Iturbide, and translated the latter's apologia, 'A Statement of some of the Principal Events in the Public Life of Agustin de Iturbide', published by John Murray in June 1824. When Iturbide left for Mexico in May, Quin was entrusted with the care of his elder children's education and was responsible for placing his son at Ampleforth College. Iturbide was executed on 19 July, five days after reaching Mexico. 
Quin contributed many articles on foreign affairs to the 'Morning Chronicle' and 'Morning Herald', and for seven years (1825-32) was editor of the 'Monthly Review'. He was a loyal supporter of Daniel O'Connell and of the campaign for Catholic emancipation, and from March 1828 to March 1829 edited the 'Catholic Journal', which represented the English Catholic Cisalpines who advocated the policy of making some concessions to the government in return for the grant of emancipation. He defended this policy at a heated meeting of the Catholic Association which was reported in the 'Catholic Miscellany' of February 1829 (2.69). The author described Quin as 'eminently conciliatory; his forehead is good; a ruddy freshness is diffused over his face, and his eye is quick and good-natured', even though he lacked the power to move an audience. 'There is more of the lawyer than the orator about him. In his moments apparently the most impassioned you can see the man of prudent calculation.' In 1835 he approached Nicholas Wiseman, then on a visit to London, with a view to the establishment of a Catholic periodical comparable with the 'Edinburgh Review' and 'Quarterly Review'. Quin, Wiseman, and O'Connell were co-proprietors of the new journal, entitled the 'Dublin Review', though it had no financial backing other than an indemnity fund of $500. Quin edited the first two issues (May and July 1836) but in October 1836, on being offered a post in the Spanish colonial service in Cuba, he precipitately resigned, leaving the trustees to find a new editor in the absence of Wiseman and O'Connell. The Cuban venture fell through, and when Quin returned from Madrid, O'Connell refused to reinstate him as editor and regarded his co-proprietorship as having lapsed. Though Quin continued to contribute articles to the review, the episode created a rift in his relations with O'Connell. In February 1842 the printers of 'The Tablet', after a dispute with Frederick Lucas, appointed Quin to succeed him as editor and he held the post for the remainder of the year, during which time Lucas produced a rival publication, the 'True Tablet'. O'Connell swayed opinion in favour of Lucas, who resumed full control in January 1843. 
In addition to the titles already listed, Quin published 'The Trade of Banking in England' (1833), summarizing the evidence submitted to the parliamentary committee appointed to examine the renewal of the Bank of England's charter, and an 'oriental romance', 'Nourmahal' (1838). He enjoyed his greatest success, however, as a travel writer, and was one of the first to exploit the opportunities of steam. His 'Steam Voyage Down the Danube: with Sketches of Hungary, Wallachia, Servia and Turkey' (1835) explored territory unfamiliar to the reading public, and this was followed by 'Steam Voyages on the Seine, the Moselle and the Rhine' (1843). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature about 1823. 
In his last years Quin was beset by poverty and ill health. For reasons of economy he moved to Boulogne, where he died of lung disease on 19 February 1843 and was buried in the English cemetery. He was survived by his widow, the daughter of Edward Wallis of Burton Grange, York, and three daughters. His brother-in-law, John Edward Wallis, succeeded Frederick Lucas as editor of 'The Tablet' in 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 22964


Quin, Walter (c.1575-1641), poet and royal tutor, was born in Dublin. He was apparently studying at Edinburgh University when, in 1595, he was presented to James VI, who was charmed with his manner. He further recommended himself to the king by giving him some poetic anagrams of his own composition on James's name in Latin, Italian, English, and French, together with a poetical composition in French entitled 'Discours sur le mesme anagramme en forme de dialogue entre un Zelateur du bien public, et une Dame laquelle represente le royaume d'Angleterre'. The good impression which Quin made was confirmed by his presenting the king, on new year's day 1596, with an oration about his title to the English throne. The Edinburgh printer Waldegrave refused, however, to print a book on the subject which Quin prepared in February 1598. Quin was at the time reported to be writing a response to the fourth book of Edmund Spenser's 'Faerie Queene', where the king's mother, Mary, queen of Scots, was denounced under the name of Duessa. 
Meanwhile Quin had been taken into the service of James VI as tutor to his sons, and he gave abundant proof of his loyalty by publishing 'Sertum poeticum in honorem Jacobi sexti serenissimi ac potentissimi Scotorum regis' (1600). The volume consists of some of Quin's early anagrams on the king's names, some Latin odes and epigrams, and some English sonnets, addressed either to members of the royal family or to frequenters of the court who interested themselves in literature. In 1604 Quin celebrated the marriage of his friend Sir William Alexander in a poem that was to remain unprinted among the Hawthornden manuscripts at Edinburgh University. 
Quin migrated with the Scottish king to England in 1603 on his accession to the English throne, and was employed as music teacher in the household of Prince Henry at a salary of $50 per annum. He lamented the prince's death in 1612 in two sonnets, respectively in English and Italian, in Latin verse, and in some stanzas in French; these elegies were printed in Joshua Sylvester's 'Lachrymae lachrymarum' (1612), and the two in English and Latin were reissued in 'Mausoleum' (1613). In 1611 he contributed Italian verses in praise of the author to Thomas Coryat's 'Odcombian Banquet'. 
Quin became, after Prince Henry's death, preceptor to his brother Charles. For Charles's use he compiled 'Corona virtutum principe dignarum ex variis philosophorum, historicorum, oratorum, et poetarum floribus contexta et concinnata', with accounts of the lives and virtues of Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius (1613); this was reissued at Leiden in 1634, and in Stephen de Melle's 'Syntagma philosophicum' (1670, 5.336-481). A more ambitious literary venture followed in 'The memorie of the most worthy and renowned Bernard Stuart, Lord D'Aubigni, renewed, whereunto are added wishes presented to the prince at his creation' (1619); 'A short collection of the most notable places of histories' in prose is appended, together with a series of poems, entitled 'Wishes', and addressed to Prince Charles. 
On Charles I's marriage in 1625 Quin published a congratulatory poem in four languages -- Latin, English, French, and Italian. It bore the title 'In nuptiis principum incomparabilium, Caroli Britannici imperii monarchae... et Henriettae Mariae gratulatio quadrilinguis' (1625). Ten Latin lines signed 'Walt. O -- Quin Armig.' are prefixed to Sir Thomas Herbert's 'Travels' in 1634. An undated petition, assigned to 1635, from Quin's son John describes both Quin and his wife as ancient servants of the royal family, and prays that the pension of $100 per annum granted to Quin may be continued during life to the petitioner. Nothing more is heard of Quin until 1641, when notification of his death in London was lodged by his widow, Anne. 
Another son, 
As an avowed royalist Quin was ejected from his studentship by the parliamentary visitors in 1648. Anthony Wood, who was acquainted with him, often heard him 'sing with great admiration'. His voice was a bass, 'the best... in England', but 'he wanted skill and could scarce sing in consort'. He contrived to obtain an introduction to Cromwell, who was so delighted with his musical talent that, 'liquored by him with sack', he restored him to his place at Christ Church ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 1.287). In 1651 he was reported to be 'non compos'. He died in October 1659, in a crazed condition, in his bedmaker's house in Penny Farthing Street in Oxford, and was buried in the cathedral of Christ Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 22965


Quincy, John (d. 1722), apothecary and physician, was apprenticed to an apothecary, and afterwards practised as an apothecary in London. He was a dissenter and a whig, a friend of Richard Mead, and an enemy of John Woodward. In 1717 he published a 'Lexicon physico-medicum', dedicated to John, duke of Montagu, who had just been admitted a fellow of the College of Physicians. It is based on the medical lexicon of Bartholomew Castellus, published at Basel in 1628, and went through eleven editions, of which the last two appeared respectively in 1794 and 1811 (greatly revised). Quincy's 'English Dispensatory' (1718), which had run to twelve editions by 1749, contains a complete account of the materia medica and of therapeutics, and many of the prescriptions contained in it had long-lasting popularity. 
Quincy studied mathematics and the philosophy of Newton, and received the degree of MD from the University of Edinburgh for his 'Medicina statica Britannica' (1712), a translation of the 'Aphorisms' of Sanctorius, a second edition of which appeared in 1720. In 1719 he published a scurrilous 'Examination' of Woodward's 'State of Physick and Diseases'. A reply, entitled 'An Account of Dr Quincy's Examination, by N. N. of the Middle Temple' (1719), speaks of him as a bankrupt apothecary, a charge to which he made no reply in the second edition of his 'Examination', published, with a further 'letter to Dr Woodward', in 1720. In the same year he published an edition of the ''Loimologia'; of an historical account of the plague in London', by Nathaniel Hodges, and a collection of 'Medico-Physical Essays' (1720) on ague, fevers, gout, leprosy, king's evil, and other diseases, which show that his main skill was as an apothecary. He considered dried millipedes good for tuberculous lymphatic glands, but considered the royal touch a method 'that can take place only on a deluded imagination', which had been 'justly banished with the superstition and bigotry that introduced it'. Joseph Collet, governor of Fort St George, was one of his patrons, and Quincy printed in 1713 a laudatory poem on their mutual friend, the Revd Joseph Stennett (1663-1713). 
Quincy died in 1722, and in 1723 his 'Praelectiones pharmaceuticae', lectures which had been delivered at his own house, were published with a preface by Peter Shaw. 


@@@@@


doc= 22966


Quincy, Roger de, earl of Winchester (c.1195-1264), constable of Scotland, was the second son of Saer de Quincy, earl of Winchester (d. 1219), and Margaret de Breteuil, younger daughter of Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (d. 1190). Roger had four brothers and three sisters. His elder brother, Robert, died in 1217; with his wife, Hawise, sister of Ranulf (III), earl of Chester (died 1232), he had one daughter, Margaret, who was passed over in the succession to the earldom of Winchester in favour of Roger. His younger brother, also named Robert, married Helen, daughter of Llewelyn ab Iorwerth, prince of Gwynedd (died 1240), and widow of John the Scot, earl of Chester and Huntingdon. Of his sisters, Hawise married Hugh de Vere, earl of Oxford, and Arabella married Sir Richard de Harcourt. Roger himself married three times: first Helen, eldest daughter of Alan, lord of Galloway and constable of Scotland; second Maud, daughter of Humphrey (IV) de Bohun, earl of Hereford (d. 1275); and third Eleanor, daughter by his first marriage of William de Ferrers, earl of Derby, by whom he was survived. According to Matthew Paris, he contracted his third marriage in haste, hoping for a male heir, but his only children were the three daughters of his first marriage: the eldest, Margaret, married William de Ferrers, sixth earl of Derby, as his second wife ['see 'Ferrers family (per. c.1240-1445)]; the second, Elizabeth (or Isabella), married Alexander Comyn, earl of Buchan (died 1289); and the youngest, Helen, married Alan de la Zouche (died 1270). 
Little is known of Roger de Quincy before 1219. He was probably the son whom Saer delivered to King John in 1213 as a Scottish hostage for the security of the Anglo-Scottish treaty of 1212. He emerged onto the political stage in 1215 when, along with Saer and the leaders of the baronial rebellion against John, he was excommunicated by Innocent III ('r'. 1198-1216), but did not figure prominently in the civil war that followed the king's death. He perhaps accompanied his father on crusade in 1219, and apparently did not return to England until some considerable time after Saer's death at the siege of Damietta in that year, for it was not until 1221 that Roger did homage to Henry III and received his father's lands. He did not receive the title of earl until after his mother's death in 1235. 
The death in 1234 of his father-in-law, Alan of Galloway, led to a considerable expansion of Roger de Quincy's already substantial estates in both Scotland and England. Galloway and Alan's extensive Scottish properties were divided in right of their wives between Quincy, who as husband of the eldest daughter received also the office of constable of Scotland, John de Balliol of Barnard Castle (died 1269), and William de Forz, future earl of Aumale (died 1260). The refusal of Alexander II, king of Scots ('r'. 1214-49), to accede to Galwegian requests that he allow instead the lordship to pass intact to Thomas, bastard son of Alan, or to another male relative, or himself assume direct lordship over Galloway, provoked a rebellion in 1235 in support of Thomas. On its suppression by Alexander, partition among the husbands of Alan's daughters was enforced. Further disturbances in Galloway followed the death in 1246 of Quincy's sister-in-law, the childless Christina, countess of Aumale, and division of her lands among her surviving sisters. A rebellion in 1247, which Matthew Paris attributed to Quincy's oppressiveness, trapped him in one of his Galloway castles, probably Cruggleton in Wigtownshire which belonged to his Comyn heirs later in the century, but he succeeded in escaping to the Scottish court. There he was successful in soliciting Alexander's aid in crushing the rebellion. 
Notices of his involvement in Galloway apart, there is no evidence for Roger de Quincy's fulfilling a role in Scotland commensurate with his landed position. Despite his holding the office of constable he played no part in Alexander II's campaign in Argyll in 1249, nor in the crisis of 1263 when Haakon IV of Norway mounted his expedition to the Hebrides in response to Scottish threats to the Norwegian possessions there. The survival of a considerable body of his 'acta' and confirmations of his grants by the Scottish crown, however, demonstrate that he was frequently resident in Scotland. His appointment in 1257 by Henry III of England as a commissioner to arbitrate between Alexander III and the leaders of the Comyn and Durward factions in Scotland on the one hand underscores his lack of active involvement in Scottish politics, while on the other it stresses his influential position as a major Anglo-Scottish nobleman. 
Roger de Quincy did not hold the prominence in politics that his father had commanded in England either, but his wealth secured him an important role. In 1239 and 1246 he joined in written remonstrances from the English nobility to Gregory IX ('r'. 1227-41) and Innocent IV ('r'. 1243-54) concerning papal interference in English affairs. Association with the stirrings of dissatisfaction with the government of Henry III expressed in the parliaments of 1248 and 1254 led to identification with the baronial opposition in 1258. At the Oxford parliament Quincy was elected by the barons to the twelve-member commission charged with attendance at the three annual parliaments provided for under the provisions of Oxford, and was appointed also to the committee that arranged the financial aid promised to Henry. In 1259 he led a delegation to St Omer to intercept Richard, earl of Cornwall (died 1272), and forbid him to return to England until he had sworn to observe the provisions of Oxford. This appears to have been Roger de Quincy's last major act, for he played little part in subsequent events which culminated in open conflict between the king and his baronial opponents, and died on 25 April 1264, eighteen days after Henry had precipitated the country into civil war. At his death he was probably the greatest Anglo-Scottish landowner of his day, holding not only one of the largest agglomerations of land in baronial hands, but one with estates spread from Perthshire in the north to the channel coast in the south. With only daughters to succeed him, however, these extensive lands were ultimately divided among their husbands, and the title of earl of Winchester lapsed. 


@@@@@


doc= 22967


Quincy, Saer de, earl of Winchester (d. 1219), magnate, was the son of Robert de Quincy (died 1197) and his wife, Orabile, daughter of Ness, son of William, lord of Leuchars in Fife. About 1190 he married Margaret (died 1235), daughter of Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1190), with whom he had five sons and three daughters. His eldest son, Robert, predeceased him in 1217, leaving only a daughter with his wife, Hawise, daughter of Hugh, earl of Chester, who was passed over in the succession to the earldom of Winchester in favour of her uncle, Saer's second son, Roger de Quincy. 
Quincy's career before 'c'.1190 is obscure. In the 1180s and 1190s he witnessed several Scottish royal 'acta' and confirmed his parents' grants to Newbattle Abbey, near Edinburgh, also making new gifts to the abbeys of Dunfermline and Cambuskenneth. Most English references to Saer de Quincy between 'c'.1160 and 1192 relate to his uncle, who was one of Henry II's 'familiares', served him as castellan of Nonancourt in 1180-84, and died in 1190, and his son, also named Saer, who accompanied Henry, the Young King, to the court of Louis VII of France and joined his rebellion against Henry II in 1173. This younger Saer was dead by 1192, whereupon his estates in six English counties passed to his uncle, Robert. 
It was following his father's inheritance of these properties that Quincy entered English public life. In 1197 he was in France, and was present with Richard I at Roche d'Orval in August 1198. On Richard's death in April 1199 Quincy acknowledged John's succession. In October 1200 he was sent to escort William the Lion, king of Scots, to Lincoln, and was present at the ceremony on 22 November when William renewed his homage for his English estates. In 1202 Quincy accompanied the king's army to Normandy to confront Arthur, duke of Brittany, and his ally, Philip Augustus of France. Quittances in 1202 and 1203 of debts due to the king and to Jewish moneylenders may represent rewards for service. Quincy was appointed joint castellan with Robert Fitzwalter of the strategic Norman stronghold of Vaudreuil. In the spring of 1203 they offered no resistance to Philip and surrendered Vaudreuil, an action which earned universal contempt. John displayed his disgust by refusing to contribute to their ransom. 
The death in 1204 of Quincy's brother-in-law, Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester, brought a dramatic change of fortune. Robert's heirs were his sisters Amice, wife of Simon de Montfort (died by 1188), and Margaret, Quincy's wife, and until the partition of the inheritance was settled Quincy was given custody of the earldom and appears also to have exercised the office of steward of England which had been held by the earls. An equal division of the lands, ratified in 1207, was made between Quincy and Montfort. The settlement awarded the title of earl of Leicester and the office of steward to Montfort, but Quincy's enhanced status was given formal recognition by his creation as earl of Winchester. Quincy's new social position brought added political importance. In the summer of 1209 he accompanied the embassy sent to resolve the diplomatic crisis that had resulted from the Scots' demolition of the English fortification at Tweedmouth. It was probably at this time that his long-running dispute with St Andrews Cathedral priory over the patronage of the church of Leuchars was resolved. Certainly he appears to have been at his castle of Leuchars in April 1209, when he received John's protection for a vessel that he was taking from there to Lynn. In the summer of 1210 Quincy served in John's Ulster campaign. He was possibly the unnamed commander of a force sent in 1211 to assist the Scots to crush the rising of Guthred mac William in Ross. He was again in Scotland on John's business in March 1212. This period saw the peak of his career in royal service: between 1211 and 1214 he acted as a justiciar, sat as an auditor in the exchequer in 1212, and in the same year was an ambassador to John's nephew, the emperor Otto IV, whose assistance was sought against France and the papacy. On 15 May 1213 at Dover, Quincy attested John's surrender of his crown to Innocent III. Some of his men may have been involved in the naval victory at Damme on 30 May, as John later instructed delivery to Quincy of a galley captured by them in Flanders. In January 1215 he witnessed the reissue of the king's charter of ecclesiastical liberties, and on 4 March was one of the nobles who took the cross with John. 
Despite this apparent closeness to John, Quincy had unresolved grievances concerning property of which he felt he had been unjustly deprived, most notably Mountsorrel Castle in Leicestershire, and was associated closely with the first stirrings of rebellion. He travelled to Scotland and in early April 1215 was at the court of Alexander II, where he joined an influential group urging Scottish intervention in England. Before the end of April he joined the dissident barons at his principal residence, Brackley in Northamptonshire, and marched with them to London. Quincy was named as one of the twenty-five barons chosen to enforce John's observance of the rights conceded in 'Magna Carta' ['see also 'Enforcers of Magna Carta]. When civil war erupted in October 1215 he and Henry de Bohun, earl of Hereford, headed a baronial embassy to France to seek French assistance and to offer the crown to Philip's son, the dauphin Louis. On 9 January 1216 he returned to England with a force of French knights, followed in May by the dauphin and his army. 
John's unexpected death in October 1216 opened an opportunity for reconciliation between the rebels and the royalists, but Quincy maintained his allegiance to Louis. In spring 1217 Quincy learned that Ranulf, earl of Chester, was besieging Mountsorrel, and on 30 April prevailed upon Louis to send an army commanded jointly by him, Robert Fitzwalter, and Thomas, count of Perche, to its relief. They arrived at Mountsorrel to find the siege abandoned, so turned to attack the royalist-held castle at Lincoln, unaware that the royalist army was marching north in pursuit. On 20 May at Lincoln they were defeated and Quincy was taken prisoner. He played no further part in the civil war and was released only after the end of hostilities in September 1217, when letters were issued to the sheriffs of eleven counties instructing restoration of his lands. Moves were made to include former rebels in Henry III's government, and Quincy attended the Westminster council of November 1217 which conceded a new version of 'Magna Carta' and granted the charter of the forest. Although he was held in high regard at the council, Quincy did not recover possession of Mountsorrel, but was compensated by the grant of the farm of Chesterton, another manor to which he had a claim. In March 1218 at Worcester he attested the settlement agreed with the rebels' former ally, Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. 
Towards the end of December 1218 Quincy was fitting out a vessel in Galloway in preparation for his departure on crusade, and in spring 1219 he sailed for the Holy Land, in the company of his son Roger, Robert Fitzwalter, and William d'Aubigny, earl of Arundel. Soon after his arrival at the siege of Damietta he became ill, and died on 3 November 1219. In accordance with his wishes he was buried at Acre and the ashes of his internal organs returned to England for burial in Garendon Abbey, of which he was patron. His son, Roger, did homage to Henry III in 1221 and received his father's lands, but did not gain the title of earl of Winchester until his mother's death in 1235. At the time of his death Quincy was one of the most significant Anglo-Scottish landholders of his day, and possessed properties in eleven English sheriffdoms and substantial estates in Perthshire, Fife, and Lothian in Scotland. He was a noted benefactor of the church, especially the monks of Garendon Abbey and Brackley Hospital, and his generosity was further evidenced by 'acta' in favour of several Scottish monasteries and a large corpus of charters to private individuals. 


@@@@@


doc= 22968


Quinton, James Wallace (1834-1891), administrator in India, was born on 7 October 1834 in Enniskillen, the son of William Quinton, a wine merchant in the town. Richard Frith Quinton (1849-1934), criminologist and governor of Holloway prison, was his younger brother. Quinton was educated at Enniskillen Royal School and Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1853. In 1856 he joined the Bengal civil service. 
Quinton spent most of his career in the North-Western Provinces and Oudh. On 20 March 1865, while stationed at Meerut, he married Pauline May, daughter of Francis Drummond, with whom he had two children, Francis William Drummond ('b'. 1865) and Anna Henrietta Drummond ('b'. 1867). In April 1875 he was appointed officiating judicial commissioner of British Burma, but returned to the North-Western Provinces and Oudh in March 1877 to become magistrate of Allahabad. In November 1878, after three months on the North-Western Provinces famine commission, he became officiating commissioner of Jhansi division, an appointment which was confirmed in April 1880. A supporter of Lord Ripon's plans for local self-government, he readily accepted an appointment in 1883 to the governor-general's legislative council, a position he again held in 1889. In June 1885 he became junior member of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh board of revenue and thereafter twice served, in 1886 and 1889, on the lieutenant-governor's council. He was a member of the public service commission of 1886 and in 1889 chaired an inquiry into the administrative structure of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh. In 1887 he was gazetted CSI and in October 1889, after thirty-three years' service, he was appointed chief commissioner of Assam. 
Quinton knew little of Assam and was given its top job purely on the basis of his seniority in the service, a fact which provoked much criticism in the wake of the disaster which overtook him in the state of Manipur. Manipur's ruling family was loyal to the British, but in return expected military aid to help them repel rivals for the throne. When, in the 1880s, British aid dried up, Tikendrajit, the state's commander-in-chief and most able brother of Raja Sura Chandra, began to doubt the value of the alliance. Instead of openly opposing the British, however, Tikendrajit befriended the young political agent Frank St Clair Grimwood. Thus, in September 1880, when Tikendrajit staged a palace coup, Grimwood obligingly hurried Sura Chandra into exile and persuaded Quinton to leave Tikendrajit and his new regent, Kula Chandra, in power. 
In March 1891, after six months of dithering, the governor-general's council in Calcutta dispatched Quinton to Manipur with instructions to recognize Kula Chandra as raja in return for greater submission to the British. Tikendrajit was to be banished. Accompanied by Colonel Skene and 400 Gurkhas, Quinton arrived at the Manipur residency on 22 March 1891 and immediately called a durbar, at which it was his intention to have Tikendrajit seized. Not surprisingly, Tikendrajit refused the bait and on 24 March Quinton ordered his men to attack the fort and seize him. The battle was horribly lopsided and within hours the British were besieged within the residency. Rejecting the option of retreat, Quinton decided to negotiate for peace and that evening, along with Grimwood, Skene, and two other British officers, he entered the fort. The talks failed, however, and on attempting to return to the residency Quinton and his companions were set upon by an angry crowd. Grimwood was speared to death almost immediately, but the others managed to scramble back into the fort. Tikendrajit apparently gave orders for them to be protected, but the crowd continued to clamour for blood and during the night they were led out to their execution. 
British revenge was thorough. A month later 8000 soldiers entered Manipur and seized the fort. Quinton's body, along with those of his companions, was recovered and buried with military honours in the residency cemetery on 30 April. In the following months Tikendrajit and his leading general, Thangal, were tried and hanged and an infant raja from a rival family was installed on the throne. 
In Britain the affair provoked popular outrage reminiscent of 1857, but although in public official criticism of Quinton was muted, in private many old India hands believed that he had paid the price of diplomatic inexperience. His widow and mother were awarded pensions. 


@@@@@


doc= 22969


Quinil, Peter (c.1230-1291), bishop of Exeter, was the son of Peter Quinil, provost of Exeter, and his wife, Helewis. Until recently the surname was interpreted as Quivil, but it appears to be a variant of the modern name Quen(n)ell or Quin(n)ell. Peter was also called 'de Exonia' during his lifetime. The fact that he was styled master in 1262 when he resigned his first known benefice, the rectory of Mullion in Cornwall, may imply that he received a university education. He became archdeacon of St David's in 1263 and was made a canon of Exeter Cathedral by Bishop Walter of Bronescombe in 1276. After Walter's death on 22 July 1280, Quinil was elected bishop of Exeter by his fellow canons between 4 August and 7 October; he was consecrated in Canterbury Cathedral by Richard of Gravesend, bishop of London (died 1303), on 10 November. 
Quinil did not hold major royal offices while bishop, and spent most of his episcopate in Devon and Cornwall, undertaking only short visits to London. He continued the work of previous bishops rather than making significant new departures. His most notable achievement in the diocese was to hold a synod in April 1287, which enacted fifty-six canons in the tradition of thirteenth-century ecclesiastical legislation. These regulated the sacraments, duties of the clergy, functioning of parish churches, and behaviour of the laity, and were copied, kept, and referred to in the diocese until the fifteenth century. In Exeter he joined together some of the small city parishes to make more viable units, but he was later accused of obstructing the attempts of the local Franciscan friars to move to a better site. His episcopal register -- the second to survive in Exeter diocese -- is partly extant in a volume of twenty-four folios but these are chiefly limited to the years 1281-4. The state of the diocese in his day is also well illustrated by the lists of ecclesiastical revenues contained in the 'Taxatio' of Pope Nicholas IV conducted in 1291. 
Quinil gave much attention to his cathedral. In 1281 and 1283 he issued statutes regulating its liturgy, commemorative anniversaries (obits), finances, and its clergy's dress and behaviour. He completed its administrative structure on national lines by ordering the chancellor in 1283 to lecture on theology or canon law and by instituting the office of subdean in 1284. He also gave the cathedral the tithes of nine churches in the diocese, either for specific dignitaries or for the chapter as a whole. In 1281, one of the canons, John Pycot, was elected dean in dubious circumstances. Quinil refused to recognize him, inaugurating a struggle between his own supporters, led by the precentor Walter of Lechlade, and those of Pycot. The latter had the backing of Archbishop John Pecham, whose relations with Quinil were generally poor. On 10 November 1283 Lechlade was murdered outside the cathedral on his way to matins. Nineteen local clergy and laity were implicated in the deed, and Edward I visited Exeter in December 1285 to see that justice was done. The mayor and four other laymen were hanged; Pycot, deprived of the deanery, retired to a monastery. On 1 January 1286 the king gave permission for the cathedral close to be surrounded by walls and gates to protect the clergy at night. The gates remained until the nineteenth century, symbolizing the uneasy relationship between the city and the cathedral. 
Quinil's other legacy to the cathedral was architectural. His predecessor Walter of Bronescombe had begun to transform the Norman building into a Gothic structure by building a new lady chapel. Quinil continued this work, and although it is not clear who conceived the idea of rebuilding the main church on Gothic lines, he was regarded after his death as 'first founder of the new work' and was said to have contributed to it at his own expense (Erskine, 1.xiii). During his episcopate, the lady chapel was finished and work began on the presbytery, the choir aisles, and two double chapels, following a plan similar to that of Salisbury Cathedral but on a smaller scale. Further west, the two Norman towers of the cathedral were opened to the interior and made into transepts with chapels on their eastern sides to accommodate altars. This work caused the cathedral to grow larger and more complex, reflecting a growth in the number of clergy and their liturgical functions. 
Quinil died on 1 October 1291, choking on syrup according to a local story, which attributed his death to his hostility towards the friars. He was buried before the altar of the new lady chapel under an incised marble slab bearing a foliated cross and the inscription 'Petra tegit Petrum: nichil officiat sibi tetrum' ('The stone covers Peter; may nothing do you [Peter] harm'). The tomb is modest and the bishop founded no chantry, but the cathedral chapter later endowed an anniversary mass in his honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 22970


Raban, Edward (d. 1658), printer, was born in England, possibly in Worcestershire. He was in London in 1600, awaiting embarkation to the Low Countries to serve in the armies fighting against Spanish occupation. Remaining on the continent he was in Leiden about 1617-19; there he learned to print, probably at the press of the Pilgrim Fathers. The details of his early life are gleaned from two of his publications, 'Raban's Resolution Against Drunkennesse' and 'The Popes New Years Gifts', both 1622. 
On his arrival in Edinburgh in 1620 Raban set up a printing press at the Cowgate Port, at the sign of the ABC. That same year he moved to St Andrews and took up residence in South Street, again at the sign of the ABC. Why Raban moved to Aberdeen in 1622 is unknown, though Robert Baron, professor of divinity at Marischal College, Aberdeen, Bishop Patrick Forbes, and Sir Paul Menzies, provost, are said to have been instrumental in his travelling north. But given the presence of both King's and Marischal colleges in Aberdeen, and the educated groups associated with these institutions, the arrival of a printer can be seen as a natural development. Raban fulfilled the role of semi-official printer to the two colleges and to the town council but his enterprise was not limited to such work. Shortly after having arrived in Aberdeen he became associated with David Melvill, burgess and bookseller. Melvill initially paid the rent on the premises (in the Castlegate, at the sign of the Townes Armes) offered to Raban by the council. Many books (particularly grammars, almanacs, and editions of the 'Psalms') printed by Raban between 1622 and 1633 carry Melvill's name on the imprint. 
Some time before 1624 Raban married Janet Johnston, with whom he had at least one child, a daughter, baptized Constanzia. Janet died in 1627 and by 1637 Raban had married Janet Ailhous. In 1643 (the year of Melvill's death) Raban moved to accommodation in the Broadgate. Six years later he retired, and in 1650 he was succeeded by James Brown, son of the minister of Innernochty. 
Over 150 publications (excluding jobbing printing) emanated from Raban's Aberdeen press. This output included graduation theses and some of the writings of the local professoriate, such as William Guild, principal of King's College, and Robert Baron, who was responsible, as one of the six Aberdeen doctors, for the 'Generall Demands Concerning the Late Covenant' (1638). The instabilities of the times are further reflected in Raban's printing of 'A Solemn League and Covenant' (1643) and 'A Declaration of... James, Marquess of Montrose' (1644). His initiative as printer can be seen in his production in 1622 of 'A New Prognostication', which was brought out probably annually. Such was the work's success and reliability that it was subsequently ruthlessly pirated. And Raban's 1625 edition of the 'Psalms' is the first in Scotland to incorporate harmonized tunes. Raban died in Aberdeen in 1658 and was buried in the west wall of St Nicholas churchyard, Aberdeen, on 6 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 22971


Rack, Edmund (c.1735-1787), writer on agriculture, was born in Attleborough, Norfolk, the son of Edmund Rack, weaver, and his wife, Elizabeth, a Quaker preacher. He was brought up as a Quaker, and was apprenticed to a shopkeeper in Wymondham. At the end of his apprenticeship he moved to Bardfield in Essex, and was employed as a drapery shopkeeper by a Miss Agnes Smith, whom he later married. He became interested in literature, and at the age of thirty began to write in magazines such as the 'Monthly Ledger' and the 'Monthly Miscellany' under the name Eusebius. 
About 1775 Rack settled in Bath. While still living in Norfolk he had taken an interest in agriculture, and in 1777 he published a scheme for an agricultural society in the 'Farmer's Magazine' and the 'Bath Chronicle', which was to encourage agriculture in the counties of Somerset, Wiltshire, Dorset, and Gloucestershire. The society was founded in 1778 with Rack as secretary, and it later became the Bath and West of England Agricultural Society and thereafter the Royal Bath and West of England Society. 
Rack edited three volumes of papers contributed to the Agricultural Society, including several of his own articles. His papers 'On the origin and progress of agriculture' and 'The natural history of the cock-chafer' were reprinted in volume 3 of Alexander Hunter's 'Georgical Essays' (1803), and that on the cockchafer also appeared in the 'Annual Register' for 1784-5. He edited the second edition of 'Caspipina's Letters' (1777) by the Revd Jacob Duche, to which he added an appendix on William Penn. Rack spent the final years of his life making a topographical survey of Somerset as part of a history of the county of Somerset. This work was published by the Revd John Collinson in 1791 in three volumes. 
In 1779 Rack helped to found the Bath Philosophical Society, and he became its first secretary. His literary works included 'Poems on Several Subjects' (1775), 'Mentor's Letters Addressed to Youth' (1777) -- written five years previously for a few of his young friends -- which ran to four editions, and 'Essays, Letters, and Poems' (1781). Philip Thicknesse accused him of writing 'A Letter Addressed to Philip Thickskull, Esq.', and responded with the satirical 'Letter from Philip Thickskull, Esq, to Edmund Rack' (1780). Rack was in poor health for many years. From 1781 he lived at Harington Place, Bath, and from 1786 at 5 St James's Parade. He died in Bath on 22 February 1787. Richard Polwhele wrote an elegy in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 22972


Rackett, Thomas (1755-1840), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, was the son of Thomas Rackett of Wandsworth, Surrey, and Marie Caillouel. His mother belonged to a Huguenot family who settled in England in 1685. From an early age he displayed a remarkable talent in natural history, music, and drawing. At fourteen he impressed David Garrick with his ability to recite in public, and received from him a folio copy of Shakespeare with a laudatory inscription. George Romney's full-length portrait shows the youthful Rackett declaiming his ode on stage. He matriculated from University College, Oxford, on 16 November 1773, graduated BA in 1777, and proceeded MA in 1780. On 26 December 1780 he became rector of Spetisbury with Charlton-Marshall, near Blandford Forum in Dorset, and held the living for sixty years. On 31 July 1781 he married Dorothy (died 1835), daughter of the Revd Thomas Tattersall, rector of St Paul's, Covent Garden, and Streatham. 
Spetisbury provided Rackett with a handsome living worth $750 per annum and a splendid parsonage house built in 1716 at a cost of $1000. His parochial duties were not onerous, and he was able to pursue his many interests with zeal. He travelled widely throughout the western counties studying burial-mounds, and was often accompanied by his daughter Dorothea. In 1794 and 1796 he toured the west country collecting minerals with Thomas Hatchett FRS and Dr Maton MD, physician to Queen Charlotte. He was an active member of the Linnean Society, the Society of Antiquaries, and the Royal Society, and a corresponding member of the Societe Statistique Universelle. He contributed several very fine drawings to the second edition of John Hutchins's 'History of Dorset'. Rackett was an avid collector throughout his life and the county record office in Dorchester contains a large collection of his documents, while the county museum houses his splendid collection of Greek coins found in the British Isles. His manuscripts reveal his interest in subjects as diverse as electricity and magnetism, gas lighting, perpetual motion, genealogy, heraldry, agriculture, botany, trigonometry, overseas trade, French politics, salt manufacture, and dry rot in ships. He corresponded with a wide range of people, among them Mrs Garrick, Sir Richard Colt Hoare, Tiberius Cavallo, Richard Gough, and Mrs Siddons, and wrote to people as far afield as India, Moscow, Nova Scotia, Boston, and Cape Town. 
Rackett's many activities and lengthy periods in London led to the accusation by the marquess of Lansdowne in the House of Lords in a debate on Roman Catholic emancipation in 1829 that his parish was being neglected. Rackett admitted that his absence had occasionally been longer than the period 'allowed by Law' (letter to bishop of Bristol, Rackett MSS, D/RAC bundle 66), but claimed that he had resided in Spetisbury 'for a considerable part of every year for the last 40 years' (Dorset RO, photocopy 267), and his curate lived only 11/2 miles away. The bishop of Bristol accepted his explanation and wrote to Lansdowne in Rackett's defence. The accusation was subsequently dropped. 
Dorothy Rackett died, aged eighty-one, in June 1835 and was buried in Spetisbury churchyard on 17 June. Thomas Rackett died at Spetisbury on 29 November 1840, aged nearly eighty-five, and was buried with his wife on 5 December. They are commemorated with a large pyramidical monument in Spetisbury churchyard, though the dates inscribed do not correspond with the parish register entries. 


@@@@@


doc= 22973


Radcliffe, Alexander (b. c.1653, d. in or before 1696), poet, was probably born in the Southern Netherlands, the only son of the exiled royalist Alexander Radcliffe (1633-1682), later of Hampstead, Middlesex. His father and grandfather both fought with the royalist forces during the civil war and the family estate was much reduced by sequestration. Radcliffe's father remained in exile between 1651 and 1660. 
Radcliffe was admitted to Gray's Inn on 12 November 1669, but, like a number of gentlemen at the inns of court, never practised law. His association with Gray's Inn continued at least until 1681, when he was one of the self-styled 'truely loyall gentlemen' of Gray's Inn who, 'in a tumultuous manner', climbing on tables and throwing their hats in the air, sought to move a declaration in support of Charles II's dissolution of parliament (Luttrell, 1.99; 'Works', vii). Radcliffe treats this incident in his poem 'The Lawyers Demurrer Argued', where he characterizes his opponents as: '
a parcell of 'Whiggs', 

The Spawn of some 'Rebells'


' who had the 'Impudence' to claim that 'Giving Thanks to the King was judg'd an affray' (A. Radcliffe, 'The Ramble', 1682, 110-15). 
In March 1672 Radcliffe acquired a captaincy in Colonel John Fitzgerald's regiment of foot, and was generally known thereafter as Captain Radcliffe. He had a reputation as bon viveur and rake, and his poems 'The Ramble' and 'A Call to the Guard by a Drum' were included in Rochester's 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1680). A substantial number of his poems are parodies and lampoons, including 'Ovid Travestie' (1680, 2nd edn, expanded from five to fifteen poems, 1681), with its parodied versions of translations of the 'Heroides' by Dryden and others in 'Ovid's Epistles, Translated by Several Hands' (1680). 'The Ramble: an Anti-Heroick Poem. Together with some Terrestrial Hymns and Carnal Ejaculations' (including among its contents several 'songs burlesqued and varied') was published in 1682 and reprinted, together with 'Ovid Travestie', in 'Works' (1696). 'Bacchinalia coelestia: a Poem in Praise of Punch' was published as a broadside in 1680. Radcliffe is primarily a comic poet, whose poems are crude, energetic, and conventional in their attitudes, with none of the complexity of Rochester; 'The Ramble' contains some sharp touches of social satire. The date of Radcliffe's death is unknown, but in 1696 he is described as 'late of Grayes Inn' ('Works', viii). 


@@@@@


doc= 22974


Radcliffe, Ann (1764-1823), novelist, was born on 9 July 1764 in London, where she was baptized on 5 August 1764 in St Andrew's, Holborn, the only child of William Ward (1737-1798), a haberdasher with premises at 19 Holborn Street, and Ann Oates (1726-1800) of Chesterfield. 
In 1772 the family moved to Bath, where William Ward managed a showroom for the firm of Wedgwood and Bentley in the Westgate buildings before moving to the more fashionable Milsom Street in 1774. Thomas Bentley was Ann Ward's uncle, having married Ann Oates's sister Hannah in 1754, and played an important role in her upbringing. After Hannah's death in 1759 her elder sister Elizabeth kept house for Bentley until he was married a second time, to Mary Stamford, in 1772. From 1768 until his death in 1780 Bentley was a partner in Joseph Wedgwood's pottery business. He moved to Little Cheyne Row, Chelsea, in 1769, to 13 Greek Street, Soho, in 1774, and to Turnham Green in the summer of 1777. After William Ward's haberdashery business collapsed at the beginning of the 1770s Ann appears to have spent long periods with the Bentleys, where her playfellow was Susannah Wedgwood, the future mother of Charles Darwin. 
Ann Ward married William Radcliffe (1763-1830) on 15 January 1787, at St Michael's Church, Bath. A graduate of Oxford, and for a time a student at the Middle Temple, William Radcliffe was primarily a journalist, an occupation he pursued for most of the 1790s. A brilliant linguist with a formidable memory and a flair for reporting parliamentary business, William Radcliffe was much in demand during a period in which there was a keen appetite for news from, and debates about, France. William survived his wife, and it is from him that most of the information about Radcliffe derives. In the obituary he wrote of his wife William Radcliffe omits reference to the Wards, 'nearly the only persons of their two families not living in handsome, or at least easy independence' ('Annual Biography', 98), in order to concentrate on his wife's illustrious maternal relatives, such as the famous de Witts of Holland, William Cheselden, surgeon to George II, and her maternal grandmother, Ann Oates, the sister of Dr Samuel Jebb of Stratford, who included among her nephews Samuel's son Sir Richard Jebb, the king's physician, and Dr Samuel Hallifax, the bishop of Gloucester. However, he does not mention Hallifax's cousin Dr John Jebb, the radical Unitarian and distinguished theologian, who for much of Ann Radcliffe's childhood lived nearby in London. 
The omission is of a piece with another of William Radcliffe's economies. In the obituary notice he describes himself as the proprietor of the 'English Chronicle', with which he was associated from 1796. Before that, he was a journalist working for, and then editor of, the 'Gazetteer and New Daily Advertiser', the most radical of the London newspapers, from 1790 to 1793. Apart from enthusiastically welcoming the French Revolution, the 'Gazetteer' staunchly supported the impeachment of Warren Hastings, the campaign to free dissenters from the 'Toleration Act', the freedom of the press, and the illegality of duelling. According to Ann Radcliffe, her husband was responsible for the political sentiments expressed in her travel book; if so, the Radcliffes were still supporting the 'Gazetteer's' politics in 1794, as can be seen from the following response to a monument celebrating the revolution of 1688 in Kendal: 'At a time, when the memory of that revolution is reviled, and the praises of liberty itself endeavoured to be suppressed by the artifice of imputing to it the crimes of anarchy, it was impossible to omit any act of veneration to the blessings of this event. (A. Radcliffe, 'A Journey Made in the Summer of 1794', 1795, 389)' In a notebook entry from 1797, Joseph Farington relates how Giuseppe Marchi had recently dined with the Radcliffes, noting that William was 'democratically inclined' (Rogers, 'Bio-Bibliography', 43). 
Thomas Noon Talfourd reports that Radcliffe regularly attended the Anglican church. Although there is no reason to disbelieve Talfourd, the statement misleads as much as it informs. While it is probably true that Radcliffe attended the Anglican church in the last decades of her life, it is not at all certain that she did so in the 1790s. Even if she did throughout her lifetime, this is not the same as saying that she was Anglican in belief, outlook, or family background. Like the 150 Anglican clergyman who subscribed to John Jebb's collected works, dissenting sympathizers who stopped short of breaking cover, she appears to have taken a liberal view of doctrinal matters. Similarly, both the 'Annual Biography' and Talfourd relate that the years she spent visiting Thomas Bentley were the future novelist's most formative period. Besides her uncle's improving company, she encountered such luminaries as Elizabeth Montagu, Hester Piozzi, Mrs Ord, and Athenian Stuart. However, both sources neglect to mention that Bentley was one of the country's most prominent dissenters, who as a founder and trustee of the dissenting academy at Warrington included among his friends and acquaintances Joseph Priestley, Dr John Aikin, and his sister Anna Laetitia, later Mrs Barbauld. The appointment of Talfourd as Ann Radcliffe's biographer may signify the enduring nature of the Radcliffes' dissenting affiliations, as Talfourd was a Unitarian, a fringe member of Leigh Hunt's 'cockney school', and a passionate advocate of William Godwin. 
According to her husband, Ann Radcliffe began writing as a means of amusing herself during the long evenings when William was away reporting parliament. She published five novels in her lifetime, though she always called them 'romances'. They were 'The Castles of Athlin and Dunbayne' (1789); 'A Sicilian Romance' (1790); 'The Romance of the Forest' (1791); 'The Mysteries of Udolpho' (1794); and 'The Italian' (1797). Her travel book, 'A Journey Made in the Summer of 1794', appeared in 1795. A final novel, 'Gaston de Blondeville', was published posthumously in 1826. Her first romance was barely noticed; the second caused a stir; the third made her famous. At the time of her death in 1823, she was hailed as the 'great enchantress' and the 'Shakespeare of Romance writers' (Miles, 7, 10), and was generally esteemed as one of the pre-eminent novelists of her generation ('GM', 1st ser., 93.87). Several volumes of poetry appeared under her name during her lifetime, but these were pirated collations of the verse she had published interspersed with her romances. 
Radcliffe's historical settings vary considerably, from pre-Reformation ('The Castles of Athlin and Dunbayne'), to the recent past ('The Italian'), with the rest falling somewhere in between. Despite these differences all her romances contain a heroine with a modern sensibility who finds herself imperilled by the forces of feudalism. Generally speaking, her plots turn on the inheritance of property. Her first romance, set in Scotland, features a heroine who is nearly blackmailed into marrying the murderer of her father and the usurper of the family castle, a threat he prosecutes by holding the heroine's brother at knife-point. Predictably, the comely peasant youth who rescues the heroine himself turns out to be a usurped nobleman. The melodramatic plot and hectic pace is continued in 'A Sicilian Romance'. The Marquis Mazzini wishes to trade his daughter, Julia, to a friend. Escaping, Julia wanders through the scenic landscape of Sicily, thus creating the opportunity for a form of graphic travelogue that Radcliffe was to make famous in her subsequent romances. Featuring rocky crags and precipitous cliffs interspersed with Arcadian retreats, her style was repeatedly characterized as a verbal equivalent of Salvator Rosa and Claude Lorraine. Julia eventually stumbles on her mother, who had been buried alive in an abandoned wing of the family palazzo after the marquis had faked her death, a piece of marital brutality that comes to loom large in the imagination of Catherine Morland, the heroine from Jane Austen's 'Northanger Abbey', who suffers from having read too much Radcliffe. 'The Romance of the Forest' features an incest theme that appeared again in 'The Italian'. In these romances a heroine is menaced by an uncle who has dispossessed her of both family and property. In 'The Mysteries of Udolpho' Emily is held prisoner in a castle in the Apennine mountains by Montoni, who has already murdered her aunt, and threatens her with much the same unless she surrenders the rights to her estates. The heroine escapes once again to embark on her picturesque and sublime travels. In 'The Italian' Radcliffe broke new ground by featuring the Roman Inquisition, until then an untried source of Gothic horror. 
Although Radcliffe was studiously apolitical as a novelist, her works are permeated with the progressive Enlightenment values that were commonplace before the terror in France, and which were staunchly held by her uncle Bentley and by her husband William. All her novels, save the first, are set in periods transitional between feudalism and modernity; and while her happy couples are themselves well born, their attitudes are distinctly bourgeois, especially as regards companionate marriage. The religious attitudes displayed in her romances are also deistical. Her heroines evince a deep interest in natural religion, in the hand of creator that lurks behind the veil of nature, and no enthusiasm whatsoever for revealed or codified religion. These values are most pronounced in 'The Romance of the Forest', which, in the figure of La Luc, also pays warm homage to the vicar of Savoyard in Rousseau's 'Emile'. 
Radcliffe's romances contain numerous innovations. She was understood to have brought landscape description to a new peak of perfection, an expertise particularly evident in the way in which she interweaves the sublime and picturesque into the fabric of her narratives. Her style of romance was understood to be 'poetic', by which reviewers meant, apart from the beauty of her scenery, her ability to evoke moods of melancholic introspection and enchantment. Her earlier romances are interspersed with poetry, while her chapters bear epigraphs, principally from Shakespeare and the pre-Romantics, itself an innovative practice. Perhaps the innovation with which she was most associated was the so-called 'explained supernatural'. While she was universally admired for the ingenuity with which she escaped the guesses of the reader, before revealing the sublunary causes of her supernatural mysteries, the device was understood to be subject to the law of diminishing returns, and she was criticized for using it, especially by Sir Walter Scott. The criticisms were certainly unfair, as the device is integral to Radcliffe's narrative practice of balancing symbolic and literal meanings, where the symbolism generated by supernatural appearance takes on its significance precisely because it is fantasized, rather than 'real'. Despite being attacked for working in a formulaic genre, Radcliffe rarely repeats herself but attempts something new in each succeeding romance, often in response to her critics. Thus her penultimate novel, 'The Italian', makes very sparing use of the explained supernatural, while her final, posthumous one, 'Gaston de Blondeville' (1826), dispenses with it altogether, a fact which may partially explain the lack of critical interest in it. 
Radcliffe was unquestionably the dominant romance writer of the 1790s. Her influence on the fiction of the decade, and on what has subsequently come to be known as the Gothic novel, was formative and deep. Her position is reflected in the unprecedented sums she received for her last two novels: $500 for 'Udolpho', and $800 for 'The Italian'. To put these figures in perspective, $80 was the average payment for the surrender of copyright, a figure including Radcliffe's distorting remuneration, while her nearest competitor was Frances Burney, whose highest figure, before 1797, was the $250 she received from Payne and Cadell for the copyright of 'Cecilia' (Raven and others, 52). Radcliffe's rising stock is also reflected in her publishing career: from Hookham, who was associated with a circulating library, to Cadell and Davies, who were at the prestigious end of the publishing market. Before 'The Castles of Athlin and Dunbayne' only a handful of Gothic novels had been published; by the time 'Udolpho' appeared, the genre accounted for roughly a third of all new novels. Although Horace Walpole's 'The Castle of Otranto' (1764), Clara Reeve's 'The Old English Baron' (1777), and Sophia Lee's 'The Recess' (1783-5) were Radcliffe's acknowledged models, critics were united in saying that Radcliffe had transformed her 'meagre' materials into a new, powerful and 'enchanting' form. Among her critics there was virtual unanimity that she stood at the head of her own school of romance. At the peak of her career, much imitated, much lauded, and very richly rewarded, Ann Radcliffe suddenly stopped publishing. She had produced five romances and a travelogue in eight years and had become one of the country's most famous novelists and was still only thirty-three. 
Radcliffe's contemporaries were mystified by her silence. In the absence of any hard information wild rumours circulated about her, some alleging her death, others arguing that she had been driven mad by her propensity for terror. According to one story, she was confined, insane, at Haddon Hall in Derbyshire, while in 1810 the anonymous 'Ode to Horror' represented Radcliffe as 'having died in that species of derangement called 'the horrors'' (Talfourd, 95; Norton, 211). Radcliffe declined the opportunity of correcting these exaggerations. 
William Radcliffe advanced reasons for the abandonment of his wife's career. According to Talfourd, Ann Radcliffe was so much the gentlewoman that nothing other than the direst necessity could force her to assume the indecorous mantle of woman author. Her husband claimed that an inheritance relieved her from the burden of writing, an apparent reference to the legacy left her by her father after his death, on 4 July 1798, of 'interests in the rents of property in Houghton-on-the-hill, near Leicester' (Rogers, 'Bio-Bibliography', 11). There was also property left to her after her mother's death on 14 March 1800. Given that the same sources indicate that Ann Radcliffe began writing for pleasure, it hardly seems credible that she stopped because of her wealth. Nor is there any evidence from early on in her career that she was shy about publicity. After the success of 'The Romance of the Forest', she broke the anonymity that was still customary for novelists by appending her name to the third edition. 
Ann Radcliffe's sensitivity to criticism appears to provide a more likely explanation. When her third romance was published in 1791, her style of writing was still relatively novel; by the mid-1790s, the market was awash with Radcliffe's imitators. Although Radcliffe herself was untouchable, those who followed her were subject to a great deal of derision. Moreover, the reviewers began to undermine Radcliffe herself, through insinuation, innuendos, and faint praise. While they did not attack her on political grounds, apart from the Jacobinical smear of being at the head of 'terrorist novel writing', critics did accuse her of subverting norms of gender and genre and of making such basic errors as suspending tripods from ceilings ('Spirit of the Public Journals', 223). 
Although Radcliffe ceased to publish after the appearance of 'The Italian' she did not stop writing. As can be seen from the book she based on her journey down the Rhine with her husband in the summer of 1794 -- the only occasion on which she left Britain -- she was an inveterate travel writer. With the Napoleonic wars making foreign expeditions difficult, the Radcliffes confined their journeys to Britain, largely to the south coast. It is from the notebooks she kept to record her travels that Talfourd extracted material for his memoir. 
Ann Radcliffe died at her home, 5 Stafford Row, Pimlico, at 2 a.m. on 7 February 1823, attended by her physician, Charles Scudamore, who cited as the cause of death the inflammation of the cerebral membranes, which he in turn linked to the asthma Radcliffe periodically suffered during the last twelve years of her life. On the basis of her commonplace book Rogers and Norton both infer that Radcliffe died of a bronchial infection exacerbated by Scudamore's prescriptions. She was buried at St George's Church, Hanover Square. No will survives, but Norton claims that William Radcliffe left a fortune of $8000 on his death in 1830 at Versailles. He was attended by his second wife, formerly the Radcliffe's housekeeper, who he married in 1826. 
There were several posthumous works: 'Gaston de Blondeville' (1826), with a prefatory memoir by Talfourd; 'St Albans's Abbey', a 'metrical romance' (1826); and the important 'On the supernatural in poetry' (1826). Written in dialogue form, and originally intended as an introduction to 'Gaston de Blondeville', 'On the supernatural in poetry' is Radcliffe's fullest statement on her aesthetic practices. 
It was only with Radcliffe's death that more information began to emerge about her, but for her modern biographers, this is where the problems begin. Two biographical sketches appeared: Talfourd's 'Memoir', and another in the 'Annual Biography and Obituary, for the Year 1824'. The latter includes material written by William Radcliffe, while the former was produced under his close supervision, to such an extent that Talfourd complained to Mary Russell Mitford that his trouble 'exceeds anything that can be imagined' (Norton, 248). Both sources contain William's recollection of his wife's appearance: 'This admirable writer, whom I remember from about the time of her twentieth year, was, in her youth, of figure exquisitely proportioned; while she resembled her father, and his brother and sister, in being low of stature. Her complexion was beautiful, as was her whole countenance, especially her eyes, eyebrows, and mouth. ('Annual Biography and Obituary', 99)' The accounts report that Radcliffe's old-fashioned education, although good, did not include the classics, and that she delighted in having Latin and Greek works read out to her before being translated. They also relate that she was passionately fond of music and that she liked to attend the opera; she preferred to sit in the pit, where she enjoyed protection from draughts as well as from the gaze of curious onlookers. Her morbid fear of being thought forward, as regards her literary fame, preoccupies both memoirs. Indeed, the greater portion of William Radcliffe's contribution to his wife's obituary notice concerns two slights on her character that preyed on her mind throughout her life. The first was that she was thought to have claimed authorship of Joanna Baillie's 'Plays on the Passions', when these works were still anonymous; the other was that Mrs Carter, the famous bluestocking, had snubbed her. Apart from rectifying these slights, the main consequence of William Radcliffe's intervention was to protect his wife's fame by tightly controlling the information that appeared about her. 
It is unclear whether William's management of his wife's reputation extended to the destruction of her papers. As the excerpts in Talfourd's memoir show, Radcliffe was an inveterate journal writer, yet none of her private papers survived, apart from a commonplace book covering the last period of her life, and the contract for 'The Mysteries of Udolpho'. In the 1880s Christina Rossetti abandoned her attempts to write Radcliffe's life for want of material. The scarcity of information has hindered all subsequent biographies of Radcliffe. Adeline Grant wrote a substantial life of Radcliffe in the 1950s, but as it was unsupported by any evidence, its claims must be viewed with caution. Deborah D. Rogers's 'Ann Radcliffe: a Bio-Bibliography' (1996) keeps scrupulously to the known facts, and is correspondingly brief. Only with the publication of Rictor Norton's 'Mistress of Udolpho' has any new light been shed on Ann Radcliffe. Norton's discoveries about Radcliffe have been limited, but he has produced additional information on the career of her husband, William, and on the relatives William had omitted from his wife's biography. 


@@@@@


doc= 22975


Charles Radcliffe, styled fifth earl of Derwentwater (1693-1746), Jacobite conspirator, was born at Little Parndon, Essex, on 3 September 1693. Along with his elder brother James he participated in the Jacobite rising of 1715 and surrendered at Preston. He was tried on 18 May 1716, found guilty, and sentenced to death, but his execution was deferred until July, and he obtained a further stay because of a changed public mood in favour of clemency. With several other Jacobite prisoners he escaped from Newgate on 11 December and fled to Urbino, where he lived in poverty, though he was later appointed the chevalier's agent in Paris. In 1723 he made his addresses to Charlotte Livingston [


@@@@@


doc= 22976


Radcliffe, Charles Bland (1822-1889), physician, born at Brigg, Lincolnshire, on 2 June 1822, was the eldest son of Charles Radcliffe, a Wesleyan Methodist minister. John Netten Radcliffe (1826-1884) was his younger brother. He completed his education, begun at home, in the grammar school at Batley, near Leeds, and was subsequently apprenticed to Mr Hall, a general practitioner, at Wortley. He finished his medical training in Leeds, Paris (where he studied under Claude Bernard), and London. He graduated MB at London University in 1845, when he is said to have been the first student from a provincial medical school to have been awarded a gold medal, and graduated MD in 1851. In the same year he married Mary Reece Urling, daughter of George Frederick Urling, lace manufacturer; there were no children. He became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1848, and was elected a fellow in 1858. He was Goulstonian lecturer in 1860 and Croonian lecturer in 1873. He subsequently became a councillor of the College of Physicians, and in 1875-6 he acted as censor. 
In 1853 Radcliffe was appointed assistant physician to the Westminster Hospital, where he became full physician in 1857, and was elected to the consulting staff in 1873. He lectured on botany and materia medica in the medical school attached to the hospital. In 1863 he was appointed physician to the National Hospital for the Paralysed and Epileptic in Queen Square, London, in succession to Charles Brown-Sequard, and it was in connection with this institution, and the diseases of the nervous system, that Radcliffe's name was best known. He was a prolific writer, publishing works on vital motion, epilepsy, and disorders of the nervous system. Between 1845 and 1873 he was also joint editor with W. H. Ranking of Ranking's 'Abstract of Medical Sciences'. 
Radcliffe was one of the earliest investigators in Britain of the electrical physiology of muscle and nerve, but he was more a theorist than an experimentalist. Sir John Burdon-Sanderson claimed that Radcliffe was essentially a vitalist, but in his doctrine electricity took the place of the vital principle. Radcliffe had a great interest in music, architecture, and theology, and was a devout if unorthodox Christian. He was a friend of Frederick Denison Maurice, the founder of Christian socialism. He died suddenly at his home, 25 Cavendish Square, London, on 18 June 1889 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 22977


Radcliffe, Charles Edward (1774-1827), army officer, was the third son of Edward Radclyffe of Barnsley ('b'. 1728) and his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Adamson of Milton, Yorkshire. He received his first commission as adjutant of the 1st dragoons (Royals) on 11 October 1797, having previously served under the duke of York in the campaign of 1794. He was made cornet on 12 April 1799, lieutenant on 4 May 1800, and captain on 1 December 1804. He embarked for the Peninsula with the Royals in September 1809, and in the following June he was appointed brigade major to General Slade's brigade, which consisted at that time of the Royals and the 14th dragoons. He continued in this position up to the battle of Toulouse in 1814, being present at Busaco, Fuentes d'Onoro, Vitoria, and various minor engagements. After the action at Maquilla on 11 June 1812, in which Slade's brigade (Royals and 3rd dragoon guards) was routed by Lallemand and driven in confusion for 6 miles with a loss of 150 men, Slade reported that he was particularly indebted to Radcliffe for his assistance in rallying the men. As a result of his experience in the war Radcliffe submitted a strong recommendation that British troopers should be taught to use the point instead of the edge of their swords, and published a small work on the subject. 
Radcliffe was employed as assistant adjutant-general of cavalry after the Peninsular War. He became a brevet major on 4 June 1814, and on 25 September was made brigade major to the inspector-general of cavalry. In 1815 he went to Belgium with his regiment, which formed part of the famous Union brigade. His squadron constituted the rearguard of the brigade in the retreat from Quatre Bras on 17 June, and he was thanked for his conduct by Sir William Ponsonby. He was specially praised by Ponsonby's successor, Colonel Clifton, for his part in the great cavalry charge at Waterloo the following day. He was severely wounded by a bullet in the knee, which could not be extracted and caused him much pain for the rest of his life. He was given a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy, dating from the day of the battle. 
Radcliffe was placed on half pay on 20 April 1820, and was appointed brigade major to the inspector-general of cavalry. 'He was a dexterous swordsman, an accomplished officer, and an able tactician... a warm and sincere friend, a conscientious Christian, and a brave man', wrote General de Ainslie, historian of the Royals. 
Radcliffe married in 1800 Mary, eldest daughter of Henry Crockett, of Littleton Hall, Staffordshire, who died a week before him. He died at Connaught Square, London, on 24 February 1827. His only son, the Revd Charles Edward Radclyffe ('c'.1801-1862), had a son, also Charles Edward Radclyffe, of Little Park, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 22978


Charlotte Maria Radcliffe, 'suo jure' countess of Newburgh (1694-1755)], Jacobite sympathizer, posthumous daughter of Charles, second earl of Newburgh ('c'.1662x6-1694) and Frances Brudenell ('c'.1672-1736). At the time of Charles Radcliffe's advances she was a widow, having been married to Thomas Clifford (1687-1719), second son of Lord Clifford of Chudleigh. She refused Radcliffe on fifteen occasions and submitted only when he climbed down the chimney of her boudoir on the sixteenth; they were married at Brussels on 24 June 1724. He took a commission in Fitzjames's regiment of the French army; he was active in freemasonry and became grand master of France, but he resigned in 1738 when the church proscribed the society. He later moved to Rome, where the Jacobite court had settled and where he had inherited a house in the Lingaria from his bachelor uncle William. 


@@@@@


doc= 22979


Radcliffe, Egremont (d. 1578), rebel and alleged assassin, was the son of Henry Radcliffe, second earl of Sussex (c.1507-1557) ['see under 'Radcliffe, Robert], magnate, among whose titles was Lord Egremont, and his second wife, Anne (died 1579x82), daughter of Sir Philip Calthorpe of Burnham Thorpe, Norfolk, and his second wife, Jane. He had two sisters, one of whom, Frances (1552-1602), married Sir Thomas Mildmay. His half-brothers included Thomas Radcliffe and Henry Radcliffe, third and fourth earls of Sussex respectively. His parents were married at some point between 1534 and 1538, but were divorced by private act of parliament on 13 November 1555, after which his mother married Andrew Wise, vice-treasurer of Ireland. The third earl of Sussex was embittered by the divorce and later described Egremont Radcliffe as 'a wicked bastarde, taken for my brother' (Sharp, 75). 
Radcliffe was educated in the household of Robert Horne, bishop of Winchester, who told Sussex in 1563 that he had sent him from Bishop's Waltham to 'your L[ordship's] Stuarde' to avoid plague but would have him back 'untill your L[ordship] shall thinke good otherwise to provide for him' (BL, Cotton MS Titus Bxiii, fol. 95'r'). Later he lived in York, as did Thomas Jenye, with whom he joined the northern uprising in 1569. His residence in York is unusual, considering his family was based in Norfolk and Somerset, unless he was serving Sussex, who was lord president of the queen's council of the north. He was a notable Catholic and felt alienated from Elizabeth I's protestant and centralizing regime. Jenye claimed to have met Radcliffe near Topcliffe, North Riding of Yorkshire, going north. Radcliffe persuaded him to join the enterprise by producing assurances and a ring that he had received from Charles Neville, sixth earl of Westmorland. Later, Radcliffe specified Westmorland as having been the 'onelie cause of his wicked revolte' (TNA: PRO, SP 70/133, fol. 101'r'). 
Sussex excepted Radcliffe and Jenye from the pardon offered on 19 November, the only two not named in the list of original rebels earlier in the proclamation. It is, however, quite likely that they had joined as early as 15 November -- according to Christopher Norton, their arrival between Durham and Darlington 'comfortyd the coman sorte' and embarrassed Sussex (Sharp, 285). The earl wanted to be 'revenged' before 'the worlde' for 'the trayterous doings of an unnatural brother' (TNA: PRO, SP 15/15/46). On the collapse of the rising Radcliffe fled into Liddesdale on the Anglo-Scottish border, remaining with Westmorland rather than the ill-fated Thomas Percy, seventh earl of Northumberland. A ship was arranged, which English officials plotted to secure by bribing the captain or by interception. Probably Radcliffe postponed his departure, as Sussex was still seeking his extradition from the borderers in August 1570. However, in October Sir Henry Norris found him in Paris. Radcliffe then went to the Spanish Netherlands, where he met Catholic exiles, and Philip II gave him a pension of 30 crowns per month. He became close to Henry Parker, eleventh Baron Morley, stepson of his aunt Elizabeth Calthorpe. 
In April 1571 Radcliffe was said to have killed George Breame, an Englishman living in Antwerp, 'with a pistolet for that he wold len[d] him no silver' ('CSP Scot.', '1569-71', 527). He was subsequently alleged to have gone to Spain in 1572 to get a royal pardon, but seemed in no hurry. In May he was sent with Jenye to represent the English exiles at Madrid. In September he went to Milan, but (according to a hostile source), 'having killed there two other... was compelled to retourne from thence' (Knox, 'Diaries', 300). In December 1573 he was said to be in prison for debt in Madrid and in May 1574, passing through France 'en route' for Flanders, to be again in prison for debt and (inevitably) for 'disorders' (TNA: PRO, SP 15/23/58). By August Philip had spent 800 ducats on him. 
Radcliffe apparently changed his attitude in Spain from the hard-core dissidence formerly attributed to him. He made overtures, asking for a pardon, to William Cecil, first Baron Burghley, the lord treasurer, from Bruges in August 1574. By February 1575 he claimed to have left 'the entertaynement I had of the kinge of Spayne', referred to 'the injuries I have suffred in Spayne for defending accordinge to my duty her magestie's honnore against Stuclye [Sir Thomas Stucley] and othare of greatar credit', but darkly said that, being 'indetted', he might 'be forced to take wher I have bine prayed... which I wolde be loathe to doe yf I might choose' (TNA: PRO, SP 15/24/4). He defended Morley and Westmorland as also opposing Stucley's invasion plans. Personal disputes may have loomed large in his desire to return to England. He described his previous behaviour as 'a yonge man's first faulte, for which the gates of reconciliation is not clene to be cutt awaye' and hoped for subsidy, especially if willing to serve in Ireland (Sharp, 72). He had returned to London by November. Sir Francis Walsingham, principal secretary, warned Burghley that were Radcliffe to 'lynger in this realme', Elizabeth might 'be dryven for example's sake to extende that punishment towardes him, that to his former offences is dewe' (BL, Harley MS 6992, fol. 32'r'). Radcliffe was sent to the Tower of London -- it was reported to Spain that he was about to make false statements against Philip and would claim that the latter planned to retaliate for English provocations. He carved his name in the Beauchamp Tower, and wrote 'Politique Discourses Translated out of French' (1578), which he dedicated to Walsingham. It was a personal volte-face, advocating acceptance of the social and political order. He might well ask, 'who ever sawe so many discontented persons... so many controllers of princes and their procedinges: and so fewe imbracing obedience?' (E. Radcliffe, 'Politique Discourses', 1578, sig. A3'v'). 
In May 1578 Radcliffe was 'secretly released and exiled'; the Spanish ambassador in London, Bernardino de Mendoza, reported that he was going to serve Don John of Austria in the Spanish Netherlands. 'He is a rash and daring man, ready for anything, and his sudden liberation and decision to serve us may well engender suspicion' ('CSP Spain', '1568-79', 584). He claimed to Sir Amias Paulet, the English ambassador in Paris, that Elizabeth would be his preferred source for 'his maintenaunce as maye be mete for a gentleman', failing which he would 'seeke his lyving where he maye finde it' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/2/42). Catholic suspicion intensified. Anselmo Dandino, the papal nuncio in France, heard that Radcliffe was going to Italy -- with the musician and probable spy Alfonso Ferrabosco -- at Elizabeth's behest, although he made a pretence of being angry with the queen. Cardinal William Allen, founder of the English seminary at Rheims, welcomed him there, though he had been warned of Radcliffe's murderous potential. Radcliffe was arrested, with a man called Gray, when he arrived in Flanders. The details are unclear, reflecting confusion over the facts at the time. Radcliffe was suspected of foul play towards Don John, who died shortly after meeting him. It is unlikely that Radcliffe and Gray were charged with Don John's death, though the Catholic exile, Sir Francis Englefield, put forward the argument that Philip should not meet an English envoy because 'some intimates of Don John' observed 'that his highness was never well after Ratclyf the Englishman gave a letter into his hands' (BL, Add. MS 28702, fol. 4'r'). Poison was suspected. The decision to execute Radcliffe and Gray was probably taken by Alessandro Farnese, duke of Parma. They were beheaded in the market place of Namur on either 19 or 26 December 1578. 
Walsingham heard that Radcliffe blamed him for the supposed plot. Disingenuously dismissing the reliability of confessions obtained by torture, he asked William Davison, the English envoy to the Netherlands, to investigate 'so villainous a slaunder', considering Radcliffe not 'so develishe but that at the houre of his deathe he wolde revoke that which before he had untruely uttered' (TNA: PRO, SP 83/11/23). Accounts conflicted, but the Spaniards continued to allege Walsingham's complicity. Sir Lewis Lewknor believed that Radcliffe and Gray had been 'most faithfully affected both in religion and service to the Spanish king', yet 'though there never was, nor ever coulde bee anie thing proved against them, and they at their deathes protested themselves to be innocent... yet theyr heads were stricken off' (Lewknor, sig. A3'r'). However, an anonymous correspondent of 1581 reminded Walsingham about a dangerous security breach when an informer 'sawe good Mr Egmonde Radlyffe goinge up to Hampton Court unto you, and afterward mayde him lose his heade for it' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/6/37). In 1599 Thomas Harrison, among other doubtful alleged services, claimed: 'If I had not cunningly escaped I had died with Egrammond Ratclif and his man, from whom I was to receive notice for Mr Secretary' ('Salisbury MSS', 9.86). It does seem likely that the English government made some use of Radcliffe's proffered services because he was eminently expendable. His picaresque career makes it probable that he died poor and unmarried -- 'A ballett of the deathe of Ratlyffe w.ch rosse w.th the earle of Northumberland Lorde Pearse whiche he made a lytle spaice before he was handged' (BL, Cotton MS Vespasian A. xxv, fol. 158'v') seems to be entirely generic, implying that he was executed in England, and the alleged farewell to his 'wedded wiffe' it recounts hardly signifies. 


@@@@@


doc= 22980


Radcliffe, Sir George (bap. 1593, d. 1657), lawyer and politician, was baptized in Thornhill on 21 April 1593, the son of Nicholas Radcliffe (died 1599) of Overthorpe in the parish of Thornhill, Yorkshire, and Margaret (died 1628), eldest daughter and coheir of Robert Marsh of Darton, Yorkshire, and widow of John Baylie of Honley in the same county. In 1607 he attended Mr Hunt's school at Oldham, where he proved himself a good scholar; in November 1609 he matriculated at University College, Oxford, and graduated BA on 24 May 1612. Earlier in the year, on 5 February, he entered Gray's Inn, where he was called to the bar in 1618. About this time he contracted what proved a brief first marriage to a daughter of John Finch, later Baron Finch. 
Radcliffe's early career appears to have been successful, but his prospects were improved by his association with Sir Thomas Wentworth, later earl of Strafford. He was introduced to Wentworth at Christmas 1618 by his former tutor, Charles Greenwood, who had accompanied Wentworth on his tour of France. During the next few years Radcliffe acted as counsel for Wentworth and his sister on a number of matters, and by 1629 he was also handling work for Wentworth's father-in-law, John Holles, earl of Clare. Together with Greenwood (later replaced by Christopher Wandesford), Richard Marris, Wentworth's steward, and Peter Man, his solicitor, Radcliffe oversaw the management of Wentworth's estate from the early 1620s onwards. His second wife, Anne (1600/01-1659), eldest daughter of Sir Francis Trappes of Harrogate and of Nidd, both in Yorkshire, whom he married on 21 February 1622, was Wentworth's first cousin. 
By the mid-1620s Radcliffe's practice kept him in London for at least the law terms, and he was in the capital in 1627 during the early period of the forced loan. By April he had decided to refuse, and he was imprisoned in the Marshalsea on the orders of the privy council on 24 April. He answered his wife's concerns with assurances of 'exceeding good company, pleasant and sweet walkes, and every kind usage, beyond expectation in a prison', and explained his resolve not to follow the example of two fellow prisoners who had attracted derision by subsequently conforming (Whitaker, 107, 148). In June he was joined by Wentworth, and together they were moved to Dartford, Kent, in late July. Radcliffe spent the next few months in confinement, apart from a brief trip to London on the dowager countess of Leicester's business. He appears to have announced his freedom a little prematurely, which prompted Wandesford to warn Wentworth not to do likewise. Radcliffe's correspondence with his wife shows him to have sat in the 1628 parliament, but his name is not listed in the register. 
Wentworth's promotion to the offices of president of the council of the north and later lord deputy of Ireland brought benefits for Radcliffe. In December 1628 he informed his wife that Wentworth aimed to secure him the office of king's attorney at York, and he was certainly in office by the summer of 1629. He was not immediately added to the commission of the peace, nor was he placed on the northern commission for compounding with recusants, despite the close connection between that commission and the council of the north. In November 1632, however, he was preferred to the office of one of the king's council learned in the law; that year he also became a bencher of his inn. 
In January 1633 Radcliffe preceded Wentworth to Ireland on 'special service' ('CSP Ire.', '1625-32', 675), armed with the king's directions that the lords justices Richard Boyle, earl of Cork, and Adam, Viscount Loftus, support him in his work. Wentworth's first dispatch to Secretary Sir John Coke of 3 August 1633 reported on Radcliffe's work in the case against the bishop of Kilfenora, and ended with the request that Radcliffe be sworn of the council, 'ther being many of them allready at this Bord allmost beneath him as farr in estate as they are in Partes and understanding' (Strafford papers, 5/10). The king granted the request immediately and Radcliffe was knighted by the lord deputy on 1 November of that year. In October 1632, in an attempt to ingratiate himself with Wentworth, Cork had suggested Radcliffe for the mastership of the rolls, an office that was filled instead by Christopher Wandesford. Unlike Wandesford, Radcliffe was not given a key office in Ireland, although suitable posts did become vacant: in 1636 the post of attorney-general went to another member of Wentworth's team of Yorkshiremen, Richard Osbaldeston, also a bencher of Gray's Inn. Wentworth seems to have preferred to employ Radcliffe in a more flexible manner, ensuring that he was well rewarded for his efforts by his membership of the Irish customs farm from 1632. In 1636-7, following Wentworth's reorganization of the farm, Radcliffe's eighth part of the profits earned him $2800. The king had also granted him $500 per annum in compensation for the loss of his legal practice. His income enabled him to invest in land in the Connaught plantation, and he also acquired property in co. Wicklow. 
It has been noted that 'None of his servants in Ireland was more important to Wentworth, or more trusted, than Sir George Radcliffe, his legal expert, whose ingenious legal trickery was vital in enabling the crown to regain the political initiative in Ireland' (Merritt, 140). He worked on a very broad range of business, including legal work, the customs farm -- of which he controlled the accounts -- and church affairs, on which he advised Archbishop William Laud and Bishop John Bramhall. In addition he handled the private landed and commercial interests of Wentworth's friends and political allies. Radcliffe made several visits to England to further and protect the lord deputy's concerns, and he accompanied Wentworth in the summer of 1636 when he was added to the commissions of the peace for all three ridings of Yorkshire. In the parliament of 1634 he sat for the city of Armagh, following Cork's refusal to place him in a seat under his control, and he was an active government member. It was Radcliffe who informed the council of Sir Piers Crosby's opposition to a government bill, prompting his removal from the board. In 1639 Radcliffe and Wandesford both contributed $500 towards the king's war effort against the Scots. In the Irish parliament of 1640 he was knight of the shire for Sligo, his son Thomas ('b'. 1623?) sitting for the borough, but he travelled to England in June to attend his patron, now earl of Strafford, who was seriously ill. Staying until August, he stood surety with Francis Cottington, Lord Cottington, chancellor of the exchequer, and another individual, possibly Wentworth, for the cost of the pepper cargo. His service earned him the lord deputy's praise, but it also ensured that he would be implicated in the charge of high treason brought against Strafford. 
On 13 November the English House of Commons resolved that Radcliffe's membership of the Irish parliament did not protect him against a possible charge of high treason, and he was ordered to appear before the house. On 9 December 1640 he was committed to the gatehouse and articles of impeachment against him were read in the Commons and presented to the Lords at the end of that month. On 27 February 1641 the Irish House of Commons began impeachment proceedings against Radcliffe, Bramhall, Lord Chancellor Richard Bolton, and Lord Chief Justice Gerard Lowther, all potential witnesses in Strafford's defence. Radcliffe was not brought to trial in either country, but during the trial of Strafford in March 1641 he was alleged to have threatened MPs Sir John Clotworthy and Nicholas Barnewall following their opposition to the government. His role in the prosecution of Sir Piers Crosby was raised, and Crosby and Lord Baltinglass presented petitions against him. When Strafford pointed out that he had not been in Ireland when the alleged intimidation of Barnewall took place, Pym observed that 'the Spirit of my lord of Strafford could move in Sir George Radcliffe, whensoever it was spoken' (Rushworth, 112). The earl of Clarendon noted that the purpose of the impeachment of Radcliffe was to render him incapable of giving evidence on Strafford's behalf and he was barred from assisting Strafford in preparing his response to the Irish remonstrance. On the king's order, however, a copy of the Irish remonstrance was sent to Radcliffe in January 1641 and later that month his answer was delivered to Strafford, 'who sent his Majesty word that he had perused it and did avow and would humbly abide by it' ('CSP dom.', '1640-41', 433). 
In his last letter to Strafford, Radcliffe promised his faithful service to the earl's family, and in July 1641 he was acknowledged by the earl's brother, Sir George Wentworth, as the only person in England acquainted with Strafford's estate business. In 1641-2 correspondence passed between Radcliffe and Strafford's heir, William Wentworth, Lord Raby, later second earl; later on Radcliffe wrote to William telling him of his intention to write a life of Strafford, and sending him a plan of the work (Radcliffe, 'Earl of Strafforde's Letters', 2.429-36). He appears to have drafted further sections that can be read in Cooper's edition of the earl's early correspondence (Wentworth, 319-26), and these two pieces provide important information on some aspects of Strafford's private life, and on the origins and nature of Radcliffe's relationship with the earl. It was, no doubt, a source of much regret to Radcliffe that by the 1650s, if not before, the second earl appears to have lost interest in him. 
Radcliffe was released from prison in June 1642 but his whereabouts during the rest of that year are not known. In 1643 he joined the king at Oxford, and was created a doctor of law by the university in October. His correspondence with James Butler, marquess of Ormond, in 1643-4 shows him still to have been handling some Irish matters. He was refused a pardon by parliament in both the Uxbridge and the Newcastle propositions, and following the surrender of Oxford he took charge of James, duke of York. Lacking an order from the king, he chose not to take the duke abroad but handed him over to the earl of Northumberland. From 1647 onwards he lived mainly in France. In June 1648 he sailed with Edward Hyde and Cottington to join the prince of Wales's fleet, but their ship was captured by an Ostend corsair, who robbed Radcliffe and a member of the Wandesford family of money and jewellery. Having reached Paris, Radcliffe attached himself to the duke of York, alleging the instruction of the late king. In October 1650, according to Clarendon, he encouraged James to visit the duke of Lorraine in Brussels and then to travel to The Hague, both against the wishes of Queen Henrietta Maria. While in Brussels Radcliffe took control of the duke's household, and upon hearing rumours of Charles II's death, allegedly began to direct the duke's affairs as though he were now king. He seems to have regained Charles II's favour to some extent in 1654 following his key role in preventing the attempted conversion of the duke of Gloucester to the Roman Catholic faith. This incident, however, added to the queen's hostility towards him. 
By early 1655 Radcliffe was very weary of his situation, complaining to Secretary Sir Edward Nicholas that the duke of York no longer consulted him and that the queen continued to speak ill of him: he was, he claimed, 'an eysore to some and useless to all' ('Nicholas Papers', 2.265). His letters to his wife, written the following year and intercepted by John Thurloe, contain similar sentiments. By this time he appears to have had difficulty in paying for much-needed new clothes, although he refused his wife's offer of money. In September 1656 he left Paris and joined the exiled court in the Low Countries. He died at Flushing on 22 May 1657 and was buried there three days later. According to an intelligence report 'all the cavaliers were at his burial, except the chancellor and two more that was at Bruges. They are generally sorry for him; for they say he was the best counsellor their master had' (Thurloe, 6.325), a comment that does not fully reflect the general view of Radcliffe held by some of his fellow exiles. Clarendon portrayed him as 'a man very capable of business; and if the prosperity of his former fortunes had not raised in him some fumes of vanity and self-conceitedness, very fit to be advised with, being of a nature constant and sincere' ('Life of... Clarendon', 1.244). Christopher Hatton, Lord Hatton, sent Nicholas a similarly mixed assessment, claiming that Radcliffe's 'vanity in blabbing and feare to offend heere is able to spoile all his honest endeavors'; Nicholas himself described Radcliffe as 'a very busy and meddling person and none of the most secret or the most discreet' ('Nicholas Papers', 1.292; 2.134). It is perhaps not surprising that Radcliffe was not on good terms with Hyde, whom he no doubt regarded as partly responsible for the destruction of the council of the north. His bitter relationship with Henry Jermyn, Lord Jermyn, was also caused at least in part by old animosities between Strafford and the queen's circle. With Ormond, however, he seems to have remained on very good terms. Radcliffe was survived by his second wife, who died 'aged fifty-eight' on 13 May 1659, and was buried in the north choir aisle of Westminster Abbey. Their son Thomas held a seat on the Irish council and died unmarried and childless in Dublin in 1679. 


@@@@@


doc= 22981


Henry Radcliffe, second earl of Sussex (c.1507-1557), was aged about thirty-five when his father died. He combined service to the crown with a regional interest in East Anglia and a close affinity to the Howard family. He accompanied Henry VIII to Calais and Boulogne to meet the French king Francois I in 1532 and was made a knight of the Bath at the coronation of Anne Boleyn. In 1539 he was one of the commissioners given responsibility for the defence of the Norfolk coast and in the 1544 invasion of France commanded 100 footmen in the vanguard under Norfolk. He survived the disgrace of the Howards in 1547 and exercised his hereditary office of lord sewer at the coronation of Edward VI. In April 1551 he was made joint lord lieutenant of Norfolk, and was reappointed in May 1552 and May 1553. 


@@@@@


doc= 22982


Radcliffe, Henry, fourth earl of Sussex (1533-1593), soldier and administrator, was the second son of Henry Radcliffe, second earl of Sussex (c.1507-1557) ['see under 'Radcliffe, Robert], landowner and administrator, and Elizabeth (died 1534), daughter of Thomas Howard, second duke of Norfolk. He was brother to Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex. There is no record of his early years. He was married to Honor, daughter and coheir of Anthony Pound of Drayton in Farlington, Hampshire, in February 1549. 
Radcliffe's public career began when he and his father declared their support for Mary I in July 1553. He was knighted on 2 October at her coronation. He accompanied his brother to Ireland on the latter's appointment as lord deputy in 1557. He was appointed to the Irish privy council and sat in the Irish parliament as MP for Carlingford in 1559. In the same year he was sent on a mission to Elizabeth I in order to ascertain her resolution regarding Ulster. Also in that year, he corresponded several times with Sir William Cecil, the secretary of state, giving a general account of the state of Ireland. In 1561 he was appointed lieutenant of the colony established in King's and Queen's counties, where he commanded a band of some 200 soldiers, foot and horse, and in 1564 he was employed in putting down the O'Mores. He also defended Maryborough in King's county against an O'Connor attack. 
When the third earl of Sussex was discharged from his office in 1564 Sir Nicholas Arnold was appointed head of a commission to investigate alleged corruption in the Irish government. Radcliffe was one of several officers charged by the commission of misuse of some $8000 of soldiers' pay funds. Feeling he was treated with undue harshness, Radcliffe refused to hand over certain records; thereupon he was imprisoned. The English privy council frowned on this action and ordered his release on bond. He left Ireland after this although his offices were not filled until 1566. 
On his return Radcliffe settled down on the Hampshire estate inherited by his wife. He had sat in parliament for Maldon in 1555, presumably by family interest, then for Chichester in 1559, when his patron was probably his wife's relative, the twelfth earl of Arundel. However, he may have been absent in this session. By 1571 his influence in Hampshire was enough to gain him election as county MP. In 1572 he sat for Portsmouth, where he had just been appointed (May 1571) warden and captain of the town and castle. He did not speak in this session but served on some half-dozen committees. 
Radcliffe spent the rest of his life busy in the affairs of Portsmouth and of the county. He had been constable of Portchester Castle and lieutenant of Southbere Forest in Hampshire since 1560. He was also steward of various crown possessions in Essex. From 1573 he was a JP in Hampshire, commissioner of musters for the county by 1576, and joint lord lieutenant with the third marquess of Winchester from 1585. 
The governorship of Portsmouth entailed heavy and diverse responsibilities since it was a major naval base and an important fortress. Radcliffe was in constant correspondence with Cecil and the privy council over details of maintenance of new work. Besides these administrative responsibilities, he gathered and passed on intelligence brought by ships from abroad. He sent out vessels specifically to bring back information from the French or Spanish coasts, and was on a constant outlook for spies and smugglers. In times of war he was the commander of a garrison of several hundred men. During the Armada he dispatched four ships to join Sir Francis Drake. In 1589 he was responsible for supplies and shipping for 1000 men sent to France. 
In his county offices Radcliffe was equally busy, examining suspects and grilling recusants (with the assistance of the bishop of Winchester), including one of the Babington plotters. He was responsible, with the marquess of Winchester and the bishop, for the county musters, including their training and equipment. He was of course especially busy in the late 1580s. Although there were disputes with his partner in the lieutenancy, he seems to have won the confidence of the privy council. In 1589 he was awarded the Order of the Garter. 
Radcliffe had succeeded his brother, as fourth earl of Sussex, in 1583. The estates were heavily burdened with accumulated debts to the crown, especially those incurred by his brother. In 1587 he wrote a piteous letter to the queen. His income from the inheritance was $450 a year; the annual instalment on debt repayment to the crown was $500. He had to borrow in order to make the payment. He begged the queen to allow him to reduce the payment to the exchequer to $250 a year. He emphasized that since he could not obtain private access to the queen, his request made publicly might well be impeded by his enemies. Whether his petition was granted is not known. This letter plays up the wholly provincial and local character of the earl's public career. His only court office was that of sewer to Mary. The lack of entree or of a patron (after his brother's death) denied him the rewards which public service brought to those who frequented the court. His career is a good example of the conscientious, hard-worked, poorly rewarded servants of the Elizabethan regime on whom the smooth operation of government rested. 
Sussex, active to the last, died on 14 December 1593. He was buried with his predecessors in the church at Borham, Essex. He was succeeded by his son, Robert Radcliffe, fifth earl of Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 22983


Radcliffe, James, styled third earl of Derwentwater (1689-1716), Jacobite army officer, was born in Arlington Street, London, on 28 June 1689, the eldest son of Edward, second earl of Derwentwater (1655-1705), and Lady Mary Tudor (1673-1726), the daughter of Charles II and the actress Mary (Moll) Davies. He descended from a long Roman Catholic and royalist ancestry. His grandfather, Sir Francis Radcliffe, third baronet (1625-1696), was raised to the earldom of Derwentwater in March 1688, one of the few peerages created by James II. With five adult sons in 1689, he was feared as the most dangerous Jacobite in the north-east; he refused the oaths to William and Mary and was briefly imprisoned in 1691. James Radcliffe's parents parted in 1700 because the countess remained implacably opposed to becoming a Roman Catholic. In 1702, together with his younger brothers Francis (1691-1715) and Charles Radcliffe (1693-1746) ['see below'], James was sent to the Stuart court at St Germain at the request of Queen Mary, widow of James II, to be a companion and fellow pupil of Prince James Francis Edward, his kinsman. 
His personal attachment to Prince James, his ancestry, and his religion coalesced to make Radcliffe a fervent Jacobite. He succeeded to the earldom in April 1705 and appears to have undertaken a grand tour before engaging in the disastrous Jacobite expedition of 1708; he was captured on board the French prize 'Le Salisbury' but released, presumably because he was under age. In November 1709 he and his brothers obtained a licence to return to England. In 1710 he travelled throughout the north to establish contact with his kinsfolk and to inspect his numerous estates, which included agricultural properties in the border counties, collieries in Northumberland and Durham, and extensive lead-mining interests on Alston Moor. He also began to form a circle of friends, mostly Roman Catholics and Jacobites, of whom he soon became the natural leader. He was described as personable, slim, fair, and an accomplished singer and guitarist; he enjoyed field sports and was hospitable and generous to his friends and charitable towards his tenants and employees, with whom he became popular. On 10 July 1712 Derwentwater married a childhood friend, Anna Maria Webb (1692/3-1723), eldest daughter of Sir John Webb, third baronet, of Odstock, Wiltshire, and Barbara Belasyse, daughter and coheir of John, first Baron Belasyse; they had two children, John (died 1731) and Anna Maria Barbara (1716-1760) -- Anna Maria Barbara Petre ['see under 'Petre family] -- who married Robert James Petre, eighth Baron Petre in 1732. 
Derwentwater was one of the leaders to whom the execution of the northern contribution to the rising of 1715 was entrusted, though he was not given formal command because he was a Roman Catholic. He rose with his brother Charles and seventy men but he was bitterly disappointed that, despite many promises of support, only 200 Northumbrians joined them. Derwentwater showed considerable leadership and courage in action at Preston; he deplored Thomas Forster's capitulation, although the position was hopeless, and accepted it only to save further unnecessary bloodshed. He was impeached for treason and arraigned at the bar of the House of Lords on 19 January 1716. He pleaded guilty but said in mitigation that he had had no foreknowledge of the plot; that he had risen impulsively and without any military accoutrements; that he had acted with decent restraint while in arms; and that he had surrendered at the first opportunity. He protested his future loyalty and asked that his innocent young family's predicament be considered. Lord Chancellor Cowper scorned the arguments and condemned him to death; by an act of attainder his titles and estates were forfeited. Considerable efforts to obtain a reprieve were made: the House of Lords petitioned the king; various individual peers and peeresses made representations; and the pregnant countess even approached the king in person. It was said that Derwentwater contemptuously rejected a reprieve in return for his abjuring Jacobitism and renouncing his faith. It was also rumoured that Robert Walpole was offered a bribe to save him and that an armed party was ready to rescue him. 
King and government were determined on his execution, however, fearing that his Stuart blood, his wealth, and his popularity would make further rebellion a continuing threat. On the scaffold Derwentwater regretted having pleaded guilty, declared his adherence to Roman Catholicism, and said that he had never owned any other but James III as his rightful king, whom he loved as a person and whom he had desired to serve since infancy. He was beheaded on Tower Hill on 24 February 1716 and immediately became a romantic martyr figure. A display of the aurora borealis coincided with the arrival in co. Durham of the hearse bearing his body for interment in the family vault in the chapel at Dilston; the phenomenon was thereafter known locally as Derwentwater's Lights. He was in addition portrayed as a tragic hero in a number of folk-songs or ballads; some Catholics treasured his relics and miracles were attributed to his intercession, and there were those who wanted him proclaimed a confessor for the faith. In 1874 the bodies of the three earls of Derwentwater were reinterred in the Petre family vault at Thorndon, Essex. In 1721, to prevent Lady Mary Tudor securing the guardianship of John Radcliffe, the countess and her father fled with both children to Brussels; she died, aged thirty, two years later and was buried in the convent of St Monica's, Louvain, where two Radcliffe aunts were professed. John, regarded by Jacobites and other sympathizers as the rightful fourth earl of Derwentwater, always a sickly boy, remained on the continent to complete his education. He returned to England for a medical consultation in August 1731 but his condition was hopeless and he died on 31 December, aged eighteen and unmarried, and was buried at Louvain. 


The forfeiture of the Radcliffe estates was prevented initially when it was shown that they were properly entailed on Derwentwater's son, John, but if he died under age they would be forfeited because his heir, Charles Radcliffe, was debarred as a convicted rebel, although the latter and his wife visited England incognito on several occasions to protect their children's rights of succession. At John's death in 1731 the estates fell to the crown during the lifetime of Charles Radcliffe who became titular fifth earl on his nephew's death and, to prevent their recovery by his sons at his death, the act 4 Geo. II c. 21 was passed, prohibiting foreign-born issue of convicted traitors inheriting English titles or landed estates. By 8 Geo. II c. 29 the revenue of the estates, some $9000 p.a., was allocated to the completion of the Seamen's Hospital at Greenwich and for the maintenance of the seamen thereafter, although grants for the relief of Radcliffe's children were made and other entailed annuities and encumbrances were honoured. In 1745 Charles Radcliffe and his son James were taken by the British ship 'Sheerness' while in the French privateer 'Esperance', bound for Scotland with arms for the Jacobites, and imprisoned in the Tower. They repudiated British jurisdiction and Charles claimed misidentification; James was freed and banished because he was a French citizen, but Charles was easily identified and condemned to death on his previous conviction for his part in the rising of 1715. He was beheaded on Tower Hill on 8 December 1746 and was buried in St Giles-in-the-Fields. His widow, who died on 4 August 1755, aged sixty-one, was buried with him. Their son James Bartholomew Radcliffe (1725-1786) became third earl of Newburgh and was granted $30,000 from the Derwentwater estates; his son Anthony James (1757-1814), the fourth earl, died without issue and the earldom devolved upon the descendants of Thomas Clifford. 


@@@@@


doc= 22984


Ratcliffe, John, sixth Baron Fitzwalter (1452-1496), rebel, of Attleborough, Norfolk, was nine years old when his father, John, was killed on 28 March 1461, the day before the battle of Towton. At three his mother, Elizabeth Fitzwalter (1430-c.1485) ['see under 'Fitzwalter family (per. c.1200-c.1500)], had been acquired as ward by his grandfather to secure the ennoblement of the Ratcliffes via the Fitzwalter barony. Although, in 1467, Lady Fitzwalter married John Dynham, who ultimately became Henry VII's lord treasurer, her first husband's death deprived the family of the status accruing from a successful baronial career. It is possible that, in the 1460s, Ratcliffe was brought up partly in Devon; but his first public duty was as JP in Norfolk during Henry VI's government of 1470-71. 
The coincidence from which Ratcliffe's career sprang happened in Calais in 1476. He may already have been serving in Calais, for among Calais's officers was his uncle Robert. John led a retinue to fight in France in 1475, and, in that year or early 1476, married Margaret, the daughter of the lieutenant of Guines Castle, Sir Richard Whetehill. The couple returned to England in the summer of 1476. Through family friendship with the Pastons, Ratcliffe supplied William, Lord Hastings, lieutenant of Calais, with a cook, a talented man who had worked for both himself and his father-in-law. Instantly Ratcliffe was JP and MP for Norfolk, and afterwards assuredly powerful in Norfolk and East Anglia. Hastings's execution in 1483 ended his sense of secure political place. Ratcliffe quickly accommodated himself with the new king. On 6 July, three weeks after Hastings's death, he was a sewer (server of dishes) at Richard III's coronation, and by the end of the year associated with Richard's comptroller of the household. Yet he may have been dabbling treasonably with Henry Tudor. On Henry's accession Ratcliffe was showered with offices: steward and receiver of the honour of Richmond in Norfolk; steward of the duchy of Lancaster in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridge; feodary in Norfolk and Suffolk; chief justice and warden of forests south of the Trent and then of all forests. Perhaps his stewardship of the household was reward for his commitment to Tudor before Bosworth; a commitment similar to his promise to Warbeck in 1493. 
From 1485 to 1492 Fitzwalter played a key role in East Anglia; but almost all records show him in conflict with his neighbours: in the winter of 1484-5 he quarrelled with Sir Robert Chamberlain; as steward of the duchy of Lancaster he reprimanded the Pastons. In politics, and personally, he was duplicitous. In October 1485 he charged the servants of Elizabeth, countess of Surrey, with making treasonable remarks about the new king. Fitzwalter had already promised the earl of Oxford and Elizabeth that he would be a good lord to her and her imprisoned husband, Thomas Howard. The countess besought Fitzwalter's Paston friends to remind him of his promise, and expressed amazement at his behaviour; he was a near relation as well as neighbour. Two years later similarly disingenuous behaviour occurred before the battle of East Stoke. In April 1487 Fitzwalter was empowered to repair beacons and array troops in Norfolk and Essex; but in May the earl of Oxford was given wide-ranging powers to raise troops in East Anglia. Fitzwalter summoned several important gentry to Attleborough and told them that Oxford's commission was illegal, and that as steward of the household he had precedence: they should not march with Oxford. John Paston (he lied) was considering not marching with Oxford, and was in touch with the rebel Francis, Lord Lovell. Fitzwalter's lack of wealth may have contributed to his recklessness. In the late 1480s he forcibly took Normans Manor, Norfolk, from William Doget and his wife. When in 1492 he lost the case arising in the king's council, he relaunched it in the court of common pleas. This provoked Henry VII's angry intervention in Star Chamber. Fitzwalter's political ambition was doomed. The earl of Surrey had re-entered national politics and was about to be restored in East Anglia as equal in power with Oxford. Although Fitzwalter was still in local government between 1488 and 1491, he lost his stewardship of the duchy, and in 1490 he was judged to be in contempt of the king's council in Doget's case. He remained on the bench in Essex until 1495; elsewhere he had lost his positions in the administration of East Anglia. 
This failing career coincided with the Perkin Warbeck conspiracy. On 12 and 14 January 1493 Fitzwalter, with Sir Robert Clifford, decided to offer support to Margaret of Burgundy. Fitzwalter allegedly promised fifty men-at-arms to fight for Warbeck, wherever he landed. Members of Fitzwalter's family may have been drawn into the conspiracy: his uncle Robert, former porter of Calais, and his steward and cousin Thomas Cressener. He was also said to have sent to Warbeck three men who later took part in his landing at Deal in 1495. Despite maintaining an outward show of loyalty, notably at the creation of the king's son Henry as duke of York in December 1493, Fitzwalter was exposed when Sir Robert Clifford, who had fled to Flanders, returned to England in 1494. Fitzwalter was arrested and delivered to court, on 20 January 1495, by servants of the earl of Oxford. Unlike Sir William Stanley, Henry VII's chamberlain, Fitzwalter was not immediately executed. He was tried, on 23 February 1495, and then transported to Guines, previously familiar to him and near his Whetehill brother-in-law, then comptroller of Calais. Fitzwalter, however, did not learn his lesson, and in the autumn of 1496 tried to escape from Guines. By now England and Scotland were at war, with Warbeck as the cause. Fitzwalter's behaviour was not to be tolerated and he was executed that November, either at Guines or at Calais; he was buried in the December following. The judgment might seem harsh, but it received a sort of vindication three years later, when a last pretender, Ralph Wilford, emerged in Fitzwalter's home territory of East Anglia to trouble the king's peace. 


@@@@@


doc= 22985


Radcliffe, John (bap. 1650, d. 1714), physician and philanthropist, was born in Wakefield, Yorkshire, the son of George Radcliffe, governor of the Wakefield house of correction (1647-61) and a man of strong republican principles, and Sarah, daughter of Mr Louder, a prosperous Wakefield resident. He was baptized at All Saints, Wakefield, on 1 May 1650. Radcliffe claimed that he was a kinsman of the Catholic earl of Derwentwater. As Radcliffe's father had numerous children he initially intended that his son pursue trade or agriculture; however, members of the neighbouring gentry and clergy noticed John's cleverness and persuaded the father to send him to the local grammar school, where he proved an apt pupil. He matriculated at University College, Oxford, on 23 March 1666 as a batteler, or exhibitioner, on the freestone foundation, and in 1667 was made senior scholar on account of his success in the logic school. He graduated BA on 26 October 1669 and became a fellow (until 1677) of Lincoln College as no vacant fellowship was available in University College. He then pursued courses in botany, chemistry, and anatomy, receiving an MA with 'uncommon applause' ('Biographia Britannica') on 7 June 1672. During his time at Lincoln he was supported in part by his mother, his father having died. He then enrolled for degrees in physic and received his BM on 1 July 1675, after which he promptly began a medical practice from his college rooms. He possessed few books and disparaged those who relied on old medical treatises, preferring instead contemporary texts, particularly those of Thomas Willis, then England's most influential medical authority. When visited in his rooms as a medical student by Ralph Bathurst, master of Trinity College and a former experimental collaborator of William Harvey and Willis, who asked Radcliffe the location of his study, he supposedly pointed to a few vials, a skeleton, and a herbal. University contemporaries valued his wit and vitality rather than his scholarship, observing that he had little interest in contemplative pursuits. 
Throughout his career Radcliffe expressed himself with a candour that at times verged on rudeness. As a bachelor of medicine he offended James Lydall, an eminent Oxford practitioner (and early colleague of Willis), as well as John Luffe, later regius professor of physic, and two apothecaries. None the less, Radcliffe's early success with patients soon persuaded the apothecaries to keep his prescriptions in their files. Radcliffe gained a reputation early on for success in treating smallpox, which was epidemic in Oxfordshire in the late 1670s. In contrast to most other practitioners, who used external heat in their treatment, Radcliffe adopted Sydenham's 'cooling treatment' for the disease, which was then unorthodox. Rapid recovery of some smallpox patients who Radcliffe had treated by this means enhanced his reputation. More significant, however, was his success with Lady Spencer, a well-connected but chronically ill woman then living near Oxford at Yarnton. She had been under Dr Lydall's and Mr Musgrave's care with little success and had not been ambulatory for years when she first saw Radcliffe. However she started walking within three weeks of his first consultation, and her recommendation of Radcliffe to her numerous noble relatives established him as a pre-eminent local practitioner within two years of his taking the bachelor's degree. He graduated DM on 5 July 1682 as a 'grand compounder', a designation that referred to his accumulation of substantial wealth. In 1684 he moved to Bow Street, Covent Garden, London, where he soon established a lucrative practice, earning, his apothecary Francis Dandridge said, 20 guineas a day within his first year. His timing was propitious, for the court reputation of Richard Lower, a well-known Covent Garden physician who had succeeded to Willis's practice upon the latter's death in 1675, was declining owing to his outspoken support of whig principles. In 1686, two years after arriving in London, Radcliffe succeeded in being appointed principal physician to James II's daughter, Princess Anne of Denmark. He became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 12 April 1687, where he opposed physician, poet, and whig notable Samuel Garth in his successful campaign to have the college sponsor the first English dispensary for the deserving poor. 
Radcliffe's eighteenth-century biographers noted that his appealing and often witty conversation attracted patients as much as his clinical skill. A frequenter of fashionable coffee houses, Radcliffe was known to love wine. At times his wit could be coarse. For example, a hypochondriacal nobleman who had befriended Radcliffe sent him repeated requests for a consultation, only to receive the reply eventually that 'his Lordship did not know when he was well, for he was in perfect health, if he would but think himself so'. Finally, though, Radcliffe visited the man, who told him he had a 'strange singing' in his head. 'If it be so', Radcliffe reportedly replied, 'I can prescribe to your Lordship no other remedy than that of swiping your a -- with a ballad', a response that 'perfectly cured his Lordship's malady' ('Biographia Britannica', 3453). At other times Radcliffe's intended jests crossed the boundary of acceptable levity. Having successfully treated William III for symptoms of dropsy, including leg swelling, in 1697, Radcliffe was called by the king for advice on a recurrence of the illness in 1699. Apparently the monarch had not followed Radcliffe's earlier advice for temperance, and the physician found him with an emaciated body but swollen lower legs. When William III asked him his opinion of the legs Radcliffe reportedly replied: 'Why truly, I would not have your magesty's two legs for your three kingdoms', a jest that terminated his presence at William's court ('Biographia Britannica'). However, despite his occasional conversational blunders with social superiors Radcliffe, who was 'a confirmed Jacobite and violent tory' (Sakula, 256), was capable of political caution. When James II's daughter and son-in-law, Princess Anne and Prince George of Denmark, abandoned her father's cause and joined the prince of Orange (later William III) in Nottingham in 1688, Radcliffe was encouraged by the bishop of London to visit her there as she was in an advanced stage of pregnancy. Radcliffe demurred, citing a need to attend his critically ill patients in London. However, his contemporary biographer, William Pittis, attributed this behaviour to Radcliffe's reluctance to declare himself at a politically unstable moment. Radcliffe was elected MP for Bramber in Sussex and sat for the borough until the dissolution in 1695. 
Even though William III appointed his countryman, Bidloo, as his chief physician, Radcliffe's court practice continued to prosper after the departure of James II. When two of William's foreign attendants, William Bentinck, afterwards earl of Portland, and William Zulestein, earl of Rochford, became seriously ill and recovered after Radcliffe's ministrations, William rewarded him with 500 guineas and an appointment as one of his physicians at a salary of $200 p.a. Aware that William's tenure was new and, perhaps, not secure, Radcliffe declined the appointment. None the less he continued to be called to court and stated that he received $600 per year for the period 1688-99 from the king alone. In 1691 William, duke of Gloucester, the two-year-old son and heir of Princess Anne and Prince George, experienced 'fainting fits' (seizures), a malady that had proved fatal to some of their other children. Radcliffe agreed to care for him provided that Princess Anne and her sister, Queen Mary, rely on him exclusively for medical advice. The child recovered and did not experience additional fits, an outcome that brought Radcliffe a reward of 1000 guineas. In 1695 William III directed Radcliffe to attend the earl of Albemarle, one of the king's favourite commanders, who had then been ill on the continent for two months with fever. When the patient recovered within a week the king gave Radcliffe $1200 and the offer of a baronetcy, while Albemarle gave him 400 guineas and a diamond ring. (Radcliffe declined the title.) Although he experienced some investment losses, notably $5000 on a failed East Indies shipping venture in 1692, Radcliffe calculated his remaining wealth in 1692 at $30,000 and at $80,000 in 1707. He acquired estates in Buckinghamshire, Yorkshire, and Northamptonshire, and had paintings by Rembrandt and Rubens in his house in Bloomsbury Square, London. 
Part of Radcliffe's medical reputation rested on his ability to make accurate prognoses, which he often delivered bluntly. When Queen Mary developed smallpox in December 1694 the privy council called for Radcliffe. Reviewing her treatment regime before seeing her Radcliffe pronounced her 'a dead woman', saying that it was impossible to save her because the treatments she had received from others assured her demise. She died soon after. Late in 1697 he told William III that he would live a maximum of four more years regardless of his medical regime. William died in 1702. In 1699 the duke of Gloucester became ill with what his physicians, Edward Hannes and Bidloo, judged to be smallpox. When the youth's condition worsened Radcliffe was called. He despaired of the duke's recovery and accurately predicted the time of his death to the hour, but not before indulging in his custom of disparaging the skill of the other physicians. Radcliffe's impolitic manner lost him a position as Princess Anne's principal physician. Reportedly he accepted a summons to see her in 1695 but then failed to appear, justifying his behaviour by saying that her illness was 'nothing but the vapours, and that she was in as good a state of health as any woman breathing, could she but give into the belief of it'. A contemporary said he did not appear because he 'was too addicted to the bottle' ('Biographia Britannica', 3457). None the less, when Anne became queen and seemed critically ill her physicians consulted secretly with Radcliffe and used his prescriptions, for which he was paid handsomely by the government. 
A lifelong bachelor, Radcliffe acknowledged one marriage proposal. It failed, however, for though the woman brought a dowry of $15,000 and the balance of her parents' estate on their deaths, she was pregnant by a family bookkeeper. In breaking the engagement Radcliffe's letter to her father of 19 May 1693 expresses his characteristic sauciness: 'The hounour of being ally'd to so good and wealthy a person as Mr. S -- d has push'd me upon a discovery that may be fatal to your quiet, and your daughter's reputation, if not timely prevented. Mrs. Mary is a very deserving gentlewoman, but you must pardon me, if I think her by no means fit to be my wife, since she is another man's already, or ought to be. In a word, she is... actually quick with child, which makes it necessary that she be disposed of to him that has the best claim to her affections.... Hanging and marrying, I find, go by destiny; and I might have been guilty of the first, had I not so narrowly escaped the last. ('Biographia Britannica', 3456)' At the age of fifty-nine Radcliffe became enamoured of a patient, Miss Tempest, on whose account he refurbished his coach and servants' liveries. Addison, writing under the name Aesculapius, ridiculed him for this in the 'Tatler' of 21 and 28 July, and 13 September 1709. 
In 1713 Radcliffe was elected MP for Buckingham and began recommending the physician Richard Mead to his patients. In the same year he purchased a mansion at Carshalton, Surrey, which later became St Philomena's Convent School. Radcliffe died in semi-disgrace, his final three months shadowed by a recurrence of contentious behaviour toward his most venerable royal patient, Queen Anne, who died on 31 July 1714. During her final hours one of her intimates, Lady Masham, sent for Radcliffe. Suffering from a severe episode of gout and learning beforehand from Mead that the queen's case was hopeless, Radcliffe declined to attend. Also, he said that in view of the queen's antipathy to him his presence might worsen her final moments, adding later in a letter that he would have come if the request had come from the proper authorities. Subsequently an old friend, Sir John Pakington MP, moved that Radcliffe be censured by the House of Commons for his failure to serve the queen, but the matter dropped. Radcliffe suffered an apoplexy while at church and died at Carshalton on 1 November 1714, having accurately predicted the date of his demise in a letter of 15 October 1714. His body lay in state at Carshalton until the 27th, and was then moved to Oxford, where it was buried on 3 December in St Mary's Church. 
Although Radcliffe described himself as avaricious and was known to be a slow payer of debts and not above cadging drinks, he was also known for his generosity to those in need, particularly members of the clergy. His will, dated 13 September 1714, provided substantial annuities to his sisters and other relatives. He left the bulk of his estate to University College in trust for building and operating a library (completed 1747), enlargement of college buildings, two medical travelling fellowships, and faculty annuities. Executors of additional trusts used the funds to build the Radcliffe Infirmary, the Radcliffe Observatory, and the Lunatic Asylum, Oxford. Additional substantial contributions were made to the building of the Royal College of Physicians (in Pall Mall East), and St John's Church, Wakefield. He also bequeathed $500 a year to St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. In 1811 it was decided that the Radcliffe Camera should be limited to books on medicine and natural science. A larger library was eventually needed, and in 1901 the Radcliffe Science Library was opened and extended in 1934 with the aid of a Rockefeller grant. In 1715 Jean Gagnier published an elegy on Radcliffe's death, 'Exequiae clarissimo viro Johanni Radcliffe MD' (1715). A gold headed cane, said to have been Radcliffe's, was given to the Royal College of Physicians by Mrs Baillie. 




@@@@@


doc= 22986


John Radcliffe (1690-1729), physician, seems to have been no relative of his namesake. He was the son of John Radcliffe of London, gentleman, and his wife, Ann, and was born on 10 May 1690; he was admitted to Merchant Taylors' School in 1703. He matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, on 17 October 1707, and became BA on 2 June 1711, MA on 23 April 1714, and DM on 30 June 1721. On 25 June 1724 he was chosen a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians; he was physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital. He died on 16 August 1729. 


@@@@@


doc= 22987


Radcliffe, John Netten (1826-1884), epidemiologist and public health activist, was born in Boston, Lincolnshire, on 20 April 1826, and was baptized at the Red Lion Street Methodist Chapel in Boston. He was the son of Charles Radcliffe, Wesleyan minister, and his wife, Rose, and younger brother of Charles Bland Radcliffe (1822-1889). Educated at the Leeds school of medicine, he gained a diploma and immediately undertook service in the Crimea as a surgeon attached to the headquarters of Omar Pasha. This proved a decisive experience. Although after returning from the war he was appointed medical superintendent of the Hospital for the Paralysed and Epileptic in Queen Square, London, Radcliffe had already developed an intense interest in 'exotic' diseases. Each of the classic research papers and reports that he wrote between the early 1860s and the late 1870s described the manner in which infections are spread from their 'natural' habitats to environments in which they sustain an 'artificial' and hence potentially eradicable existence. 
Elected to membership of the Epidemiological Society of London at the age of twenty-four, Radcliffe served as honorary secretary from 1862 to 1871 and president from 1875 to 1877. Here he met John Simon, who was at that time eager to recruit young medical men and epidemiologists to undertake studies for the medical office of the privy council. Radcliffe was appointed a public health inspector in 1869 and assistant medical officer at the Local Government Board in 1871. On 5 July 1870, at the mature age of forty-four, he married Anne Martha Billing, daughter of John Turner Billing, a London solicitor; they had three sons and four daughters. Radcliffe shunned major administrative responsibilities, preferring to concentrate on the temporal and spatial minutiae of the disease process. Simon described him as a perfectionist who immersed himself in the 'time, place and dynamics of... epidemic and endemic disease', and displayed 'the familiar knowledge which a Charing-cross policeman is supposed to have of the ominibuses which pass his beat'. A reticent man, Radcliffe possessed 'a somewhat unpunctuated and unaccentuated mode of speech' and a 'frequent preference for semi-sarcastic (though never ill intended) forms of expression' ('Lancet', 562-3). Overwork was said to have played a role in triggering the terminal neurological illness which forced him to resign from the Local Government Board in 1879. 
Adding empirical substantiation to the theoretical insights associated with the discoveries of John Snow and William Budd, Radcliffe's research into cholera, typhoid, water supply, and the disposal of sewage convinced large numbers of public health activists during the 1860s and 1870s that infection was unlikely to be exclusively propagated by a foul atmosphere, climatic variation, or the condition of the soil. His work on the diffusion of cholera in the Mediterranean region in 1865 was complemented by a scathing attack on the East London River Company, in 'On cholera in London' (1867), which, together with an equally damning investigation by William Farr and Edward Frankland, confirmed that failure to maintain consistent waterworks procedures had led to traumatic mortality from the pandemic infection in the poorest districts of the capital. Three years later Radcliffe returned to the fray and argued, in 'On the turbidity of water' (1870), that the private London water companies had failed to regulate themselves or conform to minimal safety requirements. Insisting that choice of raw river water and the state of filtering equipment must now be subject to rigorous scientific control, Radcliffe canvassed public ownership of London's water supply system. 
Radcliffe was equally radical in his attitude towards the monitoring of milk. In 1873, in collaboration with W. H. Power, he produced a masterly analysis of a large-scale outbreak of enteric fever in Marylebone. Noting that incidence and mortality were heavily concentrated among the well-to-do, Radcliffe and Power excluded both miasmatic processes and the pollution of local water supplies. Discovering that 'nursery milk' had been 'collected from three or four cows selected and set apart from the general herd' ('Parl. papers', 1874, 31), the two epidemiologists located the origins of the outbreak deep in the Buckinghamshire countryside, and thereby drew public attention in their 'Report on an outbreak of enteric fever' (1874) to the central role played by tainted water in small and remote dairies. 
Returning in the same year to an earlier preoccupation, Radcliffe visited nearly fifty communities to evaluate the rival claims of the midden, pail, water, earth, and charcoal systems of excrement disposal. Rejecting Edwin Chadwick's obsession with the water closet, Radcliffe nevertheless urged public authorities to ensure that the appliance should be made as readily available to the working as to the middle classes. As his health began to fail, Radcliffe also worked long and hard on papers on hospital hygiene and measures to be taken to prevent any possibility of a recrudescence of bubonic plague in north-western Europe. 
Together with William Farr and Edward Frankland, Radcliffe successfully combined the roles of disinterested scientist and social critic. Convinced of the frailty of explanations of disease behaviour which depended on non-quantifiable variations in atmospheric and meteorological conditions, he was converted early in his career to the idea that individual infections were transmitted by specific and potentially detectable 'germs'. However, the precise chemical and, or, biological components of these entities, and their mode of reproduction in the environment, defied explanation. Thus Radcliffe drew on an increasingly reliable body of data collected by local medical officers of health and sought through exclusion and controlled statistical observation to infer the presence of the germs associated with cholera, typhoid, and gastroenteritis. Radcliffe and William Farr's ideal -- a standardized procedure to predict future outbreaks of disease through detailed knowledge of previous episodes -- remained theoretically and empirically unattainable. But during the interregnum which separated the supremacy of the atmospheric theory and the application of new bacteriological insights in the 1880s and 1890s, Radcliffe's methodology was central to a redefinition of epidemiological practice and the environmental processes with which it was concerned. 
Radcliffe died of 'chronic cerebritis' on 11 September 1884 at 43 Fitzroy Road, London, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 22988


Radcliffe, Nicholas (d. 1396x1401), prior of Wymondham and theologian, entered St Albans Abbey in the 1350s and studied at Gloucester College, Oxford, from 'c'.1360. A contemporary of Wyclif in the theology faculty, he was a bachelor of theology by 1365, and incepted as doctor in 1368. In the same year he was appointed prior of Wymondham, a cell of St Albans, and shortly afterwards was drawn into a dispute with Henry Despenser, bishop of Norwich (died 1406), over the collection of a clerical subsidy. He returned to St Albans in 1380, and in 1382 played a leading role in the council at Blackfriars that secured a condemnation of Wyclif's works. At the same time he was credited with persuading a notorious Wycliffite, John Aston, to renounce his errors. He served as archdeacon of the abbey at least until the death of Abbot Thomas De la Mare in 1396, and may for a short time have become prior. He was appointed diffinitor (an officer responsible for pronouncing upon issues of discipline) for the provincial chapter for the year 1393-4. 
As a theologian Radcliffe was distinguished for his opposition to the work of John Wyclif (died 1384). His contemporary at the abbey, Thomas Walsingham, included his name in a list of illustrious monks, and recalled that he had 'written many books against the opinions of the heretic' (Riley, 2.305). He was the author of a sequence of six dialogues with the Carmelite theologian Peter Stokes (died 1399): 'De immortalitate primi hominis', 'De dominio naturali', 'De obedienciali dominio', 'De dominio regali et judiciali', 'De potestate Petri apostoli successorum', 'De eodem argumento'. (BL, Royal MS 6 D.x, fols. 1-283'r'). These were probably written at the request of the abbot, Thomas De la Mare, and not only tackle many of the theological questions raised by Wyclif but also reflect De la Mare's concern to counter Lollardy in the local community. Radcliffe also wrote a separate treatise 'De viatico salutari animae', two 'quaestiones', 'De voto religionis', and 'De imaginum cultu', and an 'Invectio contra errores Wyclif', all of which were known outside St Albans. Several of his academic exercises dating from his time as a bachelor respondent, including some disputations with the celebrated Benedictine master, later cardinal, Adam Easton (died 1397), also survive in fragments recorded in the lecture notes of a monk of Worcester. Radcliffe was still alive when John Moot was elected abbot in 1396, but was dead by the time of the election of William Heyworth in 1401. At his death he left 20 marks for the completion of the private dormitory, and this benefaction, together with a record of his achievements and a portrait, was inserted in the abbey's book of benefactors. 


@@@@@


doc= 22989


Radcliffe, Ralph (1518/19-1559), schoolmaster and playwright, is of uncertain origins. The Radcliffe monument in St Mary's Church, Hitchin, Hertfordshire, declares that in the reign of Henry VIII Ralph 'came out of Lancashire where his Ancestours were antiently seated one of whom was Richard Radcliffe of Radcliffe Tower'. According to Hine's 'Worthies', he was descended from a younger brother branch of this noble Lancashire stock, and his father was Thomas Radcliffe of Ordsall. He was a poor but talented scholar, and by 1533 was installed in the Carmelite house in Cambridge, being drawn to Thomas Cromwell's notice as 'an excellent scholar in Greek and Latin' suitable for the post of grammar master at Jesus College. As this letter of recommendation reveals, he was considered particularly worthy because of the accomplished polemical works he had penned 'against our school men in Cambridge' ('LP Henry VIII', addenda, 1/2, no. 624). Radcliffe secured the post, and financed his studies both through his teaching at Jesus, and through tutoring the children of the marquess of Dorset. He graduated BA at Cambridge in 1535-6, and MA in 1538-9, having sparked controversy there by challenging John Cheke's pronunciation of Greek. 
Radcliffe's radical protestant credentials meant that, following the dissolution of the monasteries, he was granted permission to establish a school for boys in the dismantled Carmelite priory at Hitchin where he took up residence about 1539. He married Elizabeth Marshall of Mitcham, and they had four children: Ralph, Jeremy, Edward, and Elizabeth. The eldest, Ralph, was educated by Radcliffe's close friend Roger Ascham. 
Radcliffe became a celebrity in Hitchin and beyond largely because of the plays that he wrote for his pupils to perform, at least once a year, for public audiences on a stage erected in the lower part of the priory. Along with noted reformers like John Bale and John Foxe, he clearly believed in the important role of the popular stage in the war against the Roman Catholic 'Antichrist'. Besides tragedies and comedies in Latin and English, Radcliffe wrote dramatic dialogues in the vernacular. Three of these survive, confirming his flair for penning entertaining polemics. The dialogues are bound together in a presentation volume ('c'.1540) for Henry VIII, and the contents are prefaced as: 'iii dialogues: the firste concernyng a governance of the Chyrche (the Interspekers... be these. The Chyrche. The two bysshoppes. The iii dyssemblars. The foole. The harlotte, and the Ryche man). The seconde is bytwen the power [poor] man, and fortune. The thirde, bytwen deth, and the goer by the waye. ('Second Report', HMC, 85)' None of Radcliffe's other works has survived, and what is known of his theatre and library is mostly reliant on Bale's favourable account of his stay at Hitchin School. Bale waxed enthusiastic about the 'theatrum... longe pulcherrimum' which the schoolmaster had constructed there (Bale, 'Cat.', 700). In the extensive library Bale found pedagogical and grammar treatises as well as Radcliffe's plays, which he admired, urging Radcliffe to publish. Among Radcliffe's plays as listed by Bale are 'De patientia Griseldis', 'De Melibaeo Chauceriano', 'De Sodomae incendio', 'De Jo.Hussi damnatione', and 'De Judith fortitudine'. 
By 1553 the school had so flourished that Radcliffe was in a position to purchase the priory estate. A portrait ('c'.1559) of this frank and genial-looking schoolmaster clutching a scroll of 'letters' hung in Hitchin Priory well into the twentieth century; a reproduction of it can be found in Hine's 'Worthies'. When Radcliffe made his will in 1558 he described himself as 'in hoole mynde... but sick in body'; he died the next year, aged forty, and was buried in St Mary's Church, Hitchin. 


