@@@@@


doc= 22990


Ratcliffe, Sir Richard (d. 1485), royal councillor, was a younger son of Thomas Ratcliffe, esquire, of the Isle of Derwentwater (Cumberland), and his wife, Margaret, a daughter of Sir Thomas Parr of Kendal. By 1475 Ratcliffe was in the service of Richard, duke of Gloucester, perhaps through the Parr connection -- one of his Parr uncles, Thomas, died in the duke's service at Barnet in 1471. Ratcliffe was active on the duke's behalf in co. Durham, and was his constable of Barnard Castle. He was a member of the ducal council by 1477. He served under the duke on the Scottish campaigns of 1480-2, and was knighted by him beside Berwick in 1481 and advanced to banneret in Scotland the following year. 
Ratcliffe was one of Gloucester's trusted associates in the events leading up to his seizure of the throne in June 1483. Ratcliffe carried the duke's letters of 10 June requesting military help from the city of York against the queen's affinity, and was present when the northern forces mustered at Pontefract a fortnight later, apparently presiding over the execution of Rivers, Vaughan, and Grey, before accompanying the army south. Richard III made him a knight of his body and he was chosen a knight of the Garter early in the reign. In September 1484 he received a major grant of land (valued at 1000 marks) in the south-west, much of it once held by the Courtenay earls of Devon. He does not, however, appear to have taken on a significant role in the region, his interests remaining primarily northern. In the first year of the reign the prior of Durham commented on 'the great rule that he beareth under the king's grace in our country' (Pollard, 358). Ratcliffe succeeded his uncle, William Parr, as sheriff of Westmorland in August 1484. He was much involved in the negotiations for a truce with Scotland, and on the death of Humphrey, Lord Dacre, in May 1485, succeeded him as the king's deputy lieutenant on the west march. Ratcliffe was one of the king's closest councillors, and after the death of Queen Anne spoke out against the possibility of Richard's marrying his niece, Elizabeth of York, on the grounds that it would alienate the king's northern supporters. His influence over the king is shown by William Collingbourne's famous couplet: '
The Cat, the Rat and Lovell our dog 

Rule all England under the Hog. 
(Horrox, 222)' It was also recognized by William Wainfleet, the bishop of Winchester, who made Ratcliffe constable of his castle of Taunton in March 1484. 
Ratcliffe fought for Richard III at the battle of Bosworth on 22 August 1485 and was probably, as the Crowland continuator states, killed there. But there was evidently some initial confusion about his fate. The royal proclamation issued immediately after the battle named him among the dead, but the next day Henry VII ordered him to be arrested and brought before him. The government apparently still believed him to be at large on 24 September, when he headed the list of those excluded from pardon, but by then his family knew him to be dead, and already on 20 September the bishop of Dromore had been commissioned to veil his widow. Ratcliffe was attainted in Henry VII's first parliament. 
Ratcliffe married Agnes (erroneously called Alice in the commission to veil her), daughter of Henry, Lord Scrope of Bolton, whose first husband, Christopher Boynton of Sedbury in Gilling, near Richmond in the North Riding of Yorkshire, had died in 1479. Agnes was dead by July 1509 when her eldest son from her first marriage, Henry Boynton, received a pardon as her executor. She had two children with Ratcliffe: a daughter, Isabel, who married Roger Lumley, and a son, Richard, who married Margaret Wilberfoss. Richard secured the reversal of his father's attainder in 1495, when he argued that as his father had been a younger son, with two older brothers still living, both of whom had several children, there was nothing to forfeit other than the grants made by Richard III, which had in any case been resumed. 


@@@@@


doc= 22991


Radcliffe, Robert, first earl of Sussex (1482/3-1542), soldier and courtier, was the son and heir of John Ratcliffe, sixth Baron Fitzwalter (1452-1496), and his wife, Margaret. The sixth baron was attainted and executed in 1496 for his part in the Perkin Warbeck conspiracy and it was not until November 1505 that the attainder was reversed. His son was first summoned to parliament as Baron Fitzwalter on 28 November 1511, following an act of parliament in 1509 confirming his right to the title (1 Hen. VIII c. 19), but his rehabilitation had already been confirmed on 23 June 1509 when he was made a knight of the Bath, while on the following day he was lord sewer at Henry VIII's coronation. 
Radcliffe prospered in the early years of Henry VIII's reign through friendship with and proximity to the young king. In 1513 he served in the vanguard of the army in France under the earl of Shrewsbury. In 1521 he served at sea, and in the following year campaigned under the earl of Surrey at Morlaix and in Picardy. In 1515 he took part in the ceremony at which Wolsey received his cardinal's hat; he was at the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520; on 7 May 1524 he was installed as a knight of the Garter; by February 1526 he was a member of the king's council. On 18 July 1525, at the creation of Henry Fitzroy as duke of Richmond, he was raised to the dignity of Viscount Fitzwalter. 
Fitzwalter was above all a loyal servant of Henry VIII, and as such he supported the king's divorce from Katherine of Aragon. In June 1529, aged forty-six, he gave evidence concerning the latter's marriage to Prince Arthur and its consummation. It was his loyalty which led to his being created earl of Sussex on 8 December that year. On 7 May 1531 he became lieutenant of the Order of the Garter and on 31 May 1532 was appointed one of the chamberlains of the exchequer. He served as lord sewer at the coronation of Anne Boleyn and was appointed to carry the king's demands to Katherine of Aragon in December 1533. On 23 June 1537 he was granted the reversion of stewardship of the royal household, once held by his father and now by the fourth earl of Shrewsbury, but when Shrewsbury died the following year he was succeeded, apparently without letters patent, by the duke of Suffolk. This turn of events shows the limitations of Sussex's power, though he was compensated by being made chief steward of the duchy of Lancaster in the north on 5 December 1539, a position formerly held by Suffolk. He exchanged his new office for the duchy's southern stewardship on 17 November 1540 and held that until his death. He had previously played an important role in quelling the disturbances in the north of England in 1536-7: he was appointed, along with the earl of Derby, to quell unrest in Lancashire and between February and April 1537 suppressed the abbeys of Whalley and Furness. On 9 May 1540 he was sent to Calais to head a commission to inquire into charges of misgovernment and sacramentarianism there, having already reached the pinnacle of his career in royal service when he was made lord great chamberlain of England for life on 3 May. 
Despite this impressive 'cursus honorum' Sussex seems to have been only a second-rate politician and statesman. In 1538 he was described as being 'of small power and little discretion and many words' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 13/2, no. 732). His military resources were small and he rarely attended meetings of the council. He had, however, close links with Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk, from whom he held the manor of Wrentham, Suffolk, for half a knight's fee. Cromwell, wary of his close links with Norfolk, may for that reason have prevented him from becoming lord steward. Conversely, his siding with Norfolk against Cromwell probably explains his elevation to the chamberlaincy and his dispatch to Calais in May 1540 following the chief minister's fall from power in the previous month. 
Sussex married three times. His first wife was Lady Elizabeth Stafford, daughter of the second duke of Buckingham, whom he married before 1507 and with whom he had Henry, the second earl, George, who married a daughter of John, second Baron Marney, and Sir Humphrey Radcliffe of Elnestow, later MP for Bedfordshire. Elizabeth died some time before 11 May 1532, and by 1 September following Sussex married Lady Margaret Stanley, daughter of the second earl of Derby. A special dispensation was needed as the two were within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity. They had two daughters, Anne, who married Thomas, second Baron Wharton, and Jane (died 1552), who married Anthony Browne, first Viscount Montagu. Margaret probably died in February 1534, and on 14 January 1537 her husband married Mary (died 1557), daughter of Sir John Arundell of Lanherne, Cornwall ['see 'Arundell, Mary]. They had two children, of whom the eldest was baptized on 22 March 1538 but died in infancy; the couple's second son, John, was baptized at St Laurence Pountney on 31 December 1539, knighted in February 1547, and died on 9 November 1568. Sussex died on 26 or 27 November 1542 and was buried in the church of St Laurence Pountney, London, but his remains were later removed to Boreham, Essex. In 1545 his widow married Henry Fitzalan, twelfth earl of Arundel, and died childless on 20 October 1557. The claims once made for her literary attainments have proved to be unfounded; the translations of classical texts surviving among the royal manuscripts in the British Library, once attributed to her, are children's exercises written by her stepdaughter Mary, later duchess of Norfolk. 


Sussex gave important support to the coup which brought Princess Mary to the throne. At the time of Edward VI's death he was at Atleburgh in Suffolk. According to Robert Wingfield, the earl (who was conservative in religion) was immediately inclined to support the princess's claims, but was deterred by Lord Robert Dudley's telling him that Edward was still alive. He was persuaded to throw in his lot with Mary when his son Henry was captured by Sir John Huddleston with letters from his father to the council at Westminster. To protect his son Sussex now joined the princess at Kenninghall and raised a substantial body of men on her behalf. Presumably on the strength of his military experience he was made her commander-in-chief, 'the queen's lieutenant and, as the proverb goes, her mouth and chin' (MacCulloch, 261). On 17 May he was made a privy councillor, and in November he served as a commissioner at the trial of Lady Jane Grey. His rewards included the wardenship of the royal forests south of Trent and annuities worth about $300. In 1554 he was elected a knight of the Garter, and in 1556 lord lieutenant of Norfolk and Suffolk. But although Sussex was active in pursuing heretics in Norfolk, he did not always support royal policy. He opposed Mary's marriage to Philip (but later accepted a Habsburg pension) and upheld the position of Princess Elizabeth as the queen's heir presumptive. One of the councillors who escorted Elizabeth to the Tower in 1554, he is reported to have wept and warned his colleagues, 'What will ye doe, my Lordes... She was a kinges daughter and is the queenes syster, and ye have no sufficient commyssyon so to do' (Loach, 92). 
Sussex married twice. His first wife, married before 21 May 1524, was Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Howard, second duke of Norfolk. They had three sons, Thomas Radcliffe and Henry Radcliffe, successively third and fourth earls, and Robert who predeceased his father. One of Anne Boleyn's attendants when Henry VIII met Francois I at Calais in 1532, Elizabeth died on 18 September 1534, and by 21 November 1538 her husband had remarried. 
By then Sussex was dead, having described Anne in his will as 'my unnaturall and unkynde devorsyd wiff' (GEC, 'Peerage', 12/1.521 n. k). He died at Cannon Row, Westminster, on 17 February 1557 and was buried nine days later at St Laurence Pountney; but his remains, like those of his father, were later removed to Boreham. By 23 June 1559 his second countess had married Andrew Wyse, formerly vice-treasurer of Ireland, who was then in prison following his dismissal for maladministration in 1554. Her plea for his release may have been heeded, since Wyse returned to Ireland in 1564 as secretary to a commission of inquiry, and they had several children. He had died by 26 January 1568; his widow died between 22 August 1579 and 28 March 1582. 


@@@@@


doc= 22992


Radcliffe, Robert, fifth earl of Sussex (1573-1629), soldier and courtier, was born on 12 June 1573, the son of Henry Radcliffe, fourth earl of Sussex (1533-1593), and his wife, Honor (died 1593), daughter of Anthony Pound of Farlington, Hampshire. His birthplace is unknown, though it may well have been Hampshire, where his father was lord lieutenant and governor of Portsmouth. The details of his education are also unknown. His family had Cambridge connections -- his aunt, Frances Radcliffe (nee Sidney), countess of Sussex, had founded Sidney Sussex College, and he later sent one of his sons to Trinity College. There is, however, no evidence that he attended the university. From 1583 to 1593 Radcliffe bore the courtesy title Lord Fitzwalter. 
In or before 1592 Fitzwalter married Bridget ('bap'. 1575, died 1623), the eldest daughter of Sir Charles Morison of Cassiobury, Hertfordshire. Their two sons and two daughters all died before both of them. The couple gained a reputation as literary patrons in the 1590s. In 1592 Robert Greene dedicated to Lord Fitzwalter Thomas Lodge's 'Euphues Shadow' and to his wife 'Philomela', which he subtitled 'The Lady Fitzwater's Nightingale'. She also received the dedication of a music-book, 'The New Book of Tabliture' (1596). Henry Lok addressed a sonnet to the earl of Sussex (as he was by then) in 'Sundry Christian Passions' (1597) and Emanuel Ford dedicated his romance 'Parismus' to him the following year. 
Radcliffe succeeded his father on 14 December 1593 and quickly assumed a modest role at court despite a straitened income -- in addition to large private debts, he owed $12,000 to the crown. In August 1594 Queen Elizabeth sent him to Scotland as her ambassador for the baptism of Prince Henry. But peaceful pursuits bored him, and in 1595 he asked the queen's permission to serve in the imperial army against the Turks. In the end, however, a less speculative project emerged and in 1596 he took command of a regiment in the earl of Essex's assault on Cadiz. Sussex's place in Essex's circle was confirmed when the general knighted him in the field on 27 June 1596. Sussex served as earl marshal from October to December 1597, and in 1599 he received the Garter. The same year, in August, Elizabeth named him colonel-general of foot, leading a London-based army charged with repelling an expected Spanish invasion. The attack never materialized, however, and Sussex's army remained a paper one. In 1601 his close relations with Essex endangered him; Essex claimed that Sussex was committed to his rebellion, and the privy council confined him in London at Sir John Stanhope's house. But Essex's claim was probably no more than wishful thinking, for no hard evidence emerged against Sussex and he was restored to favour by his re-appointment as earl marshal later the same year. 
James I's accession offered Sussex new scope for action. In August 1603 James appointed him lord lieutenant of Essex, a position he filled conscientiously until his death. But a lieutenancy offered no relief from his increasingly desperate financial plight -- by 1601 he had sold lands worth $20,000, and he continued to sell his patrimony in succeeding years. In 1614 Lionel Cranfield bought his manor of Shering, Essex, and in 1621 Sussex sold New Hall, his principal seat, the impressive pile enlarged by his uncle the third earl, to Buckingham for $21,000. King James occasionally offered Sussex some help: remitting debts to the crown, a grant of lands worth 100 marks per year in 1603, and a $400 pension in 1609, but these did nothing to halt Sussex's financial decline. His problems were probably exacerbated by the breakdown of his marriage. By 1602 he was keeping as his mistress one of his wife's former gentlewomen, Sylvester Morgan. His wife lived separately on $1700 a year charged on his estate. The illicit relationship scandalized some contemporaries; the diarist John Manningham recorded how the earl called his mistress his 'countess', even though his wife lived, and dressed her in her velvet gown. He recorded the comment of a friend that, 'I would be loath to come after him [the earl] to a wench for feare of the pox' ('Diary of John Manningham', 97-8). George Chapman in 1609 felt it appropriate to include a verse dedicated to Sussex, 'with dutie, alwaies profest to his most Honor'd Countesse' in his translation of the 'Iliad', hinting perhaps at a rapprochement between the earl and his wife, but if any such existed it was soon over (G. Chapman, 'Homer Prince of Poets', 1609, sig. EC2'v'). In September the following year Jane, ostensibly the daughter of Edward Shute but in fact Sussex's, was baptized at St Clement Danes. Sussex lived with her mother, Frances (died 1627), daughter of Hercules Meautys, Shute's wife and in due course widow, for many years. Their relationship came before the privy council in 1618, when the earl obstructed their attempt to summon his mistress. The countess of Sussex died in 1623 and Sussex married Frances within days of her burial on 11 December -- or even sooner. According to John Chamberlain, Sussex forestalled his wife's deathbed efforts to prevent the marriage taking place by wedding Frances the very day after the countess died, before the pursuivants could deliver a warrant to stop it. Frances died on 18 November 1627, having borne no legitimate children with Sussex. 
In 1625 Sussex played a significant part in the defence of Essex from an expected French attack. He organized preparations, strengthening local fortifications and leading 3000 militiamen to Harwich. Although Sussex seems to have performed this task well, Charles I alienated him by sending the earl of Warwick to Harwich with a commission appointing him joint lord lieutenant of the county. Sussex took the slight badly, claiming that his reputation was 'a-bleeding' ('CSP dom.', '1625-6', 150). Charles then restored him to sole command -- thereby alienating Warwick. Sussex later refused Warwick's offer of $2000 for his lieutenancy. Although he bore the orb at Charles I's coronation and retained his lieutenancy, Sussex never occupied a very important place in the new reign. He died at his house in Clerkenwell, London, on 22 September 1629, and was buried at St Andrew's Church, Boreham, Essex, near his former home, New Hall, on 23 October. He was succeeded as sixth earl by his cousin, Edward Radcliffe. He devised the ancient Radcliffe estate of Attleborough in Norfolk to his illegitimate daughter Jane and her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 22993


Radcliffe, Thomas, third earl of Sussex (1526/7-1583), lord lieutenant of Ireland and courtier, was the eldest son of Henry Radcliffe, second earl of Sussex (d. 1557) ['see under 'Radcliffe, Robert, first earl of Sussex], and his first wife, Lady Elizabeth (died 1534), daughter of Thomas Howard, second duke of Norfolk. From his father's accession to the earldom in 1542, he was styled Lord Fitzwalter until he succeeded to the earldom in 1557. Possibly educated in the household of Bishop Steven Gardiner of Winchester, he was at home in Latin and later acquired Italian and perhaps Spanish. There is no evidence he was educated at Cambridge or was admitted to Gray's Inn as sometimes alleged. 
Fitzwalter's public career began with his participation in the French campaign of 1544, during which he was knighted by the king at Boulogne on 30 September. In the last years of Henry VIII's reign he figured in court ceremonial occasions and in the lists, and he was a canopy bearer at Henry's funeral. In 1546 he had attended Gardiner on a mission to Brussels and John Dudley on another to France. Probably in 1545 he married Elizabeth (died 1555), daughter of Thomas Wriothesley, a match arranged in 1543. 
In the new reign the eclipse of Gardiner may have checked Fitzwalter's advance, although he fought at Pinkie Cleugh, narrowly escaping with his life. In 1549 he was appointed captain of Portsmouth, possibly through his father-in-law's temporary influence. He held this post to 1561 when he handed it over to his brother Henry Radcliffe, the future fourth earl. In 1549 he was one of the notables accompanying Northampton's French embassy to discuss a possible royal match. In 1553 he sat as MP for Norfolk (the other knight was Robert Dudley). With his father he witnessed Edward VI's will in behalf of Lady Jane; but they were not among the notables assigned by Northumberland to rally support in the counties. Father and son were among the first to join Mary at Framlingham, where the earl took command of her forces. Fitzwalter was rewarded with a land grant worth $50 p.a. During Wyatt's rebellion he was among those fighting the rebels at the gates of London. Almost immediately thereafter he was sent to Brussels with a suite of ten men to inform the emperor on recent events. He went with the strong recommendation of the imperial ambassador, Renard, and was warmly received, being detained by Charles so that he might familiarize himself with the Habsburg court. On his return he was employed jointly with the earl of Bedford in a mission to Spain to secure Philip's ratification of the marriage treaty. Warmly entertained, they preceded Philip in their return to England, reaching Southampton in time to greet him on his arrival. 
Fitzwalter, who had been summoned to sit in the Lords, was now appointed gentleman of the privy chamber to Philip, a role in which he essayed to learn Spanish. He became a favourite with the king who not only attended his second marriage, to Frances (1531?-1589) ['see 'Radcliffe, Frances], daughter of Sir William Sidney, on 24 April 1555, but participated in the jousts. (His first wife had died in January of that year.) He accumulated posts of dignity, becoming captain of the gentlemen pensioners and chief justice of the forests south of the Trent, and was awarded the honour of the Garter. He also went on a mission to Brussels, probably to urge Philip's return, and he was there again in January 1558 to solicit aid for Calais. 
In 1556 Fitzwalter had received his first appointment to a place of power as governor of Ireland and in February 1557 he succeeded to the earldom of Sussex. He went to Dublin, accompanied by his new brother-in-law, Henry Sidney, appointed under-treasurer and effectively as second in command. Sidney, and later Sir William Fitzwilliam, would serve as Sussex's 'alter ego', substituting for the earl in the latter's frequent absences in England, totalling some thirty-five months out of his eight years' term. 
Sussex's appointment as governor, the first English earl to have held the post since Surrey in 1520, was a token of a new and widened political horizon which now included Ireland as an area of primary concern to the rulers of England -- and a land of opportunity for ambitious Englishmen. In the decades since Surrey's sojourn, English policy had come to focus on new and far-reaching aims -- nothing less than the establishment of effective royal supremacy throughout the island. This was to be achieved through the full Anglicization of the ruling classes and the duplication of English legal, social, and economic institutions. The options of military conquest had been ruled out in favour of a carrot-and-stick strategy: persuasion backed by force only under necessity. For the several decades preceding Sussex's arrival, it was the former persuasion which had prevailed. The new deputy came, as he wrote in 1560, aiming at a continuation of existing policy but favouring a shift towards stronger measures designed to speed up the process, and for this purpose the English garrison was doubled to 2000. His was to be a new broom, sweeping away the lax habits and congestion of the past decades, imparting new vigour to the commands of royal authority and exacting obedience of them. 
On his arrival the new deputy found urgent problems awaiting his attention. His first move was an expedition to expel Gaelic Scots intruders in Antrim, chiefly MacDonalds, a perennial problem in that corner of the island where they were seen as possible agents of Franco-Scottish intrusion. He then turned his attentions to the garrisons in Laois and Offaly, nuclei of a protected colony of English settlers established by his predecessors. The ungenerous terms which he offered those local inhabitants who were to be allowed to remain led them to revolt under their chiefs, O'More and O'Connor. Sussex crushed the revolt and hanged O'More, but continuing resistance in the bogs and woods made any settlement impossible. Not until 1563 were grants, belatedly and vainly, made to an assortment of English, Gaels, and palesmen. Laois and Offaly remained a running sore. 
In 1558 Sussex took six months' leave in England, returning to launch a summer expedition against the Scottish isles which left a trail of desolation but failed to assail the MacDonald base of Islay. On Mary's death he returned to London and served as chief sewer at Elizabeth's coronation. Then in February 1559 he made a desperate plea to the queen to allow him to resign the governorship. He argued among other things that the reduced forces she allowed him prevented his carrying out a programme of strong government. He proposed Henry Sidney as his replacement. But the queen was adamant, and in August 1560 Sussex returned. He was now promoted to the full dignity of lord lieutenant. 
Sussex soon had to deal with the greatest of the Gaelic lords, Shane O'Neill of Ulster, younger son of the earl of Tyrone. O'Neill was already pushing his claims to succeed to the title, alleging his half-brother illegitimate. In 1557 Sussex had chastised him, ravaging Armagh and forcing him to recognize his father's authority and his brother's rights. When the father died in 1559, O'Neill pressed his claim. Elizabeth was disposed to grant him the earldom but Sussex, who had taken a great dislike to O'Neill, dissuaded her and won consent to an armed expedition against the recalcitrant chief. In the operation which followed in 1561 the lord lieutenant failed to engage his foe and, provisions dwindling, retired to Dublin. Between 1560 and 1563, after a failed attempt to assassinate O'Neill, Sussex launched further expeditions in which he ravaged Tyrone and reclaimed Loch Foyle, but did not catch his elusive prey. Thereupon the queen sent the recently rehabilitated earl of Kildare, a protege of Dudley towards whom Sussex entertained a deep antipathy, to deal with O'Neill. The latter was invited to court, made his peace, and returned to Ulster under a provisional agreement which soon crumbled. The story then repeated itself. Sussex resumed hostilities in 1562 and 1563 without success and in the end Kildare, helped by the palesman lawyer, Sir Thomas Cusack, signed a treaty which gave Shane O'Neill full recognition as the O'Neill. 
Sussex had, of course, to deal with the problems raised by the successive religious changes of these years. Under Edward VI enforcement of the new order had been uneven and had been unsuccessful in building a reformed party in the island. Consequently the Marian reversal was welcomed. It was not even thought necessary to undo the dead letter of the Edwardian legislation until Sussex summoned a parliament in 1557. There the Henrician and Edwardian laws were erased and provision made for re-establishing the old order. Hence when Sussex was commanded in 1559 to undo what he had done two years earlier, he faced a recalcitrant community. He did his best to pack the upper chamber, but it was beyond his power to do the same in the lower. The four-week session which ensued is veiled in utmost obscurity, but the government's bills were enacted; immediate dissolution followed while the governor departed for England in obedience to royal command. Later Irish tradition held that the enactment was achieved in the face of strong opposition by trickery. The houses were told they would not be sitting on the day the bills were pushed through. More recent research seems to show there was no irregularity. 
Sussex had little success on other fronts. In Mary's reign he had been criticized by the Geraldine earls and primate Dowdall for his harsh action in Laois and Offaly, and in Armagh. While there were protests to Westminster from the palesmen against heavy taxation and debasement of the coinage, Sussex's position at court was strong enough to fend off his critics. 
Under Elizabeth, Sussex was more vulnerable. When petitions from a group of law students in the pale and later from the pale gentry reached court, they got a hearing thanks to the intercession of Robert Dudley. Then an agent of the pale gentry, William Bermingham, enlarged the charges, alleging corruption and negligence in the army with the wastage of large sums. For a queen obsessed with the need for economy, these were grave matters. A special commissioner, Sir Nicholas Arnold, a protege of Dudley, was dispatched to investigate and his findings led to a further commission of two with a very large remit, including the handling of religion and an alleged plot to poison O'Neill. This was a direct challenge to Sussex's authority. When his attempt to dispatch another army against O'Neill was disallowed and the treaty mentioned above approved, Sussex's humiliation was complete. From December 1563 he was seriously ill; his friends urged his recall on grounds of health and in May 1564 he left Ireland for good. 
Sussex had little cause for satisfaction in the record of his administration. Not only had his hostility to O'Neill wrecked the chance of an accommodation with the Ulster chief, but his policy in the pale had aroused the discontent of a community hitherto loyal to the English crown. Pushing aside the local elite accustomed to the confidence of the governor and employment in the crown's business, Sussex brought in a retinue of Englishmen, eager to advance their fortunes in this new area of politics. Insulated from local opinion, Sussex went far to arouse the resentment of a community which was the pillar of English authority in the island. They were also offended by the unaccustomed burden of taxation which he levied on the pale in order to support his frequent military campaigns. Another important bloc, the Anglo-Irish earls, was alienated by his hostility to Kildare and Desmond. Lastly, Sussex's forthright, single-minded, and impatient style was ill-suited to the infinite complexities and ambiguities of Irish affairs. 
Nevertheless Sussex had learned from experience. In 1562 he presented the queen with a detailed set of recommendations for the governance of Ireland, proposing the establishment of provincial councils, modelled on the council in the marches of Wales and the council of the north, each headed by an English president with local associates and each backed by a small contingent of armed men. The Ulster president was to have increased powers and more armed force. He proposed law codes which would blend Brehon (Gaelic) and common law. Overall there was to be more effort at patient and peaceful persuasion. None of the ideas was individually new but he set forward a coherent, clearly articulated programme, much of which would be adopted by his successor, Sidney. What it revealed about Sussex was a capacity for understanding some of his own errors and in the process advancing a considered plan for long-term policy. In spite of his blunders he had learned something about Ireland. His influence on English policy in Ireland would last well beyond his term of office there. 
Sussex's recall was in no small part due to his own failures, but there were powerful forces in the English court working to achieve his downfall. Robert Dudley had backed the rehabilitation of Kildare, had entertained O'Neill on his English visit, and patronized the discontented palesmen. The commissioner sent to investigate complaints, Sir Nicholas Arnold, was his nominee. Dudley's motives seem not to have been personal but wholly political. Seeing the new opportunities for influence and patronage which Ireland offered, he moved to stake out a claim. 
Although Sussex left Ireland under a cloud, he had no difficulty in re-entering the court world. He had always seen the Irish adventure as a short-term enterprise whence, having won a reputation, he could return to the main stage of English politics. By virtue of his rank, his past experience, and his family connection with Norfolk, he found easy readmission to the court political scene. There he quickly identified with the circle clustered around the duke of Norfolk, and soon found a role which satisfied both his public and private concerns -- campaigning for Elizabeth's marriage to the Austrian Archduke Charles. He was convinced of the necessity of a royal husband to provide for the succession and stabilize domestic politics. An Austrian match, the best possible, would also stabilize England's international situation by renewing the traditional Burgundian connection without incurring the problems posed by a match with another sovereign. 
This position, of course, conflicted with the marital ambitions of Dudley, a man Sussex now cordially detested. In 1560 Sussex had expressed approval of the Austrian match to a disapproving Cecil, but in 1561 and again in 1562 had urged the assembled Garter knights to petition the queen to marry Lord Robert. The latter's attack on his Irish government had altered his view. In any case the personal animosities of the two earls (Dudley was now earl of Leicester) were soon intertwined with the marriage issue. Hostility between them would flare up intermittently until Sussex's death, although it would be an error to see a long-term factional division in the court between their respective partisans. The two would sit together in council and on committees and not infrequently join forces on a particular issue. 
When an imperial envoy arrived in London in 1565 Sussex worked hard lobbying him, seeking to convince the Austrian that Elizabeth was serious in her intentions to entice the archduke to a visit to England, but nothing definite was arrived at. Pressure on Elizabeth to marry continued from council, court, and parliament, while the rivalry between Leicester and his opponents convulsed the court. In summer 1565 and again a year later there were open confrontations between the earls; royal intervention was required when Leicester accused Sussex of dealings with the Irish rebel, O'Neill. Sussex on his part was harassing his replacement at Dublin, Henry Sidney, Leicester's brother-in-law and protege. A public reconciliation enforced by the queen papered over the quarrel, but in the winter of 1565-6 adherents of the two rivals sported coloured badges, purple for the Norfolk and Sussex followers, yellow for Leicester's; and the courtiers went about armed. The continued pressure on the queen to marry, focused in the 1566 parliament, pushed her to act and in November of that year she appointed Sussex to a mission to Vienna to discuss marriage. Royal vacillation delayed his departure to June 1567. He went still apprehensive as to Elizabeth's intentions, conscious of the strong opposition and royal irresolution. How far could he risk his own credit in the cause? He was accompanied by Lord North, allegedly placed there by the opposition to checkmate him. 
The emperor and his brother proved amenable to the match but reserved the latter's right to exercise his own religion. Henry Cobham was dispatched to London with this information. While waiting for the queen's response Sussex worked out a compromise with Charles by which the latter would have a private mass in his own quarters but attend the queen in public religious ceremonial. Cobham's letter was debated by a divided council, Norfolk ill and absent. The queen's reply fudged the issues, but a refusal to make exceptions for the archduke's religion effectively ended negotiations. Sussex, bitterly disappointed, condemned those who used religion as a cloak for their real aims, particularly 'the party' -- probably North -- who, he believed, had persuaded both courts that agreement was impossible. Sussex's persistence in pressing Elizabeth to a decision she was unwilling to make did not halt further employment in her service, but it did identify him as one of the Norfolk circle, a band of nobles conservative in religion. He did in fact go so far as to vote against the bill to secure the bishops' legal authority. 
Back at court, Sussex directed his energy to the pursuit of office. He aimed first at the presidency of Wales and the marches held by Henry Sidney, now Irish governor. Allegedly the queen promised him the post, but Leicester defeated his efforts and secured his brother-in-law's continuance in office. The queen, however, found Sussex a consolation appointment in the presidency of the council of the north, opportunely vacant. He took up the office in July 1568. Almost immediately he found himself involved in another highly sensitive mission. Mary Stuart had fled to England in May. She sought support for her restoration; the regent Moray adamantly opposed it, alleging her involvement in Darnley's murder. In October Elizabeth appointed a commission to hear both sides. Norfolk was chairman, his colleagues Sussex and the veteran councillor Sir Ralph Sadler. They were to listen to the evidence presented and report what they heard for the queen's future judgment. 
Sussex had in 1565 been thought too favourable to the Scottish queen to be sent on a mission during the Darnley marriage crisis. At that time he had bluntly expressed his views on the troubled relations between the queens. Mary should yield her claims to present possession, marry an Englishman, and in return receive recognition of her place in the succession. The commission, having held its hearing and reported, was summoned to London to join the privy council and the other earls in hearing the evidence. Sussex joined in approving Elizabeth's decision not to make a judgment, but to send Mary to Tutbury, where, he wrote, she would be a 'nearer guest'. Sussex had already in early October given his own judgment: Mary must at all costs be kept in England; a trial would be unwise for all concerned. She should be persuaded to abdicate on the promise that there would be no trial. If she refused she should then be simply detained; Moray should be backed while Elizabeth became the arbiter of Scottish affairs. 
The next chapter of Mary's history touched Sussex sorely. In spring 1569 a scheme was set afoot, backed by a surprisingly wide range of supporters, to marry Norfolk to Mary and to overthrow Secretary Cecil. The latter effort fizzled out, but the marriage was actively pursued. Norfolk's agent approached Sussex for support. The latter dodged a direct answer, pleading his distance from the political scene, expressing surprise at the proposal, and warning the duke against false advisers (Leicester was party to the plot). He did not inform Cecil of the approach. When the plot unravelled, this contact was revealed. It led to a letter from Cecil to Sussex, now lost, the contents of which are clear from the latter's reply. Cecil had expressed belief in Sussex's loyalty but he had also uttered a warning: Sussex must deal plainly with him or not at all. The earl replied defensively, asserting his plain dealing in relationships: 'I know no cunning nor will learn one' (Wright, 1.320-27). Sussex went on to lament Norfolk's fall from grace, wishing he had been present to give better counsel and urging leniency and forbearance towards the duke. 
Hard upon the Norfolk marriage affair -- triggered by it -- came the rising of the northern earls. Sussex's past associations placed him under suspicion. His enemies at court were quick to stoke the fire. His brother Sir Henry wrote anxiously from court, wishing the earl could be present to defend himself. Suspicion grew when Sussex's half-brother, Egremont Radcliffe, joined the rebels. The situation was worsened by the course of events. Sussex had met the council's warning of unrest in the north with optimistic reassurances. When the storm broke, he acted with vigour, but the initial response of the country was sluggish. Complaints came from London about his slowness, and the queen rebuked him for allowing Northumberland's escape. She now sent Sir Henry Sadler, the privy councillor, and her cousin Lord Hunsdon, to assist Sussex. On arrival, both, after preliminary queries, wrote strongly affirmative reports on the president, justifying his slowness to act by the inadequacy of the force at his disposal. Within a couple of weeks, the country rallied to Sussex's call while additional forces came from the south, commanded by Warwick and Clinton. The rising fizzled out before Christmas without bloodshed as the earls fled to Scotland. Sussex's vigorous leadership had in fact counted heavily in rallying a somewhat wavering countryside to the crown's support. 
Sussex's position was much improved, although the queen could still complain about the clemency shown the meaner prisoners while the earl, writing grumpily of Warwick and Clinton's intrusion on his authority, could talk of retirement. As late as February 1570 the vice-president and other council members were writing to deny that the earl had pressured them into accepting the Norfolk match. In January Sussex had leave to attend at court, where he defended his actions before the queen and council and received a clean bill of health. He had an interview with the queen about which he wrote to Cecil. She had shown her favour and confidence by continuing him in office, but Sussex complained the world would see this as mere approval of his services, not as evidence of her good affection towards him. She had declared she would deal with him so that the world would know, although nothing specific was mentioned. Then -- a broad hint -- he listed his personal expenses in the twelve years of service to the crown: leases sold worth $12,700. He had had no benefit other than ordinary fees. The lack of reward for his service had aroused comment elsewhere, Lord Hunsdon, among others, expressing his surprise. 
Sussex's services were now required on the border, where he returned in March 1570. The assassination of Moray had thrown Scottish affairs into disarray; civil war raged between the king's party and the Marians; the latter sheltered English fugitives, who spawned border disorder. Sussex had in January prepared a raid into Scotland, but the queen refused to allow it and reduced his forces. However, by March she was convinced of the necessity for action and authorized a campaign which Sussex carried out in later April, ravaging the eastern Borders while Lord Scrope swept through the western. Sussex was convinced the queen must assist the king's party, which was weaker, importuned her to act, and fumed at her indecision. On his own he opened negotiations with regent Morton's supporters and helped restore their morale. The queen finally agreed to send money and lend aid in mid-May. An English force commanded by Sir William Drury drove the Marians back to Glasgow, but a proposed siege of Dumbarton was halted by Elizabeth. 
She was now eager to demobilize, but Sussex dragged his feet while negotiating with the Marians for general disarmament. This engaged him in an exchange with Maitland of Lethington on the subject of loyalty. (Maitland had changed sides.) Sussex displayed both learning and intellectual verve in letters well laced with Latin quotations. This won a letter of royal praise which must have warmed his heart. She praised him for a sufficiency of wisdom mixed with good learning 'as would over match Maitland, the flower of Scottish wit'. She added, 'truly, cousin, we have always judged you wise and we know you sufficient for the place you hold but we have not seen at any time a more absolute proof of your wit and learning' (Wright, 1.369-70). Elizabeth throughout these operations had expressed approval of his actions and confidence in him. Sussex's intellectual skills did not achieve the pacification he hoped for, and the queen authorized a third raid in August and September. Scotland, although by no means settled, no longer constituted a danger to the Borders and in late December Sussex was back in London. 
The last trace of suspicion wiped away by his service, Sussex received the public display of royal confidence he longed for with his appointment as privy councillor on 30 December 1570. He remained an absentee president until 1572. In that year Elizabeth appointed him lord chamberlain of the household in succession to Howard of Effingham. Material benefits followed. In 1572 there was a grant of lands in Somerset, part of the Glastonbury Abbey estate. In 1574 he received the honour of Beaulieu in Essex, a cluster of manors, and the mansion of New Hall, a residence of Henry VIII, to which Sussex made extensive alterations. In the same year he had licence to export $2000 worth of woollen cloth free of custom, which he sold for $3200. For the remainder of his career Sussex was a diligent member of the council, a regular attender, and an active participant in the central business of state. He now sat at the same board as Leicester, a colleague not only there, but also very frequently on special committees. There were occasional flare-ups, as in 1581 and again the next year. Although the causes are obscure, the first of the two required Elizabeth's intervention. In 1578 there had also been a row with Lord North, who had disparaged Sussex's handling of his duties as chamberlain. Sussex saw the episode as a deliberate attack by Leicester's followers. 
If Sussex had an enemy in Leicester, he had a firm friend in Cecil. The secretary had been a sympathetic supporter as early as Sussex's Irish days, giving helpful advice, warning of critics at court, and playing down his failures. Cecil shared Sussex's views on the Habsburg marriage and the queen of Scots. He stood by Sussex in 1569-70 and must have welcomed a councillor who shared so many of his own goals. In the years which followed they almost always stood together on major issues. How close and personal the relationship was is revealed in two letters from Sussex to the lord treasurer. In 1578 he wrote that he would on all occasions 'stick as near to you as your shirt on your back' ('Salisbury MSS', 2.224-5). Two years later he declared that he and his wife 'love, honour and obey as a father and will do all service to you' (ibid., 2.326-7). 
Sussex's role in council business can to some degree be gauged by his membership on special committees, charged with important and sensitive tasks. Three names recur regularly on such committees: Burghley, Leicester, and Sussex; more variably appear Hatton and Walsingham. In 1576 the trio were to deal with the prince of Orange, in 1578 to receive a special French embassy, in 1581 to negotiate on marriage with Simier, Anjou's agent, or to deal with the Terceira caravel problem in the same year. In the Simier negotiations they reported back to the full council and in turn conveyed council opinion to the queen. These assignments are testimony to Sussex's role as a member of a trio (himself, Burghley, and Leicester) who formed an inner core within the council (joined frequently by Walsingham and Hatton) in whom rested the centre of power in that body. 
Two great problems engaged the council's attention in the 1570s, the successive marriage negotiations with France and the gathering crisis in the Low Countries. In the exchanges of 1570-71 over a match with Henry, duke of Anjou, Sussex as a newcomer on the council played a slight role, voting for it along with Burghley. It is just possible that his name had cropped up in the unfolding Ridolfi plot, reawakening old doubts. In the prolonged on-again, off-again negotiations for the hand of Henry's younger brother, Francis, duke of Alencon, Sussex played a significant part. In the first 1572 phase he backed Cecil in supporting the match until the St Bartholomew's day massacre put a stop to proceedings. When in 1576 a league was proposed to include Anjou (as Francis now was), the elector Palatine, and the Huguenots, to force Henri III to accept a toleration edict, Sussex firmly rejected it, doubting the Huguenots could win; more probably they would be utterly ruined. The queen, he argued, could not procure peace by war. She should look at the marriage scheme again. Events foreclosed the proposed league. 
Sussex's initial attitude towards the Dutch revolt was shaped by his anxiety to avoid war and he steadily backed proposals for Elizabeth's mediation, but when, for a moment in 1576, the seventeen provinces were united in revolt, he favoured financial aid and even armed intervention. However, he soon returned to his previous views. Then in 1578 news arrived that Anjou was treating for leadership of the state's forces. Sussex's comment on this development was that the queen's case (and England's) would be hard 'if either the French possess or the Spanish tyrannise in the Low Countries' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/8, no. 13). There must be a balance so that neither Spain nor France should triumph over the other. 
Sussex now, with the queen's backing, took the initiative (without Cecil's knowledge), when he contacted the resident French ambassador, Mauvissiere, to propose reopening the marriage question. He was convinced that only marriage could divert Anjou's search for a role in the Low Countries on one side or the other. For Sussex the overriding concern was to avoid war with Philip, and that could be done only by joint Anglo-French pressure. Here was the chance to achieve that goal. Anjou's marriage to Elizabeth would cement their co-operation and pressure Philip into accepting a compromise in the Low Countries. Lastly, the earl still had a lingering hope that Elizabeth might yet bear a child and resolve the succession problem. 
Sussex, steadfast in this policy, found an ally in Burghley (previously opposed to the marriage) during the prolonged council debate in spring 1579. Temporarily successful, they persuaded Elizabeth to invite Anjou to England. In October both were members of a committee to debate the marriage, but they failed to carry the full council in recommending it. In 1580, when anarchy in France seemed to leave England no option but intervention in the Low Countries, Sussex continued to oppose such a move. In 1582 he served on another committee, ostensibly to revive the match, but actually to seek alliance in lieu of her hand. This ended Sussex's co-operation with Leicester, who favoured the war. He had throughout the 1570s supported a clearly conceived policy, pivoting on his determination to avoid war through a marital alliance with France and joint pressure on Philip. When Sussex died, hopes for peace were fast fading. In failing health in 1582, Sussex died on 9 June 1583 in his house at Bermondsey, where his bowels were buried in the church; his body was interred at Boreham in Essex in the red brick building adjoining the church he had built. A large altar tomb features recumbent figures in memory of the first three earls of Sussex. 
In a public career of nearly forty years Sussex had held office under three monarchs. He had enjoyed highly favourable circumstances in pursuit of that career. Among his colleagues on the council he was one of the few who inherited free entry into the world of high politics. This advantage had opened the way to the Irish viceroyalty and also insured that after a poor record there he could effortlessly re-enter the public arena. A second advantage of great importance was his relationship with Cecil, who supported him even in the Irish years and sustained him in the difficulties of 1569-70. The relationship was, however, as much one of association as dependence. Usually in agreement with Cecil, Sussex did not hesitate to differ. The royal confidence was won more slowly. Only after the testing time of the northern uprising was it fully accorded. Thus, even though he had the advantage of birth, it was merit which won him the trust of those two demanding judges, Elizabeth and Cecil. 
What sets Sussex apart from most of his contemporaries was his independence, both in judgement and in action. He had no visible ideological commitment, in spite of his intimacy with a group of noblemen regarded as Catholic sympathizers, and he displayed no confessional bias. He found it easy to contemplate a Catholic consort if that concession guaranteed English security. Void of strong religious commitment, he was insensitive to the protestant outcry against a Catholic husband. This left him free to formulate a wholly pragmatic view of English foreign relations. Sussex's analysis of problems showed him a shrewd diagnostician, but when it came to prescribing remedies he was less perceptive. Solutions for him were straightforward, the alternatives black and white. He was apt to brush aside the nuances, the complexities, the ambiguities surrounding any decision. The queen's hesitation only aroused his impatience. He was curiously indifferent to the religious passions of the age and deaf to the clamours of the anti-papists. 
Sussex did not share the driving ambition of most of his fellow councillors. Two prizes he had inherited: title and estate; the latter yielded somewhere between $1000 and $2000 p.a., not a grand figure but a substantial base. Childless, he had no need to provide for his posterity and was content to leave an estate ruinously indebted to the crown. In his early years he sought power, first in Ireland and then in the north, but after accession to the council, he was content to be a participant, saying his say, but eschewing any desire to impose his will or dominate decision making. This left him free to advocate what seemed to him to be best for the realm. This independence meant that he could press on the queen courses of action unpalatable to her, from which the more politic Burghley would shy. 
Of Sussex outside his public life there is not much to be said. He patronized a company of players, the Lord Chamberlain's Men, but showed no interest in their productions. He counted no dedications by hopeful authors. His religious views were coolly neutral although he took care to fill the livings in his grant with men of learning and integrity. His personal character, so far as it comes across, is that of a downright man, firm and articulate in his opinions but able to work in a team with fellow politicians, even with the 'Gypsy', Leicester, his life-long foe. 


@@@@@


doc= 22994


Radcliffe, William (1761?-1842), improver of cotton machinery, was born probably in 1761, and baptized on 14 November 1761, at Mellor, Derbyshire, the son of William Radcliffe, a weaver, and his wife, Mary. His early life is obscure, but in 1785 he married Sarah Jackson, the daughter of Oliver Jackson, a farmer at Mellor, and four years later began business at Mellor as a spinner and weaver. He produced warps for the hand-loom weavers employed by Samuel Oldknow and also gave out some work to muslin weavers on his own account. In 1794, concurrent with the sudden collapse of Oldknow's integrated cotton-manufacturing empire, Radcliffe decided to add weaving to his capitalist activities. With wartime needs for textile products, and with the spread of the new cotton-spinning technologies (waterframe, jenny, and mule), demand pushed up weaving rates and expanded hand-loom weaving, but probably not by as much as Radcliffe claimed. He evidently profited from adding weaving to spinning: he claimed to employ more than 1000 weavers across three counties in the late 1790s, exporting the plain and fancy goods they made. To support expansion, in 1799 Radcliffe took as partner Thomas Ross of Montrose, the son of a rich Scottish merchant, who brought $6000 to the business. Ross had charge of the sales side, and travelled to the continent. Around this time the firm also moved its headquarters to the Muslin Hall at Stockport. In 1801 Radcliffe settled his family at Stockport; he became captain in the Stockport Loyal Volunteers in 1803 and was elected manorial mayor of the town in 1804. 
Radcliffe's espousal of weaving pursued political and technological directions as well as a commercial route. In April 1800, in response to a trade depression and the prospect of the export of British yarns to rival manufacturers abroad (especially the German states), Radcliffe proposed to a meeting of Stockport manufacturers held at The Castle inn that Britain's weaving capacity could be increased by mechanization, providing export of yarns was prohibited. He canvassed his mercantilist views and in 1811 wrote a pamphlet entitled 'Exportation of cotton yarns: the real cause of the distress that has fallen upon the cotton trade for a series of years past'. 
A technological breakthrough in weaving was adumbrated in the late 1780s by the primitive power-loom of Edmund Cartwright, and Radcliffe publicly committed himself to the goal of mechanizing weaving. He and his partner used their combined resources of $11,000 to buy the empty factory built by Samuel Oldknow in the Hillgate, Stockport. Here they concentrated production and recruited Thomas Johnson of Bredbury, near Stockport, an ingenious weaver, to work on the problem, Radcliffe specifying objectives and Johnson designing mechanical solutions. Modifications were recorded in four patents, taken out in Johnson's name (to conceal their source and value), between 1803 and 1807. The most important, dated 2 June 1804, was for the dressing-frame which starched the warp before it was put into the loom. With Johnson's aid Radcliffe also added mechanical movements to the loom, chiefly the taking up of the cloth by the motion of the lathe. Built with an iron frame, this superior hand-loom was known as the 'dandyloom'. Together with Robert Miller's cam-driven shedding principle (1796) and William Horrocks's variable batten speed motion (1813), Radcliffe's take-up motion formed the basis of the first truly practical power-loom, built by Richard Roberts (1822). 
By 1806 Radcliffe's profits from hand-loom weaving, now concentrated mostly in workshops, amounted to $90 to $100 a week, and his patent royalties (sold only to British manufacturers) to about $50 a week. These increases in scale and investment overstretched him, however. By now he had separated from his partner and was raising capital by mortgaging his Mellor estate, his Stockport premises, and his patents. He raised a loan of $5000 from four 'gentlemen', but still his credit contracted, and in March 1807 he was declared bankrupt. The loan of $2000 from four friends enabled him to resume business soon afterwards, but he was unable to pay off all his debts and gain a discharge from bankruptcy until 1817. Meanwhile his patented ideas were freely borrowed by rivals, and his fellow manufacturers never kept their promise to fight for restrictions on yarn exports. 
The Luddites on 14 March 1812 broke into Radcliffe's mill and residence (as well as those of other manufacturers) and destroyed both his machinery and furniture. His wife was so alarmed and injured by the rioters that she died a few weeks later, on 18 May 1812, aged forty-seven. In old age, and embittered by his struggles, Radcliffe published 'Origin of the New System of Manufacture, Commonly called Power-Loom Weaving' (1828), a rambling set of recollections, and blamed the 'Foreign Anglo Junto' centred on Manchester for all his troubles. 
Radcliffe gave evidence in 1808 in the inquiry which resulted in a parliamentary grant of $10,000 to Edmund Cartwright for his inventions. Efforts in 1825, 1834, and 1836 to obtain public recognition of Radcliffe's services were in vain until, in the last year of his life, the government awarded him a small grant of $150. He died at Mill Gate Hall, Stockport, on 20 May 1842 and was buried in Mellor churchyard on 24 May. Ten children predeceased him; he was survived by four sons and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 22995


Edward Radclyffe (bap. 1810, d. 1863), engraver, the eldest son of William Radclyffe, was baptized on 1 August 1810 at St Phillip's, Birmingham. Taught engraving by his father and drawing by J. V. Barber, he showed early promise by some etchings done at Hazlewood School in 1823, and in 1824 he was awarded the Society of Arts silver Isis medal presented by the duke of Sussex for an etching of animals. The following year he was given the society's silver palette for an engraving of cattle. At the end of his apprenticeship he moved to London about 1831, and immediately set up on his own. One of his earliest steel plates was for Roscoe's 'Wanderings in... North Wales' (1836). He was primarily a landscape and figure engraver, and worked extensively for Charles Heath in 'The Keepsake' (1836-47), 'Heath's Book of Beauty' (1839-47), 'Heath's Versailles' (1836), and 'Heath's Picturesque Annuals'. By 1838 he was sufficiently well established to marry Maria, the daughter of Major Revell of Round Oak, Englefield Green, Surrey. He contributed often a single plate to George Virtue's and H. Fisher's topographical volumes, although he engraved seven plates for Christopher Wordsworth's 'Greece' (1839), eleven for E. W. Brayley's 'Topographical History of Surrey' (1841-8), and nineteen for John D'Alton's 'History of Drogheda' (1844). He engraved after contemporary artists, including Thomas Allom, W. H. Bartlett, Cattermole and Creswick. For the 'Art Journal' he engraved seven plates published between 1848 and 1866, among them 'The Homeward Bound' and 'Morning on the Sea Coast', both after F. R. Lee, and his last, 'Hay Time', after Cox. He engraved a number of plates after his brother Charles ['see below'], eighteen of which were brought together in Robert Bell's compilation 'Golden Leaves' (1863). He engraved views on Admiralty charts, of which 'The Persian Gulf' was exhibited at the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1862. After 1859 he returned to etching for eleven designs after Cox, 300 sets of which were given as prizes by the Art Union of London in 1862. He began a 'Liber Studiorum' of Cox's work, but completed only three before his death. These were published in 1876 by the Liverpool Art Club in connection with their Cox exhibition by the print publishers. Radclyffe used mezzotint especially for four plates after Cox, two of castles and two of Welsh scenery. He exhibited six engravings at the Royal Academy between 1859 and 1863. He died on 25 November 1863 at his home in Camden Town, London, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. His plates were variously signed, probably on account of mistakes by writing engravers; variants were 'E. Radcliffe', 'E. Ratcliffe' and 'E. Ratclyffe'. 


@@@@@


doc= 22996


William Radclyffe junior (bap. 1813, d. 1846), painter, was baptized on 21 January 1813 at St Phillip's, Birmingham, the second son of William Radclyffe. Although his mezzotint of 'The Serenade', after H. Liverseege, showed his promise as an engraver, he became a portrait painter and worked mainly in London. He exhibited two portraits at the Royal Academy and two still lifes at Suffolk Street. His portraits of David Cox (1830; National Portrait Gallery, London) and his elder brother Edward were quite highly regarded. He died in London on 11 April 1846 of paralysis. 


@@@@@


doc= 22997


Radclyffe, William (1783-1855), engraver, was born on 20 October 1783 at Birmingham, and was self-educated. Nothing is known of his parents, but he was a relative of John Pye (1782-1874), and both were apprenticed to W. Tolley, a writing engraver, of 17 New Meeting Street, Birmingham. They also attended drawing classes under J. V. Barber (1788-1838). At the end of their indentures in 1801 Radclyffe and Pye decided to try their fortunes in London, where Pye's brother was already working. However, Radclyffe's resources ran out, and he returned from Stratford upon Avon, leaving Pye to go on alone. On 30 October 1804 Radclyffe married Elizabeth Hemming at Aston Juxta, Cheshire. He was probably the William Radcliffe, engraver, at Gough Street, Birmingham, in 1810, but William Radclyffe was an engraver and copperplate printer by 1814 at 21 Edmund Street, and in 1817 he had taken in Thomas Radclyffe (possibly a younger brother, whose major work was engraving forty-seven plates for William West's 'Picturesque Views... in Staffordshire and Shropshire', 1830-31). During this period J. T. Willmore and S. Fisher were taken on as pupils, and Joseph Goodyear, Thomas Jeavons, and Thomas Garner were his assistants. 
Among Radclyffe's earliest important engravings was a portrait of Bishop Milner after Barber, followed by a portrait of Lord Nelson in 1805. Both demonstrated his technical abilities. He engraved some plates for Oliver Goldsmith's 'Animated Nature' (1813), thus attracting the attention of Charles Heath, which later resulted in commissions for London publications. Six plates after J. Roe were done for 'A Historical... Account of... Warwickshire' (1815), and for John Britton's 'History... of... the Cathedral Church of Norwich' (1816) he engraved Plate 2 after Frederick Mackenzie. Four plates of Kenilworth Castle were exhibited at W. B. Cooke's exhibition of engravings in London in 1821. Radclyffe used steel-engraving from about 1823, notably for thirty-two plates for A. Blair's 'Graphic Illustrations of Warwickshire' (1823-9), after Barber, David Cox, William Westall, and Peter DeWint. This was followed by fifty plates for 'Jones' Views of the Seats of Noblemen and Gentlemen' (1829-31), all after J. P. Neale. About 1825 Radclyffe expanded the printing and engraving business and moved his residence to George Street, Edgbaston, leaving the joint business at 18 Edmund Street and 34 New Street, Birmingham. His reputation as a landscape engraver was enhanced by the ninety-seven plates done for Thomas Roscoe's 'Wanderings and Excursions in North Wales and... South Wales' (1836), for which David Cox the elder was originally intended to provide all the drawings, since Radclyffe was almost alone in appreciating his talent. Wrightson and Webb the publishers, however, insisted that about half the total should be done by George Cattermole, Thomas Creswick, Copley Fielding, J. D. Harding, and others. He had worked earlier for Roscoe in his 'Tourist' series (1832-3), with four plates after Harding. He engraved four plates after J. M. W. Turner for 'Turner's Annual Tours' (1833-6), and George Virtue employed him from 1836 to 1840 for landscape plates in some of his works. From 1840 to 1855 he provided a series of plates for the 'Oxford Almanack', and in 1842-3 he engraved five plates for 'London Interiors'; he may have done six more signed only 'Radclyffe'. His plates were usually signed 'W. Radclyffe', 'W. Radcliffe' or 'W. Radcliff'. 'Prayer in the Desert', after W. Muller, and 'Crossing the Sands', after William Collins, appeared in the 'Art Union' in 1847-8. Radclyffe did much to encourage the group of engravers emanating from and working in Birmingham and from 1814 took an active part in the promotion of the local artistic community, by whom he was much respected, culminating in 1842, when what is now the Royal Birmingham Society of Artists was formed. He was affectionately regarded by his many friends and pupils. His great skill in landscape engraving was well known nationally and enhanced the reputation of those associated with him. He died in Birmingham on 29 December 1855. 








@@@@@


doc= 22998


Radford, John (c.1562-1630), Jesuit, was born in the diocese of Lichfield, probably in Derbyshire because of his subsequent association with the Peak District. He stayed at the English College, Rome, from 20 until 24 December 1584, when he entered the Society of Jesus. He left some time later and on 1 June 1586 he arrived at the English College then situated in Rheims. Ordained priest on 14 March 1587 he was sent to England on 17 January 1589. In 1593 Henry Garnet informed Father General Acquaviva that Radford regretted leaving the society and asked to be re-admitted. His trip to the continent to enter the noviciate in Tournai in the summer of 1594 was cancelled at the last minute because of unspecified dangers. Radford ministered to Catholics in the Peak District. On 3 February 1595 a spy reported that Radford dwelt at Mr Williamson's at Sawly until he kicked Mrs Williamson's dog down the stairs for making noise during mass. The same spy also reported Radford (under the alias of Tanfield), who was 'a fine handsome man, having no hair on his face', at a house owned by Mr Jenison, brother-in-law of the Jesuit John Gerard, at Rowsley near Bakewell (Morris, 12-13). In August 1599 he was staying with Humphrey Alsop at Butterley, Derbyshire. 
Radford's 'A directorie teaching the way to the truth in a briefe and plaine discourse against the heresies of this time' (1605) was apparently written over ten years: his preface was dated 10 April 1594 and the 'Epistola dedicatoria' to the archpriest George Blackwell 27 March 1599. The treatise asserted that, contrary to the 'Adiaphorists' and 'Neuters', there was only one sure path to salvation and he provided proof that the Roman Catholic church was that path. Written 'plainly for the simple sorte' (sig. A2'v'), the book expounded orthodox Catholic teaching on all controverted matters from the four marks of the true church through justification, predestination, papal primacy, purgatory, and the sacraments to images, prayers, and devotional practices. In 1608, Thomas Manly (alias Rogers) attributed his conversion to Parsons's 'Christian Directory' and Radford's 'Directorie'. Indeed, he was later reconciled to the Roman church by Radford himself. 
On 30 October 1606 Father Robert Jones (alias North) recommended that Radford be accepted into the society and remain on the mission. Radford accordingly entered the Jesuits in England in 1607. He pronounced his final vows as a spiritual coadjutor in London on 20 January 1619. Jesuit catalogues list him in Northamptonshire from 1621 until 1623 and at the house of probation of St Ignatius, London, from 1623 until 1629. He died at the residence of Blessed Stanislaus in Devon on 9 January 1630. 


@@@@@


doc= 22999


Radford, Thomas (1793-1881), obstetric physician, was born at Hulme Fields, Salford, on 2 November 1793, the son of John Radford, dyer and bleacher. After early education at a private school at Chester, at the age of seventeen he was apprenticed to his uncle William Wood, surgeon, who was attached to the Manchester and Salford Lying-in Institution. Radford studied medicine at Guy's and St Thomas's hospitals, qualifying LSA and MRCS in 1817. In 1818 he was elected surgeon to the Manchester and Salford Lying-in Hospital. He continued his connection with the hospital as well as with St Mary's Hospital, which was associated with it, in various capacities to the end of his life. He was man-midwife-in-ordinary in 1821; surgeon-extraordinary in 1834; consulting physician from 1841 to 1881; and chairman of the board of management of St Mary's Hospital from 1874 to 1881. Radford graduated MD at Heidelberg in 1839, and later that year he was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. He married in 1821 Elizabeth Newton, daughter of John Newton, incumbent of Didsbury, near Manchester. She died in 1874. Their only child died young. 
The interests of St Mary's Hospital were always Radford's special concern. A new building for the hospital, opened in 1856, was built mainly through the exertions of Radford and his wife. He gave to the hospital, in 1853, his valuable library, rich in obstetrical works, and his museum of surgical objects, afterwards making many important additions to both collections. Some time before his death he put the sum of $3670 into a trust. Of this sum, $2670 was set aside for the provision of medical care to the poor residents in Hulme Fields; the remaining $1000 was intended for the maintenance of the library. A catalogue of the Radford Library, compiled by C. J. Cullingworth, was published in 1877. 
Radford was a pioneer of medical education in Manchester. Between 1825 and 1826 he lectured at Mr Jordan's school of anatomy on the theory and practice of midwifery. In 1829 he gave lectures on midwifery and the diseases of women and children at the theatre of anatomy and medicine at 9 Marsden Street. In 1832, in conjunction with Mr R. T. Hunt, also of the Lying-in Hospital, he lectured on the same subject at Hunt's rooms at 90 King Street. In 1833 he taught midwifery at Mr Turner's medical school in Pine Street, the first complete provincial medical school. Radford was elected president of the Manchester Medical Society in 1848. 
Radford delivered the first address on obstetrics before the Provincial (now British) Medical Association at its meeting in 1854, and was the author of many papers and communications on midwifery, and of 'Observations on Caesarean Section, Craniotomy and other Obstetric Operations' (1865), besides several pamphlets. Radford was a notable link in the chain of able and well-known Manchester gynaecologists, starting with Charles White and including John Roberton, James Whitehead, and others. Influenced by John Hull, Radford campaigned for the replacement of craniotomy by caesarean section at a time when the procedure was strongly condemned by the British obstetrical establishment. He defended the operation in a short treatise entitled 'The Value of Embryonic and Foetal Life, Socially and Obstetrically Considered' (1848). Radford was also one of the first in Britain to advocate the removal of cystic ovaries by abdominal section, a controversial procedure that provoked fierce debate in Britain. He gave much advice and support to Charles Clay in his early operations for the removal of diseased ovaries, helping to justify the claim of Manchester to have been the cradle of abdominal surgery in Britain. Radford was also the inventor of two types of forceps. 
Radford died at his residence at Higher Broughton, Manchester, on 29 May 1881 and was buried in the neighbouring church of St Paul, Kersal. 


@@@@@


doc= 23000


Rae, Alexander (1782-1820), actor, was born in London in May 1782. After the death of his father in 1787 he was educated under the Revd W. Lloyd, and in his sixteenth year entered the office of a Mr Campbell, an army and East India agent in the Adelphi. He was offered by his employer an appointment in India, which he declined. Instead he decided to adopt the theatrical profession, and made his first appearance at Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire. In 1806 he set out for Bath with an introduction from Richard Cumberland to Dimond, the manager of the Bath theatre. His first appearance there was on 28 January 1806 as Hamlet, a part which remained his favourite and which he was said to play with a beautiful settled melancholy. Rae also performed in Bath as Octavian in George Colman's 'The Mountaineers', Wilding in Samuel Foote's 'The Liar', and Charles Surface in 'The School for Scandal'. His good looks and pleasing style, rather than any conspicuous display of talent, recommended him to Colman, who engaged him for the Haymarket, where he appeared on 9 June 1806 as Octavian. 
During the season, besides repeating Hamlet, Rae played Gondibert in 'The Battle of Hexham', Count Almaviva in 'The Spanish Barber', Captain Beldare in 'Love Laughs at Locksmiths', Frederick in 'The Poor Gentleman', and Sir Edward Mortimer in 'The Iron Chest', and was the original Edward in Dibdin's 'Five Miles off is the Finger Post', a part in which he was badly received. He was said at the time to have been genteel, with an expressive face but a bad voice, to have caught something from Kemble and more from Elliston, and to have the vice of expressing strong passion by hysterical 'guzzles' in the throat. At the close of the season he went to Liverpool, where he stayed for four years, declining invitations from the Lyceum and from America. In Liverpool he played the lead both in tragedy and comedy, except for a time when he supported John Kemble. Rae won some commendation from Sarah Siddons, with whom he frequently acted. In the slack season he often visited Dublin and Scotland. 
In November 1812, as Rae from Liverpool, he made, on the introduction of Mrs Siddons, his first appearance at Drury Lane, playing Hamlet. Norval in 'Douglas', Romeo, George Barnwell, and Hastings in 'Jane Shore' followed, and in January 1813 he was well received as the original Don Ordonio in Coleridge's 'Remorse'. He was Bassanio to the Shylock of Edmund Kean on the latter's first appearance at Drury Lane, and also Othello to his Iago and Macduff to his Macbeth; when, in February 1814, Kean played Richard III for the first time, Rae was Richmond. Rae later played Horatio in Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent', Orlando in 'As You Like It', Norfolk in 'Richard II', Hotspur, Alonzo in Edward Young's 'The Revenge', Ford in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', Edgar in 'King Lear', Francesco in Philip Massinger's 'The Duke of Milan', and Rashleigh Osbaldistone in the first production of 'Rob Roy the Greygaract', Soame's adaptation from Scott (March 1818). He is last traced at Drury Lane on 19 June 1820, when he played Irwin in Elizabeth Inchbald's 'Everyone has his Fault'. 
On the death of Raymond some few years previously, Rae became stage-manager at Drury Lane. After the promotion he left his home and family to live with an actress who induced him to make what proved a crowning mistake. He quit Drury Lane and undertook in 1820 the management of the Royalty Theatre, Wellclose Square, where he opened as Sir Edward Mortimer in Colman's 'The Iron Chest'. Here he played the tragic parts of which at Drury Lane Kean had dispossessed him. The experiment was a failure, salaries were unpaid, and Rae was ruined. He then underwent an operation from which he never recovered. Attended by his wife, he died on 8 September 1820. He left a son and two daughters, one of whom also went on the stage, working mainly in Edinburgh. A performance for the benefit of his widow and three children was given at Drury Lane in October 1820. 
Rae's most pronounced gift was elegance; he had penetration and judgement, but lacked intensity and inspiration. He was handsome, about 5 feet 7 inches in height, dark-haired and a little bald, a fair singer, a good fencer, and from all accounts a fascinating companion. 


@@@@@


doc= 23001


Rae, Sir David, first baronet, Lord Eskgrove (1729-1804), judge, was the son of David Rae of St Andrews, an Episcopalian minister, and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Sir David Forbes, bt, of Newhall. He was educated at Haddington grammar school and at Edinburgh University, where he attended the law lectures of Professor John Erskine (1695-1768). He was admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates on 11 December 1751, and quickly acquired a considerable practice. In 1753 he was retained in an appeal to the House of Lords, which took him to London, where he became acquainted with Lord Hardwicke and his son Charles Yorke. 
Rae was appointed one of the commissioners for collecting evidence in the lengthy Douglas cause which established Archibald James Edward Stewart as the true son of Lady Jane Douglas and thus heir to the Douglas estates. In that capacity he accompanied James Burnett (afterwards Lord Monboddo) to France in September 1764. He was the leading advocate in the Scottish court of exchequer for many years. He succeeded Alexander Boswell, Lord Auchinleck, as an ordinary lord of session on 14 November 1782, taking the title Lord Eskgrove, from a small estate which he possessed near Inveresk. On 20 April 1785 he was appointed a lord of justiciary. 
Among his famous cases, Eskgrove tried William Brodie (died 1788) for robbing the general excise office in August 1788, the Revd Thomas Fyshe Palmer for seditious practices in September 1793, William Skirving and Maurice Margarot for sedition in January 1794, Joseph Gerrald for sedition in March 1794, and Robert Watt and David Downie for high treason in September 1794. He was promoted to the post of lord justice clerk on 1 June 1799, and was created a baronet on 27 June 1804. 
Henry Cockburn declared of Eskgrove that 'never once did he do or say anything which had the slightest claim to be remembered for any intrinsic merit. The value of all his words and actions consisted in their absurdity', adding: 'in the trial of Glengarry for murder in a duel, a lady of great beauty was called as a witness. She came into court veiled; but, before administering the oath, Eskgrove gave her this exposition of her duty: 'Young woman! you will now consider yourself as in the presence of Almighty God and of this High Court. Lift up your veil; throw off all modesty, and look me in the face'. ('Memorials... by Henry Cockburn', 118-19, 122)' But in spite of his ludicrous appearance and his many eccentricities of manner, Eskgrove was a man of the greatest integrity, and one of the ablest Scottish lawyers of the day. He collaborated in publishing 'Decisions of the Court of Session from the End of the Year 1756 to the End of the Year 1760' (1765). 
For many years Eskgrove lived in a house in the Old Assembly Close, and afterwards at St John Street, Canongate, Edinburgh. From his marriage on 14 October 1761 to Margaret (died 1770), youngest daughter of Dugald Stuart of Blairhall, Perthshire, there were two sons: David (died 1815), who succeeded as the second baronet, but as he had no sons the baronetcy passed to his brother William Rae (1769-1842). There was also one daughter, Margaret, who married, on 3 January 1804, Captain Thomas Phipps Howard of the 23rd light dragoons. Eskgrove died at Eskgrove on 23 October 1804, and was buried in Inveresk churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 23002


Rae, James (1716-1791), surgeon, only son of John Rae (1677-1754), a writer and descendant of Stirlingshire landowners, was born in Edinburgh. His grandfather, also named James Rae, was appointed barber to Charles II in 1662 and in 1686 was given permission to build public baths in Edinburgh. On 27 August 1747 Rae became a member of the Incorporation of Surgeons of Edinburgh, where in 1764-5 he filled the office of deacon or president. He also served as auditor of accounts (1754), librarian (1756), and treasurer (1760-64). Rae was the first surgeon appointed to the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, on 7 July 1766, and he immediately began to give a series of lectures. These lectures were so highly appreciated by his colleagues that in October 1776 they made a determined attempt to found a professorship of surgery in the university and to appoint Rae the first professor. This project was defeated by Alexander Monro secundus, who afterwards managed to convert his own chair of anatomy into one of anatomy and surgery. 
Rae married, in 1744, Isobel, daughter of Ludovic Cant of Thurstan; they had two sons and several daughters. The elder son, William, joined the Incorporation of Surgeons on 18 July 1777, settled in London, where he married Isabella, sister of Sir Robert Dallas, and died young. John, the younger brother, was the first fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, admitted on 14 March 1781; he became president in 1804-5 and was well known in Edinburgh as a dentist. Among Rae's daughters was Elizabeth, wife of James Fleming of Kirkcaldy, whose daughter Margaret Fleming (1803-1811) was immortalized by John Brown in 'Pet Marjorie'. 
Rae did in Edinburgh what Percivall Pott did in London: he established the teaching of clinical surgery on a firm and broad platform. He died in 1791 and was buried, as was his wife, in the family tomb in Greyfriars Church, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 23003


Rae, John (1813-1893), Arctic explorer, was born on 30 September 1813 at the Hall of Clestrain, near Stromness, Orkney Islands, the sixth of nine children of John Rae, factor, an Orcadian, and his wife, Margaret Glen, a Campbell from Argyll. He spent his boyhood in Orkney, being educated by a tutor at home, before going to Edinburgh to study medicine in 1829. He qualified in April 1833 as licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh and was appointed surgeon of the Hudson's Bay Company's ship 'Prince of Wales' in June 1833. From 1834 to 1844 he was surgeon at Moose Factory, the company post on James Bay: 'the best place east of the Rocky Mountains... a very happy home to me for ten years' (Richards, 20). Here he took part in the general work of the post and tended patients among the company's employees and local Cree people. During his leisure time, he 'learned all the different methods of hunting, fishing, sledge-hauling, snow-shoe walking and camping out... that were afterwards so useful to me in my Arctic exploration' (Richards, 22). 
In 1844 Rae was chosen by the governor of the Hudson's Bay Company, Sir George Simpson, to lead an expedition to complete the survey of the northern coastline of North America, partly accomplished by the fur traders, Samuel Hearne, Sir Alexander Mackenzie, Peter Dease, and Thomas Simpson, and by naval parties led by Sir John Franklin. With ten men, Rae left York Factory (on the western coast of Hudson Bay) on 13 June 1846 in two small boats, northward bound. At Churchill an Inuit interpreter named Ouligbuck and his son joined them. They reached Repulse Bay on 24 July and learned from a party of Inuit that the sea lay some 40 miles to the north-west, the route being partly taken up by deep lakes. This route was traversed with one of the boats, the 'North Pole'. They reached Committee Bay, where Rae's attempts to survey the coast by boat were thwarted by ice and bad weather. He turned back on 8 August and established winter quarters on Repulse Bay, where Fort Hope was built. Game was shot for the winter, and store houses and two magnetic observatories constructed. During sledge journeys in the spring and summer of 1847, the party reached Lord Mayor's Bay, on the east coast of Boothia peninsula, connecting their survey with that of Sir John and Sir James Clark Ross in 1829-33, and explored the west coast of Melville peninsula, almost reaching Fury and Hecla Strait, explored by Sir William Edward Parry in 1821-3. They returned by boat to York Factory on 6 September 1847, when Rae heard of his promotion to chief trader. He wrote a 'Narrative of an Expedition to the Shores of the Arctic Sea in 1846 and 1847' (1850). The expedition was significant, not only for its geographical and meteorological results, but because the party was able to winter in the Arctic by eating local game and fish and building igloos. 
During 1848-9, Rae joined Sir John Richardson (at the latter's request) to search for Sir John Franklin. Richardson, Rae, and party made an extremely fast (possibly record long distance) canoe journey from Sault Ste Marie near Toronto to the mouth of the Mackenzie River on the Arctic Ocean in ninety-six days, arriving on 3 August 1848. They travelled east along the coast, but ice hampered their search. They wintered at Fort Confidence on Great Bear Lake, making regular meteorological and magnetic observations. Richardson went back to England in 1849, while Rae returned down the Coppermine River to the Arctic Ocean. He explored the Rae River, which Richardson had named after him the previous year, but ice forced him to abandon attempts to travel westward along the coast and northward to 'Wollaston Land' (later peninsula). In September 1849 the party travelled up the Mackenzie River to Fort Simpson where Rae took up his post as chief trader. In his 'Arctic Searching Expedition' (1851) Richardson paid generous tribute to Rae. 
With his new appointment, Rae had responsibility for the Mackenzie River district, the company's largest, but found the unaccustomed business management and accounting difficult. In June 1850 he was promoted chief factor. He wintered at Fort Confidence in 1850-51 to resume the search for Franklin at the Admiralty's request. Two boats were built to Rae's specification and rigged by Rae himself. He left Fort Confidence on 25 April 1851, and with two men, sledges, and dogs, crossed over the ice of Dolphin and Union Strait, reaching Wollaston peninsula on 6 May. He then travelled eastward along the coast of Victoria Island, finding that no strait divided Wollaston 'Land' from Victoria 'Land' and linking his own explorations with those of Dease and Simpson in 1839. He retraced his steps westward along the shores of the Wollaston peninsula as far as Prince Albert Sound. The party reached Kendall River on 10 June, having covered some 824 miles in 42 days. 
Rae set out again from Kendall River on 15 June with a party of eleven, in the two boats built at Fort Confidence, reaching the mouth of the Coppermine River on 5 July and the eastern end of the Kent peninsula on 24 July. They sailed to Victoria Island, exploring Cambridge Bay and the shores to the north-east, sighting Pelly Point on the Collinson peninsula. The walking was so rough that their footwear quickly wore out and every step 'was marked with blood' (Richards, 80). Unfortunately the ice in Victoria Strait was too closely packed for the boats to reach King William Island where the Franklin tragedy had been enacted in 1848. Rae did find two pieces of wood while returning along the south coast of Victoria Island, which probably came from the 'Erebus' or the 'Terror'. These he brought back to England. The party returned to Fort Confidence on 10 September 1851, having crossed the narrows at the junction of Dolphin and Union Strait with Coronation Gulf. Rae reached Fort Simpson on 26 September ending a highly successful exploring expedition, which none the less left the mystery of Franklin's disappearance unsolved. He arrived in London in April 1852 and in May was awarded the founder's gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society. The same month he proposed to the Hudson's Bay Company a further Arctic expedition to complete the survey of the north coast of America along the west coast of the Boothia peninsula. This they approved and Rae was appointed leader in June 1852. He reached York Factory on 18 June 1853, and with his party ascended the unexplored Quoich River from Chesterfield inlet in July and August and wintered at Repulse Bay, at first in tents, then in snow huts. In the spring, with sledges and four men, including Ouligbuck the younger as interpreter, Rae travelled to Pelly Bay, arriving on 17 April 1854. On 21 April, he met 'a very communicative and apparently intelligent Eskimo', who said that 'a number of Kabloonans, at least 35-40, had starved to death west of a large river a long way off'. This was the first news of the tragedy of the Franklin expedition. Rae bought a cap band from the Inuit, who had not seen the dead bodies himself, and 'could not or would not' explain the place on the chart (Richards, 98). Rae continued his survey, thinking the information too vague to act upon, but asking his informant to produce more evidence. On 27 April the party reached the cairn built by Dease and Simpson at the mouth of the Castor and Pollux River in 1839. They then travelled along the west coast of the Boothia peninsula, and on their return journey to Repulse Bay carefully examined the coast of Pelly Bay, finding no strait to the west. They reached Repulse Bay on 26 May. 
From other Inuit, Rae obtained artefacts from the 'Erebus' and 'Terror', received from yet others who had observed some forty white men on King William Island dragging a boat and sledges to the south, and had later found the bodies of about thirty men and some graves on the mainland and five bodies on an island (which Rae thought must be Montreal Island at the mouth of the Great Fish or Back River). He reached York Factory in time to sail for England in the 'Prince of Wales' on 20 September, bringing the first news of Franklin's fate. Geographically, his discovery that King William 'Land' was separated from the Boothia peninsula by a strait (later called after him) was also important, and although he failed to complete the survey of the west coast of the Peninsula, he proved that it formed part of the mainland of North America. 
Rae arrived in London on Sunday 22 October 1854 and his report to the Admiralty was published in full in 'The Times' next day. It caused a sensation, mainly because it repeated the suggestion of the Inuit that the last survivors had resorted to cannibalism. A public controversy ensued and Rae was criticized for not having verified the Inuit reports himself and for having hurried home to claim the $10,000 offered to the discoverer of Franklin's fate; a reward of which he insisted he was ignorant until his return to England. In the end, he received $8000 and his findings were largely confirmed by Sir Leopold McClintock in 1857-9. Rae's biographer has commended his 'dignity and restraint' during the controversy (Richards, 131). He was awarded the honorary degree of MD by McGill University, Montreal, in 1853. 
In 1857 (having retired the previous year), Rae appeared on behalf of the Hudson's Bay Company before a select committee of the House of Commons in London, which was convened to investigate the company's activities before the expiry of its charter in 1859. In Toronto in January 1860 Rae married Catherine Jane Alicia (Kate), third child of Major George Ash Thompson of Ardkill, co. Londonderry, and Munechrone, co. Tyrone, Ireland. The Raes made their home in Britain, although Rae travelled in Canada from time to time and took part in telegraph surveys in 1860 and in 1864. He divided his last years (1870-93) between London and Orkney. In 1866 he had been made an honorary LLD by Edinburgh University and in 1880, having contributed articles to 'Nature' and other learned journals, he was made fellow of the Royal Society. He died at his home, 4 Addison Gardens, Kensington, London, of a ruptured aneurism on 22 July 1893. He was buried in the churchyard of St Magnus Cathedral, Kirkwall, Orkney, where an impressive memorial was erected by public subscription in 1895. 
Rae got on well with his superiors and fellow officers of the Hudson's Bay Company, and with Inuit and Indians. He spoke well of the naval explorers Parry, Franklin, and Richardson but felt later that neither he nor the Hudson's Bay Company was given sufficient credit for Arctic exploration by Sir Clements Markham and others, who championed the navy. In more recent times, Rae has attracted admirers such as Vilhjalmur Stefansson, not only for his discoveries, but for his ability to 'live off the land'. 


@@@@@


doc= 23004


Rae, Peter (c.1671-1748), printer and mechanic, was born probably at Burronhill in the parish of Mouswald near Dumfries; his father's name was probably Peter Rae. In February 1692 he is recorded as a student in the class of Master John Law at Glasgow University, from which he graduated MA on 4 April 1694. He held three posts of clerkship in Dumfries before marrying, on 19 July 1697, Agnes Corsane. Matrimony encouraged him to seek a parish, and following trials and delays he was ordained as minister by the parish of Kirkbride near Sanquhar on 22 April 1703. By this date Rae had already shown his interest in matters mechanical. The hammermen (metalworkers) of Dumfries made him a freeman of the incorporation on 31 July 1702; his essay piece, possibly the first grandfather clock to have been manufactured in the south of Scotland, still survived in the 1990s, as did an astronomical chime clock he presented to the third duke of Queensberry in the 1730s. 
Rae's ministry at Kirkbride involved constant strife with his parishioners, but he still managed to construct a printing press, only the seventh operating in Scotland at the time. The first recorded production was a broadside against the 'Act of Union' (1706), followed over the next fifteen years by at least eighteen further works ranging from religious tracts to chapbooks. 'A History of the Late Rebellion' (1718), researched, written, and printed by Rae, is one of the main sources for the period. The 'Dumfries Mercury' (1721), of which only the eighteenth and a portion of the twelfth numbers are known to survive, was the first newspaper in Scotland to be produced outside Edinburgh and Glasgow. A peculiarity of the press's productions was that Robert Rae was named as the printer. Robert, Peter's son, was eight years old when the press commenced operations, and although he later became involved with the family business (especially after 1714, when the press moved to Dumfries) it is likely that Peter used his son's name as a means of deflecting criticism within his parish. A hostile contemporary rhyme has no doubt of the printer's identity '
The printing trade he now does try 

The Minister trade he should lay by. 
(R. Ker, 'Works', 1719)' In 1721 Rae's wife, Agnes, inherited the extensive Corsane estates, and legal difficulties connected with the legacy persuaded him to cease printing. Nevertheless, other activities occupied this many-sided man. He was the agent at the Wanlockhead lead mines, surveyed the Lochar moss outside Dumfries, and in 1733 published his own sermon 'Gospel Ministers Christ's Ambassadors'. Peter and Agnes had at least ten children; the surviving sons turned their father's hobbies into businesses, Robert as a printer, Alexander as a clockmaker in Dumfries, and James as agent at the lead mines and farmer. Rae was given the more substantial living of Kirkconnel parish in 1732, and in 1748 was awarded a timely tribute when he was elected moderator of Dumfries presbytery. He died at Kirkconnel manse on 29 December of that year, and was buried in Kirkconnel churchyard. 'A Treatise of Lawful Oaths and Perjury' was published posthumously in 1749, and fragments of a manuscript history of Penpont presbytery survive. 


@@@@@


doc= 23005


Rae, Sir William, third baronet (1769-1842), judge, was born in Edinburgh on 14 April 1769, the younger son of Sir David Rae, first baronet (1729-1804), judge, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of John Stuart of Blairhall, Perthshire. He was educated at Edinburgh high school (1779-82), at Glasgow University ('c'.1788), and then at Edinburgh University. On 9 September 1793 he married Mary (died 1839), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Stuart. They had no children. 
Rae appears to have spent a convivial youth, and he retained convivial habits. At the age of nineteen he joined Walter Scott in founding 'The Club'. The two became lifelong friends. Scott referred to 'dear loved Rae' in the introduction to the fourth canto of 'Marmion', and later said that he was 'sensible, cool-headed, and firm, always thinking of his duty, and never of himself' (Lockhart, 1.207-8 n., 6.140). Rae followed his father's profession and became an advocate in 1791, but fifteen years later he was still described as 'not in great practice, of useful rather than shining abilities' (HoP, 'Commons', 5.2). He had, as a freeholder in Lanarkshire, whiggish connections with the duke of Hamilton and Lord Rosslyn. Through their influence he was appointed sheriff of Orkney in 1801. His politics remained, however, tory enough to win him promotion as sheriff of Edinburgh in 1809. On 22 May 1815 he succeeded his brother as third baronet. 
Rae's tranquil career changed course abruptly in June 1819 when he was appointed lord advocate in place of the bungling Alexander Maconochie. The government needed a steadier hand to deal with the social upheavals after the end of the French wars. Lord Melville, the Scottish manager, described Rae as 'a most judicious adviser' (Fry, 339), and Lord President Hope found him a man 'of conciliatory manner and frank and open temper' (ibid.). Maconochie had tried harsh repression; Rae's line, while still firm, was markedly more moderate. He virtually ceased taking action against trades unions, because their illegality was by no means certain under Scots law, and because 'in none of the cases of simple combination which came before me was I satisfied that the masters were entirely without blame' (Fry, 336). 
In April 1820 the 'radical war' broke out -- an armed rebellion, if on a modest scale, by groups of industrial workers in the west of Scotland. Rae thought the authorities there indolent and panicky at once, and correctly predicted that the business would end in nothing. He went to Glasgow himself and remained unimpressed: 'Although we have had abundance of false alarms, all has continued quiet in Scotland' (Fry, 340). The radicals were cowed, he added, to such an extent that it might be difficult to bring them to justice. Rae disdained resort to the use of spies, turncoats, agents provocateurs, and other methods normal in Scottish forensic investigation. As he set about restoring order, he showed for the most part a good sense of public relations, tempered justice with mercy, and struck shrewd plea-bargains with prisoners and their counsel. Nevertheless, he led personally for the crown in the trials of Andrew Hardie and other radicals during the summer of 1820, on indictments of high treason; three of them were hanged. 
On taking office, Rae had been elected MP for the Anstruther burghs. Much of his parliamentary career would be taken up with repelling reformers' attacks on the existing system of government of Scotland. In February 1822 he opposed Lord Archibald Hamilton's motion for a committee of the whole house on the notoriously corrupt councils of the royal burghs. Since they also elected MPs, Rae objected that any change in their constitutions would amount to 'a parliamentary reform of the burghs of Scotland' ('Hansard 2'). A few days afterwards, however, he introduced a bill to remedy at least the financial abuses in them. It became law but remained a dead letter. Later in the year he was embarrassed by the affair of the 'Glasgow Sentinel', a tory paper which the government subsidized. Libels published in it had led to a duel in which Alexander Boswell, son of the biographer, was shot dead. Rae prosecuted his killer, James Stuart, for murder. He was then himself heavily criticized for his part in supporting the newspaper. A motion in the House of Commons calling for an inquiry was defeated by an unusually small margin. 
In other respects, Rae proved himself more liberal. He successfully resisted pressure for a tightening of the already parsimonious Scots poor law. He undertook a major series of legal reforms. The lord advocate nominated to the Scottish bench, and Rae made sure that some leading whig advocates were given the preferment that once would have been refused them. He ended the long-standing grievance that judges could themselves appoint juries in criminal cases, and replaced this practice with a ballot. He set up in 1824-5 a royal commission to look at the general structure of the judiciary, with special reference to procedure and appeals, both of which were too cumbrous and slow. As a result he was able to plan a thorough reorganization of the higher Scottish courts, which gave them more or less their modern shape. He carried this into law by an act of 1830. He also initiated a review of the state of Scottish prisons (1825). He set up a second royal commission on the universities in 1826 and served on it himself. This brought to light a number of weaknesses in a system of which Scotland was immensely proud, though no legislative remedy was to follow for many years. 
In the general election of 1826, Rae lost his seat. The problems in his constituency appeared to be of no wider significance, but they gave startling evidence of decay in Melville's electoral machine. Rae was returned as MP for Harwich in 1827, soon after the political crisis at Westminster following the retirement of Lord Liverpool. Melville refused to serve under his successor, George Canning, but Rae, along with other officers of government in Scotland, agreed to stay on. This was a decisive break in the system of management under which the country had been ruled for fifty years and more. 
Rae kept his post through further changes of ministry. One diversion from the rampant factionalism at Westminster was his leading the prosecution in December 1828 of William Burke, the 'resurrectionist', who was convicted and hanged. Higher political events caught up with Rae in 1830. Melville, by then back in office, refused to recommend him to the lucrative post of chief baron of exchequer, which he might reasonably have expected after eleven years in harness. His colleague John Hope, the solicitor-general, wrote: 'The treatment of the Advocate is scandalous. I think it the very harshest and most unfeeling thing any Government ever did... The cry against Lord Melville is louder and more general than any ever raised in my time as to any public or personal matter' (Fry, 377; Omond, 349). 
Rae was made a privy councillor on 19 July 1830. He found another Scottish seat, in Bute, at the general election of that year, and resigned on the fall of the tory ministry in November. In the parliament of 1831-2 he represented Portarlington. He came back for Bute at a by-election in 1833, and sat for the county until his death. He was lord advocate again in Sir Robert Peel's government of 1834-5, and once more from 1841. Rae remained active until the end of his life, especially in some causes close to his heart: official aid for building new churches in Scotland, reform of the prisons, and erection of the Scott monument in Edinburgh. Often unfairly lampooned by the whig press as a dim and incompetent reactionary, his career rather showed his impartiality, quiet good sense, and capacity for sensible reform. He died a widower at his home, St Catherine's, near Edinburgh, on 19 October 1842, and was buried nearby at Inveresk. 


@@@@@


doc= 23006


Rae, Sir William (1786-1873), naval surgeon, was the son of Matthew Rae of Park-end, Annandale, Dumfries. He was educated at Lochmaben and Dumfries schools, and afterwards graduated MD at Edinburgh University. In 1804 he entered the medical service of the East India Company, but in the following year was transferred as surgeon to the Royal Navy. He served first in the 'Culloden' under Sir Edward Pellew. In 1807, when in the 'Fox' (32 guns) he took part in the destruction of the Dutch ships at Gressic in Java. Subsequently, when the squadron was becalmed in the Bay of Bengal, he contrived an apparatus for distilling water. When attached to the 'Leyden' in 1812-13 he was successful in his treatment of the troops suffering from yellow fever at Cartagena and Gibraltar, and received the thanks of the commander-in-chief and the medical board. In 1814 he married Mary, daughter of Robert Bell. 
In 1824 Rae was appointed to the Bermuda station. He became MRCS in 1811, extra licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1839, and FRCS in 1843. In 1831 he married Maria, daughter of Assistant Commissary-General R. Lee: she survived her husband. On 22 August 1840 he became deputy inspector of hospitals and fleets, and ultimately attained the rank of inspector-general of hospitals and fleets in January 1849. In 1855 he retired on a pension to a country practice near Barnstaple, Devon. He was created CB in July 1855, and knighted in June 1858. He died at his home, Hornby Lodge, Newton Abbot, Devon, on 8 April 1873, and was buried at Wolborough, near Newton Abbot. 


@@@@@


doc= 23007


Raeburn, Sir Henry (1756-1823), portrait painter, was born on 4 March 1756 in the village of Stockbridge, now a district of Edinburgh which lies about a mile north-west of Edinburgh Castle, at that time the westernmost limit of the city. He was baptized three days later in the parish church of St Cuthbert (the West Kirk), which lies beneath the castle rock. His parents were Robert Raeburn, a yarn boiler, who ran a successful business preparing raw yarn for the woollen trade, and Ann Elder. There were at least three other children of the marriage: William, who would work in the business; Charles, described in later life as a mariner; and Ann, who married a Robert Wemyss. 
Robert Raeburn was a man of some significance in his trade, holding office in the Incorporation of Weavers of his district on a number of occasions; but his reputation must have been tarnished when he was accused of forging a signature on a financial document and imprisoned for a period at the beginning of 1760. Accusations of sexual impropriety with his washerwoman were raised at the same time but these were not proved. 
In the year before Henry Raeburn's birth, Robert Raeburn had erected a 114 foot-long boiling house on the east bank of the Water of Leith where it flowed north through Stockbridge, on land feued from the governors of George Heriot's Hospital. This was part of a complex of buildings that the elder Raeburn was erecting during the 1750s, and it was in one of these low-lying buildings that the future painter was born. The harnessed power of this river was the necessary condition for Raeburn's trade and for the other milling operations carried out in its vicinity, and for those brought up along its banks its constant sound must have seemed a natural part of their being. 
At some time during the early 1760s Robert Raeburn and his wife both died, leaving Henry in the care of his brother William, some twelve years his senior. William took over the running of the family business (and continued in this role until his own death in 1810), while his younger brother entered George Heriot's Hospital in the spring of 1765. The school had been founded by James VI and I's jeweller, George Heriot, for the education of the orphaned children of tradesmen. The building had been erected between 1628 and the end of the seventeenth century in a Scots Renaissance style on a plateau of land above the Grassmarket, which lay to the south of the castle ramparts. The nine-year-old boy, after a quite long, uphill trek from his home, must initially have felt overwhelmed by the sheer presence of this immense, four-square building, still one of the most impressive in Edinburgh. 
While pursuing a normal academic education Henry Raeburn, at some point during these years, must have demonstrated particular manual skills which seemed to suit him to the jewellery trade. Through a process begun by his school in the autumn of 1771, Raeburn was indentured to a goldsmith, James Gilliland, on 27 June 1772. He was now sixteen. At this time the jewellers of Edinburgh operated from the 'luckenbooths' (literally, locked-up shops) in Parliament Square, clustered round the medieval church of St Giles in the High Street. It is quite likely that Raeburn took up residence with his master, whose address is recorded as Blairs Luckenbooths. Gilliland had been in business as a jeweller from as early as 1752 and his activities are recorded until April 1790, when he probably died. His wife, Elizabeth, was the sister of the London publisher and bookseller John Murray (formerly McMurray), and they operated as agents for each other in their respective cities. The appearance of the jeweller and his wife is known, for in due course Raeburn painted their portraits in miniature. 
The path that led Raeburn to portrait painting is not entirely clear, but at some time during his apprenticeship to Gilliland he seems to have graduated to painting miniatures, a class of object that would come quite naturally within his ken in a jeweller's workshop. Among his known subjects were Gilliland and his wife (both John Murray Publishers Ltd, London) and another goldsmith, and seal engraver, David Deuchar (NG Scot.). It is Deuchar who is traditionally credited with encouraging Raeburn to follow this course. These miniatures are accomplished in a descriptive sense but are formally rather naive. Given the immense skills that Raeburn developed within the next decade as he turned to life-size portraiture, it is likely that this naivety disappeared quite quickly and that many miniatures of a more sophisticated sort were painted during the 1770s and 1780s and are at present unrecognized. This possibility is borne out by a little watercolour portrait in miniature format of Sir John Clerk of Penicuik (priv. coll.), painted perhaps in the late 1780s and showing the precise control of light and shade that marks his mature work. 
Within two years of the official end of his apprenticeship, Raeburn married, probably in 1780, a widow of some substance, Ann Leslie ('nee' Edgar) (1744-1832), who was twelve years his senior. She had married the rather shadowy James Leslie in 1772 and through him had acquired Deanhaugh House, virtually opposite the Raeburn property on the other side of the Water of Leith. Besides two young daughters, Ann and Jacobina, she brought to the marriage not inconsiderable wealth inherited from her late father-in-law George Leslie, who had owned property in Paris as well as Edinburgh. A story in Allan Cunningham's life of Raeburn about how the painter met his future wife, and was enraptured by her when she came to sit for her portrait, has usually been dismissed as a romantic myth, but it has been given credence by the recent identification of an anonymous portrait of a widow as both Ann Leslie and Raeburn's earliest known full-scale portrait (NG Scot.). 
The earliest years of the marriage were spent at Deanhaugh House, which was set in attractive grounds with close-cropped sward running to the river's edge. Despite the industrial activities on the other side of the river, the setting was virtually rural and the deep valley within yards to the south was a place of luxuriant natural growth. In the next few decades as the classical New Town of Edinburgh spread in the fields above, the area acquired a degree of enlightened artificiality. On the south side of the river a temple to Hygeia, designed by the painter Alexander Nasmyth, was erected above a mineral spring, on land feued by Raeburn. 
The Raeburns' marriage produced two sons: Peter, born on 18 May 1781, and Henry, born on 24 October 1783. Within months of the latter's birth Raeburn had turned his mind towards a prolonged visit to Rome, and the summer of 1784 saw him making financial arrangements for his wife's affairs during his absence and arranging letters of credit for himself. It is an indication of Raeburn's desire to succeed that he should undertake such a journey so soon after marriage and, especially, the birth of two children. In the course of these preparations Raeburn is designated 'Mr Raeburn the Painter' and refers unequivocally to himself as 'Portrait Painter in Edinburgh'. This must mean that he had already established himself in such a role and gained at least some public recognition. Surviving portraits that would bear this out are, however, rare. There is the presumed portrait of Ann Leslie, soon to be his wife, and a portrait of the young advocate and connoisseur John Clerk, who became a close friend. The latter portrait was destroyed before its significance was realized, but old photographs suggest a painter of great observational accomplishment, but one whose visual imagination was still to be released. 
The friendship with Clerk, of whom Raeburn painted another portrait about 1815, one that is deeply eloquent (Scot. NPG), is likely to have had a significant effect on Raeburn's development. His collection of books, paintings, bronzes, and especially prints must have been a great stimulus. Among the prints was a complete set of Rembrandt etchings, whose humanity and tenebrism must have set him thinking. Sources of the practical skills that Raeburn was still developing in the years before he set off for Rome are likely to have been drawing classes of the kind that he is recorded as attending in 1781 where the older painter Alexander Runciman gave guidance. These comprised drawing from the antique and the draped figure -- but not the nude, an inevitable restriction in a presbyterian country. This must account for the suspect anatomy in a number of Raeburn's mature portraits. 
There is also a tradition that Raeburn was given some assistance by David Martin, who had once worked as an assistant to Raeburn's great Scottish predecessor, Allan Ramsay. Ramsay's method was one of careful planning and making preliminary drawings, quite the opposite of Raeburn's empirical approach. For Raeburn drawing was to be something done with a brush directly on the canvas and extended in a variety of visual responses. While Raeburn may have looked at Martin, none of Ramsay's genius had rubbed off on him, and Raeburn probably found his portraits stiff and uninspired. 
Raeburn is likely to have reached Rome in the autumn of 1784. Almost inevitably he made contact with a countryman, James Byres, antiquary, 'cicerone' (guide), and general entrepreneur, who provided a focus for Britons on the grand tour. Byres is credited with a piece of advice to Raeburn which, whatever the evidence, rings entirely true: this was always to paint with the object in front of him, and not to rely on memory or imagination. It was advice that Raeburn showed every sign of having accepted. Byres also found him a patron in the young second Earl Spencer, who commissioned a miniature of himself -- not from life, but to be copied from a pastel drawing by the Irish artist Hugh Douglas Hamilton. Compared with Raeburn's early miniatures it is startlingly sophisticated and shows him working in a main-line British portrait tradition (priv. coll.). 
The miniature was completed late in January 1786. Probably rather earlier, Raeburn had painted a life-size portrait of Byres's sixteen-year-old nephew Patrick Moir, in a melancholic pose, reading a book (on loan to NG Scot.). Not yet entirely accomplished, it has a carefully worked surface that may derive from the elderly Pompeo Batoni, pre-eminently the portraitist of young Britons, whom Raeburn must have met through Byres. His only other known works from this sojourn in Rome are two little copies, one of them a 'David with the Head of Goliath' after the seventeenth-century painter Giovanni Francesco Romanelli. The conventional view has been that Raeburn learned little in Italy, but even this tiny copy disposes of that notion, for the way in which the light floods down the principal figure to illuminate the salient features became one of his major stylistic traits. 
Raeburn was probably back in Scotland by the summer of 1786. On both legs of his journey he must have spent some time in London. Tales of meeting Sir Joshua Reynolds are not strictly documented but some sort of contact is highly likely. That he had gathered firsthand evidence of the English portrait tradition, probably from a number of sources, is borne out by the portraits he painted shortly after his return to Edinburgh: a three-quarter length of the judge Lord Arniston (priv. coll.), and a pair of head-and-shoulders portraits of Sir William and Lady Forbes of Craigievar (Craigievar Castle), the first a rather solemn exercise in Reynolds's cerebral mode, the latter two suffused with his social sensibility. 
It was with portraits like these that Raeburn very rapidly established his supremacy, brooking few rivals for the remainder of his life. It almost seemed that the vigorous society that he now entered, perceived as an 'Athens of the north', required a mediator like Raeburn and that this need was somehow a precondition of his genius. 
Although a number of Raeburn's portraits of the late 1780s continued to show the influence of Reynolds, about 1790 he was developing a highly individual, indeed unique, form of lighting, where the figure was placed in front of a strong light source which scintillated around its contours and then spread in a series of reflections of differing strength within the dark forms. The most striking of these works, and one of the most beautiful he ever painted, was the double portrait of Sir John and Lady Clerk of Penicuik, standing in front of the low hills of their estate (NG Ire.). This portrait, for which he was able to charge 60 guineas, was sent to London for exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1792 but arrived too late for inclusion -- an early misjudgment of the London art world. It was shown instead at Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery where its 'singular style' was noticed by an anonymous critic who found much in it to praise. He also suggested, however, that more attention should have been given to the foliage of the trees, one of the earliest accusations of lack of finish which were to follow Raeburn throughout his career. 
The singular form of 'contre-jour' lighting that Raeburn had devised had precedents of a sort in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Italian painting but it had never been used in portraiture in quite this way and it seems that his patrons found it rather difficult to accept. Henry Mackenzie, for example -- the 'man of feeling' -- called it Raeburn's 'falsetto style' and hoped he would give it up. In effect, Raeburn did, although carefully angled side-lighting always remained part of his repertory. It was in the mid-1790s that his inventiveness, which might have had a freer rein in a different climate, led him to paint the unique little full length of his skating friend, the Revd Robert Walker, better known as 'The Skating Minister' (NG Scot.). Its combination of poise, precision, and humour have made it by far Raeburn's most famous painting; indeed, by a quirk of taste, since its virtual rediscovery in 1949 it has gained a degree of popularity unique in British art. 
Raeburn's studio in these years was on the south side of George Street, the central avenue of Edinburgh's burgeoning New Town. However, his success, and probably his aspirations, were such that he outgrew these premises and towards the turn of the century erected a grand terraced house in York Place (initially no. 16, now no. 34). The rooms included reception areas, a picture gallery, a workshop for a frame maker, and a studio which took up the whole of the first floor. This studio contained a greatly enlarged window to the north which gathered the light above the River Forth and the county of Fife. This pure light, which meant so much to him, he controlled by a series of complex shutters, probably of his own devising. Joseph Farington called to inspect this studio in 1801, but missed Raeburn himself. Viewing some of Raeburn's portraits, he speculated on their 'Camera Obscura effect' (Farington, 'Diary', 5.1631). It is highly unlikely, however, that Raeburn used any optical devices, and Farington may simply have failed to appreciate his observational acuity. As it happens, Raeburn later became aware of the camera lucida, and in 1818 he and Francis Chantrey made drawings of each other using one; but this was probably little more than a game. It is Raeburn's only known drawing (Scot. NPG). 
One of the earliest portraits likely to have been completed in the York Place studio is the brilliantly coloured full-length portrait of Sir John Sinclair of Ulbster, dressed in highland-cum-military costume of his own design (NG Scot.). Both it and the full length of the immensely rich, self-made coppersmith William Forbes of Callendar, painted in 1798 (Scot. NPG), show Raeburn making use of the dramatic lighting effects he was now able to create. The portrait of Sinclair was the earliest of a number of portraits of highland chiefs and lairds wearing the kind of exotic dress that raised eyebrows when paraded in London. They include 'Francis MacNab ('the MacNab')' (priv. coll.) and 'Colonel Alastair Macdonell of Glengarry' (NG Scot.), both probably painted about 1810 though stylistically quite different. The former has much of the broken, loose handling that is often seen as typifying Raeburn's painting, while the latter is carefully descriptive -- of tartan, guns, dirks, and targe -- which suggests that the sitter demanded this kind of record. The contrast illustrates Raeburn's sometimes disconcerting versatility, which raises difficult problems of dating as well as the unanswered question of studio participation. The theme here, which is of a new, self-assertive type of 'Scottishness' (reactionary in some respects), is perhaps completed by the Byronically romantic full length of the second marquess of Bute of 1820, the dark figure wrapped in a glowing tartan cloak (priv. coll.). 
Worldly success seemed assured for Raeburn in the early years of the nineteenth century, but by 1808 things had gone badly wrong. His troubles seem to have stemmed from that entrepreneurial spirit that had created men like Forbes of Callendar. From 1805, and possibly earlier, he had been partner in a mercantile company, Henry Raeburn & Co., trading from the port of Leith. The other partners were his son Henry (his elder son Peter had died in 1798) and James Philip Inglis, husband of his stepdaughter Ann Leslie. The company owned a number of ships which seem to have traded mainly with London. In addition to his designation 'portrait painter' Raeburn now added 'underwriter', and in 1806 he was a director of the Caledonian Insurance Company. However, in January 1808 he was forced to seek a sequestration of his 'whole means and estate heritable and moveable' and his bankruptcy was announced in the 'Edinburgh Gazette'. The 'unexpected misfortunes' that caused Raeburn's fall are not precisely known, but by July of the same year claims against him totalled more than $36,000. Set against these claims was his considerable heritable property in the districts of Stockbridge, Canonmills, and the Dean, as well as in Leith. There was also the spacious studio in York Place, ownership of which had to be relinquished and replaced by a leasing arrangement. In the course of the year arrangements were put in place for Raeburn to reimburse his creditors by a composition of 4's'. in the pound, and the period of sequestration was ended in December. Against the securities involved, Raeburn pledged himself to 'task the remaining years of his life' until 'the trembling hand of age' overtook him (5 Dec 1808, NA Scot., CS/29/10). It was an affirmation that Walter Scott, that other great artist of the age (who in time was overwhelmed by similar misfortunes), recalled in the spring of 1819 when a second portrait of himself by Raeburn was proposed: 'he... works now chiefly for cash poor fellow as he can have but a few years to make money' ('Letters', 5.349). 
The complexities of Raeburn's financial affairs and the difficulties of disentangling them from those of the firm were such that attempts to unravel them continued long after his death. In the short term they created distinct strains within his family circle. This is confirmed in some recently discovered correspondence from the year 1813. These letters reveal a less idealized Raeburn than the one depicted by his early biographers. There was, of course, some evidence for the rosier picture of his personality. Writing to Sir Duncan Campbell in November 1812 to seek payment for his portrait (Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco), he launches his plea with a delicate and relaxed literary touch: 'Painters and poets and these sort of people, you know, are always poor, and... I am no exception to this general description' (NA Scot., GD/170/267). But writing in the following year to Daniel Vere, husband of his stepdaughter Jacobina, who had unwisely incurred financial liabilities on his behalf, Raeburn is revealed as someone easily hurt and inclined to hasty reactions. He believes that Jacobina (Bina) had looked at him 'oddly' when he last called, and concludes that she is 'as violent against' him (and Mrs Raeburn) as her sister Ann has been (Raeburn to Daniel Vere, 5 March 1813, NL Scot., acc. 11547). He will not call again until he is sure of a proper welcome. Three days later he makes the same point in a letter to Bina, regretting that he has lost her esteem. Vere (Dany) then replies that 'this unpleasant correspondence' has been quite unnecessary and that Bina had simply wished to warn her stepfather that his affairs were now a not 'inconsiderable topic of public conversation' (Vere to Raeburn, retained draft, March 1813, ibid.). 
Raeburn's entrepreneurial spirit was not quashed by the bankruptcy. The same correspondence reveals him planning to encourage builders to erect terraced houses on his land with cash advances on the security of their houses. These plans led to the erection of houses in Raeburn Place, Dean Street, and, from 1817, Ann Street, one of the loveliest streets in classical Edinburgh. However, they led to more contention within the family. His stepdaughters now launched an attack on what they believed to be an extravagant mode of living in St Bernard's House, the rather grand dwelling next to Deanhaugh House into which the Raeburns had moved a few years earlier. New silver plate had been bought and old furniture had been replaced with unnecessarily fine pieces by William Trotter. Raeburn protests that such purchases will not need to be repeated in his lifetime -- and he reminds Bina that 'there never was a thriftier or a more frugal woman' than her mother, even if she does occasionally like a 'little show' (Raeburn to Daniel Vere, 8 March 1813, NL Scot., acc. 11547). The 'little show' could refer to the over-lavish wedding presents bought for Charlotte White, who had recently married their son Henry, which had also raised hackles. 
Another way in which Raeburn thought he might revive his fortunes was to remove his practice to London. John Hoppner had died in January 1810 and Raeburn travelled to London in the spring to see if he might fill the gap that he had left. His visit was orchestrated by his fellow Scot David Wilkie, who had settled in London five years before. Wilkie introduced him to a number of artists, including William Beechey, Thomas Stothard, John Flaxman, and Benjamin West, but nothing came of his plans and he was back in Edinburgh by the end of June. From a national point of view it now seems just as well, for his definition of his time and place, which became part of his reputation, was incomplete. Effulgent statements like the glowing 'Lord Newton' of 1811 (Dalmeny House, Edinburgh) or bravura parades of Scottish sentiment like the highland portraits would not have been made. 
The episode can be seen as one of a number that illustrate a lack of ease in Raeburn's relationship with London. The earliest had been the late delivery of the Clerk of Penicuik portrait. Now came a misunderstanding with the Royal Academy of Arts, of which he had been made an associate member in 1812. Having been elected a full member, in place of Henry Tresham, in 1815, he sent in a self-portrait as his diploma picture, not knowing that portraits of members could not be accepted. Great effort had gone into the making of this Olympian image (NG Scot.), for its high seriousness was how he wished to be perceived in London. His disappointment must have been extreme. It was eventually replaced by the sentimental 'Boy with a Rabbit', a portrait of his stepgrandson Henry Raeburn Inglis. The latest expression of this theme is found in a letter to Wilkie of 1819 in which he pleads for news of the 'famous London artists', including information on their prices. In a memorable 'cri de coeur', he writes: 'I... know almost as little about them as if I were living at the Cape of Good Hope' (Greig, xlvi). The most troubling part of this feeling of being cut off from the mainstream was his inability to see the works he had sent to the Royal Academy hanging alongside those of his peers. 
There is little doubt that after 1808 Raeburn's work suffered from over-production, due partly to success but also to the promise he had made to himself about his duty to his creditors. There are many late portraits which are pedestrian or unresolved due to haste; and, surprisingly for a major painter, he was happy to make copies of other artists' works -- ranging from quite minor painters, not always of his own time, to Ramsay and Reynolds. Nevertheless, some of his finest, most responsive portraits were produced during these years, among them, besides those already mentioned, the portrait of the seated huntsman William Hunt of Pittencrieff (priv. coll.), the equestrian full length of Major William Clunes (NG Scot.), and the superb military full length of Major James Lee Harvey, which is probably as late as 1820 (Louvre, Paris). 
A marked characteristic of Raeburn's work had always been that some sitters, for not easily explained reasons, set his imagination alight, while others did not. This bore no relation to their worldly status and some of his most sympathetic portraits are of women neither beautiful nor young. Among earlier examples is the Rembrandtesque 'Margaret Gerard, Mrs James Cruikshank', painted about 1805 as a companion to the almost equally fine portrait of her West Indies merchant husband, James Cruikshank (both Frick Collection, New York). An example from the later period is the portrait of the elderly Mrs James Campbell (priv. coll.) which combines breathtaking freshness of colour and almost outrageously free handling with profound insight. There are also records that he was a man at ease with children, and in a number of group portraits he both contains and releases their wild energy; these range from the war-enacting 'Allen Brothers' (priv. coll.) of the early 1790s to the playful trio in the painting known as 'The Elphinston Children' (Cincinnati Art Museum, Ohio), which was painted about 1813. 
In these later years a number of Raeburn's portraits were permeated by the influence of Sir Thomas Lawrence, not always to their advantage. There was some level of intermittent friendship between them, and the 'Cape of Good Hope' letter makes it clear that it was Lawrence who most interested him. He was attracted less by his methods than by his sentiment. Raeburn's own perceptual method continued but it often carried a new emotional charge, particularly in his female portraits, which he must have believed was in accordance with London taste. A kind of sweet ecstasy pervades portraits like 'Mrs Scott Moncrieff' (NG Scot.), once regarded as the archetypal Raeburn, without entirely swamping them, as happens in the lost portrait of Lady Gordon Cumming, shown at the Royal Academy in 1817. Raeburn himself believed this almost ridiculously mannered portrait to be 'by much the best and handsomest female picture I have yet painted' -- which it assuredly was not (Greig archive, Scot. NPG). 
Honours came fast in Raeburn's final years: membership of the American Academy of Fine Arts in 1819, a fellowship of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1820, a knighthood in 1822, and the revived office of king's painter and limner in Scotland in 1823. The knighthood was bestowed personally by George IV in a ceremony at Hopetoun House, Edinburgh, the final act of the monarch on his famous visit to Scotland. It is a curiosity of simpler times that during the arrangements for the conferral of the knighthood the painter found himself in conversation with the secretary of state, Robert Peel, without realizing who he was. When he discovered the truth, he wrote of his dismay (with a request that he convey an apology) to a friend, the member of parliament John Maxwell of Pollok, whose portrait he was working on at the time -- a portrait that, although left unfinished at his death, shows his essential powers undimmed (priv. coll.). 
Another event connected with the knighthood offers one of the last glimpses of Raeburn the man. On the day following the ceremony, the painter and his wife gave a dinner party for a number of friends at St Bernard's House, within a virtual stone's throw of his much humbler place of birth. Among the guests were Sir Adam Ferguson, who had been knighted at the same time, and the artists William Collins and David Wilkie. In a letter to his sister, Wilkie described the boisterous evening of toasts and song. Raeburn 'made a very modest reply' to one of the toasts, and Lady Raeburn -- despite her erstwhile liking of a 'little show' -- 'would not allow herself to be called 'My Lady' on any account' (Andrew, 76-7). 
Raeburn's death came quite suddenly. Late in June 1823 he took part in an excursion of an antiquarian sort into Fife with a number of friends who included Ferguson, Sir Samuel Shepherd, Lord Chief Commissioner William Adam, Walter Scott, and the diminutive Irish novelist Maria Edgeworth, who was visiting Scott at Abbotsford. They examined sites at Ravenscraig Castle, Pittenweem, and St Andrews. It was 'a very merry party' in the words of Scott, of whom Raeburn had recently completed his second portrait, greatly to Scott's satisfaction this time (Scot. NPG). The day after returning to Edinburgh, Raeburn attempted to resume his work -- the 'task' he had set himself many years before -- but felt too unwell to continue. He retired to bed and shortly afterwards, on 8 July, died of 'a total failure of the system'. Perhaps not surprisingly, he left no will. He was buried on 10 July 1823, not as might have been expected in the graveyard of St Cuthbert's, but in the dormitory of the adjacent episcopalian church of St John the Evangelist, which had only recently been erected at the west end of Princes Street. 
Scott, because of urgent business at Abbotsford, was unable to attend 'the last obsequies of a friend whom he esteemd and respected so entirely', as he wrote in his apology to Raeburn's family ('Letters', 8.35). He did, however, pay his respects in a practical way, by revising Hugh Murray's obituary, which appeared in 'The Annual Biography' for 1823. This rather idealized view of the man and his art, given its association with Scott, was a strong signal to posterity. It was followed by a memorial exhibition in 1824. The next important exhibition, a very large one, did not come until 1876, but its impact was considerable and it evoked a review by Robert Louis Stevenson. It also had the effect of releasing many major paintings onto the market. From this time, and into the years preceding the First World War, Raeburn's popular reputation rose rapidly and at a critical level he seemed to be granted at least equal status with his great English contemporaries. He was then caught up in the great American love affair with British art, and many of his works were acquired by museums and private collectors in the United States, often for very high prices. 
The picture during the remainder of the twentieth century has been less straightforward, caused in part by the economic and political upheavals of the inter-war years, but also because the kind of glamour and sentiment that Raeburn's work seemed to represent went out of fashion. As portraiture itself fell into disrepute his reputation inevitably suffered, because his range had been virtually confined to that form. He also began to become part of a distinctly Scottish agenda that had little to do with aesthetic values. There is no doubt that Raeburn's critical reputation has been affected by a Scottish tendency to imbue certain cultural figures with something like iconic status. This has meant that criticism which was already inherently Anglo-centric (and that problem remains) has tended to side-step him because of his perceived 'foreignness'. Even in the more objective exhibition held at the National Gallery of Scotland in 1956 there remained a certain collusion with notions of a picturesque Scottishness and a purely local sentiment. Nevertheless, towards the end of the century a view, represented by Denys Sutton writing in the journal 'Apollo', gained wide support that Raeburn's qualities as a painter were of such importance that they deserved to be re-examined in depth. This shift of opinion culminated in an exhibition confined to his finest works which was shown in both Edinburgh and London in 1997-8. By this time Raeburn's work had also been discovered, or, rather, rediscovered, in Europe -- for example, a major painting, 'Major James Lee Harvey', had been acquired by the Louvre in 1995. In 2001 the National Gallery acquired its first painting by Raeburn, the double portrait known as 'The Archers' -- the kind of recognition in London which the painter had always craved. 


@@@@@


doc= 23008


Raffald, Elizabeth (bap. 1733, d. 1781), cook and writer on cookery, was born at Doncaster and baptized there on 8 July 1733. She was one of at least three daughters born to Joshua Whitaker, a man of some property in the town which the daughters inherited. After receiving a fair education, she passed about fifteen years (1748-63) in service, rising to become housekeeper at Arley Hall, Cheshire, to Lady Elizabeth Warburton. She married her employer's gardener, John Raffald, on 3 March 1763, at Great Budworth, Cheshire. They had at least nine children, all daughters; only three reportedly survived into adulthood. The daughters attracted much attention walking out, each in a clean white frock and each with her own nurse behind. The youngest, Anna, passed on this and many other anecdotes about her mother. Several sons of Mrs Raffald's sister Middleward lived with the Raffalds 'to be company for her Manchester sisters lasses' and to be apprenticed at the appropriate time ('Harland's Manchester collectanea', 145). 
A great publicist, Mrs Raffald recorded most of the highlights of her later career by advertisements in the 'Manchester Mercury' and she is reported to have assisted Harrop in its publication, both with money and with advice. She opened a shop in Fennell Street, Manchester, near her husband's floristry shop, supplying 'cold Entertainments, Hot French Dishes, Confectionaries, &c.' ('Manchester Mercury', 29 November 1763). In September 1766 she transferred her business to Exchange Alley by the Bull's Head in Market Place. This later became the Exchange Coffee House. She was a shrewd, tactful and strong-willed woman, with a good knowledge of French and an active concern for the poor. From her shop she ran a school of cookery and domestic economy, and what was probably the first register office for servants in Manchester. 
In 1769 Mrs Raffald published her 'Experienced English housekeeper, for the use and ease of ladies, housekeepers, cooks, &c., wrote purely from practice... consisting of near 800 original receipts'. Six more genuine editions were published during her lifetime, all, according to their title pages, 'printed for the author' and 'sold by R. Baldwin', the London printer. Baldwin reportedly paid Mrs Raffald $1400 for the copyright. Apparently when he suggested certain northern expressions in her work be altered, she replied: 'What I have written I proposed to write at the time; it was written deliberately, and I cannot admit to any alteration' ('Harland's Manchester collectanea', 147). The popularity of her work is shown by the many editions, mostly spurious, published in England and in Dublin during her lifetime and after. She is said to have refused to allow any portraits to be published, so that the first, from a painting by P. McMorland, appeared in the eighth edition in 1782, after her death. 
For a time Mrs Raffald ran the Bull's Head near her shop but in 1772 the Raffalds took over the King's Head, Chapel Street, Salford, which they had 'fitted up in the neatest and most elegant manner' ('Manchester Mercury', 25 August 1772). Within a month, they were advertising fortnightly 'Card assemblies' during the winter season ('Manchester Mercury', 8 September 1772). The excellent cuisine and her ability to converse in French were said to have attracted many foreign visitors. 
Mrs Raffald was instrumental in establishing a second Manchester newspaper, the 'Prescott's Journal', in 1771. The following year she published the first 'Directory of Manchester'. A second extended edition including Salford followed in 1773, and a third in 1781. She wrote a book on midwifery, with Charles White, but did not live to print it. Her husband is believed to have sold the manuscript in London, but if published it bore another name. She died suddenly on 19 April 1781, and was buried in the churchyard at Stockport on 23 April among her husband's ancestors. Raffald, an able botanist and florist, but of improvident and irregular habits, moved to London after her death, and lived extravagantly. He died in December 1809, aged eighty-five, and was buried at Sacred Trinity Chapel, Salford. 


@@@@@


doc= 23009


Raffles, Thomas (1788-1863), Congregational minister, the only son of William Raffles, a Baptist and a solicitor (died 1825), was born in Princes Street, Spitalfields, London, on 17 May 1788. Thomas's sister, Mary (died 1858), later married the judge James Baldwin Brown (1790-1843). His cousin was Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles. His mother was a Wesleyan and he was brought up in that body. In 1800 he was sent to a boarding-school at Peckham run by a Baptist minister and attended the church pastored by William G. Collyer. For a short time in 1803 he was a clerk in Doctors' Commons but in October 1803 returned to Peckham to prepare for the ministry. Between 1805 and 1809 he studied at Homerton College under Dr Pye Smith. He declined a call to Hanover Street, Long Acre, but settled at George Yard Chapel, Hammersmith, and was ordained on 22 June 1809. On the sudden death of Thomas Spencer of Newington Chapel, Liverpool, Raffles was invited to succeed him. He began his Liverpool ministry on 19 April 1812, and moved on 27 May to the new Great George Street Chapel which had been built to accommodate Spencer's swelling congregation. Raffles married on 18 April 1815 Mary Catherine Hargreaves of Liverpool. They had a daughter and three sons, two of whom became Liverpool worthies in their own right: Thomas S. Raffles, his father's biographer and the town's stipendiary magistrate, and William W. Raffles, a cotton broker. Their daughter, Mary Rachel (1817-1887), was married by Raffles to a cotton broker, Samuel Marshall Bulley (1811-1880), on 9 August 1838; their children included the cotton broker and gardener Arthur Kilpin Bulley, the promoter of women's education Amy Bulley, and the historian Ella Sophia Armitage. 
Under Raffles the Great George Street Chapel grew rapidly and by 1841 his salary was $700 per annum. He at once began to occupy a leading role in Liverpool and Lancashire Congregationalism: he was known as the 'patriarch' of the body in Liverpool, where his influence was compared to that of Thomas Binney in London. A whig by principle he played no part in party politics except in the affairs of the Liverpool Slavery Abolition Society. In 1833 he declined an offer to succeed Rowland Hill at the Surrey Tabernacle, London, preferring to minister in the urban and rural chapels of Lancashire. He was chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales in 1839. On 19 February 1840 his Liverpool chapel was destroyed by fire, the day after it had been insured. A new building was quickly erected. Raffles was secretary of the Lancashire Congregational Union from 1826 to 1843. In 1816, in co-operation with the solicitor George Hadfield, he had promoted the Blackburn Academy for the training of ministers, and in 1843 saw to its successful removal to Manchester, as the Lancashire Independent college. He was chairman of the college education committee from 1839 to 1863. In the controversy over Samuel Davidson he took the conservative side, and was himself a moderate Calvinist. The Raffles scholarship and Raffles Library were founded at the Lancashire Independent college as a tribute to him in 1861. He had received an Aberdeen LLD in 1820 and a Union College, Connecticut, DD in 1830. 
In Liverpool evangelical circles Raffles was well known, serving, among other causes, the Seaman's Friend Society, the Religious Tract Society, the Amicable Book Society, the Bible Society, Liverpool Infirmary, and the Liverpool Lunatic Asylum. His friendships were extensive: he was on good terms with Cardinal Wiseman and donned the white surplice over his cassock when he preached in Anglican pulpits. He was a great collector of original manuscripts relating to the history of nonconformity in Lancashire: these were subsequently used by Robert Halley and Benjamin Nightingale in their histories. He collected, too, vast numbers of autographs -- forty volumes in all. He was also a poet and hymn writer, publishing in 1853 his own supplement to Watts's 'Psalms and Hymns'. His 'Original Hymns' were published posthumously in 1868 with a preface by his son-in-law, J. B. Brown. Josiah Conder chose one of Raffles's hymns for inclusion in his 1836 'Congregational Hymn-Book'. Besides his verse compositions and his translation of Klopstock's 'Messiah' (1814), Raffles published his 'Memoirs of Thomas Spencer' (1813), 'Letters during a Tour through France, Savoy, etc.' (1818), 'Lectures on Practical Religion' (1820), 'Lectures on the Doctrines of the Gospel' (1822), 'Hear the Church! A Word for All. By a Doctor of Divinity, but not of Oxford' (1839 -- a riposte to Pusey), 'The Divine Command: a Jubilee Sermon to the London Missionary Society' (1844 -- interesting in that it produced a premillennialist backlash), 'Internal Evidence of the Inspiration of Scripture' (1849), and 'Independency at St Helens' (1856). He edited a new edition of John Brown's 'Self-Interpreting Bible' (1815). He died at his home at Edge Hill on 18 August 1863 and was buried at the Liverpool necropolis, on 24 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 23010


Raffles, Sir (Thomas) Stamford Bingley (1781-1826), colonial governor and founder of Singapore, the eldest and only surviving son of Captain Benjamin Raffles (died 'c'.1797) and his wife, 'nee' Anne Lyde (died 1824), was born off Port Morant, Jamaica, on 6 July 1781, aboard his father's ship, the West Indiaman 'Ann'. He numbered a seventeenth-century Sir Benjamin Raffles among his ancestors, and his paternal grandfather was a clerk for thirty years in the prerogative office, Doctors' Commons, London, but little is known about Raffles's childhood. He was christened for the second time -- on this occasion as plain Thomas -- by his uncle, the Revd John Lindeman, at Eaton Bishop in Herefordshire, on 4 July 1784. For two years he attended the reputable Mansion House boarding-school in Hammersmith, but had to leave in 1795 at the age of fourteen because of straitened financial circumstances. His father probably died about this time, leaving Anne to bring up Thomas and four younger sisters, and through a family connection she obtained him a temporary clerkship at East India House. A frail, diffident youth, Raffles's health suffered through the long hours of drudgery, but he also studied French in his own time, and his diligence impressed William Ramsay, secretary to the court of directors, whose son was Raffles's close friend. On 8 March 1805, on Ramsay's recommendation, Raffles was appointed assistant secretary to the government of the East India Company's newly elevated Penang presidency, with a salary leap from $70 to $1500 a year. One week later he married Olivia Mariamne Fancourt (1771-1814), 'nee' Devenish, a Madras assistant surgeon's penniless widow, of Irish and possibly Indian extraction, who was ten years his senior but strikingly beautiful, vivacious, and intelligent. Sailing in April, they reached Penang on 19 September 1805. 
On the voyage Raffles taught himself Malay and soon embarked on a lifetime study of the history, flora, and fauna of the region. His meagre schooling left him with a passion for acquiring knowledge and cultivating the friendship of well-educated, clever men, such as Dr John Leyden, surgeon, naturalist, linguist, and Malay scholar, who was his house guest in Penang for three months in 1805-6, and William Marsden, secretary to the Royal Navy, linguist and historian of Sumatra, with whom Raffles initiated a long correspondence in 1806. 
Appointed Malay translator and registrar of the recorder's court, in addition to assistant secretary, Raffles fell ill under the strain, and in 1807 he was sent on sick leave to Melaka, which the East India Company had seized from the Dutch during the French wars. Its splendid fortress had already been razed following the directors' orders to demolish Melaka's public buildings and transfer the population to Penang, but the rest of the town was saved on Raffles's recommendation. Indeed, in a report submitted in 1808 he urged its permanent retention, and in 1810 he visited Calcutta, hoping to be appointed governor of the Dutch Moluccas, which had also been occupied by the company. This bid failed, but he impressed Governor-General Lord Minto with his offer to turn local rulers against the Dutch to aid the company's planned invasion of Java. Minto appointed Raffles his agent in the Malay states, accepted his recommendation to use Melaka rather than Penang as the base to prepare for the Java campaign, and posted him back there in December 1810 to gather intelligence and collect supplies. 
With his customary industry and attention to detail, Raffles amassed voluminous information, sent agents to Madura, Bali, and Java, and won over the sultan of Palembang. On arriving in Melaka in May 1811, Minto approved Raffles's recommended invasion route and took him on his own ship when the fleet set sail the following month. As a civilian Raffles took no direct part in the military operations, which were commanded by Colonel Robert Rollo Gillespie, a brave soldier and admired war hero. But, to Gillespie's chagrin, when the Dutch administration capitulated in September 1811 Minto appointed Raffles as lieutenant-governor, with far-reaching powers and a council comprising Gillespie as the senior member and two Dutch officials. 
Unlike the company and the British government, Raffles regarded Java not as temporarily occupied territory but as the permanent base for extending British influence through the rest of the eastern archipelago, and he set out quickly to dismantle the Dutch system of monopoly, compulsory deliveries, and protective tariffs. Early in 1812 Raffles sent Gillespie to seize the tin islands of Banka and Billiton, appointed British residents at the courts of Javanese rulers, remodelled the judicial administration, introduced a jury system, and in 1813 abolished forced labour in favour of money rents in a large part of Java. 
Travelling widely to gather information about the history, languages, and products of Java, Raffles enlisted the help and supported the researches of American botanist Thomas Horsfield, who had already spent more than ten years in Java before the British invasion. He arranged for Horsfield to send specimens to the East India Company's museum in London and to Sir Joseph Banks, president of the Royal Society, who was collecting plants for the Royal Garden at Kew and for his own herbarium. 
In February 1814 Raffles prepared a minute in council condemning the previous Dutch regime and claiming success for his land rent system, and that same month he recommended to Calcutta an ambitious scheme to extend British interests and appoint agents at all the leading ports in Borneo, Sulu, Riau-Lingga, Bali, east Sumatra, and as far afield as Siam, Cambodia, and Cochin China. Some modern-minded Dutch officials supported Raffles's land rent reform, but the unaccustomed new system resulted in a large financial loss of government revenue, and he resorted to selling government lands on his own authority to bolster a shaky paper currency. 
Reducing the number of European troops as an economy measure brought conflict with Gillespie, who, on being posted back to Calcutta, brought charges before the governor-general in council in December 1813, attacking Raffles's whole administration and financial policy, accusing him of humiliating chiefs and regents, and of selling off government lands irresponsibly. Raffles submitted a detailed rebuttal in March 1814, which he also had privately printed in Batavia, and Gillespie was killed in action before judgment was given, but the accusations hung over Raffles for years. His remaining time in Java was fraught with troubles. Olivia's sudden death in November 1814 left Raffles distraught, and she was buried in the European cemetery at Batavia beside the grave of their friend John Leyden, who had died of malaria during the Java invasion. Meanwhile his patron, Minto, died in June 1814, and the new governor-general was critical of Raffles's financial record. In August 1814 Britain and the Netherlands signed a convention agreeing to return Java to Dutch rule. Excited by news of Napoleon's escape from Elba and the renewed outbreak of war, in August 1815 Raffles appealed to the British government to retain Java, but the directors had already issued a preliminary condemnation of his actions as injudicious and extravagant and demanded his recall. Accordingly, on 17 October 1815 the governor-general, reproving him for 'persevering imprudence', ordered Raffles's transfer to the company's ailing west Sumatra residency at Bencoolen, to which Minto had provisionally nominated him in 1813 as insurance in case Java was restored to Dutch rule. 
Dispirited and ill, Raffles decided first to go to England and left Java on 25 March 1816, calling at St Helena, where he was disillusioned at meeting the exiled former emperor Napoleon, whom he had hitherto admired. Despite arriving home, in his own words 'wretchedly thin and sallow', in October 1816 he embarked on a two-volume 'History of Java', which was written and published within seven months. The spring of 1817 saw an uplift in his fortunes. On 13 February, although they still did not comment on his Java administration, the directors exonerated him from charges of dishonourable personal motives and confirmed his Bencoolen appointment. Nine days later, in a very quiet ceremony, he married Sophia Hull (1786-1858), whom he had met while taking the waters at Cheltenham spa. Thirty years old and rather plain, Sophia appears to have appealed to Raffles as a mature, even-tempered, sensible match. She was to be a model of devotion and resilience, steadfast through personal and financial disasters, accompanying him uncomplaining on the most arduous journeys, and after his death publishing a glowing and detailed biography, but omitting any reference to Raffles's first marriage. 
On 20 March 1817 Raffles was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, which brought him into contact with distinguished scientists and dignitaries, such as the duke and duchess of Somerset. On 10 April his 'History of Java' was published, receiving mixed reviews and betraying hasty composition but causing a stir as the first English-language history. Raffles found himself lionized in London society, and from about this time he assumed the name of Stamford in place of the more pedestrian Thomas. He dined with Princess Charlotte, and on 29 May was knighted by the prince regent, who praised him in a twenty-minute speech at a Carlton House levee. The couple then toured Europe, dining with the Dutch colonial minister and also with King William, to whom Raffles offered advice about Java. 
In November 1817 Raffles and Sophia embarked for Bencoolen. Charlotte, their first child, was born at sea on 15 February 1818, and the voyage was enlivened by the company of Joseph Arnold, naval surgeon and botanist, who stimulated Raffles's already keen interest in natural history. He had high hopes for Bencoolen. In London he had tried in vain to persuade the East India Company to set up a chain of stations on the China route and develop British trade in the archipelago. At the end of the Napoleonic wars both the British government and the company wanted to reduce their commitments in south-east Asia and returned Melaka, the Moluccas, and Java to the Dutch, but, despite the failure of his Java dreams, Raffles hoped to use west Sumatra as the base to expand British influence. Because of his personal standing, he was dignified with the title of lieutenant-governor, rather than mere resident, and, through the influential contacts he had made in England, he nursed ambitions eventually to become governor-general of Bengal and a peer of the realm. 
Raffles's arrival at malaria-ridden Fort Marlborough on 22 March 1818 was sobering. Recent earthquakes had destroyed most buildings, the administration had long been in chaos, pepper production (which represented Bencoolen's sole livelihood) was neglected, and Raffles was horrified to find slaves belonging to the East India Company. He immediately freed the company's slaves, prohibited gambling, and set about reorganizing the administration, improving pepper production, and introducing an enlightened convict labour system. 
Raffles arranged for Horsfield to visit Bencoolen to accompany Sophia and himself on an arduous exploration of the Menangkabau territory of central Sumatra, where Horsfield identified many new plants. Raffles also undertook expeditions with Arnold, who discovered a five-petalled, mottled reddish parasite, the largest flower in the world, at Pulau Lebar in west Sumatra on 19 May 1818, shortly before he died of malaria. After Raffles reported the find to Sir Joseph Banks, a paper was presented to the Linnean Society of London in 1820, and the flower was assigned the generic name 'Rafflesia', and called 'Rafflesia arnoldi'. Subsequently, in Singapore in February 1819 Raffles himself discovered a large, brilliant pitcher plant, which was named the 'Nepenthes rafflesiana'. 
But Raffles's primary concern was to establish friendly relations with neighbouring rulers in order to check the spread of Dutch power in Sumatra and the revival of their protectionist measures against British trade. He tried to prevent the Dutch return to Padang and Palembang, and established British posts in the Lampongs area of south Sumatra and islands off the west coast. Alarmed at the prospect of the Dutch dominating both the Melaka and Sunda straits, in September 1818 Raffles went to Calcutta to try to win the support of Governor-General Lord Hastings for a more aggressive policy. While Hastings vetoed Raffles's ambitious Sumatra schemes, he approved a more limited proposal to protect the Melaka Strait trade route by making a treaty with Aceh in north Sumatra and acquiring a trading station at Riau or some other southern point, provided this did not bring the company into collision with the Dutch. Hastings appointed Raffles his agent to undertake this enterprise, with the assistance of Colonel William Farquhar, who had been British resident of Melaka during the wartime occupation. 
Discovering that the Dutch had forestalled them in Riau, Raffles and Farquhar investigated the Karimun Islands but found them unsuitable, and on 29 January 1819 landed at Singapore, part of the Riau-Johor empire. The following day Raffles signed a preliminary treaty with the local chieftain, the 'temenggong', permitting the East India Company to set up a trading post on the Singapore River. Since the sultanate had been in dispute for some years between two half-brothers, with the Dutch supporting the younger claimant, Raffles invited the elder brother, Hussein, over from Riau, recognized him as sultan, and on 6 February 1819 signed a treaty with Hussein and the 'temenggong' confirming the company's right to establish the post, subject to an annual payment. The next day Raffles departed for Penang to negotiate the treaty with Aceh, leaving Farquhar in charge as resident. 
The new settlement's prospects looked precarious. The Dutch authorities in Batavia protested vigorously, and the governor of Penang urged Calcutta to repudiate Singapore, accusing Raffles of acting 'like a man who sets a house on fire and then runs away'. The day before he dropped anchor off Singapore, the company's Board of Control had dispatched instructions to the governor-general forbidding the proposed mission, but these did not reach Calcutta until March, and the embarrassing news of the acquisition got back to London only in August 1819. Raffles's actions in Sumatra and the Melaka Strait provoked a 'paper war' between Britain and the Netherlands, threatening to jeopardize wide-ranging diplomatic talks, which aimed to settle Anglo-Dutch differences in the East in order to cement their friendship in Europe. But the Singapore issue was put in abeyance for years while the negotiations dragged on. 
Meanwhile Raffles returned to Singapore at the end of May 1819, bringing immigrants from Penang, and he spent three weeks drafting plans for the settlement before returning to Bencoolen. Aspiring to gather under his own control all the British possessions in south-east Asia -- Penang, Province Wellesley, Bencoolen, and Singapore -- he hurried to Calcutta to push his claims when news of the sudden death of the governor of Penang reached Fort Marlborough in October 1819. While sympathetic in principle, Hastings refused to consider the matter further until the Anglo-Dutch negotiations were settled. 
Somewhat disappointed, Raffles returned to Bencoolen in February 1820 and concentrated on making it a model colony. He settled his growing family in a country house at Dove's Rise, about 12 miles out of Fort Marlborough, where he kept a menagerie and indulged his passion for natural history. In this he was ably supported by a gifted young Scottish botanist, William Jack, whom he had met in Calcutta and appointed in November 1818 to succeed Arnold. Raffles kept up correspondence with experts in England and Calcutta, and amassed collections of manuscripts, natural history drawings, and paintings, together with botanical and zoological specimens, some of which he sent to Banks and Marsden. 
This tranquil interlude was shattered by a series of cruel disasters. Within the space of six months, between July 1821 and January 1822, three of his four children died, and the surviving infant was sent to the safe care of Sophia's parents in England. William Jack died of tuberculosis in September 1822, while Raffles and Sophia themselves were seriously ill. Disheartened and prematurely aged, 'a little old man, all yellow and shrivelled', as he described himself at that time, Raffles decided to retire from the East. 
First Raffles resolved to pay a last visit to Singapore, about which he had received encouraging but only occasional reports over the last three years because of the poor communications with west Sumatra. On landing in October 1822 Raffles was thrilled with the spectacular commercial vigour of what he called 'this, my almost only child', but he became increasingly critical of the resident's old-fashioned ways: his deference to Hussein and the 'temenggong', his tolerance of slavery and legalized gambling, and his allocation of land. In January 1823 Raffles reported to Calcutta accusing Farquhar of incompetence, in April he took over as resident himself, and the following month he stripped Farquhar of his office as military commandant. On his return to England, Farquhar complained to the directors about wrongful dismissal, claiming that he himself had been primarily responsible for choosing the Singapore site and successfully nursing the infant settlement through its formative years. 
Despite blinding headaches, which sometimes left Raffles prostrate for weeks on end, and ignoring the fact that the very survival of the settlement was still being debated in Europe, he hurried to lay down regulations for Singapore's long-term administration. Absolute freedom of trade was declared a permanent principle, not merely a temporary expedient to build up commerce. Supported by a committee comprising European officials and merchants, with representatives of the various Asian ethnic groups, Raffles drew up a town plan and resettled a large part of the population according to their different communities. He established a magistracy administering English law, with Malay social custom where appropriate for the indigenous people. Prohibiting slave trading, he provided for existing debt slaves to work off their obligations in five years, and he introduced Bencoolen's liberal system of convict labour management. He banned the carrying of arms, gambling, and cock-fighting outright, and introduced deterrent taxation on other vices, such as alcohol and opium. In June 1823 he signed an agreement with the sultan and 'temenggong', commuting their commercial and judicial privileges to money payments. Most dear to Raffles's heart was the promotion of education, which he believed was the key to progress. His ideal was to revive Asian cultures in alliance with the best of Western tradition through a college which would attract the sons of the elite throughout the region, and, three days before leaving Singapore, he laid the foundation-stone for the Singapore Institution, with generous donations from himself and his wife and a pledge for annual funding from the East India Company. 
Raffles departed from Singapore for the last time on 14 June 1823, returning to Bencoolen, where a fifth child was born but died within two months. On 2 February 1824 Raffles and Sophia set sail for England on the 'Fame', together with all their worldly possessions, worth between $20,000 and $30,000. That same night the ship caught fire. All on board were saved, but the 'Fame' and its cargo were entirely destroyed, including a large collection of plants, fish, animals, and birds; between 2000 and 3000 unique natural history drawings and paintings; original Malay manuscripts and Raffles's notes about the history of Borneo, Sumatra, and the founding of Singapore; together with Raffles's irreplaceable scientific papers and those left by Arnold and Jack, the latter representing three years' unpublished research in Penang, Kedah, Singapore, and Sumatra. 
The couple embarked again on 8 April, reaching Plymouth in August 1824. There Raffles was pleased to learn about the Anglo-Dutch treaty signed in London in March 1824, which recognized the British settlement at Singapore, to be followed by a treaty in August that year in which the Malay chiefs confirmed ceding the whole island to the East India Company. After living in London for a while, in July 1825 Raffles bought a country estate at High Wood, near Hendon, where he took up farming. Meanwhile, in November 1824 he published a 'Statement of the Services of Sir Stamford Raffles', justifying his administration over the past twelve years, and, after the author's death, he undertook the editing of George Finlayson's 'Mission to Siam', which was published in 1826. In the spring of 1825 he launched a long-cherished proposal for a zoo in London supported by a society to promote the science of zoology. Enlisting the backing of Sir Humphry Davy, president of the Royal Society, Raffles issued a prospectus in March 1825 and was elected first president of the Zoological Society at a committee meeting of the proposers, which he chaired on 26 February 1826. 
Raffles's hopes of obtaining a company pension became more pressing when most of his remaining capital was lost through a bank failure late in 1825. In April 1826 the directors finally came to a decision. They acknowledged Raffles's contribution to the successful invasion of Java and, despite questioning the propriety of his land sales, they accepted that he faced a financial crisis from the beginning of his administration in Java. While criticizing his aggressive external policy in Sumatra, they commended his internal administration in Bencoolen, and recognized his crucial role in acquiring and making sound administrative arrangements for Singapore. The overall judgment was favourable, but, so far from granting Raffles a pension, the directors now demanded $22,272 in alleged overpayments and interest going back to 1817. 
The following month Raffles suffered an attack of apoplexy, and early in the morning of 5 July 1826 Sophia found him lying dead at the foot of the stairs. He was only forty-five, but an autopsy revealed an unsuspected brain tumour and showed that for years he had been receiving the wrong treatment for supposed digestive complaints. In March 1827 the directors accepted Sophia's offer of $10,000 to cancel her husband's debt. She lived on until 1858, but their only remaining daughter died in 1840 at the age of eighteen and it was left to Raffles's cousin to continue the family name. Raffles died an embittered man, prematurely broken in health, financially ruined, failing to acquire the honours and public recognition he craved, and apparently with little to show for the privations and tragedies he and his family had suffered. He was buried at Hendon church, but the grave was unmarked, allegedly because of family arguments with the vicar, who held investments in the West Indies and objected to Raffles's campaign against slavery. In 1887 his nephew installed a brass plaque, but the coffin was discovered only accidentally during building work in the vault in April 1914. 
In many ways Raffles was a figure of contradictions and anomalies. His slight stature and sickly constitution masked an immense capacity for hard work and an agile mind. Gentle and soft-spoken, he commanded the devotion of friends and subordinates, but could be intolerant and vindictive towards those who crossed him personally or obstructed his policies. Despite his long years in the East in the service of an old-fashioned monopoly company, he sought to put into practice the most advanced Western views of his time on personal liberty, judicial equality, education, free trade, penal reform, and slave emancipation. A man of vision, with great ambitions for himself and his country, he saw Britain's mission to raise the people of the eastern archipelago from ignorance and poverty, not by means of territorial expansion but a combination of commercial and moral pre-eminence: reviving old cultures and spreading European enlightenment through economic progress, liberal education, and the rule of law. 
Despite Raffles's scanty formal schooling, his intelligence and thirst for learning inspired respect among leading scientists of his day, and after his death he was singled out for praise by Sir Humphry Davy in his presidential address to the Royal Society. A statue by the eminent sculptor Sir Francis Chantrey was erected in Westminster Abbey in 1832, an oil portrait by G. F. Joseph was presented to the National Portrait Gallery, and another by Sir James Lonsdale hangs in the council room at the London Zoo. 
But Raffles's most enduring monument was Singapore itself, which secured British supremacy in the eastern seas for more than a century and represented a triumph for the principles of free trade and 'laissez-faire'. Educational dreams were slower to materialize, although eventually the renamed Raffles Institution became Singapore's premier school. Raffles's statue, which was first installed in Singapore in 1885 to celebrate Queen Victoria's golden jubilee, was torn down during the Japanese occupation but restored after the Second World War. Not only did it survive independence, but the republic of Singapore was unique among liberated colonies in erecting a second monument to honour the foresight of its imperial founder. 


@@@@@


doc= 23011


Ragg, Thomas (1808-1881), preacher and writer, was born at Nottingham on 11 January 1808, the son of George Ragg (1782-1836) and Jane, 'nee' Morrison (died 1822), whose grandfather was a Jacobite. Ragg's father, also born at Nottingham, was great-grandson of Benjamin Ragg, brother-in-law and coadjutor of Richard Newsham, the inventor. He moved to Birmingham the year after his son's birth, and set up a bookshop in Bull Street selling radical political publications. He also continued his large lace and hosiery business for several years, but his political activities consumed so much time that this business ended in bankruptcy. George Ragg was one of the conveners of the meeting held at New Hall Hill on 22 January 1817 to petition for parliamentary reform. In 1818 he founded the 'Birmingham Argus', a reform newspaper. The following year he was prosecuted for selling Carlile's 'Republican', and was imprisoned in 1820 and again in 1821. After his release he was present at the dinner given to Henry Hunt on 14 July 1823 by the Birmingham Union Society of Radical Reformers. 
Thomas Ragg attended various dame-schools and then the academy of the prominent radical George Edmonds, an associate of his father, who later served as town clerk. He left school at the age of eleven and went to work for his father at 'The Argus'. During his father's imprisonments he helped to support the family. In 1822, after the death of his mother, he was apprenticed at Leicester to his uncle, a hosier. The uncle soon moved to the neighbourhood of Nottingham and set up a lace manufactory. Ragg, originally an infidel like his father, soon converted to Christianity, married Mary Ann Clark in 1832, and became an itinerant dissenting preacher in the Nottingham area. He also published three volumes of poetry and contributed verses to the 'Nottingham Review'. His uncle strongly disapproved of Ragg's literary interests, and the birth of a son and heir late in his life further damaged his relations with his nephew. In 1834 Ragg published 'The Deity', a work of blank verse in twelve volumes that detailed his conversion from infidelity to Christianity. Ragg dedicated the work to the poet James Montgomery, who helped arrange its publication. The work received favourable reviews from the 'Eclectic Review', 'The Times', and other publications, but Ragg's uncle reacted with increased hostility, prompting Ragg to leave the business in 1834. He became an assistant to a bookseller named Dearden, in Nottingham, where he published other volumes of verse, wrote for local journals, and contributed an appeal on behalf of the weaver-poet Robert Millhouse to 'Dearden's Miscellany'. 
Ragg's religious poetry attracted notice from Anglicans and dissenters alike. He received an offer of a university education on condition that he take holy orders but he declined. He also refused the pulpits of three nonconformist congregations. Instead, in 1839 he accepted the editorship of the Conservative 'Birmingham Advertiser', 'to bring about something like union and cordiality of feeling between Churchmen and Evangelical Dissenters' (Ragg, 'God's Dealings', xviii). For a short time he attended both an Anglican church and the prominent Carr's Lane Congregationalist Chapel, but left the latter after several chapel-goers accused him of hypocrisy in attending a dissenting chapel while editing a church publication. He was briefly a proprietor of 'The Advertiser' and he also managed the 'Midland Monitor' in 1841-2. He continued to write verse, publishing seven volumes by 1843, and his poetry attracted the notice and friendship of Robert Southey. When 'The Advertiser' failed in 1845, Ragg set up as a stationer and printer in Birmingham. 
Frustrated by what he perceived as Birmingham's animosity toward intellectual culture, in 1844 Ragg became a member of the Birmingham Polytechnic Institution (successor to the Birmingham Mechanics' Institution), taking part in meetings and debates. He also served as the institution's official printer after 1845. In 1847 he founded the Birmingham branch of the Protestant Association of the Anglican church, and in 1849 founded its official organ, the 'Protestant Watchman of the Midland District', of which he was editor. The Protestant Association's pronounced anti-Catholicism was especially prominent in the 'papal aggression' agitation of 1850-51, and formed a counterpoint to the local rise of Tractarianism. Ragg also used the pages of the 'Watchman' to protest against what he felt were the dangerously humanistic tendencies of George Dawson, an extremely popular local minister at the non-sectarian church of the Saviour. Later, in 1861, he debated with secularist George Jacob Holyoake in Birmingham's Temperance Hall. 
In 1855 Ragg published 'Creation's Testimony to its God, or the Accordance of Science, Philosophy, and Revelation', an evidential treatise dedicated to the Revd J. B. Owen. This work obtained wide popularity, reaching a thirteenth edition in 1877. Ragg updated each reissue, in order to keep it abreast of modern scientific progress. The 1858 'Teacher's Edition' of this work was prefaced by an autobiography entitled 'God's Dealings with an Infidel, or, Grace Triumphant'. Ragg also published two additional works on the reconciliation of science and Christianity in 1857 and 1858. 'Creation's Testimony' brought Ragg to the attention of Dr George Murray, bishop of Rochester, who induced him to accept ordination in 1858. He was appointed by the bishop to a curacy, the salary of which the bishop paid himself, at Southfleet in Kent. On the bishop's death he became curate of Malin's Lee in Shropshire, and in 1865 was appointed perpetual curate of the newly formed parish of Lawley in Shropshire, where he remained until his death there on 3 December 1881. He was buried in Lawley churchyard. He was survived by two sons of his first marriage, and two daughters and six sons of his second marriage, to Jane Sarah Barker. 


@@@@@


doc= 23012


Rahere (d. 1143x5), founder of St Bartholomew's Hospital and priory, London, was of unknown origins. The one authoritative source for his life, 'Liber fundacionis ecclesiae Sancti Bartholomei Londoniensis' written some forty years after his death but existing only in a fifteenth-century text, describes 'Rayer' as a man 'born of low lineage' (Moore, BL, Cotton Vespasian B.ix) and with little learning who, as a youth, sought the patronage of the nobility, and inveigled his way into their households with japes and flattery until he became a familiar figure with both king and courtiers through his prominence in courtly revels. At this time, about 1120, there was a canon of St Paul's Cathedral, prebendary of Chamberlainwood (Willesden, Middlesex), called Raherius. Bearing in mind the uncommon name without patronymic, and the strong links at that date between the royal court and St Paul's Cathedral chapter, it would seem probable that prebendary and courtier were one and the same. 'The Book of the Foundation' continues that, suddenly penitent, Rahere made a pilgrimage to Rome to seek a full pardon. However, falling seriously ill while there, he promised God that he would found a hospital should he be granted recovery. His health was restored and, on the return journey to England, he had a vision of St Bartholomew, who instructed him to build a church at Smithfield. Rahere's friends welcomed him home, though, hearing of his vow, the barons of London advised him that Smithfield lay in the king's market and that Rahere should seek the king's favour. Henry I, impressed by the petitioner, granted him the land, which was consecrated by his supporter Richard de Belmeis, bishop of London (died 1127). The building of the church caused no problem; but Rahere, anxious about opposition to his hospital, gathered together all the materials needed and, with everything ready, erected the building speedily. In the 1180s, when the early history of the priory was written down, the date of the foundation was remembered as March 1123. Rahere, who had chosen to follow the Augustinian rule, became the first prior. 
The hospital soon won a reputation for miracles and healing, but disaffected people, seeing Rahere as an arbiter over life or death, planned to kill him. He again petitioned King Henry, who in 1133 granted a charter giving both royal protection and wide-ranging privileges to the young foundation. The author of 'The Book of the Foundation' says that Rahere became 'rich in purity of conscience', diligent in divine service, sober and prudent, humble towards his brethren and benevolent to his enemies, while gently providing care to the sick and poor (Moore, fol. 41'r'). In succeeding centuries, however, his earlier reputation prevailed. John Stow reported that Rahere was 'a pleasant-witted gentleman and therefore in his time the king's minstrel' (Stow, 1.235). In Thomas Deloney's popular tale, 'Thomas of Reading', written in the sixteenth century, 'Reior' was 'the skilfullest musician that lived at that time whose wealth was very great' (Deloney, 452-3). Rahere was thus frequently portrayed as the king's minstrel or jester. He remained in office as prior until his death. The prologue to book 2 of 'The Book of the Foundation' states that he died on 20 September 'after the years of his prelacie xxii and vi months' (Moore, fol. 59'r'); but the writer also declares that the second prior (Thomas, from St Osyth's, Essex) was appointed in 1144 after the space of a year, which seems inconsistent with the earlier statement. Rahere was buried in the priory church, where his effigy, in the Augustinian habit of black cope and white surplice, under a decorated canopy, was placed about 1405. His two works of piety survive; after the Reformation, the choir of the priory church became the parish church of St Bartholomew-the-Great. The hospital, as a separate institution, became one of the world's most influential and respected medical establishments. 


@@@@@


doc= 23013


Raikes, Charles (1812-1885), East India Company servant, was born at Theobalds Park, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, on 9 December 1812, the son of Job Matthew Raikes (1767-1833), a merchant, formerly of Tunbridge Wells, and his wife, Charlotte Susannah, 'nee' Bayly. After a private education and a year at Haileybury College, in 1831 he arrived in Calcutta to take up a writership in the Bengal civil service. He married in 1834 Sophia Mary, daughter of Colonel Mathews of the 31st foot; she died in April the following year, shortly after giving birth to a daughter. On 21 March 1838, while on furlough, he married Justina Davidson, daughter of William Alves of Enham House, Hampshire; they had five sons and two daughters. 
From 1831 until 1853 Raikes was based in the North-Western Provinces, becoming magistrate of Mainpuri in 1849 and publishing 'Notes on the North-Western Provinces' in 1852. In 1853 he was appointed commissioner of Lahore. Three years later he returned to the North-Western Provinces as an officiating judge in the East India Company's chief court at Agra and remained there throughout the turmoil of 1857 until dispatched in December to Farrukhabad as civil commissioner in charge of areas liberated by Sir Colin Campbell. The uprising -- which cost him a daughter, son-in-law (George Christian, commissioner of Sitapur), and two grandchildren -- only strengthened his belief that Indians needed to be ruled despotically, a view he aired in 'Notes on the Revolt in the North-Western Provinces', published in 1858. 
Raikes retired from the civil service in 1860. In 1866 he was made a CSI and in 1867 published a third volume, 'The Englishman in India'. In retirement he served as a magistrate for Wiltshire and Sussex and commanded a corps of volunteers at Chichester. He died at his home, Mill Gap, Eastbourne, in Sussex, on 16 September 1885. His wife, Justina, had died in 1882. He was survived by several children, including Lieutenant-Colonel Frederick Duncan Raikes (1848-1915), commissioner in Upper Burma from 1896 until 1901. 


@@@@@


doc= 23014


Raikes, Henry (1782-1854), Church of England clergyman, was born in Broad Street, City of London, on 24 September 1782, the second son of Thomas Raikes (1741-1813), a merchant, who was governor of the Bank of England in 1797. His mother was Charlotte (died 1810), daughter of the Hon. Henry Finch. The Raikes family was prominent in commercial, social, and evangelical circles. Thomas Raikes, the dandy and diarist, was Henry's brother and Robert Raikes, the founder of the Sunday school movement, his uncle. 
Educated at Eton College (1793-1800), Raikes entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1800 and graduated BA in 1804; he proceeded MA in 1807. He spent most of 1805 travelling abroad. After visiting Austria and Hungary he sailed to Greece, where he met George Hamilton Gordon, fourth earl of Aberdeen, his fellow student at Cambridge, and spent the winter in exploring with him the sites of the temples and cities of Boeotia and the interior of the Peloponnese. The following year he accompanied the Mediterranean squadron for some months, as the guest of Lord Collingwood, on its cruise off the coasts of Sicily and Africa. 
In 1807 Raikes was ordained deacon and in 1808 priest, becoming curate of Betchworth in Surrey. He was subsequently curate of Shillingstone, Dorset, Burnham, Buckinghamshire, and of Bognor, Sussex. On 16 March 1809 he married Augusta (died 1820), eldest daughter of Jacob J. Whittington of Theberton Hall and Yoxford, Suffolk. They had one daughter and three sons, the eldest of whom, Henry Raikes ['see under 'Raikes, Henry Cecil], was the father of Henry Cecil Raikes. In 1828 Raikes became examining chaplain to his early friend John Bird Sumner, bishop of Chester, and in 1830 chancellor of the diocese of Chester. His influence rapidly grew, and he became well known in the city and diocese as a preacher, a public speaker on religious occasions, and an active philanthropist. A leading evangelical, he was prominent in the activities of the Church Missionary Society. On 8 August 1844 he was named an honorary canon of the cathedral. 
In Chester, Raikes encouraged a lively interest in the city's historical remains and in the restoration of the cathedral. He was a president of the Architectural, Archaeological, and Historic Society of Chester, which he helped to found in 1849, and contributed many papers to its journal. He was also appointed historian to the society. 
Raikes's most important published work was 'Remarks on Clerical Education' (1831), which encouraged the universities to improve the theological examinations and the bishops to require a theological degree as a prelude to holy orders. His other works were mostly collected sermons. He was a member of the commission for the subdivision of parishes in 1849, a measure of church reform that he had long advocated. 
Raikes died at his seat, Dee Side House, Chester, on 28 November 1854, and was buried in Chester cemetery on 5 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 23015


Raikes, Henry Cecil (1838-1891), politician, was born on 25 November 1838 at the deanery, Chester, the eldest son of 
Greatly influenced by Disraeli's concept of popular Conservatism, Raikes's desire to stand for parliament was constantly opposed by his father, who had twice unsuccessfully contested the Derby seat for the Conservatives. The latter's death left Raikes free to stand for Chester in 1865 and although defeated he was selected for the Devonport by-election in April 1866 but, again, was unsuccessful. In the following year, Raikes founded the short-lived 'Imperial Review' and worked assiduously with Lord Nevill in the creation of a national union of local Conservative and constitutional associations. Raikes was convinced that any mass political party wishing either to gain or to retain power in the future would have to 'ascertain how far their proceedings were in harmony with the wishes of the people' (McKenzie, 158) and felt that this should be the union's major role, but he was not supported in this by the party leaders. He won the Chester seat in the 1868 general election despite the significant swing against the Conservative Party. Raikes remained chairman of the national union council until 1875 but found his role in party affairs being supplanted by J. E. Gorst, one colleague observing that the tall, thin Raikes, with 'his smiling eyes and soft deliberate voice... [was] a little indefinite in plan and careless in detail' whereas the short, prosaic Gorst possessed a 'genius for organisation... [an] inflexible will and untiring diligence' (Clarke, 95). Raikes's efforts were acknowledged by Disraeli's offer of the positions of chairman of ways and means and deputy speaker of the House of Commons following the Conservative success in the 1874 general election. Raikes knew that the offer reflected an intention to shelve his political aspirations, ironically because of his views and middle-class background, and he acquiesced only very reluctantly, being keenly aware of the likely consequences of refusal. His rather autocratic manner and substantial knowledge of procedure suited both positions and over the next six years he gained general acclaim for his firmness, courtesy, and discretion in the face of significant obstruction by Irish MPs in some debates. A cartoon in 'Vanity Fair' (1875) signalled his growing political stature. 
In the 1880 general election Raikes was stunned by the loss of his Chester seat and although the Conservatives petitioned to have the result overturned on the grounds of corruption he decided to sever his links with the town. The award of a privy councillorship in March 1880 provided some compensation for his loss, as did his election as a bencher of the Middle Temple two months later, but he had missed the chance of becoming speaker of the House of Commons. His return to the Commons in February 1882 as the MP for Preston reflected strong support from his party leaders in this instance, but this was not forthcoming when he resigned in the following November to contest the vacant University of Cambridge seat: this made his victory all the sweeter. A vociferous opponent of some of Gladstone's proposals for parliamentary reform, especially that of the closure of debates, Raikes was also highly critical of Sir Stafford Northcote's ineffective leadership of the opposition, being a supporter of Lord Salisbury. He used his considerable journalistic skills to publicize his views and also founded the 'National Review' in March 1883, with Alfred Austin, in order to provide a public forum for the discussion of Conservatism. His independent stance and unwillingness to serve with Northcote, combined with an erroneous estimate of his own political standing, ensured his exclusion from office in Lord Salisbury's first administration of 1885-6. When Salisbury formed his second government in 1886, Raikes was only offered the minor position of postmaster-general, which he accepted. 
Raikes did not enjoy his tenure as postmaster-general but he was determined to be the master of his department. He rapidly acquired a substantial knowledge of its operations, which, coupled with his despotic manner, enabled him to realize his aim but led to conflicts with his staff. His determination to secure the optimum provision of postal services generated confrontation with companies which had previously enjoyed monopolies in certain sectors. In two instances Raikes was able to secure considerable improvements to services, as well as substantial financial savings, by the negotiation of new contracts, in which he enjoyed the support of both the cabinet and the House of Commons. But in the conflict with Boy Messengers Limited in 1891 he was forced to compromise in the face of both cabinet and public pressure, and he found this an unpleasant experience. His belief that the Post Office should set an example by the liberal treatment of its staff was offset by his firm handling of unrest over conditions of service between January 1890 and April 1891, and the attendant conflict with the Postmen's Union. This earned him considerable public obloquy at the time, but ultimately respect for the improved conditions he managed to wrest from Treasury. 
Lord Cranbrook believed Raikes had demonstrated significant administrative powers as postmaster-general, although another contemporary felt that he was essentially an official by nature and thus possessed the defect of his qualities. Edward Hamilton contended that Raikes's failure to achieve his political aims reflected his unpopularity within the Conservative Party as a result of his general conduct and his inability to 'say or do anything without saying it or doing it in the wrong manner' (Hamilton, BL, Add. MS 48656). Some later historians, notably Hanham, Feuchtwanger, and Shannon concur with Hamilton's analysis while acknowledging Raikes's contributions to the national union, party organization, and the post-Disraeli leadership struggle. 
A committed lay member of the Anglican church, Raikes served as chairman of the Church Defence Institution (1868-74), president of the Central Council of Diocesan Conferences (1881-5), and from 1890 as chancellor of the diocese of St Asaph. His defence of the church in the Commons was notable, especially on the issue of Welsh disestablishment. He served as deputy lieutenant of Flintshire from 1864 until his death and received an honorary LLD from Cambridge University in 1888. He died suddenly on 24 August 1891 at his home, Llwynegrin Hall, Flintshire, and was buried on 27 August at St Mary's Church, Mold. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 23016


Raikes, Robert (1736-1811), promoter of Sunday schools, was born at Gloucester on 14 September 1736 and baptized on 24 September. He was the eldest of six sons, followed by one daughter, of Robert Raikes (bap. 1690, d. 1757), printer, and his third wife, Mary (1713/14-1779), daughter of the Revd R. Drew. Robert Raikes senior had founded the 'Gloucester Journal' in 1722, and Robert succeeded to the business on his father's death. In 1767 he married Anne (died 1828), daughter of Thomas Trigge; three sons and seven daughters were born to them, of whom one son and one daughter died in infancy. 
Raikes had a benevolent disposition, and was sensitive to the abuses that went on in Gloucester gaol. In 1768 his paper carried an appeal on behalf of the prisoners, for among other hardships no allowance was made for the support of lesser offenders, who were kept alive only by sharing the rations of their fellows. He offered hospitality to John Howard, the pioneer of prison reform, when he went to Gloucester in 1773 on his tour of prisons in the west of England to publicize these and other abuses. 
The event which allegedly turned Raikes towards founding Sunday schools has grown much in the telling, but seems to have come about one Sunday when he was in St Catherine's Meadows, on the outskirts of Gloucester. There he saw the local children running wild, and was told that they had nothing else to do. Another version of the story tells that Raikes made up his newspaper on Sundays, and was annoyed by interruption from noisy children outside when reading his proofs. At much the same time, however, he heard of one dissenter named William King who had set up a Sunday school at Dursley, while another, Hannah Ball, had recently started a school at High Wycombe. There seems to have been a general movement towards the idea of religious instruction for children on Sundays, mostly promoted by dissenters. 
Whatever the true inspiration or incentive for his actions, Raikes spoke to Thomas Stock (1749-1803), curate of a neighbouring parish, who had started a Sunday school at Ashbury, Berkshire. Raikes and Stock engaged and paid four women as teachers of children in their own homes, Stock drawing up the rules for their instruction. Raikes afterwards set up a school in his own parish of St Mary le Crypt, which opened in July 1780, and on whose fortunes he thereafter concentrated. He visited the scholars at home, heard them read, and awarded prizes. Three years later he inserted in his paper a short anonymous notice of its success, which brought in many enquiries. An answer which he sent to Richard Towneley of Belfield, Rochdale, was published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in June 1784, and a laudatory account of his proceedings, with his portrait, was printed in the 'European Magazine' of November 1788. Such press notices generated further activity, with more schools opening in Leeds, Manchester, and the surrounding districts. John Wesley, preaching in Bingley, noted in his diary 'I find these schools springing up everywhere I go' ('Wesley's Journal', 7.3, 18 July 1784). Wesley encouraged his followers to start similar schools. 
Raikes had been eager that the Anglicans should lead. The bishops of Chester and Salisbury voiced their approval of his activities, and his friend Samuel Glasse, preaching a sermon at Painswick, Gloucestershire, in 1786, on behalf of its schools, claimed that 200,000 children were already being taught in England. Glasse added further momentum to the movement with his 'The Piety, Wisdom, and Policy of Promoting Sunday Schools' (also 1786) and an essay in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1788). The Baptist William Fox, who had been trying to start a system of day schools, thought Raikes's plan more practical and, after consulting him, formed the Sunday School Society in September 1786. Although he never attended a meeting, Raikes supported and encouraged Fox, and in 1787 he was admitted an honorary member in consideration of his zeal and his status as the perceived original founder of the Sunday school movement. 
Before long, Sunday schools were flourishing in Wales, Scotland, Ireland, and the United States. At Christmas 1787 Raikes was granted an audience with Queen Charlotte. She spoke favourably of the plan to the educationist Sarah Trimmer, who established a school in Old Brentford, which attracted over 300 pupils within a year and was visited by George III. When the king visited Cheltenham in 1788 Miss Burney, then a maid of honour, went to Gloucester to meet Raikes, whom she revered, finding him however rather vain and voluble. She observed that he played an important role in all Gloucester's benevolent institutions, including the infirmary and the new model prison then under construction. 
Raikes retired from business in 1802, receiving a life annuity of $100 from the 'Gloucester Journal'. He died at Gloucester on 5 April 1811 and was buried in the church of St Mary le Crypt, where there are monuments to him and his parents. A statue of Raikes by Sir Thomas Brock was erected in 1880 on the Embankment, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 23017


Raikes, Thomas (1777-1848), dandy and diarist, born on 3 October 1777, was the eldest son of Thomas Raikes (1741-1813) and his wife, Charlotte (died 1810), daughter of the Hon. Henry Finch. He had three brothers, including the clergyman Henry Raikes (1782-1854), and five sisters. His father was the brother of Robert Raikes, the promoter of Sunday schools, and was a merchant in London, governor of the Bank of England in the crisis of 1797, and personal friend of Wilberforce and the younger William Pitt. 
Raikes was educated at Eton College, where he became a 'fair classical scholar' and made the acquaintance of many youths, including George Brummell, who were to be his friends in fashionable life. In 1795 he was sent abroad with a private tutor to study modern languages, and visited most of the German courts, including Berlin and Dresden. On his return to England he became a partner in his father's business, but he was more at home in the clubs of the West End. There he spent his time in the company of the 'dandies'. He was an early member of the Carlton Club, joined White's Club about 1810, and belonged to Watier's. As he was a City merchant as well as a dandy, his nickname was Apollo, 'because he rose in the east and set in the west'. He was a tall, large man, very much marked with the smallpox, and was caricatured by Dighton as 'One of the Rake's of London'. His name appears with almost unequalled regularity in White's betting book. On 4 May 1802, he married Sophia Maria, daughter of Nathaniel Bayly, a proprietor in Jamaica. She died on 8 March 1822, leaving one son and three daughters. 
Raikes was at The Hague in 1814, spending most of his time in the house of Lord Clancarty, the English ambassador; he visited Paris in 1814, 1819, and 1820, and he spent the winter of 1829-30 in Russia. But he still remained in business, and in 1832, at a meeting of City merchants at the London tavern, proposed the second resolution against the war with Holland. Financial troubles, however, forced him to leave for France in the summer of 1833, and for eight years he remained abroad. In October 1841, when the tories came into office, he returned to England, hoping for a post through the influence of the duke of Wellington, but his expectations were disappointed, and he found most of his old friends dead or in retirement. The following years were spent partly in London and partly in Paris. His health was failing and in May 1846 he went to Bath for its waters. He then took a house at Brighton, and died there on 3 July 1848. 
Raikes's best book was his diary, comprising reminiscences of the leading men of fashion and politics -- such as the duke of York, Brummell, Alvanley, and Talleyrand -- in London and Paris during the earlier part of the nineteenth century. It was published in 1856-7. His other works included two volumes of foreign observations, and 'Private Correspondence with the Duke of Wellington and other Distinguished Contemporaries' (1861), edited by his daughter, Harriet Raikes; most of the letters to the duke related to French politics from 1840 to 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 23018


Railton, William (1800-1877), architect, was born in Clapham, Surrey, on 14 May 1800, the son of Isaac Railton of Hertford Street, Mayfair, and Caldbeck, Cumberland, and his wife, Margaret Maria, 'nee' Scott (1775/6-1867). He became a pupil of William Inwood and enrolled as a student in the Royal Academy Schools in 1823. From about 1825 to 1827 he visited Greece and Egypt, and on his way examined the then recently discovered temple at Cadachio in Corfu, his description of which was published in the supplementary volume of Stuart and Revett's 'Antiquities of Athens' in 1830. He went into architectural practice in Baker Street, London, and, from 1832 to 1851, at 12 Regent Street, and exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy between 1829 and 1851, obtaining fourth prize in the competition for the new houses of parliament in 1836. 
From 1838 to 1848 Railton held the appointment of architect to the ecclesiastical commissioners, specializing in the design of parsonages, and preparing two model designs which were criticized in 'The Ecclesiologist' ('The Ecclesiologist', 2, 1843, 145-7). He also designed a handful of country houses in the Gothic or Elizabethan styles, among them Randalls, near Leatherhead, Surrey (1830; dem.), Grace-Dieu Manor, Leicestershire (1833-4), and Beaumanor Park, Leicestershire (1845-7). He was employed upon restorations at Ripon Cathedral in 1843-4, and he adapted and enlarged Riseholme Hall, Lincolnshire, as a palace for the bishop of Lincoln in 1840-45, and built the residence of the bishop of Ripon (later Spring Hill schools) in 1838-9, along with the chapel in 1848. His churches, most of them in the Early English Gothic style, include Copt Oak and Woodhouse Eaves, Leicestershire (both 1837), Holy Trinity, Hoxton, London (1846-8), and Meanwood, Leeds (1849). 
Railton's best-known work is Nelson's Column in Trafalgar Square, London, his design for which was accepted after two competitions in 1839, and carried out in spite of strong opposition. The column itself, 170 feet high, was erected between 1840 and 1843 and is surmounted by a granite statue of Nelson by E. H. Baily (1842); the bas-reliefs which adorn the four sides of the plinth were added in 1849 and the lions at the four corners, by Sir Edwin Landseer, in 1867. 
Railton designed no buildings during the last twenty-seven years of his life. On 21 June 1860 he married Amelia Knight (1821-1898), daughter of George Borrow, a civil servant at the War Office. They lived at 65 Onslow Square, South Kensington, and had at least two daughters. He died at 140 Marine Parade, Brighton, while on a visit to Brighton on 13 October 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 23019


Raimbach, Abraham (1776-1843), engraver, was born in Cecil Court, St Martin's Lane, London, on 16 February 1776 and baptized on 28 March 1776 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. His father, (John) Peter Raimbach, was a native of Switzerland, who went when a child to England, and married Martha Butler, a daughter of a Warwickshire farmer. Raimbach was educated at Archbishop Tenison's Grammar School, London, and in 1789 was articled to John Hall (1739-97), historical engraver to the king; in the following year he executed his first independent work, the key to Bartolozzi's plate of the 'Death of Chatham' after J. S. Copley. On the expiration of his articles, Raimbach entered the Royal Academy Schools, and in 1799 gained a silver medal for a drawing from life. He studied at the academy for nine years, maintaining himself by engraving small plates for G. Cooke's editions of the poets and novelists, after R. H. Corbould, J. H. Thurston, and others; he also painted portraits in miniature which he exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1797 to 1805. In 1801 Raimbach executed three plates, after R. Smirke, for the Revd E. Forster's edition of 'The Arabian Nights'. With the money thus earned he visited Paris in 1802 and stayed two months, studying in the Musee du Louvre. After his return he joined an Artists' volunteer corps in 1803; was a member of the Society of Engravers, 1804; and engraved the illustrations by Smirke for a new edition of Johnson's 'Rasselas' (1805), doing similar work for J. Sharpe, Longman, and other publishers. In 1805 he married Juliet Harriet and went to live at 9 Warren Street, Fitzroy Square, London, where he remained until 1831, when he moved to Park Terrace, Greenwich. He engraved on steel plate for the Bank of England in 1811, and in 1819 he supported Jacob Perkins's siderographic process for the bank's competition to combat forgery. 
In 1812 Sir David Wilkie proposed to Raimbach that they should undertake the publication of a series of large plates, and the scheme was arranged on terms very favourable to Raimbach. The first result was 'The Village Politicians' (1814), a proof of which was exhibited at the Paris Salon and awarded a gold medal. This was followed by five others, upon all of which Raimbach's reputation mainly rests; these are excellent reproductions of the original pictures, the mode of execution being well suited to the subjects; they are entirely by his own hand, no assistants having been employed on them. 
In 1824 and 1825 Raimbach paid further visits to Paris, where he was well received by the leading French engravers; in 1835 he was elected a corresponding member of the Institut de France and in 1836 signed the petition supporting the work of the House of Commons select committee on arts. After Wilkie's death in 1841 the six plates which were the joint property of himself and Raimbach were sold with the stock of prints at Christies. Most of his plates were in line and on copper, usually signed 'A. Raimbach'. 
Raimbach died at his home in Park Terrace, Greenwich, Kent, of water on the chest, on 17 January 1843, and was buried beside his parents at Hendon, Middlesex, where a mural tablet to his memory was placed in St Mary's Church. His plates and so on were sold by auction on 15 March 1843. His 'Memoirs and Recollections', written in 1836, was privately printed in 1843 by his eldest son, Michael Thomson Scott Raimbach ('bap'. 26 July 1809), who at his death in 1887 bequeathed to the National Portrait Gallery, London, an excellent portrait of his father, painted by Wilkie. His second son, David Wilkie Raimbach (1820-1895), a godson of the painter, exhibited portraits at the Royal Academy from 1843 to 1855; he was for twenty years headmaster of the Birmingham School of Art, and, until within a few weeks of his death, an examiner for the Department of Science and Art. He died on 20 February 1895. There was a third son, Thomas Emmerson ('bap'. 9 July 1823), and daughters Eliza ('bap'. 10 Nov 1813), Julia Elizabeth ('bap'. 26 July 1809, died 1816), and Emma Harriet (1810- 'c'.1882) who exhibited miniatures at the Royal Academy between 1835 and 1855, and went into a French convent at Caen, where she died. 


@@@@@


doc= 23020


Rainborowe, Thomas (d. 1648), parliamentarian army officer and Leveller, was the first-born son of Captain William Rainborow (bap. 1587, d. 1642), Levant merchant and naval officer. His mother, William's first wife, was a daughter of Captain Rowland Coytmore of Wapping. Martha, the first of his two sisters, was briefly married to John Winthrop, governor of Massachusetts, as his fourth wife. His other sister, Judith, married the governor's fourth son, Stephen Winthrop, who became a captain in the New Model Army, and later a colonel. His brother William Rainborowe was a major in the New Model, but was dismissed in 1649 for his extremely radical opinions. 
Thomas Rainborowe grew up in Wapping, a Thameside parish east of the City. Raised to be a mariner like his father, he is known to have been a trader in currants with the Turkey Company before 1642. At his father's death in that year Thomas inherited all his property in Southwark and $1000. At the outbreak of the civil war it was therefore as a well-to-do young man that he joined the parliamentarian fleet under the earl of Warwick, guarding the Irish Sea to prevent Irish volunteers from joining the king's army in northern England. He had already established an economic stake in Ireland, investing $500 in the spring of 1642 in the Irish adventurers' scheme to reconquer the kingdom in return for land there. In the summer of the same year he was appointed by parliament one of the commissioners for the additional sea adventurers to Ireland, and invested a further $400 to fit out ships for an offensive against the south coast. In the summer of 1643, while commander of the 'Lion', he captured a ship off the east coast of Scotland bringing reinforcements to the king. 
Shortly afterwards Rainborowe returned to land, and went to assist Ferdinando, Lord Fairfax, in the defence of Hull. On 11 October 1643 he led 500 musketeers in a sally against the enemy. After a fierce, see-saw struggle, during which Rainborowe was taken prisoner, the enemy were driven back, and the marquess of Newcastle was obliged to lift the siege. By this time Rainborowe had risen to the rank of colonel, and he remained with the land service for another four years. His next notable exploit was an amphibious assault on Crowland Castle in Lincolnshire, which resulted in the recapture of that fortress. Now an officer in the earl of Manchester's eastern association army, he raised a foot regiment largely officered by returning emigres from New England. 
At the formation of the New Model Army in the spring of 1645 Rainborowe, as a naval officer, was exempted from the terms of the Self-Denying Ordinance, and appointed colonel of foot, despite an attempt by the peers to reject him. With remarkable efficiency he pressed almost 1500 men, returning to the treasury more than half the money allotted to him for the purpose. On 1 June 1645 he captured Gaunt House near Oxford, and less than two weeks later fought at Naseby. At the New Model's second most important battle, Langport, on 10 July he led a party of 1500 musketeers 'with admirable resolution' across a stream and uphill through a narrow lane to the royalist position (Sprigge, 65). He also fought at the sieges of Bridgwater and Sherborne, and took Nunney Castle on 20 August and Berkeley Castle on 25 September. It was at the storming of Bristol on 10 September that, in Cromwell's words, he had 'the hardest task of all' (ibid., 115). The men of his brigade scaled the high walls of Prior's Hill Fort in the face of withering musket- and cannon-fire. 
In December 1645 Rainborowe's regiment was sent to blockade Oxford, and on 25 April 1646 Woodstock surrendered to him. When Charles I attempted to negotiate his own reception by the army Rainborowe refused to get involved, and merely passed on the king's proposals to the Commons speaker. After the capitulation of the royalist headquarters at Oxford, Rainborowe was sent to reduce Worcester and was subsequently recommended for the governorship of the city by Sir Thomas Fairfax, who reminded parliament that Rainborowe had been 'very faithful, valiant, and successful in many undertakings' (Cary, 1.138). His career as governor lasted from July 1646 until the following April. 
In January 1647 Rainborowe was elected the recruiter MP for Droitwich, Worcestershire. But he did not give up his military career, for in May 1647 parliament ordered him to command the forces intended for the recovery of Jersey. His regiment mutinied, however, and threw in its lot with the other New Model regiments in their revolt against parliament. Rainborowe joined them soon afterwards. In recognition of his intelligence and military capability, army headquarters now assigned him increasingly important political and administrative responsibilities. At the end of July he was part of the delegation that presented the army's 'The Heads of the Proposals' to the king. When Charles answered the officers with foolish intransigence Rainborowe quit the meeting and returned to Bedford where he spread the news of Charles's words among the soldiers. 
Meanwhile in the City an attempted counter-revolution provoked the army to march on the capital to restore its friends to their places in parliament. On 4 August Rainborowe led an advance party of 4000 horse and foot that occupied Southwark. Later the same month Sir Thomas Fairfax appointed him to the committee of general officers to advise him on appointments and other policy matters. By now Rainborowe was becoming disillusioned with Oliver Cromwell and Henry Ireton for persisting in their negotiations with Charles. Cromwell for his part saw Rainborowe as the leader of the faction 'that were endeavouring to have no other power to rule but the sword' (Scrope and Monkhouse, 2, appx, xxxix). The antagonism between them also stemmed from Rainborowe's ambition to become vice-admiral of the navy, and Cromwell's desire to thwart him. The two men were at loggerheads, and in the army council Rainborowe blew up at Cromwell and thundered that 'one of them must not live' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 30, fol. 67). In the event he obtained the appointment on 27 September 1647, perhaps because Cromwell appreciated that it would remove him from the centre of political power. 
In the weeks before he took up his appointment Rainborowe continued to be a thorn in the side of the military grandees. In October and November he played a leading part in the army general council's debates at Putney on the Leveller 'Agreement of the People'. He poured scorn on Cromwell and others who said of the projected constitution, 'Itt's a huge alteration, itt's a bringing in of New Lawes', commenting, 'if writinges bee true there hath bin many scufflinges betweene the honest men of England and those that have tyranniz'd over them' ('Clarke Papers', 1.246). When the grandees sought to prolong the discussion of the army's engagements Rainborowe insisted that they move on to address the 'Agreement of the People'. When Ireton attacked the principle of universal manhood suffrage Rainborowe took up the challenge in words that still ring in our ears after more than three-and-a-half centuries: 'really I thinke that the poorest hee that is in England hath a life to live as the greatest hee; and therefore truly, Sir, I thinke itt's cleare, that every man that is to live under a Government ought first by his owne consent to putt himself under that Government; and... I should doubt whether he was an Englishman or noe that should doubt of these thinges. (ibid., 1.301)' Having, with Ireton, dominated the debates and won many waverers to his way of thinking, Rainborowe went on to persuade the army general council to write to parliament opposing any further addresses to the king. His next move was to demand that the 'Agreement' be submitted to the whole body of the army at a rendezvous. By now the grandees had had enough. Adjourning the debate they summoned not one but three separate rendezvous of the army, at which they presented, not the 'Agreement of the People', but a much more limited remonstrance emphasizing army grievances. Rainborowe turned up uninvited to the first rendezvous at Corkbush field near Ware, and attempted to present a copy of the 'Agreement' to General Fairfax, but he was brushed aside. 
The consequence of all this radical political activity was that both houses of parliament immediately voted to revoke Rainborowe's appointment as vice-admiral. But with Charles having escaped to the Isle of Wight and a renewal of civil war imminent, the army officers closed ranks. Rainborowe apologized for what he had done and Fairfax urged the lords to reinstate him. They still refused, but the Commons, worried that the fleet might allow Charles to slip through their clutches and flee the kingdom, overrode the lords' veto and on 1 January 1648 ordered Rainborowe at once to take up his command. 
The trouble was that neither the sailors nor their officers wanted Rainborowe to be their admiral. They resented having a man of such radical views and so identified with the army foisted upon them. Already by early 1648 the navy was rife with royalism and regarded Rainborowe as a man 'not wel-affected to the king, parliament and kingdome', whose 'insufferable pride, ignorance and insolency... [had] alienated the hearts of the seamen' ('The Declaration of the Navie', 28 May 1648; Penn, 1.258). A royalist uprising in Kent in May quickly spread to the fleet. On 27 May the men of his own flagship, the 'Constant Reformation', expelled him and bundled him aboard a small vessel bound for London. They justified themselves by denouncing him as 'a man of most destructive principles both in religion and policy, and a known enemy to the peace and antient government of this kingdom' ('A Declaration of the Officers and Company of Sea-Men abord his Majesties Ships, the Constant Reformation...', 1648). Rainborowe's authority in the navy was now at an end. Parliament appointed the earl of Warwick lord high admiral again and Rainborowe resumed his colonelcy in the army. 
Rainborowe joined Fairfax at the siege of Colchester, and was one of the commissioners who negotiated the royalists' surrender at the end of August 1648. In October Fairfax dispatched him northward to take command of the siege of Pontefract Castle. The officer whom he superseded, Sir Henry Cholmley, bitterly resented his displacement, and refused to recognize Rainborowe's authority. Rainborowe retired to Doncaster until parliament should settle the dispute. Perceiving his vulnerability there, a party of cavaliers crept out of Pontefract on 29 October and rode to Doncaster where they surprised the colonel in his quarters. Their intent was to ransom him for Sir Marmaduke Langdale, also a prisoner. But Rainborowe was not one to submit tamely to arrest. He tore himself loose from his captors in the street and brandished his sword crying 'armes, armes!' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 34, fol. 27'v'). No one answered his cry, however, and in the ensuing struggle he was run through with a sword and killed. 
The Levellers would later allege that Cromwell was somehow to blame for Rainborowe's assassination. However, the episode was thoroughly investigated at the time, and there is no evidence of Cromwell's being implicated. The body of the fallen hero was brought to London a fortnight after his death. There were reported to be 3000 in the funeral procession, which wound its way through the City, and out through the East End to Wapping where he was buried beside his father. Many elegies were printed demanding vengeance on the royalists for his death; a ballad was composed entitled 'Colonell Rainsborowes Ghost'; and his sea-green colours became a badge of Leveller allegiance. 
Rainborowe left no will. Some years before his death he had married a woman called Margaret about whom little is known. Together they had a son, William, and at least one other child. Parliament was generous to his widow. She received his full arrears of pay, amounting to over $1300, in addition to $200 per year until land worth $3000 should be granted her. In 1653 and 1654 the treason trustees deeded her the manor of Somerset, Somerset, and the manor of West Derby and Trayles, Lancashire. 
Thomas Rainborowe was one of the most vivid actors in the English revolution. A soldier of impressive professional competence and peerless courage, he led his men in a number of daring and successful engagements. During the political crisis of 1647-8 he stepped forward boldly as a tribune of the common soldiers and the poor people of England. He spoke eloquently for the Levellers' 'Agreement of the People' and nearly won the army to their side. But his radicalism, as well as his truculent personality, offended many of the higher officers, who sought to remove him from the political debate, first by granting his request to be appointed to the navy, and then by assigning him to a siege in the north of England. Heedlessness of his own safety, combined with stubborn pride, brought about his end. In death he became the most prominent of the Leveller martyrs. 


@@@@@


doc= 23021


Rainborow, William (bap. 1587, d. 1642), naval officer, was baptized at St Mary's, Whitechapel, on 11 June 1587, the eldest son of Thomas Rainborow (died 1622) of Whitechapel, a prosperous mariner active in the Levant trade, and his wife, Martha More (died 1631), and remained part of the close-knit Thameside community to the east of the City of London throughout his life. By 1618 he was sailing to the Mediterranean for the Levant Company, gaining its commendation for 'good service against pirates' (Hebb, 239): offered $25 as a reward, he asked instead to be made a member of the company. From his father he inherited shares in a number of merchant ships, among them the 400 ton 'Royal Exchange', and in or before 1625 was made an elder brother of Trinity House. Shortly afterwards he became co-owner and master of the 'Sampson', a heavily armed merchantman of 500 tons, newly built at Limehouse, which he regularly commanded on voyages for the Levant Company to and from Constantinople, sometimes carrying English diplomats. Sailing alone from Constantinople in 1628, with Sir Thomas Roe and his wife aboard, the 'Sampson' was attacked by galleys of the knights of the order of St John when becalmed off Malta. Over the next seven hours Rainborow's obduracy broke the spirit of the Maltese. Roe, adept at redeeming British hostages by diplomatic means, was, as he later wrote, only saved from becoming one himself by the 'brave courage and temper', as well as the seamanship, of his captain (Strachan, 182). In the 1630s Rainborow was among the senior mariners consulted about manning the king's ships (1632), the Chatham chest (1635), and fraudulent timber imports (1638). He served as master of Trinity House in 1633-4, ending his term just as Charles I's standing navy came into being. Edward Nicholas, then drawing up a list of suitable officers for Lord Treasurer Portland, included Rainborow as one of only two professional seamen 'that have the command as captain and [have] performed good fyght at sea in merchant ships' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/270/65). 
His contribution to the ship money fleets reflected Rainborow's determination to make the most of an overdue opportunity to rally England's maritime resources in the interests of its seafaring community. In 1635 he was Lindsey's flag captain, and bolstered the royal fleet by supplying both the 'Sampson' and the 'Royal Exchange' on charter as part of the contingent from the City of London. Afterwards he proposed the removal of galleries from the king's ships as a fire risk, but found that the officers of the navy considered that to do so would 'much diminish... [their] beauty' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/311/65). Northumberland selected him as flag captain in 1636 and quickly established a productive working relationship. At the end of the year Rainborow played a full part in Northumberland's detailed inquiry into the fleet's most serious deficiencies, and vetted his report, even though to limited effect, before it reached the king. The definitive proposal for a blockade of the port of Sale and its privateers in 1637 also came out of this association. Rainborow declared his 'extraordinary willingness to set forward that business' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/337/8) and Northumberland convinced Charles that he should take charge of it. Detailed advice was invited from Trinity House on the composition of his fleet, and four of its six captains were Trinity House brethren. Rainborow himself pressed for two pinnaces, to be built at once, for use in shallow waters inshore; and although his formal instructions still did not mention them, the admiralty accepted that without them 'the business cannot proceed' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/327/30). Writing to Wentworth at Dublin on 20 May, however, he made it clear that he would have preferred more than two, particularly as, to his growing irritation, the promised pair were proving to be so delayed that his four larger ships were left for more than two months to mount what blockade they could after Spain had failed to send any galleys. The turn of local politics within the port had as much to do with the successful outcome as had English seapower, a circumstance not lost on London commentators. After concluding a peace treaty with the king of Morocco in September 1637, and securing the release of 350 or so captives, Rainborow sailed home with the Moroccan ambassador and an English agent, Robert Blake. In what was a critical year for the future of ship money, from the submission of the king's case to the judges in February to the prosecution of Hampden in November, Charles was anxious to make the most of what might seem a happy demonstration of the practical benefits of the levy, hitherto less obvious to taxpayers than his concern for his sovereignty of the British seas. The ambassador was certainly extravagantly received, and fulsome accounts of his reception and of the expedition itself were soon in print; as Lord Conway observed, 'the reason of all... is the shipping money'. But Rainborow, offered a knighthood by Charles, preferred to accept no more than a gold chain and medal worth, it was said, $300 ('Earl of Strafforde's Letters and Dispatches', 2.124, 129). At the same time onlookers in a crowded exchequer chamber daily disturbed the court by applauding the arguments of Hampden's defence counsel. 
Rainborow had hopes in 1638 of undertaking a second stage in the campaign against the Mediterranean pirates; however, with Northumberland indisposed, his proposal in January for a more elaborate and expensive attack on Algiers found no favour, and instead he was given charge of the sea trials of the new great ship, the 'Sovereign of the Seas', which had been launched as he returned from Sale. According to her builder, Phineas Pett, who was aboard, three days in August 1638 proved enough to assess the 'condition and working of the ship in all respects' ('Autobiography', 170). Thereafter it is unlikely that Rainborow went to sea again. He was among the founders of a poor seaman's fund, to be administered by Trinity House, in September 1638, and in 1639 proposed a scheme for arming colliers as support craft for 'a great army'. During spring 1638 his daughter Martha and her husband, Thomas Coytmore, sailed for Massachusetts in a ship co-owned by Rainborow; and in time four of his six children lived for extended periods in New England, his sons William and Edward returning to fight for the parliamentarian side in the civil war. Rainborow was elected for Aldeburgh to both the parliaments of 1640, in April with Squire Bence and then in November with his tenant at Wapping, Alexander Bence, ending years of Howard influence. He was appointed to all the Commons' maritime committees, sometimes with Sir Thomas Roe, until 19 November 1641. 
Rainborow died about 12 February 1642, and was buried on 17 February in St John's Chapel, Wapping. He had made his will in July 1638, and altered it little thereafter. He married twice. His first wife was a daughter of Rowland Coytmore of Wapping, an elder brother of Trinity House and a man of substance; the three elder children (Thomas Rainborowe, with a turbulent career ahead, William Rainborowe, and Martha, whose second husband was to be Governor John Winthrop) were all probably from this marriage. His second wife, whom he married about 1624, was Judith, daughter of Reynold Hoxton of Wapping; she died in March 1638 leaving three children (Judith, who later married Winthrop's son Stephen, Joan, and Edward). Rainborow's will was mainly concerned with his children, the five younger ones between them receiving the bulk of the $5500 he disposed in monetary bequests. He left to Thomas houses in Southwark, 'some of them latelie built' and bought from William Cambell, and to William houses in Gun Alley, Wapping. Other legacies were to the poor of Wapping (one by way of Trinity House) and Whitechapel; but he said nothing about his shares in ships. 
Charles had recognized Rainborow's qualities as a professional seaman, but failed to give his inclination for reform the scope it needed, despite its moderate and conservative nature. Rainborow had little time for flights of fancy about sovereignty of the seas, and was much more concerned with finding ways of protecting merchant shipping and seamen, as ship money claimed to do, without damaging commercial interests. He recognized, better than the king, the urgent need to improve the versatility of the royal fleet as well as the quality of naval administration. In choosing to throw in their lot with the parliamentarian side in the months after his death, men who thought like Rainborow looked for a future beyond the misrepresentations and uncertainty of 1630s ship money. Prominent among them were three of the Trinity House captains who had served with him in the Sale expedition. 


@@@@@


doc= 23022


Rainbow, Edward (1608-1684), bishop of Carlisle, was born on 20 April 1608 at Blyton in Lindsey, Lincolnshire, son of Thomas Rainbow, the vicar, and his wife, Rebecca, daughter of David Allen, rector of the neighbouring parish of Ludborough. After a short time at school in Gainsborough he was sent in April 1620 to Peterborough to study under John Williams, then one of the prebendaries, and an old friend of his father. When, in 1621, Williams was preferred to the deanery of Westminster and bishopric of Lincoln, Rainbow transferred to Westminster School. In July 1623 Rainbow obtained a scholarship at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where his brother was a fellow, but in July 1625, through the family of his godfather Edward Wray of Rycot, he received from Frances, dowager countess of Warwick, a nomination to one of the Wray scholarships founded at Magdalene College, Cambridge, by her father. He graduated BA in 1627 and proceeded MA in 1630; during his time as a student he acquitted himself well when called on by the vice-chancellor to make a speech. 
In July 1630 Rainbow accepted the mastership of a school at Kirton in Lindsey, but soon moved with some Cambridge contemporaries to London, settling first in Fuller's Rents, and afterwards at Sion College, so as to make use of the library. He was ordained in April 1632. After an unsuccessful application for the chaplaincy at Lincoln's Inn he was appointed curate at the Savoy Chapel by the minister, Thomas Hastler. 
In November 1633 Rainbow was recalled to Cambridge. The master and fellows of Magdalene College elected him to a by-fellowship on Dr Goche's foundation, with a pre-election to the first open fellowship that should fall vacant. Four closed fellowships were to fall vacant before Rainbow joined the foundation. He became a successful tutor; two sons of the earl of Suffolk and two sons of Francis Leke, Baron Deincourt, became his pupils. On 23 September 1634 he preached at Paul's Cross a sermon published as 'Labour Forbidden and Commanded' (1635). In 1637 he accepted the small vicarage of Childerley, near Cambridge, and became dean of Magdalene. In 1642 he was appointed master in succession to Henry Smyth by the earl of Suffolk, who had promised it to him some years earlier. He proved himself an effective master, putting college registers in order, ably managing finances and increasing student numbers. 
The House of Lords granted Rainbow a pass into Holland on 16 May 1645. In 1648 he became rector of Great Easton, Essex, where there is evidence that he used the liturgy from the 'Book of Common Prayer', or a close adaptation of it. The preface to his 'A Sermon... Preached at the Interring of the Corps of... Susanna Countess of Suffolk' (1649) was dated from Audley End on 11 September 1649. Ejected from his mastership in 1650 for refusal to swear to the engagement, he told the parliamentary committee for regulating the universities that his objection was on grounds of conscience but that he intended to live peaceably in the Commonwealth. 
In 1652 Rainbow married Elizabeth Smyth (died 1702), daughter of his predecessor at Magdalene, and accepted from the earl of Suffolk the small living of Little Chesterford, Essex. At the presentation of the earl of Warwick, and with the assistance of Lord Broghill, he became rector of Benefield, Northamptonshire, on 23 March 1659. At the Restoration, apparently to his surprise, Rainbow was restored to his mastership at Magdalene, and appointed chaplain to the king. In 1661 he was made dean of Peterborough, but returned to Cambridge on being appointed vice-chancellor in November 1662. 
On the translation of Richard Sterne to the archbishopric of York, Rainbow was consecrated bishop of Carlisle on 10 July 1664 in Westminster Abbey by Archbishop Gilbert Sheldon. Having resigned his other preferments he had to borrow money to pay for his consecration, first-fruits, and costs of settlement in the diocese. The ruined state of his palace, Rose Castle, involved him in a heavy outlay on building a new parlour and chapel, and after protracted litigation with his predecessor and Archbishop Sterne, from whom he received $400 in dilapidations, he found much in his diocese that required reform. His visitation articles were published in 1667. Clergy found negligent did not hesitate to defy their bishop publicly, and his outspoken denunciation of immorality appears to have offended some great lady at court, once a friend, who revenged herself by blocking his translation to Lincoln in 1668. He was also rumoured for preferment on Sheldon's death in 1677, but received no offer. That year he published a funeral sermon for Anne, countess of Pembroke. 
Rainbow's hospitality and charity were boundless. In years of scarcity, when his own stores were exhausted, he bought barley and distributed it to the poor; sometimes 150 were relieved in one day by the porter at Rose. To the poor at Carlisle and Dalston he made a monthly payment of 30's'. He paid for the education of poor boys at Dalston School, and for putting them out as apprentices; he supported poor scholars at the universities; he subscribed generously to the French protestants and to foreign converts. 
Rainbow's domestic life was a model of piety: prayers were read four times a day, swearing was banned, and servants were required to live blamelessly. He was an orthodox but moderate Anglican who was sympathetic to nonconformists. His strong eirenicism encouraged friendships with presbyterians such as Francis Tallents, and had enabled him at Cambridge to manage the restoration of ejected fellows without rancour. He was famous as a preacher, and in his later sermons abandoned the ornate rhetoric of his early days for exceptional plainness and perspicuity. He planned a treatise, to be called 'Verba Christi', a collection of Christ's sermons and sayings, but it was never completed. 
Rainbow died at home on the morning of 26 March 1684 and was buried at Dalston church on 1 April. The sermon preached at his funeral by his chaplain and chancellor, Thomas Tullie, was published, together with some of his meditations and short poems, in Jonathan Banks's 'The Life of... Edw. Rainbow' (1688). Elizabeth Rainbow, who after her husband's death lived mainly at Dalemain with her sister's son Sir Edward Hasell, died in 1702, and was also buried at Dalston. 


@@@@@


doc= 23023


Raine, James (1791-1858), antiquary and topographer, son of James Raine (died 1840), village blacksmith, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Edmund Moore, was born at Ovington in the parish of Wycliffe, Yorkshire, on 23 January 1791. He was from 1804 educated at the Kirby Hill Free Grammar School, then from 1809 at Richmond School under James Tate. After teaching at Richmond he was from 1812 to 1827 second master of Durham School. Raine was ordained deacon on 26 September 1814, and priest on 20 September 1818. In 1816, already known for his antiquarian tastes, he was appointed librarian by the dean and chapter of Durham, and in 1822 they presented him to the rectory of Meldon, near Morpeth, Northumberland. Litigation with the landowners, the Greenwich Hospital commissioners, over the Meldon rectory tithes continued until 1846, when the case was decided in Raine's favour. In 1825 he was instituted principal surrogate in the diocesan consistory court, and in 1828 presented to the living of St Mary in the South Bailey, in the city of Durham. These various preferments he held until his death. In November 1825, at Bishop Barrington's request, the archbishop of Canterbury conferred on him the Lambeth degree of MA, and he was in due course incorporated 'ad eundem gradum' in the new University of Durham, which in 1857 awarded him an honorary DCL in recognition of his historical and ecclesiastical services. 
In 1812 Raine first met Robert Surtees, of Mainsforth Hall, starting a collaboration that continued until Surtees's death in 1834. In 1819 Walter Scott wrote to Raine urging him to the study of 'a treasure of ancient papers preserved at Durham which wanted only the zeal and firmness of a northern Leland to examine and arrange them' ('Letters'). By then, as chapter librarian and with Surtees's example before him, he scarcely needed this further encouragement. His first efforts were in unselfishly assisting friends in the composition of their topographical works. The county historians John Hodgson, Sir Cuthbert Sharp, and Surtees himself, all paid tribute to Raine's unstinting assistance. Surtees stated that his 'History of Durham' would never have been completed but for Raine's indefatigable industry ('History', 1, 1816, x). Raine subsequently became his friend's literary executor and arranged and edited the fourth volume of Surtees's 'History of Durham' (1840). In 1827 he had performed a similar service for John Hodgson, for whom during the author's absence abroad he saw through the press volume 3, part 2, of the 'History of Northumberland'; he later wrote a two-volume memoir of Hodgson (1857). 
In 1828 Raine published his first substantial independent work, a monograph on St Cuthbert, including an account of the saint's remains discovered in Durham Cathedral in 1827. In 1830 appeared the first part of Raine's 'History of North Durham' (that is, those detached parts of the county palatine, including Norham and Holy Island, which after 1844 were statutorily united to Northumberland). The second part of Raine's 'History' eventually appeared in 1852. Although some later writers have expressed reservations about Raine's charter scholarship, the history was important in its day and still remains useful. 
Soon after Surtees's death in February 1834, Raine organized local commemorative effort into the formation of a society bearing his name, to publish unedited historical manuscripts relating to the area between the Humber and the Forth. Raine became first secretary of the Surtees Society, constituted on 27 May 1834, and was an industrious editor of seventeen of the volumes published between 1835 and 1858 by this pioneering society, whose scheme of operation was much copied. 
While convalescing from heart stress in 1858, Raine began an autobiographical memoir (published by the Surtees Society in 1991), a charming though uncompleted account of a Teesdale rural upbringing. He died at his home, Crook Hall, near Durham, on 6 December 1858, and was buried in Durham Cathedral yard. He married on 28 January 1828 Margaret, eldest daughter of the Revd Thomas Peacock (1756-1851) and sister of George Peacock (1791-1858), dean of Ely. They had three daughters and one son, James (1830-1896), later chancellor of York Minster and the leading figure in the restoration of its library; he was also an editor for the Surtees Society and for the 'Rolls Series'. The younger James's son Angelo Raine (1877-1962), historian of York, continued to a third generation the family's clerical and antiquarian tradition. 


@@@@@


doc= 23024


Raine, Matthew (1760-1811), headmaster, was born on 20 May 1760 at Gilling in the North Riding of Yorkshire. His father, of the same name, was for many years vicar of St John's, Stanwick, and rector of Kirkby Wiske, and also master of a school at Hartforth, near Richmond, in the same county. His mother, Esther (died 1803), was of a Cumberland family. After receiving the elements of education under his father, with William Beloe for a schoolfellow, he was admitted a scholar of the Charterhouse, on the king's nomination -- obtained, it is said (Beloe, 1.10), through the interest of Lord Percy, a patron of his father -- in June 1772. In 1778 he went up as an exhibitioner to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he became a scholar in 1779 and graduated as sixteenth wrangler in 1782 (MA 1785, BD 1794, DD 1799). In 1783 and 1784 he gained the members' university prize, and in the latter year was made fellow of his college. He was ordained deacon in 1782 and priest in 1784, and served as curate of Melford, Suffolk. 
After some time spent in tuition at Cambridge, Raine was appointed headmaster of Charterhouse School on 7 June 1791, in succession to Samuel Berdmore. Charles Burney was one of his competitors. Here he remained until his death. The school enjoyed a high reputation, pupil numbers rose, and a new schoolroom was added in 1802. Raine was credited with the reform of providing a single bed for each scholar. In 1803 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1809 was chosen preacher of Gray's Inn. In July 1810 he was presented by the governors of the Charterhouse to the rectory of Hallingbury, Essex, in anticipation of his retirement. 
Raine died, unmarried, at Charterhouse Square, London, on 17 September 1811. He was buried in the chapel of the Charterhouse, where a gravestone was placed in the south aisle inscribed M. R., and a mural tablet on the adjoining wall by Flaxman, with an epitaph by Samuel Parr. Parr and Richard Porson were his close friends. His choice collection of classical books, including many 'Aldines' and rare editions, went by bequest, after the death of his brother Jonathan (1763-1831), to the library of Trinity College, Cambridge. This brother, a schoolfellow of Porson's at Eton, and afterwards at Trinity (BA 1787, MA 1790), was a barrister and a member of parliament from 1802 to 1807 and again from 1812 to 1831. 
Raine was described as eloquent in the pulpit and dignified in manner. The latter part of this description is borne out by his portrait, reputed to be by Hoppner, in the master's lodge at the Charterhouse. The Society of Schoolmasters owed much to his generosity. His only published works were two sermons. 


@@@@@


doc= 23025


Raines, Francis Robert (1805-1878), antiquary, the descendant of an old Yorkshire family, third son of Isaac Raines MD, of Burton Pidsea in Holderness, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Joseph Robertson, was born at Whitby, Yorkshire, on 22 February 1805. He received his early education privately at Burton Pidsea, but at the age of thirteen was sent to Clitheroe, Lancashire, as apprentice to William Coultate, a surgeon, who afterwards moved to Burnley. During his apprenticeship Raines went to the Clitheroe and Burnley grammar schools. He later decided to enter the church, and in 1826 was admitted to St Bees Theological College in Cumberland. In 1828 he became assistant curate of Saddleworth on the Lancashire and Yorkshire border, and in 1829 was ordained and took the curacy at Rochdale parish church. In 1832 the vicar of Rochdale appointed him perpetual curate of the chapelry of St James, Milnrow. On 21 November 1836 he married Honora Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Major John Beswicke of Pike House, Littleborough, near Rochdale. They had three daughters. 
Raines remained at Milnrow for the rest of his life, rebuilding the church there and providing schools and a parsonage. The earl of Dunmore appointed him his domestic chaplain in 1841, and in 1845 the archbishop of Canterbury awarded him an MA. He was rural dean of Rochdale from 1846 to 1877, and an honorary canon of Manchester Cathedral from 1849. On 30 March 1843 he was elected FSA. In the same year he was one of the founders, with Edward Holme, James Crossley, Richard Parkinson, and others, of the Chetham Society. He served from the first on the council, and succeeded Parkinson as vice-president in 1858. He was one of the most prominent nineteenth-century local historians in north-west England, an authority on genealogy, manorial and ecclesiastical history, and the documentary sources for the subject. 
Raines was by far the most prolific of all the many authors and editors employed by the Chetham Society, and the quantity and scope of his work has remained unsurpassed. He was a careful and thorough antiquarian-historian, working so quickly and efficiently that the society relied heavily upon him to maintain a regular flow of publications. Between 1844 and 1878 he edited eighteen volumes and contributed eleven sections to the various Chetham miscellanies. A further eight volumes which he had partly completed were finished by others and published posthumously. The breadth of his interests was exceptionally wide, with works ranging from the 1845 edition of Bishop Gastrell's 'Notitia Cestriensis', a key source for the pre-1720 diocesan and educational history of Lancashire and Cheshire, through visitation returns, and detailed biographies of the rectors and wardens of Manchester and the vicars of Rochdale, to the delightful and always rewarding heavily annotated edition (1848) of the early seventeenth-century journal of Nicholas Assheton. 
At the same time Raines was building up a remarkable collection of original manuscript material and detailed transcripts, which he housed in forty-four large volumes. On his death these, and his abundant correspondence with historians and antiquarians throughout the country, were given to Chetham's Library, Manchester, where they are now housed. This major collection of local history material is of particular importance in its coverage of the Rochdale area, but is Lancashire-wide in its scope. Other Raines material is held by the Archives and Local Studies department of Manchester Central Library. 
Raines died after a short illness at Scarborough on 17 October 1878, survived by his wife; he was buried in Milnrow churchyard. A memorial was later erected to him in the church. 


@@@@@


doc= 23026


Rainey, George (bap. 1801, d. 1884), anatomist, the son of Robert and Mary Rainey, was baptized on 25 February 1801 at Spilsby, Lincolnshire, and was sent to school at Louth. He was apprenticed to a doctor first at Horncastle and afterwards at Spilsby, where he supplemented his schooling with a course of self-education in Latin, Greek, and mathematics, as well as in medicine. After serving as assistant to Thomas Barker, a surgeon at Spilsby, and adding to his income by private teaching, he entered with very low funds as a student of St Thomas's Hospital in 1824, still supporting himself chiefly by tuition. He obtained the membership of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1827. 
For the next ten years Rainey was an active and very successful private teacher of anatomy. In 1837 his health broke down, and, being threatened with consumption, he travelled to the south of Europe, where he lived for five years, mainly in Italy. On returning to London he decided not to enter into medical practice, and was appointed curator of the museum and subsequently, in 1846, demonstrator of anatomy and of the microscope at St Thomas's Hospital, an appointment which he held until his death. For some years before his death he was in receipt of a government pension for his services to science. 
Rainey was one of the old school of pure anatomists who had no other profession, and for many years was recognized as one of the ablest anatomical teachers in London. While closely occupied in teaching, scientific research was almost his sole recreation. One of his favourite subjects of enquiry was the production of organic or quasi-organic forms by physical processes, and the deposition of mineral substances in organized bodies. On this he published a book, 'On the mode of formation of shells, of bone, and other structures by molecular coalescence, demonstrable by certain artificially formed products' (1858), as well as other works. These researches were important, not only as to their immediate object, but also in explaining the formation of urinary calculi, and leading to subsequent researches on this subject, especially those of Vandyke Carter and Ord. 
Another of Rainey's early researches was published as 'An experimental enquiry into the cause of the ascent and descent of the sap, with observations on endosmose and exosmose' (1847). To elucidate these and similar processes he made experiments extending over many years on 'the existence of continued currents in fluids, and their action in certain natural physical processes', described in four papers in the 'St Thomas's Hospital Reports' (vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5). 
Rainey also published several papers on points of minute anatomy, normal and pathological, in the 'Philosophical Transactions' (140, 1850; 147, 1857), 'Proceedings of the Royal Society' (5, 1846), the 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions' (vols. 28, 29, 31, and 32), 'Transactions of the Pathological Society' (vols. 3, 4, 5, and 6), and elsewhere. 
Rainey was an indefatigable observer with the microscope, and taught its use to students as early as 1846, when the instrument was little used in medicine. He was celebrated for his skill in the use of minute injections, and published some papers in the 'Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science'. His name was commemorated in 'Rainey's capsules', a term which was often quoted, especially in German pathological works, referring to minute parasites (later known as psorosperms) which he detected in the muscles. All his work was characterized by the most scrupulous accuracy and conscientiousness. 
A man of simple habits, absorbed in scientific pursuits, Rainey lived a somewhat solitary life, but among his friends were Thomas Hodgkin, the physician, Richard Grainger, the physiologist, and Sir Richard Owen, who valued Rainey's work very highly. His own immediate pupils, among them John Syer Bristowe and William Ord, gratefully acknowledged the value of his stimulus and guidance in scientific research, and of his powerful moral influence, which was dominant over many generations of students. Rainey was married to Martha Dee; they had two sons, William (1852-1936) and James. Rainey died on 16 November 1884 at 86 Somerleyton Road, Brixton, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 23027


Rainforth, Elizabeth (1814-1877), singer, the daughter of Sampson Rainforth, a custom-house officer, was born on 23? November 1814. She studied singing with Tom Cooke, George Perry, and Crivelli. Her first public appearance was at a concert on 29 February 1836, when she sang an aria from 'Der Freischutz', and had great success. On 27 October of the same year she made her stage debut as Mandane in Arne's 'Artaxerxes' at the St James's Theatre. For many seasons she was a popular performer at this theatre, the English Opera House, Covent Garden, and Drury Lane; her roles included Zerlina in 'Fra Diavolo' and Susanna and the Countess in 'The Marriage of Figaro'. At the same time her services as a concert singer were in great demand, both in London and the provinces. In 1837 she appeared in oratorio with the Sacred Harmonic Society. On 18 March 1839 she sang at the Philharmonic Concerts, and in 1840 at the Concerts of Ancient Music. She also performed in Dublin during the 1840s. In 1845 she sang the soprano part in the first performance of Mendelssohn's 'Hear my prayer' in London. From 1852 to 1856 she lived in Edinburgh. She retired in 1859, and until 1871 taught singing at Old Windsor; thereafter she lived at Chatterton Villa, Greenway Road, Redland, Bristol, where she died, unmarried, on 22 September 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 23028


Rainier, Peter (1741-1808), naval officer, was born on 24 November 1741 at the parish of St Mary's, Sandwich, the son of Peter Rainier of Sandwich and Sarah ('nee' Spratt). His grandfather was Daniel Rainier, a Huguenot refugee who settled in Ramsgate following the revocation of the edict of Nantes and established himself as a merchant in the surrounding area. 
Rainier attended a school in Tonbridge in 1754. He entered the navy in 1756, joining the 'Oxford' from which, in February 1758, he moved to the 'Yarmouth' and, on her arrival in the East Indies in March 1758, to the 'Tiger' (60 guns) in which he was present in the actions of 29 April and 3 August 1758 and 10 September 1759 fought off the Coromandel coast against the French admiral the comte d'Ache. In June 1760 he was moved to the 'Norfolk', flagship of Rear-Admiral Charles Steevens at the siege of Pondicherry. Steevens died in April 1761 and was succeeded by Vice-Admiral Samuel Cornish, who commanded at the reduction of Manila in September to October 1762, continuing to use the 'Norfolk' as his flagship. The 'Norfolk' returned to England in 1764 and was paid off. Rainier had no further service in the navy until 1774 and it is possible that he was employed by the East India Company during this time. He passed his lieutenant's examination on 2 February 1768 and was promoted lieutenant on 26 May 1768, and appointed to the 'Maidstone' (under Captain Alan Gardner) in the West Indies in January 1774. 
On 3 May 1777 Rainier was promoted by Vice-Admiral Clark Gayton to command the sloop 'Ostrich' and in her he captured a large American privateer on 8 July 1778 after a hard fought action in which he was severely wounded. In approval of his conduct the Admiralty promoted him post captain on 29 October 1778 and appointed him to the 'Burford' (64 guns) in January 1779. The 'Burford' was part of Sir Edward Hughes's squadron which sailed for the East Indies on 7 March 1779. The 'Burford' took part in all the operations of the war against Haidar Ali including the reduction of Negapatam in November 1781 and Trincomalee in January 1782, where a large quantity of military stores was captured. After the arrival of Admiral Suffren five major actions were fought against the French, a series unique in naval history where the same commanders and mostly the same ships confronted each other in this way. After the peace the 'Burford' returned to England and Rainier went on half pay. 
In 1790-91 Rainier commanded the 'Monarch' in the channel and then, early in 1793, he commissioned the 'Suffolk' (74 guns), in which, in the following year, he went to the East Indies as commodore and commander-in-chief. He took with him a large convoy completing a remarkable passage in which he arrived at Madras in November 1794 having made no landfall during the voyage. He remained on the East India station as commander-in-chief until 1805 during which time he assisted at the reduction of Trincomalee, which led to the surrender of all the Dutch posts in Ceylon, in August 1795, and took possession of Amboyna on 10 February 1796 and Banda Neira on 8 March. These captures produced vast booty, the admiral's share of which laid the foundation of his princely fortune. His principal duty in this command, which he discharged effectively, was to provide for the safety of the British settlements and the security of the British trade. Rainier was promoted vice-admiral of the blue on 14 February 1799 and vice-admiral of the red on 23 April 1804. Following his return to England in 1805 and retirement from active service, he continued to be consulted by the ministry on questions relating to the East India station. In the Trafalgar promotion of 9 November 1805 he was made admiral of the blue. 
Rainier was returned to parliament in May 1807 as member for Sandwich. He died at his house in Great George Street, Westminster, on 7 April 1808 and was buried in Sandwich, probably at St Mary's Church. Rainier died an immensely wealthy man. Probate was given for $250,000 (PROB 11/1480) and, after some minor bequests, he gave one-tenth of his fortune towards a reduction of the national debt in gratitude for his service with the navy in the East Indies where he 'acquired the principal part of my fortune I now have which has far exceeded my merits and pretensions' (PROB 11/1480). Rainier was not married and he left the bulk of his fortune to his nephews, Admiral John Spratt Rainier (died 1822) and Captain Peter Rainier CB (died 1836). 


@@@@@


doc= 23029


Rainolds, John (1549-1607), theologian and college head, was born on 29 September 1549 in Pinhoe, Devon, the fifth of six sons of Richard Rainolds, a prosperous farmer. His uncle Thomas Rainolds (died 1559) held numerous church positions as well as serving as warden of Merton College, Oxford, from 1545 to 1559 and vice-chancellor of the university from 1556 to 1557. His eldest brother was William Rainolds (1544?-1594). 
All of Richard Rainolds's sons studied at Oxford University, and five of them held fellowships there. John Rainolds appears to have been sent to Oxford at eight, for an exhibition at Oriel College was bestowed on him on 11 December 1557. In all likelihood he was dispatched there so that Thomas Rainolds might oversee his education. However, as his uncle was ejected from Merton College following Elizabeth I's accession to the throne in November 1558 and imprisoned in the Marshalsea, John Rainolds was probably sent back home. He returned to Oxford in 1562, this time as a student of Merton College, but on 29 April 1563 he was admitted 'discipulus' to Corpus Christi College, where his brothers Jerome and Edmund Rainolds were already fellows. 
Upon his arrival at Oxford John Rainolds had been a Catholic, as were his father, his uncle, and his two brothers at Corpus. His conversion to protestantism was gradual and perhaps not completed until the late 1560s. According to Peter Heylin, he also studied in one of the English seminaries on the continent and, if true, this might explain why he was admitted a second time to Corpus on 12 February 1564 and why it took him five and a half years to complete his undergraduate course, for he graduated BA only on 15 October 1568. In any event, Rainolds appears to have been continually in residence by 1564. During Elizabeth's visit to Oxford (30 August to 3 September 1566), Rainolds presented her with verses and acted the part of the woman Hippolyta in the production at Christ Church of Richard Edward's 'Palaemon and Arcyte'. Judging by the vehemence with which he criticized stage plays a quarter of a century later, this experience left an indelible impression on him. At the time, however, Rainolds's efforts were rewarded handsomely, and eight years later, when he presented Elizabeth with his translation of Plutarch's 'De utilitate ex hostibus capienda' (BL, Royal MS 15 A. iii), he recalled her generosity towards him on that occasion. 
Six weeks later, on 11 October 1566, Rainolds was elected probationary fellow of Corpus. His election coincided with the visitation of the college by George Acworth, chancellor and commissary to Robert Horne, bishop of Winchester, who investigated serious charges against Jerome Rainolds, which included not only his persistent adherence to Catholicism, but his concealment of church plate, vestments, and various chapel furniture as well as his conspiring to alienate certain college property. Jerome Rainolds's countercharges against the college president, Thomas Greenway, were dismissed, and he was expelled with two other fellows. In July 1568 it was Edmund Rainolds's turn to be expelled from the college, for the role he played in opposing the installation of William Cole as the new president. 
The extent to which John Rainolds sympathized with his brothers' religious and collegiate politics is not known. However, it was during that very period that his metamorphosis into puritanism occurred. William Alabaster, the Latin poet who had himself shifted from protestantism to Catholicism and back again, recounted in memorable verse how John and his then zealous Calvinist brother William Rainolds proselytized each other. It is often assumed that such an account of a mutual conversion is either apocryphal or a mistaken embellishment by Alabaster of the documented public disputation between John and his other brother Edmund Rainolds held during a visit of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, to Oxford almost twenty years later in January 1585. It should be noted, however, that Alabaster makes no mention of any spectacular public disputation and seems rather to use the battle imagery to invoke the far more drawn-out, painful, and private process of soul-searching that undoubtedly characterized the relations between members of the Rainolds family in general, and the eventual conversions of John and William Rainolds in particular. By whatever means the conversion occurred, by 1569 the gifted John Rainolds had sufficiently demonstrated his protestant credentials to be entrusted with the tutorship of Richard Hooker. 
Rainolds graduated MA on 14 July 1572, and shortly thereafter was elected Greek reader at Corpus. The lectureship was open to the university public at large and his lectures proved very popular. He began with Aristotle's 'Rhetoric', and the text of these lectures survives in the form of notes for two complete sets: the first on the 'Rhetoric' alone, the second on dialectic and rhetoric. Both can be found with Rainolds's working copy of the Greek edition of the 'Rhetoric' (1562). The lectures represent an advanced critical examination not only of Aristotle's rhetorical theory, but also of the relations between language, the passions, and the probity of the (Christian) orator. While the content of Rainolds's lectures during the latter part of his six years' tenure is not known, the exhortatory orations he was in the habit of delivering at the beginning of each term survive, and these further attest to his commitment to Christian humanism, though his endorsement of profane literature and philosophy is somewhat qualified by his nascent radical Calvinist sensibilities. These orations proved very popular and were printed several times, and in various forms, during the first half of the seventeenth century. Rainolds's lectures were also important in occasioning the rise of the short-lived erudite and ornamental literary style known as euphuism. 
Rainolds resigned the lectureship so that he could devote himself to the study of theology, but he immediately became embroiled in a controversy over his successor. The choice fell on John Spenser, who was then only nineteen and not yet a master of arts. Rainolds judged the youth, who was neither a fellow nor even a scholar of the college, inexperienced -- though not necessarily incompetent -- for the task that he himself had performed with such distinction. He launched a public campaign to annul the election, appealing to both the visitor of the college, Horne, and to Sir Francis Walsingham -- but in vain. 
No sooner was the controversy settled than a far more divisive strife broke out. Towards the end of 1579 it was strongly rumoured that Cole was about to resign his office, and Rainolds became one of the two contenders for the position. His rival, John Barefoot, had been vice-president for the previous decade and, in addition, was backed by both Leicester and his brother, Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick. Rainolds was supported by Walsingham as well as by many members of the university who considered him by far the abler candidate. Though Leicester soon came round to support Rainolds, neither Barefoot nor Warwick gave way, and the ensuing impasse was resolved only by Cole's decision to remain president. The enraged Barefoot, however, in his capacity as vice-president, immediately expelled Rainolds, Hooker, and three other fellows on the grounds of infraction of college statutes. Fortunately for Rainolds, his powerful patrons quickly arranged for an 'en bloc' reinstatement. 
In the meantime Rainolds emerged in the forefront of the puritan party at Oxford. In addition to allying himself with Cole's reforming party at Corpus, in university politics Rainolds aligned himself with Laurence Humphrey. In 1575 he appears to have taken an active role in expelling Francesco Pucci, the opinionated Italian emigre who, with the support of Leicester, the chancellor of the university, petitioned for a licence to teach at Oxford while publicly denouncing key Calvinist doctrines. Rainolds led the university opposition against conferring, at Leicester's request, the degree of DTh on the Spaniard Antonio del Corro who, as Rainolds wrote to Humphrey on 7 June 1576, was actually Pucci's mentor. Rainolds protested that Corro's deliberately obscure writings concealed 'verie great heresies about predestination and justification by faith' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.182), and beseeched Humphrey to be as firm in refusing Corro's degree as he had been with Pucci. Three weeks earlier Rainolds had also been licensed to preach and at a later date, was ordained by Edmund Freake, bishop of Norwich. 
Rainolds resigned his Greek lectureship, he later explained, so that he could devote himself to studying divinity. He was admitted BTh on 24 January 1580, having been chosen as respondent in the theology act of 13 July 1579, in the course of which he maintained three of the required six theses for the degree, completing his requirements four months later. The theses, exhibiting strong anti-Catholic sentiments and firm Calvinist attitudes on matters of scripture and the church, were immediately sent to press, appearing in March 1580 as 'Sex theses de sacra scriptura et ecclesia'. 
Having thus distinguished himself, Rainolds was charged the following year by Walsingham with the task of disputing with John Hart, an English Catholic who was to be executed alongside Edmund Campion on 1 December 1581. Shortly before the execution Hart recanted and was spared, but he soon reaffirmed his Catholic convictions and Walsingham sent him to Oxford, purposely to confer with Rainolds on the divisions between the English and Catholic churches, hoping thereby to offset the infelicitous outcome of the earlier debates between Campion and several protestant theologians. There followed a long series of conferences between Rainolds and Hart, first at Oxford and then in London. Despite his continued obstinacy, Hart finally conceded on one cardinal issue: the supremacy of the pope over secular rulers. Having been promised a reprieve from execution and banishment from England instead, Hart agreed to subscribe his name to the transcript of the debates that Rainolds prepared, which was published in 1584 as 'The summe of the conference betweene John Rainoldes and John Hart: touching the head and the faith of the church', with a dedication to Leicester. The book proved quite influential, and during the following quarter of a century it was reprinted four more times in English, and twice in Latin. 
Partly to reward him, and partly in order to continue channelling his proven disputatious skills against the Catholic church, Walsingham resolved in 1586 to endow at Oxford a special lectureship in controversial theology earmarked for Rainolds -- who had in the meantime been licensed for the degree of DTh on 14 June 1585 -- and convocation readily acquiesced. Walsingham promised to pay Rainolds $20 per annum and the latter, weary of the continued dissensions at Corpus, availed himself of the opportunity and resigned his fellowship in 1588, moving to Queen's College, where the provost, Henry Robinson, arranged room and board for him. Rainolds reciprocated by taking an active part in teaching at Queen's. 
Rainolds lectured three times a week during term, drawing consistently large audiences: 'never were any lectures in our memory so frequented as these in that university', wrote Daniel Featley, 'nor any in Cambridge, save those of Dr. [William] Whitaker' ('Abel redivivus', 2.226). The lectures specifically targeted the Jesuit Robert Bellarmine, then a professor of theology at the Gregorian University in Rome. Walsingham instructed his agents at Rome to send him transcripts of the lectures that Bellarmine delivered there and, upon arrival, they were forwarded to Rainolds for immediate public rebuttal. Of particular interest to Rainolds was the refutation of Bellarmine's attempt to make the Apocryphal books an integral part of the 'Old Testament' canon. True to his style and thoroughness, however, Rainolds left no stone unturned as he battled the Jesuit. The 250 lectures were not published during Rainolds's lifetime, but appeared in 1611 in two enormous quarto volumes under the title 'Censura librorum apocryphorum veteris testamenti'. 
In 1589 Rainolds also devoted a set of lectures to refute Hugh Broughton's 'A Concent of Scripture' (1588). In his book the talented, though eccentric and opinionated, Broughton claimed to have constructed an exact chronology, based solely on the 'Bible', from Adam to Christ. Both Rainolds at Oxford and Edward Lively -- regius professor of Hebrew at Cambridge University -- had strong reservations concerning the plausibility and value of such an exercise, and they took Broughton to task in 1589. Relying on scriptures as well as on many 'heathen' authors, Rainolds pointed out various errors in Broughton's chronology. The latter, who was not the sort of person to take criticism lightly, was highly offended, especially since the objections of his formidable opponents seemed to have carried the day with university members as well as with many bishops. For the better part of the following decade, therefore, the irascible Broughton waged a stubborn campaign against Rainolds. He first attempted to force the Oxford scholar into submission through a series of conferences with him. Having failed in that, Broughton excoriated Rainolds in lectures he delivered in Stationers' Hall in London. At the same time he resorted to a campaign of letters and pamphlets addressed to, among others, the queen, William Cecil, Lord Burghley, and John Whitgift, archbishop of Canterbury. However, though Whitgift remained unwavering in his support of Rainolds's position, he was reluctant to allow the latter to publish his lectures against Broughton. It was not until 1631 that a modified version of some of these lectures was published by William Pemble. 
While the debate with Broughton was still raging, Rainolds became inadvertently involved in a very different sort of controversy. In early February 1592 he was invited by Thomas Thornton of Christ Church to attend the performance of one of three plays by William Gager that the college staged between and 6 and 8 February. Rainolds, who was known for his objection even to academic drama, refused and when Thornton persisted he sent him a detailed letter enumerating his objections. For his part, Gager added to the last play in the series, a rendition of Seneca's 'Hippolytus', a speech spoken by Momus -- highly suggestive of Rainolds -- which was then promptly refuted in the epilogue. Gager immediately proceeded to publish both Momus's speech and his defence of academic drama as an appendix to his 'Ulysses Redux', sending Rainolds a complimentary copy in May 1592. An epistolary exchange between the two ensued, lasting until the following summer, at which time Alberico Gentili, regius professor of civil law, stepped in to take Gager's place. The main issues remained the same from the start -- primarily Rainolds's claims of the unlawfulness of men wearing women's garb, his objections to breaching the sabbath, and the more generally puritan beliefs of the moral obloquy of plays and actors -- but it quickly turned into an exercise of erudition and, with Gentili, it also descended into personal abuse. Again, Rainolds was apparently prohibited from publishing his letters, but in 1599 the puritan printing press of Richard Schilders at Middelburg in the Netherlands published 'Th'Overthrow of Stage-Playes, by the Way of Controversie betwixt D. Gager and D. Rainoldes', which included Rainolds's detailed letters to Gager as well as part of his exchange with Gentili. 
Walsingham did not intend personally to support Rainolds in perpetuity, nor to endow the lectureship. As he wrote in 1586 to Sir Thomas Bromley, the acting chancellor of the university, he would pay Rainolds a salary until he 'maie be otherwise better called and enabled to doe good either there or elswhere oute of that Place' (Corpus Christi College, Oxford, MS 303, fol. 137). One such opportunity occurred in spring 1589, when the ailing Humphrey stepped down as regius professor of theology. On 9 May convocation petitioned the new chancellor, Sir Christopher Hatton, to appoint Rainolds as Humphrey's successor but, despite widespread support for such an appointment, Elizabeth would not consent and Thomas Holland was appointed instead. Walsingham died on 6 April 1590, but his son-in-law, Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, took over supporting Rainolds's lectureship. Rainolds, however, was hoping for a more permanent arrangement. During 1593 fresh efforts were made to secure a church position for Cole that would facilitate Rainolds's election as president of Corpus. This time it was Anne Dudley, dowager countess of Warwick, who championed Rainolds's cause by attempting to secure for Cole the post of dean of Lincoln. But the queen remained obstinate in her refusal to allow for Rainolds's promotion within the university. 
Elizabeth's objections stemmed from the continued extremism of Rainolds, who participated in several presbyterian meetings during the mid-1580s as well as becoming known for some radical preaching in Oxford. Equally alarming were his writings in support of various Calvinist positions which were at variance with the official position of the English church. Thus, for example, Rainolds was mobilized by Sir Francis Knollys to respond to Richard Bancroft's St Paul's sermon of 19 February 1589, in which the latter argued for the divine origin of episcopacy. Rainolds complied not only by refuting Bancroft's claim, but also by insisting that in upholding his own position he could not be considered a heretic. A year or two later Rainolds wrote a short treatise concerning the lawfulness of divorce and remarriage following adultery, and about the same time he challenged the established interpretation -- embraced by Whitgift, and later by Thomas Bilson, bishop of Winchester -- according to which Christ descended into hell in body as well as in soul, arguing instead that this descent was made only by the body of Christ, while the pains of hell were inflicted on Christ's soul only on the cross. Needless to add, none of these opinions was published during Rainolds's lifetime, though they were widely circulated in manuscript. Small wonder, then, that when Elizabeth visited Oxford in September 1592, she 'schooled Doctor Reynalds for his precisenes, willing him to follow her lawes and not to run before them' (J. Harrington, 'A Supplie or Addicion to the Catalogue of Bishops to the Year 1608', ed. R. H. Miller, Potomac, MD, 1979, 134). 
What Elizabeth wanted, clearly, was for Rainolds to accept a position in the church. Cognizant of his stature, Elizabeth was loath to enhance Rainolds's influence at Oxford while a position in the church, by its very nature, would bring him much more in line with official religious policy. Indeed, the very acceptance of such a post would amount to a public declaration of conformity to the Church of England. Rainolds's patrons recognized the situation and convinced him to accept the deanery of Lincoln (he was appointed on 10 December 1593). Though he acquiesced, Rainolds remained resident in Oxford, invoking various technicalities in delaying his move. Only in 1598 was he finally installed as dean -- and by then it was already certain that his patrons had managed to arrange for an exchange of positions with Cole. Rainolds was elected president on 11 December 1598. 
The nine years of Rainolds's presidency greatly altered the fortunes of Corpus. Cole turned over to him a college plagued by internal conflicts and financial difficulties, and Rainolds set to work to rectify the situation. He introduced a more equitable system of distributing college revenues, which benefited the fellows as well as the college and allowed for the renovation of the hall, chapel, and library. The improved fortunes of the college also resulted in an increase in the number of students, who were subjected to the firm academic and religious discipline that Rainolds introduced. 
With the accession of James I in 1603 Rainolds, like most English puritans, was buoyed by the hope that the new monarch would look more favourably upon the reformation of the English church. Indeed, he even contributed some verses to an Oxford volume commemorating James's accession -- something he had not done for nearly forty years. In April 1603, while 'en route' for London, James was presented with the celebrated millenary petition, in which the puritans set down their grievances against the established church. The relatively moderate tone of the petition worked well upon the new monarch, who soon announced his intention to hold a conference, over which he would preside, in which all grievances and disputes between the bishops and the puritans could be aired openly. The conference was scheduled for 14-18 January 1604 and Rainolds's name appeared on every list of puritan candidates that had been circulated the previous summer and autumn. When the historic occasion arrived, it was he who led the puritan delegation, which also included Laurence Chaderton, Thomas Sparke, and John Knewstub. Rainolds did most of the speaking, while Chaderton and Sparke were 'mute as any fish'. The outcome was disappointing, for though James listened favourably to the arguments against non-residency and consented to improve the state of preachers, he had no intention of compromising on matters of church discipline and ceremonies. Ultimately Rainolds's recommendation that the king establish a synod of bishops and presbyters to determine contested issues in the church so infuriated James that he brought the audience to a close, snapping 'No bishop, no king' and leaving the room. 
In the aftermath of the conference, especially following Bancroft's elevation to the archbishopric of Canterbury, great pressure was brought to bear upon Rainolds to subscribe to the new book of canons. However, Rainolds put up a fight, using his old delaying tactics. He resorted to writing numerous letters to clarify his religious views in the hope that he would thereby privately satisfy the king and Bancroft in his conformity without the need to endure public subscription. Such a ploy was evidently successful, for it was not until the summer of 1605 that he was pushed for an immediate submission. No doubt the reason for this pressure was the impending visit of James to Oxford, scheduled for late August 1605. The king arrived at Oxford on 27 August, and Rainolds was one of the lecturers chosen in his honour. James was apparently determined to force the obstinate and slippery president of Corpus into submission, and he instructed the vice-chancellor, George Abbot, to set Rainolds a deadline for submission, making it clear that failure to comply would lead to expulsion from the university. Rainolds, however, wrote a few more letters and, in the end, appears to have withstood the pressure. 
By the time the subscription controversy subsided Rainolds was in failing health. Conscious of this, he tried to proceed in what he clearly regarded as the most important project of his career -- and the only tangible result of the Hampton Court conference -- the new translation of the 'Bible'. The task was divided among six groups, and Rainolds was part of the one charged with translating both major and minor prophets. Although officially headed by John Harding, the regius professor of Hebrew, the group met at Rainolds's lodgings at Corpus three times a week, a practice that continued even during the last weeks of the president's life. It is difficult to judge just how far the translation of the Oxford group proceeded before Rainolds's death, but it appears that most of the work was accomplished, even though officially the task was completed only in 1609. 
Rainolds died on Thursday 21 May 1607 of consumption. He had been in poor health for at least twenty years -- suffering mostly from gout -- and by the end of his life he was emaciated. His funeral on 25 May was attended by many drawn from all quarters of the university, as well as by the mayor and aldermen of Oxford, and he was mourned both at home and abroad. He was buried on 25 May in the college chapel where his pupil and successor, John Spenser, raised a monument to him. Rainolds left his large collection of books to various colleges and to friends. He did not marry. Joseph Hall, who seized the occasion to lament the great loss in recent years of eminent protestant divines such as William Fulke, William Whitaker, Hadrianus Junius, and Theodore Beza, added: 'Doctor Reynolds is the last; not in worth, but in the time of his loss. He alone was a well-furnished library, full of all faculties, full of all studies, of all learning; the memory, the reading of that man, were near to a miracle. ('The Works of the Right Reverend Joseph Hall', ed. P. Wynter, 10 vols., 1863, 6.149-50)' In Leiden, Joseph Scaliger mourned the loss of not only a profoundly erudite scholar but a towering pillar of the reformed churches, writing on the subject in his 'Illustriss. viri Iosephi Scaligeri... epistolae' (1627). That Rainolds's reputation remained high throughout the seventeenth century is manifest by the publication of many of his manuscripts, as well as by the frequency with which his judgement was invoked on both sides of the religious divide. 


@@@@@


doc= 23030


Rainolds, William (1544?-1594), Roman Catholic priest and author, was born at Pinhoe, Devon, the second son of Richard Rainolds, farmer, and elder brother of the puritan theologian John Rainolds. In 1555 Rainolds was admitted to Winchester College, after which he proceeded to New College, Oxford, where he held a fellowship between 1560 and 1572. During Elizabeth I's visit to Oxford in 1566 he was one of the members of the university to mark the occasion with learned poems. He received his BA on 17 June 1563 and his MA on 4 June 1567. Subsequently he became rector of Lavenham, Suffolk. 
There is a romantic story about Rainolds's conversion to Catholicism in Fuller's 'Church History': the protestant Rainolds and his Catholic brother John were both so successful in their attempts to convert one another that they both changed their faith. The truth is probably rather more prosaic: John Pits states in his 'De illustribus Angliae scriptoribus' that William Rainolds's conversion was due to the influence of the famous controversy between Thomas Harding and John Jewel. However, Fuller's account neatly characterizes the complicated intellectual, theological, and moral choices that faced men at Oxford in the 1560s. In 1572 Rainolds resigned his fellowship and went to live in Hart Hall. In 1575 he made a public recantation at Rome and was received into the Catholic church. On 16 August 1577 he arrived at the English College, Douai. In 1578 and 1579 there were journeys to Rheims (the new location of the English College), Louvain, and Paris. On 31 March 1580 he was ordained priest at Chalons. 
William Allen, the president of the English College at Rheims, appointed Rainolds professor of scriptures and Hebrew and on 11 April 1581 he started to lecture on the epistles of St Paul. However, Rainolds's precarious health prevented him from carrying out his teaching duties very regularly. Pits dramatically relates how over-exertion brought Rainolds close to death: Rainolds, having burst a blood-vessel and vomiting blood, made a solemn promise that, on recovery, he would devote the rest of his life to writing in defence of the Catholic church; and that, indeed, became his main occupation in life. Together with Gregory Martin, William Allen, and Richard Bristow, Rainolds was involved in the translation of the Rheims 'Bible' ('New Testament', 1582, 'Old Testament', 2 vols., 1609-10), although Rainolds's contribution mainly consisted in answering controversial works by opponents in England. Ironically, one of these opponents was William's brother John. William Rainolds replied to the attack on Gregory Martin's preface to the 'Old Testament' by the Cambridge scholar William Whitaker. Whitaker's Latin treatise 'Ad Nicolai Sanderi demonstrationes' (1583) provoked an English reply by Rainolds ('A Refutation of Sundry Reprehensions, Cavils, and False Sleights, by which M. Whitaker Laboureth to Deface the Late English Translation', 1583), which, in its turn, elicited a reply by Whitaker in 1585. In 1584 Rainolds brought out a translation of William Allen's 'Ad persecutores Anglos'. Under the pseudonym Guilielmus Rossaeus, Rainolds (probably with the co-operation of William Gifford) entered the debate about the future succession of Elizabeth I through his 'De iusta reipub. christianae in reges impios et haereticos authoritate' (1590), in which he posits that 'heretics' cannot be legitimate monarchs. When the Scottish minister Robert Bruce attacked the Catholic position on attendance at Church of England services in his 'Sermons upon the Sacrament' (1590) Rainolds replied with his 'A Treatise Conteyning the True Catholick and Apostolike Faith' (1593). His final and most substantial publication is 'Calvino-turcismus' (1597), a 1000-page treatise in which he compares protestant articles of faith to the -- in his view -- untenable ideas of infidels. The work was published posthumously by William Gifford. 
During the last years of his life Rainolds served as chaplain to the Antwerp beguines. He died at Antwerp on 24 August 1594. 


@@@@@


doc= 23031


Rainsford, Charles (1728-1809), army officer, born at West Ham, Essex, on 3 February 1728, was the second son of Francis Rainsford (died 1770), an alderman of Maldon, Essex, and influential in its parliamentary elections, and his wife, Isabella, daughter of William Bale of Foston, Derbyshire. He was educated at Great Clacton, Essex, by a clerical friend of his father, and in March 1744 was appointed second cornet in General Bland's 3rd dragoons through the influence of his uncle, Charles Rainsford (died 1778), deputy lieutenant of the Tower of London. The regiment was then serving in the War of the Austrian Succession, in Flanders against the French; Rainsford joined it at once, and carried the standard at the battle of Fontenoy on 30 April 1745. On 1 May he was appointed ensign in the Coldstream Guards, and with them was ordered home on the news of the Jacobite rising. In 1751 he was gazetted lieutenant with the rank of captain, and when James O'Hara, second Baron Tyrawley (1690-1773), became colonel of the Coldstream Guards (April 1755), he made Rainsford successively adjutant to the battalion, major of brigade, and aide-de-camp. Rainsford was private secretary to Tyrawley, governor of Gibraltar (1756-7); he returned in 1760, and in 1761 was promoted captain and lieutenant-colonel, given a company, and sent to serve under Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick in Germany. 
In 1762, when Spain threatened to invade Portugal, Rainsford again accompanied Tyrawley thither as aide-de-camp, and was shortly afterwards appointed brigadier-general and chief engineer in Portugal; he fortified many strongholds there. He was ordered home in 1763, and promoted second major in the Grenadier Guards. From 1766 to 1780 he was equerry to William, duke of Gloucester, brother of George III, and became his confidant. He commanded the army detachment at the king's bench prison, Southwark, following the May 1768 riot, and wrote of 'the difficulties the military are subject to in cases of riot, when not supported by the civil authority' (Hayter, 33). 
A professional soldier, Rainsford ranked his parliamentary involvement beneath his army career, and regarded the former as a means of advancing the latter. From December 1772 to 1774 he was, with Gloucester's permission, through the influence of William Nassau de Zuylestein, fourth earl of Rochford, and pending the election of Rochford's nephew and heir, a safe stopgap MP for the freeman franchise borough of Maldon, Essex. Bamber Gascoyne, the other Maldon MP, wrote in November 1773 that Rainsford was 'a creature of the Duke of Gloucester, no fortune' and 'cannot be of consequence enough to hurt us when elected' (Namier, 346). Rainsford voted with the government and apparently did not speak in the house. A friend of the Percy family, he was through the influence of Algernon Percy, Lord Lovaine (brother of Hugh Percy, second duke of Northumberland), from February 1787 to December 1788 MP for the burgage borough of Bere Alston, Devon. He vacated the seat, presumably over the 'Regency Bill', on which Lovaine sided with the government, but Gloucester and Northumberland with the opposition. Northumberland recompensed him by returning him for Northumberland's burgage 'pocket borough', Newport, Cornwall, of which he was MP from 1790 to 1796. He followed his patron's line in voting for Grey's resolution on Ochakov (12 April 1791). In May 1796 he wrote that if parliament had been going to continue longer he would have 'begged leave to vacate my seat' (Thorne, 5.6), and he declined a seat in the next parliament. He took little part in parliamentary proceedings. 
Promoted colonel in the army in August 1774, Rainsford was governor of Chester from 1776 to 1796. During 1776 and 1777 he was employed in raising troops in Germany for the American war, and in 1777 was appointed aide-de-camp to George III and in August promoted major-general. During the Gordon riots in June 1780 he commanded the camp established in Hyde Park and later at Blackheath. He provided cavalry escorts for infantry detachments sent from his Hyde Park camp, so that they could act in concert, while keeping a strong force to guard the camp with its supplies and six cannon. From May 1781 until his death he was colonel of the 44th regiment. In 1782 he was sent to take command of the garrison at Minorca, but before his arrival it surrendered to the Spaniards in February. He was promoted lieutenant-general in November 1782. 
On the outbreak of the revolutionary war in February 1793, Rainsford was sent as second in command to Gibraltar, where he commanded following the death of Sir Robert Boyd and remained until March 1795. He was promoted general in May 1796 and appointed governor of Cliff Fort, Tynemouth, in the same year; he saw no further active service. He married, first, on 18 July 1775 Elizabeth (1758-1781), daughter of Edward Miles, and they had one son, Colonel William Henry Rainsford ('bap'. 1776, died 1823), and two daughters, Julia Anne and Josephina; the latter, for whom Sir Joseph Yorke stood godfather, died in infancy. Rainsford married, second, on 16 February 1789 Ann Cornwallis (died 1 Feb 1798), youngest daughter of Sir William More Molyneux of Loseley Park, Guildford; they had no children. 
Rainsford had varied interests. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 13 May 1779; he was also a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and a member of a society for making discoveries in Africa and of various benevolent institutions. He dabbled in alchemy, and was a Rosicrucian and a freemason. Rainsford died at his house, 29 Soho Square, London, on 24 May 1809. He was buried in a vault in the chancel of the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula in the Tower of London, with his father, his uncle Charles, and his first wife. 
Rainsford left nearly forty volumes of manuscript, which were purchased by the British Museum (BL, Add. MSS 23644-23680) and are an important historical source. They include autobiographical memoranda, papers, and letters referring to Portugal, 1762-4, to Gibraltar, 1793-6, and to raising of German mercenaries, 1776-8, a narrative of the expedition to the Mediterranean, 1781-2, correspondence with Lord Amherst, the duke and duchess of Northumberland, and others, papers on freemasonry, magnetism, and alchemical processes, copies of the correspondence and papers of Lord Tyrawley, and Rainsford's journal of his travels with the duke of Gloucester. The papers on the raising of German mercenaries for the American War of Independence were printed in the 'Proceedings of the New York Historical Society' (1879). 


@@@@@


doc= 23032


Rainsford, Marcus (b. c.1750, d. in or after 1805), author, was the younger son of Edward Rainsford of Sallins, co. Kildare. He obtained a commission and served in the 105th regiment during the American War of Independence. In 1794 he served under the duke of York in the Netherlands, and afterwards helped to raise black troops in the West Indies. In 1799 he visited Santo Domingo, and met Toussaint l'Ouverture, the black rebel leader and later governor of Santo Domingo. He was subsequently arrested and condemned to death as a spy, but was reprieved and eventually set free. He published an account of this adventure, entitled 'A Memoir of Transactions that Took Place in St Domingo in the Spring of 1799' (1802). The book received severe reviews but a second edition, entitled 'St Domingo, or, An Historical, Political, and Military Sketch of the Black Republic', was published in the same year. He retired from the army with the rank of captain about 1803. He also published 'An Historical Account of the Black Empire of Hayti' (1805), and a poem, 'The Revolution, or, Britain Delivered' (2nd edn, 1801). The date of Rainsford's death is uncertain. His sister Frances (died 1809) married, first, in 1774, Major-General Wellbore Ellis Doyle (died 1797), and, second, Count Joseph Grimaldi, brother of the prince of Monaco. 


@@@@@


doc= 23033


Rainsford, Sir Richard (1605-1680), judge and politician, was born at Staverton, near Daventry, Northamptonshire, the second son of Robert Rainsford and his second wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Kirton of Thorpe Mandeville, Northamptonshire. He matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 13 December 1622, but left the university before receiving a degree. On 24 May 1625 Rainsford was admitted to Lincoln's Inn. He was called to the bar on 16 October 1632, having been elected recorder of Daventry in the interval. On 30 May 1637 he married Catherine (died 1698), daughter of Samuel Clerke, rector of St Peter's, Northampton, with whom he had eleven children. In 1653 Rainsford was elected deputy recorder of Northampton, a post he lost to a Cromwellian supporter during the protectorate. 
At the Restoration Rainsford represented the Northampton borough in the Convention of 1660 and in Charles II's first parliament in 1661. In this capacity he delivered nine recorded speeches and was a member of thirty-two committees. He favoured increased regulation of the press, particularly unauthorized Anglican publications, supported King Charles's Worcester House declaration, and sought to scrutinize land purchases made during the interregnum. He became a serjeant-at-law on 26 October 1660, was made a knight in 1661, and was appointed a baron of the exchequer on 16 November 1663, under the tenure of Sir Matthew Hale. In 1665 Rainsford became a symbol of persecution for the Quakers, when he presided over the general quarter sessions in Northampton. After he tried many of the nonconformist religious group for refusing to take the oath of allegiance, they publicly denounced the 'unjust and illegal proceedings' of Rainsford and his fellow judges of the exchequer ('Another Outcry', 1). 
Rainsford sat in the exchequer for five years before being transferred to the king's bench on 6 February 1669. Henry Hyde, the earl of Clarendon, considered him 'a very extraordinary man and an excellent judge' (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 309). Seven years later, when Hale resigned his post, Rainsford succeeded to the chief justiceship on 12 April 1676, despite gossip that it was he 'who most commonly slept on the bench' (Cromartie, 122). In his brief stint as lord chief justice, Rainsford's most significant constitutional case transpired in June 1677 after Anthony Ashley Cooper, the first earl of Shaftesbury, was imprisoned in the Tower by the House of Lords for treason. Shaftesbury claimed that the warrant to imprison him was illegal, but was denied a writ of habeas corpus. In a controversial decision, Rainsford found that the king's bench had no jurisdiction to allow a member of the House of Lords or Commons who had been sentenced and committed by parliament to be released from his sentence, even though such a writ would be valid in an ordinary tribunal. In June 1678 Rainsford was removed from office and replaced as lord chief justice by Sir William Scroggs. Whether he was dismissed for political reasons, as some biographers have suggested, or because of his age and declining health, cannot be determined (Campbell, 2.19; Foss, 'Judges', 7.157). Over the next eight months Rainsford's health deteriorated rapidly and he died on 17 February 1680 at his manor home in Dallington, Northamptonshire. Though his exact wealth at death is difficult to ascertain, he had inherited patrimonial property estimated at $600 a year on the death of his elder brother in the 1650s, and on retirement he received an annuity equal to his salary. A portion of his wealth helped to found an almshouse in Northamptonshire. A monument in his honour was erected at Dallington parish church, where his remains were interred. 


@@@@@


doc= 23034


Rainton, Sir Nicholas (1569-1646), mayor of London, was baptized on 10 June 1569 at Heighington in the parish of Washingborough, Lincolnshire, the third son of Robert Rainton and his wife, Margaret. On 16 November 1602 at St Christopher-le-Stocks, London, he married Rebecca (died 1640), daughter of Thomas Moulson; contrary to the claims of some late twentieth-century histories of Enfield, the couple had no children. Rainton was free of the Haberdashers' Company and traded as a mercer in Lombard Street in satin and taffeta imported from Florence and velvet from Genoa. He came to enjoy considerable wealth and had a mansion house, Forty Hall, built for him at Enfield in 1629-33. His portrait, painted by William Dobson in 1643, hangs over the fireplace. His 1636 enclosure of a considerable area of common land in Enfield encountered great local resentment, and a legal challenge by dispossessed commoners, and after his death there was anti-enclosure rioting. 
During the 1620s and 1630s Rainton ascended the civic hierarchy: sheriff in 1621-2, alderman of the wards of Tower (1621-34) and Cornhill (1634-46), and lord mayor in 1632-3, with a knighthood conferred on 5 May 1633. He also served two terms, 1622-3 and 1632-3, as master of the Haberdashers' Company and was president of St Bartholomew's Hospital from 1634 until his death. Yet he was exceptional among his senior aldermanic colleagues for his undoubted puritan sympathies. In 1632 he was elected chairman by the London feoffees of impropriations, a puritan body (suppressed by Archbishop Laud in 1633) which aimed to install more godly clergy in the church by buying out lay owners of livings. He carried these religious sympathies with him to his final days, for among the clerical beneficiaries in his 1646 will were Thomas Foxley, former clerk to the feoffees and a principal victim of Laudian rule, and two other godly divines who had become leading city presbyterians. During his mayoralty Rainton also clashed with the bishop of London when the latter challenged the traditional practice of lord mayors having their sword of office carried before them into St Paul's Cathedral. 
Along with most of his fellow aldermen Rainton refused the king's request for a loan in June 1639, more perhaps for practical than political objections. Despite close ties of family and friendship with two future parliamentarian aldermen, Richard Chambers and John Kendrick, his parliamentary sympathies appear to have declined in the early 1640s, or old age may have handicapped more active involvement. In May 1640 he was one of four aldermen committed to prison by the privy council for the defiant way they refused to draw up lists of ward inhabitants able to contribute to a royal loan. Yet in the disputed common council elections of December 1641 he clashed dramatically with some Cornhill ward electors who were determined to unseat two longstanding councillors and replace them with pro-parliamentary radicals. In the following month he was nominated to the new London militia committee but he made his excuses and was replaced by Alderman John Warner. During the trial of the pro-royalist lord mayor Richard Gurney in July, he gave evidence in Gurney's defence and visited him in the Tower. He was also one of three senior aldermen who pleaded ill health when asked by parliament to act as deputy mayor. However, after Gurney's conviction, he carried out parliament's instructions and called a common hall to elect a new lord mayor. 
After the summer of 1642 Rainton faded from political view. He died on 19 August 1646 and was buried on 15 September in St Andrew's, Enfield. A spectacular funeral monument records in effigy the deaths of Rainton and his wife, and of his nephew, also Nicholas (died 1641), and his wife, Rebecca. In addition the monument names the younger Nicholas's six children, five of whom survived their great-uncle. Sir Nicholas's will, made on 2 May 1646 and proved on the following 11 September, bequeathed property in Middlesex, London, and Lincolnshire, made several charitable donations, and left a total of over $10,000 in individual monetary bequests to relatives and friends including three bequests of $2000 each to his great-nieces, Rebecca, Ann, and Elizabeth. Sir Nicholas's heir and executor was his great-nephew, Nicholas Rainton. 


@@@@@


doc= 23035


Rainy, Harry (1792-1876), expert in forensic medicine, was born at Creich, Sutherland, on 20 October 1792, the youngest son of George Rainy (died 1810), minister of Creich, and his wife, Anne (died 1833), daughter of the Revd Gilbert Robertson of Kincardine. Rainy matriculated at Glasgow University in 1806 and began medical studies there in 1808. In 1810 he transferred to the Edinburgh medical school, where he studied for a further two years. After a two-year stint as clerk to the Glasgow Royal Infirmary, he spent a year in Paris, from 1814 to 1815, to gain further experience in various hospitals. Rainy's stay in Paris brought him into contact with the great French medical and surgical figures of the day such as Dupuytren, Orfila, and Roux, and he also became interested in ophthalmology. Rainy witnessed the famous 'hundred days' of Napoleon, and on his return journey to Glasgow in 1815 via Germany and Belgium he crossed the field of Waterloo, shortly before the fateful battle. 
Rainy's interest in eye surgery remained after his return to Glasgow and in 1824 he helped his friend William Mackenzie to open the city's first eye hospital. Rainy was directed at this point towards general practice, which provided a bedrock for his future finances. He married Barbara (died 1854), daughter of Captain Robert Gordon of Invercharron, on 30 November 1818, the marriage ceremony being performed by Dr Thomas Chalmers. Their eldest son, Robert Rainy (1826-1906), became principal of the New College, Edinburgh. Their second son, George (1832-1869), was surgeon to the Glasgow Eye Infirmary, and lecturer at the university in 1868. 
In 1832 Rainy obtained a substitute university lectureship on the theory of physic, on behalf of the absent valetudinarian professor of the institutes of medicine, Charles Badham, who resided in the south of France. Badham retained his professorial stipend and took one quarter of the student fees, Rainy taking the remaining three-quarters. Rainy taught well from 1832 to 1839, but from 1839 to 1841 his politics and religious allegiance went against him: he was an ardent tory and a keen supporter of the Free Church of Scotland before and during the Disruption of 1843. In 1839 his subject was split by the whig government, which created a new regius chair for the theory of medicine. The chair went to a prominent whig, Andrew Buchanan. 
At the same time, the government also instituted the first regius chair of medical jurisprudence and forensic medicine in the University of Glasgow, created for another staunch whig, Robert Cowan. Disappointed, Rainy then lectured on Badham's other string, the practice of medicine, until Badham retired entirely from the chair in 1840. Rainy was the university's choice for the vacant chair and had strong support, but he was deliberately excluded. The lord advocate appointed the whig William Thomson, son of the Edinburgh professor of pathology. The whig government fell in August 1841 and in October, after a long period of illness, Robert Cowan died. On Cowan's death, the university senate applied to Sir Robert Peel on behalf of Rainy. He was appointed within the month, aged almost fifty, as the second Glasgow professor of medical jurisprudence and forensic police. 
Rainy was the last overt political appointment to a Scottish regius chair of public health and forensic medicine. Although by 1841 he was a man of wide experience, he was not a medical jurist cast in the mould of Robert Christison. Rainy's tall, erect figure and fine features rarely graced the witness box mainly because, according to a contemporary, 'he was not only cross looking, but was easily made cross. This was an unfortunate trait in a professor of medical jurisprudence... Counsel quickly discovered that they could make little of him' (Anderson, 8-9). Nevertheless, Rainy was a good teacher and an able chemist. In the first instance he took Christison's line and dropped Cowan's medical police (public health) string from lectures, and he styled himself professor of forensic medicine. Considering that the impetus for the chair's origins lay in Cowan's dedication to improving public health (Cowan styled himself professor of medical police), Rainy's decision was unfortunate for Glasgow and the west of Scotland, which was struggling with the worst excesses of industrialization. Medical students wishing to study public health subjects turned either to Glasgow's extramural schools or to Edinburgh. 
Rainy taught forensic medicine to medical students and medical jurisprudence to law students. His lectures, which were delivered without notes, indicate the widening concerns of forensic medicine, and despite a well-recorded cold and forbidding demeanour he was held in warm and high regard. His main medical research contributions lay in toxicology, notably the study of arsenic, and the cooling time of dead bodies. The latter subject, undertaken in collaboration with Joseph Coates, then lecturer in pathology, resulted in a formula known as 'Rainy's curve', which provided a useful rule of thumb for this still inexact corner of medical science. 
Rainy retired from the chair in 1862. The university bestowed on him the degree of LLD in 1876 on the installation of Disraeli as rector of the university. Rainy died in Glasgow on 6 August 1876. 


@@@@@


doc= 23036


Raithby, John (1766-1826), lawyer, was the eldest son of Edmund Raithby of Edenham, Lincolnshire. Originally a law stationer in Chancery Lane, at the start of the French Revolution he apparently published anonymous pamphlets advocating democracy. On 26 January 1795 he was admitted a member of Lincoln's Inn, and was subsequently called to the bar. He practised in the court of chancery. His legal writings obtained for him a commissionership of bankruptcy; he was also nominated a sub-commissioner on the public records. Raithby died at The Grove, Highgate, Middlesex, on 31 August 1826, leaving a widow; his only daughter died young. 
Raithby published anonymously, in 1798, 'The Study and Practice of the Law Considered', which appeared in octavo form and was considered a work of great merit; for some time it was attributed to Sir James Mackintosh. An American edition appeared at Portland, Maine, in 1806, and the second English edition was issued at London in 1816 with the author's name. With Sir Thomas Edlyne Tomlins, Raithby issued a new edition in quarto form of the 'Statutes at Large, from Magna Charta to the Union, 41 Geo. III' (10 vols., 1811). Tomlins co-operated in the edition down to 49 Geo. III, at which point he relinquished the task to Raithby and Nicholas Simons. Raithby compiled an index to the work, entitled 'From Magna Charta to 49 Geo. III', which appeared in 1814 in one volume in quarto form, and in three volumes in octavo form. He also compiled alphabetical and chronological indexes to the 'Statutes of the Realm', which were published by the record commissioners in 1824 and 1828, and he wrote 'The Law and Principle of Money Considered' (1811). Apart from his work in the field of legal writing, Raithby also tried his hand at fiction and produced 'Henry Bennet: a Novel'. 


@@@@@


doc= 23037


Sir Carew Ralegh (c.1550-1625/6), landowner, of Downton, Wiltshire, was, if anything, the more blunt in his conversation with Ralph Ironside at Wolfeton, but this isolated episode of vicar baiting had no lasting effect on a respectable county career. He represented Wiltshire in the parliaments of 1584 and 1586, Ludgershall, Wiltshire, in 1589, Fowey, Cornwall, in 1601, and Downton, Wiltshire, in 1603-4 and 1621. For some years gentleman of the horse to the wealthy Sir John Thynne of Longleat, Wiltshire, Ralegh in or after 1580 married Thynne's widow, Dorothy (died 1616), daughter of Sir William Wroughton of Broad Hinton, Wiltshire, and his second wife, Eleanor. The couple settled at Downton House, Salisbury. They had three sons and a daughter. Ralegh was knighted by Elizabeth at Basing House, Hampshire, on 14 September 1601. According to Aubrey he had 'a delicate clear voice, and played singularly well on the olpharion [orpharion]' ('Brief Lives', 2.179). Although Ralegh did not desert his more famous younger brother during 1603-18, he remained largely a local gentleman, holding various county offices, including membership of the quorum of the peace in Dorset and Wiltshire from about 1583 and vice-admiral for Dorset in 1597. Ralegh died in 1625 or 1626. His second son was Walter Ralegh (1586-1646), dean of Wells. 


@@@@@


doc= 23038


Carew Ralegh (1605-1666), courtier, matriculated from Wadham College, Oxford, on 23 March 1621 at sixteen, his name remaining on the books there until 1623. According to Anthony Wood, Carew Ralegh was something of a poet in his student days, which is as may be. A single poem under his name is printed in Henry Lawes's 'Ayres and Dialogues' (1653). William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke, presented him at court when he left Oxford, but James is said to have found him the reincarnation of his father, and he promptly set off for a year on the continent. Despite widespread sympathy he was restored in blood only in 1628, James having refused assent to an earlier private bill of restoration which had passed both houses of parliament in 1624. Charles I, for his part, insisted that in return Ralegh should renounce all remaining claims to the Dorset estates, Sherborne now resting in the hands of the family of John Digby, earl of Bristol, the former ambassador to Spain. For the moment, Ralegh looked elsewhere. In 1629 he bought from Thomas Wriothesley, third earl of Southampton, an estate at East Horsley, Surrey, and married Philippa (died 1674), daughter of Sir Thomas Shelton and widow of Sir Anthony Ashley, at about the same time. The couple had at least two sons, Sir Walter (died 'c'.1663) and Philip (died 1705), and a daughter, Anne. Ralegh danced in Ben Jonson's masque, 'Love's Triumph' in 1630, and five years later became a gentleman of the privy chamber. His temper getting the better of him, he spent a week in the Fleet prison during 1639 for quarrelling with and striking Sir William St Ravee at court. He inherited his uncle Sir Nicholas Throckmorton's property at West Horsley, Surrey, in 1643. 


@@@@@


doc= 23039


Ralegh, Sir Walter (1554-1618), courtier, explorer, and author, was born at Hayes, near East Budleigh, Devon, the second son and third surviving child of Walter Ralegh (1504/5-1581), landowner, of East Budleigh, and his third wife, Katherine (died 1594), daughter of Sir Philip Champernowne of Modbury, Devon, and his wife, Catherine. The Raleghs were an old-established county family, recently traced with some caution back to the middle of the thirteenth century. The family was protestant. Walter Ralegh the elder was deputy vice-admiral in the south-west under Mary I from 1555 to 1558. Katherine Ralegh's children from her first marriage, to Otho Gilbert (died 1547) of Compton, Devon, included the noted mariner and soldier Sir Humphrey Gilbert (1537-1583), whose adventurous career greatly influenced the young Ralegh, and Adrian Gilbert ('c'.1541-1628). 
Although much has been conjectured, little is in fact known about Ralegh's early career. In particular, it is not understood for certain how he came to acquire the formidable learning displayed in later life. Sir Robert Naunton may give a lead when he writes that Ralegh was 'an indefatigable Reader, whether by sea or Land, and none of the least observers both of men and the times' (Naunton, 49). So far as can be discerned from the meagre clues to hand, some of them throwaway remarks in Ralegh's 'History of the World' (1614), he served as a volunteer in France from 1569 with the Huguenot armies during the second phase of the wars of religion, and tasted an early military reverse at the battle of Moncontour in October. Campaigning took him across northern and south-western France, the barbarities and valour he witnessed making a deep impression on him. It appears that he returned to England after the peace of St Germain was concluded in 1570. 
The date of Ralegh's matriculation at Oriel College, Oxford, remains uncertain, although he probably went up to the university in 1572. He was the youngest of four surviving sons -- there were two half-brothers from his father's first marriage, John (died 1588) and George (1527-1597), as well as an elder brother from his father's third marriage, Carew ['see below'] -- and his means may accordingly have been somewhat limited. Thomas Child of Worcestershire told John Aubrey that Ralegh, pressed for money, 'borrowed a gowne of him when he was at Oxford... which he never restored, nor money for it' ('Brief Lives', 2.179). Ralegh left Oxford without a degree, and was admitted to the Middle Temple on 27 February 1575. On admission he was described as being 'late of Lyons Inne' (H. A. C. Sturgess, ed., 'Register of Admissions to the Honourable Society of the Middle Temple', 3 vols., 1949, 1.39). His first published poem appeared in 1576, as a commendatory verse in George Gascoigne's 'The Steele Glass'. He was living at Islington, Middlesex, in 1577, entering into a bond for one of his servants summoned to answer charges in December. 
Records of Ralegh's early contacts with the court also remain elusive. His mother's elder sister, Katherine Astley (d. 1565), was Princess Elizabeth's governess from 1544, became chief gentlewoman of the privy chamber in 1558 and of the bedchamber in 1559, and remained an intimate companion of the queen until her death in July 1565. This connection may have afforded Ralegh an initial introduction, but it was perhaps through Humphrey Gilbert's means that he first met leading courtiers, among them Sir Francis Walsingham and Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. When in June 1578 Gilbert secured a patent to discover 'remote, heathen and barbarous lands... not actually possessed of any Christian prince', Ralegh sailed in his fleet as captain of the 'Falcon', a ship of 100 tons. To this day the precise purpose of Gilbert's expedition remains obscure, but he was in any case frustrated by storms, mischance, quarrels among the high command, and desertions. The 'Falcon', however, pressed on into the Atlantic, braving winter weather in a vain search for plunder and adventure. Ralegh eventually returned to Plymouth in May 1579. 
Ralegh turns up next in London. According to the not altogether trustworthy reports and assertions of Charles Arundell, Ralegh seems for a time to have moved in the circle of Edward de Vere, seventeenth earl of Oxford, Lord Henry Howard, and other Catholic courtiers, carrying a challenge from Oxford to Sir Philip Sidney after their tennis-court quarrel in August 1579. However, the association with Oxford -- and more significantly with Howard -- degenerated over time into mutual dislike. On 7 February 1580 Sir Thomas Perrot and Ralegh were committed to the Fleet prison by the privy council following a 'fraye' ('APC', '1579-80', 384). Ill feeling between them was ongoing. A month later Ralegh was caught up in another brawl, and was on this occasion obliged to cool his heels in the Marshalsea prison. Through the good offices of other friends at court, he secured a captain's commission in the reinforcements then being dispatched to Ireland to counter the Desmond rebellion and its various offshoots. He served under the lord deputy, Arthur Grey, fourteenth Baron Grey de Wilton, at the bombardment of Smerwick, co. Kerry, where a force of Italian and Spanish adventurers had landed in support of the rebels. After four days the besieged garrison sought mercy, surrendered, were disarmed, and then methodically slaughtered, Ralegh overseeing the butchery. Searching through the possessions of the dead, he discovered letters which contained some unspecified matters of secrecy, and was sent to London with the documents in December 1580. This episode is frequently portrayed as the genesis of his career at court, even though he was ordered back to Ireland early in 1581. Until the summer Ralegh was quartered at Cork. Lobbying hard for a grant of Barry Castle, in Cork harbour, stronghold of the politically suspect David fitz James Barry, first Viscount Buttevant, he fought with considerable bravery in more than one guerrilla skirmish. His earliest surviving letter, written to William Cecil, Baron Burghley, lord treasurer, from Cork in February 1581, sought an allowance in respect of soldiers' pay, and adopted a degree of familiarity, naturally well mixed with deference. Certainly, his stock had risen to the extent that in the spring he was appointed to the commission, based at Lismore, co. Waterford, which governed Munster during the absence in London of the provost-marshal, Sir Warham St Leger. 
At about this time Ralegh also fathered a child. Of the mother, Alice Goold, little is known beyond the fact that she appears to have been a daughter of Justice James Goold. Indeed, the very existence of this child rested on a single letter of disputed authenticity until the rediscovery of Ralegh's will in the 1960s revealed a bequest to his 'reputed daughter' of $333 6's'. 8died The girl's name is not known, but there is some reason to believe that Ralegh later betrothed her to Daniel Dumaresq, his page in Jersey, and that the young woman died of plague in London. 
On returning to court, Ralegh began to attract Elizabeth I's attention. The well-worn tale of how he spread his cloak over a 'plashy place', thus allowing her to walk across, rests only on gossip recorded by Thomas Fuller. So too does the rather less credible, but also widely known, story that has Ralegh and his queen scratching couplets on a window pane (Fuller, 'Worthies', 1663, 262). Naunton, trying to account for Ralegh's influence, said that Elizabeth took him 'for a kind of oracle, which netled them all' (Naunton, 49). That is as may be; there was clearly a physical attraction too. Ralegh was tall (at 6 feet, taller than most of his contemporaries), dark-haired in youth, with somewhat pale and refined features. However apocryphal, Aubrey's raw tale of how Ralegh pleasured a scarcely reluctant maid of honour against the trunk of a convenient tree, gives a flavour of the man's power, and, ultimately, his weakness. The queen detained Ralegh for a time at court, making him an esquire of the body by 1581, but he eventually departed for the Low Countries in 1582 with Francois, duc d'Anjou, travelling with Leicester, Henry Carey, first Baron Hunsdon, and Sidney. While he was there, William of Orange entrusted him with a message intended for Elizabeth's ears only. 
Ralegh rose rapidly in the queen's favour, playing the courtier to perfection and writing her elegant, at times innovative, poems -- his 'Farewell false love' was read widely in court circles during the early 1580s. Corresponding with his half-brother in March 1583, he sent Humphrey Gilbert 'a token from Her Majesty, an ancor guyded by a Lady... farther she cummandeth that yow leve your picture with mee' ('Letters', 12). The intimacy, ostentatiously displayed, is unmistakable. On 27 December 1584 the Pomeranian traveller Leopold von Wedel, recounting a visit to the English court, offered further insight into this relationship. Chatting with her courtiers, the queen pointed 'with her finger at his face, that there was a smut [smudge] on it, and was going to wipe it off with her handkerchief; but before she could he wiped it off himself' (V. von Klarwill, ed., 'Queen Elizabeth and some Foreigners', trans. T. H. Nash, 1928, 336). Tangible rewards soon began to accrue. In April 1583 Ralegh secured leases reverting to the crown from All Souls College, Oxford, selling them on without delay. In the same year, Elizabeth granted him one of her favourite palaces, the handsome London dwelling, Durham Place on the Strand. It was blessed with a lantern tower that had a 'prospect which is pleasant perhaps as any in the world' ('Brief Lives', 2.183). Views were important to him; Ralegh put the room to use as his study, and it is argued that he later used a similarly high attic room at Sherborne, Dorset, for the same purpose. Visitors to Durham Place spoke of its magnificence, of the splendour of its fabric and fittings. In May 1583 Ralegh received a patent for the sale of wine and the licensing of vintners, worth at a minimum over $700 per annum, and this remained the foundation-stone of his fortunes. 
Although now at the heart of the court, Ralegh remained very much the Devon man. Apart from Aubrey's interesting assertion that Ralegh spoke 'broad Devonshire' to his dying day ('Brief Lives', 2.182), it is known that the newly established courtier tried in July 1584 to purchase his birthplace, 'Hayes, a farme sumtyme in my fathers possession' (Devon RO, MS 2850Z/Z3). This attempt failed, but many of the honours bestowed upon him by the queen had a deliberate regional slant. Knighted on 6 January 1585, he was appointed vice-admiral of the west, lord lieutenant of Cornwall, and, with the death of Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford, lord warden of the stannaries in the same year. He also served as a knight of the shire for Devon in the parliaments of 1584 and 1586. In 1587 Ralegh was nominated to succeed Sir Christopher Hatton as captain of the guard, a post for which he appeared ideally suited, even to the most jaundiced of contemporaries. Ralegh duly took up his duties after Hatton's death in November 1591. 
To support these new dignities Ralegh received extensive estates, including the Derbyshire properties of Anthony Babington, executed and attainted for a conspiracy in support of Mary, queen of Scots, in 1586. In the same year Ralegh also received from the queen a grant of three and a half seignories in the plantation of Munster, part of the confiscated Desmond patrimony, amounting to 42,000 acres. This was far larger than any other single grant in the plantation, almost three times larger than that given to Sir William Herbert, and four times more than the grant awarded to Hatton. Since each 'undertaker' was limited to 12,000 acres, the grant drew hostile comments from the lord deputy of Ireland, Sir John Perrot, Sir Thomas Perrot's father. Ralegh in turn accused Perrot of 'raising impertinent objections'. Perrot was then warned by Burghley that Ralegh 'is able to do you more harm in one hour than we are all able to do you good in a year', a striking tribute to the strength of the latter's position at court (M. MacCarthy-Morrogh, 'The Munster Plantation: English Migration to Southern Ireland, 1583-1641', 1986, 52, 102). Ralegh was not, however, prepared to stay in Ireland. He peopled his lands with tenants -- 148 of them by 1589 -- but leased out the seignories themselves to various Englishmen in 1594 for $200 per annum. 
Ralegh's well-publicized initiatives to colonize North America began in earnest after the death of Humphrey Gilbert in September 1583. Privateering and colonization had been a central element in his half-brother's grand design for the New World, and Ralegh eagerly took up the challenge, securing a patent for the purpose of colonization in 1584, and seeking practical advice from the mathematician and astronomer Thomas Harriot. Harriot, who became a close friend and one of the overseers of Ralegh's will in 1597, worked on a dictionary of the Algonquian language with the help of two native Americans brought back by members of Arthur Barlowe's reconnaissance expedition in 1584. Ralegh also enlisted both Richard Hakluyts to compose works supporting the colonizing initiative, Hakluyt senior in his 'Inducements to the Liking of the Voyage Intended towards Virginia', and his more famous younger cousin in the 'Discourse of Western Planting' (written in summer 1584). Walsingham, Lord Charles Howard, Ralegh's cousin Sir Richard Grenville (1542-1591), and many London merchants subscribed to his scheme. In 1585, having received his patent to colonize, he sent out an expedition of four ships and two pinnaces, with 600 men, under Grenville. Although Ralegh himself never went to Virginia, he was the mastermind behind this expedition and its successors. Grenville's men settled on Roanoke Island, while Grenville himself sailed into the Atlantic on a successful privateering voyage, leaving command of the infant colony to Ralph Lane, an army officer who had served in Ireland and equerry of the stables. By July of the following year the colonists were desperately short of food and welcomed the chance of a passage home when Sir Francis Drake put in at Roanoke on his return from the Caribbean. Grenville then arrived with a relief expedition, but, finding the colony deserted, sailed off, leaving behind fifteen unfortunate men. They were never seen again. 
In 1587 Ralegh sent out yet another expedition, under John White. Unlike Lane's colony, whose purpose had been primarily a base for privateering, this was intended as a farming settlement. The planters were to have 500 acres each, more if their investment merited it. This venture was no more successful than its predecessor. After various catastrophes, White went home to organize relief. Unhappily for the colonists, Elizabeth was then involved in the Armada crisis and forbade the dispatch of further expeditions. When White did finally get two pinnaces to sea in 1588, they were diverted into piratical enterprises and were then themselves attacked. By the time a ship reached the colony in 1590 it was once again deserted, the settlers gone. Ralegh was blamed by some at the time, including Hakluyt, for neglecting the colony; and probably he must take some responsibility for the failure to relieve it. However, the main cause lies in the war with Spain, which distracted the attention of the queen and of her mariners. 
There was a good deal of the courtier, if little of the politician, in Ralegh. His letter of 29 March 1586 to Leicester, who was concerned by the need to secure a contingent of tin-miners to serve as sappers in the Low Countries, overflows with tact and reassurance. He had, he declared, raised the matter with Elizabeth, and 'found her very willing in so mich as order was geven for a cummission, but since the matter is stayd, I know not for what cause'. If Leicester would only tell him of any grievances he would do his utmost to clear the misconceptions that must have given rise to them. He expanded upon his hatred for Spain, a passage which finds echoes in so many of his later writings: 'your lordshipe doth well understand my affection towards Spayn and how I have consumed the best part of my fortune hating the tirranus sprosperety ['sic'] of that estate and it were now strange and monnsterous that I should becum an enemy to my countrey and conscience. (BL, Harley MS 6994, fol. 2'r')' The Low Countries again claimed his attention, along with those of the entire English political nation, when Sidney died in October 1586 as a result of the injury he received at the battle of Zutphen. Ralegh's honest, elegant epitaph, with more than a conscious element of 'nisi nil bonum', is arguably the best of his early work. Nevertheless, his talents as a courtier were perhaps limited. For all his success with the queen -- and, indeed, because of that success -- he made many enemies. Unlike Hatton, also raised from relative obscurity through royal favour alone, Ralegh lacked the patience and self-control of a conciliator. He occupied Hatton's lodgings at court in 1585, earning the sharp reprimand from Elizabeth that 'she had rather see him hanged than equal him with [Hatton] or that the world should think she did so' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 3.273). Ralegh was, indeed, notoriously quick to denigrate. Shortly after Leicester's death in 1588 a derogatory epitaph began to circulate at court and beyond: 'Here lies the noble warrior that never drew a sword'. Rightly or wrongly, Ralegh was popularly given credit for its composition. 
Ralegh was always, at heart, a man of action. In December 1587 he energetically assessed the defences of Devon and Cornwall, and pondered how best to pay for necessary precautions against the threat from Spain. In a thoughtful letter to Burghley he wrote that, so far as he could tell, 'if it might notwithstandinge stande withe Her Majesties likinge to beare the one half of the charge, beinge great, it would be very consonant to all good pollecy, and the countrey, as I judge, will willingly defray the rest' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/206/40). That was optimistic. Despite the danger, queen and privy council opted for economy and chose instead to forgo the mustering of any sizeable defence force. Ralegh did not confine his efforts to the south-west. He also surveyed the coastal defences of East Anglia, focusing everywhere on the need to protect deep-water harbours. William Camden maintained that he served with Charles Howard, second Baron Howard of Effingham, from 23 July 1588, but there is no other evidence for this. If Ralegh did see active service against the Armada, he was back in London by 2 August, when he was sent from court to the south coast to 'confer' with the lord admiral ('APC', 16.212). 
A long tradition associates Ralegh with the introduction of both potatoes and tobacco into England. The potato originated in Peru and arrived in Seville by at least 1570: from there it spread to other parts of Europe. However, John Gerard, in his 'Herball' of 1597, confused matters by writing that he received roots of the potato from Virginia, which grew in his garden, implying that this was a recent import and leading people to think that it had been brought over by one of the recent English expeditions. Ralegh's name is not, however, linked in print with the potato until 1699, when John Houghton claimed in a weekly bulletin that he first brought it to Ireland, whence it spread to Lancashire and then to the rest of England. Charles Smith's 'History of Cork' (1750) relates a story of Ralegh's gardener at Myrtle Grove, his house at Youghal, co. Cork, finding tubers beneath the soil, growing them, and cooking the berries instead of the roots, with unhappy results. None of this is very convincing. More interesting evidence is provided in the manuscript journal of the Royal Society for December 1693, where the president, Sir Robert Southwell, writes that his grandfather brought potatoes into Ireland, having been given them by Ralegh. If that is so, Ralegh might be indirectly credited with importing the root into Ireland. However, most of the available evidence is thin and conclusions are speculative. 
There was no reason at the time for anyone to have paid attention to the introduction of the potato; and the debate arose very much later. Tobacco was different. Smoking was a new, exotic, outlandish, and controversial habit; and credit or blame for it was soon bestowed. Tobacco was mentioned in the literature of discovery very early: by Christopher Columbus in 1492. It was introduced into Europe by Andre Thevet in mid-century, was growing in England by 1571, and was being smoked there by 1573. While Ralegh cannot have introduced it to this country, he probably helped to make it fashionable at court and in landed society. Aubrey claimed that Ralegh 'was the first that brought tobacco into England and into fashion' ('Brief Lives', 2.181). He was certainly wrong on the first point, right on the second. Smoking was just the kind of habit -- dramatic and new-fangled -- that would appeal to a man as conscious of his image as Ralegh. Potatoes had -- and have -- no such cachet. 
In 1591 there appeared the first of Ralegh's published works, 'A report of the truth of the fight about the Isles of Azores, this last summer, betwixt the Revenge... and an Armada of the king of Spain' (generally known to historians as 'The Last Fight of the Revenge'). Grenville died on 2 September 1591 in a disastrous encounter between ships under Howard of Effingham and a much larger fleet of fifty-three vessels dispatched from Spain. The English ships were caught unprepared, many of their men sick, others on shore. All save one, the 'Revenge', under Grenville, managed to escape. Grenville stayed and died with honour. It is not clear whether Ralegh was persuaded to write his account by the government to counter Spanish claims of victory, or whether he was moved to defend his cousin, Grenville, from charges of unnecessarily endangering himself and his men. Either or both are possible. Two principal objectives were pursued in his brief work: denying Spanish boasts and glorifying Grenville's conduct without, if possible, antagonizing the Howard clan. In following these Ralegh also wrote a bold, vivid, and moving account of the battle. 
Ralegh described how Grenville rejected all pleas from the master of his ship to flee from the Spanish, and ordered the master gunner to 'split and sink the ship, that thereby nothing might remain of glory or victory to the Spaniards' (or, as Alfred, Lord Tennyson, put it in his 1878 reworking of the story, that the 'Revenge' might 'fall into the hands of God, not into the hands of Spain'). In the end, the master and others of the ship's company overruled Grenville and negotiated a surrender. Mortally wounded, Grenville was carried onto the Spanish admiral's flagship, and there he died. Howard of Effingham would, according to Ralegh, have come to Grenville's aid, but was dissuaded by the rest of his fleet. As for the Spanish, they lost more ships than the English did, 'a manifest testimony how injust and displeasing their attempts are in the sight of God' (Ralegh, 'Report', sigs. A1'r'-D2'r'). Ralegh ended with a round condemnation of Spanish conduct in Europe and, above all in the Indies and Peru, thus declaring his allegiance to the protestant cause. 
Throughout the later 1580s Ralegh retained Elizabeth's confidence and so held the measure of her younger favourite, Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex. Ralegh and Essex were sometimes allies, occasionally friends, but for most of the following ten years they regarded one another warily, the relationship increasingly poisoned by distrust and suspicion. Blame for his failure to win over Ralegh, who at heart shared the same political and strategic philosophies, is conventionally laid squarely on the intransigent and irrational earl. However, Ralegh could be equally intransigent and, sometimes, just as irrational. His antagonism towards the earl may have originated over his relationship with Essex's sister, Dorothy (died 1619), who married Sir Thomas Perrot in July 1583. It was not, in any case, Essex who displaced him for ever from his central place in Elizabeth's affections. At the beginning of the 1590s, Ralegh began a liaison with Elizabeth ('bap'. 1565, died 'c'.1647), also known as Bess, one of the queen's maids of honour, and daughter of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton (1515/16-1571) and his wife, Anne. At some point late in 1591, with Bess pregnant, she and Ralegh were married in secret, fully aware that news of this union, once it leaked out, would gravely displease the queen. All accounts agree that Bess was both determined and formidable. Her brother Sir Arthur Throckmorton ('c'.1557-1626), who was very fond of her, referred to her as 'Morgan le fay' in a diary entry of 1609 (Rowse, 276). The affection between husband and wife, however, was apparently strong and enduring. It had much to endure. 
Ralegh perhaps felt that he would be able to ride the storm when it broke, but here he underestimated the intensity of Elizabeth's displeasure. Busying himself in preparations for a privateering venture, he made every effort to discount spreading rumours of the marriage, assuring Sir Robert Cecil as late as March 1592 that 'if any such thing weare I would have imparted it unto your sealf before any man livinge' ('Letters', 63). He more than once resorted to blatant falsehood when he perceived his career to be at stake. The couple had a son on 29 March. Remarkably, Essex stood godfather when the child was baptized Damerei (1592-1593), after a prominent forebear on the Throckmorton side of the family. On 27 April Bess returned to court, taking up her duties as a maid of honour, still trying to hide the facts of marriage and motherhood, while Ralegh sailed on the first leg of an expedition in which a good part of his fortune was invested. He was back in Plymouth by mid-May, and then, belatedly, his secret came out. Elizabeth took his measure. On 28 May Damerei Ralegh was brought by his nurse to Durham Place, where his father saw him for perhaps the only time. Two days later Ralegh was committed to Cecil's charge, though by 2 June he was back at Durham Place. On the following day Bess was placed in the custody of the vice-chamberlain, Sir Thomas Heneage. 
Still believing that the usual charades of courtly contrition would suffice, Ralegh lamented his wretchedness to Cecil. 'Do with mee now therfore what yow list', he wrote. 'I am more wery of life then they are desirus I should perishe, which if it had bynn for her, as it is by her, I had bynn to happelye borne' (Hatfield, Cecil MS 21/58). Later, Cecil himself recalled an occasion on which Ralegh, watching from Durham Place, noticed Elizabeth's barges on the river below, at Blackfriars. Wrestling theatrically with his keeper, George Carew, he shouted that he 'wolde disguyse hymselfe and gett into a pare of oares to ease his mynde butt with a syght of the Quene, or els, he protest, his harte wolde breake' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1729, fol. 177). Elizabeth was irritated rather than pacified by these gestures, smacking as they did of implicit defiance and a wholesale lack of remorse. It was a curious but somehow characteristic miscalculation, which provoked a venomous response from the queen. Husband and wife were both sent to the Tower of London on 7 August. 
Ralegh chafed at the disgrace, sought solace in poetry, and begged their release with as much humility as he could muster. Happily for him, the fleet he had recently sent to the Azores succeeded in capturing a Portuguese carrack, the 'Madre de Dios', one of the greatest single prizes taken by Elizabethan seamen. The ship was brought home to Dartmouth in triumph, and exaggerated tales reached London of how the vast treasure on board was being rapidly plundered by those at the scene. In this administrative chaos lay Ralegh's opportunity. On 15 September, at the request of Sir John Hawkins and through the mediation of Burghley, he was sent to Dartmouth, still technically a prisoner, as he never tired of telling those he met on the way. Once there, under Cecil's observant eye, he worked hard, enjoying the welcome given him by mariners. When all was eventually divided up, Elizabeth allowed Ralegh only a small share of the spoils: a notional profit of $2000 on the $34,000 adventured by him and his associates. She did, however, begin to forgive. On 22 December Bess was released from the Tower. 
It is possible, though now hard to prove, that the death of Bess's son helped prompt this charity. Damerei Ralegh vanishes from the record. On 1 November 1593 the couple's second child, Walter (1593-1618), was baptized at Lillington, Dorset, near the foundations of a fine new house Ralegh was beginning to build close by the old castle at Sherborne. In January 1592 the queen took a lease of ninety-nine years on all the estates of John Coldwell, bishop of Salisbury, in or near Sherborne, and immediately sublet these properties to Ralegh for the remainder of her term. The new 'Lodge', and its gardens, were substantially the work of Adrian Gilbert. 
For the time being both Ralegh and his wife were banished from court -- the ban on Ralegh was not lifted until 1597 -- but he was elected a burgess of Mitchell, Cornwall, in the parliament of 1593. He had been knight of the shire for Devon in the 1580s, and this borough seat was distinctly less exalted. Nevertheless, it was at least a stepping-stone back to favour, and in the next two parliaments he was returned for county seats: Dorset in 1597 and Cornwall in 1601. He was unique in Elizabeth's reign in sitting for three counties, a keen parliament man, actively concerned with borough patronage and with the business of the House of Commons. In 1593 he warned fellow MPs in ringing tones of the dangers posed by Spain, demanding pre-emptive action and, consequently, a grant of money sufficient for such a strike. These opinions were hardly unorthodox; and MPs duly granted the queen an unprecedented triple subsidy. However, he also strongly expressed hostility towards the Dutch. Early in 1593, perhaps, Ralegh wrote a treatise on the succession, arguing very correctly that the matter was for God and princes alone, beyond the remit of mere subjects, and beyond legislation. Again, however, he showed his lack of political common sense, wondering publicly about what James VI might do to press his claim if ever it were challenged. 
Ralegh's poems present exceptional difficulties for his editors and biographers. He allowed very few, probably only five, to be printed; others circulated in manuscript, as was common enough at the time. Most probably, he did not want his authorship revealed to the generality and, consequently, there is no established canon of his poems. Many were attributed to him which were probably not his; others lay hidden for years. Many exist in anthologies edited by others and there is no certainty as to which words are his, which were interpolated by editors, or what was his final version, if such existed. The authorship of two of the best-known poems attributed to him has been questioned. Although 'The Lie' is now accepted as his by most, but not all, scholars, 'Sir Walter Raleighs Pilgrimage' ('Give me my scallop shell of quiet') usually is not. Few poems can be dated with any precision and attempts to relate individual pieces to specific events in his life are fraught with difficulty. 
Ralegh's poems are essentially the work of a courtier, written very much within the context of the royal court. Some are commendations of the works of others, like his early verses praising Gascoigne's 'The Steele Glass', some are epitaphs, like that on Sidney. Most are concerned with love, especially his love for Elizabeth. His poetry is part, an important part, of his campaign to make a name for himself at court and, above all, to win the favour of the queen. That is not to say that the poems were cold or unemotional. On the contrary, they were passionate, angry, hyperbolic, cynical, pessimistic, and often despairing. 'Farewell, false love' is characteristic of his tone: '
Farewell, false love, thou Oracle of Lyes, 

A mortall Foe, an Enymy to reste, 

An envious Boy, from whence all cares aryse, 

A Bastard borne, a Beast with rage posseste. 

A way of Error, a Temple full of Treason, 

In all effectes, contrary unto reason. 
('Poems', ed. Rudick, 12)' His early poems to Elizabeth are more straightforward: '
Praysed be 'Dianaes' faire and harmelesse light, 

Praised be the dewes, where-with she moists the ground: 

Praised be her beames, the glory of the night, 

Prais'd be her power, by which all powers abound. 
(ibid., 4)' Later, Ralegh became, or affected to become, less confident of the queen's love. In 'Fortune hath taken away my love', he complains directly to Elizabeth of her coldness. Her response tells much about the ease of their relationship. Ralegh complained that Fortune stole her affection from him. She replied to her 'silly pugge' that Fortune had no such power over her: '
Revive againe and live without all drede, 

the lesse afraid the better thou shalt spede. 
(ibid., 19)' Ralegh was not so easily comforted and 'Farewell to the Court' may belong to the same period, the late 1580s, perhaps in response to Essex's rise to royal favour: '
Like truthles dreames, so are my joyes expired, 

And past returne, are all my dandled daies: 

My love misled, and fancie quite retired, 

Of all which past, the sorow onely staies. 
(ibid., 26)' 'The Lie', a fierce indictment of the court, the church, and most other human institutions, may also belong to this phase of Ralegh's career, but although he is the most likely author of this poem, his title to it cannot be fully established. 
Ralegh was, however, undoubtedly the author of four manuscript poems discovered at Hatfield House in the middle of the nineteenth century. Generally known as the 'Cynthia poems', they were first published in 1870. They are in Ralegh's 'best hand' and can be unequivocally counted as his. One, 'The 21st and Last Booke of the Ocean to Scinthia', is the longest poem by far that he ever wrote (522 lines). It is followed by a short fragment of 22 lines, 'The end of the boockes, of the oceans love to Scinthia, and the beginninge of the 22 boock, entreating of sorrow'. 
Were these works part of a lost epic poem comparable to 'The Faerie Queene'? It seems unlikely that Ralegh could have found time to write such a mammoth piece in the course of Elizabeth's reign. (Some editors, particularly Agnes Latham, have deciphered the numbers in the titles as 11 and 12, causing some confusion, but Ralegh would have been hard pressed to have written even ten such books.) Did Ralegh start to write an epic, beginning, for some reason, at the twenty-second book? It is possible but only very slightly more probable. The truth is unknown, and it may not matter. What exists is a major poem, written about the time of, or a little later than, Ralegh's imprisonment in the Tower when Elizabeth learned of his marriage. It describes the desolation that he felt from the withdrawal of her affection for him. He describes the joy that she gave him during his years at court and his despair that she has deserted him: '
My weery lymes, her memory imbalmed, 

my darkest wayes her eyes make clear as day 

what rage so feirce that love could not allay. 

Twelve yeares intire I wasted in this warr 

twelve yeares of my most happy younger dayes, 

butt I in them, and they now wasted ar 

of all which past the sorrow only stayes, 

So wrate I once and my mishap fortolde. 
('Poems', ed. Rudick, 52-3)' He finishes with the lines: '
But be it so, or not, th'effects ar past, 

her love hath end, my woe must ever last. 
(ibid., 65)' The poem was evidently intended for the queen, to make her aware of his suffering and to relieve him from it. It was probably given to Cecil, so that he could present it to her. Instead, he placed it in his archive where it stayed, presumably unread, for nearly four hundred years: it is unlikely that it reached her. Rhetorical, exaggerated, and self-pitying as it is, 'The Ocean to Scinthia' is a work of tremendous poetic force. 
Ralegh was, so far as can be discerned from his writings and his poetry, a conforming member of the Church of England. He was, however, prone to expressions of rational scepticism, a potentially dangerous trait given the company he sometimes kept and his inclination towards discussion and debate. His patronage of Thomas Harriot, and his contacts with Giordano Bruno, Christopher Marlowe, and Harriot's other patron, Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, tarred him with more radical notions. The belief that Ralegh was an atheist, that he denied God and advocated his own views to others, finds expression in Robert Persons's pseudonymous 'Elizabethae... saevissimum in Catholicos sui regni edictum... cum responsione' (1592), and is echoed by other commentators during the seventeenth century and beyond. According to an English summary of Persons's work, Ralegh presided over a 'school of atheisme' in which, under Harriot's direction, 'both Moyses and our Savior, the olde, and the new Testamente are jested at, and the schollars taughte, among other thinges to spell God backwarde' (R. Persons, 'An Advertisement Written to a Secretary of my Lord Treasurers of England, by an English Intelligencer as he Passed through Germany towards Italy', 1592, 18). Persons's attacks -- even his charges of atheism -- were by no means confined to Ralegh, who was indeed something of a secondary target providing evidence to her Catholic enemies that Elizabeth governed through atheists. 
Nevertheless, Persons's accusations here amounted to a little more than smoke without fire. Ralegh's still obscure links with Marlowe were viewed with suspicion, and on one notorious occasion he and his brother Carew quite deliberately ruffled the temper of Ralph Ironside, vicar of Winterborne, Dorset, during a supper hosted by Sir George Trenchard at Wolfeton, Dorset, in 1593, by enquiring deeply into the nature of the soul, and exposing what they saw as Ironside's circular theological arguments (BL, Harley MS 6849, fols. 183'r'-190'r'). This spat helped prompt an abortive investigation by the court of high commission in March 1594. Ralegh duly proved his religious credentials by overseeing a raid on Chideock, Dorset, and the arrest there of the Arundell family priest, John Cornelius, alias Mooney. 'He is', said Ralegh, 'a notable stout villain, and I think can say much' (Edwards, 2.91). It certainly seems that Cornelius had no compunction about talking to Ralegh, albeit on topics of his own choosing. According to a Catholic narrative Ralegh passed an entire night conversing with Cornelius and came away impressed by the man's sincerity. If, indeed, it ever took place, the long hours of talk did neither man any good. Cornelius was determined upon martyrdom, and nothing Ralegh or anyone else did or said could deflect him from his purpose. 
In these years of disgrace Ralegh's preoccupation with the fabled empire of El Dorado took firm root. The power of Spain was, he observed, founded on its American silver and gold. A project to establish England's own source of wealth in the New World grew alongside his schemes to create a colonial empire on the north coast of South America. His dreams about the treasures of lost cities combined with an appreciation of Spain's present military weakness, sharpened by Spanish travellers' tales, and by the adventures of the governor of Trinidad, Antonio de Berrio, who had repeatedly travelled through the interior of Guiana in search of gold. The resulting voyage -- financed largely on credit through the efforts of William Sanderson, Ralegh's nephew by marriage -- was all very much a last resort; Bess, perhaps at her husband's suggestion, wrote to Cecil, hoping that he might 'draw Sir Walter towards the east than help him forward towards the sunset' (Rowse, 182). Cecil chose instead to invest in the new expedition, and Ralegh eventually sailed from Plymouth with four ships on 6 February 1595. When the Spanish colony on Trinidad was overwhelmed, amid considerable brutality, Ralegh focused on information provided at some length by a particularly valuable prisoner, the elderly Berrio. There followed an eventful voyage up the rising waters of the Orinoco. Like the Spaniards before him, Ralegh was beguiled all the way by tales of fantastic cities and wealth in the interior, and ultimately obliged to return to the coast empty-handed. Attempts to secure some plunder in the Caribbean were equally futile -- costing several lives in an abortive assault on Cumana -- and Ralegh arrived in Plymouth in September, his holds empty, to face the indifference of queen and privy council. 
The scorn and derision of Ralegh's fellow countrymen grew intensely irksome. Some even suggested that he skulked in Cornwall for a year, making up the whole adventure. 'What becumes of Guiana', he wrote to Cecil on 10 November 1595, 'I miche desire to here, whether it pass for a history or a fable' (Hatfield, Cecil MS 36/4). 'Her majestye', he suggested two days later, would 'shortly bewayle her negligence therin, and the enemy by the addition of so mich wealth weare us out of all'. Once or twice in these fulminations he makes a telling point: 'wee must not looke to mayntyne warr uppon the revenus of Ingland' (ibid., MS 36/9). 
Over the winter Ralegh wrote a report on the expedition, 'The Discoverie of the Large, Rich and Bewtiful Empire of Guiana'. Dedicated to Cecil and Howard of Effingham, it was an elegant and memorable piece of travel writing, at once a self-justification and a call to exploit his discoveries. As they journeyed up the Orinoco: 'on both sides of the river we passed the most beautiful country that ever mine eyes beheld; and whereas all that we had seen before was nothing but woods, prickles, bushes and thorns, here we beheld plains of twenty miles in length, the grass short and green, and in divers parts groves of trees by themselves, as if they had been by all the art and labour in the world so made of purpose. ('Works', 8.427)' However, the rapid rising of the rivers made it impossible to mine for gold in the time available and they lacked the necessary tools. Ralegh, though, was confident that 'the sun covereth not so much riches in any part of the earth' as in Guiana. He fully intended to return, because, as he wrote in conclusion: 'Guiana is a country that hath yet her maidenhead, never sacked, turned, nor wrought; the face of the earth hath not been torn, nor the virtue and salt of the soil spent by manurance, the graves not been opened for gold, the mines not broken with sledges, nor their images pulled down out of their temples.' Once conquered it could be easily defended. Ralegh had already made friends with the indigenous people and if the Spanish were once driven out the principal native chief would pay Elizabeth hundreds of thousands of pounds in tribute. At all events he convinced himself. More and more, the illusion of Guiana appeared -- to a frustrated man -- a means of re-establishing his own fortune and bolstering English war chests at one and the same time. The book was read widely, both at home and abroad. Latin, German, and Dutch editions all appeared within five years. Harriot drew a presentation map of Guiana, while his friend George Chapman waxed lyrical upon the fertility of the land and the friendliness of its inhabitants. Yet, all these tales of distant marvels failed to move the Cecils or the queen. 
Elizabeth and her privy councillors were, however, concerned at the dangers posed by a revived Spain. Virtually the entire privy council now recommended an attack on the Spanish coast, and in 1596 the interests of Essex and Cecil combined to pursue this goal. Ralegh's maritime knowledge was suddenly in demand, and he was closely involved in the labyrinthine discussions which, eventually, established who should take charge of what. He worked hard to raise the necessary troops and to prepare the fleet, under the direction of his friend Howard of Effingham, placating and cajoling suspicious courtiers and a queen reluctant to spend money in pursuit of campaigns abroad. When the commanders assembled, Ralegh and Sir Francis Vere quarrelled over the scope of their respective commands, and these arguments were never entirely resolved. This was all quite in character. Nevertheless, the ensuing expedition was one of the triumphs of Elizabethan arms. On 20 June 1596 the fleet arrived off Cadiz, taking the Spanish authorities there completely by surprise. Ralegh was sailing in the rearguard, patrolling the coast to surprise enemy shipping, but he was present for the main assault. In one of his longest surviving letters, written on the day after the assault to Arthur Gorges, he provided a vivid narrative of the action. He was wounded in the fighting, receiving 'a greevous blow in my legg, larded with manie splinters which I daylie pull out' ('Letters', 149). Cadiz was sacked, but the wealth of the merchant fleet in the harbour was lost when the Spanish ships were scuttled. Essex busied himself in knighting sixty followers, but a great opportunity for plunder passed the victors by. 
Ralegh's narrative was published in 1700 by his grandson as 'A Relation of the Action at Cadiz'. It is one of the finest set-piece battle scenes in English literature. Writing of his own attack on the Spanish galleons, he described how the 'Philip' ran aground: 'tumbling into the sea heaps of soldiers, so thick as if coals had been poured out of a sack in many ports at once, some drowned, some sticking in the mud. The Philip and the St Thomas burnt themselves. The St Matthew and the St Andrew were recovered with our boats ere they could get out to fire them. The spectacle was very lamentable on their side; for many drowned themselves; many, half burnt, leapt into the water, very many hanging by the ropes ends by the ship's side under the water even to the lips; many swimming with grievous wounds stricken under water, and put out of their pain; and withal, so huge a fire, and such tearing of the ordnance, in the great Philip and the rest, when the fire came to 'em, as if any man had a desire to see Hell itself, it was there most lively figured. (W. Oakeshott, 'The Queen and the Poet', 1960, 214-15)' Weighing this triumph, Elizabeth inclined towards forgiveness. Ralegh was allowed to return to court the following year, and once again exercised his captaincy of the guard. As Essex's star waned, so Ralegh and his friends recaptured something of their old authority. For example, Henry Brooke, eleventh Baron Cobham, a rich if rather superficial young man, was appointed lord warden of the Cinque Ports, in succession to his altogether more worthy father, and in the face of a determined campaign by Essex to promote his own candidate. Ralegh acknowledged the influence of Cecil, now the queen's principal secretary, in restoring his own fortunes, flattering him and commiserating with him gracefully on the loss of his wife, Cobham's sister, in January 1597. 'Yow shall', he wrote: 'butt greve for that which now is as then it was when not yours, only bettered by the difference in this, that shee hath past the weresume jurney of this darke worlde and hath possession of her inheritance... Sorrows draw not the dead to life butt the livinge to death. (Hatfield, Cecil MS 37/97, fol. 2'r')' Touching the melancholy of bereavement Ralegh was seldom lost for words. Possibly at the instigation of Burghley, he worked to foster better relations between the Cecils and Essex -- passing on news from Cecil to the earl and recording by way of an intimate touch in July 1597 that Essex had been 'wonderfull merry att the consait of 'Richard the 2'' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/264/10). He was recovering lost ground. Nevertheless, much of his former wealth had been eroded by expensive efforts to repair the breach with Elizabeth, and by his outlay on Sherborne. When he drew up his will that same month, his estate appears relatively modest. Ralegh's own lands by now consisted only of the Irish estates -- vast, but never profitable -- and the leasehold on the manor of Sherborne. In this interesting document the queen was nowhere remembered. Indeed, the beneficiaries were exclusively members of his family, and his servants, although Cecil was given a residuary interest in a set of porcelain. Ralegh, it may be noted, had a liking for quality chinaware. 
The will was drawn up for a purpose. Ralegh was sailing as Essex's second-in-command on a new expedition against Spain, the so-called 'islands voyage'. Beset by foul weather, incompetence, and deep divisions among the senior officers, the enterprise was a fiasco. It threatened to prove something worse when a Spanish fleet set sail in October 1597 for the undefended coasts of England, only to be swept away in turn by Biscayan storms. Ralegh's capture of the town of Fayal in the Azores was the sole achievement of any note, and here, so Essex maintained, the rear-admiral had flouted his direct orders. 
This fresh quarrel gravely weakened the carefully nurtured amity between Essex and Ralegh, but Elizabeth chose to blame the earl, roundly and personally, for the expedition's shortcomings. The debacle of Essex's expedition to Ireland in 1599, where a private parlay with Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone, touched on treason, and his precipitate return to court that autumn, completed the favourite's fall. Increasingly paranoid, Essex numbered Ralegh and Cobham among his bitterest foes: anyone who was not for him, stood against him. In the miserable finale Essex was condemned by the privy council in 1599, by commissioners at York House in 1600, and, after his desperate rebellion, by his peers in the court of the lord steward on a charge of high treason in February 1601. Ralegh, himself accused by the distracted earl of treason, and, fantastically, of plotting to divert the succession to Philip, infante of Spain, joined in the persecution. During spring 1600 he warned Cecil to ensure that the stricken favourite did not recover ground lost: 'the less yow make hyme the less he shalbe able to harme yow and yours... for after revenges feare them not... His soonn [son] shalbe the youngest earle of Ingland... butt if the father continew he wilbe able to break the branches and pull up the tree, root and all. Lose not your advantage: if yow do I rede your destiney. (Hatfield, Cecil MS 90/150)' That such a letter survives among Cecil's papers testifies to the anger Essex's insinuations aroused. It testifies as well to Ralegh's political naivety. Elizabeth, noting his flaws, declined to have him sworn a privy councillor, despite repeated hints and requests. She did, however, appoint him governor of Jersey in August 1600, a post Ralegh had coveted ever since news of the fatal illness of the previous governor, Sir Anthony Paulet, was first made public, early in the year. 
Cobham, something of a royal favourite in Elizabeth's final years, was assiduously courted as a friend and ally. Witty and capable, for all his shallowness, he proved congenial company for Ralegh, who regretted Cobham's failure to join him at Bath in a distinctly sycophantic letter of 29 April 1600: 'we can butt longe for yow and wyshe yow as owre lives whersoever' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/1/57). Cobham was at that moment preoccupied by his forthcoming marriage to Frances Fitzgerald, 'nee' Howard, dowager countess of Kildare, but the following summer he and Ralegh, along with Northumberland and other courtiers, visited the Low Countries to experience life on campaign. For Ralegh this was nothing new, and he was soon back in England. That autumn he travelled to Cornwall, and also to Jersey, surveying his new command. He took his oath of office on the island on 20 December. In his absence a fire, beginning in the stables, caused considerable damage to Durham Place. When Essex staged his rebellion on 8 February 1601, Ralegh was again in London. Early that morning he met his rebel kinsman Sir Ferdinando Gorges (1568-1647) on boats in the middle of the Thames, counselling common sense, discretion, and reliance on the queen's clemency; but discretion and common sense were in short supply that day. Gorges refused, honouring his commitment to Essex and warning Ralegh of bloody times ahead. While they talked, Sir Christopher Blount aimed four bullets at Ralegh from Essex House, but the optimistic shots missed their target. Recognizing the futility of negotiation, Ralegh hurried to court and mobilized the guard. Essex's rising was crushed within hours. When he was brought to the executioner's block, seventeen days later, rumour had it that Ralegh gloated over his rival's fate, although the truth of the matter seems to have been that, obliged to attend the execution as captain of the guard, Ralegh withdrew to the armoury precisely to avoid such a charge. There was, for the moment, no means of restoring a reputation hopelessly tarnished: '
Raweleigh doth time bestride; 

He sitts twixt winde and tide, 

Yet uppe hill hee cannot ride, 

For all his bloodie pride. 
(TNA: PRO, SP 12/278/23)' The popular ballad was a travesty -- and Ralegh was by no means its only target -- but the archetypal greedy and covetous upstart courtier struck a familiar chord. Although innocent of any open triumphalism, there is no question that Ralegh sought advantage from his rival's fall. He begged -- and may have obtained -- some of the lands of Essex's follower, the volatile Sir Edmund Baynham, who was sentenced to death for treason in February, only to be pardoned in August. 
In September 1599 Ralegh also obtained from the queen a freehold title to his Sherborne estate, which he then proceeded to expand through further purchases. With Sherborne relatively secure there seemed little point in holding on to his Munster estate, long since a liability. In 1602 the Irish lands were sold to Sir Richard Boyle for $1500. Meanwhile, the courtier and captain of the guard had other roles to play. In September 1601 Ralegh escorted Charles de Gontaut, baron de Biron, Henri IV's emissary, 'to Westminster, to see the monuments' (Hatfield, Cecil MS 88/22). He disagreed openly with Cecil in the parliament of 1601 over the latter's call for further financial sacrifice in support of the war effort. In a quarrel fashioned on semantics, and again disclosing political ineptitude, Ralegh argued that to Spanish ears the very request would argue poverty in the state, and encourage a redoubling of their efforts against England. He is said to have blushed during the acrimonious debates over monopolies, defending the practice through his administration of the Cornish tin mines, and challenging his opponents to relinquish their own monopolistic interests if he did the same. The great silence that followed this typically theatrical gesture may signify embarrassment, or, more likely, open disagreement. 
Ralegh's alienation of Cecil had serious consequences. Causes for the rift are still elusive. It may be that Ralegh felt disappointed that he was still not sworn a privy councillor, and that he somewhat unfairly blamed Cecil rather than Elizabeth for this frustration. That is conjecture. What is known is that Cecil, though outwardly correct and civil in all his dealings with Ralegh, felt increasingly abandoned by a former ally in the two years before Elizabeth's death. By summer 1601 he was writing to his client -- and Ralegh's cousin -- Sir George Carew (1555-1629), lord president of Munster, that he had been so frustrated and irritated by 'the mutinys of those whom I do love and will (howsoever they do me)', that he had been 'left to seek new Freends' ('Letters', ed. Maclean, 84-5, 89). Cecil duly found them. Over the next two years Ralegh's name was repeatedly blackened in the letters of Henry Howard, youngest brother of Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, written to James in Edinburgh to assure him of Cecil's (and Howard's) loyalty, and to warn him against the intrigues of others. As Howard described him, Ralegh was once again an atheist, indiscreet, incompetent, hostile to the very idea of James's succession. More significantly, Howard's long-winded venom was clearly prompted by Cecil's own clandestine letters to James. All this is as crucial to understanding Ralegh's subsequent troubles as it is murky and unedifying. Given his significance at court, Cecil's dissociation from Ralegh, his insistence that he could never support a man of 'light and soddain humours' fundamentally opposed to a Stewart succession (Bruce, 18), was deeply damaging, and it is difficult to escape the conclusion that the latter's wilful part in this critical breach amounted to an entirely avoidable miscalculation. 
Ralegh was still not entirely without friends. Northumberland, in his own secret correspondence, advised James that although Ralegh was certainly 'insolent, [and] extreamly heated' he was essentially powerless, unable to do the king 'muche good nor hearme'. Moreover, the earl felt compelled to add that there were 'excellent good parts of natur' in his old friend (Bruce, 67). However, Northumberland was himself subjected to Howard's insinuations, and these assurances probably did little to alter James's already low opinion of Ralegh. 
When Elizabeth died on 24 March 1603, Ralegh's world began to fall apart. He hastened from the west country to meet the new king, only to receive the driest of welcomes. Aubrey puts the punning words into James's mouth, 'on my soule, Mon, I have heard rawly of thee' ('Brief Lives', 2.186). Ralegh was present in his official capacity at the queen's funeral, but thereafter endured a series of telling rebuffs. He was stripped of his monopolies and captaincy of the guard in May, and was given notice to quit Durham Place, Tobias Matthew, bishop of Durham, having successfully petitioned James for the return of his London home. The decisive blow fell soon after. On 15 July, while at court, Ralegh was detained for questioning in connection with two tangled treasons, then coming to light. He was placed under house arrest in the charge of Sir Thomas Bodley, at Fulham, Middlesex. Implicated by Cobham in the so-called Main plot, which ostensibly hoped to foment rebellion and Spanish invasion, aiming thereby at the death of the king and the elevation of Arabella Stewart in his place, Ralegh was conveyed to the Tower on or about 20 July. There, overwhelmed with despair at the turn of events, he wrote a touching letter of farewell to Bess and made an unconvincing attempt at suicide on 27 July: he tried to stab himself to the heart using a table knife. Neither the theatricality of the gesture nor the essentially unchristian nature of the act were lost on hostile observers. Subsequently, however, his spirits returned. He perceived that the sole evidence of any substance laid against him was a statement made by Cobham on 20 July -- made, moreover, in the heat of the moment, when Cobham was under the not wholly unfounded impression that Ralegh had betrayed 'him'. Cobham withdrew his accusations almost as soon as they were made, but these fleeting charges had the two conspirators soliciting enormous sums of money from Spain -- 500,000 or 600,000 crowns. In this confession, Cobham admitted his intention to press for the money during a forthcoming visit to the continent. He had, he said, also planned to travel home via Jersey, where he and Ralegh proposed to discuss the distribution of this war chest, with a view to stirring revolt wherever the opportunity arose. 
Cobham's curious, retracted testimony remained the most telling evidence against Ralegh when he was finally brought to trial at Winchester on 17 November. It was presented in court, not as a signed confession, but rather in the form of a 'certificate' attested by the examining counsellors and as an 'affirmation' from the lord chief justice, Sir John Popham. Cobham even smuggled letters of exoneration to Ralegh in October. The trial itself was an extraordinary affair, with Ralegh resolute and dignified, and with the attorney-general, Sir Edward Coke, losing his temper on more than one occasion and failing to present his case with any clarity. Coke did, however, manage to throw in an accusation of atheism, echoed by the lord chief justice at the end of the day, and he did trump Ralegh's letter from Cobham with a written confirmation from Cobham of previous accusations. The precise wording of this restatement is nevertheless interesting, for it departs from the charges allegedly made on 20 July. Cobham now declared that Ralegh had urged him to mediate with the former's friend Charles de Ligne, count of Aremberg, in order to secure a general pension of $1500 for foreign intelligence. He added that 'coming from Greenewich one night', Ralegh passed on information on 'what was agreed upon betwixt the King and Low Countrymen' for transmission to Aremberg, insisting that Ralegh had been the principal cause of his own discontent. Though this is far from the broad sweep of treason embraced in his outburst of 20 July, the court seems to have interpreted Cobham's letter as an elaboration on that testimony, focusing upon the fact of accusation. At the end of a momentous day, this was sufficient to persuade a jury of Ralegh's guilt. 
However, it is clear from Cobham's subsequent confessions, after Ralegh's conviction, and at his own arraignment, that these accusations should be seen as replacing those made in the heat of the moment, months earlier. Events on the night he returned from Greenwich seem to hold the key to Ralegh's subsequent actions. According to Cobham, Ralegh arrived full of 'discontent uppon certeine woords that that day as he sayed had passed between the lord Cecill and him' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/4/91). He then pressed Cobham to negotiate with Aremberg 'that he should doe best to advertise and advise the king of Spaine [Philip III] to send an armie against England to Milford Haven'. Characteristically, Ralegh held that the bold approach was necessary in such situations: 'many more', he growled, in a prophetic utterance, 'had been hanged for words then for dedes' (ibid.). The picture that emerges from Cobham's later testimony, of a discontented Ralegh denouncing James and his ministers, conjuring visions of a Spanish descent on the nation that had treated him so poorly, and exploring the availability of a pension from any amenable foreign prince, offers a credible summary of his treason. Ralegh never denied that he lent 'a patient ear' to Cobham's 'unwise and lavish projects' (Hatfield, Cecil MS 102/51). 
Legally if not morally, Ralegh's much maligned jury returned a correct verdict, even on the basis of Cobham's revised accusations, which they never heard. The most extraordinary aspect of Ralegh's political downfall was his simultaneous transformation in the popular imagination from upstart villain into popular hero. His composure at Winchester, the harshness of a technically accurate verdict, and Coke's loss of temper on so public a stage all combined to replace loathing with sympathy. As Dudley Carleton put it a few days later, 'never was a man so hated and so popular in so short a time' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 80, fol. 622'v'). 
Despairing of mercy from James, Ralegh wrote another letter of farewell to his wife. Here is Ralegh at his doleful best: for all the obvious sentiment so characteristic of the man, and for all the common form, no one reading these lines can doubt that he loved his wife. James, however, ultimately allowed him his life on 9 December 1603, first putting Cobham, and the Bye conspirators Thomas Grey, fifteenth Baron Grey of Wilton, and Sir Griffin Markham, each in turn, through the grim charade of a reprieve on the scaffold. Ralegh dutifully thanked both king and Cecil, hoping that an early release might follow. That liberty was not forthcoming; Ralegh, like Cobham and Grey, was long to remain a prisoner in the Tower. Incarceration was comfortable enough. He was allowed his two rooms in the Bloody Tower, his books, a 'stilhows' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/19/112), or laboratory, a garden for his exercise, and congenial company. For most of this time his wife was allowed to come and go without significant restriction, and their third son, Carew ['see below'], was baptized at the church of St Peter ad Vincula on 15 February 1605. Lady Ralegh took a house on Tower Hill for its proximity to her husband's gaol. Nevertheless, confinement vexed a man of Ralegh's stamp. He suffered from some form of 'palsy' or paralysis (Hatfield, Cecil MS 109/13). Dr Leonard Poe, a royal physician, attended him in September 1604, and in March 1606 Peter Turner, another medical man, reported that Ralegh was complaining of a numbness in his left side, 'and his tong taken in sum parte, in so mych that he speketh wekely' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/19/112). Turner, perhaps taken in by another of Ralegh's theatrical performances, recommended a move to less chilly quarters. 
The king did not at this stage act vindictively against Ralegh or his family, granting all his goods and chattels to his servants John Shelbury and Robert Smith on 14 February 1604 for the use of his wife and child, in order to settle his debts. Ralegh's wine licensees were ordered by the privy council to pay their arrears to the trustees one week later, and the right to grant wine licences was given to the earl of Nottingham (Howard of Effingham) and his son only in December 1604. Shelbury and Smith dutifully discharged their obligations. On 3 August 1604 the Sherborne estate was granted by letters patent to family trustees who held them on behalf of Lady Ralegh and young Walter for the duration of Ralegh's life. It may be that Ralegh held out for more, for the freehold to Sherborne, or it may be that here is the first intimation of a serious problem that blighted the Raleghs for years afterwards. By the following winter it had become apparent that a conveyance of the Sherborne estate to his son, dated 20 January and sealed on 12 April 1603, contained a fatal flaw, in that the clerk who had copied it from the draft had omitted ten crucial words. Legally, this left Ralegh in freehold possession of the estate at the time of his attainder, the manor being thus forfeit to the king. James at first inclined to confirm Ralegh's family in their possession, but by the end of 1609 Sherborne passed to his favourite, Sir Robert Carr. Intending it for his eldest son, the king purchased it back again in February 1610, Carr repurchasing it after the death of Henry, prince of Wales. 
Quite early on, Ralegh's prospects for release appeared to turn on the feasibility of another voyage to Guiana. He was staking, and continued to stake, everything on the chimera of mountains of gold within a far-off continent. With support from a favoured Scot, John Ramsay, Viscount Haddington, Ralegh approached Cecil, by now earl of Salisbury, in summer 1607. He suggested that if the queen, Anne of Denmark, and Salisbury would each take a third stake in the venture (which he calculated would cost $5000) then he and his friends would cover the rest. Ralegh himself would travel under another's command, as a private gentleman, so as to guarantee his return to England. 'Wee will break no peace, invade none of the Spanish towns. Wee will only trade with the Indiens and see none of that nation except they assayle us' (Hatfield, Cecil MS 124/121). Salisbury declined the bait. Later that year Ralegh is found cultivating James's eldest son, then thirteen years old, advising him on shipbuilding. The death of Henry on 6 November 1612 -- despite the application 'in extremis' of a 'quintessence' supplied by Ralegh, 'which he sayes they shold have applied sooner' -- was a grievous blow to his hopes of liberty ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.389). This medicine, subsequently known as Ralegh's 'cordial', became famous, its properties passing into legend as the recipe itself was lost. Its concoction is again in character: Ralegh was long known to be dabbling in medicines and chemistry in the Tower. Earlier in 1612, reporting the death of Sidney's daughter Elizabeth Manners, dowager countess of Rutland, to Sir Ralph Winwood, John Chamberlain remarked that Ralegh had been 'slaundered to have geven her certain pilles that dispatcht her' (ibid., 1.374), and when Ralegh fell sick in February 1615 some, the ever cynical Chamberlain among them, put it down to his chemical experiments. 
During his years in the Tower Ralegh produced a great deal of prose but relatively little verse. His own situation and the conditions at court were now, of course, quite different from those during Elizabeth's reign. Only four poems from these years can be accepted as Ralegh's with any confidence. One compares the world to a theatre and men to actors, a favourite theme with Ralegh and other Elizabethans. 'Had Lucan hid the truth to please the time' is dedicated to Sir Arthur Gorges, translator of Lucan's 'Pharsalia'. There are three versions of a petition to Anne of Denmark, which are confidently attributed to Ralegh but could have been written at any time between 1603 and 1618. Of several poems alleged to have been composed by him on the night before his execution, only one is likely to be genuine: '
Even such is Time who takes in trust 

Our youth, our Joyes and all we have, 

Then payes us bake with age and Dust, 

Who in a darke and silent Grave 

When wee have wandred all our wayes 

Shuts up the storie of our Dayes. 

But from Times rage, the Grave and Dust 

My God shall raise me up I trust. 
('Poems', ed. Rudick, 80)' The verse appeared in countless seventeenth-century collections and as an inscription upon at least three tombs of the period.Ralegh's prose writings under James are much more numerous, varied, and wide-ranging than those written before 1603. However, like the poems, they present bibliographical problems. To begin with, some of them -- 'Maxims of State' and 'The Cabinet Council' for instance -- although they carry Ralegh's name, are not by him at all. The texts and contexts of others are uncertain. 'Observations and Notes Concerning the Navy and Sea Service', dedicated to Prince Henry in 1607, actually started life in 1597-8 as a manuscript presented to Elizabeth, was revised under James, but was not printed until 1625. 
Ralegh was now denied direct participation in political or military life and, until his second expedition to Guiana, could maintain his reputation only with his pen. He reinvented himself as a kind of elder statesman, instructing Henry and advising James. Two tracts on proposed marriages between the children of James and the house of Piedmont-Savoy reveal his stance. They were probably written at Henry's instigation. The proposal made early in 1612 for a marriage between Princess Elizabeth and Victor Amadeus, eldest son of Charles Emmanuel (I), duke of Savoy, was adroitly criticized by Ralegh, on the grounds that it would be of no political advantage to Britain; might entangle the king in the impossible defence of Savoy against its powerful neighbours; and would not serve the comfort of the princess, who would be matched with a Catholic husband. Better, said Ralegh, for her to marry Frederich (V) Wittelsbach, prince palatine of the Rhine, who was a protestant and would strengthen the alliance with the Netherlands. (Ralegh's advice was taken, with unhappy results.) The companion piece, 'A Discourse Touching a Marriage between Prince Henry of England and a Daughter of Savoy', is rather more problematic, since some versions appear to have been addressed to Charles, duke of York. It was probably made to serve for both in turn. 'There is', said Ralegh, 'a kind of noble and royal deceiving in marriages between kings and princes' who bestow their daughters only for their own advantage. 'We do not need to fear Savoy, but it is the Spaniard whom we should fear, who layeth his pretences and practices with a long hand' ('Works', 8.239). The duke of Savoy was firmly tied to Spain and to Rome, and might entangle James in their conflicts. The prince would do well to hold off marriage for the time being and then marry with a French princess. In 'A Discourse Touching War with Spain', probably written early in James's reign but not printed until 1702, Ralegh presented the king with general arguments for assisting the Netherlands against the Spanish. Without external help the Dutch would have to submit to the Spanish, which would provide the latter with a base for the invasion of England. If James did not assist them, the Dutch would look to the French, which would be equally disastrous: a familiar argument from the reign of Elizabeth, but cogently put by Ralegh. 
About 1609 -- the year that his friend and fellow prisoner, Northumberland, was writing something very similar -- Ralegh tried his hand at a familiar genre: the father's advice to his son. His version, known as 'Instructions to his Son and to Posterity', has a sharpness and cynicism that partly marks it out from the efforts of Shakespeare's Polonius and others. The first chapter, headed 'Virtuous persons to be made choice of for friends', turns out to be more self-seeking than the title suggests. A man should choose his betters for his friends and should shun the poor and needy. 'Such therefore as are thy inferiors will follow thee but to eat thee out'. While a man's betters are best for his friends, he should remember that 'great men forget such as have done them service' ('Works', 8.557-8). Wise choice of a wife was crucial to the preservation of a man's estate: 'the only danger therein is beauty, by which all men in all ages, wise and foolish, have been betrayed'. It is better to choose beauty in a mistress rather than a wife, 'for when thy humour shall change, thou art yet free to choose again' (ibid., 8.559). On the other hand, it is inadvisable to marry an 'uncomely' woman, for the sake of the children, 'for comeliness in children is riches, if nothing else be left them' (ibid.). The 'Instructions' circulated in manuscript until 1632, when they were printed: six more editions followed up to 1636. 
Ralegh's major work during the years in the Tower was 'The History of the World'. While most of his prose works up to then had been written for private circulation (the tracts on 'The Revenge' and Guiana excepted) the 'History' was intended for publication to a wide audience. Ralegh began writing it about 1607; the work was entered in the Stationers' register in 1611 and appeared towards the end of 1614. This copy did not have the 'Preface'. It was suppressed by George Abbot, archbishop of Canterbury, on 22 December and copies were seized by the king's agents for his own use. According to Chamberlain the suppression came about because it was 'too sawcie in censuring princes' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.568). The suppression order was soon lifted and the 'History' was reprinted in 1617. It remained popular: there were at least eleven editions in the seventeenth century, one in the eighteenth, and one in the nineteenth. 
The 'History' is described as 'The first part of the general history of the world', implying, as Ralegh said, that other parts were to come. This, he admitted, was his intention and indeed he had 'hewn them out'. What exists is a substantial work, of about a million words, in five books, running from the creation of the world to 146 BC, the time of the second Macedonian war. The first two books are principally, though not wholly, concerned with biblical history, the last three mainly with the story of Greece and Rome. In the first two God's judgments are seen as the central determinants of events; in the latter three the role of man is more evident. History is regarded as moral exemplum, a classical concept appropriate to the treatment of ancient history but unusual for the subsequent discussion of Henry VIII. The juxtaposition of the discussion of Henry with that of James must have registered as ironic with the original readers, especially later when James's 'unstained sword of justice' had Ralegh's blood on it. 
The 'History' is far more than a chronology. Its opening chapters described the creation of the world and its nature, before Ralegh moved to the philosophical problems raised by the concepts of prescience, providence, free will, and fortune. He adopted the familiar distinction between first and second causes. God's will, he later wrote, determined everything: 'there is not therefore the smallest accident, which may seem unto men as falling out by chance, and of no consequence: but that the same is caused by God to effect somewhat else by' (Ralegh, 'History', 1736, 2.v.10, 175). Yet God works through second causes, 'instruments, causes and pipes', which carry his will to the world. The distinction is not clear or unambiguous, but it enabled Ralegh to focus upon human actions. Essentially, he wrote for a purpose, as a man of action: it was, he said, 'the end and scope of all History, to teach by example of times past, such wisdom as may guide our desires and actions' (ibid., 2.xxi.6, 307). 
One principal theme of the work was the general wickedness of kings and the severity of God's judgment upon them: 'Oh by what plots, by what forswearings, betrayings, oppressions, imprisonments, tortures, poisonings, and under what reasons of state, and politic subtilty, have these forenamed Kings, both strangers and of our own nation, pulled the vengeance of God upon themselves, upon theirs, and upon their prudent ministers! (Ralegh, 'History', 1736, preface, xv)' The misdeeds of English kings were related in some detail. Of Henry VIII, Ralegh wrote that 'if all the pictures and patterns of a merciless prince were lost in the World, they might all again be painted to the life, out of the story of this king' (ibid., preface, viii). Only one ruler in the entire history of the world receives unstinted and unadulterated praise from Ralegh: Epaminondas of Thebes, with Hannibal as 'proxime accessit'. 
Although Ralegh believed that history could provide examples and precepts for rulers to follow, its events demonstrated only too clearly that they were unlikely to do so. His book ends with a paean of praise to Death: 'Oh eloquent, just and mighty Death! whom none could advise, thou has persuaded; that none has dared, thou hast done; and whom all the world hath flattered, thou only hath cast out of the world and despised: thou hast drawn together all the far stretched greatness, all the pride, cruelty, and ambition of man, and covered it over with these two narrow words, 'Hic jacet'. (Ralegh, 'History', 1736, 5.vi.12, 815)' The bitterness, pessimism, and anger that marked so much of Ralegh's poetry remained to the end in his prose. 
The next work that Ralegh wrote in the Tower, 'A Dialogue betweene a Counsellor of State and a Justice of the Peace', is very different in tone, style, and content. Written after the dissolution of the Addled Parliament in 1614, and presented in manuscript to James, it sought to persuade the king to call parliament. The counsellor took the part of those advising James against parliaments, which he claimed had always been dangerous to kings in the past. In reply the JP attacked the use of imprisonment without trial and argued that parliaments provided the king with the best way of raising money, which should be done by persuasion, not constraint. The argument proceeded by methodical examination of the relations of English kings with their subjects since the reign of John. It has none of the force or brilliance of the 'History'; it is indeed often quite boring, yet it may have had in the short term the greater influence. 
With the advantage of hindsight, many commentators have dismissed Ralegh's final voyage to the Orinoco to try to find El Dorado as the hopeless pursuit of fantasy, but it is important to remember that friends and foes alike seriously questioned whether the enterprise was viable long before Ralegh set sail. For some, Ralegh deluded himself with daydreams. Locked away in the Tower, his vivid imagination simply got the better of him. Others, less charitable, wondered what the old fox was up to now. Surely he realized that Spanish settlements on the Orinoco had multiplied since 1595, and that, for all his disclaimers, the voyage would mean bloodshed? Was that perhaps what he wanted -- one means to foment dissent between England and Spain being as good as any other? Here was a way to frustrate the carefully nurtured plans of James and the Spanish ambassador Diego Sarmiento de Acuna, count of Gondomar, who had long endeavoured to persuade a sceptical Philip that Charles, now prince of Wales, should marry his daughter, the Infanta Maria. And might not the frustration of these desires be encouraged by France? Ralegh certainly opened negotiations with the French ambassador, Count des Maretz, in 1616, apparently with the aim of securing a refuge in France if all went wrong, though evidence on the precise nature of these discussions remains obscure. In fact, the expedition may be taken at face value: it was Ralegh's final, personal gamble. He believed -- he had to believe -- that there was a mountain of gold or silver, deep in the jungles of Guiana, and he clung to proofs of its existence, gleaned over twenty years. The Spanish crown had no valid claim to unoccupied, undiscovered regions; the gold was there for the taking. 
Ralegh was released on 19 March 1616, and at once set about planning his expedition. The planning was, of course, extensive, and little he said or did comforted those at court who were determined on a lasting peace with Spain. He discussed with Sir Francis Bacon, attorney-general, the possibility of seizing the silver fleet, brushing aside the latter's remarks that this would amount to an act of piracy: had Bacon, he asked rhetorically, ever heard 'of men being pirates for millions?' The Guiana fleet sailed from Plymouth on 12 June 1617, but storms and adverse winds detained it off the southern coast of Ireland for nearly two months. Finally, on 19 August, a fair wind allowed the ships to make their way south from Cork. It was to be a laborious voyage, with illness taking its usual toll. Never comfortable at sea, Ralegh himself succumbed to fever, and was unable to face solid food for nearly a month. The fleet did not arrive in harbour, at the mouth of the Cayenne River, until 14 November. An expedition under Lawrence Keymis, with Ralegh's nephew George Ralegh in command of the land forces, sailed up the Orinoco in five ships on 10 December. Carrying provisions for one month, the three vessels that survived the shoals of the delta battled against strong currents and arrived at the Spanish settlement San Thome on 2 January 1618. 
The English then took the town by storm. Fatalities in the brief, bitter struggle included the Spanish governor, Diego Palomeque, and Ralegh's elder son, Walter. There can be little doubt that the assault was pre-planned, and if so, that the action directly violated the commission by which they sailed. It is, however, uncertain whether the expedition acted under verbal orders from Ralegh, or whether they were rather following Keymis's own directions, given in an atmosphere of uncertainty and fear. Ralegh subsequently tried to excuse this aggression by claiming, in his 'Apology for the Voyage to Guiana', that quite another settlement had been stormed, but the characteristic evasion smacks of desperation. 
Thereafter, Keymis visibly began to lose his nerve. The principal problem, of course, lay in the fact that no one knew for certain where the mine might be found. Three launches were eventually sent further up the Orinoco under George Ralegh's command. They travelled 300 miles upstream, but discovered neither gold nor silver. After an occupation of twenty-nine days San Thome was burnt to the ground and the expedition returned to the river mouth. News proceeded ahead of the main party, and on 13 February Ralegh was told of his son's death. He met Keymis with accusations, refusing to accept any apology, and declaring that his lieutenant's obstinacy had undone him. Keymis took to his cabin. First he tried to put a bullet through his breast, but the shot was deflected by a rib. He then stabbed himself to the heart. Ralegh received the news of his suicide with contempt. Thereafter he blamed his dead subordinate for all his misfortunes. It is difficult not to reflect that Keymis had been charged with an impossible mission. 
Faced with the crisis of his schemes, Ralegh planned another expedition to San Thome. The mine, he reasoned, must have been overlooked, it might still be exploited. His men, however, refused to follow, and soon afterwards the fleet sailed north. Even then, Ralegh conjured with visions of revictualling and returning to Guiana, and he thought once more of plundering the Spanish treasure fleet. By now such hopes were vain; his demoralized troops were disinclined to adopt risky strategies. In the last week of March the rest of his fleet deserted, leaving Ralegh in the 'Destiny', alone off Nevis. With a mutinous crew he sailed north towards Newfoundland, then across the Atlantic to Kinsale, co. Cork, where a number of the company melted away. Ralegh, with the remnant of his force, sailed on to Plymouth. 
The failure of his expedition left Ralegh stunned. 'My braines are broken,' he wrote to Bess on 22 March 1618, 'and tis a torment to mee to write... as Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Hawkins died heart-broken when they failed of their enterprize, I could willinglie doe the like' ('Letters', 353-4). Once home, he received no sympathy. A proclamation of 9 June denounced reports that the peace between England and Spain had been compromised by violence at San Thome. Ralegh was placed under arrest by order of Howard of Effingham soon after his landing and conveyed to London by his cousin Sir Lewis Stucley (1574/5-1620), vice-admiral of Devon, at the end of July, in accordance with directions from the privy council. While still at Plymouth he made an abortive attempt to escape by ship to France, but then changed his mind, resolving to see matters through at home. It can only be surmised that he was concerned for the fate of his wife and son, or that he believed James's anger to be essentially a diplomatic device. Perhaps he even hoped that the Spanish alliance would soon come to grief. At Salisbury, Ralegh wrote an 'Apology for the Voyage to Guiana', insisting that Guiana was English territory, and that the actions against Spanish authorities there were entirely justified. James arrived in the city on his summer progress, apparently rejected the 'Apology', and ordered Ralegh on to London. A second attempt to escape to France was frustrated by Stucley. As Chamberlain put it, Ralegh was: 'bewrayed, or in a sort betrayed by Sir Lewes Stukeley (who had the charge of him) and brought backe by certain boates that waited for him about Wolwich. Sir Lewes did nourish him in the humor with promise to assist and accompanie him, but yt was a fowle 'pas de clerc' for an old cousener to be so cousened and overtaken. ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.165)' The cozener again! Ralegh was conveyed to the Tower on 10 August, and appealed to George Villiers, marquess of Buckingham, for help two days later. His options had narrowed ominously. Buckingham was then actively supporting the Spanish alliance, and had little time for Ralegh's point of view. 
James wished Ralegh dead; only the means to this end remained unresolved. A commission established to probe his offences first questioned Ralegh on 17 August, and members of his crew were also interrogated. Suspecting that stories of the silver mine were spurious, and half-believing that Ralegh's voyage was one element in an involved conspiracy fomented by France, the commissioners persevered. Ralegh was interviewed repeatedly by Sir Thomas Wilson, acting on behalf of the privy council under their commission dated 10 September. Wilson was no impartial examiner -- he openly sought incriminating evidence from this 'arch-hypocryte', asking God to preserve James 'from having many such dangerous subjects' (Harlow, 272-3). Despite Wilson's efforts, the pickings were meagre. On 18 October the commissioners reported their findings to the king. James, however, was dissatisfied with their proposals. Simply issuing a warrant for executing the sentence of 1603 seemed unduly arbitrary, but he wanted no public hearing either. There was a risk that this 'would make [Ralegh] too popular, as was found by experiment at the arraignment at Winchester, where by his wit he turned the hatred of men into compassion for him' (ibid., 296). Mindful of Coke's bungling fifteen years earlier, the king wished rather to steer a middle course. Ralegh should be called before the commissioners alone, 'those who have been the examiners of him hitherto'. Examinations would be read out, Sir Henry Yelverton, the attorney-general, and Sir Thomas Coventry, the solicitor-general, would inform against him, the prisoner might speak, and 'others confronted with him, who were with him in this action' (ibid., 297). The conclusion was, of course, preordained. 
The privy council duly summoned Ralegh before it on 22 October. Yelverton accused him of blatant lies -- Ralegh had been ungenerous to a king who had pardoned his manifest treasons, he had known all along that there was no mine, he had planned to foment war between England and Spain, he had abandoned his men and betrayed James. Ralegh in his reply also reached back across time to his finest hour, recalling the apparent harshness of the original verdict handed down at Winchester, 'he hath heard that the King said that he would not bee tried by a jury of Middlesex'. He had, he insisted, fully believed in the mine, he had not plotted with France, and he had not abandoned his own men in Guiana (Harlow, 299). His words were, of course, to no purpose; the commissioners informed him that they were satisfied of his guilt, and that he was therefore to be put to death. 
Sentence was confirmed in his presence by Sir Henry Montagu, lord chief justice at the court of king's bench, Westminster, on 28 October. Again Ralegh tried to excuse his actions on the recent voyage, only to be stopped by Montagu, who told him that, since he had not been pardoned expressly in his commission, what he had or had not done in Guiana was quite irrelevant to the question at law, which was whether the king might indeed now confirm a sentence of execution passed in November 1603. Ralegh then took the only course open to him and threw himself on James's clemency. Montagu made a considered, and in the circumstances a rather courageous speech, affirming his own belief in Ralegh's character and religion, and praising his 'History'. 'You must do', he said, 'as that valiant captain did, who perceiving himself in danger, said in defiance of death, 'death thou expectest me, but maugre thy spite I expect thee'' (Harlow, 304). He concluded by granting execution. 
Ralegh spent his last night in the Gatehouse and was executed on the morning of 29 October 1618, at Westminster. He made a long, moving speech, lasting three-quarters of an hour, welcoming the fact that he was to die in the light, forgiving his enemies and traducers, insisting that he had no ulterior motive in planning his expedition, that he had not plotted with France, and that he had never considered seeking refuge abroad. The execution of Essex still troubled him: 'There was a Report spread, that I should rejoice at the death of my Lord of Essex, and that I should take Tobacco in his presence; when I protest I shed Tears at his Death, though I was one of the contrary Faction.' He asked the onlookers to pray with him for divine forgiveness, summarizing his own career as he did so. He had been, he admitted, 'a Man full of all Vanity'; he had lived 'a sinful Life, in all sinful Callings, having been a Souldier, a Captain, a Sea-Captain, and a Courtier, which are all places of Wickedness and Vice' (Harlow, 309-10). Ralegh maintained his courage to the end, touching the edge of the axe and jesting with the sheriff that here was 'a sharp Medicine... a Physitian for all Diseases'. His head, severed at the second blow, was placed into a 'Red-leather bag' (ibid., 310), and was carried away by Lady Ralegh, who kept it by her thereafter. The body was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster. 
A. L. Rowse once remarked of Ralegh that his was a personality 'people could not let alone' (Rowse, 259). At the centre of gossip and romance when alive, Ralegh was no less a focus of interest in death. Throughout November 1618 Chamberlain sent Carleton copies of letters, verses, and ballads. 'We are so full still of Sir Walter Raleigh', he wrote on 21 November, 'that almost every day brings foorth somwhat in this kind' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.185). There was no juicier topic for the newsmongers that side of Christmas. 
During the 1620s Ralegh's posthumous career as a protestant and popular hero grew. In 'Sir Walter Rawleighs Ghost, or, Englands Forewarner', Thomas Scott presented him as the man to save England and addressed him as 'not borne for thy selfe but thy Countrie' (Beer, 120). Sir John Eliot possessed and used Ralegh's 'Dialogue' as a source of arguments and precedents in his debates with the crown over forced loans and arbitrary imprisonment. In 1628 the 'Dialogue' was printed and given a new and slightly misleading title, 'The Prerogative of Parliaments'. It went into five editions that year. 
There were two further editions of 'The Prerogative' in 1640, and over the following twenty years radicals plundered Ralegh's 'History' for examples of the workings of providence. The 'History' was reprinted four times before 1640 and again in 1652 and 1666. In 1650 Oliver Cromwell recommended the work to his son Richard: 'recreate yourself with Sir Walter Raleigh's History: it's a Body of History; and will add much more to your understanding than fragments of Story' (Beer, 173 n. 12). In the course of the 1650s several of Ralegh's texts were published or republished, and some works by others were attributed to him, notably 'Maxims of State' and 'Cabinet Council', the latter published by John Milton. Plainly his name carried a powerful attraction for writers and publishers, either to sell works which were not actually his or to validate a message; but it is not always easy to identify the message. It is far from clear, for instance, whether Milton published 'Cabinet Council' because he was offering it as an ironic criticism of Cromwell or because it gave advice on how best to endure tyranny. Ralegh seems to be supplied with varying identities by writers of the Commonwealth and protectorate: for some the representative of corrupt monarchies, for others the advocate of aggressive commercialism. The one thing that seems quite certain is that his name attracted interest and helped to sell books. 
Ralegh's name is still congenial to publishers, but with time the reasons for his enduring popularity have changed. The poem 'Britannia and Rawleigh', attributed to Andrew Marvell, ranked Ralegh in the 1670s with the steadfast puritans, while the 1719 'Tragedy of Sir Walter Raleigh', by George Sewell, portrayed him not for the first or last time as a victim of perfidious Spanish intrigues. The nineteenth century, in turn, fashioned Ralegh as the archetypal heroic Englishman, the pioneer of empire, while adding a gloss derived from still earlier times. Suppressing with a shudder Aubrey's tale of the maid and the tree, Victorian popular histories, and even the assiduous Edward Edwards in his 'Life and Letters', turned him into something of a knight errant -- the lad with his eyes fixed on distant horizons, as in Sir John Everett Millais's 'Boyhood of Ralegh', the gallant adventurer stepping forward in doublet and ruff to throw his cloak before an appreciative queen. And 'in extremis', of course, Ralegh played the man, fought and (in his own way) triumphed against immense odds, only to be duped, and at length cruelly murdered. A later, more cynical, age favoured his patronage of science and, particularly, his religious scepticism, detected the religious doubts that surfaced at Trenchard's dinner party as re-emerging in the 'History', and left Ralegh the politician and soldier alone, highlighting instead his scholarship and poetry. In the process he has been somehow sidelined. With Bacon he remains the Renaissance man 'par excellence', but Renaissance men now sit uneasily in a modern world of intense specialization. Significantly, the best biography of Ralegh remains that written by William Stebbing, published as long ago as 1891. 
All these reworkings of the Ralegh persona touch on truth. He was indeed a victim of royal high-handedness, he was indeed the author of the most influential book published in the seventeenth century, he was indeed an accomplished courtier, a man fascinated both by the possibilities of distant new-found lands, and by those same new-found lands themselves. He certainly questioned some fundamental aspects in church doctrine. However, when these characteristics are added together the resulting creation must then be fleshed out with the judgement of contemporaries, many of whom found him a loquacious upstart, a compulsive liar given to insincere theatrical gestures, incapable of keeping a secret, a man who yearned to play some part -- any part -- in the high game of national politics but whose own shortcomings left that goal for ever beyond reach. Ralegh's overriding ambition was to advance himself and his family, and of this he made no bones. Again and again he urged his son to avoid poverty, to cultivate his betters, to get on in life, for poverty is shameful, the poor are despised and without the means to choose their own destiny. Nevertheless, he failed even here, at one point enjoying that free choice, but ultimately squandering both wealth and opportunity. Those who came after him, who never met him, have instinctively liked Ralegh, or their version of Ralegh. He was certainly a most astonishing and compelling man, in his writings as in the rest of his life, touched by genius, and greatness, the focus of legend. It should not be forgotten, however, that many of those who lived in the same small world of the Elizabethan court, after long association with Ralegh, either disliked him intensely or distrusted him profoundly. Their reservations must at least qualify our admiration. 
Ralegh's elder brother, 
Sir Walter Ralegh's third son, 
Ralegh supported his king in the first civil war, but in time recognized that the English republic offered opportunities to the family of its foremost 'martyr'. Or, as the uncharitable Wood put it, he 'cringed afterwards to the men in power' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1813-20, new edn, 2.244). It was rather more to the point that the Digbys, who had taken possession of Sherborne, remained determined royalists. Ralegh still coveted Sherborne, and saw opportunity in their misfortune. He sat as MP for Haslemere, Surrey, in the Rump Parliament from 1650 to 1653, petitioning time and again for the restoration of his father's lands in Dorset. But the Digbys' title was strong, and the most he secured was $500 a year out of the estate. One of these petitions was published in 1669, after his death, under the title 'A Brief Relation of Sir Walter Ralegh's Troubles'. There is little doubt that he either wrote or else contributed information to the 1659 pamphlet 'Observation upon some Particular Persons and Passages, Written by a Lover of the Truth'. 
After Richard Cromwell's resignation Ralegh took his seat in the restored Rump, sitting frequently until its dissolution in March 1660. A supporter of General George Monck's efforts to reach an accommodation with Charles Stuart he was appointed to his father's former office, the governorship of Jersey, on 29 February 1660. At the Restoration he declined a knighthood; the honour was instead conferred upon his eldest son on 15 June, but young Walter Ralegh died in or about 1663. Two years later Carew Ralegh sold the West Horsley estate to Sir Edward Nicholas. He died at his London house in St Martin's Lane before the end of 1666 and was buried with his father at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 1 January 1667. It is said that Sir Walter Ralegh's head was interred at the same time. The register records that Carew Ralegh was 'kild', and without doubt his death was sudden, for a nuncupative will was subsequently registered in which he left his entire estate to his wife. Curiously, the parish register of West Horsley maintains that he was buried in the burial place of the manor in September 1680. 


@@@@@


doc= 23040


Ralegh, Walter (1586-1646), dean of Wells, was the second son of Sir Walter Ralegh's elder brother, Sir Carew Ralegh (c.1550-1625/6) ['see under 'Ralegh, Sir Walter (1554-1618)] of Downton, Wiltshire, and his wife, Dorothy (died 1616), widow of Sir John Thynne of Longleat, Wiltshire, and daughter of Sir William Wroughton of Broad Hinton, Wiltshire. He was born at Downton and educated at Winchester College and at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he matriculated as commoner on 5 November 1602. He graduated BA in 1605 and MA in 1608. 'He was admired for his disputations in the schools, even when he was an undergraduate' (Patrick). 
Ralegh took holy orders, and in 1618 became chaplain to William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke. In 1621 he was presented by his patron to the rectory of Chedzoy, near Bridgwater, Somerset, and in the following year received the rectory of Wilton St Mary, Wiltshire. Between 1620 and 1623 he married Maria, daughter of Sir Ralph Gibbs of Honington, Warwickshire. About 1630 he was chosen a chaplain-in-ordinary to Charles I, who admired his preaching. In 1632 he was made rector of Elingdon, otherwise Wroughton, Wiltshire, and in 1635 of Street-cum-Walton, Somerset. In 1634 he was minor prebendary of Combe in Wells Cathedral, and in 1636 he was created DD. The next year he became rector of St Buryan, Cornwall, and in 1641 succeeded George Warburton as dean of Wells. 
Before the civil war Ralegh was one of the circle associated with Lucius Cary, second Viscount Falkland, at Great Tew; among his friends were Henry Hammond, William Chillingworth, and Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon. While he was attending the king during the civil war his rectory at Chedzoy was plundered by the parliamentarians, his property stolen, and his cattle driven away. His wife and children took refuge at Downton, where Ralegh joined them. After the royalist victories in 1643 Ralegh was able to return to Chedzoy and to live there in safety until the defeat of George Goring, Lord Goring, at Langport in 1645. Ralegh was reported to have been captured at Bridgwater on the fall of that town (21 July 1645), though another report says that he was taken when Raglan Castle surrendered in August 1646. He was placed under house arrest at Chedzoy and subsequently removed, first to the county gaol at Ilchester, then to the county committee's prison at Banwell, and eventually to his own deanery at Wells. His gaoler was David Barrett, a Baptist shoemaker who was marshal to the Somerset county committee. In the late summer of 1646 Ralegh was mortally wounded in a scuffle with Barrett and died, at his deanery, six weeks later. According to Simon Patrick the incident occurred when Ralegh tried to stop Barrett when he attempted to inspect a letter that Ralegh had written to his wife (cf. Walker, 'Sufferings of the Clergy', which, however, contains several inaccuracies, and Ryves, 'Mercurius Rusticus', 1647). Ralegh died on 10 October 1646, and was buried in the choir of Wells Cathedral, before the dean's stall. 
Ralegh's papers were preserved in the family, and thirteen of his sermons were given by his widow to Simon Patrick (1626-1707), then dean of Peterborough, who published them in 1679, with a biographical notice and a Latin poem written in praise of Ralegh by a Cambridge admirer, probably Patrick himself. The volume is entitled 'Reliquiae Raleighanae, being discourses and sermons on several subjects, by the Reverend Dr. Walter Raleigh'. The sermons, all apparently dating from before the outbreak of the civil war, show that Ralegh was moderate in his churchmanship, able to criticize both Calvinist and Arminian extremes, though usually in restrained language: 'the truth', he declared, 'lies between both' ('Reliquiae Raleighanae', 156). A sermon, 'The original of wars', evidently preached at the time of the bishops' wars, is more emphatic in its denunciations of puritans as a 'viperous brood of error and contention' (ibid., 142) motivated by greed for the church's wealth, although in it Ralegh also attacks swaggering cavaliers as 'Ruffians and Rodotomantos, Brethren of the Sword that read Tavern Lectures' (ibid., 133). In 1719 Laurence Howell published 'Certain Queries Proposed by Roman Catholicks, and Answered by Dr. Walter Raleigh', with an account of Ralegh copied from Patrick. Of a tract on the millennium which Ralegh is said to have written, no trace remains. 


@@@@@


doc= 23041


Raleigh, Alexander (1817-1880), Congregational minister, was born at The Flock, a farm near Castle Douglas, Kirkcudbrightshire, on 3 January 1817. He was the fourth son and the fifth of the nine children born to Thomas and Isabella Raleigh. His parents were members of the Reformed Presbyterian church which maintained the ideals of the covenanter Richard Cameron. Alexander attended the high school at Castle Douglas, and in 1832 was apprenticed to a draper there; he continued in that trade in Liverpool after the family moved there in 1835. He joined the Congregational Crescent Chapel of which John Kelly (1801-1876) was minister, entered Blackburn Academy in March 1840, and moved to Manchester when the Lancashire Independent College took over the students of Blackburn Academy in 1843. 
On 6 November 1844 Raleigh accepted a call to be minister of Greenock Congregational Church and was ordained there on 5 April 1845. Ill health compelled him to resign on 10 July 1848, but after a period of rest he began to minister to the church at Masborough Chapel, Rotherham, on 24 August 1850. On 10 August 1851, at Edinburgh, Raleigh married Mary Darling, only daughter of James Gifford of that city; they had four daughters and a son, Sir Walter Alexander Raleigh (1861-1922). Raleigh subsequently moved to West George Street Congregational Church, Glasgow, and began his ministry there on 1 July 1855 in succession to Dr Ralph Wardlaw (1779-1853). He supervised the move to a new church at Elgin Place, opened in August 1856. Ill health still afflicted him and in December 1856 he moved south to Hare Court Chapel, Canonbury, London. His last move was to Kensington Congregational Church in 1875. 
Alexander Raleigh was an attractive character, unassuming, tactful, and generous in his dealings with others. His rich, musical voice and polished sentences made him a powerful pulpit orator whose services were in constant demand. In May 1861 he preached the annual sermon of the London Missionary Society and was appointed one of the Merchants' lecturers. He was an exceptionally successful minister. The high regard in which he was held was shown by his being elected chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales on two occasions, in 1868 and 1879. In 1865 he represented the Congregational Union at the National Council of American Congregational Churches at Boston, together with Dr Robert Vaughan (1895-1868) and Dr George Smith (1803-1870), and his eirenic spirit did much to overcome the American hostility to Vaughan, who had been critical of the north during the civil war. 
Some eighteen titles were published under Raleigh's name, most of them sermons. The most popular were 'Quiet Resting Places' (1863), 'The Book of Esther' (1880) (a series of meditations), and 'Thoughts for the Weary and Sorrowful' (ed. Mary Raleigh, 3rd edn, 1886). A few of his publications were lectures and addresses, including 'Questions and Duties of the Time', his chairman's address at the Congregational Union meeting on 13 October 1868. Raleigh died at his home at 27 Ladbroke Grove, London, on 19 April 1880 and he was buried at Abney Park cemetery. His wife survived him and edited a life of Raleigh (1881) and collections of his sermons. 


@@@@@


doc= 23042


Raleigh, William of (d. 1250), justice, administrator, and bishop of Winchester, came of a prominent Devon family which had several branches and whose members are sometimes difficult to distinguish from one another. In 1212 King John presented him to the church of Bratton Fleming in that county, when he was described as 'clerk'. He is first known to have served as a clerk of the bench in 1214, and there are numerous further references to him in that capacity from 1219 to 1229. For at least the latter part of that period, and certainly from 1225, he was the personal clerk of the bench and eyre justice Martin of Pateshull, and left the bench to go on eyre when Pateshull did so, including a circuit in the north in 1226-7, when he also acted as a commissioner for the assessment of tallage. It seems unlikely that he was the same William of Raleigh who was sheriff of Devon from 1225 to 1228; the sheriff was most likely the Devon knight of that name who had probably also served as a coroner immediately before 1225. William of Raleigh the clerk became a justice of the bench in May 1229, following Pateshull's retirement, second only to Stephen of Segrave in seniority, and above Robert of Lexinton, who had been a justice long before him. He inherited Pateshull's rolls, with the preparation of which he had been much concerned, and which later passed to Henry of Bracton, who handed them in to the exchequer in 1257/8. By December 1231 Raleigh's clerk was Roger of Thirkleby, a future justice. 
Raleigh took part in an eyre in Middlesex in 1229, and then in seven more eyres elsewhere in 1232/3, in all but the first of which he was the senior justice. He became senior justice of the bench in Michaelmas term 1233, superseding Thomas of Muleton, and remained as such until his appointment in May 1234 as justice of the court 'coram rege', after the fall of his predecessor, the justiciar Stephen of Segrave. He thus became the most senior of all the king's judges, but without the title of justiciar, that office being allowed to lapse. For the whole of his tenure of office he was the only professional justice in the court, sitting with household stewards and members of the king's council as colleagues. By 1238 Bracton was probably his clerk, perhaps succeeding Thirkleby at about the time of the latter's marriage in 1235 or 1236. 
During the next few years Raleigh was a trusted royal counsellor as well as a justice, and in fact between 1236 and 1239 he seems to have been the king's chief adviser, being responsible for at least some of the 'Statute of Merton' in 1236 and for other legal reforms, and also for a programme of fiscal reforms which tried to lay secure foundations for the royal finances, culminating in 1237 in the grant of a thirtieth on movables. His position was shaken, however, by the revolt of Richard, earl of Cornwall, in January 1238, and was probably further undermined in the following August, when Henry III tried to persuade the monks of Winchester to elect as bishop another leading counsellor, the queen's uncle William de Valence. On the monks' stating a preference for Raleigh, the king remarked that Raleigh had killed more men with his tongue than Valence had with his sword. In February 1239 Raleigh was elected bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, but he declined; in April he was elected bishop of Norwich, and this time he accepted. As a result he ceased to be a justice, and he retired from the court about Whitsuntide. 
On his appointment as bishop Raleigh gave up the lesser church livings he had acquired earlier. The most prestigious was the treasurership of Exeter Cathedral, which he had obtained by 1234; others included Blatherwycke in Northamptonshire, to which he had been presented in 1220, perhaps as a consequence of his association with Pateshull, and Whaplode in Lincolnshire, which he had received in 1231. As bishop of Norwich he punished Jews accused of conspiring to crucify a Christian boy. In 1241 the monks of Winchester still wanted him as their bishop, this time in preference to Boniface of Savoy, another of the queen's uncles and the king's candidate. The king again opposed Raleigh's candidature and urged him to renounce it, but he refused, upon which the king appealed to the pope. In September 1243 Innocent IV confirmed the choice of Raleigh by bull, which the strenuous efforts of the king and the persecution of Raleigh failed to reverse. Unable to obtain possession of his see, Raleigh placed Winchester under interdict and retired to France, where he enjoyed the favour of Louis IX. In 1244 the king had to relent and allow Raleigh to take possession of his bishopric, which was, however, ruined by the costs of the long dispute and by having been in the king's hands for six years. 
As bishop of Winchester Raleigh continued to play a wider public role, and in 1244 he was one of the joint committee of bishops, earls, and barons chosen to consider the royal demand for a subsidy. The next year he attended the Council of Lyons. In 1247 the king spent Christmas at Winchester and was reconciled with the bishop. In 1249 Raleigh went abroad again, this time to save money; he died at Tours on 1 September 1250. Matthew Paris wrote a touching account of his end. Earlier he had described him, in his annal for 1236, as a clerk who was the king's familiar, a discreet man and skilled in the laws of the land. One of the most notable of thirteenth-century justices, Raleigh has been plausibly credited with the authorship, or at least the patronage, of the treatise 'De legibus et consuetudinibus Angliae', traditionally named 'Bracton' and formerly ascribed to Henry of Bratton. Bratton probably worked under him in the court 'coram rege' and may have made revisions to an existing text, based on the law as administered by Pateshull and Raleigh, in the years before 1239. The treatise and the compilation known as 'Bracton's Notebook' provide between them a number of examples of legal innovations by Raleigh through the drafting of new writs, such as the action of cosinage in 1237, and contain many of the cases he heard, some from plea rolls which no longer survive. William of Raleigh had a brother called Robert, probably younger, who on one occasion acted as William's agent in the bench, but who seems to have died young in 1236. 


@@@@@


doc= 23043


Ralfe, James (fl. 1820-1829), naval historian, was the author of 'The Naval Chronology of Great Britain', which covered the years 1803 to 1816 (3 vols., 1820): it was a useful compilation, intended to be a continuation of the 'Naval Chronology' of Captain Isaac Schomberg, but more extensive. It was apparently issued in parts; the date on the title-page was that of its completion. Ralfe subsequently wrote 'The Naval Biography of Great Britain, consisting of Historical Memoirs of Those Officers of the British Navy who Distinguished Themselves During the Reign of His Majesty George III' (4 vols., 1828), published in parts. In 1829 Ralfe issued a pamphlet vindicating Sir Edward Codrington's conduct at Navarino. The data in the 'Naval Biography' seem to have been mostly contributed by the subjects, and may be accepted as largely correct as to facts: the inferences are less certain, and the style is very stilted and verbose. The work was reportedly financially unsuccessful, and in 1829 an attempt was made by some senior naval officers to raise a fund for the author's benefit, the subscriptions to be paid to his publishers, Messrs Whitmore and Fenn, 6 Charing Cross. 


@@@@@


doc= 23044


Ralfs, John (1807-1890), surgeon and botanist, was born at Hill House, Millbrook, near Southampton, on 13 September 1807, the second son of Samuel Ralfs (died 1808), yeoman, and his wife, Mary. Following the death of his father from typhus, John, his brother, and two sisters were brought up at Southampton by their mother. 
Ralfs was educated at private schools in Southampton, Bishop's Waltham, and Romsey; he was then articled to his uncle, a Brentford surgeon, with whom he lived for two and a half years. He was also a student under Dr Lyford at Winchester Hospital, before further study at Guy's Hospital, London. His studies at Guy's were interrupted by typhus and it was not until 1832 that he passed the MRCS examination (specially commended for his botany). After a year as assistant at a practice in Towcester, Northamptonshire, he spent about two years in partnership with another surgeon at Shoreditch in London. In 1835 health problems (probably a tubercular lung infection) forced Ralfs to move to Torquay, where in the same year he married Laura Cecilia (died 1848), daughter of Henry Newman of London. Although a son, John Henry, was born in 1836, the marriage failed within two years; Laura took her son and returned to her parents in France. No longer practising his profession, and very frail, Ralfs settled in Penzance in November 1837. As his health gradually improved he increasingly returned to his schoolboy love of botany. 
In 1839 Ralfs published his 'British Phaenogamous Plants and Ferns'. By the early 1840s a fascination with the smaller freshwater algae during field forays on Dartmoor led to the idea for a work on British Desmidieae. At about the same time, Arthur Hill Hassall was also planning a work on British freshwater algae. From extant correspondence it is clear that Hassall and Ralfs were fully aware of each other's intent to publish from before 1844. Later reports suggest Ralfs initially believed the works complemented each other and suggested co-operation. However, later correspondence (from 1844 onwards) indicates that Ralfs came to the decision personally to publish his original data before it could be used elsewhere. This may have been in part due to Hassall's demands for data, drawings, and other assistance from many contemporaries (including Ralfs and Jenner), which were on the grounds of priority of intent. Hassall's work, 'A History of British Freshwater Algae', was published in 1845. Ralfs's 'The British Desmidieae' did not appear until 1848, yet eighteen months before publication Ralfs already had a subscription list greater than 220 names, with many of the subscribers requiring more than a single copy. A restricted print run (500, according to Marquand) has subsequently made the work, in its time considered unsurpassed for the beauty and accuracy of its plates, both rare and costly. German scientists bought many copies. 
Comparisons between Ralfs's and Hassall's works, and approach to the subject, were inevitable. Ralfs is among those pioneers usually considered as founders of the critical approach to freshwater algology, Hassall as an acquisitive compiler, whose intent was to permit the leisured 'amateur' Victorian microscopist to identify his finds. Both contemporaries and later workers have tended to assess Hassall's algal work as largely second-hand and often careless, Ralfs's as both careful and original. Typical contemporary comment, in a letter of 9 October 1851 from David Landsborough I to Mrs Gatty (Sheffield City Library) is: 'Ralfs wrote an excellent book with exquisite plates, on the 'Desmidieae' which I have. It is much more to be depended on than Hassall's which Arnott says is a bad book full of errors.' 
Before publication of 'The British Desmidieae' Ralfs's first paper, 'Desmids and diatoms', was read by the Revd M. J. Berkeley before the Edinburgh Botanical Society, in whose 'Transactions' Ralfs's papers appeared over many years. He also published in the 'Annals of Natural History', in 'The Phytologist' (1842), and in the 'Report and Transactions of the Penzance Natural History and Antiquarian Society' (1851-1884?), the latter papers mostly about Cornish marine macroalgae. 
In addition to his own works, Ralfs contributed strongly to the data provided (from 1838) by Amelia Warren Griffiths for the botanical texts in editions of Banfield's 'A Guide to Ilfracombe' (retitled 'A Guide to North Devon' from 'c'.1850) and 'The North Devon Handbook' (1857; 1860; 1877) of Tugwell and Stewart. Ralfs was also involved in writing botanical text for Courtney's 'A Guide to Penzance' (1845), Besley's 'The Hand-Book of Western Cornwall' (1873?; 1880?), J. T. Blight's 'A Week at the Land's End' (1861; 1876; 1893; 1973), and 'The Official Guide to Penzance' (1876; 1888). He contributed a desmid list for 'The Flora of Tunbridge Wells' by Edward Jenner (who had drawn the illustrations for Ralfs's 1848 book). He also provided specimens which assisted in the production of academic works such as Sowerby's second edition of Smith's 'English Botany' (the cryptogams described therein by Berkeley and Wilson were amplified by specimens sent by Ralfs) and Darwin's 'Insectivorous Plants'. Andrew Pritchard's 'History of Infusoria' was revised and enlarged (4th edn, 1861) by botanists including Ralfs, whose Diatomaceae section (pp. 756-940) was condensed by Pritchard (Ralfs, through illness, could neither further revise the Diatomaceae nor provide the desmid sections, as originally agreed). 
In 1850 Ralfs visited the Dordogne chateau of Count Morambert (where his wife had died in 1848), during a six-month visit to France. He also then visited many French botanists, in Paris, Falaise, Caen, and Vire. However, letters from Lenormand and de Brebisson to the Revd M. J. Berkeley in 1851 suggest Ralfs proved no real correspondent following his return to England -- possibly owing to continued ill health. 
Through the misconduct of a trusted relative, it is said, Ralfs lost most of his 'moderate competency' (Marquand). In 1858 J. D. Hooker and T. H. Huxley initiated a charitable subscription fund to provide Ralfs with a small annuity. The fund, under the auspices of the Philosophical Society, was vastly oversubscribed and, in addition to providing Ralfs an annuity, formed the basis of a second fund for general 'relief of necessitas Scientific Men'. An additional legacy from Ralfs's friend the Revd Henry Penneck (died 1862) also provided some financial relief. Despite poor health and failing eyesight from the early 1850s onwards, Ralfs remained active in botanical research until he was at least seventy-five. For many years a committee member of the Penzance (Morrab Gardens) Library, he catalogued its books, did much of the buying of natural history stock, and prepared its printed catalogue. The library subsequently obtained Ralfs's unpublished manuscripts for his 'Flora of West Cornwall' (8 vols., 1878-86), 'Flora of the Scilly Isles' (1876), and 'Fungi of West Cornwall' (2 vols., 1880-86). 
In his final years Ralfs lived at 13 Clare Street, Penzance, in a house owned by a Miss Quick who cared well for him. He died there on 14 July 1890, and was buried in the local cemetery. A monument was erected to his memory by the Penzance Natural History and Antiquarian Society, of which he had been both vice-president and president (1883-4). He had been elected honorary fellow of the Royal Microscopical Society (1889) and, much earlier, had been proposed for (but had declined) associateship of the Linnean Society. His name is commemorated in taxa at many levels and in many plant groups. 


@@@@@


doc= 23045


Ralph, earl of Hereford (d. 1057), magnate, was the second son of Drogo, count of Amiens and the Vexin, and Godgifu (Gode), daughter of AEthelred II and Emma. His father died on pilgrimage to Jerusalem in 1035 and Godgifu married Eustace (II), count of Boulogne (d. c.1087); she was dead by 1049. Ralph came to England with his uncle, Edward the Confessor, in 1041. He attested three charters of 1050 as earl ('AS chart.', S 1020-22); his sphere of authority was probably the east midlands, the region where the lands of his wife, Gytha, are to be found. Their distribution suggests that she was related to the local magnate Burgraed, whose lands lay in Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and Northamptonshire; like Earl Ralph, he was a benefactor of Peterborough Abbey. Ralph himself held estates in Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Leicestershire, Middlesex, Northamptonshire, and Rutland, as well as Berkshire, Gloucestershire, Warwickshire, and Worcestershire; but his full holding cannot now be recovered. Much of it must have come from the king, but he received a life-lease of Cranfield, Bedfordshire, from AElfwine, abbot of Ramsey. 
Ralph's tenure of the east midlands would have brought him into contact with Harold Godwineson, earl of East Anglia, and it is noteworthy that he named his son Harold. When, however, Earl Godwine and his family fell out with the king in 1051, Ralph raised the levies of his earldom for his uncle. In 1052 he and Earl Odda commanded the royal fleet assembled against Godwine at Sandwich, but they could not prevent the earl's triumphant return. Godwine and his sons were reinstated in lands and office, but Swein Godwineson died on pilgrimage to Jerusalem in 1052, and it was probably then that Ralph received Swein's earldom of Hereford, which included Oxfordshire ('AS chart.', S 1105). There was already a Norman presence in the shire, and at least one castle, at Hereford itself, though its builder, Osbern Pentecost, was driven out on Godwine's return. 
In 1055 Ralph defended Herefordshire against the exiled Earl AElfgar and his ally Gruffudd ap Llywelyn, but their encounter on 24 October was a disaster: 'before any spear had been thrown the English army fled because they were on horseback, and many were killed there -- about four or five hundred men -- and they killed none in return' ('ASC', s.a. 1055, text C). The invaders sacked Hereford, burning down St AEthelberht's minster. Later sources accuse Ralph and his Frenchmen of starting the flight. It was this engagement which later earned Ralph his opprobrious nickname 'the timid' or, more properly, 'timorous' ('timidus'), in contrast to the 'vigorous' ('strenuus') Earl Harold, who chased the invaders into Wales. Ralph probably lost Hereford to Earl Harold at this juncture. He died on 21 December 1057, not much above thirty, and was buried in the abbey at Peterborough. His elder brother Count Walter died in 1063, allegedly poisoned by Duke William of Normandy. His son Harold, a minor in 1066 in the care of his great-aunt, Edith, received part of his father's estate and later acquired the castle and honour of Ewias Harold, which preserves his name. His descendants are the Sudeleys of Toddington, Gloucestershire (for the early history of whom 'see 'Sudeley family). 


@@@@@


doc= 23046


Tosny, Ralph de (d. 1102?), baron, was the son of Roger de Tosny and Godehildis, and thus from one of the most powerful families on the southern frontier of Normandy. The viking ancestor claimed for them, an otherwise unknown uncle of Rollo, first duke of Normandy, called Malahulc, was added to the family tree only in the twelfth century; during Ralph's lifetime his ancestry was traced to a Frankish great-grandfather. Tosny, in the Seine valley, was in the family's hands by the 980s and gave them a hereditary territorial surname by the 1010s, probably the first in the duchy. Roger founded one of the earliest baronial abbeys at Conches, which provided an alternative surname over several generations. An outsider as far as Duke William's relatives were concerned, Roger and two sons older than Ralph were killed in a bloody feud with the Beaumonts 'c'.1040. Afterwards his widow was married into the ducal kin in the person of Richard, count of Evreux, in whose household Ralph was presumably raised. 
Ralph de Tosny's own career began in the 1040s, witnessing charters, first alongside his mother and then from 1050 alone, at a time when his family was being drawn closer to the ducal kin through his sister Adelize's marriage to William fitz Osbern. When the French attacked Normandy in 1054 he was Duke William's standard-bearer and trusted envoy, but as he grew older he became like his father, proud and reckless, a typical Norman (except that his ancestry was Frankish). Physically brave into his old age, he was simply incapable of subordinating his will to anyone else, even his lord, for any length of time. 
Ralph's power was based on large estates around Conches, Tosny, and Acquigny, with other fiefs scattered north of the Seine and even in the Cotentin. By the early 1060s he had married, and significantly it was outside the duchy. His bride, Isabel 
(or Elizabeth; died in or after 1102)
, was the daughter of Simon de Montfort l'Amaury and at least Ralph's match in character: adored by her knights, she rode to war with them, armed as they were. 
Ralph de Tosny's belligerence had a frequent outlet in violent quarrels with neighbouring barons. One, about 1060, involved the Montgomerys; Duke William took their side, confiscated Ralph's lands, and exiled him. In retaliation, Ralph and other dispossessed lords razed the town of St Evroult, but in 1062 or 1063, at the prompting of Simon de Montfort and because the duke needed all the friends he could get in the southern marches, William reinstated him. For the rest of the 1060s Ralph was at the centre of things in Normandy, present both at the ducal court and in the army which invaded England. Tradition later had it that he declined to carry the Norman banner at Hastings so that he could join the thick of the fight. 
The rewards which Ralph de Tosny found in England were modest for a lord of his standing. Other and lesser members of his family, Robert of Stafford and Robert de Tosny of Belvoir, were treated at least as well. Perhaps he preferred Normandy, or it may be that more expansive gifts were ruled out by his earlier rebellion and then by his support for Robert Curthose in 1078-9, when again his lands were briefly confiscated. At first he probably received only the big scattered soke of Necton in Norfolk and a handful of manors in Essex and Hertfordshire, including Flamstead, later capital of the Tosny barony. More came his way after the fall in 1075 of his nephew Roger de Breteuil, earl of Hereford, in Berkshire, Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, and Herefordshire, with Clifford Castle. Ralph is only once known to have visited England after 1066 (though the documentation may be misleading) and took little interest in his English gains, subinfeudating half, including Clifford. Few of the principal families of the Norman honour became his tenants in England. On the other hand he gave generously there, to his own abbey of Conches, to St Taurin at Evreux, and to St Evroult, the last as belated amends for his earlier crimes and after he returned from Spain 'c'.1075 (whether from pilgrimage or a military campaign is unclear). In Normandy he husbanded his resources more carefully, but made many small gifts to those and other houses. 
On the death of William I in 1087, Ralph de Tosny was among the Norman lords who threw off Duke Robert Curthose's authority by expelling his garrisons from their castles, but then fought alongside him in the successful 1088 campaign in Maine. In the early 1090s Ralph witnessed several of the duke's charters, but he was alert to his own interests, and when Curthose failed to defend him in another of those nasty private wars along the march, this time against his wife's nephew Guillaume, count of Evreux, he switched to William Rufus, who willingly sent help. When peace came in 1091 or 1092, Curthose formally transferred the Tosny fiefs to Rufus's lordship. Ralph was then a Rufus loyalist, more or less, probably joining his 1098 campaign against the French, but taking the opportunity of his death in 1100 to settle a grudge against his Beaumont neighbours. He died an old man, pugnacious almost to the last, on 24 March, probably in 1102, and was buried at Conches Abbey. All the Tosny lands passed to his oldest surviving son, another Ralph. 


@@@@@


doc= 23047


Escures, Ralph d' (c.1068-1122), archbishop of Canterbury, was the son of Seffrid d'Escures and his first wife, Rascendis. The alternative name de Turbine sometimes attached to him is not recorded before the fourteenth century, and may have originated in a confusion with his successor at Canterbury, William de Corbeil. 
Seffrid, whose name suggests kinship with the lords of Belleme, held extensive lands in the neighbourhood of Alencon, from which he made substantial grants to the abbey of St Martin of Sees, a daughter house of St Evroult founded by Roger de Montgomery, vicomte of the Hiemois, and his wife, Mabel, heir of Belleme; many years later Seffrid died at St Martin's in the monastic habit. Ralph entered the house about 1078, when according to later tradition he was ten years old, and rose to be sub-prior, and then in 1088 prior. In 1089 he became the house's second abbot. He was to hold office under increasingly difficult circumstances for sixteen years. He clearly owed his promotion to more than family influence, for there is remarkable unanimity among contemporaries on his learning and affability. For some time the house prospered. Roger de Montgomery had already taken monks from St Martin's to found a substantial monastery at Shrewsbury about 1083, and in Ralph's time Montgomery's family made extensive further grants of Sees, notably in the lordship of Pembroke and Lancashire. In 1094 Sees also profited from Robert de Belleme's war with Robert Giroie, since part of the former's booty was the arm of St Ceneri, which was taken to St Martin. In the meantime, the links between Sees and its mother house remained strong, and Ralph became a close friend of Roger du Sap, abbot of St Evroult from 1091. Many years later Jean de Rheims dedicated his life of St Evroult (now lost) to Ralph, who is described by Orderic Vitalis as very well versed in letters, eloquent, agreeable, and universally beloved. 
The death of William Rufus in 1100 was disastrous for St Martin and its abbot. In 1102 Abbot Ralph was in England when Robert de Belleme and his brothers rose against Henry I -- after the fall of Bridgnorth the men of Shrewsbury sent Ralph to the king with the keys to the fortress. Count Robert forfeited his English lands and returned to Normandy, bent on creating a near independent lordship based on Belleme. The demands he made on Sees, already heavy, became intolerable, and by 1104 both Bishop Martin of Sees and Abbot Ralph had fled to the protection of King Henry of England. According to William of Malmesbury, England was then full of such exiles, but Ralph was set apart by his unwillingness to burden any of his hosts with too long or exacting a stay. His first documented appearance was at Durham that September, to attend the translation of St Cuthbert to the new cathedral. When doubt was cast on the survival of the saint's uncorrupted body, Abbot Ralph made peace between the contending parties, and himself carried out a detailed examination of the body before proclaiming it as perfect as on the day of death. In 1106 Ralph was at least for a while back in Normandy, where he visited his old acquaintance, Archbishop Anselm, at Bec; he had probably ceased to exercise authority at Sees by this date, although the sources unanimously refer to him as abbot until 1108, and his successor was not elected until 1110. 
When Anselm returned to England in 1107 Ralph seems to have attached himself chiefly to the archbishop's household. Certainly he became familiar with the monks of Christ Church, and he came to visit his friend Bishop Gundulf of Rochester in March 1108 as he lay dying. With prophetic foresight Gundulf gave Ralph his episcopal ring. Since Lanfranc's time, at least, the bishopric of Rochester had been recognized as in the archbishop's gift, and on 29 June, Anselm nominated Ralph to the bishopric and took his homage. The next day he was sent to Rochester with the sub-prior of Canterbury and the archdeacon, who invested him with the bishopric. Ralph was consecrated by the archbishop of Canterbury on 9 August; his happy prognostic was 'They are as the angels which are in heaven' ('Mark' 12: 25). 
The people of Rochester remembered Ralph as a friend to their church and liberties, and a handful of charters provide some support for this view. Otherwise he appears only rarely in the sources; late in 1108 he was sent to Southwell to command Thomas, archbishop-elect of York, to come to Canterbury for consecration and to make a profession of obedience, Ralph's first known involvement in the primacy debate which would cast a dark shadow over his later years. By now Anselm was clearly dying, and the next April, Ralph was at Canterbury for his last hours and burial. To the very end Anselm and the monks of Canterbury were preoccupied by the need to secure a profession from Thomas, following the wholly exceptional act of submission of one archbishop to another secured by Lanfranc from Thomas's uncle and predecessor in 1072. The canons of York were no less determined to cast off this humiliating subjection. As Canterbury's representative during a vacancy Ralph continued to press for Thomas's surrender. He also watched over the rights of Canterbury during the long vacancy that followed Anselm's death. It was probably as deputy for the archbishop that he consecrated the crypt chapel at Bury St Edmunds, and promoted Baldwin to the priorate, perhaps in 1112. There was little to indicate that he would soon be called to a much wider stage. 
After a five-year vacancy King Henry, pressed by the pope and the monks of Canterbury, at last took steps to appoint a new archbishop. In April 1114 he summoned his bishops and magnates to Windsor; Bishop Ralph accompanied the prior of Christ Church and a party of his monks, who had also been called. By then Ralph and the aged bishop of Norwich were the only monks among the bishops, and the remainder combined to oppose the king's own choice, Abbot Faricius of Abingdon, demanding a clerk of their own order as vigorously as the monks of Christ Church refused one. In this impasse Ralph emerged as the compromise candidate, a monk but at least a bishop, and of wonderful affability. Nominated on 26 April, and installed at Canterbury on 16 May, he secured his own replacement at Rochester by Abbot Ernulf of Peterborough, a former monk of Christ Church, whom he invested with the bishopric on 28 September. Emissaries set off for Rome late in the year to seek papal confirmation of Ralph's translation and a pallium. According to the letters of support for his election which they carried, the new archbishop was too infirm to make the journey himself, the first sign of the chronic ill health that was to dog his later years. 
The ambassadors received at first an icy reception, since Pope Paschal II was already indignant at the reluctance of the English church to refer serious matters to his judgement and to render 'Peter's pence', and an episcopal translation without the previous consent of Rome was conceived as a particular affront. Only the intercession of Abbot Anselm of St Saba, nephew to the late archbishop, at length secured Pope Paschal's agreement, conveyed in letters of the most grudging assent of 30 March 1115. As legate, Abbot Anselm was charged with raising all these matters with the king, as well as with the pallium for Ralph. On 27 June he was received in procession at Canterbury by the archbishop, eight of his bishops, and the communities of Christ Church and St Augustine. Anselm laid the pallium in its silver casket on the high altar of the cathedral, the archbishop swore his oath of fidelity to the pope, and put on the pallium. After enthronement on the seat of St Augustine he proceeded immediately to consecrate Theulf as bishop of Worcester. Very shortly afterwards he appointed John, his sister's son, as his archdeacon. 
The legate also bore a less welcome gift, a detailed requisitory of the pope's grievances against the English church, which he delivered to the king at his court at Westminster in September 1115. It came at a time when the entire Norman episcopate had been suspended for failing to attend a legatine council, and when Thurstan, the archbishop-elect of York, was refusing to make a profession of obedience to Canterbury, and was threatening to seek consecration from the pope. For his part, Ralph refused to consecrate Thurstan unless he professed, even if confronted by a papal command. It was agreed to send the blind but infinitely experienced Bishop William de Warelwast of Exeter to Rome to seek a resolution to these difficulties. A less urgent problem, over the place of consecration to the see of St David's of the queen's chancellor, Bernard, whom Ralph categorically refused to bless anywhere but at Canterbury, was more easily settled when King Henry arranged that Bernard should make his profession and receive Ralph's blessing at Westminster, the queen's favourite residence. 
Late in the year Alexander, king of Scots, wrote to seek the archbishop's advice on finding a new bishop of St Andrews; Alexander's proposal that a new bishop should be consecrated at Canterbury rather than by the archbishop of York must have been extremely welcome, though nothing seems to have come of the proposal immediately. In March 1116 the archbishop was among those who swore allegiance to William AEtheling at Salisbury, an occasion that also saw the king compel Thurstan of York to renounce his see rather than profess to Canterbury, in spite of letters of powerful support from Pope Paschal. Shortly afterwards Thurstan crossed to Normandy to join the king, where he was allowed to resume his status as elect, and continued to press his case. In August, Abbot Anselm returned to Normandy with a new legatine commission for England, a clear indication of the failure of the mission of the bishop of Exeter. A council of English magnates therefore urged Ralph to travel to Rome to present his case, and in September he set out with a substantial company. 
Still in Normandy, Ralph fell ill at La Ferte with an ulcer of the face, and for a month his life was despaired of. Further delayed by bad weather, the archbishop and his companions spent Christmas at Lyons. When they reached Rome in March, it was to find the city under assault from the emperor Heinrich V, while the pope had fled to Benevento. The archbishop nevertheless celebrated mass in St Peter's on 12 March, but could communicate with the pope only through messengers, who secured no more than empty courtesy. On the other hand, Thurstan's representatives received unequivocal papal support. Apparently with Paschal's consent, Ralph spent eight days with the emperor, but it became increasingly clear that the rumours of the pope's imminent return to Rome were baseless. By the end of the year Ralph was back at Rouen after much fruitless suffering. 
On hearing of the death of Pope Paschal in January 1118, Thurstan left York and joined the king in Normandy, armed with papal letters commanding Ralph to consecrate him without a profession, and hoping for equally determined support from Paschal's successor. Ralph remained with the king, partly no doubt to strengthen the king's resolve to require a profession, partly because the legate Anselm still awaited the king's leave to cross to England to exercise his legation, partly perhaps in the hope that a new pope would be more sympathetic. In September he attended an important royal council at Rouen, where the legate Cono denounced the imperial antipope, and the king took counsel on the war raging along the Norman frontier. The new pope, Gelasius II, proved as staunch a friend to Thurstan as his predecessor, and wrote to Ralph in uncompromising terms commanding him to consecrate Thurstan without a profession, letters that Ralph would always insist he had never seen. Gelasius died suddenly in January 1119, but his successor, Calixtus II, proved no less insistent on Thurstan's rights. The state of war with France and Anjou, and the uncertainty over the pope's movements, yet again frustrated Ralph's attempts to go to plead his case in person, and though a messenger succeeded in delivering a letter of impassioned complaint, this received short shrift from Calixtus. In July (probably in 1119, rather than 1118), as the archbishop was taking off his vestments after mass, he suffered a severe stroke. He made a partial recovery, but his speech was permanently impaired, and his movement restricted; for some time, at least, he could only travel in a litter. 
In May, Pope Calixtus had announced his intention of hearing the dispute between Canterbury and York at a council to be held at Rheims in October, to which Ralph and Thurstan were both summoned. A large delegation of English bishops set out, as did Thurstan, but Ralph was too ill, and Canterbury's case was chiefly represented by his half-brother Seffrid, shortly to become abbot of Glastonbury, and his nephew John, the archdeacon. In spite of their protests the pope consecrated Thurstan on 19 October, leaving the issue of the profession to be disputed elsewhere. The king, enraged by what he chose to represent as a breach of faith, forbade Thurstan to enter England and disseised him of his estates. On 4 January 1120, by contrast, Ralph was received with ceremony at Canterbury after an absence of three and a half years; on 4 April he was well enough to consecrate David as bishop of Bangor at Westminster. At this point King Alexander renewed his application for a new bishop of St Andrews, this time specifying Eadmer of Canterbury as his candidate. This was a choice that the archbishop could scarcely oppose, and Eadmer was sent off with the archbishop's blessing and King Henry's leave. Meanwhile, however, the pope's support for Thurstan was unwavering, and, faced by a threat of interdict, Henry submitted; at Christmas 1120 Ralph and the other bishops met the king at London and accepted defeat, at least for the moment. Thurstan returned to England and his church a few weeks later. 
On 25 November 1120 the king's only legitimate son had drowned in the 'White Ship', two years after his mother's death. Henry's second marriage, to Adeliza of Louvain, was settled with remarkable haste, the marriage taking place at Windsor on 29 January 1121. Ralph was too unwell to perform the wedding, but insisted on taking part in the coronation the following day. His celebrated ease of manner had disintegrated under the pressure of illness and failure, and he broke off the ceremony on seeing the king wearing the crown that it was the archbishop's cherished right to place upon his head. With unexpected restraint the king agreed to untie the thong below his chin, and Ralph was ultimately persuaded to replace the crown and allow the mass to proceed. In the summer he entertained yet another papal legate, Cardinal Pietro Pierleone, later the antipope Anacletus II, at Canterbury and seized the opportunity to display the largely forged privileges of his see. Ralph was again ill at Michaelmas, and so could not attend the council where the king pressed Thurstan once more to agree to make a profession, and with no more success. His last recorded act was to consecrate Gregory as bishop of Dublin at Lambeth on 2 October. By now he was failing fast; he does not certainly attest any later royal charters, and Eadmer has nothing to report of him from then until his death at Canterbury on 20 October 1122. He was buried in the middle of the cathedral nave three days later. 
Ralph's pontificate was in many ways unsuccessful; he struggled long and fruitlessly against ill health and a world that had little place for the exceptional privileges of Canterbury which Lanfranc had secured in very different times. There is a marked difference between the accounts of Anselm and Ralph given by Eadmer, who served them both, and Ralph seems a colourless figure by comparison with his predecessor. For the most part the supporters of York could find little to say for him, yet even one of those could call him worthy of his high office, as it were a lesser pope, barely second to a king to whom he was right arm, heart, and eye. Eadmer, too, speaks of Ralph's shrewd counsel even after his stroke. Elsewhere testimonies to his learning and piety are widespread. The worst that the young William of Malmesbury could say of him was that he could descend into unbecoming frivolity. He was generous to the monks of Canterbury as well as Rochester and his twenty-five surviving charters show him making valuable gifts to Lewes, St Osyth's, and the nuns of Malling. At Abingdon he intervened to make peace when the monks fell out with their abbot; he supported Christina of Markyate in her tribulations; in Wales, Ireland, and Scotland he sought to maintain the influence of Canterbury as vigorously as any of his predecessors. 
Apart from a handful of letters on routine business, and a defence of Canterbury's claims over York addressed to Pope Calixtus, impassioned to the point of incoherence and probably to be conceived as the collective work of Canterbury's partisans, only one work of his certainly survives, a sermon on the feast of the Assumption of the Virgin. Originally delivered to the monks of Sees in French, it was translated into Latin at the request of abbots Guillaume of Fecamp and Arnulf of Troarn; travelling under false colours as the work of Anselm it survives in some fifty manuscripts. There was even an Anglo-Saxon translation from the Latin text found in a single manuscript, probably from Canterbury or Rochester. Modest though it is, this celebration of the Virgin's chastity and humility from his happiest years remains Ralph's most apt memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 23048


Ranulf (d. 1123), administrator, was a man of uncertain background, whom Henry I appointed his chancellor in 1107. The chancellor was the king's principal domestic servant, a clerk in charge of the court's secretarial and religious services and in receipt of the top pay and allowances. There were also pickings. Some time after 1106 Ranulf was granted by the king custody of the escheated honour of Berkhamsted. But, possibly because of poor health, lack of a suitable vacancy, or simply choice, he did not, like his predecessor and successor, retire to a bishopric. He attested over 160 royal acts, and probably accompanied Henry I for at least part of all the king's visits to Normandy during the years of his chancellorship. But he was also sometimes involved in the government of England during the king's absences, serving as a member of the regency council that assisted Queen Matilda and Prince William, and being recorded as a justice in the exchequer in 1119. According to Henry, archdeacon of Huntingdon, the chancellor also employed his lively intelligence, shrewdness, and cunning to the disinheritance and impoverishment of the unworldly. And as his health declined -- he suffered from some unspecified illness for twenty years -- so his cupidity and deceit increased. 
The moralist had found a good subject, and would not have given Ranulf credit for the good education he gave to his sons. Ranulf sent them to school at Laon under the patronage of his predecessor, Waldric, in 1107 elected bishop of that city, and employed as their tutor William de Corbeil, later archbishop of Canterbury, who was attending the lectures of the great Master Anselm. The archdeacon regarded Ranulf's death, of which he may have been an eyewitness, as suitably ignoble. In January 1123, after spending Christmas with the king at Dunstable, the two set off for Berkhamsted, where Ranulf was to entertain his master. When they reached the top of the hill from which his castle came into view, Ranulf was so jubilant that he fell from his horse and was ridden over by a monk -- at St Albans remembered as one of theirs. A few days later Ranulf died of his injuries. Clearly a trusted servant, even perhaps a friend, of the king, he could have shared not only Henry I's wealth but also some of his virtues and vices. 


@@@@@


doc= 23049


Ralph (d. 1123), bishop of Chichester, was considered by Orderic Vitalis to have been a court chaplain under William II before he became bishop in 1091, but his chief claims to fame are his establishment of the material basis of his cathedral church and chapter, and his model conduct as a diocesan according to the notions of the time. William of Malmesbury, in his 'Gesta pontificum', says that Ralph was alone among the bishops in resisting Henry I's pecuniary exactions from the clergy, thereby winning the king's respect; indeed, that as a result of his bemoaning the poverty of his bishopric and the fire that had burned down his cathedral (1114), he was actually helped by Henry's liberality to rebuild the church. One of the bishop's charters shows that, probably after 1114, he was also eliciting donations from the laity of his diocese towards the cathedral fabric. William of Malmesbury says that Ralph raised up his see from being humble and poor 'to the height of glory' ('De gestis pontificum', 206). Ralph gathered together as many clergy as the means of the bishopric could sustain, thus creating canons for the cathedral, he donated valuables for the liturgy to the cathedral, he travelled around his diocese three times a year preaching, and he rebuked wrongdoers with good humour. Some of this picture is given colour by the admittedly sparse charter evidence. The main pattern of cathedral prebends in the vicinity of Chichester had been clearly established no later than 1147. Charters of Ralph stress the importance of priests' attendance at episcopal synods, not for the sake of financial dues but 'to hear the episcopal precepts' ('Acta', 74), and the need to provide a secure material basis for the priest who would actually reside as pastor in a parish. 
According to the chronicle of Battle Abbey the first rumblings of dispute between the bishop of Chichester and the abbey were felt in Ralph's time, over the bishop's right of hospitality and the abbot's liability to attend the bishop's synod. However, it is difficult to assess the trustworthiness of the charter and chronicle evidence, particularly on the latter issue, since it could be affected by hindsight from the certainly rancorous disputes of the mid-twelfth century. Ralph, abbot of Battle from 1107, and Bishop Ralph appear to have been the best of friends. Although not a central figure in politics, Ralph Luffa was a consistent supporter of Archbishop Anselm (died 1109). He was not cowed by William II's bludgeoning, according to William of Malmesbury, but offered to resign his bishopric in support of Anselm's recognition of Pope Urban II ('r'. 1088-99) in 1095, even though he felt weakened by Anselm's subsequently going into exile. Again, according to Eadmer, he acted and spoke staunchly in favour of the archbishop of Canterbury's right to exact obedience from York in 1108-9. When Orderic says that of William II's chaplains who obtained bishoprics, some oppressed the weak and amassed wealth, while others, inspired by a deep sense of pastoral responsibility, devoted themselves to the welfare of their flocks and laudably amended their own lives, we must suppose that he thought of Ralph in the latter category. Ralph died on 14 December 1123, in circumstances of exemplary piety, having given all his possessions to the poor. 


@@@@@


doc= 23050


Ralph (d. in or after 1151), bishop of Orkney, was a native of York, where he became a priest. York writers state that he was elected by 'men of Orkney' to the bishopric of Orkney (between June 1109 and February 1114) in the church of St Peter at York, and he was consecrated by Thomas (died 1114), archbishop of York, to whom he made his formal profession. He is the third bishop known to have been formally consecrated by York to the see, which had been established by Earl Thorfinn 'c'.1050. These appointments, however, were in opposition to those consecrated by authority of the archbishops of Hamburg-Bremen, and it is doubtful whether any of the three had full possession. The support registered for Ralph by 'men of Orkney' probably reflects the political disputes within the earldom at this date, and suggests that he was favoured by Magnus Erlendsson's party. After Earl Magnus's murder about 1115 Ralph must have faced increasing difficulty in getting possession, as is clearly perceived in the letter of 20 November 1119 from Calixtus II to the Norwegian kings Sigurd ('r'. 1103-30) and Eystein ('r'. 1103-23) requesting them to see that he remained in peaceable possession, and in that from Calixtus's successor, Honorius II, to King Sigurd in 1128, in which an intruder into the see is mentioned and the statement made that there can be only one bishop in possession. This must refer to the strong position of Bishop William (died 1168) in the islands, and from this date onwards Ralph is active as a suffragan of York. 
Ralph had already supported Thurstan (died 1140), archbishop-elect of York, in the latter's struggle for the independence of the see of York against the claims of Canterbury, visiting him during his exile in France and being present at the archbishop's consecration at Rheims on 19 October 1119. He alone of the English and Norman bishops dared to take his seat beside the metropolitan for the opening next day of the general council at Rheims, and Thurstan must have secured the first papal bull on Ralph's behalf at this time. For his open support of the archbishop Ralph incurred the wrath of Henry I. In 1128 he assisted at the consecration of Robert (died 1159), bishop of St Andrews, by Archbishop Thurstan; the chronicler of the occasion explains that he was assistant to the bishop of Durham and the archbishop of York because of his unacceptability to the people of his diocese, having been chosen by neither clergy, nor people, nor 'princeps terrae'. Ralph represented the aged archbishop at the battle of the Standard, near Northallerton, on 22 August 1138. He played an active role in exhorting and absolving the English host, although he was probably not responsible for the speech ascribed to him by some authorities (but to Walter Espec by Ailred of Rievaulx). In 1143 he acted as suffragan of William de Ste Barbe (died 1152), bishop of Durham, and represented him at the consecration of William Fitzherbert as archbishop of York in Winchester. Some time before this (1133-40) his sons ('Paulinus filius Rad. Orcadensis ep.' being named) were granted the land of Garmondsway, co. Durham, by Bishop Geoffrey Rufus. Ralph is last recorded in 1151; it is not known when he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 23051


Gubiun, Ralph (d. 1151), abbot of St Albans, was probably born towards the end of the eleventh century. According to Matthew Paris he was an Englishman, although his name would suggest Norman origins ('Gesta abbatum', 106). Two contradictory versions of Gubiun's early career are given in the 'Gesta abbatum'. According to the first he joined the community as a youth, and distinguished himself in the production of books in the scriptorium before entering the service of Alexander, bishop of Lincoln (died 1148), where he remained until becoming abbot. In the second and more plausible account he entered the bishop's service as a secular and rose to the position of chamberlain and bishop's chaplain before leaving to begin life as a monk at St Albans, at the bishop's suggestion. At Lincoln he studied the 'Bible' under an Italian, Master Wodo; his experiences of intellectual life and book production there may explain both the close relationship between the abbey and the see, and the appearance of several Italian scholars at St Albans in the 1150s. 
Gubiun probably entered St Albans in the 1130s. He rose quickly to prominence (though not perhaps as a copyist), and was elected abbot in 1146. Although he made several notable improvements during his short abbacy, expanding the abbey buildings, increasing the community's wealth, and securing the confirmation of the abbey's privileges from Pope Eugenius III ('r'. 1145-1153), he attracted bitter criticism, probably for his close association with, and apparent subjection to, Lincoln. He was also held responsible for the loss of some of the monks' most precious vestments, and for the degradation of the shrine of St Alban, which was robbed of costly gold decorations added by the previous abbot, Geoffrey. Matthew Paris also suggests that he became drawn into a conflict with the prior, Alcuin, who was driven as a result to join Westminster Abbey. 
In his fourth or fifth year as abbot Gubiun fell sick and resigned the abbacy in favour of Robert of Gorham, the nephew of his predecessor Geoffrey. He died on 6 July 1151, and was buried at the entrance to the chapter house of St Albans Abbey. His remains were exhumed in 1979 and reburied, together with those of other twelfth-century abbots including Geoffrey, at the west end of the nave. 
Matthew Paris describes Gubiun as a 'lover of books', and he was probably the author of, among other works, a history of Alexander the Great. Compiled from the work of a wide range of classical authors, including Solinus and Pompeius Trogus, the text includes as much topographical as historical detail. Two copies of his history survive, both perhaps transcribed at St Albans in the late twelfth or early thirteenth century. The text was used in the fourteenth century by the chronicler Ranulf Higden (died 1364), and by the St Albans historian Thomas Walsingham (died 1422) for his own 'Historia Alexandri magni'. 


@@@@@


doc= 23053


Ralph (d. 1174), administrator and bishop of Bethlehem, was described by the historian William of Tyre, who succeeded him as chancellor of the Latin kingdom of Jerusalem, as 'a good-looking Englishman, who was well-educated but very worldly' ('Willelmi Tyrensis archiepiscopi chronicon', 2.738). H. E. Mayer has argued persuasively that he should be identified with Ralph who between 1137 and 1141 was the chancellor of Matilda, the wife of King Stephen of England, but nothing certain is known about him until he was invested as chancellor of the kingdom of Jerusalem. This took place after 24 September 1143 (when Elias held that office) and before 1 February 1146, and the appointment was almost certainly made by Queen Melisende, co-ruler since November 1143 with her son Baudouin III. In 1146 when Fulcher, archbishop of Tyre, became patriarch of Jerusalem, the crown nominated Ralph to the vacant see, the most prestigious archbishopric in the kingdom. His candidacy was opposed, for unknown reasons, by a group of clergy led by Fulcher, and it has been conjectured that this led Melisende to dismiss Ralph as chancellor because she was unwilling to antagonize the hierarchy: his last act in her reign is dated July 1147. 
Until June 1150 Ralph continued to style himself archbishop-elect and to enjoy the temporalities of Tyre, but Pope Eugenius III subsequently refused to ratify his appointment. Throughout this time, as relations between Baudouin III and Melisende deteriorated, Ralph remained a firm supporter of the young king, and he received his reward when Melisende was driven from power at Eastertide 1152. By 20 April Baudouin had reinstated him as chancellor, an office he retained for the rest of his life. In 1153 he and Frederic, bishop of Acre, were sent by the king to Antioch to restore peace between Prince Reynaud de Chatillon and the patriarch, Aimery de Limoges, whom he had maltreated and imprisoned. Their mission was a success: Aimery was released and all confiscated church property was restored. Perhaps in recognition of his services, Baudouin nominated Ralph as bishop of Bethlehem when that see fell vacant, and Ralph's fellow countryman, Pope Adrian IV, ratified this appointment in the autumn of 1156. As suffragan of Jerusalem Ralph unsuccessfully opposed the election of Amaury de Nesle as patriarch in 1157-8, perhaps because he was Queen Melisende's candidate. 
In King Amaury's reign (1163-74) the Byzantine emperor, Manuel I Komnenos, helped to fund an extensive programme of mosaic decoration in Ralph's cathedral, the church of the Holy Nativity: the nave mosaics depicting general and provincial councils of the church, with inscriptions in Latin and Greek, were designed to emphasize the unity of the Orthodox and Latin churches, and no doubt represented a view of the church that Ralph shared. Ralph took an active part in warfare against the Muslims. He was severely wounded in battle in 1167 in the course of King Amaury's Egyptian campaign; but he had recovered by the spring of 1170 when he carried the Holy Cross on a campaign in Transjordan, while in the following December he helped Amaury repel Saladin's attack on Darum. Although two western sources record the presence of a bishop of Bethlehem in northern France in the winter of 1169-70, the writers may have confused him with the bishop of Banias (Belinas in Latin) who is known to have been there. Ralph is last recorded in a document of 18 April 1174: he died soon after and was buried in the chapter house of the Augustinian canons at Bethlehem. 


@@@@@


doc= 23054


St Albans, Ralph of (fl. 1195x1214?), Benedictine monk and hagiographer, was probably a native of Dunstable and a monk of St Albans. By some writers he is called Robert. He is possibly to be identified with the Ralph who was prior of Wymondham, a cell of St Albans, at some point between 1195 and 1214. At the request of William, another monk of St Albans, he wrote a metrical life of St Alban, which amplified and versified William's Latin prose lives of St Alban and St Amphibalus. Copies of Ralph's work are in four St Albans manuscripts: BL, Cotton MS Julius D.iii, part 2, folios 125-58, and Claudius E.iv, folios 47-58'v', and in Dublin, Trinity College, MS 177 (formerly E.i.40), folios 3-20, and Cambridge, Gonville and Caius College, MS 230, folios 172ff. (incomplete). In a treatise 'On the foundation and merits of the monastery of St Albans' composed probably by Thomas of Walsingham, Ralph is compared to Virgil. 


@@@@@


doc= 23055


Evesham, Randal of (d. 1229), abbot of Evesham, was born at Evesham but became a monk of Worcester, as did his brother Ralph (or Radulf). In 1203 he was joint leader of some Worcester monks sent to Rome with evidence to support Wulfstan's canonization, and became prior of Worcester on 24 December. Randal was elected bishop of Worcester on 2 December 1213 but renounced the see in favour of the king's chancellor, and on 20 January 1214 a divided Evesham chapter accepted the advice of the papal legate, Nicolo of Tusculum, to elect Randal abbot. Thomas of Marlborough (died 1236), his closest aide, was perhaps untruthful in stating that Randal, when prior of Worcester, already had a seat in the Evesham chapter, for Thomas was trying to prove that only monks of Evesham ought to be elected abbots. 
Randal arrived at Evesham on 22 January 1214, and on 9 March was blessed by the legate in St Mary's Abbey, York. Though mild, he restored discipline and prudence to Evesham's internal affairs after the misrule of his predecessor, Roger Norreys (died 1223). In 1215 he and Thomas were in Rome for the Lateran Council, and obtained papal confirmation of Evesham's administrative customs and of the revenues due to each obedientiary. Under Randal the abbey paid off its debts, improved its buildings and estates, and endowed its church with ornaments. He attended the translation of St Wulfstan's relics at Worcester in 1218, but the next year was prevented at a Worcester synod from either wearing his mitre or enjoying the precedence he claimed on the strength of it. Randal was a president of the Benedictine general chapter for the southern province in 1219 and 1225, a justice on eyre in 1221, an arbitrator between the bishop and convent of Worcester in 1224, and a witness to the reissue of 'Magna Carta' in 1225. He died on 17 December 1229, probably at Evesham Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 23056


Bristol, Ralph of (d. 1232), bishop of Kildare, was a native of Bristol, but settled in Dublin. He first appears in the records as the clerk of William Piro, bishop of Glendalough from 1192 to 1212. Before 1200 he was appointed first treasurer of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, by Archbishop Henry of London. His name, sometimes with the title 'magister', occurs as a witness to many charters of this archbishop. 
In 1223 Ralph was consecrated bishop of Kildare, where his episcopacy began a succession of English and Anglo-Irish bishops which was maintained until the end of the fifteenth century. As bishop of Kildare he was involved in a dispute with William (II) Marshal over advowsons, the outcome of which is unknown. Ralph was one of the churchmen deputed by Henry of London, as archbishop of Dublin, to collect witness depositions and material relating to the sanctity and miracles of Lorcan O Tuathail (Laurence O'Toole) before that saint's canonization. The results of this inquiry were sent in letters, with the archbishop's seal, to Eu in Normandy, whose canons wrote the first life of Laurence. According to James Ware, Ralph granted a fourteen day indulgence to the abbey of Glastonbury. The construction of Kildare Cathedral was begun during his episcopacy. He died on 24 August 1232. 


@@@@@


doc= 23057


Maidstone, Ralph of (d. 1245), bishop of Hereford, is of unknown origins. His date of birth is unknown, but is unlikely to have been later than 'c'.1195. Since he is referred to, from his earliest occurrences, with the title of 'magister', he probably received a higher education in the first or second decade of the thirteenth century. Where he was educated is uncertain, but either Oxford or Paris is a possibility in view of his later links with both. He made his early career in the diocese of Coventry and Lichfield, perhaps through the patronage of Bishop William of Cornhill (died 1223). He occurs as treasurer of Lichfield Cathedral on 21 September 1219 and between 1215 and 1223, his predecessor in this office last occurring in 1204. Between 1220 and 1221 he is recorded as archdeacon of Shropshire (in the diocese of Coventry), but very soon after this, in or by 1222, he was made archdeacon of Chester. Occurrences of his name in witness lists suggest that he was quite active in this office in the first half of the 1220s; thereafter he seems to have absented himself from the diocese, perhaps to go to Paris to teach, since Matthew Paris names him as one of several English scholars who left Paris for Oxford in 1229 when the university was dispersed following riots. It may have been while he was there that he composed the commentary on the 'Sentences', which he is said to have written while still archdeacon of Chester (extract in London, Gray's Inn, MS 14, fols. 28-32). 
By 22 June 1231 Maidstone was chancellor of the University of Oxford, but soon after this he was made dean of Hereford in succession to Master Thomas of Bosbury, who died on 29 September 1231; Ralph first occurs as dean on 28 July 1232. He may have been recommended to Bishop Hugh Foliot of Hereford by the latter's friend and protege Robert Grosseteste (died 1253), whom Ralph would have known at Oxford. Shortly after Hugh Foliot's death (7 August 1234) he was elected bishop of Hereford; on 30 September 1234 he received the temporalities, and he was consecrated on 12 November of that year by Archbishop Edmund at Canterbury. Already as dean he had received signs of royal favour, being twice granted the right to take stags in the Forest of Dean; as bishop, in November 1235 he baptized Henry, son of Richard of Cornwall, at Hailes, and shortly afterwards was sent to Provence to escort Eleanor, the intended bride of Henry III, to England; in 1235, 1236, and 1237 he was involved with negotiations with Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. 
During May 1237 Maidstone seems to have been making plans to resign from his bishopric, since it is at this point that he confirmed, and promised to renew, his predecessor's arrangements for leaving the episcopal manors stocked and provided with money for seed in a vacancy, and furthermore he established posts for four vicars-choral in the cathedral. He made other benefactions to Hereford Cathedral, including houses in London, service books, vestments, and relics. He had apparently made a vow while still archdeacon of Chester to enter the Franciscan order. The Dunstable annals attribute his wish to become a Franciscan to the injuries he received from a fall in 1238, which left him unable to celebrate mass for a time, but this probably was a contributory factor rather than the original cause. On 17 December 1239 at Oxford he was received into the Franciscan order, having resigned his bishopric, and became a member of the Franciscan community at Oxford, where he helped to build the church. A glossed 'New Testament' which is inscribed as having been given by him, as a former bishop of Hereford, to the Franciscans of Canterbury, survives as BL, Royal MS 3 C.xi. Later he moved to the Franciscan convent at Gloucester, where he died and was buried in the choir. His date of death can be ascertained from the Hereford Cathedral obit book, which says that the time he spent as a mendicant was equal to the length of time he had been bishop, as 27 January 1245. 


@@@@@


doc= 23058


Shrewsbury, Ralph (c.1286-1363), bishop of Bath and Wells, was of obscure origins, but he may have been connected with the Bold family of the parish of Aston Botterell, Shropshire. Through much of his life he had strong ties with Shrewsbury Abbey, where he probably gained his early education, and his toponym was perhaps as much derived from the abbey as the town. His first certain connection with the abbey was his appointment to the rectory of Edgmond, Shropshire, in its patronage in July 1305. The income from this, his first benefice, helped him to study at Oxford University and by 1308 he had graduated MA. For the next twenty years his life was devoted to study. He gained the unusual distinction of two doctorates, the first by 1317 in canon law, and the second, by 1329, in theology. His standing at Oxford led to his appointment as chancellor of the university in the course of 1328, a post he retained until November 1329. 
While he was at Oxford, Shrewsbury's career progressed slowly by the standards of successful clerics of his day and, unlike them, he is not known to have undertaken royal or ecclesiastical service. Edgmond remained his only benefice until 1317, when he became a canon of Wells. Shrewsbury Abbey continued to be his patron thereafter, presenting him to the rectories of Walton-on-Trent, Derbyshire, in 1319 and Hodnet, Shropshire, in 1328. On the death of Bishop Droxford of Wells, Shrewsbury was elected his successor by the chapter of Wells on 2 June 1329. Although the royal assent quickly followed, on 28 June, and although by 3 September he had been consecrated, it soon became clear this would be a contested appointment. An alternative candidate emerged, in the form of Robert Wyville, Queen Isabella's secretary. On 12 June and 2 August royal letters were sent to Pope John XXII unsuccessfully pressing Wyville's claim, probably at the queen's instigation. For nearly a year Shrewsbury's position was insecure, until his rival was papally provided to the see of Salisbury. After a long series of letters by Shrewsbury to the pope and leading cardinals, an appeal for support to Roger Mortimer, a testimonial from the chancellor of Oxford University, and the payment of a substantial sum of money, Pope John confirmed his appointment on 30 May 1330, six weeks after Wyville's provision. 
Shrewsbury's lasting importance rests on his pastoral activities during the thirty-four years he was a diocesan bishop. Historians have regarded him as an exemplary medieval bishop and in his lifetime he gained a reputation for sanctity. His register, which survives for the bulk of his episcopate, shows him to have been a conscientious pastor. From July 1331 he spent most of his time in his diocese, rarely leaving for more than a few weeks each year and scarcely at all during the last decade of his life. He regularly travelled round it, diligently carrying out his episcopal functions, until illness and advancing age confined him to a favourite manor. He sought to improve the standards of the clergy, beginning with regular visitations of the diocese in the 1330s which seem to have continued for the rest of his episcopate. To the same end he encouraged clerical education by frequently granting dispensations for absence to study. The same mixture of discipline and encouragement was applied to the major religious houses of the diocese. In 1337 he secured the right to disafforest the manor of Cheddar, ending the use of forest law there and earning popular approval in the diocese. During the black death his pastoral care extended to arranging emergency provision for the sick to make confession to the laity where no clergy were available. 
Shrewsbury was a notable benefactor of Wells Cathedral, taking a close interest in it throughout his episcopate and making a visitation of it three times. In 1335-7 he revived the requirement of the chancellor to lecture on theology or canon law, modelling it on the practice at Oxford University. His principal benefactions at Wells were to the minor clergy, enabling the vicars and choristers to live a communal life. The Vicars' Hall, begun in 1348, and probably the Vicars' Close, were built at his expense and at the same time they received a new constitution and endowment. In 1349 the choristers also received an endowment, and in 1354 a house was built for them. Shrewsbury was a keen builder, responsible for the magnificent moat and walls of the bishop's palace in Wells, begun after 1340, and for work at several episcopal manors, some of which the chapter later regarded as unduly extravagant. He increased the revenue of the see by appropriating the rectory of Great Chew to it in 1341. 
As bishop, Shrewsbury was able to repay the earlier generosity of Shrewsbury Abbey by establishing a chantry there in 1345, endowed with the manor of Burton near Condover, Shropshire, and cancelling a debt of $20 in his will. His last years, burdened with ill health, were largely spent at Wiveliscombe where he died on 14 August 1363 aged nearly eighty. He was buried in Wells Cathedral in front of the high altar, beneath an alabaster effigy which can now be seen in the north choir aisle. For some thirty years after his death his tomb was a popular place of veneration. In this respect Shrewsbury takes his place within a wider fourteenth-century tradition of unofficial cults around saintly bishops. 


@@@@@


doc= 23059


Ralph, George Keith (b. 1752, d. in or after 1811), portrait and subject painter, was born in September 1752. He registered as a student at the Royal Academy in 1775 aged '23 last Sept' (Hutchison, 141) and exhibited thirty-five works there between 1778 and 1811 including one of Mr King, master of the ceremonies at Bath (1790). In 1794 he described himself as portrait painter to the duke of Clarence. He also exhibited at the Society of Artists and the British Institution. Although largely based in London, Ralph appears to have obtained considerable employment in the provinces, notably in the eastern counties. Several of his portraits were engraved including one of John Spink, alderman and banker of Bury St Edmunds. The original oil painting is in the town's Guildhall. His work is competent and straightforwardly painted, but lacks distinction. He was living in Covent Garden, London, in 1811, but is not heard of after that. 


@@@@@


doc= 23060


Ralph, James (d. 1762), historian and political writer, was probably born between 1695 and 1710 in or near Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, but may possibly have been born in England. Nothing is known of his parents. By 1724 he was married to Hannah Ogden and had a daughter, Mary, who was born that year. He was living in Philadelphia and worked there as a clerk. An aspiring poet, he belonged to a literary society which included Benjamin Franklin, whom he befriended. Many years later Franklin recalled that Ralph was 'ingenious and shrewd, genteel in his manners, and extremely eloquent; I think I never knew a prettier talker' (Kenny, 219). In 1724, after what Franklin described as a falling-out with his wife's relatives, Ralph abandoned his family and left for London with Franklin. He never returned to America, but corresponded with his daughter, who remained there. 
In December 1724 Ralph arrived in London. Living on money lent to him by Franklin, he set out to find work as an editor, as a copyist, and as an actor, but all without success. He had an affair with a milliner and lived with her for a time. He then moved to Berkshire in search of work, assumed Franklin's name, and found a job teaching at a village school. He wrote to Franklin asking him to look after his mistress in London. Franklin apparently misinterpreted Ralph's intentions and made sexual advances which were rebuffed. This put an end to their friendship and gave Ralph the opportunity to renege on the money he owed Franklin. In 1726 Franklin returned to Philadelphia. 
Ralph now resumed his literary ambitions in London and in 1727 published a book of poetry, 'The Tempest, or, The Terrors of Death'. This was followed by another, 'Night' (1728), which sold well enough to go into a second edition. He now turned to literary polemics, for in 1728 he published an attack on Alexander Pope, 'Sawney, an Heroic Poem Occasion'd by the Dunciad'. In this work of blank verse Ralph defended the Grub Street authors who had been ridiculed by Pope in the 'Dunciad'. He provoked a withering counter-attack in a second edition of the 'Dunciad', in which Pope described him as a 'low writer' ('DNB'). Ralph believed that Pope's attacks turned the publishers against him and that his literary career suffered. At all events his career as a poet was over. 
Ralph is often attributed with 'The Touchstone' (1728), an anonymous work written 'by a Person of some Taste and some Quality' which attacked the 'vitious Taste of the Town' and bemoaned the decline of high comedy. However, a recent alternative attribution is to the translator Robert Samber. About this time Ralph caught the attention of the young Henry Fielding, and wrote the prologue to Fielding's 'Temple Beau' (1730). Thus began a friendship and intermittent collaboration that lasted for more than twenty years. Fielding began managing the Haymarket Theatre in 1736 with Ralph as his assistant. Ralph owned shares in the theatre and advised him on his theatrical productions. 
Ralph's 'Fashionable Lady' was staged at the Goodman's Fields Theatre in April 1730. But he met little success as a playwright. In 1733 he was appointed surveyor of houses for Cambridgeshire, but apparently continued living in London; by the early 1750s, if not before, his home was in Chiswick. Fielding's plays satirized the Walpole ministry and led to the theatrical 'Licensing Act' of 1737, which closed down the Haymarket Theatre and put Ralph in straitened circumstances. As he wrote in a plaintive begging letter to his friend Thomas Birch, 'all my schemes are broken as I feared' (Okie, 166). 
Ralph now turned to political journalism and it was this that finally brought him a degree of financial security. He began writing occasionally for opposition newspapers in the early 1730s, contributing to the 'Weekly Register' and 'Daily Courant'. From 1737 to 1739 he covered parliament for the anti-ministerial 'Universal Spectator'. In 1739 he resumed his collaboration with Fielding as co-editor of a new opposition journal, 'The Champion'. Ralph wrote most of the political essays, attacking the government for its inept handling of the 'war of Jenkins' ear' and for an array of alleged court evils, such as corruption, vice, and standing armies. He continued these broadsides for 'The Champion' until 1744. In 1743 Ralph edited 'The Critical History of the Administration of Sir Robert Walpole', a compilation of anti-ministerial tracts from newspapers and pamphlets. He wrote essays for 'Common Sense' in 1739 and from 1743 to 1745 he and William Guthrie wrote 'Old England, or, The Constitutional Journal', co-sponsored by the earl of Chesterfield and George Bubb Dodington. Dodington became Ralph's patron for most of the next decade. From about 1743 Ralph was his personal secretary and stayed with him occasionally at his villa in Eastbury, Dorset. When Dodington joined the Broadbottom administration in 1744, Ralph was pensioned by the Treasury at $200 per year. Dodington, however, soon looked to rejoin the prince's opposition circle and in 1747 launched a new anti-court journal, 'The Remembrancer', with Ralph as editor. Ralph was the intermediary between Dodington and the prince of Wales in the negotiations that concluded with Dodington rejoining the opposition. Ralph conducted 'The Remembrancer' until the death of Prince Frederick in 1751. 
It was under Dodington's patronage that Ralph wrote his most important work, 'The history of England during the reigns of King William, Queen Anne, and King George I, with an introductory review of the reigns of the royal brothers Charles and James' (1744-6). It was intended as a continuation of William Guthrie's 'History of England'. Ralph's history, published serially in two volumes, contained long transcriptions of documents and ran to over 2000 folio pages in length. It was misleadingly titled because Ralph never, in fact, progressed beyond William's reign. 
Ralph's history sold poorly and won its author few plaudits, but is a work of considerable merit and marked an advance in scholarship over the more popular English history of Paul de Rapin-Thoyras. Ralph examined far more documents than Rapin and used them meticulously. He was the first historian to examine the origins of the revolution of 1688 in detail and to explore its European background. In an age when historical writing was twisted by partisan politics, Ralph wrote from a 'country' viewpoint which allowed him to see through the special pleading of whig and tory historians, whose biases and errors he noted throughout. And Ralph wrote more about economics, in particular the financial revolution of the 1690s, than any previous historian of the period. 
Another impressive work from this period was 'The Other Side of the Question' (1742), Ralph's vivid critique of Sarah Churchill's 'Account of the Conduct of the Dowager Duchess of Marlborough'. The book illustrates Ralph's country whig views. He presents Sarah and, to a lesser extent, her husband as archetypal courtiers, power-hungry self-seekers. Tory stalwarts like Henry Sacheverell fare no better in Ralph's account. In 'Of the Use and Abuse of Parliaments' (2 vols., 1744) Ralph surveyed the history of parliament from the seventeenth century onwards, showing how 'through the craft and perfidy of kings, the degeneracy of mankind, and the extinction of that noble spirit which accompanies liberty', parliaments invariably become corrupt and tyrannical (Okie, 159). 
After Prince Frederick's death in 1751 Ralph joined another opposition faction led by William Beckford and the duke of Bedford, and produced yet another propaganda journal, 'The Protestor'. Ralph's new organ assailed the 'Jewish Naturalization Bill' of 1753 and played a key role in having it repealed. Ralph was pensioned into silence by the Pelham ministry in 1753 at $300 per year. He stopped political pamphleteering but wrote occasional literary reviews for the 'Monthly Review'. In 1758 he published anonymously his most popular and influential work, 'The Case of the Authors by Profession or Trade Stated'. Drawing upon his own experiences as a Grub Street author, he argued that aristocratic patronage of literature had given way in the eighteenth century to a system in which writers were exploited by mercenary booksellers. Ralph's view of publishing in Augustan England became the conventional wisdom in the nineteenth century. His thesis was restated in books and essays by Oliver Goldsmith, Isaac Disraeli, and by Lord Macaulay. 
In the late 1750s Ralph wisely ingratiated himself with the earl of Bute, from whom he received a pension when George III succeeded in 1760. Afflicted with gout, Ralph was about to edit yet another newspaper, this time one which was pro-Bute, when he died in Chiswick on 24 January 1762. 


@@@@@


doc= 23061


Ralston, John (d. 1451/2), bishop of Dunkeld, was the illegitimate son of unknown parents. He is first recorded in 1426 as chaplain and secretary to James I's nephew Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Douglas. He remained the earl's secretary until Douglas's death in 1439. Ralston, apparently educated at St Andrews University, was styled licensed in canon law and was about to obtain the degree of doctor of canon law when elevated to the episcopacy. There was another John Ralston, a notary, alive in the 1440s, and entries in sources about the two men could be confused; but it appears that the future bishop was rector of Douglas, Lanarkshire (in the patronage of the earls of Douglas), by 1429 until 1443, and dean of Dunkeld from late 1445 until he became bishop there by provision on 27 October 1447. He had been consecrated by 31 March 1448. He may have been in Rome in person briefly in 1446. A single reference to him as provost of Bothwell collegiate church, between 1424 and 1430, is thought to be unreliable. 
By 1442 Ralston had begun to appear at the court of James II, possibly as a result of Douglas patronage. He was the king's secretary by January 1443 and occupied that post at least until mid-1448, when he and two others were sent on an embassy first to France, and then to Burgundy, in part to seek a suitable bride for the king. Mary of Gueldres, a kinswoman of the duke of Burgundy, was chosen, and the marriage negotiations were concluded in the spring of 1449. On his return Ralston was briefly king's treasurer, but he was relieved of his duties after the dramatic collapse in September 1449 of the Livingston faction which so dominated court politics in the late 1440s. He may have been connected with the Livingstons, as he had to apply to the king for a remission of rancour. Early in 1450 he resumed his regular appearances as witness to crown charters. Ralston was still alive on 26 October 1451, but he had died by 28 April 1452, when his successor as bishop was provided. He was buried in his cathedral, where he had continued the work of building the nave. 


@@@@@


doc= 23062


Ralston, William Ralston Shedden- (1828-1889), librarian, folklorist, and Russian scholar, was born on 4 April 1828 in York Terrace, Regent's Park, London, the only son of William Patrick Ralston Shedden (1794-1880), merchant of Calcutta, and his wife, Frances Sophia, daughter of William Browne of that city. His grandfather William Ralston Shedden of Roughwood, Ayrshire, had had children from two unions in America, the second of which was confirmed on his deathbed in New York; but the Scottish estate passed none the less to relatives, and Ralston's father (as he afterwards maintained) was brought up ignorant of the facts. The Sheddens retired to England in 1833, settling at Palmyra Square in Brighton, where Ralston spent much of his childhood before being educated to university entrance level by the Revd John Roughton Hogg at Lower Brixham, Devon. Admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1846, he read mathematics, but was drawn to law, and before graduating in 1850 had entered Lincoln's Inn, London. His sensitive, warm-hearted nature was, however, distracted by London's squalor, and he gave himself to church charity work; he also became involved in the Working Men's College, and subsequently observed and commented on poverty in Paris. 
The family's Indian wealth was meanwhile being exhausted by litigation. Shedden's claim to Roughwood was denied by a Scottish court and by the House of Lords, but the 'Legitimacy Declaration Act' encouraged him to try again; insolvent as he now was, his case was brilliantly argued before the probate court in 1860 by his daughter Annabella Jean. Despite the emphatic judgment that Shedden was illegitimate and could not inherit British property, he appealed, and as late as 1869 reverted unsuccessfully to the House of Lords. By contrast his son, who loved and later succoured him, shrank from the notoriety and assumed the surname Ralston; in 1861 he formalized the name as Shedden-Ralston, preparatory to being called to the bar at the Inner Temple. Although he resided there in Fig Tree Court for many years, he never practised law, having already in 1853 joined the department of printed books at the British Museum. By diligent if often tedious work, he rose steadily to reach by 1867 the upper section of the first class of assistants. Slim, about 6 feet 6 inches tall, with receding dark hair above a wistful face and flowing pepper-and-salt beard, he was an imposing but kindly figure; his presence was said to bring sunlight to the darkest room. He moved easily in the intellectual world, and was often at Macmillan's 'tobacco parliaments'; he enjoyed cordial if self-effacing relations with many leading writers, including Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Wilkie Collins, Tennyson, Carlyle, and George Eliot. 
With the encouragement of Anthony Panizzi, Ralston developed a Slavonic speciality. He taught himself Russian to a very high level (by memorizing the pages of a dictionary), though he lamented his hesitancy when speaking it. He began to write about Russia and from the first exhibited his love of the common people, whose rich, lucid language, strong traditions, and unaffected religion he witnessed for himself in 1868 and 1870, when he also became acquainted with prominent linguists and folklorists such as V. I. Dal and A. N. Afanasyev. Among the earliest authors to excite him as translator were Koltsov (the 'Russian Burns'), the racy dramatist Ostrovsky, and the earthy fabulist Krylov. His study 'Krilof and his Fables' (1869) was a landmark in the reception of Russian literature in Britain. As a translator and critic Ralston is, however, associated primarily with Turgenev, with whom he enjoyed a warm and productive friendship. Turgenev gave much practical help and advice, and Ralston enthusiastically championed the novelist in print, facilitated meetings with leading British authors, arranged a grand dinner for him in 1881, and translated -- as 'Liza' -- Turgenev's 'Dvoryanskoye gnezdo' ('A nest of the gentry'; 1869): Turgenev considered this the best translation ever made from any work of his. 
Nicknamed the Russian Don Quixote, Ralston saw his vocation as tilting at British ignorance about Russia. Passionate in both praise and blame, he was constantly truthful and erred only by occasional extravagance. Already by 1875 he had published nearly a hundred items, including three authoritative books, 'The Songs of the Russian People' (1872), 'Russian Folk-Tales' (1873), and 'Early Russian History' (1874). He lectured inimitably on Russian topics at the Royal Institution, at Oxford University, and throughout Britain. However, a crisis now occurred. For some years Ralston had protested that the museum constrained his time and energy, imposed on him unnecessary cataloguing chores, kept him from Slavonic books, and passed him over for promotion. As 'one of the rare just spirits in that academical Dotheboys Hall' (Gosse, 131), he became implicated in attacks on management and in April 1875 resigned his post, ostensibly on grounds of ill health. 
Ralston was now a free agent, but needed to fill his life with work in order to survive. While he could, he did. He promoted Tolstoy's 'War and Peace', translated Lermontov's 'Song of Ivan Vasilyevich', contributed articles to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', wrote numerous reviews, and helped to found the Folklore Society. His regular public story-tellings were extraordinarily popular and led to invitations to Marlborough House and Buckingham Palace. His researches were rewarded by membership of many Russian institutions, including the Geographical Society and the Academy of Sciences. But the lack of a daily routine drove Ralston in on himself and depression set in. He failed to carry through a planned monograph on Russian heroic poetry and a biography of Pushkin, and desisted from writing a general work on Russia, in favour of Mackenzie Wallace. His attempts at travel, to Russia and elsewhere, were generally aborted. He complained of rheumatism, dyspepsia, roaring in the ears, perpetual sleepiness; he perhaps had myalgic encephalomyelitis. Enforced inactivity brought no income, and most of what he did publish was unremunerative; his pension was mean, and he gave generously to friends and to charity. He increasingly shunned society, becoming almost a recluse. 
Ralston no longer cared whether he lived or died: as early as 1882 he spoke of killing himself. In 1887 he nearly set his chimney on fire while burning his papers and diaries; all that survived was a large group of Turgenev's letters, and a few from Tolstoy and some English writers. Relief did sometimes come, as when late in 1888 Ralston became engaged to 26-year-old Annie, daughter of Henry Vizetelly. He hoped to obtain a post in Russia to support her, and placed such capital as he possessed -- some $3000 -- in a trust for their marriage. Precisely at this period, however, he was twice arrested for disorderly behaviour, and his old Cambridge friend A. J. Munby had to intervene on his behalf at Bow Street and with the lunacy commission. Forced to move from his comfortable flat at 8 Alfred Place, Bedford Square, to cramped lodgings nearby at 11 North Crescent, Ralston attempted to control his despair with narcotics. On 6 August 1889 he was found dead, a gutta-percha sheet over his head and a bottle of chloroform in his hand. The coroner returned a verdict of misadventure. Ralston was buried in Brompton cemetery on 12 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 23063


Ram, James (1793-1870), lawyer and legal writer, was born at Berechurch, Essex, where he was baptized on 24 March 1793, the son of James Ram and his wife, Jane. He was indentured to a London firm of solicitors, but later entered Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1817 and proceeded MA in 1823. After making what was then the grand tour between 1818 and 1822, he entered the Inner Temple, where he was called to the bar on 21 November 1823. A pupil of the conveyancer Richard Preston, he practised in London and Ipswich, where he lived in later life. He married Elizabeth Jane (1799/1800-1881), the only daughter of Ralph Willett Adye, army officer and inspector of artillery, and had five sons and three daughters. 
As a legal author Ram obtained a reputation for painstaking research, methodical arrangement, and lucidity of style. He published works on jurisprudence, property, debt, and a father's custodial rights over his children. He died at 22 Silent Street, Ipswich, on 11 August 1870. His son Edward Ram (1843-1918), vicar of St John's, Timberhill, Norwich, was a prominent ritualist clergyman. 


@@@@@


doc= 23064


Robert Ram (d. 1657), Church of England clergyman, was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1611, MA in 1614 (incorporated Cambridge 1615), and was a fellow (1615), and where he was maintained by the income from a prebend in Ferns. After ordination he served first as rector of St James's Church, Colchester, then as minister of Spalding in Lincolnshire. In 1639 he married Anne, daughter of Tyringham Norwood. During the English civil war he came to prominence as a strong supporter of the parliamentary cause. In January 1643 he wrote to the people of the neighbouring town of Croyland condemning their folly in resisting parliament. They responded in March by launching a raid on Spalding, capturing Ram and some other inhabitants. These they deployed as hostages, twice tying Ram to the ramparts of Croyland in an effort to dissuade the attacking parliamentary forces. On 27 April the town was finally taken by Cromwell, and Ram freed after five weeks' imprisonment. Nothing daunted, he became chaplain to Colonel Edward Rossiter's regiment and is next found preaching to the soldiers in March 1646 before Newark, reassuring them that 'Your enemies are Gods enemies' since 'The Lord of Hosts is our 'generalissimo'' (R. Ram, 'A Sermon Preached at Balderton', 1646, 11-12). His most popular work was 'The Souldiers Catechism', published in 1644, which reached its seventh edition by the following year. In it he defended the iconoclasm of the parliamentary soldiers, and attacked the prayer book as a brazen serpent, 'the most abominable idol in the land' (R. Ram, 21-2). In 1684 the 'Catechism' was republished, but this time it was dedicated to Chief Justice Jeffries to serve as a warning of the dangers of those times 'when men were taught rebellion as a principle of religion... to fight against God's anointed' (R. Ram, eighth edn, sig. A1'v'). Theologically, Robert Ram was an orthodox Calvinist, a defender of presbyterianism and of infant baptism, concerned about the excesses of the religious radicals. On leaving the army he returned to Spalding and was buried there on 4 May 1657. 


@@@@@


doc= 23065


Ram, Thomas (1564-1634), Church of Ireland bishop of Ferns and Leighlin, was born at Windsor, the son of Dr Francis Ram (1537-1617) and his wife, Helen. He was educated at Eton College ('c'.1583-1588) and at King's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1588, graduated BA in 1592-3, MA in 1596, and held a fellowship from 1591 to 1601. In 1599 he accompanied the earl of Essex on his ill-fated expedition to Ireland, subsequently becoming chaplain to his successor, Lord Deputy Mountjoy. In July 1600 he acquired the first of his many Irish benefices, the prebend of St John's, attached to Christ Church, Dublin, which he held until 1602. There followed, among others, the deanery of Cork (1601-5), the precentorship of Christ Church, Dublin (1601-34), the vicarage of Balrothery (1604), the deanery of Ferns (1604-26), and the rectory of Wexford (1605-22) and prebend of Fethard (1629-34), both in the diocese of Ferns. Though made bishop of Ferns and Leighlin in 1605 (nominated 6 February, consecrated 2 May), he retained a number of his benefices 'in commendam' because of the poverty of the sees, the result of his sixteenth-century predecessors' habit of leasing valuable lands for low rents and high entry fines. 
One of a number of committed English protestants appointed to Irish bishoprics at the start of the seventeenth century, Ram proved conscientious, residing in Ferns and Leighlin, travelling to Dublin to attend the chapter of Christ Church, and making an annual visitation of his diocese, as well as producing detailed reports for official inquiries in 1612, 1615, and 1622. But efforts to restore episcopal finances and spread protestantism made very slow progress. He began legal proceedings to recover illegally leased lands, and increased the value of Ferns from $66 when he was appointed to $120 by 1622, though it was not until after his death that the firm hand of Lord Deputy Wentworth forced the issue. He built a new episcopal residence at Leighlin, and bequeathed his library for the use of his clergy (it was destroyed in the 1641 rising). He improved the quality of the ministry by attracting local ordinands and educating them at the new University of Dublin (Trinity College), but made little headway with the lay population. In a revealing account written in 1612, he told of his efforts to use his legal powers to make the inhabitants come to church. Though some of the ordinary people confessed privately to him their desire to conform, their social superiors were, he concluded, so firmly committed to Catholicism that, together with the priests, they could ensure that Catholics shunned the established church and its institutions. Thus all those who attended the two protestant schools in his dioceses were warned by one local priest that they and their children risked damnation. Ram joined with most of the other Church of Ireland bishops in 1626 to sign a protest against the proposed toleration of Catholicism, and is recorded in 1631 implementing official policies to close down Catholic mass-houses. He died on 24 November 1634, reportedly of apoplexy, while attending convocation in Dublin, and was buried at Gorey, co. Wexford, in a chapel which he had built on his own estate, Ramsfort. 
Ram founded an enduring dynasty. He had married first Jane Thompson, 'nee' Gilford (or Gifford), with whom he had one son and four daughters, and second, Anne Bowen, with whom he had three sons and one daughter. His eldest son, Thomas, inherited Ramsfort, and one of his descendants, Colonel Abel Ram, was the 'ram of Gorey' who fell foul of Swift in 1728. His second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 23066


Ramadge, Francis Hopkins (1793-1867), physician, was born in Dublin, the eldest son of Thomas Ramadge of that city. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1816 and MB and MA in 1819. He was incorporated on his MB degree at Oxford as a member of Magdalen Hall on 4 May 1821, and proceeded MD on 27 June in the same year. Ramadge was admitted an inceptor candidate of the Royal College of Physicians on 26 June 1820, a candidate on 1 October 1821, and a fellow on 30 September 1822. He was censor in 1825. Ramadge established himself in London, where he became physician to the Central Infirmary and Dispensary, lecturer there on the principles and practice of medicine and chemistry, and senior physician to the infirmary for asthma, consumption, and other diseases of the lungs. On 16 September 1826 he married Elizabeth Batts Bell at St Clement Danes, Westminster. 
Besides contributions to 'The Lancet', 'Medical Times', and 'Notes and Queries', Ramadge wrote 'Consumption Curable' (1834), which later appeared in two further editions and was also published in New York and translated into German and French. He also wrote 'On Asthma and Diseases of the Heart' (1847). He translated R. T. H. Laennec's 'De l'auscultation mediate'; 'Treatise on Mediate Auscultation' (1846) appeared in an edition with Ramadge's own annotations and was seen through the press by Theophilus Herbert. Ramadge died at 12 Clarges Street, Piccadilly, London, on 8 June 1867, leaving a widow, Harriette, presumably his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 23067


Ramage, Craufurd Tait (1803-1878), writer, born at Annefield, near Newhaven, on 10 September 1803, the son of John Ramage of Leith and Elizabeth, 'nee' Lumsdaine. He was educated successively at Wallace Hall Academy, Dumfriesshire, at the Edinburgh high school, and from 1820 at Edinburgh University, where he graduated MA in 1825. While at the university he took private pupils, including Archibald Campbell Tait, afterwards archbishop of Canterbury, with whom he maintained a lifelong friendship. After leaving college Ramage became tutor in the family of Sir Henry Lushington, and spent three years with his pupils in Naples (1825-8), afterwards making a tour of the kingdom of the Two Sicilies between April and June 1828. For thirteen years after his return he was tutor in the family of Thomas Spring-Rice, afterwards Lord Monteagle. He contributed to the 'Quarterly Journal of Education', the 'Penny Cyclopaedia', and the seventh edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. In 1839 he married Mary ('b'. 1821/2, died after 1878), daughter of Robert Paterson of Rock Ferry, Cheshire; they had two sons and three daughters. 
In 1841 Ramage was appointed vice-master of Wallace Hall Academy; on the death of Dr Mundell he succeeded to the rectorship in 1842. He was a justice of the peace for Dumfriesshire from 1848, and in 1852 the University of Glasgow conferred on him the degree of LLD. He died at Wallace Hall on 4 December 1878. 
Ramage published four anthologies, from Greek (1864), Latin (1864), French and Italian (1865), and German and Spanish (1868). He also wrote a 'Defence of the Parochial Schools of Scotland' (1854), defending the established church, 'The Nooks and By-ways of Italy' (1868), a history of Drumlanrig Castle (1876), and 'Bible Echoes in Ancient Classics' (1878), and in addition contributed to 'Notes and Queries'. An abridged edition of 'Nooks and Byeways', published as 'Ramage in South Italy', includes letters written to his mother from Italy between August 1825 and August 1828. 


@@@@@


doc= 23068


Ramberg, Johann Heinrich (1763-1840), painter and printmaker, was born at Hanover on 22 July 1763. His father, who was war secretary of the electorate and a lover of art, encouraged his son's early talent. In 1781 he came to England and was introduced to George III, for whom he made many humorous sketches and caricatures. He is said to have been a pupil of Sir Joshua Reynolds and Francesco Bartolozzi, and in November 1781 he entered the Royal Academy Schools, where he studied with Benjamin West under the special protection of George III. In 1784 he gained a silver medal for drawing from the life. He began to exhibit at the Royal Academy in 1782, when he sent five drawings, two of which -- 'The Embarkment' and 'Good News' -- were engraved. Between 1784 and 1788 he exhibited further historical and genre subjects. Ramberg made three drawings of the exhibition of 1784 (BM) including 'Sir Joshua Reynolds showing the prince the paintings in the exhibition'; this, together with 'The exhibition of the Royal Academy, 1787' and 'Portraits of their majesties and the royal family viewing the exhibition of the Royal Academy, 1788', was engraved in line by P. A. Martini. These works are of interest to historians for their record of exhibitions in the Great Room of the Royal Academy in the late eighteenth century. During the 1780s he gave his addresses as 19 Eaton Street, Pimlico, 85 Newman Street, and then 3 Frith Street, Soho. 
In 1788, with the help of his royal patron, Ramberg visited the Netherlands, and afterwards Germany and Italy, returning to Hanover in 1792, when he was appointed electoral court painter. In 1789 he painted the curtain (destr.) for the court theatre in Hanover, which he himself etched in 1828, and of which sketches are preserved in the British Museum and in the Kupfertischkabinett, Berlin. While in Dresden in 1790-91 he met Goethe and painted, for the decoration of Carlton House, 'Alexander Crossing the Granicus'. His other works include literary and historical subjects for book illustrations such as 'Olivia, Maria, and Malvolio' from 'Twelfth Night', engraved by Thomas Ryder for Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery; 'The Goldfinches' for Macklin's 'British Poets'; 'Public Amusement' and 'Private Amusement', engraved by William Ward; and 'The Departure of Queen Marie-Antoinette and her Family', engraved by J. F. Bolt. He also painted portraits of the princesses Mary, Elizabeth, and Sophia (daughters of George III), and a portrait of Baron Denon, etched by Denon himself. His work as a draughtsman for German almanacs and pocket books extended to more than twenty years, but his best illustrations are those which he himself etched for the narrative cycles 'Reineke Fuchs' and 'Tyll Eulenspiegel', both published in 1826. He became one of the most popular illustrators in Germany and produced drawings for many contemporary writers. He made, from sketches by the Princess Elizabeth, landgravine of Hesse-Homburg, a series of twenty allegorical designs entitled 'Genius, Imagination, Phantasie', which were lithographed by Julius Giere and published at Hanover in 1834. Ramberg died at Hanover on 6 July 1840, and was buried in the Gartenkirchhof. Several studies of his satirical caricatures and book illustrations were published in German in the 1960s, and two exhibitions of his work were held in Hanover in 1973 and 1988-9. 


@@@@@


doc= 23069


Sir Alexander Ramsay of Dalhousie (d. 1342), a highly successful border warrior in the 1330s and early 1340s. Ramsay was heavily involved in eroding the English occupation of southern Scotland and in a series of successful Scottish military operations against the Balliol faction and its English supporters. This included participation in the battle of Culblean in Aberdeenshire in 1335, an encounter that saw Edward Balliol's chief northern supporter, David Strathbogie, earl of Atholl, defeated and killed. Among many actions in the more familiar terrain of the eastern borders Ramsay's most important intervention was perhaps his relief by sea of the besieged garrison of Dunbar Castle in 1338, an achievement vital in ensuring the successful defence of an important Scottish border stronghold. These high-profile incidents are in a sense untypical, though, of Ramsay's military career. His regular mode of operation was as a guerrilla leader, continually harassing the English presence in southern Scotland with a relatively small armed retinue, which at one time had its base in a network of fortified caves. 
One reward for Ramsay's military success was the renown of being regarded, according to Scottish accounts, as a paragon of chivalry. A genuine attachment to the chivalric ethos is certainly suggested by the jousts in which he led the Scots against a party of English knights under Henry of Grosmont, the future duke of Lancaster, at Berwick early in 1342, in which four of the participants were killed. But Ramsay, initially a relatively minor Lothian laird, also gained rewards more tangible than high contemporary esteem. In 1340 he was made warden of the east march, confirming his status as the chief war leader of the region. In 1342, moreover, he captured the powerful fortress of Roxburgh from the English. Now in possession of the castle that dominated the area, Ramsay was made sheriff of Teviotdale by David II, an appointment which recognized the extension of Ramsay's influence into the central borders. These developments, though, marked an encroachment on the territorial interests of the other greatly successful Scottish border warlord of the era, Sir William Douglas of Liddesdale. At the height of his power Ramsay was seized by Douglas at Hawick in the central borders in June 1342, removed to the castle of Hermitage in Liddesdale, and starved to death. Ramsay's demise was not lightly accepted by his followers: in 1344 the Scottish parliament was still trying to prevent the Ramsay kindred from seeking revenge for the murder. The Dalhousie Ramsays would never again reach the heights of status that Sir Alexander had achieved. His illustrious career did, though, provide an imposing example of military endeavour and local leadership for his peers and future generations of the family. Ramsays were frequently involved in Anglo-Scottish warfare from Sir Alexander's time onwards, and as important aristocrats of the region they directed their ecclesiastical patronage firmly towards the Cistercian house of Newbattle, Edinburghshire. 
It was a member of a Fife-based cadet branch of the family, 


@@@@@


doc= 23070


Sir Alexander Ramsay of Dalhousie (d. 1402) fought at the battle of Otterburn in 1388; his seat of Dalhousie was targeted during the invasion of Scotland by Henry IV in 1400; and he fought, along with two other Ramsays, and was killed at Homildon Hill on 14 September 1402. His grandson, also 


@@@@@


doc= 23071


Sir Alexander Ramsay of Dalhousie (d. in or before 1465), who was knighted at James I's coronation in 1424, was one commander of a force which defeated a major English raid at Piperdean in 1435, and was appointed to the border office of conservitor of the truce in 1451. The experience of the Ramsay family was ultimately one of moderate success amid the opportunities and dangers of regular warfare in lowland Scotland. A family tradition of militarism and local leadership developed, but the rewards of this rarely seem to have been outstanding after the mid-fourteenth century. Ramsay bellicosity can be seen as very much in the mainstream of European aristocratic behaviour, albeit tinged with the specifically Scottish edge of entrenched opposition to the English enemy. Unsurprisingly, a later Alexander Ramsay of Dalhousie was killed at Flodden in 1513. 


@@@@@


doc= 23072


Ramsay, Allan (1684-1758), poet, was born on 15 October 1684 at Leadhills, in Crawfordmuir parish, Lanarkshire, the son of John Ramsay ('c'.1660-1685), factor to the Hope estate and superintendent of its lead mines, and the probably Scots-born Alice (died 1700), daughter of Allan Bower, gentleman and mineralogist of Derbyshire. Ramsay has long been alleged to be a descendant of the Douglas family and a relative of the Ramsays of Dalhousie; there is little evidence for this, and even his status as the great-great-grandson of Ramsay, laird of Cockpen, is doubtful and may be a result of the search by one of his sons, the younger Allan Ramsay, for illustrious forebears. 
After the early death of his father, who died in debt, Ramsay was brought up by his mother and her second husband, Andrew Crichton, a local bonnet laird. He was possibly educated for at least some of the time up to the age of fifteen at Crawfordmuir parish school, and helped his stepfather on his farm. In his youth he was captivated by the folklore, poetry, and popular history of the Scottish past. According to Allan Ramsay the younger, Crichton opposed Ramsay's becoming a painter, and instead sent him into trade: in later life Ramsay clearly retained an interest in the visual and plastic arts, and also 'organized several sales of paintings and other works of art' (Brown, 12). Following his mother's death, about January 1701 Ramsay went to be apprenticed (as his brother Robert had been in 1695) to a wigmaker in Edinburgh, receiving back his indentures in either 1707 or 1709, after which he opened his own business (by tradition in the Grassmarket, though no firm evidence for this appears to exist). Ramsay was admitted a burgess of Edinburgh on 19 July 1710. In 1711 he moved to a shop trading under the sign of the Mercury; this was possibly in the north parish, where he was living in 1712-13. By 1714 he had moved to the north-east parish, but it is not until 1718 that there is firm evidence that Ramsay was at the Niddrie's Wynd address which is sometimes projected back into earlier years. 
Depressed by what he regarded as the treachery of the Union, Ramsay threw himself for some years into the study of literature. William Hamilton of Gilbertfield, the translator of Blin Hary's patriotic 'Wallace', by his poem 'The Dying Words of Bonnie Heck' (printed in the first volume of Watson's 'Choice Collection' of 1706) was said to have 'awakened within' Ramsay 'the desire to write in the dialect of his own country' (Smeaton, 37). By 1711 Ramsay was writing in the vernacular, and his 'Elegy on Maggy Johnston' dates from this time. 
On 14 December 1712 Ramsay married Christian Ross (died 1743), daughter of Robert Ross (died 1699/1703), a writer, and his wife, Elizabeth Archibald. They had several children: Allan Ramsay (1713-1784), who became a painter; Susanna ('b'. 1714), who was possibly later known as Anne (or there may have been a separate daughter of that name born between 1719 and 1724); Niell ('b'. 1715), Robert ('b'. 1716), Janet, Catherine, and Agnes ('b'. 1725); and another daughter, Christy, who died in infancy, probably in the 1720s. It appears that besides the eldest son only Janet, Anne, and Catherine survived into adulthood, since they were left their father's shop. 
Shortly before his marriage Ramsay had become one of the original members of the Easy Club, founded on 12 May 1712. The club was a quasi-Jacobite grouping whose 'direct precursor' (Shuttleton, 52) was to be found among high-tory groups such as the Greppa, who met in Mistress Henderson's howff (tavern) after 1696; Archibald Pitcairne's Greppa Club was portrayed as Hades by his whig opponents, and Ramsay may have been taunting them in their own coin when his elegy on Pitcairne drew on Aeneas's journey there. 
The Easy Club was typical of the convivial Scottish urban clubs of the eighteenth century which did so much to promote the Scottish Enlightenment. Such clubs were to some extent born out of social necessity, since there was little available living space for socializing at home in the huge twelve- or sixteen-storey lands within the narrow boundaries of the city wall. The club began with six members, and never had more than twelve. The idea that important figures such as Archibald Pitcairne, Patrick Abercrombie, and Thomas Ruddiman were members of the club has been largely disproved, but Ramsay certainly formed connections with Ruddiman, and in all probability Pitcairne, in these years. Ramsay's Latin (and quite possibly his French) probably benefited more from Ruddiman's circle than from his own schooling. 
Pitcairne and Ramsay alike were fond of John Steill's tavern, the Cross Keys, which was to host Edinburgh's Musick Club. The subsequent Musical Society (supported by Ramsay) had Jacobite members and, according to at least one authority, sang Jacobite songs. Steill later subscribed to Ramsay's 1721 and 1728 volumes. The club was soon Ramsay's literary patron, on 2 February 1715 appointing him its poet laureate. Each member of the club took a fictitious name, usually that of a famous man of letters or literary mode: Ramsay first chose Isaac Bickerstaff. However, after the death of Pitcairne on 20 October 1713 and in common with other members of the club, he selected a Scots name, and from the meeting of 5 November onwards was known as Gavin Douglas. The 'Aeneid', which Douglas had translated into Scots and which had been published by Ruddiman and Robert Freebairn in 1710, was a widely recognized source of Jacobite code, and Ramsay drew on it freely in his elegy on Pitcairne, which was published in 1713 bearing the epigraph: '
Sum yonder bene for reddy Gold in Hand 

Sald and betrasit thare native Realme and Land. 

' This refers to a passage from 'Aeneid', vi, and is here a coded reference to the Union. 
The club, which addressed an anti-Union manifesto to George I on 9 February 1715 (there is no evidence it was ever sent), dissolved at about the time of the Jacobite rising of that year, by which time Ramsay's career as a poet was taking off. His early work was traditionally thought to have been published in the broadside format used by the chapmen and balladeers of popular culture, and one early survivor in this format was: 'A Scheme and Type of the Great and Terrible Eclipse of the Sun', sold by James Watson near the Luckenbooths for 1died in 1715. Subsequently Ramsay continued to publish in broadside form alongside more substantial publications. 
In 1716-18 Ramsay completed the second and third cantos of the unfinished medieval poem 'Christ's Kirk on the Green', which was published first in two and then in three cantos in the latter year: by 1723 this had reached a fifth edition. Appointed constable in 1716, he received a commission in 1718 in the local militia. By then he had also begun working as a bookseller (as well as a dealer in prints, through which he became acquainted with Hogarth) and issuing his own work, including 'Scots Songs' (1718), in which some compositions are probably adaptations rather than original pieces, following a practice which became standard in the Scottish vernacular revival. Figures such as William Hamilton of Gilbertfield and Sir William Scott of Thirlestane congratulated the poet on his developing reputation. By 1719 Ramsay was complaining to the town council that his work was being pirated in London, and his status was further exemplified in the list of subscribers (among them Alexander Pope, Richard Steele, John Gay, and John Arbuthnot, as well as heavyweight Jacobites such as David Erskine of Dun and George Lockhart of Carnwath) to his quarto volume of 'Poems' (1721), printed by Ruddiman, which followed an earlier gathering of 1720. The book realized 400 guineas for its author. By the early 1720s Ramsay had abandoned wigmaking in favour of bookselling, which also mushroomed not only into dealing in prints and engravings but also into the arrangement of auction sales in books, medals, jewellery, and silver. Some time before 1720 Ramsay had also become a member of the Whinbush Club (for Clydesdale men living in Edinburgh). Notwithstanding his networking and success in business, in 1722 he also pressed the duke of Roxburghe to help him secure a pension, 'the plea being that by writing Scots verse he is performing a national service' (Martin, 31). 
In the same year Ramsay moved his shop near Edinburgh Cross, and produced his 'Fables and Tales' and 'A Tale of Three Bonnets', a satire on the Union. His 'Fair Assembly' (1723) attacked presbyterian attitudes to dancing, and following his admission to the Royal Company of Archers on 13 July 1724 he wrote several poems in praise of the royal company, at this time a nest of closet Jacobites, urging them to 'assert your King and Country's Cause' and to 'break... each disgraceful Link' of the chain which bound Scotland ('Works', 6.25, 26, 28). The success of his 'Tea-Table Miscellany: a Collection of Scots Songs', published in three volumes in 1723, 1726, and 1727, set the seal on his reputation; a fourth volume appeared in 1737, by which time the original set had gone through ten editions. The 'Miscellany' included work by Jacobites such as Hamilton of Bangour and Robertson of Struan, as well as traditional ballads and work by seventeenth-century writers, with pieces adapted or written by Ramsay himself; its format of setting new words to old airs was already established Jacobite practice. The year after the first volume appeared, Ramsay drew on the Bannatyne manuscripts, to which he had gained access through the good offices of William Carmichael, to publish 'The Ever Green: being a Collection of Scots Poems, Wrote by the Ingenious before 1600' (1724). As a subsequent editor, Lord Hailes, pointed out, Ramsay was anything but scrupulous, freely altering his material for an eighteenth-century audience, in particular changing versification and spelling; his work does, however, predate later developments in scholarly editing. He altered William Dunbar's 'Lament for the Makaris' in order to include a prophecy of himself, and included poems of modern composition. Of these, one -- 'The Vision' -- purported to be a medieval dream vision in which the narrator saw Scotland restored through the wars of independence; in fact it was yet another piece of anti-Union Jacobitism by Ramsay himself. 
Ramsay's pastoral dialogues -- 'Patie and Roger' (1720) and 'Jenny and Meggy' (1723) -- proved popular, and leading figures in Edinburgh society suggested that he write a longer drama. In 'The Gentle Shepherd' (1725), a descendant of Gay's 'Shepherd's Week' of 1714, Ramsay suggestively uses the pastoral form in a celebration of the revitalizing effects wrought by the return of the royalist exile Sir William Worthy, a thin disguise for James Stuart. The drama, which aimed to move classical patriotism into a Scottish landscape setting, was enormously successful, feeding Ramsay's reputation in England as well as north of the border. Following the appearance of Gay's 'Beggar's Opera' in 1728, Ramsay's play was converted into a ballad opera at the instigation of the pupils of Haddington grammar school. In this guise it remained popular into the early nineteenth century; the play was performed at least 47 times in Scotland, 101 times in England, and 5 times in the United States before 1837. 
The success of 'The Gentle Shepherd' enabled Ramsay to flit in 1725-6 to the Luckenbooths, in the very centre of the High Street, with a fine view over Edinburgh Cross, the central afternoon rendezvous of society in the capital. Here he changed his sign to 'Hawthornden's and Ben Johnson's ['sic'] Heads' (Martin, 31). In his new premises Ramsay (probably in 1725) opened a circulating library, the first in Britain, though it is not clear whether it directly influenced the opening of the circulating libraries in Bristol, Birmingham, and London which followed; its contents were unsurprisingly condemned by Robert Wodrow. In 1726 Ramsay was deemed respectable enough to have his own pew in the Tron Kirk, and soon his poetic output had increased to the point that he was able to issue the third volume of the 'Miscellany' and 'A Collection of Thirty Fables' (1730). Thereafter he was content to prepare new editions and undertake editorial work such as his 1737 collection, 'Scots Proverbs'. Although he wrote poetry, it was not for market; indeed, Ramsay opined that he would wish to destroy half his printed works, so that the other half would gain in value by their rarity. His fame was now growing apace, and by the 1730s he was the favourite of many of the great Scottish families. His reputation was also strong south of the border: Gay and Steele were likely visitors, and Ramsay was well known in London. In Dublin in 1727 'a broadside elegy... was hawked through the streets' on the false rumour of his death (Martin, 125). 
Presbyterian opposition to his circulating library became increasingly manifest after Ramsay added to it a number of contemporary French plays in translation in 1736. When he also conceived the idea of developing a theatre in Edinburgh, opposition grew further. Ramsay, who wrote prologues, epilogues, and a masque, as well as publishing several editions of plays by other hands, was an enthusiast for the stage: in 1727-8 he had already 'defended the idea of staging plays in Edinburgh' (Murphy), and in 1733-5 he had managed the 'Edinburgh Company of Comedians at the Tailors' Hall' (ibid.). The theatre in Carrubber's Close was built in 1735-6 and opened on 8 November 1736, with annual tickets at 30's'. or 2 guineas. It staged 'The Recruiting Officer' on its first night, and it was also used for popular entertainments such as rope dancing. Unfortunately for Ramsay the 1737 statute of 10 Geo. II (passed in response to Henry Fielding's attacks on Walpole), banning stage plays outside London or Westminster except during the king's residence, was eagerly implemented by the local authority with clerical encouragement. Ramsay fought closure of his theatre until 1739 (on 27 February a number of his actors were fined $50 by the court of session). He was left with significant debts and had to sell the wood furnishings, and probably scenery and costumes too; none the less, he was later probably instrumental in the development of the Canongate Concert Hall, which opened in 1747 on land owned by Richard Cooper, a friend and collaborator. Ramsay's defence of a domestic Scottish theatre was matched by his interest in retaining native artistic talent in Scotland. He had also opened in 1729 the Edinburgh Academy of St Luke, where his son was a student (possibly under Ramsay's friend John Smibert) before it closed about five years later. In these areas Ramsay was thoroughly aware of the threat the metropolis posed to an indigenous Scottish culture. 
In 1733 Ramsay bought some ground on the Castlehill, overlooking the Nor' Loch, and there built a house: the Goose Pie, constructed in the style of the Octagon at Twickenham (itself designed by the Jacobite architect James Gibbs for the secretary of state for Scotland), in a place still called Ramsay Garden, close up against Edinburgh Castle. As the inscription of 1734 shows, it was conceived as an explicitly Horatian 'House of the muses' of poetry and painting (Brown, 23). As this suggests, the house was shared by Ramsay and his son Allan, who took over its ownership in 1741 after Ramsay had retired from active business (his town house and shop having been put up for sale in the 'Caledonian Mercury' in early 1739). In semi-retirement Ramsay lived in a kind of Horatian 'rus in urbe', though not in domestic felicity, for on 28 March 1743 his wife died. He did not fully retire from his business until 1755, though he left it largely in the hands of others. In 1745 his fame, central residence, and political opinions made him a prime focus for Jacobite interest during Charles Edward Stuart's occupation of Edinburgh. However, it has been claimed that Ramsay eluded disturbance by going to stay with his friend Sir John Clerk of Penicuik, where he experienced a serious indisposition which kept him out of town. The Jacobite army nevertheless used his house as a vantage point for firing on the castle garrison. Despite the poet's non-involvement at a time of risk, his nationalist work 'The Vision' was republished in a separate edition in 1748, when there was considerable Jacobite unrest in Edinburgh. 
Ramsay's health began to fail in the 1750s, scurvy in his gums affecting his jaw and as a result his speech. He died on 7 January 1758, and was buried two days later in Greyfriars kirkyard. 
Ramsay was an early avatar of the primitivists and folklorists of the 1760s and thereafter, who wrote and collected at a time when it may yet have seemed possible to him that the preservation and defence of the culture of his native land might serve a political purpose rather than a cultural or literary one. Deeply interested in the visual arts, the theatre, and Scotland's historic literature, he sought to preserve the country's status as a cultural centre. It was Ramsay who helped a distinctive Scottish literature to survive by yoking the Jacobitical discourse of heroic valour to the poetic productions of the Scottish past, and through identifying the folk vernacular with the idea of a national literature in the present. 
Ramsay was, as he put it himself, 'A black-a-vic'd, snod, dapper fellow... With phiz of a Morocco cut', whose 'tripping gait... earned for him the sobriquet of Denty Allan' (Smeaton, 13); later, he put on more weight than this picture suggests. He was regarded as amiable and kind to children: 'from pure kindness to the young, he would help to make dolls for them, and cradles wherein to place these little effigies' (Smeaton, 113). Canny in business, and in person short, fat, friendly, kind, hospitable, and vain, he was popular with his contemporaries. His achievement, which remains both historic and underestimated, was considerably more than the sum of its parts. 
The best bibliography of Ramsay's works (of which 143 original and subsequent editions were published in his lifetime alone) is Burns Martin's 1931 list in 'The Works of Allan Ramsay', edited by Kinghorn and Law (vol. 6), which was updated in 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 23073


Ramsay, Allan, of Kinkell (1713-1784), portrait painter, was born in Edinburgh, in the parish of New Kirk, on 2 October 1713, the first of at least five surviving children of the Scottish poet and bookseller Allan Ramsay (1684-1758) and his wife, Christian Ross (died 1743). 
Ramsay grew up surrounded by books and from 1726 he attended the Edinburgh high school, where he acquired a good knowledge of Latin and French. To these would be added eventually Greek, Italian, and German. He was drawing 'since he was a dozen years old' (Ramsay sen. to John Smibert, 10 May 1736, Brown, 'Ramsay's rise', 221) and before he was sixteen he drew a most accomplished head of his father (Scot. NPG) which was later engraved as the frontispiece for subsequent editions of his father's 'Poems'. In 1729 he enrolled at the new (but short-lived) artists' Academy of St Luke in Edinburgh and by July 1732 he was in London studying under Hans Hysing. Although he had left by September 1733, Ramsay learned much of the painting of drapery and the use of gesture from his master. 
Between 1732 and 1736 Ramsay was practising as a portrait painter in Edinburgh and of the few pictures which may now be identified from this period, 'Kitty Hall of Dunglass, later Mrs Hamilton' (City Art Centre, Edinburgh) shows a lively professional competence. Ramsay benefited considerably from his father's connections. He met the virtuoso Sir John Clerk of Penicuik, who commissioned copies from him, and in 1733 and 1734 assisted with the design of the remarkable octagonal Guse-Pye (or Goose Pie) house (intended for his father's retirement, but transferred to his son in 1741), at the top of Castlehill in Edinburgh. In 1735 his father was soliciting the help of the provost of Edinburgh to send his son, now painting 'like a Raphael' (Ramsay sen. to John Smibert, 10 May 1736, Brown, 'Ramsay's rise', 221), to Italy to further his studies. Sir Peter Halkett Wedderburn of Gosford and Pitfirrane and his son Peter put up 2000 merks and Sir John Clerk supplied introductions to Dr Richard Mead and Dr Alexander Gordon in London who, in turn, gave further introductions and advice. By May 1736 Ramsay was ready to depart, accompanied by Alexander Cunyngham (1703-1785) (later Sir Alexander Dick, third baronet, of Prestonfield), a cultured and good-humoured Scottish physician of repute. They had resolved to speak only Italian in Italy 'as we had been well founded in it before we left Edinburgh' (Cunyngham's diary, Forbes, 99). 
Ramsay and Cunyngham were in Paris in July, when they met Cardinal de Polignac and the collector P.-J. Mariette, and proceeded south to Lyons and Marseilles in September. After a rough sea voyage from Genoa they arrived in Leghorn on 1 October. They spent three weeks in Florence, where Dr Mead had provided an introduction to the grand duke's physician and Ramsay was able to copy some of the antiquities in the ducal galleries. On 26 October they finally arrived in Rome and took lodgings on the piazza di Spagna. For three weeks they 'did little else than scamper about every day all over the streets of the City of Rome' (Cunyngham's diary, 15 Nov 1736, Forbes, 111). They met many of the Jacobite exiles and were introduced to the Pretender (James Stuart) and his exiled court; on 31 December they attended the birthday celebrations for Charles Edward Stuart, the Young Pretender, and in January 1737 they were admitted to the masonic lodge in the strada Paolina, whose membership was principally confined to Stuart sympathizers. Such conduct was, it appears, youthful extravagance, for both Ramsay and Cunyngham became staunch Hanoverians. 
Ramsay was more serious concerning his professional advancement. He had initially been disappointed by Raphael's 'Stanze' in the Vatican (an experience later shared by Reynolds), but he diligently pursued his studies under Francesco Imperiali and at the French Academy. After Cunyngham left Rome in March 1737, Ramsay visited Naples, where he studied briefly under the ageing Francesco Solimena, who was impressed with the portrait drawings he made of British travellers. In October he returned to Rome to stay a further six months, during which he bought, on commission from Dr Mead, a volume of seventeenth-century drawings after the antique by Pietro Santo Bartoli (probably that now in Glasgow University Library). In April 1738, accompanied by the Anglo-Italian Samuel Torriano (died 1785), he set out north, passing through Venice, Parma, Milan, and Turin. Torriano left him at Marseilles and Ramsay arrived back in England in June 1738. Only one painting can now be associated with this first visit to Italy, the remarkable portrait of Torriano painted in Rome in 1738 (priv. coll.), which suggests Ramsay had thoroughly absorbed much of the Italian baroque convention. 
By August 1738 Ramsay had taken apartments in the Great Piazza in Covent Garden, and had begun his London practice as a portrait painter. He soon achieved eminence within that crowded profession, due not only to his technical competence but also to his social and intellectual accomplishments. Dr Mead received him into the privileged circle of his dining club, and in 1740 Ramsay published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' descriptions of the recently discovered frescoes at Herculaneum, translated from the Italian of Camillo Paderni, who had been his fellow pupil under Imperiali in Rome. In 1743 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. Meanwhile in December 1738 Alexander Gordon ventured to suggest that young Ramsay was 'one of the first rate portrait painters in London, nay I may say Europe' (Gordon to Sir John Clerk, 7 Dec 1738, Smart, 'Ramsay: Painter', 42). Within a year he had made his mark in society with a series of imposing whole-length portraits: the second duke of Argyll, the duke of Buccleuch, the lord chancellor, the first earl of Hardwicke, and Rachel and Charles Hamilton, the children of Lord Binning, younger brother of Lord Haddington (all in priv. colls.). He had also married in 1739 Anne Bayne, the daughter of a professor of Scots law at Edinburgh, Alexander Bayne of Rires (c.1684-1737), and Mary Carstairs (1695?-1759); they had three children who did not survive childhood and it was in giving birth to the last, on 4 February 1743, that the first Mrs Ramsay died. 
In the course of the 1740s Ramsay laid the foundation of his considerable fortune. He maintained a highly practical attitude to his profession, working extremely hard and choosing his moments for self-advertisement. He was always confident of success, telling Cunyngham in 1740 that he had put the visiting French and Italian painters (J. B. Van Loo, Andrea Soldi, and Carlo Rusca) to flight and now himself played 'the first fiddle' (Ramsay to Cunyngham, 10 April 1740, Forbes, 142). A self-portrait of this time (NPG) illustrates this self-belief, with its clear gaze and Italianate stylishness. A constant flow of commissions led him to employ a drapery painter, Joseph van Aken 
(or van Haeken; 'c'.1699-1749)
, whose expert services he shared principally with Thomas Hudson, his only serious English rival. While this practice at times resulted in a certain monotony, particularly with modest half lengths, it enabled Ramsay to maintain an extraordinary level of production. From this first decade 300 portraits survive, more than half his total output. The decade closed, as it had begun, with outstanding whole-length portraits, three of which were destined for semi-public display. In 1747, following the example of Hogarth, he presented to Thomas Coram's Foundling Hospital in London a portrait of his patron Dr Mead; in 1748 he gave to the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary a whole length of the second earl of Hopetoun, and in 1749 he painted a dramatic portrait of the third duke of Argyll for the Glasgow city council. All three portraits remain 'in situ'. A fourth imposing whole length, of the twenty-second chief of MacLeod painted in 1747 to 1748, in which the pose of the 'Apollo Belvedere' is disguised with check trews, was dispatched to Dunvegan Castle on the Isle of Skye. 
Ramsay never forgot Scotland and three visits he made between 1745 and 1748 may serve to chart his social progress. He was in Edinburgh when the Young Pretender entered on 16 September 1745 and when the Guse-Pye house was briefly threatened as a site of strategic importance; but during this visit of perhaps three months he displayed a practical tolerance towards his sitters, who included the wife of the solicitor-general, Mrs Robert Dundas, and Lord and Lady Ogilvy, the most enthusiastic Jacobites (all in priv. colls.). It was on this visit to Edinburgh that Ramsay also painted Charles Edward, the Young Pretender, most probably in October 1745. The portrait, which is in the collection of the earl of Wemyss, was categorically identified as a likeness of Charles in 2014. The only known likeness of the Young Pretender made while he was in Britain, it was engraved by Robert Strange and became an important image of Jacobite propaganda in 1745-6. Ramsay was next in Scotland in the late summer of 1747, staying until January 1748, during which time he bought a small estate in Fife, becoming known as a laird, Allan Ramsay of Kinkell. In the autumn of 1748 he spent three weeks at Inveraray Castle as the guest of the third duke of Argyll, 'the king of Scotland'. 
In July 1749 Ramsay and Hudson acted as pallbearers at van Aken's funeral. While the effect of his passing should not be exaggerated, the next five years saw pronounced changes in Ramsay's art and his emergence as a political essayist. He also married a second time, in Edinburgh on 1 March 1752, Margaret Lindsay (died 1782), daughter of Sir Alexander Lindsay of Evelick, a kinsman of the earl of Balcarres, and his wife, born Amelia Murray, daughter of the fifth Viscount Stormont and sister of William Murray, who became the celebrated Lord Mansfield. They married without the consent of her parents who, despite the approval of Lord Balcarres, who told Ramsay he was 'very glad to hear you have got my fair cousin' (Balcarres to Ramsay, 12 March 1752, Smart, 'Ramsay: Painter', 95), remained opposed to the match. Ramsay was already maintaining a daughter from his previous marriage and helping his two surviving sisters, but he assured Sir Alexander that he could furnish his wife with an annual income of $100 which would grow 'as my affairs increase, and I thank God, they are in a way of increasing'; he had no motive for marriage 'but my love for your Daughter, who, I am sensible, is entitled to much more than ever I shall have to bestow upon her' (Ramsay to Lindsay, 31 March 1752, Smart, 'Ramsay: Painter', 96 n. 10). There were three surviving children from their long and happy marriage, Amelia (1755-1813), Charlotte (1758-1818?), and John (1768-1845). 
The Ramsays were in London until the end of 1753 when they moved to Edinburgh until June 1754. Ramsay's portraiture now assumed a new informality, approaching Hogarth's naturalism, but also much affected by the contemporary French manner. When he painted the Wemyss sisters, Lady Helen and Lady Walpole, in 1753 (both priv. coll.), Ramsay remarked that 'les joues de My Lady Nelly Wemyss parlent Francois' (Smart, 'Ramsay: Painter', 110). Among other outstanding works from this time are 'Thomas Lamb', of 1753 (National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh), and 'Hew Dalrymple, Lord Drummore', of 1754 (Scot. NPG). David Hume also sat to him in Edinburgh in 1754 (priv. coll.), the portrait marking a friendship based on mutual intellectual respect. In 1754 Ramsay, Hume, and Adam Smith founded in Edinburgh an exclusive debating club, the Select Society. It first met on 22 May, with Hume as treasurer, and the rules laid down that the society could debate any subject 'except such as regard Revealed Religion, or which may give occasion to vent any Principles of Jacobitism' ('Rules and orders of the Select Society', MS, NL Scot.). At this time Ramsay was advising Hume on the first volume of his 'History of England' (published in 1754), particularly on his assessment of Shakespeare. He was himself already beginning to publish essays which would continue to appear as occasional and anonymous pamphlets throughout the rest of his life. 
In 1753 there had appeared 'On Ridicule' and 'Concerning the Affair of Elizabeth Canning'. The former, concerning the use of ridicule as a test of truth, Ramsay advertised as 'tending to show the usefulness, and necessity of experimental reasoning in philological and moral enquiries'; while excusing himself as 'one whose necessary studies have been of a nature little connected with deep erudition', Ramsay reminded his readers that 'printing was discovered by a soldier, and gunpowder by a monk' (Smart, 'Ramsay: Painter', 98). 'Elizabeth Canning' defended one Mary Squires against a sentence of death passed at the Old Bailey on evidence supplied by Elizabeth Canning, and it contained an impressive display of logic involving a discussion of the words 'improbability' and 'impossibility', much in the manner of Hume. The prisoner was afterwards released. Ramsay's pamphlet was to come to the notice of Voltaire, who was pleased to describe the author as a 'philosophe'. In 1754 there appeared as 'The Investigator: Number CCXXI' (a whimsical statistic) the 'Essay on the Naturalization of Foreigners', advocating that 'every man who lived in England would be an Englishman to all intents and purposes'. 
In 1755 (when Ramsay was already in Italy) 'The Investigator: Number CCXXII' (a further whimsy) published the most important of his writings, 'A Dialogue on Taste'. It appeared two years after Hogarth's 'Analysis of Beauty', and was an altogether more disciplined performance. Ramsay described how fashion arose from the pleasures of the rich and powerful; how the eye is frequently pleased by what is 'the reverse of consistency' -- as the darkening of the principal apartments of the new Mansion House in London 'by clapping before the windows stately pillars which support nothing or, which is much the same, nothing of any use'; on the other hand the 'vastly natural' quality of a portrait by Quentin de La Tour, a country house view by Lambert, or Hogarth's 'March to Finchley' was appreciated by 'the lowest and most illiterate of the people'; he maintained the superiority of Greek architecture over the Roman (the Romans being mischievously described as 'a gang of meer plunderers, sprung from those who had been, but a little while before their conquest of Greece, naked thieves and runaway slaves') and of Gothic architecture over contrived post-Renaissance classicism (which was in effect a misapplication of Greek principles). In April or May 1755 Hume told Ramsay that his essay 'has met with a very good reception from the wits and the critics... they told me it was very entertaining, and seemed very reasonable' ('The Letters of David Hume', ed. J. Y. T. Greig, 1932, 1.221). Horace Walpole soon noticed Ramsay as 'a very agreeable writer' with 'a great deal of genuine wit and a very just manner of reasoning' (Walpole to Sir David Dalrymple, 25 Feb 1759, 'Horace Walpole's Correspondence', ed. W. S. Lewis, 1951, 15.47). Hogarth amicably announced that purchasers of his own 'Analysis of Beauty' would be given copies of 'A Dialogue on Taste', 'written by A.R., a friend of Mr Hogarth and eminent portrait painter now at Rome' (Smart, 'Ramsay: Painter', 101). 
Ramsay, accompanied by his wife and sister Catherine, had left London in July 1754 and reached Italy in October. As on his previous visit to Italy, Ramsay spent two months in Florence, copying in the ducal galleries, before arriving in Rome in December. He took rooms on the Viminale Hill, 'to seclude myself a good deal from the English travellers without falling out with any of them, and to preserve the greater part of my time for painting, drawing and reading' (Fleming, 147). He held weekly 'conversazioni' for British visitors and attended those given by the young and ambitious Robert Adam, who considered the Ramsays worthy company 'as Mrs Ramsay is of so good a family and Mumpy himself so rich' besides being 'generally known and regarded' (Fleming, 121, 174). Ramsay and Adam were quickly familiar with the Abbe Peter Grant, the Roman agent of the Scottish Catholic mission far better known for his unctuous attendance on wealthy tourists, and Robert Wood, the renowned eastern traveller then accompanying the duke of Bridgewater in Rome. Together they formed an unofficial Caledonian Club, gossiping in 'ain Mither tongue' (Fleming, 171). 
Ramsay painted Robert Wood (NPG) and General John Burgoyne (priv. coll.), while the portrait of his wife holding a parasol (priv. coll.) must have been painted soon after the birth of their first child, Amelia, in March 1755. Ramsay also copied paintings by Domenichino and Batoni (whom he came to know well), and sketched Roman antiquities with the French artists Clerisseau and Pecheux. He made a considerable number of life studies (National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh) at the French Academy which prompted Adam to observe that Ramsay 'knew less about the proportions of the human figure than any young boy about Rome' (Fleming, 174). There was always an element of striving about Ramsay's art and, perhaps to vindicate himself, Ramsay had his pupil David Martin bring out to Rome a number of his drawings to be shown at the Accademia di San Luca. 
The study of antiquity increasingly occupied his time, and Ramsay formed an unlikely friendship with the Venetian engraver, designer, and antiquarian G. B. Piranesi ('the most extraordinary fellow I ever saw', said Adam; Fleming, 165). They argued about the respective merits of Greek and Roman classical architecture, but Piranesi saw fit to include a generous tribute to him in one of his capricci in 'Le antichita Romane' (1756), in which a tomb appears (visibly) inscribed to Allan Ramsay: 'Scoti Pictor et in omni liberal artium facultae celeber'. Later in 1761 Piranesi attacked Ramsay in his 'Della magnificenza ed architettura de' Romani' for having so wilfully misrepresented the achievements of the Romans and their architects in his 'Dialogue on Taste'. 
Ramsay paid a visit to Naples and sketched what was then thought to be Virgil's tomb at Posillipo, and while he stayed at the Villa d'Este in Tivoli in the summer of 1755 he began his search for the site of Horace's villa, a task which was to occupy him increasingly in later years. In the summer of 1756 Ramsay was taken ill and convalesced at Viterbo, but he was fit enough when he left Rome in May 1757. Again he stopped at Florence, where he copied the portrait of Galileo by Sustermans for the master of Trinity College, Cambridge. Late in August 1757 the Ramsays were back in London. 
Ramsay now took up residence at 31 Soho Square, a fashionable area of Westminster, and entered upon the most distinguished episode of his professional career. His compatriot the third earl of Bute (a nephew of the third duke of Argyll) was now the prince of Wales's governor, and he commissioned from Ramsay a whole-length portrait of his royal pupil (Mount Stuart, Rothesay, Isle of Bute). Within weeks of his return from Italy, on 12 October 1757, Ramsay attended the prince at Kew for the first sitting. The portrait was admired and the prince in turn commissioned a whole length of Lord Bute (National Trust for Scotland, Edinburgh). After the prince ascended the throne in October 1760 as George III, with Bute as his favourite minister, he turned to Ramsay to paint his coronation portrait and that of his queen, Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, whom he married in September 1761. These elegant state portraits (Royal Collection), the most impressive of British monarchs since Van Dyck, were completed by March 1762. Meanwhile Ramsay's position as painter to the king was criticized as a flagrant instance of undue Scottish influence, and was further complicated by the almost unnoticed survival of the previous, unimpressive incumbent, John Shackleton. In December 1761 Ramsay was appointed 'One of His Majesty's Painters in Ordinary', duly succeeding as 'Principal Painter in Ordinary to the King' upon Shackleton's death in March 1767. His relations with the king and queen were, it seems, relaxed, and he was the only courtier able to speak with them in German. In January 1762 he was ordering German books, 'matters of entertainment or Belles Lettres', by Lessing, Rabener, Gellert, Gessner, and Hagedorn (Ramsay to an unknown correspondent, 4 Jan 1762, Brown, 'Ramsay's Rise', 212). 
From 1762 until his death in 1784 Ramsay was responsible for supplying at least 150 pairs of portraits of George III and his queen, either for the royal family, or for the lord chamberlain for distribution to government representatives abroad. He received 80 guineas for each portrait, so that his private fortune, already remarked upon by Adam in 1755, now increased considerably. He originally intended to 'give the last painting' of each replica himself but his resolve soon gave way. Joseph Moser recalled seeing his studio 'crowded with portraits of His Majesty in every stage of operation. The ardour with which these beloved objects were sought for by distant corporations and transmarine colonies was astonishing; the painter with all the assistance he could procure could by no means satisfy the diurnal demands that were made in Soho Square upon his talents and industry. ('European Magazine', 64, 1813, 516)' In 1764 Ramsay acquired a more spacious house at 67 Harley Street where coachmen's rooms and haylofts were converted into a long gallery to facilitate production. His principal assistants were David Martin (1737-1797) and Philip Reinagle (1749-1833), who received up to 25 of the 80 guineas Ramsay was being paid for each picture. 
Apart from the coronation portraits Ramsay painted profile half lengths of the king and queen, and a fine whole-length portrait of the queen with the two young princes, George and Frederick, between 1764 and 1767 (Royal Collection). For Lord Bute he painted, about 1764, a whole length of his particular friend, the king's mother, Augusta, the dowager princess of Wales (Mount Stuart, Rothesay, Isle of Bute). But royal portraiture was not an exclusive occupation, and many of Ramsay's finest portraits date from the ten years after his return from the second visit to Italy. Delicate colour and a French elegance lend them particular distinction. The beautiful picture of his wife holding a flower (National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh), his portraits of Lady Holland, Lady Coke, Mrs Elizabeth Montagu, and Lady Susan Fox-Strangways (all priv. coll.) provide ample evidence for Horace Walpole's comment that Ramsay, 'all delicacy', was 'formed to paint women', in contrast, he thought, to Reynolds, who seldom succeeded with them (Walpole to Sir David Dalrymple, 25 Feb 1759, 'Horace Walpole's Correspondence', ed. W. S. Lewis, 1951, 15.47). Ramsay's double portrait of Walpole's nieces, Laura Keppel and Lady Huntingtower (priv. coll., USA), painted in 1765, remains, perhaps, his masterpiece. In 1766 Ramsay painted the remarkable half lengths of his friend David Hume (Scot. NPG), full face in a bright scarlet coat, and Hume's temporary charge in England, the exiled Jean-Jacques Rousseau, dressed in dark Armenian fur and looking askance (National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh). These are profound studies of character and Rousseau's subsequent disenchantment with his portrait may be construed as a compliment to Ramsay's grasp of his instability. 
Such elegant pictures lacked the grandiloquence which, as Reynolds understood, was becoming necessary for the effective exhibition picture. Ramsay never exhibited, although he had been elected a member of the Society of Arts in 1757 and became a vice-president of the Society of Artists in 1765; nor did he join in the various campaigns for annual exhibitions in London. Ultimately it was Reynolds who became the president of the Royal Academy in 1768. Ramsay's attitude to painting was very different from that of his earliest London years. Now he could choose his sitters; as the king's painter he was no longer a competitor, and he was financially independent. Moreover his ambitions were no longer wholly focused on his painting; travel, writing, and classical scholarship increasingly occupied his time. 
In September 1765, accompanied by his wife and eldest daughter, Amelia, Ramsay spent ten days in Geneva with Lord Stanhope, a mathematician of repute and a long-standing patron, and his wife, a sister of the earl of Haddington, who was suffering from a fractured thigh. From Geneva he took the opportunity of visiting Voltaire at Ferney. On their return journey they spent two weeks in Paris, where, apart from his familiarity with painters, Ramsay saw Hume, then attached to the British embassy, and Horace Walpole, confined to his rooms with gout. He was introduced to Baron d'Holbach and to Diderot, who called him 'philosophe' -- 'on dit qu'il peint mal, mais il raisonne tres bien' (D. Diderot, 'OEuvres completes', 19, 1876, 174); Ramsay entered into correspondence with him. 
In 1766 Ramsay spent six months in Edinburgh where, as a freeholder in the shire of Kinross, he engaged in two minor legal disputes with his customary punctiliousness, a quality which continued to inform his essays. His previous pamphlets had been revised and reissued as 'The Investigator' in 1762, and over the next ten years further political essays appeared essentially adhering to the king's high tory policies. 'An Essay on the Constitution of England' appeared in 1765, a defence of the liberties enjoyed by the English people under Hanoverian rule. In an appendix he transcribed and discussed the original articles of the 'Magna Carta', showing how it was influenced by popery and concepts of arbitrary power. Ramsay had inspected the original articles through a manuscript he had discovered in a private collection and which, through his advocacy, was presented to the British Museum in 1769. Ramsay's essay was well received, being translated into German in 1767 with the author's name on the title-page. There followed in 1769 'Thoughts on the Origin and Nature of Government', written in 1766, expressing serious concern over the threatened loss of the American colonies, but defending the right to tax them. In 1772 he published two essays on the necessity of government intervention in the affairs of the East India Company, of which he was a prominent shareholder: 'An Enquiry into the Rights of the East India Company of Making War and Peace', and 'A Plan of the Government of Bengal'. The latter contained a letter from Ramsay to the prime minister Lord North, dated 20 March 1772, and the text of a speech given by Ramsay to the general court of the East India Company on 12 November 1772. 
Early in 1773 Ramsay suffered a permanent injury to his right arm through a fall which effectively ended his career as a painter, although his activity had been reduced for several years. Later that year, with his sister Janet, he returned to Geneva to see Lady Stanhope, who was now disabled. Again he visited Voltaire at Ferney, this time accompanied by the young fifth earl of Chesterfield. Ramsay himself now began to suffer from rheumatic pains and in 1775, with his wife and daughter Amelia, he returned for a third time to Italy, hoping to effect a cure. But the waters at Pisa and Casiano proved ineffectual, the latter being like those of 'Tunbridge Wells, but twenty times stronger' (Ramsay to Sir John Pringe, 22 Nov 1775, Ingamells, 798). With more success he tried the baths on the island of Ischia and he began to draw again; drawings of himself and his wife dated 1776 are in the National Gallery of Scotland. But Ramsay was principally engrossed with antiquarian pursuits (Fuseli commenting on his fondness for 'tracing on dubious vestiges the haunts of ancient genius and learning'; Smart, 'Ramsay: Painter', 244) and soon became obsessed with the site of Horace's Sabine villa which he believed, probably correctly, to have been at Licenza. Count Orsini lent him rooms in his palace there, the young Jacob More made drawings for him, and his wife acted as amanuensis. 'An enquiry into the situation and circumstances of Horace's Sabine villa, written during travels through Italy in the years 1775, 1776 and 1777' is preserved in two manuscripts in the University Library, Edinburgh, and in the National Library of Scotland. 
The Ramsays left Rome in June 1777 and were back in London by October. More essays followed. In 1777 appeared 'Letters on the Present Disturbances in Great Britain and her American Provinces', originally published in the 'Public Advertiser' (18 April 1771; 25, 26 January 1775). 'A Succinct Review of the American Contest' was first published in February 1778. 'A Letter to Edmund Burke', dated 13 March 1780, answered that statesman's speech concerning government expenditure and the need for economic reform; the present system, wrote Ramsay, was 'the popular or democratic system, and the most popular and democratic that was ever seen in any empire so rich and extended as ours'. The Gordon riots of 1780 induced 'Observations on the Riot Act by a Dilettante in Law and Politics' in 1781, advocating a strengthening of legislation for the protection of life and property. 
Ramsay was now part of London's intellectual society and there are glimpses of him in the Reynolds-Johnson-Boswell circle between 1778 and 1780. On 9 April 1778 Ramsay spoke at length on Horace's villa at a dinner given by Reynolds with Johnson, Boswell, and Edward Gibbon among the guests. Soon afterwards Boswell implored Ramsay to write the biography of his father the poet -- but only a brief manuscript account survives (published in 'The Works of Allan Ramsay, 1686-1758', 4, ed. A. M. Kinghorn and A. Law, 1970, 71-5). On 29 April Ramsay hosted a dinner for Reynolds, Boswell, and Johnson, at which the conversation ranged over Alexander Pope, Homer, and Robert Adam; on the next day Johnson declared: 'I love Ramsay. You will not find a man in whose conversation there is more instruction, more information, and more elegance, than in Ramsay's' (Boswell, 'Life', 3.336). His conversation was more than once described as lively, and even his military son-in-law (who became Sir Archibald Campbell of Inverneil) described 'the famous Allan Ramsay' with some affection as the 'old Cadger' who was 'Rich and Highly respected; a most Sensible, Pleasing, Clever Old man' (Smart, 'Ramsay: Painter', 259). 
Mrs Ramsay died on 4 March 1782 and that summer Ramsay resolved to return to Italy for his fourth and last visit, 'to alleviate his bodily infirmities, by change of climate, and to dissipate the melancholly occasioned by the loss of one valuable part of his family, and the dispersion of others' (advertisement to 'Horace's Sabine Villa' MS, Edinburgh University Library), both his daughters having gone to the West Indies with Amelia's military husband. Ramsay was accompanied by his son, the fourteen-year-old John Ramsay, who kept a journal (MS, NL Scot.), describing how he transcribed classical texts and read Latin texts to his now fragile and demanding father. In April 1783 he spent two months in Naples, where the distinguished British minister Sir William Hamilton played him Handel sonatas, receiving in return a copy of Ramsay's last pamphlet. The 'Essay on the Right of Conquest', just published in Florence, was a slightly jaded rationalization of imperial expansion. Ramsay continued his study of Horace's villa, again staying in Count Orsini's palace at Licenza in September 1783, while the German artist Philipp Hackert, then painter to the king of Naples, made ten views, including a map, of the site. In October 1783 Ramsay and his son went to Florence, their visit marked by the attentions of the aged Sir Horace Mann and the rather unworthy verses which Ramsay was persuaded by the poetaster Robert Merry to have published in 'The Arno Miscellany' in 1784. Horace Walpole told Mann this was the act of 'an old dotard... sporting and playing at leap frog, with brats!' (Walpole to Mann, 8 Nov 1784, 'Horace Walpole's Correspondence', ed. W. S. Lewis, 1951, 25.540). In the summer of 1784 Ramsay resolved to return home, primarily to see his daughters, then about to return to England. But the journey proved too much, and he died on arrival at Dover, on 10 August 1784. He was buried in St Marylebone Church, Middlesex. 
Ramsay was a portrait painter of great distinction. Within the history of British art he appears a sophisticated artist, conversant with contemporary Italian and French practice, and at his best in the 1750s and 1760s. Both Reynolds and Gainsborough learned from his example. After his death British painting came to be dominated by the more imaginative, and often more heroic, paintings shown at the annual exhibitions of the Royal Academy, and it was only in the mid-twentieth century that Ramsay's refined elegance was again properly appreciated. Ramsay's other interests, his classical scholarship and his political essays, must now be accounted minor in comparison, but they set him apart from other painters of his time and showed the breadth of his understanding. One of the last portraits of Ramsay, the marble bust by Michael Foye carved in Rome from 1775 to 1777, shows a determined, level-headed elderly man with a set, down-turned mouth -- the 'Old Mumpy' expression which Robert Adam had described (Scot. NPG); it seems a far cry from the handsome and ambitious self-portrait of his young manhood, but it is draped with a toga, suggestive of that Roman gravitas and steady spirit which characterized his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 23074


Ramsay, Andrew (1574-1659), Church of Scotland minister, was born at Fettercairn, the youngest son of David Ramsay of Balmain, Kincardineshire, and Katherine Carnegie, daughter of Sir Robert Carnegie of Kinnaird, Perthshire. He was educated at Marischal College, Aberdeen, whence he graduated MA. In common with many of his contemporaries Ramsay continued his schooling in France, where he studied theology. Latterly he occupied a professorial chair at the University of Saumur. An accomplished scholar, he published 'Oratio' (1600) and 'Paraenesis et orationes de laudibus academae Salmuriensis' (Saumur, n.d.) during his stay on the continent. He had returned to Scotland by 1606, when he was appointed minister of Arbuthnott, in the presbytery of Fordoun. Probably soon afterwards he married Marie Fraser; the couple had four sons, including Andrew Ramsay (1620?-1688), later burgess and lord provost of Edinburgh. 
Ramsay supported royal policy regarding the kirk, and was soon involved in religious controversy. He was appointed constant moderator of the presbytery of Fordoun, and in that capacity voted for the establishment of episcopacy in Scotland at the general assembly of 1610. On the authority of John Spottiswoode, archbishop of St Andrews, he was rewarded with a call to the ministry at Edinburgh in 1613, and was installed at the parish of Greyfriars on 28 April of the following year. He was named burgess of the city ('gratis') in 1615, and on 21 October of the same year was a member of the newly formed court of high commission (renewed on 15 June 1619). Despite his apparent conformity Ramsay (along with fifty-four others) appended his signature to the 'protestation for the liberties of the Kirk' of 1617, an action which frustrated James VI's plans to undermine the power of the general assembly. Following a personal audience with the king, however, Ramsay withdrew his protest. Consequently he retained the favour of James. He was appointed to the chair of divinity at the University of Edinburgh in 1620, and was subdean of the Chapel Royal in 1629. 
Unsurprisingly, while Henry Guthrie, bishop of Dunkeld, knew him as a 'guid, modest, learned [and] godlie man' ('Fasti Scot.', 1.70), presbyterian nonconformists took a dim view of Ramsay's support for episcopacy. His sole aim -- according to the exiled minister David Calderwood in 1623 -- was to gain preferment by 'amazing the sillie people with griek & latine, [thereby] tickling the ears of the learned sort [and] flattering princes' (Calderwood, 'Answere', fol. 46'r'). There was some substance to these allegations, as Ramsay's preaching was widely regarded as tending towards Arminianism. In 1633 he was 'severely censured' by his brother-in-law, Sir John Carnegie, and Alexander Henderson, minister of Leuchars, for having adopted 'the modish Laudean doctrine of England' (Wodrow, fol. 12'r'- 'v'). At the same time Ramsay was openly courting the patronage of William Laud, archbishop of Canterbury. His renowned 'Poemata sacra... et epigrammata sacra' (a collection of Latin verse written in the style of Ovid) was published at Edinburgh to coincide with the coronation of Charles I, at which Laud was present. The work was highly commended by the contemporary Latinist Arthur Johnston, a client of the archbishop, who later reprinted the poems as part of a wider collection entitled 'Deliciae poetarum Scotorum' (Amsterdam, 1637). 
Notwithstanding his attempts to cultivate the patronage of Canterbury, Ramsay was passed over for the newly created bishopric of Edinburgh in 1634. Neither was he preferred during the extensive reshuffle of Scottish bishoprics -- masterminded by Laud -- which continued into the following year. Disillusioned, Ramsay's immediate thoughts were of 'dimitting his ministry and retiring to his own lairdship' ('DNB'). By 1637, however, he had sided with the nonconformist ministers of the capital, and -- on the occasion of the riot at Edinburgh on 23 July -- refused to read the service book from his pulpit. Subsequently Ramsay preached vehemently against the adoption of the new liturgy and canons, and successfully urged his congregation to sign the national covenant in February 1638. In 'A warning to come out of Babylon... preached at the receiving of Mr T. Abernethie, sometime jesuite, into the church of Scotland' (Edinburgh, 1638), he demonstrated his own adherence to the covenant. Thereafter Ramsay supported the presbyterian administration in Scotland, and was moderator of the general assembly of 1640. In 1646 he was appointed rector of the University of Edinburgh, a position he held until 1648. In that year, however, he was accused of acting to the prejudice of the government, largely because of his refusal to preach against the engagement with Charles I. The decision to prosecute Ramsay over the issue was not unanimous. The presbyterian diarist Robert Baillie, for example, 'could not voyce to depose a man of such age and parts' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 3.92). Nevertheless, he was deprived of his ministry by the general assembly of 1649, and he retired to the family estate of Abbotshall, Fife. Later, in 1649, he composed an apology in which he objected to some of the innovations introduced into the kirk since 1638. His disapproval extended to all forms of set prayer in public worship, but especially the Lord's prayer; the repetition of the creed at baptism; and the practice whereby ministers knelt for private prayer on entering the pulpit. On 8 November 1655 the synod of Lothian -- on account of his 'age and great esteem for piety and learning' ('DNB') -- voted in favour of his reinstatement, but he took no further active role in kirk affairs. Ramsay died at Abbotshall on 30 December 1659, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 23075


Ramsay, Sir Andrew, of Abbotshall and Waughton, first baronet, Lord Abbotshall (1620?-1688), provost of Edinburgh, was the third and eldest son of Andrew Ramsay (1574-1659), professor of divinity in the University of Edinburgh and minister of Greyfriars Church, and his wife, Marie Fraser. Bred a merchant, he was admitted a burgess of Edinburgh on 10 August 1642 and a baillie in 1652. He bought the estate of Abbotshall, Fife, from the Scotts of Balwearie, and acquired the estate of Waughton, Haddingtonshire, by marriage to the heir of the Hepburns, whose name is unknown. He assented to the tender of union from the English parliament at Dalkeith in 1652. During Oliver Cromwell's government he was lord provost of Edinburgh from 1654 to 1657 and in 1655 was knighted by Cromwell. He was a member of the second protectorate parliament in 1656, and in 1658 went to London in an attempt to obtain from the protector some relief for the town's burdens. 
At the Restoration Ramsay gained the friendship of John Maitland, second earl of Lauderdale, newly appointed secretary of state for Scotland, by prevailing on the city to give $5000 sterling to the government for the superiority of Leith, and another $5000 sterling for the new imposition granted to the town by the king on wine and ale. By ingratiating himself with Lauderdale he secured the favour of the new administration and was again knighted, by Charles II on 17 July 1660. Under Lauderdale's auspices he was again elected lord provost of Edinburgh in 1662 and he kept the chair for twelve successive years, defeating by complicated artifice or open violence any attempt of the council to remove him. He was elected to represent Edinburgh in the convention of estates in 1665 and 1667 and in the parliament from 1669 to 1674. In 1669 he was selected as one of the lords of the articles, and in 1670 he was appointed to the committee for considering union with England. In 1669 he was created a baronet. He was sworn of the privy council in 1671, and was admitted an ordinary lord of session on 23 November 1671, despite having no legal experience. According to Sir George Mackenzie his promotion, with that of three others who like him 'had not been bred lawyers', rendered the court of session 'the object of all men's contempt' (Mackenzie, 240). In recognition of Ramsay's services to the government, Lauderdale prevailed on the king to settle on the provost of Edinburgh $200 a year. In 1667 Ramsay procured from the king a letter ordaining that he as provost should have the same place and precedence as was due to the mayors of London and Dublin, and that no other provost could be called lord provost but he. Following a dispute with the university, at Ramsay's insistence, on 10 November 1667 the town council resolved that the lord provost should also hold the office of rector and governor of the college. By his corrupt and often tyrannical conduct as lord provost, Ramsay lost the support of many of the citizens of the city. 
Through his influence in the town council, his presidency of the conventions of royal burghs, and the leading vote among the burghs in parliament, Ramsay was extremely useful to Lauderdale, so much so that the party opposed to Lauderdale resolved to remove him from his office. A motion to supersede him in March 1672 was lost by only two votes. In 1673 articles of impeachment were given in against him by the earl of Eglinton, which alleged that Ramsay had obtained a letter from the king to 'thrust Mr Rochead out of his employment as town clerk of Edinburgh without a formal and legal sentence' (Mackenzie, 262). Lauderdale, fearing recriminations due to his involvement in the ousting of Rochead, prevailed on Ramsay to resign the offices both of provost and of lord of session. In 1685 he was named a commissioner of trade. He died at his house at Abbotshall, Fife, on 17 January 1688. His son Andrew succeeded him in the baronetcy and estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 23076


Ramsay, Sir Andrew Crombie (1814-1891), geologist, was born on 31 January 1814 in Glasgow, third of the four children of William Ramsay and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Crombie. His father was a manufacturing chemist and businessman associated with the dyeing industry, noted for his integrity and his scientific abilities; his mother is said to have been a woman of strong but gentle character. Ramsay was not a particularly healthy child, and he was sent to school at Saltcoats on the Ayrshire coast and then in Glasgow. However, his education was cut short by his father's death in 1827. Insufficient provision had been made for the family and his mother was forced to take in boarders, and Ramsay himself had to start work in a counting house. 
Ramsay held a number of positions in business during a period of over ten years, not enjoying any of them. A venture in the cloth trade proved unsuccessful; but he began to develop an interest in science and literature, and met Lyon Playfair, who boarded in Ramsay's household. His scientific studies were encouraged by John Nichol (1804-1859) of Glasgow University, and he became interested in geology. 
Ramsay developed a particular interest in the geology of Arran, and spent a number of vacations on the island. In 1839 a committee was established to prepare for the British Association's meeting in Glasgow in 1840, and Ramsay compiled a geological map, and geological model, of Arran. Nichol arranged for him to lecture to the association's geological section, and to conduct a field excursion to the island. The hope that this might bring Ramsay to the attention of the leaders of the geological community was dashed when Ramsay overslept and the geologists departed to Arran without him! However, Nichol came to the rescue and Ramsay's work was published the following year as 'The Geology of the Island of Arran'. 
Despite the Arran fiasco, Ramsay's abilities had been noticed by Roderick Murchison, who invited him as travelling companion on a visit to America. By the time Ramsay arrived in London to take up this offer, Murchison's plans had changed, but he induced the geological survey's director, Henry De la Beche, to offer Ramsay a position as assistant geologist; and he started work in Pembrokeshire in April 1841. He was highly successful in this new occupation and he was promoted to local director between 1844 and 1845; in 1848 he also became geology professor at University College, London. With the establishment of the Royal School of Mines at Kensington in 1851, Ramsay resigned from University College to take up the new chair of geology. He held his two appointments concurrently until 1872, when he succeeded Murchison as director general of the survey. This position Ramsay held until his retirement in 1881. 
Ramsay's most important fieldwork was undertaken in Wales in the years 1848-51. There the surveyors' systematic work provided empirical information that eventually helped close the bitter controversy between Murchison and the Cambridge professor, Adam Sedgwick, concerning the Cambrian-Silurian boundary. Besides having responsibility for the mapwork, Ramsay was responsible for the geological sections of Wales. They had considerable aesthetic appeal as well as scientific significance. Yet Ramsay proposed a rather bizarre geological hypothesis, that certain major igneous masses near Bangor were responsible for metamorphosing not only the adjacent mainland rocks, but those of Anglesey too. So the island's gnarled rocks were construed by Ramsay as metamorphosed Cambrian, not Precambrian. This was in keeping with a view held for some years within the survey that Precambrian rocks were found in Britain only in the gneisses of north-west Scotland. In addition to the geological maps and sections of Wales, Ramsay produced a major survey memoir: 'The Geology of North Wales' (1866; 2nd edn, 1881). 
During his work in Anglesey, Ramsay stayed for a few days in 1850 at the home of James Williams, rector of Llanfair-yng-Nghornwy, whose daughter Louisa he married on 20 July 1852. They took their honeymoon in Europe, enabling Ramsay to see glaciers and glacial phenomena at first hand, as well as the contorted alpine rocks. He had previously been interested in geomorphology, especially with regard to the erosive powers of rivers and the development of river systems, on which topic he had published an important memoir ('On the Denudation of South Wales and the Adjacent Counties of England') in 1846. Now, with his new alpine experiences, he developed a keen interest in glacial phenomena, and became one of the field's leading authorities. 
Lakes had long troubled proponents of the origin of valleys by river action; and although the glacial theory of Louis Agassiz (which had been presented to the British Association in Glasgow in 1840) accounted for many surface phenomena observable in northern lands, the origin of lakes was still problematic. Could glaciers 'scoop' the hollows now occupied by lakes? In 1862 Ramsay presented his view to the Geological Society that glaciers could indeed hollow out lake-basins, without requiring earth movements to produce areas of weakness. His paper was controversial and led to numerous discussions over several decades. Ramsay's view eventually prevailed, though it is thought that earth movements may indeed play a part in basin formation. Ramsay also proposed (in 1854) that glacial conditions had existed in the Permian era, as well as in the geologically recent Pleistocene; and subsequently he contemplated other Palaeozoic glaciations. Initially, these ideas were coolly received, but in the light of the astronomical theory of James Croll, the hypothesis gathered strength, though it was not fully accepted in Ramsay's lifetime. 
Following De la Beche's death in 1855, Ramsay might have hoped to assume the survey directorship, but the position went to Murchison, and it was only on his demise in 1872 that Ramsay succeeded to the leadership. Already in somewhat failing health, he was unable to achieve as much as director-general as he and his colleagues might have expected, and the affairs of the survey languished somewhat under Ramsay's leadership. He had had a serious breakdown in health in 1860, from which he only partly recovered. In 1878 his left eye was surgically removed following a severe infection. With such afflictions, he found that his administrative duties weighed upon him, and it was only with a struggle that he finished the second edition of his Welsh memoir. 
In 1863 Ramsay published his 'Physical Geology and Geography of Great Britain', which reached its fifth edition in 1878. This book originated in six lectures for working men given at the School of Mines Museum, but it was developed and enlarged to become one of the standard nineteenth-century geological texts. By all accounts, Ramsay was an excellent lecturer, though he had to receive assistance in his lecturing work in his declining years. 
As president of the Geological Society in 1863-4 Ramsay gave influential addresses on the problem of breaks in the stratigraphic record, arguing in terms of Charles Lyell's theory that such breaks might be attributed to the occurrence of continental conditions, for the existence of which Ramsay offered empirical evidence. For his presidential address to the British Association in 1880 he lectured 'On the recurrence of certain phenomena in geological time', which involved a wide survey of geological theory, seen through the lens of his uniformitarian beliefs. Ramsay claimed, for example, that metamorphism could occur at any geological epoch -- contrary to a view held on the continent that certain rock types were associated with particular geological epochs. 
Ramsay was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1844, and received its Wollaston medal in 1871. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1862 and received a royal medal in 1880. He received the Royal Society of Edinburgh's Neill prize in 1866. He was awarded an LLD by the University of Edinburgh in the same year, and by Glasgow University in 1880. He presided over the geological section of the British Association in 1856, 1866, and 1881, and was association president in 1880. Ramsay received the Italian award of the Cross of St Maurice and St Lazare in 1862, and was knighted shortly before his retirement in 1881. 
Ramsay was a considerable traveller, visiting the continent several times, and North America in 1857. He was an active climber, admirable lecturer, lucid writer, and jovial raconteur. He was a devout Christian, but readily accepted the ideas of Darwin and Lyell. However, while an outstanding field geologist, Ramsay was somewhat unsympathetic towards laboratory studies and is recorded as saying that he didn't believe in looking at a mountain with a microscope. Sir Andrew and Lady Ramsay retired to Beaumaris in Anglesey but the geologist's old age was dogged by ill health. He died at his home in Beaumaris, 7 Victoria Terrace, on 9 December 1891, survived by his wife, four daughters, and a son; he was buried at Llansadwrn. 


@@@@@


doc= 23077


Ramsay, Andrew Michael (1686-1743), philosopher and Jacobite sympathizer, was born in Ayr in 1686, probably on 29 May, the son of Andrew Ramsay ('c'.1660- 'c'.1740) and his wife, Susanna. His father, a baker and burgess of the town of Ayr, was a staunch Calvinist; his mother was an Anglican. Ramsay was educated at the grammar school in Ayr and later described himself as having shown an early interest in study and the sciences. From the age of fifteen he was so taken with mathematics that he would spend twelve hours a day, without eating or drinking, in learning the calculus. With his mother's encouragement, he soon rejected the 'Dogme affreux de la predestination' (Bibliotheque Mejanes, MS 1188, p. 4). On his deathbed he recalled that his deep sense of piety at this time manifested itself in hours spent at prayer in a ruined Roman Catholic church. He entered Edinburgh University, perhaps with the intention of studying for the Episcopalian ministry, and seems also to have attended lectures in theology at Glasgow University. At the age of nineteen he encountered at Edinburgh a sceptical Episcopalian doctor who taught him the virtues of toleration and encouraged him to be critical of established religion. He abandoned his plans for a career in the Scottish Episcopal church and was at first drawn to deism, eventually discovering an interest in the mysticism of Madame Bourignon and, later, of Madame Guyon. Ramsay did not undertake this spiritual journey alone. He conversed and corresponded throughout this period with George Cheyne, James Cunningham, George and James Garden, Robert Keith, Lord Deskford of Cullen, and Lord Forbes of Pitsligo. This circle of friends, with whom Ramsay remained in contact for many years, constituted a distinct group of educated followers of mystical theology, several of them based in the north-east of Scotland, whose leanings were towards nonjuring and even Jacobitism. 
Ramsay's first employment came from another Scottish follower of Madame Bourignon, Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall, but he soon moved to the service of the earl of Wemyss as tutor to his two children. This took Ramsay to London towards the end of 1708 and drew him closer to the world of the Jacobite nobility. Under the influence of James Keith, Ramsay took an interest in the Philadelphian movement and corresponded extensively with his Scottish friends about the activities of the French Prophets, both in London and Edinburgh. Ramsay was introduced to the Prophets by Nicolas Fatio de Duillier, who taught him mathematics for a time. He decided, however, to quit London and travel to the Netherlands in spring 1710. Encouraged by Scottish friends who were already in residence there, Ramsay settled briefly at Rijnsburg, the village between Leiden and The Hague which was the home of Madame Bourignon's disciple Pierre Poiret. At Leiden Ramsay attended some of Boerhaave's lectures, but he soon accepted Poiret's advice that he should travel to Cambrai to study with Archbishop Fenelon. Like Madame Bourignon or Madame Guyon, Fenelon preached the doctrine of disinterested love, but, unlike them, he encouraged his protestant pupils to convert to Catholicism. Ramsay arrived at Cambrai in August 1710 and embarked on six months of spiritual debate and confession, during the course of which he was received by Fenelon into the Catholic church. 
Some time before Fenelon's death in 1715, Ramsay had moved with his encouragement to Blois, where he served as secretary to Madame Guyon herself, in particular maintaining a correspondence with her Scottish disciples. Towards the end of 1716, however, he had moved to Paris, where he served as governor to the son of the comte de Sassenage, and began to become acquainted with the Jacobite court in exile and with the Benedictines of Scots College. He was devastated by the death of Madame Guyon, which he reported to his friends in Scotland. Ramsay's 'Life of Fenelon', which was published in French and in an English translation by Nathaniel Hooke in 1723, contained an extensive account of Madame Guyon as well as the story of his own conversion, and was in part a response to Poiret's edition of her autobiography (1720). By this time Ramsay had already published a discourse on epic poetry, extolling Fenelon's composition 'Telemaque', which was printed with a new edition of that poem in 1717, as well as an 'Essay philosophique sur le gouvernement civil' (1721), according to Fenelon's principles, which was rapidly translated into English and appeared in editions at both London and Edinburgh in 1722. In the 'Essay' Ramsay praised the virtues of monarchy, condemned rebellion, and argued that the proper practice of love for one's neighbour and one's self would overcome the danger of political revolution, which was caused by an excessive love of power on the part of rulers or of independence on the part of their subjects. 
Ramsay's service with the comte de Sassenage terminated in September 1722. His friends arranged a pension for him from the abbey of Signy and his appointment as a chevalier of the ordre de Saint-Lazare on 20 May 1723. Through his acquaintance with the duke of Mar and with Lord Lansdowne, Ramsay was eventually able to find permanent employment with the Jacobite court. He was called to become tutor to the young prince, Charles Edward, in December 1723 and travelled to Rome in that capacity early in 1724. However, disunity and political intrigue in the Jacobite court at Rome soon led Ramsay to seek permission to return to Paris. The Old Pretender at this time described him as 'an odd body... yet I will be charitable enough to think him a madd man' (Henderson, 'Chevalier Ramsay', 106-7), and he did not rejoin the royal household. Instead Ramsay forged a literary career, in particular through the publication of 'Les voyages de Cyrus' (1727), dedicated to his new patron, the duc de Sully, which was again translated into English by Hooke. In both its French and English editions Ramsay's 'Cyrus' was a sensation. Deeply indebted to Fenelon's example, it told the story of Cyrus's adventures among the magi and the Greeks, drawing heavily on the tradition of a pristine ancient wisdom akin to Christianity, and arguing for the existence of three states of humanity: the innocent, the fallen, and the restored. It attacked the ideas of Spinoza and upheld the existence of a subtle fluid, through whose actions God produces physical effects. It also hinted at a doctrine of metempsychosis. In its pages Ramsay attempted to reconcile the philosophy of Descartes with that of Newton in a mystical Christian context. 
In the wake of his success and at the request of English Catholics, Ramsay undertook a journey to London in 1729. In December he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society; he was also chosen as a member of the Spalding Gentlemen's Society, and on 10 April 1730 received the degree of DCL from Oxford University, where William King promoted his cause. He was, however, disappointed in his hope of meeting Jonathan Swift, whose writings had 'prepared [him] for relishing those principles of universal religion' (Ramsay to Swift, BL, Add. MS 4805, fols. 188-9). On his return to France Ramsay entered the service of the family of de Bouillon as a tutor, and moved to live first at Andresy and then at Pontoise. He was created a baronet in the Jacobite peerage on 23 March 1735. Although he was disappointed in his desire to become a member of the Academie he continued to publish widely. The most substantial of his works, the 'Histoire du vicomte de Turenne', which was based on extensive documentation that Ramsay printed, appeared in 1735, and celebrated the career of one of the heroes of the family that employed him. Its translation into English led to the falling out of Ramsay and Hooke. 
In common with several of his Catholic Jacobite friends Ramsay became a leading figure in French freemasonry, as a member of the Lodge St Thomas. In 1737 he delivered 'A Discourse Pronounced at the Reception of Freemasons', which stressed the order's desire to unify humanity through the love of virtue, and argued that freemasonry had originated during the crusades. In June 1735 Ramsay married Marie (1701- 'c'.1761), daughter of Sir David Nairne and his wife, Marie-Elizabeth de Compigny. Ramsay and his wife had a son, who died in infancy, and a daughter. In his last years he moved to St Germain-en-Laye, where he was nursed by his wife. He died there on 6 May 1743 NS and was buried the following day in the parish church; his heart was entombed at the convent of the Sisters of the Holy Sacrament, rue Casette, in Paris. On his deathbed Ramsay dictated 'Anecdotes' of his life, but he left unpublished his great work, 'The Philosophical Principles of Natural and Revealed Religion'. His widow succeeded in placing the book with the Foulis brothers in Glasgow and it eventually appeared in two volumes in 1748-9. It reiterated many of the arguments of Ramsay's 'Cyrus', but made more explicit his attempt to reconcile Newtonian ideas to his own philosophy. 


@@@@@


doc= 23078


Ramsay, Charles Aloysius (fl. 1677-1680), stenographer and translator, was descended from a younger branch of the noble Scottish family of Ramsay. He was thought to be related to Andrew Michael Ramsay and has been stated to be the son of Carl Ramsay (1617-1669), a municipal official of Elbing, Prussia, and author of travelogues and works on Polish and Russian history, which have been left in manuscript. Charles Aloysius Ramsay, who was living at Frankfurt in 1677 and at Paris in 1680, is identified in his own works as a 'Scottish gentleman'. A student of chemistry, medicine, and Latin, Ramsay became a wandering scholar and 'stenography's knight errant' (''Stenografiens vandrande riddare''; Melin, 1.344) on the European continent. 
Ramsay's shorthand system is based on the popular 'Tachy-Graphia' of Thomas Shelton. Ramsay may first have seen Shelton's system in its anonymous Latin translation ('Tachy-Graphia', 1660) intended for a European market. Ramsay's adaptation of Shelton's system was disseminated on the continent in German ('Tacheographia, oder, Geschwinde Schreib-Kunst', Frankfurt, 1678; translated presumably by Ramsay from a Latin original); in Latin ('Tacheographia', Frankfurt, 1681); and in a French translation by the unidentified 'Sieur A. D. G.' ('Tacheographie, ou, L'art d'ecrire aussi vite qu'on parle', Paris, 1681, with accompanying Latin text). All had subsequent editions; claims that earlier editions existed, however, have not been verified. In its French translation Ramsay's system had great influence and was published at least four times between 1683 and 1693 (from 1690 with the title 'Nouvelle methode'). A copy of the 1690 'Nouvelle methode' was in the library of Samuel Pepys, who himself used Shelton's shorthand (cf. 'Catalogue of the Pepys Library at Magdalene College, Cambridge', 1978, 1.119). In 1678 Ramsay translated into Latin as 'Utiles observationes' (two parts, part 2 with the title 'Observationes chymicae') a German work by chemist and alchemist Johann Kunckel, dedicated to the Royal Society. 
Ramsay's was not the first shorthand system published in Europe. The Abbe Jacques Cossard had published a French system in 1651, but few copies were printed and it had little circulation. Likewise, a German system has been attributed to Daniel Georg Morhof (1666). Shelton's system was known in Europe at this time and was discussed by Gaspard Schott in 'Technica curiosa' (1664). A year after his German system was published, Ramsay was accused by Johann Christoph Mieth ('Die curiose Schreibe-Kunst', 1679) of plagiarizing Shelton's alphabet. Ramsay's German alphabet is indeed virtually identical to that of Shelton; two characters differ and two are dropped. His French alphabet, however, differs in eight characters, four being omitted. The differences among his German, Latin, and French alphabets suggest that Ramsay attempted to adapt his system to the linguistic requirements of each language and undermines the idea that he was a mere plagiarist. The question of plagiarism aside, the influence of the 'Ramsay literature' (M. Levy, 'The History of Short-Hand Writing', 1862, 58) was strong in Europe for a century after its first publication and was recognized in England. In 1736 Philip Gibbs remarked that the French 'have got a Short-hand Book, which was published a good while ago', citing the full title of Ramsay's 'Tacheographie' though not giving his name ('An Historical Account of Compendious and Swift Writing', 56). 


@@@@@


doc= 23079


Ramsay, David (d. 1642), courtier, was born in Scotland, one of the nine children of Robert Ramsay of Wyliecleuch, Berwickshire, known as Sir Robert Ramsay. David Ramsay was kinsman to the Ramsays, earls of Dalhousie, and to John Ramsay, Viscount Haddington and earl of Holdernesse (c.1580-1626). His brothers included Sir James Ramsay (1589?-1638/9), groom of the bedchamber to Prince Henry and later a soldier in Swedish service, and George Ramsay, intruded by James I into a fellowship at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1612. David Ramsay was also a beneficiary of royal favour. On 19 June 1604 a warrant was issued for the payment to David Ramsay of $26 13's'. 4died for a livery as groom of the bedchamber to Prince Henry. He is probably the 'Ramsey' reported by John Chamberlain to have been in the company of Prince Henry in March 1612. On 18 November 1613, following the death of the prince, he was awarded a pension of $200 per annum for his service as a groom. 
In 1631 Donald Mackay, first Lord Reay, charged privately that Ramsay, unhappy with recent religious developments in England, had that spring sought Swedish support for a scheme to alter the frame of government by means of an army entrusted for use in the Thirty Years' War to James Hamilton, marquess of Hamilton. When this allegation became known, Ramsay challenged Reay to a duel, but then appears to have withdrawn his challenge. A difficulty for Reay was that his charge involved admitting to involvement in the plot, but it seems there was some truth in his allegations. Certainly Ramsay, who was in the Netherlands at the time alleged, had been fishing in dangerous waters, and seems to have been completely lacking in diplomatic skills. After the trial, in August 1632, Hamilton received from a servant in the Netherlands some frank advice to the effect that: 'you will do yourself much right to provide some place for David Ramsay with the King of Sweden for he hath disobliged so many great men here and the King himself is so displeased with his behaviour that he is utterly lost in this place.' On 20 November 1631 Sir Thomas Roe had written from London to Princess Elizabeth of Bohemia, who had asked for information on the affair, that Ramsay had mentioned her name in connection with it, and was 'not a man on whose discretion to rely, being much transported by self-opinion' ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1625-49', 421). 
Given the seriousness of the issues, and the implications for Hamilton, the matter could not be ignored, but it was decided to hear them not in Star Chamber but in the court of chivalry. The case opened on Monday 28 November 1631 at the Painted Chamber in Westminster, before Robert, earl of Lindsay, lord high constable, and in the presence of the earl of Pembroke, the earl of Arundel, the earl of Dorset, and others. The dramatic case had taken on the appearance of a public spectacle; on 5 December 'the fame of the cause brought thither such a crowd of people as was not imaginable' and Ramsay appeared at each of the sessions in a new and expensive costume ('State trials', 3.489). Progress in the trial was hampered by procedural wrangling over whether the several facts at issue were matters of honour or of treason, and over the respective roles in the case of judicial combat and the court's determination of the facts. When the facts proved impossible to establish with certainty, the court set the duel for 12 April, and issued instructions for the type and dimensions of the weapons to be used. Sir William Calley's son rode to London especially to see the contest, to be held at Tothill Fields. But he, and many others, were disappointed. 
On 10 April the contest was deferred by the king until 17 May; on 12 May Lindsay announced a verdict: 'they had not found David Ramsey guilty of treason... yet they found that he had seditiously committed many contempts against his majesty, the reformation of which his majesty reserved to himself'. Ramsay and Reay were both committed to the Tower of London until they promised not to 'attempt any thing one against the other'. The king's direct influence is clear. He had 'revoked his letters patents, given to the said lords for the trial of this cause, not willing to have it decided by duel', and the official verdict in respect of Ramsay reads very like Charles's own conclusion, sent to James Hamilton and dated 8 May, four days earlier: 'And for David Ramsey, though we must clear him of that treason in particular, yet not so far in the general, but that he might give occasion enough by his tongue of great accusation, if it had been rightly placed, as by his foolish presumptious carriage did appear;' and Charles was determined: 'that you may know David Ramsey, that you may not have to do with such a pest as he is, suspecting he may seek to insinuate himself to you upon this occasion. Wherefore I must desire you, as you love me, to have nothing to do with him. ('State trials', 3.513-14)' Despite this devastating judgment upon his character, Ramsay remained a recipient of royal largess. He was still a groom of the privy chamber when in the late summer of 1633, in an effort to rehabilitate himself, he passed to the king information about Jesuits and other recusants then active in London, which was forwarded to the commissioners for recusants. It seems from a petition of 1643 on behalf of Fabian Phillips that Ramsay had been able to acquire an interest in the office of filazer, and that having 'had formerly a reversion of the same by letters patent' he had farmed it to Phillips in January 1640 ('CSP dom.', '1643', 471). When he made his will on 13 May 1642 he was living in the fashionable new district of Covent Garden, and was able to dispose of considerable legacies, to his sister Agnes, his niece Barbara Forrett, his nephew David Forrett, and to Patrick Shawe, husband of his sister Barbara. Other beneficiaries included James Maxwell, usher of the black rod, and the patentee and army officer Sir John Meldrum, to whom he left $100 apiece and who, along with his nephew, he appointed his executors, though only the last was able to appear to prove the will on 3 August 1642. 


@@@@@


doc= 23080


Ramsay, David (c.1575-1660), clockmaker, was probably born in Fife, the second son of the three sons and two daughters of James Ramsay (died 1580) and his wife, Elizabeth, eldest daughter of David Ramsay of Clatty. It appears that in the absence of his elder brother, George, David took possession of his brother's property in Lothian and court action was taken to evict him. He then went to France, where John Carnegie, writing to his brother from Paris on 10 January 1610, related how he had been through the palace and the town seeking clocks, which were both scarce and expensive; however, the king's clockmaker had promised to show him a very fine 'reveil-matin' clock, and Carnegie would take Ramsay's advice regarding its worth. Possible products of Ramsay's years in Paris are the very early watch by him, later housed in the Victoria and Albert Museum, with a small irregular octagonal case of gold and silver, with hinged covers, bearing engravings of the annunciation and nativity, and an oval gold watch in the French style, dated to between 1600 and 1610 and signed 'David Ramsay, scotus, me fecit', subsequently held in the British Museum. In later years he employed a French journeyman, Guillaume Petit. Some fourteen watches, all of fine quality and some with alarms or calendar dials, survive in various collections. 
Writing long after the event, Ramsay's son, William, claimed that on the succession of James to the English crown in 1603: 'he sent into France for my father, who was then there, and made him page of the bedchamber and groom of the privy chamber, and keeper of all his majestie's clocks and watches. This I mention that by some he hath been termed no better than a watch maker.... It's confest his ingenuity led him to understand any piece of work in that nature... and therefore the king conferred that place upon him. (Ramesey, preface)' If correct, this would suggest that Ramsay returned to Paris. Certainly, however, David Ramsay made three watches for Henry, prince of Wales (died 1612), between 1610 and 1612 (his bill of $61 was not paid until 1622), and the 'Book of ordinances made at the Establyshinge of Prince Henry... at Oatelands' named him as a groom of Henry's bedchamber ('Sixth Report', HMC, 672b). In 1613 he was granted a pension of $200 per annum, and in the same year James I gave him a pension of $30. His 'clock watch with alarum', dating from about 1615, is remarkable for the smooth action of its hand-cut wheels and pinions. On 26 November 1618 he was appointed chief clockmaker to James, with fees and allowances. In July 1619 he was granted rights of residence in England. 
Ramsay's interests in mechanics led him to apply for licences and patents for the manufacture and use of numerous inventions and engines: 'to plough without horses' in 1619; 'to make an engine invented by John Jack and David Ramsay, Page of the Bedchamber, to raise water', for draining land and mines; 'an engine to turn spits'; and others dealing with the manufacture of saltpetre and a scarlet dye. Ramsay's royal duties were evidently considerable. In 1616 he received $234 10's'. for the supply and repair of clocks and watches for James I. In 1622 he received another payment of $232 15's'. for repairing clocks at Theobalds, Oatlands, and Westminster, and for making a chime of bells at Theobalds. 
No specific renewal of his appointment to Charles I has been found, but in January 1626 a warrant was issued to pay him $150 for coins to be given by the king on the day of his coronation. A large sum of money owing to him since the time of James I was paid in 1627 -- $441 3's'. 4died for work, plus $358 16's'. 8died 'in lieu of diet and bouche of court' -- and in 1632 he received $219 for bills submitted during that year. At this time he was living variously in King Street and Cannon Row, running east from the parish church of St Margaret, Westminster. Ramsay's wife was English; her name is not recorded but their son William Ramesey was born on 13 March 1627. William was schooled at St Albans, Bushy, Westminster, and other places. His father could not grant his request to go to St Andrews University so he attended Edinburgh, but had to leave that city because of the plague and from April 1645 he lived in London. By profession he was a physician and astrologer. 
When Charles granted a charter of incorporation to the Clockmakers' Company he nominated Ramsay as its first master, an office he held for a year from October 1632. It seems, however, that he was mostly absent from town as a deputy was elected who presided at the court meetings during that time. An incident involving Ramsay was recounted by the astrologer William Lilly. Ramsay was told of treasure buried under the floor of Westminster Abbey and in 1632 he was given permission by the dean to search for it. He employed a diviner, John Scott, to ply his hazel rod through the cloisters and saw it twitch when they reached the west side. Their labourers excavated a coffin, but as this was deemed to be too light to contain anything of value, it was returned to its resting place unopened, no doubt disappointing the crowd of onlookers, Lilly among them, who had gathered for entertainment. 
In his later years, Ramsay fell into poverty -- perhaps having ventured his money in some barren mine -- and in 1641 his creditors had him imprisoned in Westminster Gatehouse. He petitioned the House of Lords for payment of six years' arrears of his pension as groom of the privy chamber, but it was 1645 before the committee for the advancement of money granted him one-third of the money arising from his discovery of delinquents' estates. His petition of 1645 referred to arrears of bills and wages due to him from the king and prince amounting to $2000, payment of which he 'forbeares to request till times are better: yet having lost favour of the King... by his residence in London he had been cast into prison'. The petition is marked 'Nothing done in it' ('Sixth Report', HMC, 41b-42a). In 1651 a further petition was referred to the mint committee; the outcome is unknown. It seems that he was still in prison in 1651 when he hoped to gain from the sale of some secret way of dyeing cloth scarlet. His son William, in the dedication to his father of his 'Vox stellarum' (1652), alludes to this impoverishment having given 'occasion to some inferior-spirited people not to value you according to what you both are by nature and in yourself'. By this time David Ramsay was free and living in Holborn, by the Wounded Hart, near the King's Gate. 
Ramsay died in 1660, being described as of the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields in the administration granted to William on 20 August that year (TNA: PRO, PROB 6/203, fol. 113). A petition of 1661, from Mary, widow of David Ramsay, who stated that she raised troops for the king's service 'at Duke Hamilton's coming into England', since which time she had been sequestered and plundered, may refer to his widow. In 1660 Captain William Partridge petitioned for the appointment as king's clock- and watchmaker in succession to David Ramsay. 


@@@@@


doc= 23081


Ramsay, Edward Bannerman (1793-1872), Scottish Episcopal dean of Edinburgh and author, was the fourth son of Alexander Burnett, advocate sheriff of Kincardineshire, and his second wife, Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of Sir Alexander Bannerman of Elsick; he was born at Aberdeen on 31 January 1793. His father (who was the second son of Sir Thomas Burnett, bt, of Leys, and his wife, Catherine Ramsay), after his succession in 1806 to the estates of Balmain and Fasque in Kincardineshire, left to him by his uncle, Sir Alexander Ramsay, assumed for himself and his family the name of Ramsay, was made a baronet by Fox (13 May 1806), resigned his sheriffship, and lived until his death in 1810 at Fasque, the estate later owned by the Gladstones. 
Edward Ramsay spent much of his boyhood with his great-uncle, Sir Alexander, who lived on his Yorkshire estate. He was sent to the village school at Halsey after his uncle's death, and in 1806 to the cathedral grammar school at Durham. He completed his education at St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1816. In the same year he was ordained to the curacy of Rodden, near Frome in Somerset, and in 1817 became curate also of Buckland Denham in the same county, where the absence of the rector gave him the whole pastoral charge. In the 'Sunday Magazine' of January 1865 he wrote 'Reminiscences of a west of England curacy', in which he describes his life at this period and his friendship with the Wesleyan Methodists among his parishioners. His favourite studies were botany, architecture, and music. He became an accomplished player on the flute, and had a special admiration for Handel. In 1824 he went to Edinburgh as curate of St George's, York Place, where he remained for two years, and after a year's incumbency of St Paul's, Carrubbers Close, became in 1827 assistant to Bishop Sandford of St John's Church. He succeeded Sandford in 1830, and remained pastor of that congregation until his death. 
Ramsay's English education had not made him a less patriotic Scot, but it enlarged his view of Scottish patriotism. He advocated consistently, and at last successfully, the removal of the barriers which separated the Scottish Episcopal from the English church. In 1841 he was appointed by Bishop Terrot dean of Edinburgh, and, having declined Peel's offer of the bishopric of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and at later periods the bishopric of Glasgow and the coadjutor-bishopric of Edinburgh, he became familiarly known in Scotland as 'the Dean' or Dean Ramsay. He was a vice-president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and delivered the opening address in 1861. His only other contribution to its 'Proceedings' was a 'Memoir' of Thomas Chalmers, a friend for whose genius he had a high admiration. It was largely due to him that the statue of Chalmers was erected in George Street, Edinburgh. 
The 'Reminiscences of Scottish Life and Character' (1858), which gave Ramsay his widest reputation, had its origin in 'Two lectures on some changes in social life and habits', delivered at Ulbster Hall, Edinburgh, in 1857. It was rewritten and much enlarged in successive editions, of which twenty-one were published during his life; the twenty-second was issued after his death with a notice of his life by Professor Cosmo-Innes. The book has been recognized as the best collection of Scottish stories and one of the best answers to the charge of want of humour frequently made against the Scots. It is composed largely of stories and anecdotes furnished by his own recollection or that of his friends of all classes, supplemented by contributions from ministers of the various Scottish churches and others of his countrymen. Those who heard Ramsay tell Scottish stories maintained that print weakened their flavour, but they were woven together in the 'Reminiscences' in an artless personal narrative, which has a charm of its own. The work did much to establish in the English mind an impression of Scotland being inhabited by pawky characters, revelling in their individuality and eccentricity, and they made Ramsay one of the best-known Scots of his time. In addition to the 'Reminiscences' Ramsay published 'A Catechism' (1835), at one time much used, and a number of volumes of sermons and lectures, of which 'Pulpit Table-Talk' (1868) is characteristic. 
Ramsay was the principal founder of the Scottish Episcopal Church Society, in 1876 absorbed in the Representative Church Council, a society which improved the still slender emoluments of the clergy of the Episcopal church. In theology his sympathy was with the evangelical rather than the high-church party, and in politics with the liberal Conservatives. He retained through life a warm friendship for W. E. Gladstone, with whom he was associated in the foundation of Trinity College, Glenalmond. But he was not a man of party, and the epithet 'unsectarian' might have been invented for him. His links with the clergy of other communions and his open-minded attitude did much to lessen the prejudice with which episcopacy was regarded in Scotland. 
Ramsay married, in 1829, Isabella Cochrane, a Canadian, who predeceased him without children. Her nephews and nieces found a home in his house, where his brother, Admiral Sir W. Ramsay, resided after retiring from the navy. Dean Ramsay died in Edinburgh on 27 December 1872. A tablet was placed in St John's Church by his congregation, and an Iona cross in the adjoining burial-ground, facing Princes Street, was erected to his memory by public subscription. Ramsay left an autobiography of his ministry. It was bought by David Douglas at the sale of the effects of H. J. Rollo and was published privately by Douglas, edited by F. M. F. Skene, as 'Reminiscences of a Scottish Episcopal Ministry' (1892). 


@@@@@


doc= 23082


Ramsay, Sir George, ninth baronet (1800-1871), philosopher, elder brother of William Ramsay (1806-1865), professor of humanity at Glasgow University, was born at home on 19 March 1800. He was the second son of Sir William Ramsay, seventh baronet (died 1807), of Bamff House, Aylth, Perthshire, and Agnata Frances, daughter of Vincent Biscoe of Hookwood, Surrey. He was educated at Harrow School and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1823 and MB in 1826. On 9 October 1830 he married Emily Eugenia (1806-1885), youngest daughter of Captain Henry Lennon of co. Westmeath, with whom he had three sons. He succeeded his elder brother, Sir James Ramsay, as ninth baronet on 1 January 1859 and died at Bamff on 22 February 1871; the title passed to his eldest son, Sir James Henry Ramsay, the historian. His youngest son, George Gilbert Ramsay LLD, was elected professor of humanity at Glasgow University in 1863. 
Ramsay wrote voluminously on philosophy, psychology, and political economy from a standpoint firmly within the Scottish common-sense philosophical tradition. One of the most notable features of his writings is his determined opposition to utilitarianism, which in his 'Enquiry into the Principles of Human Happiness and Human Duty' (1843) he criticizes for excessive emphasis on rationality and consequent neglect of sources of emotional satisfaction. In his writings Ramsay attempts to counteract philosophical rationality by the use of literary examples, a tendency most pronounced in his 'The Philosophy and Poetry of Love' (1848), where excerpts from his philosophical writings are interspersed with a literary anthology. Ramsay's ethical philosophy chiefly distinguishes itself from that of his Scottish Enlightenment forebears through its romanticism; he strongly emphasizes the destructive effect of ennui on human happiness, and as an antidote recommends the state of continual emotion ensured by the cultivation of one 'prominent desire'. He also stresses the role of 'domestic happiness' and an ideal of affective marriage. 
On political questions Ramsay was a Conservative. In 'The Moralist and Politician, or, Many Things in Few Words' (1865), a collection of aphoristic writings, he characterizes aristocracy as the connecting link between 'monarchy' and 'democracy', without which the constitution 'falls to pieces', on the grounds that aristocrats represent local interests which would be ignored by the absolutist spirit of pure democracy. Ramsay attributes the condition of Ireland to the failure of the Irish aristocracy in 'A Proposal for the Restoration of the Irish Parliament' (1845). 


@@@@@


doc= 23083


Ramsay, George, twelfth earl of Dalhousie (1806-1880), naval officer, second son of John (1775-1842), the fourth son of George Ramsay, eighth earl of Dalhousie, was born on 26 April 1806. His mother was Mary (died 1843), daughter of Philip Delisle of Calcutta. He entered the navy in December 1820 and served in the frigates 'Cambrian' and 'Euryalus' in the Mediterranean, and on the South American station in the 'Doris', from which, on 30 April 1827, he was promoted to be lieutenant of the 'Heron'. He afterwards served in the 'Ganges', the flagship of Sir Robert Otway, at Rio de Janeiro, and in the 'Orestes' on the coast of Ireland; his three years as first lieutenant of the 'Nimrod' on the Lisbon station was followed by a period in the 'Rodney' in the Mediterranean from November 1835 until his promotion to the rank of commander on 10 January 1837. From August 1838 to August 1842 he commanded the 'Pilot' in the West Indies and on 20 March 1843 he was advanced to post rank. He married Sarah Frances (died 1904), only daughter of William Robertson of Logan House, Midlothian, on 12 August 1845. 
From August 1849 to the end of 1852 Ramsay commanded the 'Alarm' (26 guns) on the North American and West Indian stations. In December 1853 he commissioned the 'Euryalus', a new screw frigate, then considered one of the finest ships in the navy, and during the two following years he commanded her in the Baltic. On 4 February 1856 he was nominated a CB, and on the conclusion of peace with Russia was sent, still in the 'Euryalus', to the West Indies, whence he returned in the spring of 1857. He was then appointed superintendent of Pembroke dockyard, where he continued until September 1862. On 22 November 1862 he was promoted to the rank of rear-admiral, and from 1866 to 1869, with the 'Narcissus' as his flagship, he was commander-in-chief on the east coast of South America. He became vice-admiral on 17 March 1869 and admiral, on the retired list, on 20 July 1875. On 6 July 1874, on the death without issue of his cousin, Fox Maule, eleventh earl of Dalhousie, he succeeded to the title. On 12 June 1875 he was also created Baron Ramsay in the peerage of the United Kingdom as a reward for his naval service and his tory principles. He died suddenly at his home, Dalhousie Castle, Midlothian, on 20 July 1880. 
Dalhousie's eldest son, 
In February 1880 Ramsay was a candidate for Liverpool in a by-election, as an advanced Liberal and a follower of Gladstone; he was defeated mainly, it was said, by the influence of his father, who was a staunch Conservative. In the general election of 1880 he was returned as the minority member for Liverpool unopposed with two Conservatives, but on his father's death on 20 July that year was called to the House of Lords. In September he was appointed one of Queen Victoria's lords-in-waiting and he was nominated a knight of the Thistle in November 1881. In January 1883 he spent some weeks in Ireland as one of a royal commission to inquire into the state of the country, and came back, in his own words, 'even more impressed than I was before I went with the serious state of discontent, quite apart from outrages, which seems to pervade all Ireland out of Ulster'. This impression led him -- in contrast to the timidity of many of his colleagues in the Lords -- to support Gladstone's home-rule policy in 1886, and in March he joined the Liberal ministry as secretary for Scotland in succession to G. O. Trevelyan; he resigned with his colleagues in July. He was sworn of the privy council in April 1886. 
In 1887 Dalhousie and his wife made an extensive tour of the United States. They arrived at Le Havre in poor health on their return voyage in November. On the 24th the countess's illness proved fatal, and Dalhousie, unable to bear the shock, died in Le Havre the next morning. The bodies were buried in the family vault in Cockpen parish church, Midlothian. They left two sons, the elder of whom, Arthur George Maule Ramsay, succeeded to the title. 


@@@@@


doc= 23084


Ramsay, James (1589?-1638/9), army officer in the Swedish service, was born in Scotland probably in 1589. He was the eighth of nine children of Robert Ramsay of Wyliecleuch, known as Sir Robert; a brother was the courtier David Ramsay and he was a kinsman of John Ramsay, Viscount Haddington and earl of Holdernesse. In later life he became known as Black Ramsay to distinguish him from another James Ramsay in Swedish service at the time called the Fair. He is generally styled Sir James, though on what basis is not known. 
James Ramsay accompanied King James to London in 1603, where he became an attendant in the privy chamber of the king and of Prince Henry. He is probably the same as the James Ramsay who was recommended for service at the court of Christian IV of Denmark-Norway by James VI and I in the first decade of the seventeenth century. In 1611 Ramsay was sent back to the Stuart kingdoms to levy recruits for the impending Kalmar War between Denmark-Norway and Sweden. However, he did not remain long in Danish service as in 1614 the Swedish chancellor, Axel Oxenstierna, entrusted a messenger known as Ramsay with carrying a letter to Colonel James Spens, the Stuart ambassador to Sweden and Swedish ambassador to the Stuarts. Some time before 1614 Ramsay married Isobel Spens (died after 1646), the ambassador's daughter. Little more is known of him during the next decade apart from his appointment as an ensign in the Swedish army in 1615. Ramsay next appears as a lieutenant-colonel in Colonel Spens's regiment from 1624 to 1626. The following year he became the colonel of his own recruited regiment of Scots. 
Ramsay and his regiment were frequently considered by Oxenstierna and King Gustavus Adolphus for the Swedish campaigns in Germany during the Thirty Years' War. By 1630 Ramsay's regiment had suffered such a high mortality rate that Oxenstierna authorized the provision of new recruits from Courland, Lithuania, and Scotland. The Swedish chancellor was also quick to rectify Ramsay's shortage of funds for his troops, and wrote directly to the treasurer to release money to him. When the marquess of Hamilton's troops landed in Germany in 1631 Ramsay ensured the delivery of victuals to the starving and sickly men. In March 1631 Oxenstierna even recommended Ramsay as the only officer suitable to take over the occupation of Colberg with his regiment of 600 soldiers, revealing the high esteem he had for Ramsay's military leadership. 
At the battle of Breitenfeld near Leipzig in September 1631 Ramsay's troops served in the vanguard whose actions helped bring victory to the Swedes, alongside those of Colonel Robert Monro of Foulis and Sir John Hamilton. Soon afterwards Ramsay's regiment was instrumental in forcing the fortified castle at Wurzburg to surrender after the city had already capitulated to the Swedish king through the mediation of a Scottish priest named Ogilvie. During the manoeuvre Ramsay was incapacitated by a wound in the arm. Not only was he rewarded with a large land grant in the duchy of Mecklenburg, but he was also appointed the governor of Hanau. His regiment continued to undertake leading roles in Swedish army manoeuvres, such as the taking of Aschaffenberg, Oppenheim, and Creuznach. Shortly after this Ramsay's wife must have decided to leave Germany as in 1632 Oxenstierna requested that money be released for her removal along with her household to Stettin. Ramsay's favourable reputation was widespread and in 1634 the burgesses and town council of Nuremberg personally requested his appointment as commandant of their town upon the death of the former incumbent, Colonel Hastfer. Chancellor Oxenstierna had to refuse the request as Ramsay was still serving in Hanau. That year the Stuart ambassador to Poland, Sir George Douglas, visited Ramsay. During this period Ramsay was promoted major-general. 
However, Ramsay's fortunes soon changed as imperial forces began to besiege Hanau in 1635, and the garrison barely survived until the following year when Swedish forces, led by Colonel Alexander Leslie, liberated the town. After a brief respite, during which Ramsay managed to send provisions to another garrison nearby, Hanau was again besieged and this time Philip Maurice, count of Hanau, made his peace with the emperor, and relinquished the Swedish cause. Seeing the impossibility of his situation, Ramsay agreed to evacuate the city on honourable terms. Oxenstierna wrote Ramsay a letter commending and congratulating him on his steadfast performance at Hanau, allowing him to retain his rank until he received full payment and compensation from the Swedish government to the value of 50,000 riksdaler (about $15,000). This was to cover several arrangements: to maintain his wife in Scotland, to secure an equivalent for his lands in Mecklenburg, and to obtain his safe conduct to Swedish quarters. However, Ramsay did not believe that this agreement would be honoured and in December 1637, to put pressure on the Swedes who would not want to give the Germans further cause to attack, he took the count of Hanau prisoner and re-occupied the town. Barely two months later, on 12 February 1638, Henry, Count Nassau Dillenburg, surprised, wounded, and captured Ramsay, who died a prisoner in the castle of Dillenburg on either 11 March 1638 or, according to T. Fischer, 29 June 1639. His widow lacked the means to bring his body back to Scotland and he was eventually buried at Dillenburg town church on 18 August 1650. 
It is not known how many children Ramsay had, although a son, David, attained the rank of colonel in the Swedish service (his will is printed by Fischer, 'Scots in Sweden'). Although Ramsay, unlike so many of his compatriots serving in the Swedish army, was never ennobled by the Swedes, he still proved a respectable and consistent soldier of the highest calibre, to the extent that he was actively sought after as governor by conquered German populations. 


@@@@@


doc= 23085


Ramsay, James (c.1624-1696), bishop of Ross, was born in Irvine, the son of Robert Ramsay ('c'.1598-1651), principal of Glasgow University, and his wife, Janet Campbell. He entered Glasgow University on 31 March 1645 and was laureated in 1647. About 1648 he married Mary Gartshore, with whom he raised a large family. The resolutioner party in the church ordained him to his first charge at Kirkintilloch on 19 February 1653. During the English occupation his parishioners defied the prohibition against attending his services, which the protester clergy had obtained after having failed to stop his admission. In 1655 he was translated to Linlithgow, where, despite obstructions to his call, the synod declared him legally called and admitted. A respected member of the resolutioner party, he preached in thanksgiving for Charles II's restoration ('Moses Returned from Midian', 1660), and on 29 May 1661 officiated at the anniversary pageant in Linlithgow at which symbols of the solemn league and covenant and the interregnum were burned. In 1664 he was appointed to the charge of Hamilton and 'ex officio' to the deanery of Glasgow. From 1665 to 1667 he was rector of Glasgow University, heading the subscriptions of the oath of allegiance to episcopacy on 6 January 1666. Accompanying the duke of Hamilton with Thomas Dalziel's forces at the skirmish at Pentland on 28 November 1666, he protected him from a rebel's blow. 
Ramsay's views on dissenting presbyterians became intolerant as he and many brethren grew aghast at the undermining of the diocese of Glasgow by the indulged ministers and the prevalence of conventicles. In September 1669 in a bold remonstrance to the king, drawn up by Ramsay and Arthur Ross, parson of Glasgow, the diocesan synod lamented the state of the church and criticized government policy for not enacting uniformity of worship and discipline. Summoned before the council, they were both confined to their parishes for a year. The remonstrance was suppressed, but it provided a reason for the dismissal of Alexander Burnet as archbishop of Glasgow. Under his successor, Robert Leighton, Ramsay supported measures for conciliation and accommodation of presbyterian dissenters, but John Paterson, dean of Edinburgh, reported that he was oppressive towards the conforming clergy. He earned sufficient favour to be recommended to the vacant diocese of the Isles in 1672. The chapter completed the formalities of his election on 31 July, but the clergy objected that although otherwise qualified, he could not fulfil his episcopal duties without knowing Gaelic, and requested the king to nominate another man. The objections were heeded, for on 22 July 1673 Ramsay was instead nominated bishop of Dunblane and 'ex officio' dean of the Chapel Royal. 
During 1674 a movement for the calling of a national synod arose among Edinburgh and Glasgow clergy, supported by Bishop Laurie of Brechin and by Ramsay. Archbishop Sharp of St Andrews and others opposed it vehemently, fearing its destabilizing influence and suspecting it was intended to lead to demands for the recall of parliament. On 8 July 1674 at a conference of the bishops and some clergy, Ramsay was alone in pressing the case for a synod to settle the church. For disobeying his metropolitan the king ordered Sharp to translate him to the Isles. On 28 July Ramsay petitioned the privy council, which forwarded his petition to the king. Sharp suspended him from his episcopal functions. In April 1675 Ramsay followed the primate to court 'where they fall a scolding in their letters' (Wodrow, 2.304). A commission of Scottish bishops arbitrated in September, and after Ramsay's submission to authority in December he resumed his see of Dunblane in April 1676, holding the charge of Culross 'in commendam'. In 1676-7 his rights to an annuity due to the deanery of the Chapel Royal were disputed in an important case for church revenues. 
After the death of Bishop Young of Ross, Ramsay was named his successor on 14 April 1684; he served his diocese diligently for five years, residing also at Culross. Although he accepted the royal prerogative and obeyed the 'Test Act', in May 1686 he again stood up for his principles in a sermon to parliament against the act for the toleration of Roman Catholics. In order to overawe other opponents of the toleration, he was summoned before Alexander Burnet, now archbishop of St Andrews, and John Paterson, now bishop of Edinburgh, for defamatory remarks about the earls of Perth and Melfort, and remarks offensive to Lord Moray. Melfort remarked that because of previous kindnesses, Ramsay was 'the only one amongst the Bishops I regrate' (earl of Moray papers, 7/619). The bishop held out for a synodical trial but there being no proof the case was dropped. Ramsay also narrowly escaped the dismissal that befell Bishop Bruce of Dunkeld on 3 June. During 1687-8 Ramsay was keen to assist Robert Boyle's abortive project for the distribution of Gaelic bibles and catechisms in his predominantly Gaelic-speaking diocese. However, because of the difficulties inherent in expounding scripture and doctrine from books in the Irish form of Gaelic, which was not fully understood in Scotland, Ramsay was unable to condemn those who designed to have 'the language quite worn out of this country', along with 'the barbarity of the manners of some of our highlanders' (NL Scot., MS 821, fol. 89'r'). Nevertheless, Ramsay commissioned a Gaelic translation of a catechism, and ensured there was a school in every parish, even if its language was English. 
At the revolution this opponent of the excesses of Stuart church policy displayed the same loyalty to the crown as his brethren; Ramsay was deprived of his see on 22 July 1689, retiring into obscurity in Edinburgh. When on 9 August 1694 he ordained James Greenshields a presbyter, it was conditional on an oath 'to the same King for whom the Bishop professed to suffer' (Christ Church library, Oxford, Wake papers, vol. 19, fol. 189'r'). On 22 October 1696 Ramsay died at Edinburgh 'in very low circumstances' (Keith and Spottiswoode, 517); he was buried in Canongate churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 23086


Ramsay, James (1733-1789), surgeon and slavery abolitionist, was born on 25 July 1733 at Fraserburgh, Aberdeenshire, the only son of William Ramsay (1683-1754), ship's carpenter, and his wife, Margaret Ogilvie (1696-1772) of Powrie. After attending Fraserburgh grammar school he was apprenticed to Dr Alexander Findlay, a local surgeon. A bursary enabled him to enter King's College, Aberdeen, and brought Ramsay under the teaching of Dr Thomas Reid (1710-1796), professor of moral philosophy, who exercised a profound influence on his thinking. After obtaining the degree of MA on 9 April 1753, he continued his surgical training in London with Dr George Macaulay, physician and treasurer of the British Lying-in Hospital. He passed his examination to enter the navy on 2 June 1757 and was appointed to the 'Arundel', a sixth rate of 24 guns and 160 men, on the West Indies station, where he came under the command of Sir Charles Middleton. The 'Arundel' intercepted the British slave ship 'Swift', ravaged by dysentery, on 27 November 1759 and, on boarding her, Ramsay found over 100 slaves wallowing in blood and excreta, a scene of human degradation which remained for ever in his memory and so distracted his attention that, on returning to his ship, he fell and fractured his thigh bone. It was the more serious of two such accidents and he remained lame for life. 
With an end to his naval service in prospect, Ramsay sought ordination in the Anglican church to enable him to work among slaves. He returned to Britain in July 1761, left the navy in September, and was ordained by the bishop of London in November. He departed almost immediately for St Kitts, where he was appointed to St John's, Capisterre (1762), and to Christ Church, Nicola Town (1763). In 1763 he married Rebecca Akers (died 1804), daughter of a well-connected planter; they had a son, who predeceased him, and three daughters. Responding to a local need, he practised his skills in surgery and midwifery, but provided a free service to the poor. He was also appointed surgeon to several plantations and this enabled him to see the conditions under which slaves laboured, the brutality of many owners and overseers, and the mutilating punishments and cruel injustice meted out to them. His sympathy for disadvantaged settlers led to involvement in local government and he proposed a more equitable taxation system, while his naval experience was reflected in his 'Essay on the Duty and Qualifications of a Sea Officer' (1765), which was highly acclaimed and translated into a number of other languages. 
Ramsay's interest in the welfare of slaves was encouraged by people of integrity, but aroused the antagonism of influential planters and local government officials who, facing ruin, attempted to manipulate the interest rate in their favour to the detriment of honest and thrifty citizens. Ramsay felt it his duty to challenge this illegal scheme and became the target of verbal abuse, scurrilous pamphlets, and letters to newspapers. He was deprived of his magistracy, privileges of the clergy were curtailed, and churchgoing discouraged. His letters to the bishop of London disclose serious disaffection among colonists at this period. They marked the beginning of his relationship with British politicians. 
On returning to Britain in 1777 Ramsay visited his married sister Jean in Fraserburgh, adopted his nephew James Ramsay Walker, and paid for the boy's education. Walker subsequently became bishop of Edinburgh and primus of the Scottish Episcopal church. Ramsay was then received into the family of Sir Charles Middleton at Barham Court, Teston, Kent, where Lady Middleton immediately warmed to the cause of slaves. In April 1778 he rejoined the navy as chaplain to Admiral Barrington on the West Indies station. His knowledge of West Indies affairs may have influenced the appointment for he had been introduced to Lord George Germain, secretary of state for the American department, who arranged for him to supply private intelligence. Ramsay saw action against the French off St Lucia in December 1778 and off Grenada and St Kitts in July 1779. He was subsequently based in St Kitts gathering intelligence for Admiral G. B. Rodney, formed a lasting friendship with Sir Gilbert Blane, Rodney's physician, and rendered valuable service to the Jews when Rodney captured St Eustatius. During this time he prepared the material for his book 'Sea Sermons for the Royal Navy' (1781), which revealed a genuine affection for the sailor, an understanding of his character, and an appreciation of his contribution to the nation. 'You and your fellow-combattants were a band of brothers engaged in one cause', he said ('Sea Sermons', 17817). It was a phrase later adopted by Nelson. 
Early in 1779 Ramsay had been invited by Middleton, then a rear-admiral and comptroller of the navy, to assist him with a radical reform of the Navy Board and he returned to Britain with his wife and family during the latter part of 1781, to be awarded a Lambeth MA and, in January 1782, installed as vicar of Teston and rector of Nettleshead. The livings were in Middleton's gift and the rectory adjoined Barham Court, where Ramsay acted as Middleton's confidential secretary. He also appears to have initiated policy, for several papers are in his handwriting and preliminary drafts appear in his private diary. In 1782 he also took the new diploma of the Company of Surgeons, which suggests an intention eventually to resume his practice in St Kitts. 
At Barham Court and the Middleton's London home in Hertford Street, Ramsay found himself among an influential circle of philanthropists, intelligentsia, and politicians where his account of the iniquities of the slave trade aroused vehement indignation, and Lady Middleton urged him to lay his evidence before the nation. His 'Essay on the Treatment and Conversion of African Slaves in the British Sugar Colonies' appeared in 1784 and was the most important event in the early history of the anti-slavery movement. In this work he reviewed the status of slaves in history, their moral rights, their ill treatment in British colonies, and the influence of nutritional deficiency, overwork, and mutilating punishments upon morbidity, mortality, and output, with examples of the benefits of enlightened management. Nevertheless he foresaw the problems of precipitate emancipation and proposed a programme of preparation which would encompass education, Christian teaching, the inculcation of family and social values, and the passing of equitable laws. The book received immediate acclaim but was followed by a flood of vituperation from the planter community in anonymous letters to national and colonial newspapers, which Ramsay countered effectively in his 'Reply to Personal Invectives' (1785). Meanwhile, in 'An Inquiry into the Effects of Putting a Stop to the African Slave Trade' (1784) he advocated the development of a mixed economy on the African coast for emancipated slaves who would trade their produce for British manufactures. This book impressed Pitt and William Wilberforce. 
During this period Ramsay was acting as Middleton's secretary and, in addition to the reorganization of the Navy Board, was involved in the settlement of Australia. He appears to have chosen the surgeons of the first fleet (1787), who achieved a remarkable health record and provided the medical establishment of the colony. He also collaborated with Sir Gilbert Blane in his book 'Diseases of Seamen' (1785) and Blane was impressed by his warm and disinterested zeal for the service. 
Initially, Ramsay bore the acrimony of the planters alone until Wilberforce, whom he had met in 1783, and T. Clarkson, his curate in 1787, rallied to the abolitionist cause. He was thereafter consulted by Pitt as the Middletons co-ordinated the anti-slavery campaign. In the run-up to the first Commons debate on abolition (May 1789) -- a response to the deluge of petitions following the controversy over Ramsay's books -- Ramsay prepared briefs for Wilberforce and other politicians containing many of the moral arguments and much of the evidence which Wilberforce used in his speech. During the debate Crisp Molyneux, a planter from St Kitts, impugned Ramsay's character and professional reputation. Although Middleton leapt to his defence and Olaudah Equiano, an emancipated slave acquainted with St Kitts, confirmed all that Ramsay had written, Ramsay never recovered from this attack. He developed increasingly severe abdominal pain and died from a massive gastric haemorrhage on 20 July 1789 in the Middletons' London home in Hertford Street. He was buried in Teston churchyard on 25 July and a memorial near to that of his black servant Nestor is in Teston church. He was survived by his wife. 
C. I. La Trobe paid tribute to Ramsay's diligence, benevolence, and urbanity and to his mild and charitable disposition (La Trobe, 17), while Clarkson admired his insight, coolness, courage, patriotism, public spirit, amiability, and the personal example which characterized his ministry (Clarkson, 2.117). Even his enemies acknowledged his exemplary qualities, while deploring the intemperate language of his books; and the abolition of the British slave trade in 1807 probably owed more to James Ramsay's personal integrity, ethical arguments, and constructive proposals than to any other influence. 


@@@@@


doc= 23087


Ramsay, James (1786-1854), portrait painter, was the son of Robert Ramsay (1754-1828) of Sheffield, a carver and gilder who later became a dealer in prints and plaster models. Thus Ramsay was brought up in an atmosphere of artistic activity, this being intensified when Francis Chantrey, then a precociously talented youth, became an apprentice to Ramsay's father in 1797. In the following year his father published two mezzotint portraits of well-known Sheffield men painted by the Chesterfield artist E. Needham. The engravings were produced by John Raphael Smith and, possibly influenced by Needham and Smith, Ramsay became attracted to a career in art himself. By the age of fifteen, when he joined the family business, he was already a talented artist, his father announcing in 'The Iris' (Sheffield), on 12 February 1801, that the services of 'Ramsay Junior' were available as a 'Portrait and Miniature Painter'. In 1803 Ramsay left Sheffield, taking with him a self-portrait, and, after showing it to an old friend of his father, Robert Pollard, in London, was successful in having it accepted by the Royal Academy. He was then only seventeen and, uncertain of his future in London, returned to Sheffield on a number of occasions over the next four years for what he advertised locally as 'short stays'. He was probably the James Ramsey who entered the Royal Academy Schools in March 1805 when his age was given as twenty-one. However, he soon established himself as a successful portrait painter in London, and three years after his first arrival there exhibited at the Royal Academy a portrait of Henry Grattan which was engraved in mezzotint by Charles Turner; in 1810 one of John Townley, and in 1813 that of Lord Brougham. In 1814 at the Royal Academy he varied his exhibits for the first time by showing two scriptural subjects: 'Peter Denying Christ', and 'Peter's Repentance', and in 1819 sent views of Tynemouth Abbey, and of North and South Shields. He also exhibited at the British Institution and the Society of British Artists. His main work for the remainder of his life, however, was portraiture of well-known people. One of the most notable of these was his friend and fellow artist Thomas Bewick, of whom he painted at least three portraits; the earliest of these was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1816 and engraved by John Burnet (National History Society of Northumbria, Newcastle); the remaining two at the Royal Academy in 1823. One of these 1823 exhibits showed Bewick alone (NPG); the other consisted of a group portrait including Ramsay and his wife (Laing Gallery, Newcastle). His other sitters included James Northcote RA and Charles, second Earl Grey (1824). Although he once contemplated practising as a portrait painter in Scotland following the death of Raeburn (letter to Reid, the Leith bookseller, quoted by Jane Bewick in a letter to her brother Robert Elliott Bewick, 12 Aug 1823, Huntington MSS HM 17315), Ramsay remained based in London for some forty years. In 1848, however, he decided to move with his wife to practise in Newcastle upon Tyne, a town with which he had long been connected through his several portrait commissions in the north-east of England, his friendships with brother artists in the area, and his regular appearances at various exhibitions there. He continued to exhibit at the Royal Academy while at Newcastle, showing several portraits of local celebrities, including George Hawkes, first mayor of Gateshead (1848), and William Armstrong (1854). He died after a long illness, at 40 Blackett Street, Newcastle, on 23 June 1854. Examples of Ramsay's work are in the Carlisle Art Gallery, Hull Art Gallery, and Newcastle Central Library, and in the collections of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Newcastle and the Natural History Society of Northumbria. 


@@@@@


doc= 23088


Ramsay, James Andrew Broun, first marquess of Dalhousie (1812-1860), governor-general of India, was born at Dalhousie Castle, Bonnyrigg, Midlothian, on 22 April 1812, the youngest of three sons of George Ramsay, ninth earl of Dalhousie (1770-1838), soldier, and colonial governor, and his wife, Christian Ramsay (1786-1839), only daughter and heiress of Charles Broun of Colstoun in East Lothian. 
James accompanied his parents to Canada in 1816 but returned home in 1822 and entered Harrow School in 1825. In 1829 he went to Christ Church, Oxford, where his career was not outstanding. Gladstone, Canning, and Elgin were among his contemporaries. He showed some signs of youthful intolerance -- his diary notes, 'We certainly are immensely cocky but then, hang it, we have reason' (K. Fieling, 'In Christ Church Hall', 1960, 164) -- but was also prone to self-examination and the desire to do better. When he came of age he resolved 'to act solely by a consideration of what will most conduce to the interests and happiness of my countrymen... In my private life... I will hope and pray that I ever shall be all that an honest and good man could wish to see me' (Warner, 1.24). The death of his elder brother, Lord Ramsay, in 1832 (the second brother had died some years before) prevented him from obtaining honours although he was awarded an honorary fourth (then regarded as equivalent to a second class) at his examination a year later. 
Ramsay's political views evolved along Conservative lines; in 1831 he was unhappy about the 'Reform Bill' and the clamour of its partisans. At the 1835 general election as Lord Ramsay he stood as a tory candidate for Edinburgh with 'no wish to perpetuate abuses or to preserve blots' (Warner, 1.34). He was defeated, but his good humour, determination, and the spirit in which he accepted defeat were remembered, and the election served to introduce him to public life. He subsequently became a JP for Haddington, joined several political and philanthropic committees, and resisted calls to come forward for an English seat, preferring to remain in Scotland. On 21 January 1836 he married Lady Susan Georgiana Hay (1817-1853), eldest daughter of the marquess of Tweeddale, a family friend. It was a love match and Ramsay came to depend much on his wife's support; her premature death at thirty-five overshadowed the remainder of his life. Their first child, Susan Georgiana, was born in 1837 and a second daughter, Edith Christian, in 1839. 
In 1837 Ramsay was elected MP for East Lothian, but his father's death the following year called him to the Lords as the tenth earl of Dalhousie. It seems he saw little chance of early advancement in the upper house (where he joined the group of Peelite tory peers) and so devoted his energies to specifically Scottish issues. In 1839 he became a member of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, representing the presbytery of Dalkeith, in which lay his own parish of Cockpen. He took an active part in the assembly at a time when the great questions which resulted in the Disruption four years later were already stirring. Dalhousie was in favour of church reform but later resigned his seat in disagreement that the assembly should persist with a measure against a ruling of the court of session confirmed by the House of Lords. 
Dalhousie soon attracted the notice of the duke of Wellington and Sir Robert Peel, who, after the fall of Melbourne in 1841, became Conservative prime minister. Dalhousie declined an appointment to the queen's household (although his wife briefly served as a lady of the bedchamber) and was considered for the governorships of Madras and Bombay. In 1843 his chance came with the offer of the post of vice-president of the Board of Trade when Gladstone became president. 
Dalhousie took up office with a vigour that would become characteristic of his tenure in India; he was usually first and last at his desk each day, often working into the early hours. His appointment was soon followed by the onset of the 'railway mania' which confronted the board with a huge workload. Gladstone gave Dalhousie a free hand, allowing him an insight into railway business of great value later when he dealt with schemes in India. In 1845 he succeeded Gladstone as president, and eventually joined the cabinet. If Dalhousie had had his way, he would have subjected the construction and management of railway schemes to the co-ordinating control of government. He failed, however, to win Peel's support and devised instead a mechanism for the close scrutiny of each new scheme before sanction was given. 
Dalhousie, when president, also had to deal with a wide range of other issues including banking, the coal trade, land matters, and sugar duties. His abilities and capacity for work were recognized not only by his own party but also by the opposition. After Peel's fall in 1846 Lord John Russell tried and failed to secure Dalhousie for the whig cabinet. 
In the following year, however, Dalhousie accepted Russell's offer of the governor-generalship of India in succession to Viscount Hardinge, on the understanding that it would not compromise his political loyalties. A factor in his decision was the insecure financial position he inherited (a debt by now of $48,000): the governor-general commanded a substantial salary. He sailed for India in November 1847 and was sworn as governor-general in Calcutta on 12 January 1848. At thirty-five he was the youngest man to have held the appointment; small and short but well made in stature, with dark brown hair and a rich resonant voice, he had a quiet dignity coupled with a nervous force backed by obvious strength of mind and character. 
Dalhousie faced problems of consolidating East India Company rule without jeopardizing its essential dynamism. His policy came to have two closely interwoven strands: economic and administrative 'modernization', and strategic territorial expansion within India's 'natural frontiers'. The two strands were linked by the immediate and practical need to strengthen the company's hold on India and to create a state capable of providing the resources both for its own occupation and for the underpinning of British economic and military power throughout the East. The problems were not new (the concerns of his predecessors such as Bentinck and Ellenborough show this), but Dalhousie's combination of political and administrative skills, energy, and sheer determination to become thoroughly acquainted with the Indian system of government and administration and its condition and resources was. The consistent pursuit of this dual policy has given Dalhousie the credit for laying the foundations of modern India through modernization and consolidation but also the blame for the most serious crisis of the whole period of British control -- the uprising of 1857. 
From the outset Dalhousie established a rigorous official routine in Calcutta. He rose at about 6 a.m., read a 'Bible' chapter, and then devoted himself to office boxes until breakfast over the Indian newspapers at 8 a.m. At 9.30 a.m. he went to his desk and usually stayed there until 5.30 p.m., consuming lunch while at work. While away from Calcutta on tour he worked equally hard to keep up with the necessary business. As at the Board of Trade, he put immense effort into mastering the details of questions with which he had to deal and used this as a means of enforcing considerable personal authority throughout the entire Indian government. For example, only sixteen days after taking up his duties he refused to continue established practice of autographing blank dispatches for the government secretaries to draft over, so that in future 'I may see what I am signing' (Dalhousie MSS). His arduous days meant he preferred quiet evenings with his wife rounded off with another 'Bible' chapter before bed; he much disliked the official functions, many of them after normal working hours, that were inseparable from his official position. 
Dalhousie considered the governor-general 'the beginning, middle and end of all', and his style made it the more so; he confided to his diary in 1854 on the departure of Sir Henry Elliot, 'I have myself done the chief part of the work in his, as in every other, department of Govt.' Dalhousie's almost obsessive attention to detail shows he saw this as the only safe way to get things done and his frustrations were revealed in another document of 1854 when he advised, 'if you want anything done which 'must' be done, follow my plan viz Order it to be done, see that it is done and 'circulate' the papers afterwards' (Dalhousie MSS). 
Despite his forceful style it is equally clear, however, that Dalhousie accepted advice, did not generally allow personal considerations to influence his judgement (although he was involved in some acrimonious wrangles with other key figures, such as the commander-in-chief Sir Charles Napier, when this resolve was tested to the full), was prepared to forgive mistakes, and was keen to give credit to subordinates where credit was due. Overall, Dalhousie's example and efforts improved the conduct of the company's administration. Canning, his successor (1856-62), observed that 'Dalhousie, though he did more than was necessary in some matters, made business shorter and smoother' (M. Maclagan, 'Clemency Canning', 1962, 47). Dalhousie's thoroughgoing administrative background was important in his selection as governor-general and, arriving after the defeat of the Sikhs, he seemed destined to undertake the final pacification of India. In April 1848, however, two events occurred that would mould the course of Dalhousie's incumbency: the death of the raja of Satara, which raised the question of the 'lapse' of princely states to the direct rule of the East India Company, and the outbreak of revolt in Multan, which initiated a train of events leading to the annexation of the Punjab, the last of the major native powers within the 'natural frontiers'. 
Dalhousie has been credited with invention of the doctrine of lapse, which featured so strongly in the territorial expansion of his years in India. The doctrine was, in fact, first promulgated in 1834 and formalized in 1841, and Dalhousie was not alone in India or in London in wishing to use it to give both order and legitimacy to the 'falling-in' of princely states. In this way the company's rule could be extended gradually and methodically, with each case being carefully considered on its merits and its contribution to company resources, and in a way designed to avoid overstretching Calcutta's capacity to deal effectively with new acquisitions. Dalhousie later wrote that he was 'for the extension of territory by way of consolidation' (Wood MSS). He noted in relation to Satara that, 'while I would not seek to lay down any inflexible rule with respect to adoption, I hold that on all occasions where heirs natural shall fail, the territory shall be made to lapse and adoption should not be permitted, excepting in those cases in which some strong political reason may render it expedient to depart from this general rule. (S. N. Prasad, 'Paramountcy under Dalhousie', 1964, 106)' Dalhousie hoped incorporation of princely states would rationalize administration, broaden company revenue, and consolidate its geographical hold on the subcontinent. Such reasoning was the reality of Indian politics, and talk of any moral responsibility for the welfare of the population at large was 'nothing else than ambitious and hypothetical humbug' (India home miscellaneous series, vol. 828). Satara, therefore, 'lapsed' and established the outline of Dalhousie's policy towards the princely states, although its presentation was moulded, in each case, by reaction to the policy both at home and in India. 
The Punjab was even more crucial; it came to exemplify Dalhousie's concern to link strategic and improving policies in a co-ordinated way to consolidate company power and provide a model for effective administration elsewhere in the subcontinent. In 1848 the Punjab lay beyond formal British authority but within the company's sphere of interest. The revolt at Multan, therefore, presented Dalhousie with a major crisis within ten months of arriving in India; he saw that a solution must allow military savings and some addition to company revenue, although initially he resisted annexation. A second Anglo-Sikh war had not been unexpected, but the difficulties the company forces experienced in gaining a decisive victory were a surprise and it was not until January 1849 that Multan was taken. 
In the meantime Dalhousie had left Calcutta for the Punjab and exercised close, though not unchallenged, supervision over Lord Gough, the commander-in-chief. Victory was achieved only after considerable effort, and in March 1849 Dalhousie decided to annex the Punjab to reinforce company standing against its enemies within India. Drawing on the advice of those with experience of the Punjab during its period of company supervision after 1846, he was convinced that the province would be a paying proposition. The young Sikh maharaja Duleep Singh was deposed, and the famous Koh-i-noor diamond was confiscated and sent to Queen Victoria (it remains part of the British crown jewels). Dalhousie was created a marquess in recognition of his role in the campaign and, characteristically, noted in his diary that 'I of course prefer to be a Scottish Earl of 1633 to being an English Marquis of 1849', although he was still 'most deeply grateful for it and gratified by it' (Warner, 1.230-31). 
Dalhousie was fully aware that annexation was only the start of the Punjab problem; it was the largest and most powerful state to be absorbed by the company since the final defeat of the Marathas in 1818. Contemporaries drew a distinction between it and previous conquests; annexation had not just overturned a dynasty but clashed with a nationality, so British policy had to be more comprehensive, persuasive, and assertive than ever before. Dalhousie was, therefore, concerned to frame a civil policy pitched towards the local sources of influence while maintaining a firm grip on military security. His response was to devise a mixed form of military and civilian government under his own supervision, so the Punjab became a new form of non-regulation province under a board of administration until 1853. Boards, which divided authority and responsibility, were not generally favoured by Dalhousie, but it provided a way of managing Henry Lawrence (hitherto the British resident in Lahore), whom he thought 'plus Sikh que les Sikhs'. The governor-general also wanted to make the best use of the available official talent, and made appointments without regard to the usual rules of seniority. In contrast to the older established territories, the new administration was to be 'rough and ready... until revenues mend' (Dalhousie MSS). Dalhousie also identified the need for a co-ordinated scheme of pacification and development to stitch the Sikhs to company rule, and was therefore keen to use 'Native Agency united with Europeans' because 'policy would dictate our doing so, even if finance should not compel it' (Henry Lawrence MSS). 
Dalhousie was equally keen that annexation should not mean full-scale, and therefore unsettling, change for the Punjab. The authority of the local chiefs ('sardars') had already been undermined by the military and political changes that had swept the province since the death of Ranjit Singh in 1839. Where 'sardars' were effective collaborators with company rule, they were retained. Where resumption by the new rulers of chiefly authority was deemed necessary, extremes of leniency or harshness were avoided and the decisions made with certainty and quietness to consolidate British control. The major problems facing the board were in the extraction of revenue from powerful village brotherhoods, which held sway in most of the province, and in settling the men of the defeated Sikh army back to the plough. Dalhousie was anxious to preserve village rights so far as possible and to establish effective arbitration procedures; settlement officers were vested with full civil and revenue powers. Revenue demands were cut by 25 per cent and it is clear that Dalhousie was carefully balancing immediate needs against longer-term political security. Mistakes occurred, but settlement officers trod as carefully as possible. John Lawrence was petitioned by some headmen in Butala; he sent them away but told the assessing officer that 'You might quietly take a look at your statements' (John Lawrence MSS). The care with which these detailed problems were approached owed much to the influence of the governor-general himself. 
The Punjab pacification also necessitated dealing with about 40,000 Sikh soldiers. Dalhousie decided, despite misgivings from London, to recruit local corps and regarded 'the free enlistment of the young Sikhs from the Manjha [area] as a measure of great political value' (Dalhousie MSS), thereby establishing a key component of the future military history of India. The Manjha benefited from Dalhousie's blend of civil and military policy because he considered it 'of the utmost moment to provide means of subsistence and employment for the Sikhs of the Manjha who have been the most turbulent in the recent proceedings and have been most affected by the results of the war... To this end the opening of new branches from the Irrigation Canal which traverses the upper Manjha... was very early urged upon me on Political and Financial grounds. (Dalhousie MSS)' This combined policy was crucial to the stability of the Punjab during the tumult of 1857. 
The Punjab problem came early in Dalhousie's Indian career and did much to develop his ideas for consolidating company rule. Ideally, such consolidation would concentrate on civil and economic measures, but Dalhousie soon concluded that the company 'could not, consistently with its own safety, appear in an attitude of inferiority... among the numberless princes and peoples embraced within the vast circuit of the Empire' (Dalhousie MSS) in India. External difficulties always posed dangers. Trouble in Burma during 1851 was, therefore, unwelcome to Dalhousie; it gave no opportunity to consolidate within the natural frontiers, nor did it promise much for the company's coffers. The grievances of British mercantile interests in Rangoon were old and unproven, but they were skilfully manipulated. Dalhousie tried hard to avoid war but failed: the new province of Pegu was added to the empire on 20 December 1852. Dalhousie decided that Pegu should be entrusted to a commissioner with an administration similar to that developed for the Punjab. Initial optimism about a swift settlement proved unfounded, and the governor-general characteristically brought his direct authority to bear. The commissioner was asked to prepare a comprehensive plan for future government of the province; he was told that 'order internally I must have, and at whatever cost' ('The Dalhousie-Phayre Correspondence, 1852-56', ed. D. G. E. Hall, 1932, 100). Effective British authority was gradually imposed from 1854, and Pegu also remained quiet in 1857. 
Dalhousie had reservations about the annexation of both the Punjab and Pegu; both threatened to pose major problems for his concept of an ordered consolidation of company rule. This was not the case, however, in relation to the absorption of many of the 'internal' princely states: he advocated 'taking advantage of every just opportunity which presents itself for consolidating the territories which already belong to us, by taking possession of States which may lapse in the midst of them; for getting rid of those petty intervening principalities which may be a means of annoyance, but which can never, I venture to think, be a source of strength. (Hunter, 128-9)' The outcome at Satara has been noted, as has the fact that Dalhousie did not invent the doctrine of lapse. It was typical of the man that he applied the doctrine in a more rigorous and uniform way than his predecessors; he presumed in favour of annexation if it could be done 'legitimately'. Even so, not all princely states could have lapsed to company rule in this way; Dalhousie generally recognized the right to adopt of those rulers whose sovereignty predated company paramountcy. 
Financial and security factors form a thread through Dalhousie's absorptions of internal princely states. The nizam of Hyderabad lost territory through the long-standing question of the financing of the Hyderabad contingent, a body of native troops provided for company use. Dalhousie, concerned as always to make the most of scarce resources, wished to see the contingent's cost cut and its troops used more flexibly. He did not want the full-scale annexation of Hyderabad; instead, he wanted a portion of Hyderabad to be held against the costs of the contingent. This was achieved in 1853. Nagpur was next to be absorbed, in 1854; Dalhousie wrote, 'To sum up in one sentence, the possession of Nagpur would combine our military strength and would enlarge our commercial resources -- and would materially tend to consolidate our power' (Dalhousie MSS). The lapse, however, did not take place without heirs coming forward, and a contemporary noted that 'the real law by which Nagpur was added to our dominions was the law of the strongest' (E. Arnold, 'The Marquess of Dalhousie's Administration of British India', 2 vols., 1862-5, 2.164-6). Nagpur was to Dalhousie a classic case of consolidation; it added 40 lakhs of rupees to the company's annual revenue and 80,000 square miles of valuable territory in central India, and it straddled the routes from Bombay to Calcutta and the north. 
The same principle of lapse on failure of heirs was applied to several other princely states by Dalhousie. In Jhansi (1853) he decided that 'the British Government would not derive any material advantage from the annexation... for it was very small and its revenue inconsiderable; but since it lay in the midst of other British districts its possession... would tend to the improvement of the general internal administration of British possessions in Bundlekund, beside greatly benefiting the people of Jhansi. (Rahim, 210)' Jaitpur and Sambalpur (1849), Baghpat (1850), and Udaipur (1852) were also incorporated under lapse. Absorption of these smaller states caused concern among some native rulers about the company's long-term intentions, and the home government refused Dalhousie's desire to absorb Karauli, one of the oldest Rajput states. After the mutiny the annexation of Baghpat and Udaipur was reversed. Dalhousie was convinced, however, that his policy was the correct way to consolidate the reality of company power behind its extended frontier. 
Dalhousie also abolished several titular sovereignties that had ceased to have any real substance and yet remained as a distraction to company supremacy. In 1853 he supported the wish of the Madras government to avoid designating an heir as nawab of the Carnatic, and in 1855 the raj of Tanjore was suppressed. Dalhousie also contemplated abolishing the Mughal emperor's title at Delhi but was overruled by caution in London. 
Just as Dalhousie's Indian career opened with exceptional events in the Punjab, so it closed with an exceptional problem in Oudh. The annexation of Oudh was not undertaken on the basis of conquest, lapse, or suppression of titular sovereignty. Since 1801 it had been a protected state with full internal autonomy but had become racked by increasing internal political strife. Dalhousie was reluctant to intervene if it would cost rather than raise company revenues. Yet Oudh was both economically productive and strategically important, straddling as it did the trading and military routes from Bengal to the north-west. The nawabs had also provided useful loans to the company during moments of crisis such as the First Anglo-Afghan War (1838-42), and many of their wealthier citizens held company stock. 
The loyalty of the nawabs over many years forced Dalhousie to admit that he could not 'find a pretext' for annexation and to decide to preserve the nawab's title and royal status, a line inconsistent with his general views. In February 1856, however, the king refused to sign a new treaty, or to abdicate, thereby breaking the loyalty that had protected him for so long; Oudh was consequently annexed. The transition to British rule had all the appearance of ease and order backed by the co-operation of the nawab. It was decided that the new administration should be modelled on that of the Punjab, and the same attempts were made to balance company control with the adherence of locals with power and influence. Unlike the Punjab, however, the measures did not work as well, and arguably contributed to the uprising of 1857. The long-standing question of Oudh was tackled very late in the day by Dalhousie, and absorption of the province was rushed. Dalhousie was unable to devote the detailed attention he applied to the Punjab: he was preoccupied with handover arrangements for his successor, and was in increasingly poor health. 
Traditionally, territorial acquisitions occupy centre stage of Dalhousie's Indian career. From his own perspective internal reforms were equally important, not as agents of deliberate 'Westernizing', but as practical steps for the consolidation of British power in India. Temperament and previous experience fitted him well for a career devoted to 'improvement' in the mid-Victorian sense. As with India's external and princely state affairs, financial difficulties were also central to domestic policies. Dalhousie strove after the most cost-effective administration possible for India's development as a modern state. This would hinge as much on railways, posts and telegraphs, streamlined bureaucracy, and reformed education as on improved military and territorial measures. 
Dalhousie's annexations added to revenue and, although charges initially increased in a higher proportion than income, strenuous efforts were made to keep costs to a minimum. Besides, he saw territorial accretion as an inevitable process to be regulated and assessed in the longer term; only when company rule was securely established on a wider revenue base throughout India could real returns be expected. His aim was not uniform centralization but local responsiveness. Ideally the government of India should not control local affairs, and fully centralized departments like the post office should be the exception rather than the rule. Dalhousie wanted secure administration and attacked what he saw as proven abuses. For instance, he said Bombay's administrative problems were worsened by the presidency government's tendency to correspond on little slips of paper 'like an electric telegraph' (Dalhousie MSS). He also reduced courses at Fort William College from twenty-two to six months, supplementing them with in-service training, and pressed for competitive entry designed to produce a more professional service. If India was not understood, she could not be administered safely: 'There never was a mutiny in this army except from our own injustice or ill management' (Dalhousie, 'Letters', 344). He also took steps to enlarge the legislative council and to include more expert opinion; there were already Indians who could contribute to policy. In 1854 the appointment of an Indian judge to the bench of the 'sadr adalat' was recommended. 
The changes made in the administration of the law sprang from the same desire for more effective, impartial, and therefore secure rule, for example by bringing Europeans within the jurisdiction of local criminal courts (they already came under local civil courts), although Indian law needed modification to be acceptable to Europeans. Dalhousie undertook some of the most important domestic reforms ever introduced into modern India. Most significant was probably his railway scheme, contained in a seminal minute of 1853 which drew much on his previous British ministerial experience and was heralded by the 'Friend of India' newspaper as 'the text book for all future Railway projects in India' (8 Sept 1853). The minute also embodied proposals that had been impossible at home. Dalhousie wished to establish a strategic scheme for the whole country, embracing a rational assessment of political, military, and commercial needs and, while making the most of private capital, reserved the right of the government of India to take over lines after twenty-five or thirty years. He was also careful to decide on only one gauge -- of 5 ft 6 in. -- after careful weighing of the technical and financial arguments, rather than the standard of 4 ft 81/2 in. established after the Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1825. Dalhousie took care to make the best use possible of expert opinion and worked closely with Colonel John Pitt Kennedy, who had been appointed consulting engineer for railways in 1850. In 1853 the first line in India was opened over the 20 miles from Bombay to Thana. In 1855 Dalhousie himself inaugurated the first section of the East Indian Railway from Calcutta to Raniganj. By 1858 there were 400 miles of railway open and another 3600 planned throughout the subcontinent. 
Dalhousie supplemented railways with the electric telegraph, which revolutionized the tempo of both commercial and official business. He also established a public works department and colleges of engineering, key agents in development policy, especially of roads and irrigation. Social measures included the initiation of a complete scheme of public education in both English and the vernaculars (framed before Sir Charles Wood's famous 'Education Despatch' of 1854), action against thuggee, suttee, dacoity, and infanticide, concern to improve the lot of Indian women, and reform of prison administration. In social policy he was generally careful to avoid disturbing deeply held Indian beliefs; for example, it was 'the duty of the Government to maintain in Calcutta, as heretofore, the Seminaries of that peculiar oriental learning which is cultivated by the great sects of Hindus and Musalmans respectively' (S. C. Ghosh, 'The utilitarianism of Dalhousie and the material improvement of modern India', 'Modern Asian Studies', Feb 1978). He also held that 'no British subject should suffer penalties in his person or in his property by reason of the religious creed that he professes' (Dalhousie MSS), and he was keen that the Taj Mahal, as a symbol of historic India, should not have a railway viaduct built in too close proximity. Increased social change was fostered, nevertheless, and contributed to the outbreak of 1857. 
The three quasi-autonomous presidency governments sometimes frustrated Dalhousie in his quest for efficiency although, as noted, he was aware of the dangers of over-centralization. He reorganized the workings of the central secretariat and the governor-general's council in Calcutta through the division of the work and the introduction of more specific accountability. He was also called upon to implement the changes required by the company's new charter passed by the British parliament in 1853 and to institute the new legislative council and the lieutenant-governorship of Bengal. One of his last acts was to put forward proposals for military reforms, including a case for increasing the company's European strength and reducing dependence on native troops. The Indian army had for a long time diverted some of its best officers to civil administration, and Dalhousie's concern increased when British troops withdrew for service in the Crimean War (1854-6), despite his objections, because the European force was 'not more than adequate for preserving the Empire in security and tranquillity even in ordinary times' (C. Jackson, 'A Vindication of the Marquis of Dalhousie's Indian Administration', 1865, 160-61). Again he was concerned that the responsibilities of company power fell short of the means to fulfil them. 
Dalhousie's tenure as governor-general was twice extended, so that he served for three years beyond his allotted time. At a personal level his career in India was immensely stressful (he referred to it as a form of 'transportation'), and his habit of hard work together with the climate soon took its toll on his health. From 1853 his life was also seriously overshadowed by the death of his wife 'en route' to Britain to convalesce, although he received immense support from his elder daughter, Lady Susan, who joined him in 1854. In 1855 he spent time in the Nilgiri hills in a vain attempt to restore his energies and was glad to hand over his responsibilities to Canning on 29 February 1856, leaving India 'exhausted with fatigue, agitation and pain', telling his friend Couper that 'Opus exegi -- my work is done', and determined on retirement (Dalhousie, 'Letters', 371). 
He arrived at Spithead on 13 May 1856, having, typically, spent the voyage composing a major review of his Indian administration. Dalhousie travelled to London and, although very ill, received a number of friends at Claridge's, including Gladstone. Dalhousie received a letter of thanks for his services from Queen Victoria, and the directors of the East India Company voted him a pension of $5000 per year. In August he moved north to Arrochar and from there to Edinburgh (Dalhousie Castle being in the hands of builders). His health remained precarious; in December 1856 he wrote, 'My progress is so slow and my condition such, that there is no probability of my return to public life, under any circumstances, for a long time to come, if ever' (Warner, 2.400). During 1857 his health was further eroded by the news of the mutiny in India; a sea cruise to Malta brought little improvement. In September 1857 he recorded that 'I can hardly bear to think of the horrible scenes that have been acted' (ibid., 401). A year later he was back in Edinburgh and, as the alterations to Dalhousie Castle were by then complete, he took an interest in the running of the estate. India was never far away, however, and the factor on the estate recorded how Dalhousie often talked of the mutiny and considered that, if he had still been in Calcutta, the turmoil would not have happened. 
Dalhousie's health remained poor, and in 1860 he gave up the duties of lord warden of the Cinque Ports (assumed after the death of the duke of Wellington in 1852). In September he was presented with a granddaughter by Lady Edith, who had married Sir James Fergusson in 1859. His strength now declined steadily; he died peacefully at home on 19 December 1860 from Bright's disease of the kidney. He was buried next to his wife in the Dalhousie vault in the old churchyard at Cockpen. 
In 1865 the duke of Argyll concluded, 'When the records of our Empire in the East are closed, Lord Dalhousie's administration will be counted with the greatest that have gone before it' (Campbell). It is a measure of Dalhousie's achievement that this verdict still holds true, and his career is seen as crucially important both by historians of the British empire in the East and by those of the emergence of India as a modern nation. Fittingly, Dalhousie Road still remains in New Delhi as a reminder to both traditions. 
Dalhousie was frustrated in developing a political career at home, and India gave him the opportunity to make his mark from a sense of both patriotic duty and ambition for his family tradition. He proved himself a superb, lucid, and indefatigable administrator who was at once a master of detail but also a strategic thinker. He did not set out for India with any preconceived ideas of 'modernization', 'Westernization', or 'annexation'. Instead he used his immense skills and energy in a pragmatic way to tackle the fundamental problem of closing the gap between the reality and fragility of company power on the one hand and the expectations vested in it on the other. It is for this that Dalhousie should be remembered and not for the supposed application of abstract nostrums or for a 'post hoc' responsibility for the mutiny. 


@@@@@


doc= 23089


Ramsay, John, Lord Bothwell and Lord Balmain (c.1464-1513), administrator and conspirator, was reputedly the son of Sir John Ramsay of Corstoun and his wife, Janet Napier. Evidence for his early career is found only in late sixteenth-century chronicles, which describe him as a page of James III who survived the execution of the royal familiars at Lauder Bridge in July 1482 by leaping onto James's horse and clinging to the king. His life was spared at James's 'earnest sollicitatione, being bot a zouthe of 18 zeires of age, and a courte pimpe' ('Historical Works', 206). The trustworthiness of the details of this episode cannot be taken for granted, but the unanimity of the sources makes it appear likely that Ramsay was indeed threatened with execution in 1482 and saved by the king's intercession. What is certain is that he became squire of the chamber, gaining the lands formerly held by Alexander Kennedy of Irwell on 6 September 1483, then the barony of Bothwell and a 40 merk annuity from Lord Monypenny's lands in February 1484. About 1484 Ramsay married a widow, Isabel Cant of Dunbar, and on 20 July they received a twenty-year lease on half the lands of the Two Kinkells in Strathearn, Perthshire, and part of a mill at Strathmiglo, Fife. Knighted at an unknown date, by May 1485 Ramsay had been raised to the peerage as Lord Bothwell, and his official duties increased: he was auditor of the exchequer (1484-7), commissioner for leasing crown lands in Ettrick and Menteith (during 1486), master of the royal household (November 1486), custodian of Dunbar Castle (from June 1486), and royal justiciar south of Forth (from 1487). On 30 October 1485 Ramsay, with Bishop William Elphinstone and others, represented James III at Henry VII's coronation at Westminster, and he was closely involved in negotiations for an Anglo-Scottish truce in May-July 1486 and November 1487. 
As a royal familiar, however, Ramsay became the scapegoat for James III's politically unpopular policies and the focus of rebel propaganda, held responsible for the pro-English foreign policy, and even accused of having poisoned Queen Margaret (who had died in July 1486). Such accusations helped to give the rebels justification for the overthrow and murder of James III in June 1488. Seeking help against the rebels, Ramsay spent Easter 1488 at Windsor with Henry VII, from whom he received $13 6's'. 8died as a gift, and subsequently became one of several Scottish exiles at the English court. On 6 August 1488 he was among ten of James III's supporters summoned by James IV to answer the charge of treason; in their absence, on 8 August, they were forfeited by parliament. The barony of Bothwell was granted to Patrick, Lord Hailes (elevated to earl of Bothwell on 17 October). 
Though the apparent nadir of Ramsay's career, the years 1488-97 marked the most interesting phase of his life as client and agent of Henry VII; he had an annuity of 100 merks from Easter 1488 to Michaelmas 1496, in return for which Henry expected intelligence reports and loyal service. In April 1491 Henry entered into an agreement with James Stewart, earl of Buchan, and Sir Thomas Tod, with Ramsay acting as their guarantor, to try to capture James IV and his brother James, duke of Ross, one of a number of unsuccessful English schemes to preserve the Anglo-Scottish peace by undermining James IV. Ramsay's favour with Henry VII is evident from his joining the king's expedition to France in October-November 1492. 
Ramsay proved particularly useful to Henry VII when James IV sheltered Perkin Warbeck from November 1495 to July 1497. About March 1495 Ramsay accompanied Richard Fox, bishop of Durham, into northern England on a diplomatic-intelligence mission, and the Scot returned home in late 1495 or early 1496, presumably as Henry's agent to uncover the details of the Warbeck plot. Despite being 'ondir respit and assurans within the realm of Scotland' (Ellis, 1.25), Ramsay was given considerable freedom to move around the country and travel to Berwick, and he received $10 from Henry VII on 24 May and 15 July 1496. Two of Ramsay's letters to Henry in 1496 have survived, one written between 28 August and 2 September and the second dated 8 September; both allude to negotiations for an Anglo-Scottish treaty held at Berwick and involving Ramsay and Bishop Fox. The letters combine self-promotion, concerning Ramsay's plots to kidnap Warbeck and his efforts to persuade James to abandon the 'fenyt boy' and make peace, with fairly accurate factual information on the Scottish military preparations (including the precise date of attack and James's shortages of money, supplies, and ordnance) and on Warbeck's treasonable dealings with various Englishmen, the French envoy, and Margaret of Burgundy's representative. The reports also contain more speculative and fanciful opinions on James IV's unpopularity with his subjects -- Ramsay asserts that an English military victory was assured if Henry took the offensive by land and sea. Perhaps the only remarkable aspect about the activities of Ramsay, who is vilified by Scottish historians for betraying James IV, is that he was so successful, managing to repay Henry VII's patronage while ingratiating himself with James IV. Any man who serves three kings and survives plots, rebellion, and exile has to possess some degree of tenacity, charisma, and an appearance of loyalty. 
Ramsay accompanied James IV to Norham and Kintyre during 1497, being restored to royal favour by grant of remission and rehabilitation on 18 April. Between 27 April 1497 and 6 November 1500 he was rewarded for his good service with lands in Tealing and Polgavie in Angus, Terringzeane in Ayrshire, Kirkandrews, and Wigtown, and a house, garden, and other land in Cowgate, Edinburgh. In 1507 he inherited the ward, relief, and non-entries of the Corstoun lands by Janet Ramsay's death, while on 13 May 1510 James gave his knight of the body the barony of Balmain, and lands in Ely and Westir Strathe, 'for his good service and special favour'. Ramsay was auditor of the exchequer in the early sixteenth century and a trusted privy councillor, and his knowledge of English affairs led to his appointment as envoy to Henry VIII on 24 January 1513. He was present on various occasions during Nicholas West's embassy to Scotland from March to April 1513. Given his earlier career, it is ironic that Ramsay died at Flodden on 9 September 1513; the exchequer rolls record the lease of land to William Ramsay, son of John Ramsay of Balmain, 'qui obiit in bello'. 


@@@@@


doc= 23090


Ramsey, John (d. 1551), prior of Merton and religious pamphleteer, is first recorded in 1513, when, as an Augustinian canon, he attended St Mary's College, Oxford. He supplicated for his BA in 1514, and for his BTh in 1522, being admitted to the latter degree on 26 June. In 1528 he was 'prior studentium' at St Mary's, but two years later, on 18 February 1530, he became prior of Merton, Surrey, an office he held until the dissolution of the house on 13 April 1538. On 9 May following Ramsey -- under the name of John Bowle (probably his family name) -- received an annual pension of 200 marks, together with the promise for life of the prior's London house in Trinity Lane. 
It is not surprising that Ramsey should have adapted easily to monastic dissolution and protestant reformation, for he had clearly come to hold advanced literary and religious opinions. Among the eight books which survive from his library is Erasmus's 'Enchiridion', and while he was still prior of Merton, in 1537 his fellow canon Thomas Paynell dedicated to him 'Comparation of a vyrgin and a martyr', the translation of another of Erasmus's works which Ramsey had commissioned. On 3 July 1545 he was admitted rector of Woodchurch, Kent, a benefice he held until his death in September 1551. 
The former prior of Merton should not be confused with a namesake, probably an Ipswich artisan, who was active as a protestant pamphleteer under Edward VI. One of his writings, 'Communication Betw. a Poore Man and his Wife', recorded in 1595, is now lost. Of the other two, 'A Plaister for a Galled Horse', published in 1548, may have been the first, since it promises another plaster if this one proves too cold. One of a group of attacks on the mass produced in this period, it derides Romish priests as 'blynde owles', and denounces them as traitors and heretics, while the mass itself is represented as an exercise in hypocrisy and superstition. Ramsey's other tract, 'A Corosyfe to be Layed Hard unto the Hartes of all Faythfull Professours of Cristes Gospel', is less knockabout in style. It calls on all to remember the full and final sacrifice of Christ, urging them to remember their battleaxe (Christ's cross), to keep their armour bright, and never again to lust after the fleshpots of Egypt. They should love their neighbours, have a care for the poor, and obey the magistrates, who are God's ministers on earth. Ramsey concludes by commending the king, wishing him long life. 


