@@@@@


doc= 23091


Ramsay, John, earl of Holdernesse (c.1580-1626), courtier, was the second son of Sir Robert Ramsay of Wyliecleuch. He had at least six siblings, for four brothers and two sisters were named in his will, dated 6 January 1626, not long before his death. He first makes an appearance in the historical record in June 1599, when he was in the service of James VI and I, in somewhat unedifying circumstances. On the tenth of that month John Ramsay, one of the king's 'familiar serwands' (Pitcairn, 2.91-3), was struck by one Patrick Myrtoun, one of the king's carvers, after a verbal quarrel in the king's own chamber at Falkland Palace in Fife. On the following day they encountered each other in the courtyard of the palace and once again exchanged heated words. Myrtoun drew his sword on Ramsay who responded in kind, but both were restrained by other royal servants and no blood was shed. Because these violent encounters took place while the king was in residence in the palace, the two were formally convicted of treason. They submitted themselves to the king's will and were pardoned and once more received into his favour. 
The following year Ramsay more than redeemed himself and set his career at court on a firmly upward path. On 5 August 1600 he was in the company of the king when James was apparently lured to Perth by John Ruthven, third earl of Gowrie, son of William, the second earl, who had been executed in 1584. This was the so-called 'Gowrie conspiracy', the precise object and circumstances of which remain a mystery. The king was taken to Gowrie House, the Ruthvens' Perth residence, which he entered in the company of nobody else but the two Ruthven brothers. The official version, first given a public airing six days after the event, has it that soon afterwards James VI broke an upstairs window to call to his retinue for help because his life was threatened. The first person to arrive 'by the providence of God' was 'his Majesteis peadge and trustie servand', John Ramsay (Moysie, 142). He is said to have found the king tussling with Alexander Ruthven, the earl's younger brother, whom he killed. He then encountered the earl himself on the stairs and told him that the king had been killed. The earl, carrying two swords, put their points to the floor in what seems to have been a gesture of submission but he too was thereupon killed by Ramsay. Having thus apparently saved his sovereign's life Ramsay found almost instant favour from a grateful monarch. On 13 November that year he was knighted and given the lands of East Barns, near Dunbar in Haddingtonshire, the charter for which even narrated the details of the incident at Perth by way of an explanation for the gift. 
After accompanying James VI to England in 1603 Ramsay spent most of the rest of his life at court. He did, however, maintain links with his homeland, and was appointed between 1610 and 1623 to various commissions for the peace for the constabulary of Haddington, where his principal Scottish lands lay. He was given further lands in England and a number of pensions from the English crown, as well as royal gifts to help him to settle his debts. On 11 June 1606 he was raised to the Scottish peerage with the title of Viscount Haddington and Lord Ramsay of Barns. To commemorate his deeds of 1600 he was allowed to incorporate within the coat of arms which he was granted a crown and a right arm holding a sword, at the point of which was a heart, and the motto 'Haec dextra vindex principis et patriae' ('This right arm saved the king and the nation'). 
On 20 February 1609 Haddington married Lady Elizabeth Ratcliffe (died 1618), daughter of Robert, earl of Sussex. At the wedding celebrations the couple were honoured by the performance of a masque, specially written by Ben Jonson and performed by five English and twelve Scottish men of 'noble birth or high position' ('Scots peerage', 4.301). The marriage produced two sons, both of whom predeceased their father. On 28 August 1609 Haddington received a charter of the lands formerly belonging to the Cistercian abbey of Melrose, which were erected into a temporal lordship carrying the title Lord Ramsay of Melrose. In 1618, however, he resigned these lands with their title into the hands of Sir George Ramsay of Dalhousie, a kinsman. 
Haddington certainly returned to Scotland in 1617, probably as part of the king's retinue on his only return visit to his kingdom after 1603. He must have stayed on after the king's journey back to England, for he served in November as one of the king's commissioners at the general assembly at St Andrews which rejected the liturgical reforms which would come to be known as the five articles of Perth. In 1619 he appears to have retired from court to France in protest at having been refused an English peerage, being passed over for the earldom of Montgomery. In 1621 he must have returned to favour, for on 22 January that year he was made baron of Kingston and earl of Holdernesse. With the title came the right to carry the English sword of state before the king every year on 5 August at the celebrations to mark the anniversary of his rescue of the king from the Gowrie conspiracy in 1600. His vote was counted at the notorious Scottish parliament of 1621 which approved the five articles of Perth, although he attended only by proxy. 
Holdernesse's first wife having died in 1618, in July 1624 he married Martha Cockayne, daughter of Sir William Cockayne and sister of Charles, first Viscount Cullen. The marriage produced no children and she survived her husband, marrying Montagu Bertie, later second earl of Lindsey, in 1627. She died in July 1641. Holdernesse died in London in February 1626 and was, according to a request in his will, buried on 28 February in Westminster Abbey beside his sons James, who had died in 1618, and Charles, who had died in 1621. As he had no surviving children his titles died with him. 


@@@@@


doc= 23092


Ramsay, John (1802-1879), poet, was born on 16 August 1802 in Kilmarnock, the son of James Ramsay, carpet weaver, and his wife, Jean, 'nee' Fulton. He received a limited education, during which he resided occasionally with a grandfather at Gulillard, near the village of Dundonald, Ayrshire. He was apprenticed in carpet weaving in Kilmarnock, and soon began to compose verses while working at the loom. Subsequently he became a grocer in Kilmarnock, by which time he is described as 'married [with] a rising family' (Paterson, 405). His entry in the Scottish register of deaths gives his wife's name as Elizabeth Templeton. However, meeting with reverses he relinquished the business, and for fifteen years he travelled through Scotland selling his poems. Finally he became the agent of a benevolent society in Edinburgh. 
While a carpet weaver Ramsay contributed verses to the 'Edinburgh Literary Journal', then edited by Henry Glassford Bell. In 1836 he published his collected poems under the title of 'Woodnotes of a Wanderer', which reached a second edition in 1839. 'The Eglinton Park Meeting', the leading piece in the volume, is a humorous description in 'ottava rima' of a review of the Ayrshire yeomanry by the marquess of Hastings in 1823. 'Address to Dundonald Castle', in somewhat laboured heroic couplets, is energetic and picturesque. As late as 1871 Ramsay published a volume entitled 'Gleanings of the Gloamin'. He died at 495 St Vincent Street, Glasgow, on 11 May 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 23093


John William Maule Ramsay, thirteenth earl of Dalhousie (1847-1887), followed his father into the navy in January 1861 and, having passed his examination with unusual brilliance, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant on 12 April 1867. He was then appointed flag-lieutenant to his father in the 'Narcissus', but it is doubtful if he ever joined her, being lent to the 'Galatea', then commanded by Alfred, duke of Edinburgh, with whom he remained until the ship was paid off in the summer of 1871. In September 1872 he joined the 'Lord Warden' as flag-lieutenant of Sir Hastings Yelverton, the commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, and, on Yelverton's striking his flag, he was promoted commander on 4 March 1874. For the next three years he was equerry to the duke of Edinburgh, and in October 1875 he matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford, where he spent some months as an undergraduate. From April 1877 to August 1879 he was commander of the 'Britannia' training ship of naval cadets. After this he virtually retired from the navy, and devoted himself to study and politics. He married Lady Ida Louisa Bennet (1857-1887), daughter of the sixth earl of Tankerville and his wife, Olivia, in December 1877; she was also active in political society. 


@@@@@


doc= 23094


Ramsay, Laurence (fl. c.1577-1588), poet, consistently used his verses to castigate puritan sectarians and Catholics alike. About 1577 he venomously attacked 'the pestilent Pelagians, Arians, and Anabaptists, besides Atheists, & Papists' in a poem of eighty-two seven-line stanzas in the form of a monologue spoken by Satan entitled 'The practise of the divell... in his papistes, against the true professors of Gods holie worde, in these our latter dayes', published in London by J. Charlewood for Timothie Rider. In 1579 the same bookseller distributed a broadside by Ramsay, entitled 'A Short Discourse of Mans Fatall End with an Unfaygned, Commendation of Syr Nicholas Bacon', which begins 'Since God hath fyxt our dayes and yeares, to live and else to dye'. This thirty-six-line poem, written in couplets and commemorating the death of Bacon, celebrates the dead knight in part for the fact that 'no patch of popish mynde in him was ever found'. In later life Ramsay seems to have been attached to the household of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, who favoured an aggressively anti-Catholic foreign policy. After Leicester's death, Ramsay wrote 'Ramsies farewell to his late lorde and master therle of Leicester, which departed this worlde at Cor'burye the 4 Sept. 1588', which was licensed to Edward Aggas on 7 October 1588. No copy is now known. Also lost is Ramsay's 'Wisshinge and Wouldynge', for which Edward White obtained a licence on 5 August 1583. It was possibly a poem resembling 'I would and I would not' by Nicholas Breton. 
The 'Dictionary of National Biography' identifies Ramsay with the Laurence Ramsay who joined a body of sectarians meeting at Faversham, Kent, in 1550 and who advocated Anabaptism and Pelagianism (Strype, 'Ecclesiastical Memorials', 2/1, 370). However, in the light of Ramsay's explicit attacks on 'Anabaptistes and... Pelagians' as 'sectes diabolicall', either this identification seems unlikely, or represents a religious position that (twenty years later) Ramsay had come to regret (Ramsay, 'Practise of the Divell'). 


@@@@@


doc= 23095


Ramsey, Robert (c.1595-1644), composer and organist, was born of unknown parents. He apparently passed his adult musical career at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was organist and master of the choristers, and from where he supplicated for the MusB degree, having spent seven years in the study of music. A grace was granted on 10 June 1616 on condition that he compose and perform a motet in the university church of St Mary the Great: this work, the eight-part 'Inclina domine', is still extant. His acceptance of these duties may in fact have antedated the award of his degree, and it was probably in a musical capacity that he justified his first recorded payment by the college in 1616 when, styled simply Mr Ramsey, he was allowed 20's'. 'for extra commons at the tyme of the Kinges being here' (Payne, 'Provision and Practice', 283). This suggests a much earlier date of appointment than has been accepted by most commentators and almost certainly refers to royal visits that had taken place in Easter term of the previous year. An additional commons payment followed in 1619 but, owing to lacunae in the archives, no further payments to him appear until June 1629. 
On 5 August 1622 Ramsey married Elizabeth Ryding at Great St Mary's, Cambridge, and the couple moved to the parish of Holy Trinity, where, between 1623 and 1626, three children were born to them. Ramsey is styled master of the choristers in January 1632, though at Trinity these duties and those of organist were discharged by one man. Further 'rewards' followed in the 1630s and early 1640s, possibly for the composition of music. These include payments of 10's'. made in July 1638 by Peterhouse, very probably for music delivered to that college for inclusion in its so-called 'Caroline' partbooks, and of 5's'. 'for one werke' (Payne, 'Provision and Practice', 284) unfortunately not specified. 
Ramsey's music, though variable in quality, is important for its experimental, Italianate features typical of the early baroque. His most adventurous music is contained in his continuo songs and monodies, such as 'What Tears, Dear Prince', which laments the death in 1612 of Henry, prince of Wales, and the highly expressive 'In Guilty Night'. Such settings cater to the taste for Italianate music which Thomas Mace says was prevalent in Cambridge at the time, and the composer's royalist sympathies would have been much appreciated at Trinity. Ramsey mourned Prince Henry's death with another work -- the 'Dialogues of Sorrow', dated 1615 in its manuscript source and probably meant for publication. This work uses a consort of viols and was probably intended, together with a number of English madrigals, for domestic use at Trinity and, like the majority of them, is both scored in six parts and fragmentary. 
Ramsey is perhaps best-known for his settings of English and Latin liturgical texts, which, while embracing Italian practice, are generally more conservative than his solo vocal pieces in the new monodic style. His Latin music employs devices found, for example, in Monteverdi's sacred music; but he is at his best when combining the madrigal and anthem, as in his masterpiece, the six-part 'How are the mighty fallen'. Some of his madrigals and anthems, including a fine six-part elegy, probably on the death of Prince Henry, entitled 'Sleep fleshly birth', are preserved in a set of autograph partbooks (Euing Collection, Glasgow University Library). 
Ramsey died in 1644 and was buried at Holy Trinity, Cambridge, on 12 February; at Michaelmas of the same year the college paid 6's'. 8died towards his funeral expenses. 'Widdow Ramsey', very probably the composer's widow, was buried on 2 August 1667 (Payne, 'Provision and Practice', 284-5). 


@@@@@


doc= 23096


Ramsay, Robert (1842-1882), lawyer and politician in Australia, the eldest son of Andrew Mitchell Ramsay (1809-1869), a minister of the United Presbyterian church, and his wife, Isabella Milne, was born at Hawick, Roxburghshire, on 16 February 1842. The family emigrated in 1847 to Melbourne (one of the three children died on the voyage), and Robert was educated at Robert Campbell's and John Macgregor's school in the Melbourne suburb of St Kilda, and then at Scotch College, Melbourne. He studied law at Melbourne University, graduating in 1861, and was admitted a solicitor in 1862. He began practice on his own account, but in January 1866 John Macgregor, jun., to whom he had been articled, took him into partnership in the firm of Macgregor, Ramsay, and Brahe of Melbourne. He married, on 16 April 1868, at Yangery, near Warrnambool, Isabella Catherine, the daughter of Roderick Urquhart of Yangery Park, Victoria. 
Ramsay began his political career as secretary to a committee for abolishing state aid to religion, a cause to which his father devoted much of his life. From 1870 to 1882 he represented East Bourke in the legislative assembly, where state education initially absorbed his attention. He was a moderate protectionist, generally supporting Sir James McCulloch's ministry. In the frequent changes of Victorian ministries Ramsay served as minister without portfolio from 1872 to 1874, as postmaster-general from 1874 to 1877 (when, by introducing long terms of contract for the mail service, he saved the colony considerable sums of money), and as minister of public instruction from 1875 to 1877. In this last post he vigorously administered the 'Education Act', which he had introduced in 1872, and in two years opened more schools in country districts than any predecessor. He firmly believed in national education and ardently supported the separation of church and state. His tenure of office ended on 11 May 1877, but in 1878 he represented Victoria at the telegraphic conference in Sydney. On 5 March 1880 he joined James Service's ministry, where as chief secretary he was responsible for the controversial police actions which eventually led to the capture of Ned Kelly's gang, and, as minister for public instruction again, he tackled the problems of country schools and insisted on removing the name of Christ from school readers. After the government's defeat in August 1880, he left office, but continued active in parliamentary affairs until he died suddenly of pleurisy at his residence in Gipps Street, East Melbourne, on 23 May 1882. He was buried at Melbourne general cemetery, and was survived by his widow, two sons, and two daughters. He left an estate of about $40,000, largely in pastoral properties. His main legacy to the colony was the firm establishment of secular education, the culmination of his and his father's campaign. 


@@@@@


doc= 23097


Ramsay, Thomas (fl. c.1647-1653), Roman Catholic agent, was the son of the emigre Scot Dr Alexander Ramsay. According to the 'Dictionary of National Biography' he was born in the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West in the neighbourhood of Temple Bar and was sent by his father about 1647 to study in the University of Leiden under the care of an uncle, who in fact opposed this plan and instead encouraged Ramsay to take up studies in Greek and philosophy at Glasgow, graduating MA there. Apparently fleeing the plague in Glasgow, Ramsay resumed the study of philosophy in Edinburgh, taking a second MA degree there. To improve himself further he travelled to Bremen, headed south for Wurzburg, and proceeded to Rome, where he spent some time in a Dominican friary and in a Jesuit college. The pope then sent him, he recalled, to Germany on a mission which involved work among Baptist communities. Returning to Rome he was circumcised in order to appear convincingly as a Jew. Adopting the alias Thomas Horsley, he left Hamburg for the port of Shields in April 1652 and established himself in Newcastle upon Tyne as a Jew, using the name Joseph ben Israel. From Newcastle he moved to nearby Hexham, where he arrived on 4 June 1653, claiming to have been born in Mantua. At Hexham Thomas Tillam had been building up a Baptist congregation in the early 1650s, separate from the Baptist community in Newcastle and in conflict with its ministers. It was this that led to 'one of the most bizarre episodes in the religious history of the North' (Howell, 249) -- the case of the 'false Jew'. When the apparent Jew ben Israel converted to the Baptist faith, it seemed a triumph for Tillam's ministry in a period of mounting excitement, not least among Baptists, about the possible readmission of the Jews to England, with the prospect, some thought, of their conversion to Christianity as a heralding of the second coming of Christ. 
It soon emerged, though, that the Jew ben Israel was in fact the English-born Catholic convert Ramsay, perhaps sent to the north-east by forces unnamed to sow confusion among Baptists there. And if that was his mission he succeeded brilliantly. Tillam's reputation was brought down and that of the Newcastle ministers rehabilitated. Ramsay was summoned to a church hearing in Newcastle, travelling there in company with Tillam and being confronted with the captain who had transported Ramsay to Shields as Horsley. The extraordinary case next came to the government's attention; on 8 July 1653 the keeper of the Gatehouse prison was issued with a warrant by the council of state to take into custody Thomas Ramsay, 'suspected of being a Romish priest' ('CSP dom.', '1653-4', 428); on 13 July a warrant was issued for Ramsay's arrest and he was sent to London for examination by the council which, on 4 August 1653, appointed Commissary-General Whalley to head a committee for investigating Ramsay concerning his entry into England. On 23 August it was ordered by the council that the information delivered to it about Ramsay be written up for publication by Secretary Thurloe. 
The sensational and serpentine case made ideal journalistic diet, and a work published in Newcastle in 1653 neatly captured the multiple identities of Ramsay as Anglo-Scot, Catholic-Jew and bogus Baptist. If Ramsay was the Thomas Ramsay issued with a pass by the council of state just before the Restoration in March 1660, that is our last glimpse of the 'false Jew'. 


@@@@@


doc= 23098


Ramsay, Thomas Kennedy (1826-1886), judge and jurist in Canada, born in Ayr on 2 September 1826, was the third son of David Ramsay, writer to the signet, of Grimmat in the parish of Straiton, Ayrshire. His mother was the daughter of Thomas Kennedy of Kirkmechan House, Ayr; she died in 1878. The family moved to St John's, Maryhill, where Ramsay began his education under private tutors; later he attended Madras College, St Andrews, then Ayr Academy, and completed his education in France. In 1847 he and his family migrated to Canada and settled on the estate of St Hugues in Quebec. After studying law in the office of Meredith, Bethune, and Dunkin, solicitors, he was admitted to the bar in 1852, and soon had a thriving practice. He was also an active contributor to the press; for a time he helped manage 'La Patrie', in which he fought the battle of the seigneurs (landed proprietors) with substantial success. He was himself owner of part of the Ramezay seigneury. He was co-founder and editor of the 'Law Reporter' in 1854, and aided in establishing the 'Lower Canada Jurist' in 1857. In 1859, because of his sound knowledge of French and English, he was appointed secretary of the commission for the codification of the civil law of Lower Canada, but in 1862 he was dismissed, allegedly because his very conservative political views were unacceptable. He taught civil law briefly in Morrin College, Quebec City, and in 1863 and 1867 he stood unsuccessfully as a Conservative in elections to the assembly. From 1864 to 1868 he was crown prosecutor at Montreal, and in this capacity in 1866 he prosecuted the Fenian raiders charged with invading Lower Canada at Sweetsburg. In 1867 he became QC. 
In 1870 Ramsay was appointed an assistant justice of the superior court of Quebec, and in 1873 a puisne judge of the court of queen's bench for the dominion. His industry was immense and he spent great pains upon his judgments, invariably writing them out. Especially well read in Roman law, he wrote various pamphlets on legal subjects. His only relaxation was farming his estate at St Hugues. He died suddenly while still serving on the bench on 22 December 1886. He was unmarried. He was buried at the Mount Royal cemetery, Montreal. In an obituary he was described as 'one of [Canada's] ablest lawyers and its most irascible judge' ('Montreal Daily Star'). 


@@@@@


doc= 23099


Sir William Ramsay of Colluthie (d. in or after 1382), who next rose to prominence in national affairs. Ramsay of Colluthie, a minor laird, shared the developing family penchant for warfare. He was one of four Ramsays captured at the battle of Nevilles Cross in 1346. It was probably Colluthie also who took a retinue of ten on pilgrimage in the company of the future earl of Douglas in 1356, and fought at Poitiers in that year. These and other military ventures no doubt endeared Ramsay to David II, whose inner circle of retainers was a group of knights with shared chivalric leanings. Royal favour certainly propelled Ramsay from minor landed status into the top rank of the aristocracy in 1358 when David II awarded him the vacant earldom of Fife, in disregard of the rights of its heiress, Isabella. Magnate opposition to such flouting of rank, led by Robert the Steward (subsequently Robert II), resulted in 1359/60 in Ramsay's losing the earldom, which passed briefly to the Steward's family when Isabella married Robert's son Walter. Despite this setback Ramsay continued to prosper in the service of David II, and served as steward of the royal household in the later years of the reign. Ramsay's national prominence came to an end when his royal patron died suddenly in 1371, although his career appears to have stretched into the early 1380s. 
Meanwhile the Dalhousie Ramsays remained prominent in Lothian and the borders, and in warfare. 


@@@@@


doc= 23100


Ramsay, William, first earl of Dalhousie (d. 1672), politician and army officer, was the eldest son of George Ramsay, first Lord Ramsay of Dalhousie (died 1629) and Margaret Douglas, daughter and heir of George Douglas of Helenhill, brother of William, earl of Morton, and Robert, earl of Douglas. Ramsay's parents were married in 1593. Ramsay himself married in 1617 Margaret Carnegie (died 1661), eldest daughter of David Carnegie, first earl of Southesk. They had four sons and three daughters: George (the second earl), John, James, and William; Marjory, who married James Erskine, earl of Buchan; Anne, who married first John, earl of Dundee, and second Sir Henry Bruce of Clackmannan; and Magdalene, who died unmarried. After Margaret's death in April 1661 Ramsay married Jocosa (died 1663), the daughter of Sir Allen Apsley and widow of Lyster Blunt of Maple Durham. 
Ramsay was chosen to represent the burgh of Montrose in the Scottish parliament in 1617 and 1621. On 21 July 1618 he obtained from the king a charter of the barony of Dalhousie and of the lands of Carrington, Edinburghshire. He succeeded his father as Lord Ramsay of Dalhousie in 1629, and on the occasion of the coronation of Charles I in Scotland was created earl of Dalhousie and Lord Ramsay and Carrington by patent dated 29 June 1633. 
Dalhousie was among those of the commissioners appointed for the subscription of the king's covenant who were covenanters, and he subscribed the libel against the bishops presented the same year to the presbytery of Edinburgh. In late March 1639 he had a horse regiment from Edinburghshire, which went to secure the eastern borders with Balmerino's, Cranston's, Home's, and Lothian's cavalry regiments, and Sir Robert Munro's infantry regiment. He also signed the letter of the covenanting lords to the earl of Essex and served as colonel in the covenanting army which took up a position on the Duns Law to bar the progress of the king's army northwards. His regiment disbanded on 20 June. 
In 1640 Dalhousie raised 800 foot from Lothian for a regiment in which his eldest son served as lieutenant-colonel. On 20 August 1640 Dalhousie's foot was part of the covenanting army which crossed the Tweed and invaded England. Dalhousie's unit brigaded with Lord Boyd's and Dundas of Dundas's infantry at Newcastle. It left England on 21 August 1641, disbanding six days later. At the parliament held in Edinburgh in November 1641 Dalhousie's name was inserted in a new list of privy councillors, to displace certain others chosen by the king. He served as president of parliament in 1641, 1644, and 1645. In the politics of the 1640s Dalhousie has been identified as one of the 'Royalist or pragmatic' nobles among the covenanters (Young, 62). 
Dalhousie was engaged in the campaign in England in 1644, in command of a horse regiment levied from Berwickshire, Lothian, and Stirlingshire. Dalhousie's horse served at the siege of York and broke with the other allied cavalry regiments at Marston Moor, but rallied to assist the siege of Newcastle. He was called out of England with his regiment to proceed to the north of Scotland to aid Argyll against Montrose, but his son held the field command. The regiment saw active service in England and Scotland until August 1646 when it became a reserve force; it was disbanded on 9 February 1647. Montrose's second son, James, Lord Graham, who had been confined in Edinburgh Castle, was delivered over to Dalhousie to be educated. 
On 24 October 1646 Dalhousie was appointed high sheriff of the county of Edinburgh (this was to be confirmed by parliament on 12 July 1661). On 4 May 1648 he was nominated colonel of horse for Edinburghshire, with his son as alternate colonel, for the engagement on behalf of Charles I. He did not accept the offices, but he did support the engagement, which he had been constrained to repudiate by 1 June 1649. In 1651 he or his heir was nominated by Charles II colonel for Edinburghshire but due to the English occupation they could not levy any men. For having sided with Charles II he was fined $1500 on 12 April 1654, which was reduced to $400 on 6 April 1655. Dalhousie died, 'a very old man', in November 1672 (GEC, 'Peerage'). 


@@@@@


doc= 23101


Ramesey, William (1627-1676?), physician and astrologer, was born on 13 March 1627 in Westminster, the son of David Ramsay (c.1575-1660), a Scottish clockmaker, whom James I made keeper of his clocks and watches, and an English mother. Believing his paternal ancestors to have come from Egypt, Ramesey revised his surname in accord with what he thought to be its true spelling. He attended schools in and around London, including St Albans, Bushey, Westminster, and Mile End. He would have gone up to Oxford, but this intention was thwarted by the civil war, which also subsequently interrupted his studies at St Andrews. Moving to Edinburgh, he was obliged to leave by an outbreak of plague. He returned to London in April 1645. 
Ramesey continued to study both physic and astrology. However, unlike most of his contemporaries combining these pursuits -- notably Nicholas Culpeper -- Ramesey was a royalist, unhappy with what he called 'this perverse and rebellious Age' (Ramesey, 29). But the increasing identification of astrology itself as perverse and rebellious, on political as well as religious grounds, left him increasingly isolated. His 'Lux veritatis, or, Christian Judicial Astrology Vindicated, and Demonology Confuted' (1651) was a reply to the criticisms of Nathanael Homes in 'Daemonology and Theologie' (1650); it was answered in turn by another divine, William Rowland, in 'Judiciall Astrologie, Judicially Condemned' (1652). 
Ramesey's contribution to this debate was undistinguished, being mostly a repetition of points made by Christopher Heydon half a century earlier. The main difference between the two lies in Heydon's confident tones and Ramesey's defensive, petulant manner. He also signally failed to present a convincing case for astrology's religious probity; after arguing that it deals only with natural causes and transgresses neither God's secrets nor man's free will, he provided examples of astrology at its most magical, answering horary questions, such as 'Where is my husband?' and 'When shall I receive the money due me?' 
In 1652 Ramesey produced another small astrological work, 'Vox stellarum' (not to be confused with the better-known almanac of the same name by Francis Moore). By now he was living with his father 'in Holborn, within two doors of the wounded Heart, near the King's Gate' (Ramesey, preface). In that year he received his MD at Montpellier, and on 31 July 1661 was admitted as an extra licentiate to the College of Physicians. 

'Astrologia restaurata' (1653) is Ramesey's principal work: it is a thorough if rather ponderous introduction to astrological theory and practice in all its branches, including horary, elections, nativities, and physic. Ramesey even included a section on 'Teaching how to judge of the permanency or durability of Kings, or such as are in Authority by any Revolution' (Ramesey, 225), exactly the sort of thing that was undermining the standing of his beloved subject. 
Ramesey's subsequent publications include a theological tract, 'Man's Dignity and Perfection' (1661), 'De veneris, or, A Discourse of Poisons' (1663), and 'Some Physical Considerations of... Wormes' (1668). By that time, astrology had almost disappeared from his work. 
In June 1668 Ramesey was admitted MD at Cambridge by royal mandate; he is said to have by then become physician-in-ordinary to Charles II. He was now living in Plymouth, Devon. His last publication was 'The Gentleman's Companion' (1676). According to Francis Bernard, he died that year while in prison -- for debt, John Gadbury believed. 


@@@@@


doc= 23102


Ramsay, William (1806-1865), classical scholar, was born in Edinburgh on 6 February 1806, the third son of Sir William Ramsay, seventh baronet, and his wife, Agnata Frances, daughter of Vincent Biscoe of Hookwood, Surrey. Sir George Ramsay, the ninth baronet, was his elder brother. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and at Glasgow University from 1823 to 1826, before going to Cambridge, where he matriculated at Trinity College in 1826. He was made a scholar in 1828 and proceeded BA in 1831 and MA in 1836. His anonymous obituarist in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' claims that he was appointed a professor of mathematics at Glasgow while an undergraduate at Cambridge. In 1831 Ramsay was elected professor of humanity (Latin) at Glasgow. In 1834 he married Catherine, daughter of Robert Davidson LLD, professor of civil law in the university. They had one daughter. 
Ramsay's colleague as professor of Greek was E. L. Lushington, brother-in-law of Tennyson. C. J. Fordyce, a more recent occupant of Ramsay's chair, described them as 'a pair of professors who not only outshone all their predecessors but vastly outshone their contemporaries in the other [Scottish] universities'. Their pupils included a number of men who later became prominent classical scholars: W. Y. Sellar, L. Campbell, D. B. Monro, and J. Frazer. Ramsay resigned his chair because of ill health in 1863. He was succeeded by his nephew, G. G. Ramsay. 
Ramsay produced a variety of classical works, of which 'Elegiac Extracts from Tibullus and Ovid' (1840) and an 'Elementary Manual of Roman Antiquities' (1859) went through several editions. He also wrote a 'Manual of Roman Antiquities' in the third division of the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana' (1848) and contributed many articles to William Smith's classical dictionaries. He spent some time after his retirement in Rome collating manuscripts of Plautus, and, according to Fordyce, his edition of 'Mostellaria' (1869) 'laid the foundation of Plautine studies in Britain'. He died at San Remo on 12 February 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 23103


Ramsay, William Norman (1782-1815), army officer, was the eldest son of Captain David Ramsay RN (died 1818) and belonged to the family of the Ramsays of Balmain in Kincardineshire. He entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, on 17 January 1797, was commissioned second lieutenant, Royal Artillery, on 27 October 1798, became first lieutenant on 1 August 1800, and second captain on 24 April 1806. He served in the Egyptian campaign in 1800-01. On 14 June 1808 he married Mary Emilia, eldest daughter of Lieutenant-General Norman McLeod, twentieth chief of McLeod; she died on 10 August 1809. 
In 1809 Ramsay was posted to I troop (Bull's), Royal Horse Artillery, and went with it to Portugal. This troop was engaged at Busaco in 1810 and was specially thanked by Sir Stapleton Cotton for its conduct while covering the retreat to Torres Vedras. 
When the British army again advanced in 1811 the troop equally distinguished itself. It was mentioned by Wellington in dispatches (14 and 16 March, 9 April) for its conduct in the actions of Cazal Nova, Foz d'Aronce, and Sabugal. At Fuentes d'Onoro (5 May) the British cavalry on the right wing was driven back by the French cavalry, which was in much greater strength, and I troop, or part of it, was cut off. It was supposed that the guns were lost, but soon a commotion was observed among the French cavalry: 'an English shout pealed high and clear, the mass was rent asunder, and Norman Ramsay burst forth, sword in hand, at the head of his battery, his horses breathing fire, stretched like greyhounds along the plain, the guns bounded behind them like things of no weight, and the mounted gunners followed close, with heads bent low and pointed weapons in desperate career. (Napier, 3.150, 151)' In 1812 I troop took part in the battle of Salamanca, and in the advance on (and retreat from) Burgos, distinguishing itself in the action of Venta de Pozo on 23 October. Major Bull was wounded during the retreat, and had to leave the army. Command of the troop fell temporarily to Ramsay, and though Major Frazer assumed it at the beginning of 1813 his appointment to command the whole of the horse artillery three months afterwards left I troop in Ramsay's hands throughout the 1813 campaign. 
At Vitoria (21 June 1813) the troop was attached to Graham's corps, and contributed largely to the capture of Abechuco, by which the French army was cut off from the Bayonne Road, its best line of retreat. Ramsay rode a couple of 6 pounders over a hedge and ditch, in order to get them up in time to act against the retreating enemy. Frazer wrote that 'Bull's troop (which I have no hesitation in saying is much the best in this country) had, under Ramsay's command, been of unusual and unquestionable service' (Fraser, 186). Two days after the battle (23 June) Ramsay was ordered forward in pursuit of the French. Wellington met him at a neighbouring village and, as he had some thought of sending him with Graham's corps by another road, told him, according to his own account, to halt there 'and not to move from it till he should receive further orders from myself, knowing that he would be sent to from the advanced posts. Notwithstanding these orders, Ramsay left the village in the morning before the orders reached him to join Graham; and he got forward into the defile, and it was not possible to bring him back till the whole column had passed. ('Dispatches', 10.539)' For this alleged disobedience Wellington put Ramsay under arrest. 
Ramsay's act was due to some misunderstanding. He supposed that he was to wait at the village for the night, and that if orders for the troop were issued in the course of the night, Wellington would forward them. None came; and next morning Ramsay, acting on the verbal directions of a staff-officer and a written order from the quartermaster-general, advanced to rejoin the cavalry brigade, to which he belonged. As his friend and chief, Frazer, wrote: 'Admitting, contrary to all evidence, that he had mistaken the verbal orders he received, this, surely, is a venial offence, and one for which long-tried and faithful services should not be forgotten.' There was a strong feeling in the army that he was hardly used, but Sir Thomas Graham's intercession on his behalf only irritated Wellington. A distorted account of this affair was given in Samuel Lover's novel 'Handy Andy' (1842). Ramsay was soon released, but was not recommended for promotion. 
In mid-July 1813 Ramsay was allowed to resume command of his troop, and on 22 November he received a brevet majority. In the advance of the army over the Pyrenees his troop was attached to Sir John Hope's corps, and he was one of the officers specially mentioned by Hope in his report of the actions near Biarritz on 10-12 December. Ramsay was twice wounded slightly in these actions. 
On 17 December he became captain in the regiment, and had to return to England to take command of K troop. In the spring of 1815 he was transferred to H troop, which formed part of Wellington's army in the Netherlands. A week before Waterloo, Frazer speaks of him as 'adored by his men; kind, generous, and manly, he is more than the friend of his soldiers'. At Waterloo (18 June 1815) his troop was at first with the cavalry division, but, like the rest of the horse artillery, it was soon brought into action in the front line. It was placed a little to the left rear of Hougoumont, and there before the end of the day it had lost four officers out of five. Ramsay himself was killed at about 4 p.m., during the heavy fire of artillery and skirmishers which was the prelude to the French cavalry charges. A bullet, passing through a snuff-box which he carried, entered his heart. 
Ramsay's friend Frazer buried the body immediately behind in a hollow during a momentary lull in the battle, and afterwards erected a monument in the church at Waterloo. The body was a few weeks afterwards sent to Scotland, where on 8 August it was reinterred in the churchyard of Inveresk, near Edinburgh, his family burial-place, beneath a sarcophagus, supported by a cannon and shot, and surmounted by a helmet, sword, and accoutrements. 
The elder of Ramsay's two brothers, Lieutenant Alexander Ramsay RA, was killed in the attack on New Orleans on 1 January 1815; his other brother, Lieutenant David Ramsay RN, died in Jamaica on 31 July 1815. 


@@@@@


doc= 23104


Ramsbotham, Francis Henry (1801-1868), obstetrician, was born on 9 December 1801 at Richmond, Surrey, son of John Ramsbotham, lecturer on obstetric medicine at the London Hospital and physician to the Royal Maternity Charity, who also had a large obstetric practice in east London. Ramsbotham was educated at St Paul's School and apprenticed to a druggist in Cheapside before he entered in 1818 the London Hospital, and in 1819 Edinburgh University, where he graduated MD in 1822. He became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1822, and fellow in 1844. At first his assistant, he eventually succeeded to his father's practice, which he continued successfully for many years. In 1825 the Royal Maternity Charity, the Tower Hamlets Dispensary, and the Eastern Dispensary appointed him their physician. He was obstetric physician and lecturer on obstetric and forensic medicine at the London Hospital from 1854 to 1863. In 1826 he helped to found, and became secretary of, the Obstetric Society of London. He was also president of the Harveian and Hunterian societies, and vice-president of the Pathological Society. At an unknown date he married Mary, daughter of Henry Lindsay of Perth. They had two sons. 
As a practitioner Ramsbotham's chief rival was David Daniel Davis, with whom he vied for pre-eminence in English midwifery. Ramsbotham was an enthusiastic and popular teacher, but could be dogmatic, and his fixed opposition to the use of chloroform in childbirth led to a decline in his practice in his later years. Ultimately he moved from New Broad Street to Portman Square, but this failed to lift his professional prospects. Ill health obliged him to relinquish his practice and retire to Wood End, near Perth, the home of his son Francis John, where he died on 7 July 1868. 
Ramsbotham's main publication was 'The Principles and Practice of Obstetric Medicine and Surgery' (1844), a rival to Davis's 'Principles and Practice of Obstetric Medicine' (1836). Ramsbotham's was one of the first medical books brought out with expensive illustrations, and was very successful, running to many editions in Britain and the USA. He also published two other monographs and journal articles for the medical press, mainly on midwifery. 


@@@@@


doc= 23105


Ramsden, Jesse (1735-1800), maker of scientific instruments, was born at Salterhebble, near Halifax, Yorkshire, the son of Thomas Ramsden, innkeeper, and his wife Abigail, 'nee' Flather, probably on 6 October 1735, though his baptism on 3 November is the earliest surviving record. Between the ages of nine and twelve he attended the free school in Halifax. He was then sent to live with his uncle in the district of Craven, in the West Riding, where for four years he studied mathematics with the Revd Mr Hall, after which he was apprenticed to a Halifax clothworker. In 1755, having completed his apprenticeship, he went to London and found employment as a clerk in a cloth warehouse. By this time, however, his interests had clearly been drawn to scientific instrument making, for in 1756, at the mature age of twenty-one, he bound himself apprentice to Mark Burton, mathematical instrument maker, of Denmark Street, Strand, for a fee of $12. 
Ramsden soon acquired such a reputation as a mathematical scale engraver that other instrument makers sought his services, and in 1763 he began trading under his own name, in the Strand. To improve his knowledge of optical instruments he spent his evenings and leisure hours in the nearby house of the Dollond family, one of the most famous and prosperous families in the profession. On 16 August 1766 he married Sarah (1743-1796), the youngest daughter of John Dollond, FRS ['see under 'Dollond family (per. 1750-1871)] at St Martin-in-the-Fields. Dollond had developed, and in 1758 patented, the achromatic lens, which allowed an image free of the coloured rings which hampered vision. Ramsden acquired a share in this lucrative patent as part of his bride's dowry. He took a shop in Haymarket, near Little Suffolk Street, trading under the sign of the Golden Spectacles. Two sons and two daughters were born to the Ramsdens between 1767 and 1771, but only John (1768-1841) survived infancy. 
The foundation of Ramsden's reputation lay in the advances that he made in the design of astronomical instruments used for measuring exact angles in the heavens. By 1760 such instruments stood at the forefront of research in the physical sciences as astronomers across Europe, and especially in England, sought to obtain data that would enable them to refine their understanding of the moon's orbit, the solar, and (they hoped) the stellar, parallaxes, and to map the stars to an error of less than a single arc second. The application of astronomical research to navigation was of pressing importance to Britain as a maritime power. To find a ship's longitude at sea with the aid of tables of the moon's motion, newly compiled by Tobias Mayer and Nevil Maskelyne, seamen needed sextants which were small and light enough to be handy, yet accurately divided, and affordable. This demand led Ramsden to develop his first dividing engine, with its 30 inch wheel, in 1767. The dividing engine was a machine devised for the fast precision graduation of mathematical instruments with circular scales, such as octants, sextants, and theodolites; the mechanical concepts involved were similar to those embodied in an earlier and smaller engine constructed by Henry Hindley, a prominent clockmaker of York, which, according to tradition within the mathematical instrument making world, had been described to Ramsden by John Stancliffe. Ramsden's first engine did not measure up to his expectations, leading him to build a second, superior, machine which became operational about 1775. The old engine was used by Sarah and the apprentices for less accurate work before it was sold to the Frenchman Bochart de Saron and illegally exported (England being then at war with France), hidden in a piece of furniture. At the Revolution it was confiscated from de Saron, and it is now preserved in the Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers in Paris. The second machine consisted of a horizontal bell-metal wheel 45 inches in diameter, its rim incised with 2160 precision teeth. The teeth were engaged by an accurate lead-screw, which, turned by means of a treadle and cord, rotated the wheel through an exact, pre-selected angle. A sextant body was centred upon the wheel, and by alternately depressing the treadle and moving a radially sliding cutter, a semi-skilled operative could divide the 120 degree of a sextant scale in 30 minutes, to a far higher degree of accuracy than a master scale divider could have done by hand in as many hours. The engine could graduate sextants as small as 8 inches in radius, thus pioneering the development of precision miniaturization. 
In 1777 the commissioners of longitude awarded Ramsden $300 for this invention, and bought rights in the engine for a further $315, on condition that he wrote a full description of its construction, and that they could nominate other craftsmen to be taught to make and use other engines of the same kind. Ramsden also agreed to divide sextants brought to him, at 6's'. each. His 'Description of an Engine for Dividing Mathematical Instruments' was published in 1777. The book was translated into French by Jerome de Lalande and published in Paris in 1790. Having developed the circular dividing engine, Ramsden then applied the precision lead-screw to divide fractional parts in his straight line dividing engine, with which he could calibrate linear mathematical scales with an accuracy of one four-thousandth part of an inch. His description of this engine was published in 1779. 
It seems that the Ramsdens did not enjoy a happy marriage, for in or soon after 1773, when Ramsden moved to larger premises at 199 Piccadilly, alongside St James's Church, Sarah and her son went to live in the Haymarket, probably at no. 55, a house owned by the Dollonds. She did not entirely sever her contacts with former associates. Ramsden's contacts with Matthew Boulton in Birmingham may have begun prior to their separation, for records from 1777 disclose exchange of workmen and each man supplying goods to the other; in 1786-7 Sarah Ramsden was corresponding from the Haymarket with Boulton on behalf of an official of the king of Naples who was negotiating for a steam engine from Boulton and Watt. She was living at Hercules Buildings, off Westminster Road, Lambeth, at her death on 29 August 1796, and was buried at St Mary's, Lambeth, on 1 September. 
Ramsden further expanded his premises in 1780, taking 196 Piccadilly and the large, high wooden sheds behind these properties, previously occupied by a coach builder and reached from Piccadilly through a wide passageway under the intervening houses. Here he had both space and headroom to construct the large astronomical apparatus for which he became renowned. The sale of smaller instruments (some of which were imported from outside London) and sundries, together with repairs and resale of instruments, generated sufficient income to pay his workforce of sixty men. 
The dividing engine, in both its circular and linear forms, became one of the key inventions of the industrial revolution, foreshadowing as it did the replacement of hand craftsmen by labourers operating complex precision apparatus. Before Ramsden, astronomical instrument makers had approached precision division through geometry; his instincts were essentially those of an engineer who sought exactitude not through draughtsmanship but by mechanical generation. Without Ramsden's dividing engine, sextants could not have been made in sufficient numbers, or cheaply enough, to transform navigational practice. By 1789 he had graduated more than a thousand sextants, not to mention numerous surveying instruments. 
In the 1770s Ramsden began to experiment with the graduation of full circles for astronomical observatories, as an alternative to the large mural quadrants which were then in use throughout Europe. He was aware, probably from the work of the duc de Chaulnes in France in the 1760s, that a circle was thermally and mechanically more stable than a quadrant, and hence less prone to error when carrying a set of precision graduations. The circles forming part of Ramsden's own observatory apparatus were not divided on the engine, which was incapable of graduating such large arcs to the accuracy demanded by astronomers for fundamental research and star mapping; rather, he used an elaborate procedure of bisection and trisection, where each fraction was laid off and subjected to multiple checks and corrections by means of micrometer microscopes. The errors which inevitably remained on the finished circle were known and could be compensated for. In this way, Ramsden's efforts transformed the accuracy of precision astronomy from between one and two seconds of arc to half a second, a breakthrough of fundamental importance. 
Ramsden's notorious slowness in completing major observatory commissions largely derived from his pioneering work on the circle. Quite simply, it was a new technology and Ramsden was a perfectionist, reluctant to finish an instrument if any suspected faults in its design were likely to rebound to his discredit once it was in the client's hands. The division of a full circle by hand took about 150 days and could only be performed in equable temperatures, and that did not take into account the resolution of any engineering problems encountered in mounting the circle and telescope for use. Ramsden's clients became exasperated with the delays, often amounting to years, between placing an order and taking delivery of an instrument, their irritation made worse by the knowledge that he was by far the best craftsman of his day. The first originally divided (that is, not engine-divided) instrument that he delivered, in 1787, was a 36 inch theodolite for General William Roy's project to remeasure the longitude between the Greenwich and Paris observatories, and out of which the Ordnance Survey developed. Two years later he had to be harassed into completing the first astronomical apparatus bearing a full circle ever constructed, of 5 feet in diameter, ordered by Giuseppe Piazzi, and installed at Palermo observatory in Sicily, where it is preserved. A mural circle 6 feet in diameter ordered for Dunsink observatory in Ireland was twenty-eight years in the making, being completed only after Ramsden's death. 
Ramsden was the first instrument maker seriously to tackle the structural problems inherent in the design of equatorially mounted telescopes. In 1774 he published an account of his 'New Universal Equatorial' and instruments of his design were constructed for George III and other prominent persons. He also built small clockwork-driven equatorials, and he remodelled the large and defective equatorial sectors which Jeremiah Sisson had built for the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, in 1775. Ramsden's truly innovative equatorial instrument was that completed for Sir George Shuckburgh in 1793. Transforming the unsuccessful equatorial sectors with which Bird and Sisson had experimented in the early 1770s, Ramsden produced a far more stable design. Using conical load bearing supports and compensating for the changing weight distribution inherent in a large 'English' equatorial mounting, he brought engineering skills to the resolution of problems of building large instruments with ponderous moving parts. 
In addition to the work discussed above, Ramsden made numerous other improvements to scientific instruments. For telescopes he developed the reduced aberration 'Ramsden eyepiece', as well as two new micrometers. He made zenith sectors, barometers, levels, precision balances, and pyrometers for detecting slight changes of heat in metals, and in 1795 received the Royal Society's Copley medal for his 'various inventions and improvements to philosophical instruments'. Specimens of his craftsmanship can be found in the national collections of most countries affected by western science. Yet he was more than a superb craftsman, being acknowledged as an equal member within the international scientific community. 
Ramsden was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 12 January 1786, and to membership of the Imperial Academy of St Petersburg in 1794. He enjoyed cordial relations with the leading scientists of the age, including such aristocratic amateurs as the duke of Marlborough, whose apparatus he had made and installed at Blenheim, and which he continued to maintain. He corresponded widely with foreign astronomers and scientists, and they called on him when in London; men from those more feudal parts of Europe were sometimes struck by the easy social acceptance of a craftsman by England's scientific gentry. Ramsden learned to read French with sufficient fluency as to enjoy Moliere and Boileau, while his favourite scientific authors were Euler and Bouguer. 
Ramsden's personal appearance was, according to the Revd Louis Dutens: 'above the middle size, slender, but extremely well-made, and to a late period of life, possessed of great activity. His countenance was a faithful index of his mind, full of intelligence and sweetness. His forehead was open, and high, with a very projecting and expressive brow. His eyes were dark hazel, sparkling with animation. He had a good musical voice. (Aikin, 454)' Ramsden lived simply and, said Dutens, spent his evenings in the kitchen with his apprentices, eating bread and butter, discussing ideas, and perfecting designs. Several of his apprentices went on to distinguished careers in their own right, notably Thomas Jones (1775-1852), who was bound for seven years on 14 March 1789. A few foreign apprentices and journeymen are also known; Georg Dreschler of Hamburg spent five years with Ramsden, as did Franccois Antoine Jecker, who on his return to Paris constructed a straight line dividing engine on Ramsden's pattern and was noted for adopting, as Ramsden had done, a strict division of labour in his workshop ['see 'Industrial spies]. Richard Lovell Edgeworth, in his 'Memoirs' (1820, 1.191-2) recorded a famous episode when Ramsden drove down to Kew palace with an instrument which George III had ordered. He asked if the king was at home, and insisted on being admitted. The king received him graciously, and, after examining the instrument, said to him: 'I have been told, Mr Ramsden, that you are considered to be the least punctual of any man in England; you have brought home this instrument on the very 'day' that was appointed. You have only mistaken the year.' 
Ramsden died on 5 November 1800 at Brighton, where he had gone for the benefit of his health; his body was brought back for burial at St James's, Piccadilly, on 13 November. His foreman, Matthew Berge, who had been with him upwards of thirty years, completed the major unfinished instruments and continued to live and trade at 196 Piccadilly until his own death in 1819. Ramsden's estate passed to his son John, by this time a commander in the East India Company's navy. His brothers-in-law, Peter and John Dollond, were called in to make an inventory of Ramsden's assets, including his stock and machinery, which came to under $5000. Of the considerable sums owing to him, only $1300 appeared to be recoverable. 


@@@@@


doc= 23106


Ranby, John (1703-1773), surgeon, the son of Joseph Ranby of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, innkeeper, was apprenticed to Edward Barnard, foreign brother of the Company of Barber-Surgeons, on 5 March 1715, paying him the sum of $32 5's'. On 5 October 1722 Ranby's surgical skills were examined. His answers were approved, and he was ordered the seal of the Barber-Surgeons' Company as a foreign brother. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 30 November 1724. He married, in 1729, Jane, the elder daughter of the Hon. Dacre Barrett-Lennard. Queen Caroline, according to Lord Hervey, 'once asked Ranby whilst he was dressing her wound if he would not be glad to be officiating in the same manner to his own old cross wife that he hated so much' (Hervey). Ranby was appointed surgeon-in-ordinary to the king's household in 1738, and in 1740 he was promoted sergeant-surgeon to George II. He became principal sergeant-surgeon in May 1743, and in this capacity accompanied the king during the German campaign of that year. Ranby was present at the battle of Dettingen, where the duke of Cumberland, the king's second son, was one of his patients. 
In 1745 Ranby's influence with the king and the government of the day was sufficient to ensure the passing of the act of parliament constituting a Company of Surgeons distinct from that of the barbers. His exertions in promoting this separation were rewarded by his nomination as the first master of the newly founded surgeons' company, a special favour, as he had never held any office in the old and united Company of Barber-Surgeons. Joseph Sandford, the senior warden of the old company, and William Cheselden, the junior warden, took office under him as the first wardens. Ranby presented a silver loving cup to the company to mark his year of office, and it is still in the possession of the Royal College of Surgeons of England. He was re-elected master of the company in 1751, when the company entered into occupation of their new theatre in the Old Bailey, and for a third time in 1752. Ranby was appointed surgeon to the Chelsea Hospital on 13 May 1752 in succession to Cheselden. He became a controversial figure as a result of his role during the last illnesses of Queen Caroline, in 1737, and of Robert Walpole, earl of Orford, in 1745 (see 'A Narrative of the Last Illness of the Earl of Orford', 1745). Ranby had a large surgical practice, and the surgeon introduced by Fielding into his novel 'Tom Jones' (1749) is said to be him. He is also mentioned in Fielding's 'Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon' (1755). It has also been claimed that Ranby served as the model for the hero in Hogarth's 'Rake's Progress' ('N&Q', 29). Ranby was a man of strong passions, harsh voice, and inelegant manners. Queen Caroline called him 'the blockhead' before submitting to the operation from which she died. 
Ranby's writings include 'The Method of Treating Gunshot Wounds' (1744), an account of some of the surgical cases which came under Ranby's care when he served under Lord Stair in the German campaign, terminating at the battle of Dettingen, and 'Three curious dissections by John Ranby, esq., surgeon to his majesty's household and F.R.S. 1728', printed in William Beckett's 'Collection of Chirurgical Tracts' (1740). 
Ranby died on 28 August 1773, after a few hours' illness, at his apartments in Chelsea Hospital, and was buried in the south-west portion of the burying-ground attached to the hospital, in a square sandstone tomb with a simple inscription. 
A natural son of the surgeon, 


@@@@@


doc= 23107


John Ranby (1743-1820), pamphleteer, assumed the name of Ranby by royal licence in exchange for that of George Osborne, in 1756. Educated at Eton College, he stated that he knew Richard Watson, afterwards bishop of Llandaff, at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was admitted on 26 May 1761; however, he did not graduate. Ranby, who was admitted at Lincoln's Inn in 1762, 'huzzaed after Mr. Wilkes' in 1763, but developed into a partisan pamphleteer on the tory side. In 1791 he published 'Doubts on the Abolition of the Slave Trade', which James Boswell (who called Ranby his 'learned and ingenious friend') highly commended. In 1794, in his 'Short Hints on a French Invasion', he deprecated the general tendency to panic. Three years later he supported Bishop Watson in his controversy with Gilbert Wakefield, and in 1811 he attempted to explode the theory of the increasing influence of the crown. In later life he lived first at Woodford in Essex, where he befriended Thomas Maurice, the orientalist, and then at Bury St Edmunds, where he died on 31 March 1820. He was buried at Brent Eleigh in Suffolk, and a monument was placed there commemorating him and his wife, Mary, daughter of Edward Grote and Mary Barnardiston. Mary Ranby died on 3 January 1814. 


@@@@@


doc= 23108


Rand, Isaac (1674-1743), botanist, was probably the son of James Rand, who in 1674 agreed, with thirteen other members of the Society of Apothecaries, to build a wall round the Chelsea Physic Garden. Isaac Rand was already an apothecary practising in the Haymarket, London, in 1700, though his apprenticeship formally ended in 1702. In Plukenet's 'Mantissa' (1700) he is mentioned as the discoverer, in Tothill Fields, Westminster, of the dock now known as 'Rumex palustris', and described as a diligent investigator and a botanist of great promise. He seems to have had a particular interest in inconspicuous plants, and is credited by fellow botanists such as Doody and Buddle with new discoveries including the goosefoot 'Rand's oak blite' ('Chenopodium glaucum'). He is known to have botanized with James Sherard, and with Petiver, with whom he was not on good terms, being somewhat critical of his work. He was a member of the Botanical Society that met weekly between 1721 and 1726 in a coffee house in Watling Street. Rand had a wife, Ann, about whom nothing more is known. 
In 1707 Rand and nineteen other members of the Society of Apothecaries, including Petiver and Joseph Miller, took a lease of the Chelsea garden (owned by the manor of Chelsea) and were made trustees. For some time before Petiver's death in 1718 Rand seems either to have assisted him or to have succeeded him in the office of demonstrator of plants. In 1725 he was appointed to the newly created office of 'praefectus horti' or director of the garden. Among other duties he had to give at least two demonstrations in the garden in each of the six summer months, and to transmit each year to the Royal Society the fifty specimens required by the terms of Sir Hans Sloane's new lease of 1722 (in his capacity as lord of the manor of Chelsea). Rand himself delivered the plants on many occasions. Lists of the plants sent for several years are at the Royal Society and in the Sloane MSS (British Library). Rand was in charge when Linnaeus, who was not impressed by his understanding, visited the garden. Dillenius's edition of Ray's 'Synopsis' (1724) contains several records by Rand, whose assistance is acknowledged in the preface. William Sherard proposed that Rand's name, rather than that of the foreigner Dillenius, should appear as editor, but Rand declined. He also is mentioned by Elizabeth Blackwell as having instructed her and assisted with specimens for her 'Curious Herbal' (1737-9), which she produced at Chelsea. He is one of those who put their names to a certificate of accuracy, and a copy in the British Library has manuscript notes by him. 
By 1727 relations between Rand and Philip Miller, gardener to the Society of Apothecaries, seem to have been strained, and it has been inferred that rivalry was the reason why each produced a catalogue of the garden in 1730. Publication of Rand's 'Index plantarum officinalium... in horto Chelseiano', a list of 518 plants used in medicine, was ordered by the society, and 1000 copies printed, as was pointed out by Rand in a letter to Samuel Brewer. The two publications may, however, have been intended for different audiences. In 1739 Rand published 'Horti medici Chelseiani index compendiarius', a longer alphabetical list of all the plants in the garden. He was succeeded as demonstrator by Joseph Miller in 1738 or 1740. Rand died in the parish of St James, Westminster, in 1743, some time before 11 May. His widow presented his botanical books and extensive herbarium to the society, and bequeathed 50's'. a year for replacing twenty decayed specimens. His books remained at Chelsea. His herbarium was preserved there, with those of Ray and Dale, until 1862, when all three were presented to the British Museum (and thus later were moved to the Natural History Museum, London). Important specimens, particularly British species, were incorporated in the general herbarium, and many of Rand's specimens are in the Sloane herbarium. Rand was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1719. Linnaeus retained the name 'Randia', applied by Houston in Rand's honour to a genus of tropical Rubiaceae. 


@@@@@


doc= 23109


Randall, John (1570-1622), Church of England clergyman, was born in 1570 at Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire, and sent 'by his relations' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.319) to St Mary Hall, Oxford, matriculating aged eleven on 27 November 1581. Following a move to Trinity College, Randall graduated BA on 9 February 1585, was elected a fellow of Lincoln College on 6 July 1587, and proceeded MA on 9 July 1589. Among his pupils at Lincoln in the early 1590s was the impoverished future puritan Robert Bolton (1572-1631), to whom he lent many books. Tutor Randall was 'of no great note then, but afterward became a learned divine and godly preacher at London' (Bagshawe, 6-7). When Queen Elizabeth visited Oxford in August 1592 Randall was appointed to 'frame and oversee the stage for the academical performance given' in her honour ('DNB'). Afterwards Randall studied divinity, and was admitted BD on 28 June 1598. 
On 31 January 1599 Randall was presented by Gilbert Talbot, seventh earl of Shrewsbury (1553-1617), to the rectory of St Andrew Hubbard, London; he applied for his preaching licence on 14 May. There he made a reputation as a staunch puritan and effective preacher; he married a wife and had a daughter, but outlived both. When he began to draw up his will on 11 January 1622, he had been afflicted by a serious illness. Randall bequeathed property to the poor of the parishes of Great Missenden, All Hallows, Oxford, and St Andrew; a tenement called Ship Hall to Lincoln College, Oxford; and property in Southwark and Oxford, as well as money, to various relations including eight married sisters. His brother Edward Randall and nephew Joshua Randall were named executors. The will was signed on 13 April and Randall died at his house in the Minories in May, probably at the end of the month since he was buried in St Andrew Hubbard in June. In the same year William Holbrooke, who seems to have been his curate from about 1613, published his mentor's 'The Description of Fleshly Lusts', 'The Necessitie of Righteousnes', and 'The Great Mystery of Godliness'. The dedications, to Mary, Lady Weld, Lady Bennet, and Mistress Thomasin Owefield, reveal the godly circles of which Randall was a respected member. Further works followed: 'St Pauls Triumph' (1623) (Sermons on 'Romans' 8: 38-9); 'Three and Twenty Sermons, or, Catechisticall Lectures upon... the Lords Supper' (1630), dedicated to Lady Boys, another friend; and 'Twenty-Nine Lectures of the Church' (1631), dedicated to Richard Knightley of Preston Capes. 


@@@@@


doc= 23110


Randall, Joseph (d. 1789), schoolmaster and agriculturist, is of unknown origins. In 1740 he started a boarding-school for boys at Heath, near Wakefield, which he described in detail in 'An Account of the Academy at Heath' (1750). His school could accommodate 130 boarders, with a further 30 or 40 pupils boarded out in the village. The staff of ten masters and assistants taught an extensive range of subjects that included English, Latin, and history, mathematics, geography, astronomy, and natural and experimental philosophy. Randall's particular interests are demonstrated in the textbooks that he published for his pupils, the first of which, 'A System of Geography' (1744), contained a brief history of the Quakers in North America, which was published separately in several editions. In 1750 he published a course of lectures on geography, astronomy, chronology, and pneumatics, and he clearly taught the practical as well as theoretical aspects of these subjects, for the school possessed apparatus for scientific experiments, including an orrery. 
By June 1763 Randall had given up the school and moved to York, where he advertised places for six private boarders for a basic fee of 15 guineas a year. Here he also professed to resolve all questions relating to annuities, leases, reversions, livings, and matters of intricate accounts, and he interested himself in practical agriculture. His main interest was in the system of seed-drill husbandry devised by Jethro Tull and the associated need to prepare a good, well-drained seedbed. He designed four implements for this work: a drill (seed-furrow plough), a spiky roller to pulverize the soil, a potato planter, and a draining plough. They were not especially original (Randall cited William Ellis as the inspiration for his spiky roller) and they were criticized as complicated and poorly constructed. From the brief published descriptions they do not seem to have been very effective. Randall's influence, rather, lay in his contribution to disseminating knowledge about the new drill husbandry. He did this principally in two publications, published in 1764. The first was dedicated to the Society of Arts and entitled 'The semi-Virgilian husbandry, deduced from various experiments, or, An essay towards a new course of national farming'; the second was 'Construction and extensive use of a new invented seed-furrow plough, of a draining plough, and of a potato-drill machine, with a theory of a common plough'. Though verbose and diffuse these works did play their part in spreading the news of drill husbandry. Randall also claimed: 'I do, and will continue to instruct young gentlemen... in the mechanical and geometrical principles of all the implements of husbandry' ('Museum Rusticum', 440-41). Here, again, was his contribution to the spread of new ideas. Randall died at York on 8 August 1789, 'aged upwards of 80' ('GM', 59/2). 


@@@@@


doc= 23111


Randall, John (1717-1799), organist and composer, born on 26 February 1717, was a chorister of the Chapel Royal under Bernard Gates. On 23 February 1732 at the Crown and Anchor tavern in the Strand Randall sang the part of Esther in the dramatic representation of Handel's oratorio. At Christmas 1742 he was appointed organist to King's College chapel, Cambridge. There he graduated MusB in 1744 and in 1755 he succeeded Maurice Greene as professor of music in the University of Cambridge. In 1756 he proceeded MusD. He was also organist at Trinity College, St John's College, and Pembroke College. Assisted by his pupil, William Crotch, from 1786 to 1788, Randall retained his appointments until his death at Cambridge on 18 March 1799. His wife, Grace Pattison, whom he married on 5 October 1756, predeceased him on 27 April 1792. 
Randall set to music Thomas Gray's 'Ode for the Installation of the Duke of Grafton as Chancellor of the University' (1 July 1769). He published 'A collection of psalm & hymn tunes, some of which are new & others by permission of the authors, with six chants and Te Deums, calculated for the use of congregations in general' (1794). Of these Randall is best known by his two double chants and the hymn tune 'University'. Four published songs and three anthems in manuscripts in Cambridge complete his known compositions. 


@@@@@


doc= 23112


Randall, John (1755-1802), shipbuilder, was the son of John Randall, shipbuilder, of Rotherhithe. He received a classical education. On the death of his father, about 1776, he successfully continued the shipbuilding business, applying himself at the same time to the study of mathematics and the principles of naval construction. In the course of his career, as well as building a large number of ships for the mercantile marine and the East India Company, he built over forty for the government, including several 74-gun ships and large frigates. He took a prominent part in founding the Society of Naval Architects, and collected materials for a treatise on naval architecture, which he abandoned on the publication of some French works. 
Randall died at his house in Great Cumberland Street, Hyde Park, London, in 1802. His death occurred towards the end of a strike by shipwrights, who worked along the Thames, against a reduction of their wages from a war to a peace rate. It was alleged that he died from a fever resulting from a slight wound incurred in his attempt to quell a riot. However, the charge of wounding him was denied by a spokesman for the shipwrights, who claimed he was highly respected by his employees as more of a parent than a master. Randall was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 23113


Randall, William (fl. 1585-1604), musician and composer, was born of unknown parents and began his career at Exeter Cathedral, where he was certainly a vicar-choral and possibly previously a chorister. By 15 February 1585, however, he had left Devon for London, for on this date he was sworn epistoler at the Chapel Royal. He is next recorded as a lay clerk at St George's Chapel, Windsor, in 1586-7 and 1600-01, but had left by 1602-3. In the meantime Randall continued his association with the Chapel Royal: on 26 July 1592 he was referred to as an organist, and between June of that year and April 1598 he witnessed numerous entries in the cheque book. 
At some time before January 1601 Randall tried to secure readmission to his Exeter vicar's stall, of which he claimed to have been unjustly dispossessed by the dean and chapter, for on the 23rd of that month Queen Elizabeth wrote on his behalf, accusing the canons of penalizing him for his service at court and insisting he be reinstated forthwith. But the Exeter canons, in their reply dated 28 March, firmly denied any unfairness and pointed out that Randall, who had clearly resigned his place, had not in fact been 'sent for' to serve the chapel, 'but made great sute & frindes to obtayne the place' (Payne). Despite an entry in the Exeter accounts dated 16 October of the same year, showing that the vicars-choral paid Randall 33's'. 4died, however, there is no evidence that he was ever reinstated. 
Randall's few surviving compositions comprise a good consort 'In nomine' for five viols, three very accomplished keyboard pieces, and the music for three anthems, two of which are fragmentary. (A service setting sometimes attributed to him is actually by Greenwood Randall, another Exeter musician and possibly a relative.) 
Having attended both the funeral of Elizabeth I and the coronation of James I in April and July 1603 respectively, Randall had either died or resigned by 1 March of the following year, when he was succeeded by another emigre Exonian, Edmund Hooper. 


@@@@@


doc= 23114


Bernard Randolph (bap. 1643, d. after 1689?), writer, the son of Edmund Randolph and Deborah Master and Edward Randolph's younger brother, was born in Canterbury and baptized in October 1643. By 1664 he was living in Smyrna and he traded extensively through the Aegean region of the Ottoman empire until after 1680. Between 1683 and 1684 he travelled three times to Massachusetts to assist his elder brother Edward as deputy collector of customs. Back in England he published in 1686 'The Present State of the Morea', a brief account of the port cities of the Peloponnese. A year later followed a longer, more anecdotal work, 'The Present State of the Islands in the Archipelago', in which Randolph interwove his own travels with descriptions of trading conditions and the conflict between Ottoman and Venetian rule in the lands around the Aegean. He died probably after 1689. 


@@@@@


doc= 23115


Randolph, Charles (1809-1878), marine engineer and shipbuilder, was born on 26 June 1809 in Stirling, the son of Charles Randall, bookseller, printer, and stationer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Steadman. He was educated at Stirling high school, Glasgow grammar school, the University of Glasgow, and at Anderson's Institution in Glasgow where he attended lectures by the chemist Dr Andrew Ure, brother of Isabella Ure, the wife of John Elder ['see below']. He was then apprenticed as a wright (engineer) in William Kinross's coachworks in Stirling, subsequently transferring to Robert Napier's works at Camlachie where he was trained by David Elder ['see below']. 


During his apprenticeship Charles Randall changed his name back to the original Randolph, which the family had not used since his grandfather's participation in the Jacobite rising of 1745. On becoming a journeyman he worked in two Manchester firms: Omerods, and Fairbairn and Lillie. He returned to Glasgow in 1834 to open a millwright's business in Centre Street in partnership with his cousin Richard Cunliffe, a yarn merchant with contacts in the local textile trades. The new firm soon won fame for the accuracy of its gear-cutting and machining. In 1839 John Elliot (died 1842), a manager with Fairbairn and Lillie, joined the partnership, which then traded as Randolph, Elliot & Co., and extended its activities to England, Ireland, and mainland Europe. 


Randolph, Elder & Co. diversified at once into the fast-expanding marine engineering business and with the help of W. J. Macquorn Rankine, then professor of civil engineering at the University of Glasgow, began experimenting with a two-cylinder compound engine following the example of other marine engineers. John Elder had for some time been concerned to improve the efficiency of marine engines by reducing friction of the moving parts, which would increase the power and cut coal consumption. Where others had failed Elder succeeded, because, according to Macquorn Rankine, he 'had thoroughly studied and understood the principles of the then almost new science of thermodynamics' (Macquorn Rankine, 29-30). The partners took out their first patent for a compound engine in 1853. The pistons of the high- and low-pressure cylinders were diametrically opposed so as to balance and largely neutralize strain and friction on the bearings, an aspect of engineering previously neglected. The new engines installed in the 'Brandon' for the London and Limerick Steamship Company in 1854 reduced coal consumption per indicated hp from 41/2 lb to 31/2 lb. By experimenting with James Watt's proposal for steam-jacketing cylinders they were able to further reduce coal consumption to between 2 lb and 21/2 lb. 
Despite suspicion of the high piston speeds which these engines achieved, success was almost immediate and orders flowed in to the firm, notably from the Pacific Steam Navigation Company. John Elder described these developments in a series of scientific papers read at meetings of the British Association for the Advancement of Science between 1858 and 1860. In 1858 the partners began iron shipbuilding at a yard in Govan. Early in 1859 their engine works was burnt down and an imposing new shop with an Egyptian facade was constructed, capable of handling the massive cylinders for their engines. At the height of this success Elder, who was a man of striking good looks, was married on 31 March 1857 by his close friend the Revd Norman Macleod to Isabella Ure (1830-1905) ['see 'Elder, Isabella], who later helped pioneer the higher education of women in the west of Scotland. 
Randolph Elder continued to develop its engines, experimenting in the 1860s with both triple and quadruple expansion and water-tube boilers. To the frustration of their competitors they either together or separately patented all their innovations. In 1863 they built their first high-speed naval compound engine, which when demonstrated in HMS 'Constance' totally outperformed competitors with conventional engines. During the American Civil War the firm constructed in five months in 1864 five blockade runners fitted with these engines. This must have strained relations with Macleod, a fervent supporter of anti-slavery. During that year Randolph Elder moved to a new, large shipyard at Fairfield, further down the River Clyde in Govan, which was considered to be about as complete and convenient a shipbuilding establishment as any in the world. By now the firm was undoubtedly the most successful shipbuilding and marine engineering business on the Clyde, employing some 4000 people, and the three partners were very rich men. Randolph and Richard Cunliffe withdrew from the partnership in 1868 but remained as investors. In the previous fifteen years the firm had supplied 111 sets of marine engines with an aggregate 20,145 indicated hp and had built 106 ships. John Elder continued as sole partner and began building a new engine works, which farsightedly included a boiler shop, separate from and to the west of the engine works, as well as a floating dock and repair slip. In his first year in business Elder constructed fourteen steamships and three sailing-ships of a total of over 25,000 tons, nearly double the production of any other Clyde yard. He attributed this achievement to a willingness to innovate continuously. During the late 1860s he devoted a great deal of time to experiments with the use for naval monitors of round hulls propelled by water-jets that could be used safely in shallow water. 
Like his father, Elder was a deeply committed Christian and keenly interested in schemes to foster the social, intellectual, and religious welfare of his workforce. He organized and contributed to an accident and sick fund and in 1869 was planning to build new model houses and schools near the works. He was prevented from realizing this scheme by a serious liver complaint, which led to his death in London at the early age of forty-five on 17 September 1869. His funeral, according to Norman Macleod, who conducted the service, 'was one of the most impressive sights I ever witnessed. The busy works south of the Clyde were shut, forge and hammer at rest, and silent as the grave. The forest of masts along the river were draped in flags, lowered half mast in sign of mourning.' Of the man, he recalled: 'His religion was a life, not confined to the church or to Sunday, but carried out every day in the family, in the counting house, in society, and in business, manifested in untarnished honour, in the sweetest temper, in gentle words and most remarkable and most unselfish considerations for the feelings and the wants of others. (Craig, 36-7)' He had only recently been elected president of the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders of Glasgow. With Macquorn Rankine, he served as an officer in the 1st (Lanarkshire) rifle volunteers. As he had no heir, his wife inherited his large estate. 
On his retirement in 1868 Charles Randolph turned his attention to the improvement of the River Clyde, and he presented a long and unsolicited report on its development to the Clyde Navigation trustees in the same year. With a barrage of statistics he forecast with some accuracy that the trust's existing plans would be unable to cope with demand over the next fifty years. As a trustee he played an important part in its affairs over the next decade, particularly in the construction of Queen's Dock at Stobcross on the north bank of the river. He was also concerned to improve Glasgow's sewage disposal, helping to found the Glasgow Sanitary Association and supporting the construction of outfall sewers. Parsimony and competing priorities delayed action until after his death. 
Randolph remained active in business, and in 1868 he helped establish the British and African Steam Navigation Company in partnership with Glasgow and Liverpool investors, including James Buchanan Mirrlees, Thomas Coats, and S. R. Wilson; he served as its first chairman. He was a director of the Glasgow-based Tharsis Sulphur and Copper Company, the Glasgow and South Western Railway Company, the Lochgelly Coal Company in Fife, the Bent Colliery Company at Hamilton, the Scottish Commercial Insurance Company, Nobel's Explosives Ltd, and the British Dynamite Company, the last of which he was also chairman. He never lost his appetite for invention, and in his later years he built a steam carriage that, unlike most others, was successful. He was an active member of the Philosophical Society of Glasgow and was much interested in education. He married Margaretta Sainte Pierre; the marriage was childless but they adopted a daughter, Agnes, who at the time of her father's death was married to Andrew Rintoul, a Glasgow merchant. Randolph died at his home, 14 Park Terrace, Glasgow, on 11 November 1878 and was buried in the old Holyrood churchyard, Stirling. He left $60,000, almost half of his estate, to the University of Glasgow to complete the Common, or Bute, Hall; the antechamber and the grand south staircase were named in his honour. In recognition of his munificence the university commissioned a portrait by the artist Duncan Macnee. There is no doubt that John Elder and Charles Randolph, by pioneering the compound engine, ensured the Clyde's continuing technical domination of the world shipbuilding industry in the second half of the nineteenth century. They were atypical in that, unlike many leading-edge firms in Britain at the time, they took great care to protect all their inventions and innovations by patent, which frustrated other shipbuilders throughout the world who had themselves been trying to design similar two-cylinder engines. In their lives they reflected the liberal Christian ideas of Norman Macleod and John Caird that dominated Glasgow society at the time. 


@@@@@


doc= 23116


Randolph, Edward (d. 1566), soldier and military administrator, was one of at least three sons and two daughters of Avery Randolph (died 1561), landowner, of Badlesmere, Kent, and his wife, Anne (died in or after 1561), daughter of Sir John Gaynsford of Crowhurst, Surrey, and his wife, Katherine. Thomas Randolph (1525/6-1590), a diplomat, was one of his brothers. His wife was Sybil Croft, sister of Sir James Croft. Born in Kent, he was one of Sir Thomas Wyatt's 'alise neighbours companions in the same profession of armes' (Loades, 50), and possibly one of his proposed militia in 1549. Not surprisingly, Randolph was involved in Wyatt's rebellion of November 1553 to February 1554, when, like many others, he escaped punishment by fleeing abroad. Two months later he was in Paris with his brother Thomas, distancing himself from the rebels there and seeking pardon from Mary's government. That was promised on condition that he remained in France and sent useful information home. Consequently, Randolph estimated rebel numbers abroad -- his figure, real or imagined, was 150 -- spied on the French army, and acted as intermediary for Sir Peter Carew. His official pardon came in October, and in the following April (1555) he received an annual pension of 200 crowns from Philip II with the designation of colonel of infantry. It was a rare distinction, recognizing his military talent perhaps, but certainly intended to bind him to the Marian regime. A show of outward conformity masked Randolph's continuing opposition; he met with other sympathizers at Arundel's tavern and kept in touch with the French ambassador. He was 'vehemently suspected', with his brother-in-law ('Croft and he all one'), of complicity in the Dudley conspiracy of March 1556 ('CSP dom.', '1553-8', 325-6). 
Hence Randolph was one of the 'young heads' (Loades, 245), allied by marriage and limited prospects, who opposed Mary's government both openly and surreptitiously. His credentials thus established, like 'other gentlemen that be soldiers' (Loades, 207-8), his talents were put to good use by the Elizabethan regime. Her accession brought the rewards of military recognition and office: Randolph became a valued field commander and lieutenant of the office of ordnance. In November 1559 he was sent to Scotland with 300 men to counter the French threat and $3000 'to comfort the Protestants' ('CSP for.', '1559-60', 262). He won golden opinions at Leith: 'He is wise, painful, skilful and no pillar or robber', wrote Cecil to Norfolk ('CSP for.', '1560-61', 242(4)). 
In 1563 Randolph was appointed high marshal of the garrison at Le Havre, under Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick, and between June and July subscribed to a series of letters, describing the inadequacies of the fortifications, the equipment, the victuals, and the pay, then, finally, the enemy trenches closing to arquebus range, the windmills lost, the ovens broken, and the bakers dead of the plague. Randolph, 'of whom they have great want' ('CSP for.', '1563', 1042(3)), was seriously ill by 18 July, and the constable of France gave permission for an English messenger to see him. 
After the fall of the garrison and his own repatriation, Randolph was appointed lieutenant of the ordnance, once again second in command to Warwick. (His predecessor, William Bromefield, had succumbed to wounds suffered at Le Havre.) At the Minories, Randolph carried out routine commissariat work and sat on boards of commission to inspect accounts, including those of Le Havre, Berwick, Admiral William Winter, and Lieutenant Bromefield. In July 1566 he headed an expeditionary force to Ireland. As the leaseholder of an estate in Queen's county, he may have had a particular interest. Shane O'Neill's attack on the Derry garrison in November was defeated with heavy losses, but Randolph was one of the few English casualties. After his death, which may have occurred on 12 November, his account books were put in safe custody, and his debts to the ordnance office were listed. A year later his widow had her annuity confirmed -- an appropriate recompense from a government now firmly established. 


@@@@@


doc= 23117


Randolph, Edward (bap. 1632, d. 1703), colonial administrator in America, was born in Canterbury, and baptized on 9 July 1632, the son of Dr Edmund Randolph (1600-1649), physician and a graduate of the University of Padua and University College, Oxford, and his wife, Deborah (died 1666?), daughter of Giles Master. The family owned lands around Biddenden, south-west of Canterbury. Randolph was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1650 and to Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1651, but is not recorded as having graduated or been called to the bar. By 1660 he had married Jane (1640-1679), the daughter of Thomas Gibbon of West Cliffe, Kent, and his wife, Alice Taylor, with whom he had four daughters. The marriage connected him with the family of Robert Tufton Mason, claimant to the proprietorship of New Hampshire, opening the way to government employment and his subsequent career in North America. 
For several years Randolph served as muster-master for the Cinque Ports and supplied timber for the Royal Navy. By the 1670s, however, he was in dire financial straits, and in the spring of 1676 Mason procured his appointment to carry a royal letter to the Massachusetts government requiring a response to Mason's claims, at which time he was also to gather information on New England's condition and its people's loyalty to the crown. He reached Boston in June, and returned to London in September, submitting several lengthy papers charging the Massachusetts government with abuse of its charter powers, tolerance of illegal trade, and tyranny over both its own citizens and its New England neighbours. Later he proposed plans for royal intervention. The detailed, if strongly partisan, information he provided and the forensic skills he displayed in its presentation were essential to the legal processes that culminated in the crown's 1684 annulment of the Massachusetts charter of government. 
Randolph now began a long career as royal office holder in America. In June 1678 he was commissioned collector of customs in New England, a post that, following his return to Boston in December 1679, gave him abundant opportunity to experience and report back further instances of the colonists' disdain for royal authority. He served as councillor and attorney-general in the royal government set up in New Hampshire in 1679. In 1681 he married Grace Grenville, who died in December the following year. He married, third, in 1684, Sarah Platt, 'nee' Backhouse ('b'. 'c'.1650), who predeceased him and with whom he had a fifth daughter. In alliance with a small group of colonists he identified as willing to collaborate with the crown, he played a major role in planning the new form of government, the dominion of New England, which was created in 1685 to replace the puritan regime in Massachusetts and also included the other New England colonies and later New York. Within the dominion Randolph accumulated the further offices of councillor, secretary and register, deputy postmaster, surveyor of woods, and deputy to William Blathwayt, auditor-general for the American colonies. 
Randolph worked busily to advance his own fortunes in tandem with royal authority. But his sweeping plans to regulate trade, reissue land titles, and further the cause of the Church of England in America were intensely unpopular. He found himself increasingly excluded from power by his fellow royalists, especially after the dominion passed in 1686 under the rule of a new and autocratic royal governor, Sir Edmund Andros. As news of the revolution of 1688 reached Boston, popular discontent exploded into revolt. On 18 April 1689 Randolph and other members of the dominion government were seized and imprisoned before being sent back to England in February 1690. There they were exonerated from charges of misgovernment after a hearing before the committee of trade and plantations, and Randolph was given new employment in October 1691 as surveyor-general of customs throughout the American colonies. 
Randolph landed in Virginia in April 1692 and began a three-year inspection of almost every eastern port between Maine and North Carolina. Throughout he uncovered evidence of inadequate record-keeping and official connivance with illegal trade, touching off several sharp conflicts with local authorities. When summarized in a formal report to the customs commissioners on his return to England in September 1695, his information led directly to the 1696 enactment, largely drafted by Randolph and sustained by his testimony before parliament, that significantly tightened regulation of colonial trade. From December 1697 until the summer of 1700 he was again in America, supervising enforcement of the new regulations and sniffing out local malfeasance. In Bermuda, in consequence, he spent nine months in prison before securing his release and the governor's dismissal. He repeatedly proposed the consolidation of the American colonies under direct royal authority, a plan adopted by the Board of Trade in a bill placed before parliament in 1701 but never enacted. In the autumn of 1702 he travelled once more to America -- his seventeenth transatlantic voyage. He died in Virginia in April 1703 and was buried in Accomack county, Virginia. 
Randolph typified a new species of emigrant to America in these years, of men who identified their own advancement with that of royal authority, farming the colonists rather than the land. But he was exceptional in his tireless zeal and grasp of larger issues of policy, his refusal to compromise with friend and foe alike, and the rigour and accuracy of his countless letters and reports. Though generously salaried by the crown and given many opportunities for personal profit, he did not die a wealthy man. His legacy was rather the tightening of imperial control and an enduring suspicion among the colonists of the men and methods deemed necessary to secure it. 




@@@@@


doc= 23118


Randolph, Francis (1752-1831), Church of England clergyman, was born at Bristol on 29 December 1752, the son of George Randolph, a Bristol doctor. He was king's scholar at Eton College in 1771 and was admitted at King's College, Cambridge, in 1772. He graduated BA (1777) and MA (1780) and was a fellow of the college from 1775 to 1787. He was made DD at Lambeth in 1795 and at Dublin in 1806. Having taken holy orders he held an impressive range of clerical posts. He was appointed vicar of Broad Chalke, Wiltshire, in 1786 and rector of Chenies, Buckinghamshire, in 1788; he was also rector of Aston until 1804, when he obtained the rectory of Watton, Hertfordshire. In addition to these posts he was English teacher to the duchess of York at the court in Bavaria and chaplain to the duke of York; he was prebendary of Bristol from 24 December 1791. Among his patrons was Francis Russell, fifth duke of Bedford, who in 1817 presented him to the living of St Paul's, Covent Garden; in the same year he was appointed vicar of Banwell, Somerset. He was a proprietor of Laura Chapel, Bathwick, Bath, which had sittings for one thousand people and opened in 1796. 
In 1788 Randolph published a letter to William Pitt on the slave trade, in which he advocated partial and progressive emancipation. He gained fame as a theologian by contributing to the Socinian controversy. His tract 'Scriptural Revision of Socinian Arguments, in a Letter to Dr Priestley' (1792) prompted a response from Benjamin Hobhouse; Randolph rejoined with a vindication of his 'Scriptural Revision' in 1793. In 1800 he published a collection of sermons. 
Randolph became embroiled in scandal when, in August 1795, he was entrusted with some letters of the princess of Wales to carry to Brunswick but, being prevented from going, he sent them back by coach from London to the princess at Brighton. They were lost on the way. Lady Jersey was accused in the press of having intercepted them and of sending some of them to Queen Charlotte, whom they supposedly maligned. In 1796 the earl of Jersey published the correspondence between Randolph and Lady Jersey in an attempt to clear his wife's name. However, the princess was unconvinced and her friends suggested that Randolph had been promised a bishopric for parting with the papers. Thomas James Mathias published several satirical pieces on the incident. 
In 1808 Randolph issued 'A Few Observations on the State of the Nation', addressed to the duke of Bedford, in which he revived a plan propounded by Richard Watson, bishop of Llandaff, for a redemption of the national debt. Randolph, who was married, died at his prebendal house, Bristol, on 14 June 1831 and was buried in the churchyard of Bristol Cathedral. In the north aisle of Banwell church there is a mural tablet to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 23119


Randolph, John, third earl of Moray (d. 1346), magnate, was the second son of Thomas Randolph, first earl of Moray. The identity of his mother is not certain, but she may have been Isabella Stewart, a daughter of Sir John Stewart of Bonkill -- in 1329 John Stewart's grandson, also John, was described as Thomas Randolph's nephew. John Randolph's elder brother, another Thomas Randolph ['see under 'Randolph, Thomas, first earl of Moray], became second earl of Moray on the death of their father on 20 July 1332, but died at the battle of Dupplin Moor on 11 August that year. Succeeding his brother in the earldom, and also in the lordships of Annandale and Man, Moray immediately assumed an active military role in the conflict between the supporters of David II and those of Edward Balliol, the English-backed claimant to the Scottish crown. Moray played a leading part in a successful attack by Bruce partisans on Balliol at Annan in December 1332, which forced Balliol to flee the kingdom. On 19 July 1333 Moray was present at the disastrous defeat of pro-David II forces at the battle of Halidon Hill near Berwick, but managed to escape death or capture. The defeat, and the military ascendancy achieved in its aftermath by Balliol and Edward III, caused David's followers to reconsider the position of their young king. Some time in the winter of 1333-4 Moray seems to have been entrusted with a mission to the French court to arrange for David's transfer there from his bolt-hole in Dumbarton Castle. He returned to Scotland in the spring of 1334 with ships and money from the French king to pay for the expenses involved in moving David II from Dumbarton, which was safely effected in May 1334. 
On Moray's return he and Robert the Steward, David II's nephew and heir apparent, co-operated in attacks on Balliol supporters in Clydesdale, and by July 1334 they had become joint guardians. Moray's claim to exercise guardianship may have been partly justified by his own blood relationship to David II, for his grandmother was a sister of Robert I. The Steward apparently resented Moray's role as joint guardian, and the legacy of the personal animosity between the two men was to be an important feature of the politics of the kingdom throughout David II's reign. 
On 27 September 1334 Moray forced the submission of David Strathbogie, titular earl of Atholl, one of the disinherited who had accompanied Edward Balliol to Scotland in 1332, and who had since been occupying Moray's own lordships of Lochaber and Badenoch. In April 1335 Strathbogie and Moray had a further falling out at a parliament held by the guardians at Dairsie in Fife. The Steward seems to have supported Strathbogie's position against Moray's, and an entry in the exchequer rolls indicates that the adherents of the two guardians were soon engaged in a struggle for control of the king's fermes and customs revenues from the burghs north of the Forth. 
In July 1335 Edward III and Edward Balliol launched a renewed assault on David II's supporters in Scotland and swiftly established their campaign headquarters in Perth. In August Moray defeated a force under the command of Gui, count of Namur, who was bringing his troops to the assistance of Edward III, in a series of running battles in and around Edinburgh. Gui and his men surrendered to Moray, who agreed to free the count under the condition that he took no further active part in Edward III's campaign. While escorting Gui to the English border, Moray was himself surprised and captured by a force from the English border garrisons. By 13 August 1335 he was recorded as being a prisoner at York, and he was subsequently held in a number of English gaols, including Nottingham Castle, Windsor, Winchester, and the Tower of London. He remained a prisoner until February 1342, when he was ransomed by Edward III in exchange for William Montagu, earl of Salisbury, who had been captured by the French early in 1340. 
In June 1341, not long before Moray's release, David II had returned to Scotland from France. The earl's close political relationship with the young king was immediately restored, and David is reputed to have served under his command in a raid on northern England about 1342 (the precise date of this expedition is difficult to determine). Moray's interest and prominence in Anglo-Scottish warfare rested partly on his status as lord of Annandale. The chief castle of the lordship, Lochmaben, was garrisoned by English forces, and much of Annandale remained subject to the authority of agents of the English crown. In domestic politics, the affinities and allies of Moray and the Steward continued their rivalry from the 1330s. In 1342 Sir Alexander Ramsay, an active figure in Anglo-Scottish warfare and an associate of Moray, was appointed sheriff of Teviotdale by David II. The previous holder of the office, one of Ramsay's local rivals, Sir William Douglas of Liddesdale, promptly seized Ramsay and allowed him to die in his custody. Douglas was saved from the king's revenge by the Steward, although the incident provoked a long and bitter feud between the followers of Douglas and Moray. The latter still played an important role in border warfare and accompanied the king during his invasion of northern England in October 1346. On 17 October Moray was killed while commanding one of the three Scottish divisions at the battle of Nevilles Cross near Durham. 
Randolph married Euphemia (d. 1388/9), daughter of Hugh Ross, fourth earl of Ross, but the marriage seems to have produced no children. On 2 May 1355 Euphemia, as countess of Moray, received a dispensation to marry Robert the Steward (the future Robert II). Although the earldom of Moray had been granted to John's father in a male entail, after 1346 the husband of John's sister Agnes, Patrick, earl of Dunbar, assumed the title of earl of Moray. David II reclaimed the earldom for the crown in 1367-8; in 1372, however, David's successor, Robert II, granted the comital title to John Dunbar, the son of Sir Patrick Dunbar and John Randolph's younger sister Isabella. Title to the lordships of Annandale and Man passed to John Dunbar's elder brother, George, earl of March. 


@@@@@


doc= 23120


Randolph, John (1749-1813), bishop of London, was born in Oxford on 6 July 1749, the third son of Thomas Randolph (1701-1783), president of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and Thomazine Honywood (1707/8-1783). He was educated at Westminster School and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 17 June 1767. He graduated BA (1771), MA (1774), BD (1782), and DD by diploma on 30 October 1783. From 1779 to 1783 he was a tutor and censor at Christ Church where he helped the dean, Lewis Bagot, to enforce discipline; he was appointed proctor in 1781. He was tutor to William Wyndham, later Baron Grenville, and to Richard Polwhele, who complained that, entrenched behind forms and ceremonies, Randolph's 'manner was frigid, and his words were few' (Polwhele 1.84). On 13 September 1785 he married Jane Lambarde (died 1836), the daughter of Thomas Lambarde of Sevenoaks, Kent. 
His father's influence at Oxford enabled Randolph to become a 'professorial pluralist' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 5: '18th-cent. Oxf.', 517) as professor of poetry (1776-83), regius professor of Greek (1782-3), professor of moral philosophy (1782-6), and regius professor of divinity (1783-1807). He delivered one lecture a term, in Latin, on the poetry of Homer and the course was still incomplete after seven years. The regius chair in Greek was a sinecure which normally went to a man from Christ Church and Randolph resigned it when he was promoted to the regius chair in divinity. He sought in his lectures on divinity to provide ordinands with a thorough instruction in the theology of the established church and a clear understanding of how it differed from that of Rome. However, as Cox remembered, the lectures were 'given late in the evening by candle-light; one effect of this (and not a very surprising one, considering the hour, the subject, and the audience) was, that many of the class slept through the lecture... the only things really carried away by the majority of the class, were the Syllabus given to each one at the commencement of the course, and a formidable printed list of authors recommended for future reading, presented at the close of the lectures. (Cox, 140)' Randolph was a conscientious and assiduous teacher who kept, in his own hand, a list of all students who attended each lecture. But his colleagues were critical of the appropriateness of these discourses; later Cyril Jackson, dean of Christ Church, commenting on over-long lectures, complained that Randolph 'used to write complete doctrinal treatises, which is absurd' (letter to Howley, 20 Oct 1810, LPL, MS 2186 fol. 24). His library, which was sold after his death, consisted of 1623 items that reflected his wide interests in theology, classical literature, history, natural science, and travel. 
Randolph's clerical career was as successful as his academic one; his limited experience as a parish priest did not bar his route to the episcopate. He held the prebend of Chute and Chisenbury in Salisbury Cathedral for twelve months from October 1782, was rector of Ewelme and canon of Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford (1783-1807), and sinecure rector of Darowen in Montgomeryshire (1797-1800). He was consecrated bishop of Oxford on 1 September 1799, translated to Bangor on 6 January 1807, and thence to London on 9 August 1809. The charges issued on his primary visitation of each diocese reflect his consistent concerns: a profound distrust of Catholics and protestant dissenters, especially the Methodists; his opposition to clerical non-residence; his support for the education of the children of the poor; and his concern to keep his clergy well informed of clerical legislation in parliament. As bishop of London his correspondence reveals a conscientious bishop, much concerned to enforce the clergy residence act of 1803 and aware of the need for new church buildings to accommodate the rapidly growing population. His politics were traditional: he believed it was the duty of the clergy 'to promote the good order of society... by stifling every seed of discontent' (J. Randolph, 'A Charge Delivered to the Clergy of the Diocese of Bangor', 1808, 6), and warned 'the spirit of democracy is not easily subdued... it again rears its head wherever it can find or create the seeds of discontent; the dog returns to its own vomit again' (ibid., 9). Earlier a staunch opponent of the principles of the French Revolution, in 1813, as bishop of London, he rejected a proposal by the duke of Bedford to erect a statue of Charles James Fox in the porch of St Paul's Church, Covent Garden, commenting 'It looks like dedicating the Church to him. -- If the Porch has been the scene of popular Elections for Westminster I can only lament the abuse, but this is no reason for augmenting it' (letter to Mr Embry, 22 May 1813, LPL, Randolph MSS 3, fol. 43). 
As well as sermons and charges Randolph published the heads of his divinity lectures in 1784 (the whole course being published posthumously by his son in 1869-70) and engaged in controversy with Herbert Marsh on the synoptic gospels. He edited 'The Clergyman's Instructor', a collection of tracts on clerical duties, in 1807; his son published his lectures on Homer in 1870. He was a leading supporter of the National Society, a Busby trustee of Westminster School (1804), a governor of Charterhouse, and an official trustee of the British Museum. Sworn of the privy council on 27 September 1809, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 19 December 1811. 
Randolph died suddenly on a visit to one of his sons, Thomas, rector of Much Hadham in Hertfordshire, on 28 July 1813, following an apoplectic fit while on horseback. He was buried in Fulham churchyard on 5 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 23121


Randolph, Thomas, first earl of Moray (d. 1332), soldier and guardian of Scotland, was the son of Sir Thomas Randolph of Stichill, Roxburghshire, and of a daughter of Marjory, countess of Carrick, and her first husband, Adam of Kilconquhar. Thomas's mother was half-sister to Robert I, and he was 'our dearest nephew', but had no claim to the throne. His father (who probably died soon after 1296) and grandfather had held public office, including the chamberlainship; neither Thomas nor his father appears in the first phase of the wars of independence (1296-1304). 
When Robert Bruce seized the throne on 25 March 1306, Randolph was probably with him, and he was certainly there when incompetence lost the battle of Methven on 19 June to Aymer de Valence. He was taken prisoner, and only the fact that he switched allegiance and was promised his heritage before the arrival of Edward I's orders that the prisoners were to be sent for trial and execution saved his life. He was, however, imprisoned for a year or so, first at Inverkip and then in the custody of the earl of Lincoln, but in September 1307 he is found in the party which pursued Sir James Douglas near Paisley. Late in the following year he was captured in Peeblesshire, surprised in a house by a force under Douglas, and was sent to his uncle the king, whom he is said to have reproached for fighting a war of hit and run. They quarrelled, but in March 1309 Randolph was at parliament with the style of lord of Nithsdale -- an obvious invitation to drive the English from their strongholds there. This he seems not to have attempted, but on 19 February 1310 he is described in the same way and as 'then lieutenant of the illustrious prince of Scotland from Forth to Orkney' ('Liber sancte Marie de Lundoris', no. 10), which was more than the king then controlled. Clearly he was now in the innermost counsels of Robert I. 
Randolph's value was recognized when the king conferred upon him a huge earldom, the first new one for almost a century and one which revived a title extinct since 1130. Between 12 April and 29 October 1312 he was made earl of Moray, with territory stretching from the western sea to the Moray Firth and south to the border of Perthshire; his judicial privileges of 'regality' were all-encompassing, and the king's tenants and vassals now owed homage to him -- and this before the king conferred a much smaller earldom on his own brother and heir, Edward. The limitation to heirs male was probably a bonus in the earl's eyes, not a disadvantage. In 1328 he paid $275 as the tenth of rents of himself and his tenants within the regality for one term, representing annual rents totalling $5500; his share of that is not discoverable. 
Moray is not mentioned in connection with the taking of Dundee or Perth, but early in 1314, in anticipation of Edward II's promised invasion to recover Scotland, he set siege to Edinburgh Castle. Eventually, as Barbour tells it, a former member of the garrison showed a way up the castle rock; Moray and a small party climbed it at night with ladders which took them to the top of the wall, and the castle fell. Another source adds that his army had launched a major diversionary assault, which must be correct, for the few on the wall cannot have overcome the garrison by themselves. The date was 14 March 1314; when Edward II came there in June 1314 and in August 1322, the castle on Edinburgh Rock was a heap of rubble. 
In the preparations for Edward's attempt to relieve Stirling Castle, Robert I made Moray and Edward Bruce commanders of the two forward divisions, or 'battles', of his army, while he commanded the rear. On 23 June 1314 a group broke away from the English army as it went through the Torwood, and made for the castle. The king is said (by Barbour) to have reproached Moray that a rose had fallen from his chaplet, but the remark may have been borrowed from the chivalrous court of Edward III in France (1340s); it is not in doubt that Moray with a force of infantry stopped the English knights, killed many, and put great heart into the main Scottish army. On the following day, according to Barbour, after the English van rode at Edward Bruce's division, Moray and his division attacked the main English force. The progress of the battle is obscure, but the English defeat was complete save for the escape of Edward II. 
The disaster did not put the English in a peace-making frame of mind, and the Scots had to turn the screw by direct attacks on England and by seeking to drive them from Ireland. Moray crossed to Ulster with Edward Bruce in May 1315, and campaigned with him to Louth in the summer. He returned for reinforcements to Scotland, rejoining Edward at Dundalk to ravage as far south as Castledermot in the winter of 1315-16, then went back to Scotland, where he appears on 16 July 1316 for the first time as lord of Man. He was then at the unsuccessful siege of Berwick, but at an assembly at Cupar, Fife, on 30 September 1316 the king confirmed Moray and Man to him in a wholly exceptional act carrying not only the great seal, but also the seals of Edward (Bruce), king of Ireland, and of the prelates and magnates. What lies behind this is uncertain, but most probably it records Edward's reluctant agreement to Moray's title to Man, which the Scots had regained and lost once more; it was recovered by Moray, apparently late in 1317. 
In the first half of 1317 Moray was with King Robert in Ireland, ravaging as far as Tipperary, before returning in May. In the following years he was active in northern England, offering the alternative of paying blackmail or suffering destruction. He secured the surrender of a number of Northumberland castles in 1318, and in 1319 commanded the force which defeated the men of Yorkshire at Myton and drew Edward II from the siege of Berwick. After the truce of 1320-21 he commanded under the king in the invasion of October 1322, when Edward was humiliated at Byland; Moray led the uphill assault which drove the English to flight. The military abilities he showed in these years have to be read between the lines of Barbour's poem, which is much concerned to advance the repute of Douglas, often at the expense of Moray. 
When Edward Bruce went to Ireland, it was as King Robert's designated heir presumptive; none the less if Robert had an under-age son, Moray, not Edward, was to be guardian. In December 1318, when Edward had been killed, the succession of a child became more likely and Moray was confirmed as designated guardian (failing him, now, Douglas), and was given the valuable lordship of Annandale, formerly of the Bruce family. His position as second in the kingdom after an ailing king was as apparent as his unswerving loyalty, and in marked contrast to the royal home life south of the border. It was he who swore on the king's behalf to the truce of 1319 and to the extraordinary agreement with Andrew Harclay on 3 January 1323; he had negotiated with the earl of Lancaster in January 1322 as 'lieutenant' on behalf of a king in declining health who would not allow him to act as ambassador in England in 1323 without receiving very important English hostages in return. Once they had been received, he made the thirteen-year truce of Bishopthorpe, which effectively recognized the stalemate of the war, on 30 May 1323. 
Moray now entered the international stage, for that truce permitted the Scots to seek the lifting of ecclesiastical sanctions imposed on them as warmongers, and he wrote to John XXII (doubtless the wording came from the royal chancery) seeking his recognition of Robert as king. By mid-January 1324 he was at Avignon, where he so far prevailed that John XXII agreed to write to Robert as king, if only to tell him that this did not mean that he was recognized as king; the pope also fell silent about the censures of 1317-20. On his return in 1324 Moray was supposed to go to York for peace negotiations, but there was no serious English will for them; he had to make do with a renewal of royal charters of his three lordships. None the less his time abroad was clearly not wasted, for he was given letters of credence to Charles IV of France in April 1325 and was at the French court with an embassy by June. From there he went to the papal court, where he is recorded on 1 October, and where he may have stayed for some months. In February 1326 the pope wrote to him urging him to return from France to Scotland, but the Anglo-French war of St Sardos in 1324-5 had produced a much more favourable climate at the French court. There in April 1326 he made the treaty of Corbeil, a Franco-Scottish alliance which, after twenty-three years of French indifference or hostility, became the cornerstone of Scottish foreign policy for the remainder of the fourteenth century. 
Moray returned with this remarkable achievement to obtain his king's confirmation in the parliament of July 1326. Six months later the Scots broke the truce, and in the summer of 1327 launched a highly successful attack on northern England. Moray was in command, but Douglas brought tactical skill and is depicted by Barbour as saving Moray from the folly of fighting their way out of a tight corner; that is as may be. What is clear is that first they drew Edward III himself into responding, and then humiliated the king and his divided Anglo-Hainaultese force, before escaping unnoticed at night from Stanhope Park. They were home by 9 August 1327. A month later King Robert was in Northumberland, besieging castles and distributing lands there to his followers; the bankrupt English government had no option but peace, which was concluded at Edinburgh in March 1328. In July Moray took the child David Bruce to Berwick for his marriage to Joan of the Tower, and negotiated again with Queen Isabella, agreeing that four English magnates, Thomas Wake, Henry de Beaumont, Henry Percy, and William Zouche, should have restitution of the lands they claimed in Scotland. This departure from the determined policy of Robert I is difficult to explain, and the failure to carry it out certainly gave Edward III his excuse to interfere again in Scotland. 
The death of King Robert on 7 June 1329 made Moray guardian or regent for David II, an office he fulfilled with determination and distinction for a miserable 100 merks per annum. The government lost the annual tenth of rents granted to Robert for life, but persisted with the three-year tenth granted in 1328 to pay off the English for the peace. The last instalment of the $20,000 was paid in November 1331, the penalty documents destroyed, and the new king, knighted by Moray, crowned and anointed, received the homage of his magnates; the peace and above all the recognition of independence now seemed secure. Credit for the extraordinary achievements of the years 1327-31 belongs to Robert I and Moray, though the greater share must go to the earl. The guardianship was not untroubled, however, for Douglas had been killed in Spain, and the disinherited were nagging for their rights. The chronicler Bower depicts Moray active throughout the kingdom as justiciar, enforcing a stern justice, and then falling ill, poisoned by a friar, but struggling to appear fit as, swollen and flushed, with his army he received an English herald, whom he convinced that the Scots could still win a war, so that hostile plans were dropped. Moray died at Musselburgh, near Edinburgh, on 20 July 1332; presumably he had been nauseous for some time, suggesting liver cancer rather than food poisoning. On 6 August the disinherited invaded. 
According to Barbour, Moray was of middling height and build, with a broad pleasant face; courteous and debonair, he loved loyalty, generosity, and honour. The few royal accounts show him close to King Robert in his final illness, and he was buried near him in Dunfermline Abbey. He married Isabel, daughter of Sir John Stewart of Bunkle, and they had two sons and two daughters. The elder son, 


@@@@@


doc= 23122


Randolph, Thomas (1525/6-1590), diplomat, was born at Badlesmere, Kent, the second son of Avery Randolph (died 1561), landowner, of Badlesmere, Kent, and his wife, Anne (died in or after 1561), daughter of Sir John Gaynsford of Crowhurst, Surrey, and his first wife, Katherine. One brother was Edward Randolph (d. 1566), a soldier; a sister, Mary, married William Crispe, lieutenant of Dover Castle. Apparently he had at least one more sibling of each sex. Randolph described his Kentish birthplace as a farm, not apparently his father's since he himself bought it later. 
Randolph was schooled at Canterbury and went to Oxford with an exhibition from the chapter there. He proceeded BA in October 1545 and BCL in early 1548, when he was twenty-two. On 5 April 1548 the faculty office licensed him as a public notary. After migrating to Christ Church, he acted in this capacity as chapter clerk and also maintained a law studentship there, apparently even after acquiring on 21 November 1549 the (possibly ill-paid) post of principal of Broadgates Hall, the precursor of Pembroke College, specializing in civil law. He supplicated for DCL in October 1566 and June 1575, but did not complete the process. Anthony Wood thought he perhaps got the degree 'on one of his embassies', but lack of reference to him as doctor makes this unlikely (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 1.178). 
Randolph was the subject of complaints in June 1550 by a Broadgates faction led by Thomas Darbyshire, who became principal under Mary I. Not being a theologian, Randolph was not so blatantly protestant as to suffer immediate expulsion after her accession. He gave shelter to John Jewel, ejected from Corpus Christi. Randolph did resign on 14 October 1553, but three months later Jewel was still with him at Broadgates. The idea that Randolph was a protestant exile is a half-truth. He was the conventional travelling gentleman, with protestant contacts and sympathies. His contacts at Paris were also significantly Scottish, such as George Buchanan, William Kirkcaldy of Grange, and James Melville of Halhill. Melville depicted Randolph as a religious exile in need of his financial help. By Randolph's own account, however, he was openly subsidized by his father. 
Dr Nicholas Wotton, Mary's ambassador in France, procured a pardon for Edward Randolph (implicated in the rebellion of Sir Thomas Wyatt the younger) and employed Thomas Randolph occasionally. Following his return to England, in January 1558 Thomas Randolph was elected to parliament for both New Romney in Kent and St Ives in Cornwall, probably under the respective sponsorship of Sir Thomas Cheyne, lord warden of the Cinque Ports and a friend of his father, and Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford. Randolph was again selected by Bedford for St Ives in 1572 and witnessed his will in 1584. 
Randolph did not stay in England. In 1561 he claimed that in the previous eight years he had never been able to see his parents two days together. Elizabeth I's accession found him already acting as a diplomatic, if unaccredited, agent in Germany. In December 1558 he said he would accompany the returning exiles Sir Anthony Cooke and Sir Thomas Wroth from Strasbourg to Antwerp. In the new year he was again elected to parliament, this time for Grantham, Lincolnshire, through the influence of Sir William Cecil. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton proposed Randolph as clerk to the privy council. Instead he was sent in June 1559 to Throckmorton's embassy in France before undertaking the delicate task of secretly escorting James Hamilton, earl of Arran, via Geneva and Antwerp to Scotland. Oddly Randolph adopted the alias Thomas Barnaby or Barnabe, a former informant of Cecil. 
In late November 1559 the lords of the congregation sent Randolph himself with William Maitland of Lethington south to seek English support, though the Berwick authorities tried too late to persuade him to stay in Scotland after having 'so discovered himself' as to compromise Elizabeth's bogus neutrality (Clifford, 1.588). The French complained about the activities of Barnaby, rather than Randolph, despite his carelessness with his alias. Randolph returned to Glasgow on 25 December, 'utterly destitute of anie maner of aide of one of my armes, by reason of a great fluxe of humours that is descended into the same, and also greved with a burnynge fever' (ibid., 1.665). He continued to press Cecil for a commitment to back Scottish protestantism, having helped encourage the successful intervention of 1560. 
Randolph's expansive and gossipy correspondence serves as a major source for the period after Mary, queen of Scots, returned to Scotland. To an appreciable extent he was seduced by life at Mary's court, an environment for which he was unprepared by experience and in which he occupied a more prominent place than an English diplomat ever could have done in France. His lack of formal ambassadorial rank made him especially susceptible to the flattery of being seated with lords at feasts. His identification with his host government was at times considerable, as in the suppression of the rebellion of George Gordon, fourth earl of Huntly, in 1562 while he was touring Aberdeenshire with Mary. Randolph cultivated a courtly, perhaps even genuine, attachment to one of Mary's ladies, Mary Beaton (c.1543-1597) ['see under 'Queen's Maries (act. 1548-1567)]. Even as late as 1586 it was worth teasing him about the possibility of marriage to 'Mrs Beeton' (BL, Harley MS 6994, fol. 29'r'). 
Randolph was not at this stage naturally allied to Calvinist critics of Mary. Although he helped introduce Scottish reforming ministers to English patrons, his sympathy was rather with his old visitor Jewel, now bishop of Salisbury, whose 'Apologia pro ecclesia Anglicana' (1562) he presented to James Stewart, first earl of Moray, and which he rather optimistically asserted could be generally accepted by Scottish reformers. Randolph was sceptical of the 'exact severity' of John Knox, 'thoughe I acknowledge his doctryne to be sounde'. He was 'as wylfull as lerned' and acted 'as thoughe he were... of Godes previe consell, that knewe howe he had determined of her [Mary] from the begynnynge' ('CSP Scot.', '1547-63', 564, 597, 672). 
Randolph could not be accredited to the Scottish queen in her absence, but even on Mary's return he was not officially titled ambassador and was only allowed $1 6's'. 8died per day (later in his career he received $2 per day). The idea of a cheap posting was doubtful given Randolph's activity as a correspondent and courtier, but he was never paid the kind of allowance an ambassador of higher status would expect. Shortly before being expelled from Scotland in 1566 he claimed to be too indebted to 'depart with honeste [honesty]' ('A letter of Thomas Randolph to the earl of Leicester', 139). His old friend Throckmorton, visiting the previous year as a fully accredited ambassador, stressed the expense of Randolph's networking in Scotland: 'faire promises heretofore have drawen him to spend largely & to execute his charge carefully', but he had become discouraged 'since the fructes of his service worke him soe smalle advantage' (BL, Cotton MS Caligula B.x, fol. 297'r'). 
In 1563 Randolph was instructed to dangle before Mary the prospect of recognition as Elizabeth's successor. This was to be done in return for dependence on Elizabeth's approval in Mary's marriage. Uncertainty over it damaged Randolph's position, giving him a reputation in Scotland for deceit. Elizabeth used him as a convenient scapegoat for her own dithering. Typical was the queen's instruction to Randolph in October 1565, when she had second thoughts about promising a special embassy, placing the blame with him for the misunderstanding. 
Elizabeth's sincerity in offering Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, as a bridegroom for Mary may have been very doubtful, but Randolph took it seriously and insistently urged him to show more enthusiasm, 'not to offend, but in all dutyfull service duly to serve your lordship duringe my life' (BL, Harley MS 787, fol. 121'v'). He genuinely wanted a settlement between Mary and Elizabeth, for 'to have them all wayes lyve in thys sorte and dowte th'one of th'other, is unprofitable to them bothe' ('CSP Scot.', '1563-9', 222). However, after the abortive meeting at Berwick of Randolph and Bedford with Moray and Lethington in November 1564, there was little chance of progress. In March 1565 Elizabeth declined to guarantee concessions even if Mary did marry to her liking and precipitated her objectionable marriage to Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley. This surprised Randolph, who completely failed to anticipate it. 
The embitterment of Elizabeth's and Mary's relationship extended to Randolph, who found himself caught in the middle. It was not merely that a welcoming court changed to a suspicious one, but the 'debacle' seemed likely to ruin his diplomatic career. Randolph blamed his situation on Mary and Scotland in general, reversing his former liking for them and concluding that the Scottish queen's accession to the English throne would be 'as greate a plague unto our nation as cane come owte of Hell' ('A letter of Thomas Randolph to the earl of Leicester', 139). He tended to a lurid view of Catholic plots supposedly conducted through David Riccio. Randolph egged on Moray to revolt in summer 1565 and viewed favourably the genesis of the plot to kill Riccio, a deed accomplished after his own withdrawal to Berwick. 
The animus was reciprocated. In October 1565 two harquebusiers shot into Randolph's lodgings, and in February 1566 he was expelled over the payment of 3000 crowns sent to Moray, although the money never actually passed through his hands. With some reluctance he finally departed on 2 March after the provost of Edinburgh told Randolph's landlord to throw out his belongings. The anti-Marian satire 'Mr Randolph's Fantasy' was also blamed on him, though he clearly featured as dedicatee rather than author. The author, Thomas Jenye, was his clerk. Elizabeth was annoyed enough with Mary and (for once) supported rather than repudiated her servant. Randolph still considered himself 'unfortunate that ever I sette my foote in this countrie, whear so lyttle succes insuethe of so maynie yeres spent in yt as I have done', having 'gotten graye heares [hairs], not so hable a boddie for travaile as I brought with me, nor farther inriched in substance that yor honour knowethe, of whom I have byne a contynuall begger and shamles craver' (TNA: PRO, SP 52/11/49; SP 52/11/84). The last complaint was partly addressed. On his return to England, Elizabeth started giving Randolph significant grants of royal lands in Kent, for instance at Milton and Badlesmere. This created the local landed base that qualified him for appointment as JP for Kent by 1573. He also became constable of Queenborough Castle in Kent in 1567. He consolidated his position around the Medway estuary by becoming steward of the estates of the bishop of Rochester. 
Randolph became master of the posts in May 1567, something apparently promised when he was in Scotland. In February 1566 Bedford had requested Leicester to assist Randolph: 'great and earnest suit hath been made for the postmastership... that Sir John Mason could admit a joint patent with him. You know Mr Randolph's service and how that he hath deserved a better thing than this, which if he miss in... his absence, would discourage any one to serve. ('Pepys MSS', 76)' This served to enhance Randolph's diplomatic status -- it was as postmaster that he was often introduced to foreigners. The department was also a vital auxiliary to the diplomatic service: though Randolph did most administration by deputy, he was an active regulator. From 1572 he was also (less actively) chamberlain of the exchequer. 
The postmastership seems to have brought with it at least the honorary status of gentleman of the privy chamber. Randolph was described as a gentleman of the privy chamber when accredited to Ivan IV. Russian specialists undertaking previous negotiations had been handicapped by lack of status; Randolph was supposed to provide this through his position as a courtier, while still being too junior to evade the most arduous journey in the Elizabethan diplomatic world. He landed on the White Sea coast on 23 July 1568, and arrived at Moscow on 15 October, but had to wait four months for an audience. Differences in custom enhanced the impression of offhand treatment. 
The two monarchs' expectations were fundamentally incompatible. Ivan was interested in an answer to previous proposals of his for a reciprocal guarantee of asylum, in case Russia became too dangerous for him to remain there, and an offensive alliance, which he sought to direct against Poland. Elizabeth instructed Randolph to 'passe these matters with silence', conceding the simpler point of asylum if he must (Tolstoy, 43). Randolph's purpose in being there, she concurred with the London merchants, was to secure confirmation and extension of trading privileges for the Russia Company. They actually paid the $1527 cost of the mission. This had become more urgent with the incursion into Russia of non-company interlopers, who tried to defend their position by accusing Randolph of treachery 'as yf all the divles in hell were confederate to overthrowe this intercourse' (Willan, 105). He managed to refute the charge, a dangerous one where so unpredictable a monarch as Ivan the Terrible was concerned. 
Randolph fulfilled the Russia Company's requests concerning White Sea, Baltic, and Persian trade. The grant was good enough that its reaffirmation was sought for another twenty years. Ivan, though, was disappointed that Elizabeth would not sign the treaty he sent back with Andrei Grigoryevich Savin on Randolph's return in October 1569. He complained to her that Randolph's 'talke was of bowrishnes and affaires of marchaunts... of our princelie affaires he made them of none effect' and 'whosoever was trusted in our affaires, and did deceave us, it were not meete that you should creditt them' (Tolstoy, 110, 114). Accusations of duplicity echo Randolph's career in Scotland; but it was probably true that he never 'did agree... otherwise then it should please the queen her majestie to like of at his returne home' and 'the true meaning... for want of a good interpretor, was not well understood' (ibid., 130). Randolph retained enough interest in the east to have considerable 'goodes adventured... into Persia [and] Media' to bequeath in his will (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/76, sig. 75). He was given supervisory commissions over, and invested in, voyages directed to the north-east and north-west passages. 
When news arrived that the Scottish regent Moray had been shot in January 1570, Randolph was sent north again, in the first instance to discover whether he was dead and, if so, to determine what would happen next. He shuttled between Edinburgh and Berwick for a year, and then returned in early 1572 with Sir William Drury, the marshal of Berwick, attempting to effect Elizabeth's incoherent desire for a Scottish settlement favourable to England that nevertheless did not openly reject Mary's sovereign rights. 
Archibald Campbell, fifth earl of Argyll, himself no model of political consistency, was later reported as trying to exclude Randolph from negotiations in February 1570 -- 'it wes not for the wele of the cuntrie that sic ane personage as he sould be permittit... to remayne thairin, to mak tumult and discord amangis the nobilitie of this realme' (Thomson, 160-61). At the time he certainly told Randolph another story. Melville's autobiography accused Randolph of acting as 'a double dealer and sower of discord' and encouraging the recalcitrance of his old acquaintances Maitland and Kirkcaldy in Edinburgh Castle, while claiming to support the regency for James VI (Melville, 198). At the time Melville had claimed to believe Randolph was 'utterly myndit till peacefy our troublit estait, wherby ye may wyp away the wicked oppinion of the vulgaire that beleves the contrary' ('CSP Scot.', '1571-4', 163). Frequently cited though Melville's statements have been since his autobiography was discovered, they are best considered as 'simply... paranoid', aggravated because he blamed Randolph for losing him a land grant (Pollitt, 17). 
Maitland's and Kirkcaldy's attacks on Randolph's bias towards the regency, not to mention Mary's, were so vehement that the king's party believed that Maitland and Kirkcaldy had persuaded Elizabeth to have Drury take over negotiations from him. Kirkcaldy attempted to capture the regent, Matthew Stewart, fourth earl of Lennox, on 4 September 1571, supposedly to try to extricate him from Randolph's malign influence. It went wrong and Lennox was killed. Randolph's disillusionment with the queen's party was more outspoken from this point -- 'yff they weare hable to sett all the devilles in hell loose to make myscheif they wold not leave on [one] of them untyed' (TNA: PRO, SP 52/22/34). He certainly desired a more decisively partisan English policy and was frustrated in its absence. Indeed, 'yf I were ons qwyte of this countrie I wyll see Muscovia before that I come here agayne' though he conceded that the Scots were 'the honester men' (TNA: PRO, SP 52/18/75; BL, Cotton MS Caligula C.ii, fol. 396'v'). 
Despite his Scottish missions, Randolph attended the parliament of 1572, sitting on committees on Mary (12 May) and on church ceremonies (20 May). In 1571 he married Anne (died 1572x5), daughter of Thomas Walsingham of Chislehurst, Kent, and his wife, Dorothy. Thomas Walsingham (1560/61-1630), the literary patron, became his brother-in-law. An alliance to the protestant gentry of north-western Kent was of wider significance because of the Walsingham connection to Francis Walsingham (c.1532-1590). By 1575, and probably as early as 1572, Anne Randolph had died in childbirth and Randolph had married Ursula (died in or after 1592), daughter of Henry Copinger of Buxhall, Suffolk, who was of Kentish origin. The couple had three sons, Thomas ('bap'. 1575), Ambrose, and Robert, and three daughters, Frances (1576-1618), Ursula, and Elizabeth. Considerable sense of kinship between Randolph and Francis Walsingham survived this change of wife. Walsingham, inaccurately but deferring to Randolph's slight seniority, called him 'uncle'. Randolph probably expected more promotion from this connection than actually occurred. His political and religious views and personal connections developed in parallel -- in the 1570s he did join the so-called 'ideologues of the left' (MacCaffrey, 'Queen Elizabeth and the Making of Policy', 189). He became a close friend of William Davison and also grew closer to Leicester. In 1578 he appealed to the earl as 'th'onlye mayntayner in Englande of honeste and godlye men' on behalf of a preacher imprisoned over 'prophesyings', with an incidental repudiation of 'those that beare the name of puritans yf anye be so wicked as to calenge that to themselves' (BL, Cotton MS Titus B.vii, fol. 18'r'). Two years later he recommended Leicester support the return to Scotland of his Christ Church contemporary Christopher Goodman. Far more unequivocal than in his attitude to Knox two decades before, he praised Goodman's 'greate testimonie of his trewe service in Chryste's churche' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/144/34). In 1584 he was involved in the Kentish gentry's petitions against Archbishop Whitgift's anti-puritan measures. His antipathy to Mary also led Randolph, who possibly had had some influence on Buchanan's political ideas in the 1560s, to encourage the Scottish scholar to write 'De jure regni apud Scotos' (1579) and to arrange for the printing of his play 'Baptises' with its stress on the tyranny of Herod. 
In October 1573 Randolph went to France on a two-month mission to assess Francois, duc d'Alencon, as a marital prospect for the queen. According to the French ambassador, Bertrand de Salignac de la Mothe Fenelon, he was only named because Sir Henry Killigrew was ill. Fenelon described him as 'entirely depending' on Leicester: the earl had to counteract Randolph's 'doubts and fears into which the importance of the matter put him' as it concerned 'too closely the persons of very great princes with whom he had never before negotiated anything' ('Correspondance', 5.427, 431). Randolph's diffidence may have been increased by his earlier abortive foray into royal marital questions. Between March and May 1576 he was back in France, but the mission's aim was superseded by 'the peace of Monsieur' (6 May 1576). 
Randolph returned to Scotland in early 1578 for more troubleshooting when, as in Russia in 1568 and Scotland in 1570, 'all the divels in Hell were sturringe and in greate rage in this countrye' ('CSP Scot.', '1574-80', 283). He concluded that the Anglophile regency of James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton, was unsustainable and his voluntary retirement was wise. Three years later he was sent back to see if Morton's life could be saved -- he had the remarkable responsibility of delegated authority to call for invasion of Scotland by Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon, and Henry Carey, first Baron Hunsdon. Walsingham, however, thought Morton doomed and wanted to concentrate on removing the sinister influence of Esme Stewart, sieur d'Aubigny, now duke of Lennox. The latter was a point on which Randolph required Walsingham's urging: 'Yor putting of us in hope that D'Aubigny mighte easely be wonne to be at her majestes devotion was at the first interpreted to have ben 'ironice' spoken by youe, but since yt seemith youe insist uppon yt, I could wish youe were ether otherwies perswadid of the man or at least keapt this opinion to yor self. (BL, Cotton MS Caligula C.vi, fol. 128'r')' Randolph was, however, more dedicated to his own opinion than two decades before. He insisted that both aspects of English policy -- seeking to stir up putatively Anglophile and pro-Morton Scots, and threatening military action -- were useless. On the one hand, those 'heretofore... familiar are all nowe as strainge unto me as if I had set fire in their chief city', a crime of which not even the Marians had yet accused him (BL, Cotton MS Caligula C.vi, fol. 124'r'). As for d'Aubigny, Randolph determined 'not for all that to leave him desperate except I found you more resolute then I doe and better prepared to maynteyne so great a quarrell as this wil be if it be not looked to' (BL, Harley MS 6999, fol. 81'r'); 'an honourable peace is to be preferred to the most just war' ('Hastings MSS', 2.23). Randolph did, however, finally burn his boats with Lennox by denouncing him at length on 20 February 1581 before the Scottish estates as an agent of the international Catholic conspiracy. This may have 'helped to seal Morton's fate', but less so than the plots of Archibald Douglas, earl of Angus, which seemed in Scotland to be more of Randolph's 'craftie conspiracies' ('DNB'; Moysie, 31). 
Hunsdon, with whom Randolph had been at cross purposes in 1572, meanwhile insisted that a military demonstration could work and that if there was no sign from Anglophile Scots this was owing to Randolph's incompetence. Randolph's old friend Bedford reported considerable argument in the privy council: 'I tould my lords that youe having so much experience of this countrie I sawe no cause why youe should not have as good instruccons as he, but I thinke my lord hath no great goad [good] lykinge of youe, and I could wish he were more circumspecte then he is. Mr Secretarie Walsingham and others held verie harde for youe... my lord of Leycester is your very good frend... so that her majestie hath a verie good opinion of all youre dealings there. (TNA: PRO, SP 52/29/40)' Hunsdon did make a point of writing to Randolph as 'assurid ffrind' to 'lovinge friend' (BL, Lansdowne MS 31, fols. 93'r'-94'r'). Probably more sincere was his next denunciation of Randolph in 1587, this time for allegedly extorting the wages of newly appointed posts from them and causing the Berwick-London service to deteriorate. 
Though Randolph's opposition to extreme measures was probably objective, he was also personally nervous at the anti-English feeling in Scotland. He asked Walsingham to 'vouchesauf me in yor superscriptions the name of an embassadeur to save my throte from cutting yf it be other wyse taken', and sent him some testamentary directions (TNA: PRO, SP 52/29/13). Shots through his window, as in 1566, did finally cause him to retire to Berwick on 28 March 1581. 
Despite Randolph's failure in 1581, he was entrusted with the organization of the subsequent Anglo-Scottish border meeting. He missed Lennox's fall in 1582, though the prospect made him actually volunteer to return to Scotland, lest others 'repe the glorie of that for which I have adventured my bodie and spent of my owne, almoste to extreme beggerrie' (TNA: PRO, SP 52/30/28). In 1586 Randolph succeeded in forging a stronger amity and even convinced James finally to sign an alliance with Elizabeth with a last-minute cut in the financial offer. Memories of 1581 had made Randolph's welcome doubtful: Elizabeth, however, took pains to assure James that he 'in your childesche yeres sought all menes of your preservation' and 'hathe no other scope than to kipe us frendes' ('Letters of Queen Elizabeth and King James VI', 28). James concurred, though after his mother's execution the following year, when there was an abortive rumour that Randolph would be sent back to excuse it, the young king sneered at 'dotinge Randalle' ('Extracts... Courcelles', 41). 
Randolph then made 'speede... to be owte of thys countrye', even though this 'haste... agayne distempered my boddie' (BL, Cotton MS Caligula C.ix, fol. 397'r'). Walsingham probably helped him back into parliament as MP for Maidstone, Kent, in 1584, 1586, and 1589. He was on the parliamentary committee on Mary (4 November 1586), and set off with Walsingham to her trial at Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire, 'bycause of the knowledge I have of that woman's formar dealing agaynste her majestie' but was forced to 'retorne home... so miserablye I was tormented with the collicke' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/194/16; SP 12/194/39). It is likely that a knighthood was finally in the offing. Davison's disgrace after Mary's execution, however, put paid to any chance of such reward for Randolph, his close friend and a notorious anti-Marian. 
Randolph's will expressed 'assured hope and confidence' in salvation, and also showed that he had no more cause to complain of poverty. Besides leases of lands for his wife and sons, he left $500 of 'plate, jewells, housholde stuffe, and readie mony' to his wife, portions of $500 for each of his three daughters once eighteen, and speculative trading investments for Ambrose Randolph, which he considered might come to exceed $500 in value. Randolph was supposedly 'well in health' when he made this will on 1 April 1589; when he added a codicil requiring his eldest son to guarantee his mother's jointure on 15 May 1590 he was probably less so, and on 8 June he died at his London house in St Peter's Hill. On 6 July he was buried in the local church, St Peter Paul's Wharf -- his monument was doubtless, as requested, 'without great charge, voide of superstition' but perished in 1666 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/76, sig. 75). Randolph asked Walsingham, William Brooke, tenth Lord Cobham, and Sir Walter Mildmay to acquire his heir's wardship for his widow. His relationship with the Kentish magnate Cobham was equivocal. He sent Walsingham nervous secret denunciations of Cobham's relatives -- though not him -- for corruption, but in 1591 Ursula Randolph did, as envisaged, turn to the only survivor of 'those honorable personnes my husband did so specially affect' (BL, Lansdowne MS 67, fol. 82'r'). 
Randolph's broad and distinguished range of connections in both England and Scotland was remarkable. Though some Scottish friendships -- such as with Maitland and Kirkcaldy -- did not endure, he participated significantly in bringing Scottish and English political classes into an unprecedented degree of sympathy, though his efforts to develop an active Anglophile faction contributed only slightly to the Marian defeats of 1567, 1573, and 1582, in each case after his own departure. 
Randolph was 'one of the first in England whom we can possibly identify as a career diplomat', spending over ten years abroad and, even at home, being frequently called upon to receive distinguished foreigners (Bell, 'Elizabethan diplomacy', 268). He showed that the profession could be worthwhile financially, though commercial investment seems to have supplemented direct rewards. He was, according to Thomas Morgan, 'both dogged and craftye'. Morgan attributed to James the remark 'that he never came thither [to Scotland] to do good, so as I am gladde that he knoweth Randolphe' (Murdin, 500, 505). The claims of the scarcely more reliable Melville have received more attention than they deserve. Inconsistencies in Randolph's negotiations generally emanated from Elizabeth: his own instinct was to be a partisan, not a duplicitous middleman. 


@@@@@


doc= 23123


Randolph, Thomas (bap. 1605, d. 1635), poet and playwright, eldest son of William Randolph (1572-1660) and his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Smith of Newnham, near Daventry, in Northamptonshire, was born in his maternal grandfather's house and baptized in Newnham church on 15 June 1605. 
Randolph's father originated from Hamsey, near Lewes, in Sussex. According to Aubrey, who had most of his information from a brother of the poet, William Randolph had been 'very wild in his youth', was disinherited, and became steward to a local landowner, Sir George Goring ('Brief Lives', 2.195-8). Later he settled at Little Houghton, near Northampton, and served in the same capacity Edward, eleventh Baron Zouche (died 1625), who had a house at Harringworth in the north of the county. His younger children William ('b'. 1607), Robert (1611-1671), and Elizabeth ('b'. 1613) were baptized at Little Houghton, as were the seven children of his subsequent marriage, on 30 March 1619, to Dorothy West, sister of Sir Richard Lane, lord keeper under Charles I. 
At the age of nine Thomas Randolph wrote a 'History of the incarnation of our Saviour' in English verse, the manuscript of which, says Aubrey, was 'kept as a rarity' by his half-brother John (1620-1680). At an unknown date he was elected a king's scholar at Westminster School, where contemporaries included William Cartwright, the younger Donne, William Hemminges, son of the editor of the first folio, the Grecian James Duport, and Richard Busby, the future headmaster. He proved a brilliant student. Archdeacon Thomas Plume records a story told him by John Hacket that John Williams, when dean of Westminster, had singled out the ten-year-old Randolph to make extempore verses on subjects set by the dukes of Richmond and Buckingham and Sir Fulke Greville ('Essex Review', 14, 1905, 19). The occasion is likely to have been one of the annual Rogation week election dinners held after Williams became dean in July 1620. Latin verse-composition formed an important element of the curriculum, and Duport long after placed Randolph, with Cartwright and Abraham Cowley, among its leading practitioners (Duport, 'Musae subsecivae', 1676, 75-7). The school maintained a strong dramatic tradition, and the headmaster, Lambert Osbaldeston, had himself recently acted in Robert Burton's 'Philosophaster'. Some verses prefaced to the posthumous 'Poems' of 1638 by Randolph's stepbrother Richard West assert that he: '
had not long of Playes Spectatour beene 

But his small Feete wore 'Socks' fit for the Scene. 

' Here also he seems to have begun writing occasional verse, supplying two monumental epitaphs for the abbey cloisters on the surveyor William Laurence and the organist John Parsons. In May 1623 he was elected as head of the school to a scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge, which, following the current practice, he took up a year later, entering on 9 April 1624 and matriculating as pensioner on 8 July (CUL, UA, Matr. 2). 
In 1625 Randolph framed the first of several contributions in Latin verse to university congratulatory volumes on royal events and in the following year the longest of the elegies published in 'Manes Verulamianae', the Trinity-inspired memorial volume for Bacon. Thomas Fuller attributes to him some lost verses on the discovery of a book in the belly of a cod-fish at Cambridge market on midsummer eve 1626 (Fuller, 'Worthies', 1662, 359). Above all, Randolph found ample scope to develop his talent for drama. His first attempt may have been the free rendering of Aristophanes' 'Plutus' which, as 'Hey for honesty, down with knavery', was to form the basis for the version published by Francis Jacques in 1651. 'Aristippus', described as 'A Private shewe presented on a Fast night to the Seniours and fellowes of Trinitie' (Washington, DC, Folger Shakespeare Library, MS V.b.320), recommends to young students not the cyrenaic sage but the canary wine colloquially known by his name. Contemporary printed editions, where it is subtitled 'The Joviall Philosopher', follow it with 'The Conceited Pedlar', a witty monologue dated in one manuscript to All Saints' day 1627 (BL, Add. MS 27406). 
In the same term of this, his third, year Randolph presided as 'father' at the informal initiation ceremony or 'salting' of freshmen in the college hall, delivering in verse a series of comic sketches of each of his 'sons'. By the time that his name appeared eighth in the 'ordo senioritatis' of BAs in the following Lent all available college fellowships had been filled. On 11 August 1629 he was sent by the retiring master, Leonard Mawe, to the chancellor of the university, Lord Holland, with a letter of recommendation citing the support of Williams, then lord keeper, for a fellowship by royal mandate. This describes him as a person 'of those extraordinary parts of wit and learning... that scarce an age doth bring forth a better or the like' ('Poems', ed. Thorn-Drury, xi-xii); he was admitted minor fellow on 22 September. In the same year he contributed prefatory Latin lines to Huntingdon Plumptre's 'Epigrammaton opusculum' and an epithalamium on the marriage of Lord Goring with Lettice Boyle on 25 July. 
It is uncertain when Randolph first made the acquaintance of Ben Jonson, an old Westminster of an earlier generation, though a possible connection was through his father's employer and Jonson's friend, Lord Zouche (Bridges, 2.320). 'A gratulatory to Mr Ben Johnson for his adopting of him to be his Son' was probably written after the older man's disabling stroke in the winter of 1628-9. However, the circumstances of his adoption as described by William Winstanley ('Poor Robin's Jests', 1667) in the famous anecdote of Randolph's paying his reckoning at the Devil tavern not in coin but with the extempore epigram 'I John Bo-peep' are elsewhere applied to Drummond of Hawthornden ('The Works of William Drummond', 1711, ix). Randolph's mollifying answer to the 'Ode to Himself' that Jonson wrote in response to the hostile reception of 'The New Inn' probably belongs to early spring 1629. In the following year his prospects suddenly broadened. No sooner had rival editions of 'Aristippus' and 'The Conceited Pedlar' been entered in the Stationers' register in March and April than plague forced the closure of both the Cambridge colleges and the London theatres until the autumn. According to notes taken by Malone from a lost office-book of Sir Henry Herbert, the King's Revels company produced Randolph's 'The Entertainment' that summer in the provinces; its more familiar title is given in some verses on the ''Play called the' Entertainment, 'printed by the name of the' Muses' looking-glass' (1638) in Sir Aston Cokayne's 'Chayne of Golden Poems' (1658). This series of portraits of the virtues and vices, paraded before two puritan critics to persuade them of the moral seriousness of drama, was licensed on 25 November to the Children of the Revels, probably for performance at the reopening of the Salisbury Court theatre. A similar licence was granted on 26 November to the pastoral drama 'Amyntas', a blend of high-flown Italian pastoral with English humour and farce which, subtitled 'the impossible dowry', was later acted before the king and queen at Whitehall, probably in 1631. A third piece, 'Praeludium', a brief dialogue between an actor and a theatregoer ascribed by the future Chancellor Hyde to 'T. Randall after the last Plague' (BL, Add. MS 37425, fols. 54-5), was probably written for the same occasion. 
On 5 July 1631 Randolph figured sixth in the 'ordo' of MAs and incorporated at Oxford in the same year. On 10 February 1632 the college conclusion book recorded the grant of 'allowances... agaynst the Kyngs coming, for comedyes', and Randolph's 'The Jealous Lovers', later dedicated to the master, Thomas Comber, as 'a thing born at your command', was ready by 7 March (Nelson, 1.636-43). This Jonsonian comedy in blank verse draws on his earlier play, 'The drinking academy', which survives anonymously in manuscript. In the event the royal visit was postponed to 19 February, when Trinity's offering was obliged to take second place to the Queens' College comedy, Peter Hausted's 'The Rival Friends', which was poorly received. Though the edition of Hausted's play published in London in June ascribes its failure to inter-collegiate rivalry -- 'Cryed downe by Boyes, Factions, Envie, and confident Ignorance' -- rumour put down to royal displeasure the suicide of the vice-chancellor, Dr Henry Butts, who had granted it precedence. Randolph, whose 'Jealous Lovers' staged on the following day was pronounced 'not onely more compendious, but more facetious' (ibid., 1.636), could not resist a gloating allusion in the satirical Latin speech that he delivered at Great St Mary's in July as prevaricator during the commencement ceremonies. The text of his play, printed soon after by the university press, includes commendatory verses by Francis Meres and Duport alongside dedicatory poems to Thomas Riley, the principal actor, Sir Christopher, later Lord, Hatton, Anthony Stafford, Lane, and Osbaldeston. Oldys records a highly improbable story that the royal visit was the occasion of an exchange with Henrietta Maria in Latin verse (BL, MS C.45.d.14, p. 413). 
Five days after the performance the college elected Randolph to a major fellowship, but from this point his career enters an uncertain phase. In the 'Eglogue to Mr Johnson', written at some time after the success of 'The Jealous Lovers', he laments leaving the university and his Aristotelian studies for the unruliness of theatrical life: the intriguing phrase 'Call'd hence to keep the flock of Corydon' has been taken to indicate a role in the management of the Salisbury Court, though hard evidence is wanting. It is commonly assumed that he 'indulged with increasing ardour in the dissipations of London literary life' ('DNB'), though the loss of his finger in a tavern brawl had already been mentioned in his Latin speech of July. If an undated anecdote is to be believed he was forced to adopt a clever subterfuge by which he: 'being thrust out of his fellowship desired a 'bene discessit' [honourable discharge], which being obtained, he presented to the King, saying he could prove under the hands of the head & all the fellowes that he was expelled undeservingly, whereupon he was reestablished in his place againe. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood F.31, fol. 104'v')' In July 1633 he contributed a Latin hexastich to the Cambridge congratulatory volume on the king's return from Scotland, and sixty hexameters to the fourteen Latin pieces collected there in September for the 'Mausoleum Mauritianum' in memory of Landgraf Moritz of Hesse-Cassel. 
Randolph met his end in his native county, to which he had retained a deep attachment. Following a period allegedly spent in his 'delightful studies' at his father's house at Little Houghton (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.566) he was offered the generous sum of $100 per year to take a post some 25 miles to the north-west as tutor to Edward (died 1638), eldest son of the William Stafford (died 1637) of Blatherwycke whose second marriage he celebrated in 1634 with a pastoral eclogue. Some undated verses to his 'Aunt' Lane mention an attack by smallpox, and his constitution may already have been undermined. Without doubt he was popular and gregarious: both Duport and Wood attribute his death in the following year to a readiness to match the conviviality of admiring friends. Thomas Bancroft wrote that: '
he dranke too greedily 

O' th'Muses Spring 
(Bancroft, 'Two Bookes of Epigrammes', 1639, bk 1, no. 8)' and the charge was repeated by the sneering poet in the first act of his contemporary Robert Wild's comedy 'The Benefice', who likened Randolph to Tom a Bedlam, concluding: '
Pitty! So rare a Fancy should have found 

An 'Helicon' so deep as to be drown'd. 

' Randolph was buried on 17 March 1635 in Blatherwyck church, on the south side, at the lower end of the north chancel, the register describing him as 'one of the fellowes of Trinity Colledge' ('Poems', ed. Thorn-Drury, xix, n. 3). In the summer of 1640 Hatton, Stafford's neighbour at Kirby Hall, paid $10 to Nicholas Stone the younger for the mural tablet of white marble that incorporated the English verses by Hausted which Aubrey dismisses as 'puerile'. The posthumous collection of 'Poems with the Muses Looking Glasse and Amyntas' (1638), brought out at Oxford by Randolph's brother Robert -- himself promoted by Wood as 'a most ingenious poet' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 1.430) -- was said by West to comprise 'but's Ashes, which were throwne about'. Owen Felltham was among the ten writers who contributed commendatory verses, and a copy of 'the late 'R''s Poems' had apparently reached Sir Henry Wotton bound up with Milton's 'Comus' by April 1638. The enlarged edition that followed in 1640 incorporates an engraved portrait, the unsigned work of William Marshall, that was validated by Aubrey from the testimony of contemporaries: 'From Mr. Needler: -- his haire was of a very light flaxen, almost white... It was flaggy, as by his picture before his booke appeares. He was of a pale ill complexion and pock-pitten -- from Mr. Thomas Fludd, his scholefellow at Westminster, who sayes he was of about my stature or scarce so tall.' The collection proved popular, and was reissued no fewer than five times between 1643 and 1668. Among its strengths are its epithalamia, love poems, songs, and above all pastoral pieces, from amatory dialogues like 'A pastorall courtship' to the rustic eclogue on Robert Dover's Cotswold games ('Annalia Dubrensia', 1636). The style is throughout fluent and fertile and the tone good-humoured. In the field of drama some contemporaries, rather too eagerly, hailed him as Jonson's natural successor; the major plays were frequently reprinted at the time and continued to attract praise from Langbaine (1691) to the 'Biographia dramatica' (1812). The first substantial collection of Randolph's works was brought out by W. C. Hazlitt in 1875, and modern scholarly interest began with editions of the poems by Parry (1917) and Thorn-Drury (1929) and the researches of G. C. Moore-Smith in the intervening years. The canon, nevertheless, remains fluid (Beal, 189-92): the Latin comedy 'Cornelianum dolium', published in 1638 as by 'T. R.', has been proposed as a refashioning of Randolph's work by Richard Braithwait, while forty-two poems not printed in the 1640 edition are attributed to him in manuscript verse anthologies of the time. 


@@@@@


doc= 23124


Randolph, Thomas (1701-1783), college head, was born on 30 August 1701 in Canterbury, Kent, the eldest of three sons of Herbert Randolph (1657-1726), recorder of Canterbury, and his wife, Grace (1674-1750), daughter of John Blowe. He was educated at King's School, Canterbury, and elected to a Kent scholarship at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 19 November 1715; he graduated BA (1719), MA (1723), BD (1730), and DD (1735). On 22 August 1738 he married Thomasina (1706/7-1783), daughter of William Honywood, of Cherdon, and Frances Raleigh, and sister of Sir John Honywood, third baronet. There were six children of the marriage, three sons and three daughters, of whom one daughter, Thomasina, and three sons, Thomas, Herbert, and John Randolph, survived into adulthood. 
The early years of Randolph's career in the Church of England followed a conventional path and, while still pursuing his studies and publishing, notably 'The Christian's Faith a Rational Assent' (1744-5), he attracted the attention of the bishop of Oxford and regius professor of divinity, John Potter, through whose influence he was made rector of Petham and Waltham in Kent. On 23 April 1748, however, he was elected to the presidency of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where his younger brother, Francis, was still a fellow. His working life in Oxford as president of a small college was enhanced by public office as vice-chancellor of the university from 1756 to 1759, archdeacon of Oxford from 1767, and Lady Margaret professor of divinity from 1768. 
Assiduous and methodical in his work, Randolph's legacy to his college persists in numerous handwritten notebooks covering college business and the history and management of its estates. Letters from tenants are often endorsed with notes of his replies, and the large volume of estate material is digested into a compendious survey. Typical of his interest is the notebook on Mapledurwell estate, 'Notes on manorial customs, with notes on copyholds, rents, fines and tenants' (Corpus Christi College archives, Cb 9/1). Similarly, when the Cheltenham school needed investigation in 1761 the president made a precis of the school statutes. Randolph's presidency also inaugurated regular dated notes of the decisions of the senior members; these minutes, or acts and proceedings, have proved a valuable source for historians of collegiate life in eighteenth-century Oxford. From the earliest months of his presidency the grant books are written up in Randolph's hand. The important collections of William Fulman and Lord Coleraine were bound, with their contents listed and foliated, by the president himself. 
Orthodoxy and tradition governed Randolph's attitude to church and state. Apart from theological sermons preached and published in the middle years of his life he came to grips with public controversy in his publications over the question of subscription at matriculation to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. His two most trenchant pieces were 'An answer to a pamphlet entitled Reflections on the impropriety and inexpediency of lay-subscription to the XXXIX articles in the University of Oxford' (1772) and 'An answer to a pamphlet, entitled, Considerations on the propriety of requiring a subscription to articles of faith' (1774). However, having put up a stout defence of the soundness of the established position, he bowed to the majority, mindful perhaps of his own previous position when he had preached against party zeal in January 1752. Though his part in the expulsion of the sixteen Methodist dissenters from St Edmund Hall in 1768 had caused unpopularity he was not intolerant of dissent when practised within the framework of the law; his concern was to preserve the perceived orthodoxy of the university. 
During his term as vice-chancellor Randolph faced up to two notable controversies: the reorganization of the delegacy of the university press in 1757-8 and the skirmishes preceding the election of the new chancellor, Lord Westmorland, in 1759. These events have been well documented in print because they were closely connected to the career of the eminent lawyer William Blackstone. Blackstone's campaign for a radical overhaul of the management structure and business methods of the press was sharply focused on Randolph, who, as vice-chancellor, was chairman of the delegates. 
Evidence of Randolph's benign and just leadership in his college is clear from the earliest days of his administration. The acts and proceedings reveal patient but firm dealings with the misdemeanours of junior (and sometimes senior) members; time is always offered to both parties to consider their position and to reconvene for further meetings, punishment is never summarily enforced, negotiation seems endlessly patient. Having come from a family with a strong affection for the college where he and his brothers had been educated and subsequent generations were to follow, and with his own wider contacts, Randolph raised the status of the college in academic terms through judicious selection; subsequently it became associated with good teaching and firm discipline. As one of the least well paid of Oxford heads of houses he was also a prudent manager of his money. His private accounts, which he kept with the same meticulous detail and care as the college records, give a privileged view of his domestic life. The records show a simple, well-ordered life; donations to charity feature frequently and provision for his family is consistently generous. 
Randolph died at Corpus on 24 March 1783 and was buried there on 2 April, after a funeral oration in the chapel preached by John Buckland, fellow of the college. In his will it is his family, his servants, his circle of relatives, and the poor of the parishes of Petham and Waltham, Salwood and Hythe who benefit from the modest fruits of his orderly life. His widow died later in the same year, on 11 December aged seventy-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 23125


Randolph, William (1650-1711), colonist in America, was born on 7 November 1650 at Morton Morell, Warwickshire, the second son of Richard Randolph (1620-1671) and his wife, Elizabeth Ryland (1625-1699). During the interregnum the family moved to Dublin, where Richard Randolph later died. William was educated at home, becoming proficient in Greek and Latin, and studied law privately, although he never practised as a lawyer and was never called to the bar. His father was the half-brother of Thomas Randolph, the noted poet, and the brother of Henry Randolph (1623-1673), who emigrated to Virginia in 1642, marrying Judith Somes, daughter of the speaker of the house of burgesses. It was a visit from this successful relative that caused William himself to leave Britain, arriving in Virginia between 1669 and 1673. 
Randolph may have spent the earliest part of his residency in Jamestown engaged in building houses and barns, but by 1674 he was sufficiently wealthy to bring over twelve indentured servants and purchase 500 acres on Swift Creek, Virginia. He took a great interest in horse-racing, and was a favourite of Governor William and Lady Berkeley, although his high spirits once caused him to be charged with public profanity. During the traumatic period of Bacon's rebellion in 1676 Randolph remained neutral, although his property was scavenged by Bacon's men, causing considerable damage, and he was close friends with William Byrd and Captain Henry Isham of Bermuda Hundred, both Baconites. Randolph, however, profited handsomely from Bacon's defeat by purchasing plantations forfeited by the rebels, Turkey Island in 1684, and two others in 1698. 
Perhaps as early as 1675 Randolph married Mary (1652-1735), heir of Captain Henry Isham and Katherine Banks, with whom he had nine surviving children, the first born in 1681. From his family seat at Turkey Island, he was now close to the new colonial capital at Williamsburg, which had replaced Jamestown, and became a local political figure, serving as county sheriff, coroner, justice of the peace, member of the house of burgesses, lieutenant-colonel of the militia, and escheator-general, a position which aided his accumulation of more than 10,000 acres of tobacco land. Randolph also inherited his uncle's position as court clerk of Henrico county, and served as speaker of the house of burgesses. 
Randolph's estates soon made him a very wealthy man, with a large population of slaves who worked on his tobacco plantations, and his own ship, which took the produce of his lands to England to be sold through Micajah Perry, his agent in Britain. As was common among colonial planters, Randolph consistently owed enormous debts to Perry for the luxury goods with which he furnished his mansion and fitted out his family. Always keenly interested in education, especially for Native Americans, he was a major proponent of a university for Virginia, and was a generous donor when the College of William and Mary was finally established in 1693, serving as one of its trustees. 
A particular friend of the Byrd family, Randolph kept watch at William Byrd's deathbed and acted as adviser to Byrd's sons when they served on the colonial council and ran the family estates. Randolph himself, however, was increasingly plagued by melancholia and gout, finally dying at his home on Turkey Island on 21 April 1711; he was buried in Turkey Island cemetery. He had established the Randolph family as an American dynasty that would be integral to the history of Virginia. One of his sons, John Randolph, the colonial lawyer and legislator, was knighted during a visit to England in 1730. His wife died on 29 December 1735. 


@@@@@


doc= 23126


Rands, William Brighty (1823-1882), parliamentary reporter and writer, was born on 24 December 1823 in Keppel Street, Chelsea, London, the son of a small shopkeeper, George Rands. He received a very limited education, and derived much of what he knew from reading at secondhand bookstalls. He had a varied career, worked for some years in a warehouse, went on the stage, and then became a clerk in an attorney's office. Having taught himself stenography, in May 1857 he entered the employment of Messrs Gurney, and was soon appointed a reporter in the committee rooms of the House of Commons. He proved very efficient, and after attending, during a session of the house, a committee on the merits of the Armstrong and Whitworth ordnance, he received a vote of thanks from the committee. Ill health compelled his resignation in August 1875. 
When parliament was not sitting, Rands spent his time in literary work by special arrangement with his employers. At an early period he became a member of the staff of the 'Illustrated Times', and he also contributed to many other journals, such as 'St. Pauls Magazine' and 'Good Words for the Young'. In 1867, under the name Henry Holbeach, he contributed a tale entitled 'Shoemaker's Village' to 'The Argosy'. He wrote many articles for the 'Contemporary Review', contributed to the 'Saturday Journal', and also wrote for 'Tait's Edinburgh Magazine'. He was a reviewer for the 'Pall Mall Gazette' and also wrote for 'The Spectator'. In 1878 he helped to found 'The Citizen' newspaper in the City of London. 
Rands was in many ways an eccentric character, and his domestic life was apparently somewhat irregular. On 5 October 1846, he had married Mary Ditton (died 1881), the daughter of Benjamin Ditton, a cheesemonger, at the parish church of St Mary Lambeth, and they had three children. But after some years, Rands left his wife to live with Hannah Rolls ('b'. 1831/2), the daughter of John Rolls, a member of the Curriers' Company and of the court of aldermen of the City of London. Rands and Hannah had four children, and after the death of his first wife he married Hannah on 25 March 1881 at Camberwell register office. Rands was also for some time a preacher at a chapel in Brixton, and composed hymns, one of which, beginning 'One Lord there is all lords above', achieved considerable popularity in the nineteenth century. 
Rands was in fact a considerable all-round man of letters, poet, writer of fiction, literary critic, essayist, and children's writer. His adult poetry, such as 'The Chain of Lilies' (1857), is typically Victorian sub-Tennysonian. The Christmas tale 'The Frost upon the Pane' (1854) is almost equally sub-Dickensian, although his story of simple village folk is not without its own charm. His literary criticism is rather more robust. As well as essays on such American writers as Hawthorne and Poe, Rands produced a sketch of the life and writings of Robert Bloomfield in 1855, and in 1869 as Matthew Browne published a two-volume study, 'Chaucer's England', in which he reveals himself as an enthusiastic and informed advocate of the medieval poet. His essays on miscellaneous subjects, for example, in 'Henry Holbeach: Student in Life and Philosophy' (1865), also retain some vitality in their lively, quirky opinions. 
But it is as a children's writer that Rands is most likely to be remembered, principally for three books: 'Lilliput Levee' (1864, 1867), 'Lilliput Lectures' (1871), and 'Lilliput Legends' (1872). 'Lilliput Levee' contains some delightful verse, from the opening poem, in which children take over control of the world from adults, to such near-classics as 'Topsyturvey-world' and 'The Dream of a Girl who Lived at Seven-Oaks'. 'Lilliput Lectures' combines talks for children on such topics as 'The world' and 'The family' with such poems as 'Great, Wide, Beautiful, Wonderful World'. But 'Lilliput Legends' is all stories, sometimes fables or fairy-tales like 'Prince Hydrangea', which mix fantasy and realism in ways that remind one of George MacDonald. William Brighty Rands is a writer who often memorably catches the mind, the voice, and the imagination of the child. Rands died on 23 April 1882, at his home, Luton Villa, 67 Ondine Road, East Dulwich, London, and was buried in the Forest Hill cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 23127


Ranulf (I), third earl of Chester (d. 1129), magnate, was son of Ranulf (Ralph) de Briquessart, vicomte of the Bessin (the area around Bayeux), and Matilda, daughter of Richard, vicomte of the Avranchin (the area around Avranches). The name Meschin ('younger' or 'junior') was presumably first employed to distinguish him from his father. 
In the Durham book of fraternity (the 'liber vitae'), in addition to Ranulf there are listed his parents, an elder brother, Richard, who died young, and a younger brother, William; and he had also a sister, Agnes, who was the first wife of Robert de Grandmesnil (died 'c'.1136). Ranulf (I) was a member of the military household first of William II and then of Henry I. He is first recorded as Ranulf, son of Ranulf 'le vicomte', on 24 April 1089 when he authenticated with his cross a grant of Robert Curthose, duke of Normandy, to the cathedral of Bayeux. In 1093-4, as nephew of Hugh d'Avranches, earl of Chester (died 1101), he witnessed the charter which recorded the establishment of a monastic community at Chester. About 1098 he became the third husband of Lucy (died 'c'.1138), heir of the honour of Bolingbroke, who had earlier been married first to Ivo Taillebois and then to Roger fitz Gerold (the father of her son William de Roumare). This made him a major landowner in Lincolnshire. It also either originated or strengthened his ties with what would become the English shires of Cumberland and Westmorland, centred on Carlisle. In succession to Ivo Taillebois he was for a time lord of Appleby, for he later referred to 'my castle' in that place, which controlled the road from north Yorkshire to Carlisle (Prescott, no. 3). William Rufus had captured Carlisle in 1092, and it became the centre of Anglo-Norman settlement in the region. Ranulf was long remembered as the first lord of this region, and his lordship was for a time visible on the ground. An interesting charter of David, king of Scots, granting Annandale to Robert (I) de Brus ('c'.1124), defined his territory as being north of 'the boundary of Ranulf Meschin' ('divisam' 'Randulphi Meschin'), and his rights as those 'which Ranulf Meschin once had in Carlisle and in his land of Cumberland' (Lawrie, 48-9). It is possible that Ranulf's involvement at Carlisle predated 1100, for one of his charters describes William Rufus as his lord, but firm dates come from the reign of Henry I. Close to Carlisle, at Wetherhal, 'c'.1106, Ranulf founded a Benedictine priory, a colony of St Mary's Abbey, York. The earliest baronies, according to the memory of the shire in 1212, were granted by Ranulf in the reign of Henry I, and the more significant of these were held by his relatives and dependants. His brother-in-law Robert de Trivers was given the lordship of Burgh by Sands. His Norman tenant Richer de Boiville received Kirklinton and served as sheriff. 
The most important member of a tightly knit family group was Ranulf's younger brother 
Ranulf was in regular though not frequent attendance at the court of Henry I: he is found at various times at the palaces at Westminster, Winchester, and Rouen, at the hunting lodges at Brampton and Woodstock, and at the monastery at Reading. Most significantly, he was one of the commanders of Henry's forces at the battle of Tinchebrai in late September 1106, the others being Robert, count of Meulan, and William (II) de Warenne, earl of Surrey (died 1138), all three men described by Orderic Vitalis as officers of the royal household. Ranulf was one of the magnates who witnessed the treaty of Dover made with the count of Flanders on 17 May 1110; and he was present at the Christmas court at St Albans in 1115. He occurs twice as a royal justice, first in 1106, then 'c'.1116, and it may be significant that in each case one of his fellow justices was Geoffrey Ridel, whose wife was an illegitimate daughter of Hugh d'Avranches, earl of Chester. Even with his substantial English lordships, Ranulf was frequently in Normandy, particularly at times of military threat. 
In 1119 Orderic Vitalis mentioned 'Richard, earl of Chester, and his kinsman and successor Ralph of Briquessart' as pre-eminent among those who remained loyal to the king (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 6.223). The chronicler here looked ahead to the last and most crucial of the events that determined Ranulf's career. On 21 November 1120 Richard of Chester and Ranulf were together at Barfleur and witnessed a charter in favour of the abbey of Cerisy. Just four days later Richard died in the 'White Ship' disaster. Ranulf was appointed earl of Chester in succession to his cousin, and occurs as such in a charter issued at London early in January 1121. The precise terms of his succession are not clear, but certainly some of Lucy's Lincolnshire lands were surrendered to the king, and seemingly also Ranulf's lordships in Cumbria. According to later tradition, on succeeding to the earldom Ranulf 'gave back to the lord king the county ('comitatus') of Cumbria, on condition that each of those he had enfeoffed should hold of the king in chief' (Wilson, 492): this is from the 'Chronicon Cumbrie', a 'special source of error' according to J. H. Round ('DNB'), but with regard to the timing of the transfer probably accurate. He promised the king a substantial relief, for in 1129/30 his son Earl Ranulf (II) owed $1000 'for his father's debt for the land of Earl Hugh' ('Pipe rolls', 31 Henry I, 110). This may well represent the full total of the original debt, for good connections at court and loyal service in the field would temper the king's demands for payment. 
At court in the early 1120s Earl Ranulf (I) was named as chief among the kinsfolk who arranged a marriage that linked the Basset and Ridel families: named also in an agreement ratified by the king at Woodstock were his brother William le Meschin, his constable William, his chancellor Geoffrey, and Nigel d'Aubigny. All the while the old campaigner remained on military alert. In March 1123 the king at Woodstock received news of a threat from supporters of William Clito (died 1128), and immediately the earls of Gloucester and Chester were sent over to Normandy 'to guard that territory' (Symeon of Durham, 267-8). Throughout the winter of 1123-4 Ranulf had charge of the garrison of Evreux. Good intelligence of the movements of the enemy led to the ambush at Bourgtheroulde on 25 March 1124, which led to the capture of Waleran, count of Meulan, and others, and gained Ranulf much credit. 
The earldom of Chester gave Ranulf his title, but in the county itself he may not have had time to put down strong roots. His own grants as earl were all confirmations, to St Evroult in Normandy, to St Werburgh's, Chester, and to his wife's foundation at Spalding in Lincolnshire. He did, however, establish a second generation of his family in English lordship. His daughter Alice married the marcher lord Richard de Clare who was killed by the Welsh in late April 1136. Among the witnesses to his son's charters occur Richard Bacun, who married an illegitimate daughter, an illegitimate son, Benedict, and Fulk de Briquessart, who was possibly his nephew. Ranulf died in January 1129, and was buried in the chapter house of Chester Abbey. A long series of agreements made by his son Ranulf (II) (de Gernons) and his widow, the Countess Lucy, are entered on the pipe roll of 1129/30. Among these the countess offered the king 500 marks that she not be required to marry again. 


@@@@@


doc= 23128


Ranulf (II), fourth earl of Chester (d. 1153), magnate, was the son of Ranulf (I), third earl of Chester (d. 1129), and his wife, Lucy of Bolingbroke (died 'c'.1138). He had a half-brother, William de Roumare, Lucy's son from a previous marriage to Roger fitz Gerold, and a sister, Alice, who married Richard de Clare (died 1136). Among those who witnessed his charters were Benedict 'brother of the earl' (presumably an illegitimate son of Ranulf (I)), Foulque de Bricquessart (probably either a nephew of Ranulf (I) or another illegitimate son), and Richard Bacun, founder 'c'.1143 of Rocester Abbey, Staffordshire, who described Ranulf (II) as his uncle ('avunculus'). 
On his father's death in January in 1129 Ranulf (II) succeeded to his lands and titles in England and Normandy. He had evidently attained his majority, so would probably have been born during the first decade of the twelfth century. His Norman interests lay in the Bessin (the area around Bayeux) and the Avranchin (the area around Avranches), and included the hereditary 'vicomte' of Bayeux. In England his honour as earl of Chester lay principally in the north and midlands, with the most important demesnes in north and east Cheshire (such as Eastham and Macclesfield), in Warwickshire (Coventry), Leicestershire (Barrow upon Soar), and Lincolnshire (Greetham). On or after becoming earl of Chester, Ranulf (I) had surrendered to the crown his lordship of Carlisle and most of his wife's Lincolnshire inheritance based upon Bolingbroke, none of which came later to Ranulf (II). However, about one-third of Lucy's Lincolnshire estate, largely within the soke of Belchford, had remained with Ranulf (I), was retained by Lucy until her death 'c'.1138, and did subsequently pass to their son. The disposition of these holdings was clearly the subject of negotiation with Henry I, for among the accounts charged to Ranulf (II) in the 1130 pipe roll was a debt of $1000 left by his father 'for the land of Earl Hugh [of Chester]' and another debt of 500 marks for a concord over his mother's dower. Lucy herself rendered further accounts, including one of 400 marks 'for her father's land'. 
During the closing years of Henry I's reign Ranulf (II) was present at royal councils in Northampton (8 September 1131, when magnates were required to swear fealty to the Empress Matilda), Westminster (29 April 1132), and Windsor (Christmas 1132). Although favoured by geld pardons in 1130 in Leicestershire, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire, Staffordshire, and Warwickshire, totalling $21 4's'. 0died, there is no sign that he enjoyed the king's familiarity as his father had done. On the other hand, his marriage (not later than 1135) to Matilda, daughter of Robert, earl of Gloucester, associated him with the party favouring the empress's succession (after his death, his widow issued a charter referring to the empress as her aunt). Despite this, in common with nearly every other Anglo-Norman magnate, he accepted King Stephen's accession, attending the royal council at Westminster at Easter (22 March) 1136 and witnessing the Oxford charter of liberties (which signalled the earl of Gloucester's submission to Stephen) in April of that year. To all appearances Ranulf remained a loyal subject until 1140, despite his father-in-law's formal defiance of the king (May 1138) and military leadership of the Angevins in England following the empress's invasion (September 1139). 
An early test of Ranulf's allegiance came in February 1136, when Stephen granted Carlisle to Henry of Scotland in the first treaty of Durham. The terms were confirmed in a second treaty of 9 April 1139. Ranulf's resentment at the alienation of a lordship formerly held by his father explains, at least in part, his withdrawal from the royal council at Easter 1136 in protest at the elevated position enjoyed there by Henry of Scotland, and his attempt in 1140 to capture Henry and his wife on their return from Stephen's court. However, the significance of Carlisle in motivating Ranulf's behaviour should not be exaggerated. It lay far from his main territorial interests, and he seems to have played no part in the military campaigns against the Scots which reached a climax with their defeat at the battle of the Standard in August 1138. The earl of Chester's principal ambitions were focused instead on the north midlands, especially in Lincolnshire where his mother's inheritance lay. 
Having antagonized the king through his bid to capture Henry of Scotland, Ranulf compounded his offence later in 1140 by contriving the seizure of the royal castle at Lincoln. He arrived unarmed with three knights, ostensibly to collect his wife, and the wife of William de Roumare, who had been paying a social visit. On being allowed in, they seized weapons, expelled the royal garrison, and admitted Roumare and his men. The king's response was to visit Lincolnshire, but instead of taking reprisals against the half-brothers he treated them with favour: William of Malmesbury said that he 'added to [their] honours' (Malmesbury, 80-81), the 'Gesta Stephani' that he peaceably renewed a pact with Ranulf while intending to watch whether the promises were kept. Stephen left for London before Christmas, but made a surprise return during the festival to lay siege to Lincoln Castle. Ranulf managed to escape, obtained the armed assistance of his father-in-law, Robert, earl of Gloucester, and other Angevin adherents, raised soldiers from Cheshire and Wales, and marched back to Lincoln, where his wife and half-brother were continuing to resist the siege. At the battle of Lincoln on 2 February 1141 both Stephen and Ranulf fought on foot. The king was captured, and the earl followed up his victory with sack and slaughter in the city itself. 
Although he played a leading role in the king's downfall, an event which looked set to bring the Empress Matilda to power, it seems clear that Ranulf fought primarily not on behalf of a contender for the throne, but for himself and his family. According to William of Malmesbury 'he seemed ambivalent in his loyalty' (Malmesbury, 82-3), and promised fealty to the empress only on condition that the earl of Gloucester would help him relieve Lincoln Castle. The speeches before the battle, put into the mouths of the protagonists by Henry of Huntingdon, have Ranulf perceiving the conflict in personal terms, to avenge the wrong done to himself, in contrast to Robert of Gloucester for whom the crown was at stake. Ranulf's ambivalence over the succession dispute, and consequent distrust by both parties, was repeatedly illustrated during the years which followed. He is not known to have attested any of the empress's charters after Stephen's accession. At the siege of Winchester in September 1141 he initially joined the queen's army, only to encounter such suspicion and hostility that he switched to the empress's camp; here, according to William of Malmesbury, his arrival was 'late and ineffective' (ibid., 102-03). His Norman castle at Bricquessart fell to the Angevins in 1142, and the castle he had taken at Lincoln withstood a siege by Stephen two years later. Although he subsequently met Stephen at Stamford (probably early in 1146, when the royalist cause was gaining ground) and apparently renewed his fealty to the king, even this reconciliation did not persist. He duly helped Stephen to capture Bedford town and besiege Wallingford Castle, but the king and the royalist magnates remained deeply suspicious of his failure to restore revenues from royal lands and castles he had seized, and thought he should give hostages to secure his good faith. He was again with the king at Northampton on 29 August 1146, but here his request that Stephen help him to campaign against the Welsh was seen as an attempted entrapment, and his refusal to give hostages or restore royal property led to his sudden arrest and imprisonment. He was released after agreeing to Stephen's terms and taking an oath not to resist the king in future, whereupon he set about trying to recover by force what he had been obliged to surrender. Subsequent campaigns led to armed confrontations with Stephen's son Eustace, and on at least two occasions, near Coventry (probably early in 1147) and Lincoln (1149), with the king himself. 
In the years following the battle of Lincoln Ranulf was also involved in a series of conflicts and negotiations with northern and midland barons, including Alan, earl of Richmond, William, count of Aumale, Robert Marmion, and Gilbert de Gant, who was captured in the battle and forced to marry the earl's niece Rohese de Clare. His consistent purpose was to strengthen his authority from the west coast to the east, and to this end he kept a house in Lincoln with separate household officials, refined his honorial administration especially for financial affairs, and employed a scribe as accomplished as those in royal service. A charter issued by Stephen, undated but probably attributable to the brief reconciliation of 1146, demonstrates the extent of his ambitions. He was granted royal manors in Warwickshire, Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, and Lincolnshire, the towns of Newcastle under Lyme, and Derby, land in Grimsby, and the soke of Grantham, plus the honours of William d'Aubigny Brito (Belvoir), Roger de Bully (Tickhill), and Roger de Poitou (Lancaster, although that which lay north of the Ribble was under Scottish control). He was also confirmed in his tenure of Lincoln Castle, including the right to retain 'Lucy's tower', a reference which hints at the hereditary claims which had underlain his seizure of the castle. Much of this may already have been encroached upon by Ranulf, and much was presumably surrendered as the price of his release following his arrest at Northampton: Lincoln, for example, was in Stephen's hands by Christmas 1146, and, despite attacks on the castle in 1147 and 1149, Ranulf failed to regain it. 
The death of Robert, earl of Gloucester, in October 1147, followed by the retirement of the Empress Matilda to Normandy early in 1148, brought a change in the political context, and with it Ranulf's closer association with the Angevin party. There is charter evidence of a gathering at Chester of the king's principal baronial opponents, such as Roger, earl of Hereford, and Gilbert fitz Richard, earl of Hertford, some time in 1147 or 1148, and also of a visit by Ranulf during this period to the Angevin headquarters at Bristol. Most significantly, when the future Henry II (then aged sixteen) was knighted by David, king of Scots, at Carlisle on Whitsunday (22 May) 1149, Ranulf was in attendance. He did homage to King David, who granted him the honour of Lancaster (including lands north of the Ribble) in exchange for a renunciation of claims to Carlisle; it was also agreed that Ranulf's son would marry one of the daughters of Henry of Scotland. Ranulf almost certainly did homage to the future Henry II on this occasion also, for he addressed him as 'his lord' in a charter of March 1150 at the latest. The immediate consequences of this meeting were slight: a plan to launch a combined assault on York was thwarted by Stephen's arrival, Ranulf was blamed by the king of Scots for failing to deliver his promises, and the proposed marriage never took place. But the earl of Chester had clearly made a firmer commitment to the Angevin cause than at any previous time in the civil war, and he was prepared to be a witness to Henry's charters both on this visit and on his return to England in 1153. 
Even so, Ranulf continued to put his own interests first. Some time between 1149 and 1153 he made a formal agreement with Robert, earl of Leicester, whereby each pledged to bring only twenty knights if obliged by his liege lord to fight against the other, and generally to limit the impact of the war upon their estates. In the event, both earls joined the Angevin campaign in 1153, but Ranulf still struck a hard bargain, securing from Henry (not later than April) a charter issued at Devizes attested by ten men 'on the part of earl Ranulf' to complement the eleven other witnesses. This made lavish grants in the north midlands, many repeating those given by Stephen probably in 1146 but also including the estates of several royalist barons which the earl was effectively being invited to seize. Among these were the holdings of William Peverel of Nottingham, who was widely believed to have been responsible for Ranulf's death, and who in 1155 was disinherited for the crime. 
As a marcher earl, Ranulf had to cope with a resurgence of Welsh aggression. In 1136 or 1137 he led a disastrous expedition into Wales from which he was one of the few to escape alive. In 1146 raids into Tegeingl east of the River Clwyd by Owain, king of Gwynedd, prompted Ranulf's appeal to Stephen for military assistance; within days of the earl's arrest, the Welsh were invading Cheshire, and reached Nantwich before being driven out by his seneschal Robert de Montalt on 3 September. Four years later, in alliance with Madog ap Maredudd, king of Powys, he prepared an attack on Owain Gwynedd, but the enterprise collapsed after defeat at Coleshill. As this episode demonstrates, Ranulf fully appreciated the value of co-operation as well as confrontation with the Welsh princes. Cadwaladr, brother of Owain Gwynedd, was a son-in-law of Ranulf's sister Alice. He accompanied Ranulf to the battle of Lincoln, where Welsh forces figured prominently, and was welcomed to the earl's court in the late 1140s and early 1150s, when he witnessed charters as 'king of Wales' in defiance of his brother. A Welsh prince referred to by Orderic Vitalis as Maredudd -- probably Cadwaladr's brother-in-law Madog ap Maredudd of Powys, but possibly Cadwaladr's son Maredudd -- was also with Ranulf at the battle of Lincoln. 
Despite Ranulf's interests in Normandy, none of his charters is known to have been issued there, and the focus of his attention was clearly upon the English side of the channel. He certainly lost his Norman estates during the civil war: Bricquessart fell to the Angevins in 1142, and the lands Ranulf held from the bishop and cathedral of Bayeux featured in a charter of Robert, earl of Gloucester, in September 1146. At Devizes in 1153 the future Henry II duly restored Ranulf's 'Norman inheritance', interpreting this liberally to include Breuil, the castle of Vire, and other holdings once associated with his family, together with comital status and extensive lordship in the Avranchin. As with Henry's other promises to Ranulf in 1153, however, these did not survive the earl's death, and his son succeeded, in Normandy as in England, substantially to the position enjoyed at Stephen's accession. 
Ranulf founded four religious houses, an abbey for Savignac monks at Basingwerk, Flintshire, in 1131, priories for Benedictine monks and nuns at Minting, Lincolnshire, and Chester respectively (both at uncertain dates), and a priory for Augustinian canons at Trentham, Staffordshire. The last foundation, made on his deathbed in 1153, was probably the restoration of a house originally established by Hugh d'Avranches. At the end of his life he also compensated Lincoln Cathedral and the abbeys at Burton and Chester for the evils inflicted upon them, and soon after his death his widow and son made a grant to Walter, bishop of Chester, specifically for his absolution. The author of the 'Gesta Stephani' suggests that he was excommunicated some time in the late 1140s, but, if so, reconciliation with the church seems apparent from a gift he made to Bordesley Abbey, Worcestershire, between 1149 and 1153, at the instigation, and in the presence, of Bishop Walter, and also from the fact that, according to later tradition, he was buried next to his father in Chester Abbey. Ranulf died on 17 December 1153 at Gresley, Derbyshire. According to the 'Gesta Stephani', the earl was given poisoned wine while a guest at the house of William Peverel. In this version, he 'just recovered, only because he had not drunk much', but in any event he did not survive for long. Ranulf's wife, Matilda, who in 1172 founded Repton Priory, Derbyshire, died on 29 July 1189. Their son Hugh of Cyfeiliog, born in 1147, succeeded him as earl of Chester, taking seisin of the lands in 1162. 
Most contemporary verdicts upon Ranulf were unfavourable. Although Orderic Vitalis acknowledged his resourcefulness and daring, the 'Gesta Stephani' criticized 'the cunning devices of his accustomed bad faith' ('Gesta Stephani', 192-3), and Henry of Huntingdon, through a speech supposedly by the royalist spokesman at the battle of Lincoln, called him 'a man of reckless daring, ready for conspiracy... panting for the impossible', prone to defeat or, at best, to Pyrrhic victories ('Historia Anglorum', 734-5). Clearly, his strategy during the civil war was to take every opportunity to enhance his territorial position, especially in the north midlands, and such commitments as he made, either to the king or to the Angevins, were calculated to that end. Other magnates followed similar policies, but Ranulf (II) was exceptionally ruthless in pursuit of his ambitions, and accordingly he was hated by many and trusted by none. 


@@@@@


doc= 23129


Ranew, Nathanael (1602?-1677), clergyman and ejected minister, was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 10 June 1617, graduated BA in 1621, and proceeded MA in 1624. He was incorporated at Oxford on 10 July 1627 and ordained deacon and priest in Peterborough in September of that year. 
About 1644 Ranew became minister of St Andrew Hubbard, Little Eastcheap, London, a rectory that had been sequestered from Richard Chambers. The following year he was named as rector of West Hanningfield, Essex. On 29 February 1648 he was instituted under parliamentary order to the vicarage of Felsted, Essex, vacant after the death of Samuel Wharton. There he was 'well beloved' by the earl and countess of Warwick, who lived at Leighs Priory, near Felsted (Kennet, 890). They bestowed upon Ranew $20 per annum during his lifetime. On the division of Essex into classes the same year Ranew was placed in the eleventh, or East Hinckford, classis. He also subscribed to 'A Testimony of the ministers in the province of Essex, to the trueth of Jesus Christ, and to the solemn league and covenant; as also against the errors, heresies, and blasphemies of these times' (1648) and in 1649 he signed 'The Essex Watchmen's Watchword', which sought to explain the ministers' original opposition to the crown and their current opposition to sectaries and the 'Agreement of the People'. In 1650 Ranew was reported by the triers as 'an able, godly minister' (Davids, 389). 
Following the Restoration, on 1 March 1661 Ranew secured the vicarage of Coggeshall, Essex, as a precaution in case of difficulties at Felsted, but did not take up the living. After being ejected from Felsted in September 1662, Ranew settled in Billericay. His 'Solitude Improved by Divine Meditation' (1670), dedicated to the countess of Warwick, reflects his concern for proper preparation for death. On 30 April 1672 he took out a licence as a presbyterian teacher in the house of a Mr Finch, in Billericay, which was the same day licensed as a presbyterian meeting-house. Ranew died in Billericay in 1677 and was buried there on 17 March. His widow, Susanna, renounced administration of the estate in favour of Ranew's son, also Nathanael, bookseller and stationer, of the King's Arms, St Paul's Churchyard, who had published his father's book. Richard Ranew, who proceeded MA from Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1660, was possibly another son. 


@@@@@


doc= 23130


Ranken, Alexander (1755-1827), Church of Scotland minister and author, was born in Edinburgh on 28 February 1755. At the age of fifteen he entered the university of his native city and after graduating in arts began to study divinity in 1775. On 28 April 1779 he was licensed to preach, and in the same year became assistant to the pastor of St Cuthbert's, Edinburgh. He remained there two years, when, on 17 August 1781, he was appointed minister of the parish of Cambusnethan, Lanarkshire. On 12 November 1782 he married Euphemia Thomson (died 1822); they had two children, Margaret (1783-1786) and Andrew (1785-1851). In July 1785, he was invited by the provost and magistrates of Glasgow to become minister of St David's in the town. There he received praise for the insight, chasteness, and simplicity of his sermons. In April 1801 Glasgow University gave him the degree of DD. 
Besides topical homilies and memorial sermons for members of the royal family, Ranken was chiefly known for two published works, 'Institutes of Theology' (1822), and especially his nine-volume 'History of France from the Time of its Conquest by Clovis to the Death of Louis XVI' (1802-22). The 'History' is organized thematically, with separate chapters on topics such as the arts, laws, and political affairs. The first three volumes received strong but fair criticism from Henry Hallam in the 'Edinburgh Review' for the arrangement and Ranken's poor understanding of his Latin sources, as well as for being 'shamefully destitute of references' ('EdinR', 6.220). Marking his prominence in the kirk, in 1811 Ranken was appointed moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. He died in Glasgow on 23 February 1827 and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 23131


Ranken, George (1828-1856), army officer, was born in London on 4 January 1828, the eldest son of George Ranken of London. After education at private schools, in 1844 he passed into the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. He was commissioned second-lieutenant, Royal Engineers, on 1 October 1847, and was promoted first-lieutenant on 29 December 1849. On 6 April 1850 Ranken embarked for Canada, arriving in Montreal early in May; he went to Quebec, returning to Montreal in March 1852. In July he took a prominent part in trying to extinguish the great fire at Montreal, when over 10,000 people were made homeless. In February and March 1853 Ranken travelled through the United States and to the West Indies. During the tour he made the acquaintance of W. M. Thackeray, who was lecturing, and travelled with him. Ranken's journal of his travels was edited by his brother, W. B. Ranken, and published as 'Canada and the Crimea, or, Sketches of a Soldier's Life' (1862). In summer 1853 Ranken was again at Quebec, and during the cholera epidemic tried to mitigate the sufferings of the poor. He advocated in the local press the formation of a society to help distressed immigrants. In 1854 he distinguished himself in extinguishing the fire which destroyed the parliament buildings at Quebec, and received the thanks of the Canadian legislature for his role in saving the library of the Literary and Historical Society. 
Ranken returned to England early in 1855, and was quartered at first in Edinburgh and then at Fort George, near Inverness. At this time he contributed letters, signed Delta, on military topics to the 'Morning Post'. He urged increased pay for soldiers in the Crimea to induce the militia to volunteer for the line, a suggestion adopted by Lord Panmure. He proposed the formation, later carried out, of camps of instruction, and also the reorganization of the Royal Artillery and of the Royal Engineers. 
While at Fort George, Ranken volunteered for active service, and was ordered to the Crimea, arriving at Balaklava on 12 August 1855. He served in the trenches. On 8 September the British assault on the Redan took place, with Ranken in the van. The assault, though unsuccessful, led later to Russian evacuation. On 10 September Ranken rode into Sevastopol to see the ruins of the burning city. 
After the siege Ranken was placed in charge of the waterworks for the army. He was promoted second-captain on 25 September 1855 and brevet major on 2 November for distinguished service in the field. On 28 February 1856 he was accidentally killed while, under Lieutenant-Colonel Lloyd, demolishing the Korabelnaya barracks, Sevastopol, known as the White Buildings. General Codrington in his dispatch praised 'this excellent and gallant officer'. Ranken was buried on 2 March 1856 at the Right Attack burial-ground of the Royal Engineers in the Crimea, where eleven of his fellow officers had been buried. A memorial window was placed in the church of Valcartier, north of Quebec, a church towards the building of which he had largely contributed, and a monument was erected in the cathedral of Quebec. Ranken was unmarried. He kept a journal when in the Crimea, from which extracts were selected by W. B. Ranken and published in 1857 as 'Six Months at Sebastopol'. 


@@@@@


doc= 23132


Rankin, Thomas (1738-1810), Methodist minister, was born in Dunbar, Haddingtonshire. Taught the 'principles of religion' by his parents (details of whom are unknown) and at school, he wandered as an adolescent into the 'trifling amusements' of the genteel life, particularly music and dancing (Rankin, 'Life', 5.136-7). He questioned the innocence of such practices and the security of his own spiritual estate after hearing Methodist preachers and the testimony of Methodists among troops garrisoned in Dunbar. Drawn into the Methodist orbit, Rankin attended class meetings, heard sermons by George Whitefield in Edinburgh while residing there with an uncle, and experienced the spiritual highs and lows that typified an evangelical conversion, culminating in his sense of forgiveness of sin. The ordeal produced a collapse that gave 'the appearance of a rapid consumption'. The spiritual ordeal also produced in Rankin aspirations for the ministry, 'thoughts of preaching' as he and other Methodists termed it. He entertained taking orders in the Church of Scotland, and sought Whitefield's advice on that possibility. Further schooling proving impractical, Rankin went on business to Charles Town, South Carolina, for an Edinburgh firm. He returned after several months and heard more Whitefield sermons, but gradually moved away from the Calvinistic towards the Wesleyan wing of the Methodist movement. 
In 1759 Rankin began ministerial apprenticeship in the Methodist pattern, travelling with Wesley's lay preachers. In the first years of preaching he experienced doubts about his call, feelings of worthlessness, and temptations at the hand of 'Satan', but was sustained in the faith by fatherly counsel from Wesley, the support of brother preachers, and encouragement from pious sisters. Wesley appointed him to the Sussex circuit and in subsequent years to the Sheffield, Devonshire, and Cornwall circuits (1762-4). By 1765, when the printed conference 'Minutes' first specify appointments, Rankin numbered among the handful of Wesley's assistants and headed the Dales circuit. He continued in that capacity for Epworth, Cornwall, and Sussex circuits. In 1769-70 Wesley had Rankin 'accompany him in his tour through the kingdom' (Rankin, 'Life', 5.181). Thereafter the relations between the two remained close, and when Wesley became concerned about the good order of the infant American movement, he turned to Rankin first for counsel and then as his general assistant for America. 
Rankin arrived in June 1773 as tensions between the colonies and Britain were increasing, and came commissioned to replace Francis Asbury and to rectify the discipline among American Methodists. Relations with Asbury proved testy from the start. Rankin's name comes in for regular criticism in Asbury's journal, while Asbury's name appears frequently in Wesley's letters to Rankin. Asbury's resistant attitude, subversive actions, questioning of appointments, and undermining of policy -- none of which Asbury tolerated against his own leadership -- had some effect on Rankin's modest success and popularity. However, Asbury's judgement that Rankin proved too strict a disciplinarian, too loyal to Britain, and too subservient to Wesley for American Methodism has prevailed. 
At issue in the exercise of discipline were Methodism's indigenization, adaptation to a slave-holding colonial culture, and adherence to British Wesleyan practices. Rankin was not the first nor last immigrant to experience difficulty in grasping the subtle changes that American culture had wrought on imported patterns. Rankin convened the first American conference, itinerated across the eastern seaboard, welcomed African Americans into the Methodist movement, presided over countless quarterly meetings, and brought what had been quite centrifugal evangelical impulses into Methodist order. He departed in October of 1777. 
Rankin took regular appointments in Britain until 1783 when he retired, but remained an active supernumerary in London until 1795. In 1789 Wesley selected him as one of the few to be ordained for England and he continued preaching until his last illness. He died on 17 May 1810 at North-Green, in Finsbury, London, and was accorded the honour of burial near Wesley at the City Road Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 23133


Rankine, (William John) Macquorn (1820-1872), civil engineer and physicist, was born in Edinburgh on 5 July 1820, the second son of David Rankine (died 1870), rifle brigade lieutenant and civil engineer, and his wife, Barbara (died 1871), the elder daughter of Archibald Grahame (or Graham), a Glasgow banker. Tracing his ancestry to Robert the Bruce, Rankine could claim to be a Scot of Scots. His only sibling, David, died young. In early childhood Rankine's parents guided his religious education; his father taught him arithmetic and elementary mechanics. Between 1828 and 1829 he studied at Ayr Academy; in the autumn of 1830 he briefly attended Glasgow grammar school; later he studied geometry with George Lees in Edinburgh. During prolonged periods of confinement due to illness Rankine was privately educated. He exhibited a keen interest in the theory of music and read deeply in higher mathematics, including number theory. In December 1834 his uncle Archibald Graham gave him Newton's 'Principia' in Latin: Rankine devoured the book, citing it later as the foundation of his natural philosophy. 
Between 1836 and 1838 Rankine attended classes in natural philosophy, natural history, and botany at the University of Edinburgh. He had matriculated but did not register for a degree. Outside the university he studied chemistry with David Boswell Reid. James David Forbes awarded Rankine gold medals for prize essays on the wave theory of light (1836) and on methods in physical investigation (1838). At college Rankine read widely in empiricist and Scottish common-sense philosophy, explored French and German scientific literature, but did not attend mathematics classes, or progress to the exacting Cambridge mathematical tripos. Opting, instead, for the fashionable profession of the engineer, Rankine helped out on the new Leith branch (1837-8) of the Edinburgh and Dalkeith Railway which his father superintended. In 1838 he became a pupil of John Benjamin MacNeill, a prominent engineer with extensive commitments in the north of Ireland and a clutch of talented apprentices including Le Fanu and Bazalgette. Between 1839 and 1841 Rankine learned his trade implementing river improvements, waterworks and harbour works in Ireland. At work on MacNeill's Dublin and Drogheda Railway (1841) he developed 'Rankine's method' for setting out curves. 
Back in Edinburgh Rankine published a series of investigations conducted with his father as 'An experimental inquiry into the advantages attending the use of cylindrical wheels on railways' (1842). He dedicated the work to his former teacher Forbes, a vociferous advocate of science applied to practice. In December 1842 Rankine became a fellow of Edinburgh's Royal Scottish Society of Arts. In July 1843 he entered the Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE) in London as an associate. During 1843 he read papers to the institution: one explained the fracture of axles by referring to molecular structure; others developed David Rankine's suggestions or publicized his mechanical contrivances; some received prizes, including a premium of the institution's president James Walker. Between 1844 and 1848 Rankine worked for Locke and Errington constructing the Clydesdale Junction Railway and on projects sponsored by the Caledonian Railway Company, of which his father had become secretary. In 1845-6 he projected the Edinburgh and Leith Waterworks, only to have the scheme defeated by the Edinburgh Water Company. In 1848 the Institution of Civil Engineers showed itself wary of Rankine's programme to reform the practice of sea defence construction, and of engineering practice generally, as an inductive science. 
Rankine made his scientific debut in 1840 with a neat and topical mathematical analysis of the cooling of the earth. In 1842, after reading Clapeyron's discussion of Carnot's heat theory, Rankine started to write on molecular physics, elasticity, and, especially, the mechanical action of heat. From July 1849 he published results linking the temperature, pressure and density of gases, vapours (especially steam), and liquids, much encouraged by the close agreement between his theoretical deductions and Regnault's new experimental data. Rankine became a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1849. Shortly thereafter, in February 1850, he matched William Thomson's account of Carnot (1849) with an idiosyncratic theory of the mechanical action of heat. Here Rankine considered heat not as Carnot's indestructible caloric but, following Joule, as motion equivalent to work. 
During the early 1850s Rankine, Thomson, and Rudolf Clausius elaborated a new thermodynamics which supplemented Joule's first law with a second law characterizing the potential efficiency of engines and, later, the order and decay of physical systems. Rankine's work had two distinguishing features. First, he quickly perceived and elaborated the links between the new science and thermodynamic engines, especially the ubiquitous steam engine, and its serious contemporary rivals like the air engine. By April 1851 he had constructed a simple law governing the potential efficiency of any heat engine in terms of its upper and lower working temperatures. Here was a perfect theoretical standard against which actual engine economy and the efficient practice of the engineer were to be assessed. Between 1853 and 1857 Rankine collaborated with the Glaswegian shipbuilder James Robert Napier in the development of a marketable hot-air engine (with regenerator), convinced on theoretical grounds that its efficiency would be greater than the maximum attainable by any condensing steam engine. Despite initial hopes that air would supersede steam they abandoned their patent when practical problems proved insurmountable. Second, rather than treat macroscopic phenomena, Rankine exploited what Maxwell termed scientific imagination to create a complex mechanical model of the unobservable whirling motions in which he believed heat to consist. He had designed this versatile hypothesis of molecular vortices to unify the study of heat, elasticity, light, and, ultimately, electromagnetism. Although Rankine was feted by contemporaries as a founder of thermodynamics, Maxwell, Thomson, and others questioned his tenacious adherence to a hypothesis beyond the test of direct observation, accused him, not without justification, of obscurity in his statements of the second law, and claimed that the phrase 'molecular vortices' was of far greater import than the detail of the model itself (published December 1851). 
Rankine nevertheless established himself as a significant scientific voice. As secretary of section A of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS) from 1850 he met Cambridge mathematical physicists like George Gabriel Stokes. He was president of section A in Newcastle (1863). Countering William Thomson's universal dissipation of the energy available to humanity, Rankine proposed in November 1852 a cyclic cosmology in which energy might be reconcentrated. Rankine had joined the Glasgow Philosophical Society early in 1852 and soon became prominent on its council. In January 1853 he presented the society with a set of general laws of the transformation between 'actual' and 'potential' forms of energy. This Aristotelian dichotomy engineered a succinct statement of an empirical law of energy conservation. Rankine's penchant for patenting scientific constructs expressed itself in many such coinages: some ('stress', 'strain', 'adiabatic') endured; others ('actual energy') fell into disuse or were so cumbersome ('platythliptic') as to cause mirth among tongue-tied colleagues. 
Shortly after his election to the Royal Society of London (2 June 1853) Rankine refashioned the science of thermodynamics in geometrical terms: his diagram of energy (a theorized indicator diagram) linked the science of energy and heat-engine practice in a visual form ideal for teaching. In March 1854 the Royal Society of Edinburgh awarded him its Keith prize for his work on heat. In May 1855 he outlined the science of energetics in which he treated the laws of physical energy in an abstract and general manner, eschewing mechanical complexities and, in particular, treating heat phenomenologically. Positivists would subsequently champion Rankine's suggestion that energy -- rather than matter -- constituted a secure ontology for all physics. But Rankine had not abandoned the hypothesis of molecular vortices. As president of the Glasgow Philosophical Society (elected November 1861) he drew upon Scottish common-sense philosophy to argue for the legitimacy and probability of his model by virtue of its predictive capacity and its use of mechanical analogy. Having increasingly relaxed the conditions of the model, Rankine finally claimed that all that he required was a steady circulation of streams. Nevertheless scientists abandoned the hypothesis on which his claim to scientific originality largely rested in preference for a new orthodoxy of Maxwellian statistical physics. 
From 1849 Rankine balanced a burgeoning scientific career with engineering commitments. By the beginning of 1851 he had transferred his Scottish base from Edinburgh to Glasgow. There he worked at the core of the Glasgow Philosophical Society, establishing himself as an engineer concerned to promote the city's improvement. In partnership with John Thomson, son of medical professor Dr William Thomson, Rankine surveyed the Glasgow College grounds, promoted a submarine telegraph between Britain and Ireland, and, jointly with the professor of natural philosophy, lodged a patent for improvements in telegraph conductors (1854). Their most ambitious project (1852) revived the audacious scheme of Lawrence Hill and Rankine's friend the engineering professor Lewis Gordon to bring water to Glasgow from Loch Katrine. 
Although Glasgow was to be the centre of Rankine's scientific and engineering business, in 1853 and 1854 he frequented Gordon's Westminster offices. Their proximity provided the opportunity to plan the relaunch of the all but abandoned engineering chair. The year 1855 saw these plans in operation: an appointment as visitor of the Edinburgh observatory enhanced Rankine's scientific status; from January to April Rankine lectured to aspirant civil engineers on applied mechanics and the science and practice of heat engines; they left the classroom with commercially valuable results. In September the British Association visited Glasgow, responding to the invitation of Rankine, the Philosophical Society, and other local bodies. Gordon resigned his commission during the meeting; Rankine used his address as president of section G (mechanical science) to make a thinly concealed bid for the chair. 
On 7 November 1855 Rankine succeeded Gordon in the regius chair of civil engineering and mechanics, despite eleventh-hour attempts by some incumbent professors to have the government endowment of $275 per annum redirected. Rankine allied himself with a reforming whig faction in the college, including anatomy professor Allen Thomson. His widely reported inaugural address espoused the harmony of theory with practice in mechanics, and outlined a tripartite theory of knowledge -- theory, practice, and the application of theory to practice -- which left room for a new breed of engineering scientists to bridge theoretical and practical domains. A second introductory address (November 1856) likened the Christian's quest for spiritual perfection to the sacred duty of the engineer to perfect himself in the liberal and noble art of engineering. 
Firmly ensconced in the college, Rankine promulgated a programme of engineering science in three interrelated ways. The first was institutional. Rankine was appointed consulting engineer to the Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland (1865) and elected to bodies like the American Academy of Sciences (1856) and the Royal Academy of Sweden (1868). But the institution which gave him greatest scope for immediate action was closer to home. In 1856 Rankine supported a Glaswegian association temporarily constituted to host a summer meeting of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. Collaborating thereafter with Walter Neilson and J. R. Napier, Rankine built upon the successes of the summer to create a permanent professional body for Scottish engineers independent of the Institution of Civil Engineers. Recently honoured with the degree of LLD from Trinity College, Dublin (1857), Rankine resigned his associateship of the Institution of Civil Engineers -- never having been granted full membership -- and was elected president (1857-9) of a new and dynamic Institution of Engineers in Scotland. The institution encouraged engineering science and practice in and beyond the Glaswegian 'metropolis of mechanics', worked closely with the Philosophical Society, and brought together academics, engineers, shipbuilders, and ironmasters like William Baird and Henry Dunlop. 
No less important was the dissemination of Rankine's engineering science in literary form. Building upon the recent technical pedagogy of Moseley, Willis, and Whewell, Rankine repeatedly developed in his lectures new analytical techniques. His 'reciprocal diagrams' of frames and forces (1856) allowed an engineering designer more scope in studying the stresses in structures. Rankine issued lithographs of lecture notes in 1855 and 1856. Thereafter he arranged with Richard Griffin in Glasgow to publish a series of exhaustive manuals suitable for teaching and reference alike. The central pillar -- 'A Manual of Applied Mechanics' (1858) -- had been extensively sketched in the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana'. The 'Steam Engine and other Prime Movers' (1859) extended an article on the mechanical action of heat in Nichol's 'Cyclopaedia' and offered a typically anglocentric historiography of thermodynamics; contemporaries applauded this work as the first systematic treatise of the new science. 'Civil Engineering' (1862) put Rankine's applied mechanics to work in engineering practice. Completing the best-selling series with 'Machinery and Millwork' (1869), Rankine wrote with the authority of an experienced juror of 'machinery in general' at the London International Exhibition (1862). With a companion volume of 'Useful Rules and Tables' (1866) the manuals were standard texts. Some remained in print well into the twentieth century. Rankine's former student and assistant in his final years, E. F. Bamber, completed the 'Mechanical Textbook' (1873) as a much-needed light introduction to the weighty matter of the manuals. 
Rankine structured his books to suggest that engineering knowledge had its roots in scientific principle: he stated a general problem, solved it, and only then treated the special cases encountered in practice. Where no principles were yet accessible he was a natural historian of an artefactual world, provisionally collecting the data of engineering with the ultimate intention of subsuming them under scientific law. Consequently his works were exhaustive rather than elegant and they were hard reading for the bulk of the profession. Contemporaries nevertheless recognized a rare combination of practical sense, scientific breadth, original investigation, and literary workmanship in a permanent 'Principia' of engineering. In order to respond to topical matters -- from the stability of chimneys to the dynamics of the new velocipede -- Rankine made almost weekly contributions to 'The Engineer' from 1858. Even in popular works Rankine channelled his energies to promote or reflect practical and especially scientific engineering. A keen cellist, pianist, and vocalist, his one published composition was a piano accompaniment to a song entitled the 'Iron Horse'; as a British Association red lion, hailed as lion-king in 1871, he penned quirky and humorous poems like 'The Mathematician in Love' and 'The Three-Foot Rule' (a protest against the metric system). These 'Songs and Fables' (1874) appeared posthumously with illustrations by Jemima Blackburn, wife of Glasgow College's mathematics professor. Thus his model of a systematic and responsive body of engineering theory escaped the Glasgow classroom to endure in literary form and, through his college students, in practice. 
Finally, Rankine increased the purchase of engineering science by, quite literally, raising the profile of the university and of his own subject within it. From the late 1860s he worked to raise funds for the new college buildings -- a cathedral of science -- at Gilmorehill. Although in 1855 engineering was not recognized as a subject qualifying for a degree, and the university commissioners disallowed Rankine's suggestion (approved by senate in 1859) that college engineers be granted diplomas, by 1862 Rankine had at last ensured that a systematically educated Glasgow engineer could leave the university with a certificate of proficiency in engineering science. Rankine seriously considered moving to Edinburgh and its chair of engineering in 1868, and the following year admitted his aspirations to succeed Thomas Graham, a distant relation, as master of the Royal Mint. But he remained in Glasgow to press for a full degree in engineering. In 1872 the university began to offer the degree of BSc for science subjects, including engineering. 
In July 1859 Rankine had taken a leading part in raising and organizing the second Lanarkshire, or Glasgow University corps, of the rifle volunteers. He attended a course at Hythe to qualify himself to instruct the corps in musketry. He became captain (October 1859) and then major of the corps (May 1860-June 1864). Later Rankine was the first convenor of the Glasgow University senate committee on the education of candidates for commissions in the army. 
One of the reasons Rankine resigned his commission in 1864 was the increasing burden of work related to naval architecture. From the mid-1850s Rankine collaborated closely with men like J. R. Napier and the partners John Elder and Charles Randolph who combined craft skills with an overtly scientific approach to marine engineering and shipbuilding. In the autumn of 1857 Napier provided Rankine, in confidence, with a body of raw data from experiments relating engine power, size, shape, and speed of steamships. By December 1857 Rankine had deduced a general formula for the resistance of ships of the designs usually given to steamers. Unable to divulge a result which was commercially sensitive and, in Napier's 'Admiral', practically proven, Rankine published a letter in the 'Philosophical Magazine' (September 1858) disguising the formula as an anagram. 
Thereafter Rankine was ubiquitous on British Association committees, gathering and reducing data on the design, propulsion, and resistance of ships in commercial practice, and thereby seeking to remould shipbuilding as an exact science. He was a member of the Institution of Naval Architects from 1862. In 1864, in order to gather data on sea waves and the rolling of ships, he made observations in the Western Isles. He lectured to the Royal School of Naval Architecture in the years 1865-8 and was an examiner at the school. Rankine worked with Isaac Watts, chief constructor of the navy, Frederick K. Barnes of the controller's department, and Napier as corresponding editor and principal contributor to 'Shipbuilding, Theoretical and Practical' (1866). 
Rankine's numerous papers in hydrodynamics usually deployed his favoured strategy of stating simple principles and then following even the most difficult of investigations through with elementary mathematics. The topics he chose were almost invariably of practical relevance: he developed a theoretical description of waves of finite height (sea waves) on the surface of deep water; he applied his theory of streamlines to find good forms of lines for real ships; he investigated the causes of and remedies for ship resistance; in 1865 he produced a theory of the propeller. In these writings, always undertaken in dialogue with men of practice like Napier, Rankine successfully combined considerations of the fluid flow and the geometry of actual ships with engine propulsion, hull resistance, and, most importantly, work: that is, he had found a new practical object for energy physics in a science, jointly developed with William Froude and others, of naval dynamics. As a recognized expert, in December 1870 he accompanied William Thomson on a scientific sub-committee of the government committee on designs for ships of war, created after the loss of the 'Captain'. 
The death of John Elder precipitated Rankine once again into the presidency of the Institution of Engineers in Scotland (1869-70). Drawing upon his experience as co-editor and contributor in the area of engineering, mathematics, and natural philosophy to 'The Imperial Dictionary of Universal Biography' (3 vols., 1857-63) Rankine wrote in 1870 and published in 1871 a memoir of his intimate friend and confidant. In May 1872, at the end of the university session, Elder's widow significantly enhanced the value of Rankine's professorship with a donation of $5000. Although in August 1872 Rankine was fit enough to work with Stevenson Macadam on a study of an explosion at the Tradeston Flour Mills, he did not teach again. Failing sight proved to be a symptom of deeper illness (possibly heart disease). Rankine's health deteriorated rapidly in October; during his last days he lost the power of speech and then of motion on his right side. He died, unmarried, at 59 St Vincent Street, Glasgow, on 24 December 1872 and was buried at Sighthill cemetery, Glasgow, four days later after a public service in the university chapel. The city mourned a chameleon -- engineer, natural philosopher, and engineering scientist -- who had brought the minute and orderly habits of a businessman to science and practice alike, worked to create a new science of thermodynamics, and fostered the philosophical reform of commerce and industry in the second city of the empire. 


@@@@@


doc= 23134


Rankins, William (bap. 1565, d. in or after 1609), writer, was baptized on 24 November 1565 at St Gregory by Paul, London, the son of Henry Rankyn and Mary Robynson (died 1584). Two years after his son's birth Henry was elected to the livery of the Barber-Surgeons' Company, and he eventually became master of that company in 1587. During his lengthy career the elder Rankins seems to have earned a tidy sum. When he wrote his will in March 1597 he bequeathed to his elder son, William, $160; however, he also stipulated expressly that William was to have nothing to do with the administration of the estate. In fact, Henry set up his will so that his younger son (also named Henry) would inherit most of the estate if William were to 'mislike or refuse to accept' the bequest initially set forth in the will. (In retrospect, it would seem that William did indeed 'mislike' the arrangements made by his father. Over time, and upon arrival at adulthood, William's younger brother collected most of what the estate was valued at, a portion of $145.) 
Such opposition seems to have been commonplace throughout Rankins's life. He began his literary career attacking plays in a polemic entitled 'A mirrour of monsters: wherein is plainly described the manifold vices, and spotted enormities, that are caused by the infectious sight of plays' (1587). Also, early on, he published 'My Roughcast Conceit of Hell' (n.d.) and a forceful denunciation of the Englishman's habit of imitating foreign fashions ('The English Ape', 1588), both dedicated to Sir Christopher Hatton. 
Ten years later, however, Rankins had reversed his position on the theatre and was writing plays for the Lord Admiral's Men at the Rose Playhouse. Philip Henslowe, the playhouse owner and company financier, paid Rankins for 'Mulmutius Dunwallow' (October 1598), 'Hannibal and Scipio' (January 1601), 'Scogan and Skelton' (January-March 1601), and 'The Conquest of Spain by John of Gaunt' (March-April 1601). The first play was apparently based on Raphael Holinshed's chronicles. (The last three were co-written with Richard Hathway, whose career as a playwright for the Admiral's Men produced at least eight other plays written between 1598 and 1602, including '1,2 Sir John Oldcastle'.) In addition, some theatre historians conjecture that Rankins was part-author of a play entitled 'Leire' (entered into the Stationers' register in 1594) which was revived by the Queen's and Sussex's Men for Henslowe on 6 and 8 April 1594 shortly before the Stationers' entry. 
In 1598 Rankins published 'Seaven Satyres Applied to the Weeke, Including the Worlds Ridiculous Follyes'. Dedicated to his friend John Salisbury of Lleweni, esquire, the book stands as Rankins's last substantial work. The preface to John Bodenham's 'Belvedere' (1600) contains but three short stanzas ('A Sonnet to the Muses Garden') signed 'W. Rankins, Gent'; and in 1604 he contributed some miscellaneous verses to the anonymous 'Plato's Cap'. By this time Rankins's professional career had subsided. A note of ownership inscribed in a copy of Holinshed, dated 4 June 1609 and perhaps written by Rankins himself, is possibly the last mention of him while he lived. Throughout his life his output was steady; but he seems generally to have drawn little attention, although in 1598 Francis Meres mentioned Rankins in his 'Paladis Tamia' (along with Joseph Hall and John Marston) as one of the three best satirists of his age. 
A 'William Rankyns of Clifford's Inn, gent', who bound himself to appear at the Middlesex sessions on 15 September 1587 might, or might not be the writer. If he is synonymous with the author, then Rankins's literary career was launched, like those of so many contemporary writers, during his time at the inns of court. 


@@@@@


doc= 23135


Rankley, Alfred (1819-1872), genre painter, was born on 30 December 1819 and baptized on 17 January 1820, with his twin brother William, at St Mary's Church, Marylebone, London. His parents were James Rankley and Jemima, 'nee' Cooper, who later worked at Marylebone court house as a porter and housekeeper respectively. He attended the Royal Academy Schools and began to exhibit at the academy in 1841, when he sent a scene from Shakespeare's 'Macbeth'. Next year 'Palamon and Lavinia' was exhibited at the Society of British Artists, and in 1844 a scene from 'Othello' was shown at the academy. Rankley has been described as being 'caught up in the early Victorian craze for ambitious historical pieces' (Reynolds, 110). He was one of many artists who searched pre-Norman English history for episodes that could be used as vehicles for dramatic effect: his 'Edith and the Monks Finding the Body of Harold' was exhibited at the Society of British Artists in 1846. In 1847 he sent 'Cordelia' to the British Institution, and 'The Village Church' to the Royal Academy, a painting that was well received and later engraved. From then until 1867 he exhibited regularly at the academy, generally sending a single work, and never more than two. 
Rankley's contemporary subjects have proved more enduring than his historical ones. In 'Contentment' (1850) he explored the effects of education on social class, through a painting of a young scholar 'ill at ease in his family's simple cottage', an early treatment of this subject (Boase, 279). Among his best works were 'Old Schoolfellows' (1854) and 'The Doctor's Coming' (1864), the latter depicting a scene from a Gypsy encampment. 'Old Schoolfellows' in particular shows to good effect the technical ability that Rankley acquired through his earlier works. The painting depicts a prosperous young man alleviating the penury of a schoolfriend, who lies on his sickbed; when shown at the Royal Academy the catalogue entry included a quotation from the book of 'Proverbs', chapter 17: 'A friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for adversity'. Such sentimentalism was characteristic of Rankley's work and the painting displays 'that clarity of anecdote and simplicity of moral appeal which was the strength as well as the limitation of mid-Victorian subject painting' (Reynolds, 110). 
Rankley's paintings -- 'conscientiously finished, and inculcating some healthful thought' (Redgrave) -- were popular, and among those engraved were 'The Parish Beauty' and 'The Pastor's Pet', by Robert Mitchell; 'Reading the Litany', 'Sunday Afternoon', and 'The Sunday School', by James Scott; 'Refreshment, Sir?' by W. H. Egleton; and 'The Scoffers', by H. T. Ryall. His last exhibited works were 'Following the Trail' and 'The Hearth of his Home' (1870), and 'The Benediction' (1871). Rankley died, unmarried, at his home, Clifton Villa, Campden Hill, Kensington, London, on 7 December 1872, and was buried in the St Marylebone cemetery, East Finchley. His studio sale was held at Christies on 3 February 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 23136


Ransford, Edwin (1805-1876), singer and composer, was born on 13 March 1805 at Bourton on the Water, Gloucestershire. He first appeared on the stage as an extra in the chorus at the King's Theatre, Haymarket, and was afterwards employed in the same capacity at Covent Garden. In March 1825 he married; his wife's name was Hannah (1804/5-1876). During Charles Kemble's management of Covent Garden, Ransford sang the baritone role of Don Caesar in Samuel James Arnold's 'The Castle of Andalusia' (27 May 1829), and was engaged soon afterwards by Arnold for the English Opera House (later the Lyceum). During the autumn seasons of 1829 and 1830 he was at Covent Garden, and in 1831 he played leading characters under R. W. Elliston at the Surrey Theatre, where he won great acclaim. Later that same year he appeared at Sadler's Wells as Captain Cannonade in John Barnett's opera 'The Convent, or, The Pet of the Petticoats' and on 3 November he played Giacomo in the first English production of Auber's 'Fra Diavolo' at Drury Lane. In 1832 he was with Joe Grimaldi at Sadler's Wells, playing Tom Tuck in Andrew V. Campbell's nautical drama 'The Battle of Trafalgar', in which he made a great hit with S. C. Neukomm's song 'The Sea'. He afterwards fulfilled important engagements at Drury Lane, the Lyceum, and Covent Garden. At the last-named theatre he played the Doge of Venice in 'Othello' on 25 March 1833, when Edmund Kean made his last appearance on the stage; he was also in the cast, as Sir Harry, when Charles Kemble made his last appearance, as Charles Surface in 'The School for Scandal'. His own final theatrical engagement was with W. C. Macready at Covent Garden in 1837-8. 
After his retirement from the stage, Ransford sang for a time at concerts, and then, from 1845 onwards, produced a series of popular musical entertainments in which he took the leading roles. Among these ventures were 'Illustrations of Gipsy Life and Character' (with the words to the songs by Eliza Cook), 'Tales of the Sea', and 'Songs of Dibdin'. Ransford was also well known as a composer of songs and glees, and between 1835 and 1876 had more than fifty pieces published. Under the name of Aquila he composed thirteen 'Sacred Ballads' (1862-9) and wrote the words to the popular song 'In the days when we went Gipsying'. He was also the author of 'Jottings -- Music in Verse' (1863). 
For some years Ransford was in business as a music-seller and publisher, and during the 1840s and 1850s he issued many popular songs. His business began in Charles Street, Soho Square, and moved to 461 Oxford Street in 1850. When he went into partnership with his son William Edwin (died 1890), a talented singer, in 1869, the business was based at 2 Princes Street, Cavendish Square, where it continued to be managed by William after his father's death. A genial and popular man, Ransford died at his home, 59 Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square, on 11 July 1876, and was buried at Bourton on the Water on 15 July. His wife died four months later, aged seventy-one. 


@@@@@


doc= 23137


James Ransome (1782-1849), entered his father's business in 1795. With his brother Robert he took out several patents for improvements in ploughs. Threshing machines, scarifiers, and other agricultural implements were also improved by his firm. The brothers were among the earliest members of the Royal Agricultural Society of England, which was founded in 1838, and they gained in later years many of the society's chief medals and prizes. From the 1830s to the 1860s Ransomes also became leading manufacturers of railway equipment, especially of chairs and fastenings, and of chilled-iron crossings. Patents were taken out covering the manufacture of each of these. James Ransome died at Rushmere, near Ipswich, on 22 November 1849, his wife Hannah, daughter of Samuel Hunton of Southwold, having predeceased him on 8 December 1826. They had a large family. 
Their eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 23138


James Allen Ransome (1806-1875), born in July 1806, was, after being educated at Colchester, apprenticed to the firm of Ransome & Sons; he became a partner in 1829, the firm then taking the style J. R. and A. Ransome. Between 1826 and 1829, and again from 1833 to 1839, he resided at Yoxford, Suffolk, where a branch of the business was established. He started a farmers' club there which was the precursor of many similar institutions, notably the London Farmers' Club, of which Ransome was one of the founders. In 1839 he moved permanently to Ipswich, and under his direction the business assumed huge proportions. In 1843 he published 'The Implements of Agriculture', part of which had been prepared as a prize essay for the Royal Agricultural Society of England. This was the most important book on its subject published in the mid-nineteenth century. Ransome had joined the Royal Agricultural Society in 1838, served two terms on its council (1844-6 and 1855-7), and was one of the most popular figures at its annual shows. He was an alderman of Ipswich from 1865 until his death. He married Catherine (died 17 April 1868), daughter of James Neave of Fordingbridge, Hampshire, on 4 September 1829; and they had two sons, Robert James and Allen Ransome, and three daughters, one of whom married J. R. Jefferies, an active member of the firm. James Allen Ransome died at his house in Carr Street, Ipswich, on 29 April 1875. 
The small brass foundry established by the elder Robert Ransome in the latter half of the eighteenth century had, by the 1850s, become one of Britain's leading agricultural engineering firms, employing more than 1000 workers. From producing and sharpening ploughs and other agricultural implements, the firm had diversified widely, especially into railway equipment. It was one of the first companies to build cast-iron bridges and later it also became renowned for its lawnmowers, when it was under the direction of Robert Charles Ransome and James Edward Ransome ['see under 'Ransome, Robert Charles]. Members of the family retained their Quaker affiliation, and were active civic and philanthropic figures in Ipswich, where their works were based. 


@@@@@


doc= 23139


Robert Ransome (1753-1830), who was born at Wells, Norfolk, son of Richard Ransome, a schoolmaster there. His grandfather, Richard Ransome, was a miller of North Walsham, Norfolk, and an early Quaker, who suffered frequent imprisonment while on preaching journeys in various parts of England, Ireland, and the Low Countries. He died at Bristol on 8 November 1716. On leaving school Robert Ransome was apprenticed to an ironmonger, and he commenced business for himself at Norwich with a small brass foundry. Shortly afterwards he added iron founding. He married Mary Raven in 1782, and they had two sons. 
Ransome possessed inventive skill, and as early as 1783 he took out a patent for cast-iron roofing plates, and published 'Directions for Laying Ransome's Patent Cast-Iron coverings', printed for the patentees in 1784. On 18 March 1785 he took out his first patent for tempering cast-iron ploughshares by wetting the mould with salt water. In 1803 he was responsible for one of the most important developments ever made in the manufacture of ploughs. This was the chilling process, whereby the underside of the share was made extra hard, while the upper part remained soft and tough. The upper part thus wore away faster than the lower, so that a sharp cutting edge was maintained and less draught was required. By the use of these shares, the continual laying and sharpening of wrought-iron shares was avoided. This invention was at once adopted and was not superseded. In 1808 Ransome took out a further patent for the manufacture of interchangeable plough parts. This development enabled him to offer farmers easier maintenance and replacement of worn parts, and to achieve a measure of standardization. 
In 1789 Ransome moved to Ipswich, establishing there the business that became successful in manufacturing a wide range of agricultural and industrial implements. Ransome was joined in business by his two sons, and the firm traded as Ransome & Sons from 1818. During the period after the Napoleonic wars, as well as manufacturing ploughs the firm undertook general iron-founding and engineering work. William Cubitt was engineer to the business from 1812 to 1826, and he made the firm a pioneer in the construction of cast-iron bridges, the most notable of which was Stoke Bridge, Ipswich, built in 1818. 
Upon retiring from business in 1825, Ransome learned copperplate-engraving as an amusement, and constructed a telescope for his own use, for which he ground the speculum himself. The later years of his life were spent at Woodbridge in Suffolk, where he died on 7 March 1830. 
Robert Ransome's elder son, 


@@@@@


doc= 23140


Ranson, Thomas Fryer (1784-1828), engraver, was born on 19 July 1784 in Sunderland, co. Durham, the son of Thomas Ranson and his wife, Mary. He was apprenticed to an engraver in Newcastle and in 1814 gained a Society of Arts medal. In February 1818 he was charged at Marlborough Street magistrates' court with possessing a forged $5 note and briefly imprisoned. Despite having refused to surrender the note he was bailed, and at a subsequent hearing the Bank of England decided not to prosecute. A year later he published an engraving of himself seated in a cell at Coldbath Fields prison. 
Ranson is best known for his engraved portraits, especially that of Duncan Gray, after Sir David Wilkie, for which he won a Society of Arts gold medal in 1822. He was employed to work on the long-running publication 'Ancient Marbles in the British Museum' (1812-61) and engraved topographical subjects, such as the doorway of South Weald church, after J. A. Repton. He died, unmarried, at his residence, 23 Blandford Street, Portman Square, London, before 27 August 1828, when administration of his goods was granted to his brother Cuthbert. 


@@@@@


doc= 23141


Ranyard, Arthur Cowper (1845-1894), astronomer, born at Swanscombe, Kent, on 21 June 1845, was the son of Benjamin Ranyard (1792/3-1879), a barge owner, and his wife, Ellen Henrietta White (1810-1879), the founder of the Biblewoman Movement ['see 'Ranyard, Ellen Henrietta]. He attended University College School, London, from 1857 to 1860, then went on to University College. Here the influence of Professor Augustus De Morgan led him to concentrate his attention on mathematics and astronomy, and he formed a close friendship with the professor's son George. In 1864 the two young men formed the plan for a society for the special study of mathematics, and issued a circular inviting attendance at the first meeting of 'the University College Mathematical Society' on 7 November 1864. The first meeting was actually held on 16 January 1865, when, after Professor De Morgan's presidential address, Ranyard read the first paper, 'On determinants'. The new association received the support of eminent mathematicians, and ultimately developed into the London Mathematical Society. 
Ranyard entered Pembroke College, Cambridge, in October 1865 and graduated MA in 1868. Having adopted the law as his profession he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1871, but his tastes lay in the direction of science, and his means enabled him to devote much of his time to astronomy. He became a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1863, and served on its council (1872-88 and 1892-4) and as secretary (1874-80). He was assistant secretary of the expedition for observing the total solar eclipse of 1870, and made a successful series of polariscopic observations at Villasmunda in Sicily. In 1878 he went to Colorado to view the solar eclipse of that year, which he observed and photographed at a station near Denver. In 1882 he observed and photographed the total solar eclipse at Sohag in Upper Egypt. His most extensive work in astronomy was the eclipse volume of the Royal Astronomical Society (commenced in 1871 and completed in 1879), in which are systematized and discussed the observations of all solar eclipses down to 1878. It was originally begun in conjunction with Sir George Airy, but soon devolved on Ranyard alone. 
In 1888 Ranyard's friend Richard Anthony Proctor died, leaving his great work, 'Old and New Astronomy', incomplete. Ranyard generously undertook to finish it for the benefit of the author's family, and wrote chapters on the universe of stars, the construction of the Milky Way, and the distribution of nebulae, which he discussed with much ability and thoroughness. He also succeeded Proctor as editor of 'Knowledge', a popular journal dealing with astronomy and natural sciences, to which he contributed a long series of articles on astronomy, giving his mature views on many intricate problems. His most important investigations were those on nebulae, the density of which he concluded to be extremely low, even as compared with the earth's atmosphere, and on star clusters, which he regarded as showing evidence of the ejection of matter from a centre, and not gradual condensation, as supposed by Laplace. 
Although mainly engaged in scientific pursuits, Ranyard took much interest in public affairs, and in 1892 was elected a member of the London county council, where he sat on the committee dealing with the new '(London) Building Act', which passed into law in the summer of 1894. Ranyard resigned that year due to ill health. 
In 1872, in conjunction with Lord Lindsay (twenty-sixth earl of Crawford), Ranyard undertook experiments on photographic irradiation, and in 1886 he investigated the relation between brightness of object, time of exposure, and intensity of photographic action. 
Ranyard, who was unmarried, lived a somewhat retired life of laborious industry. He was a man of generous spirit, extremely conscientious and completely devoted to duty. He died of stomach cancer at his home, 13 Hunter Street, Brunswick Square, London, on 14 December 1894, and was buried in the cemetery at Kingston upon Thames on 19 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 23142


Ranyard, Ellen Henrietta (1810-1879), home mission worker, was born on 9 January 1810 in the district of Nine Elms, London, the eldest daughter of John Bazley White, maker of cement. She was a member of the Congregational church in Walworth, and after attending a 'Bible' meeting at Wanstead when she was sixteen she accompanied her friend Elizabeth Saunders on a mission to supply 'Bibles' to poor families. The two discovered that thirty-five families were without 'Bibles', and they collected 35 pennies towards supplying each family with the scriptures. She recollected: 'I came home having seen for the first time how the poor live; their ignorance, their dirt, their smells.... She [Elizabeth] spoke to them, but the spirit of God carried the message home to 'me'.... When I went to bed at night I took up my 'Bible' to read my usual chapter with a new feeling for it... my hard young heart was softened, and a quiet new affection drawn out to this new and gentle friend. (Alldridge, 106-7)' Both girls caught typhoid fever after their missionary visit. Elizabeth died; but Ellen recovered and believed that she had found her life's work. 'I remember thinking', Ellen wrote a few years later, 'that the 'Bible' work was the one work to which I had been called by God, and to which I must keep faithful as one who had been baptised for the dead' (Alldridge, 108). Once recovered from typhoid, Ellen returned to the thirty-five homes, collected the remaining money, which amounted to $6, and took it to a women's 'Bible' committee meeting at the British and Foreign Bible Society, of which her grandmother was president, and from which the thirty-five 'Bibles' were procured and distributed by Ellen. She eventually became a secretary of the 'Bible' committee, and canvassed other districts in addition to her own. 
In her early twenties Ellen and her family moved to Swanscombe in Kent, where she met Benjamin Ranyard of Millibank Street, Westminster. They married at York Street Chapel, in Surrey, on 10 January 1839. They had two sons and two daughters, including Arthur Cowper Ranyard. Ellen Ranyard combined her maternal responsibilities with philanthropic ones, primarily her work with the Bible Society. In her spare time she painted in oils as well as creating woodland scenes out of dried seaweed and watercolour. She also wrote edifying poems with titles such as 'Bear ye one another's burdens' and 'On Self-Regulation', which were collected and published in 1855 in 'Leaves from Life' and in 'The Border Land and other Poems' under the pseudonym LNR. She also wrote texts for the Bible Society, the first of these being a children's book about the 'Bible', 'The Book and its Story' (1852), to celebrate the society's jubilee. Two years later she edited the society's journal, 'The Book and its Missions, Past and Present'. 
In 1857 the Ranyards left Kent for Bloomsbury, London. They settled at 13 Hunter Street, not far from slum areas which Ellen Ranyard, after visiting with a retired physician friend, decided to 'civilize'. She planned to accomplish this, as did many a Victorian philanthropist, by bringing the inhabitants both spiritual and material assistance since, as she remarked in a later publication, 'If Jesus makes our hearts clean, our homes will soon be clean too' ('Life Work', 108). Her prime concern was how to supply London's poor with 'Bibles' and she decided that this would best be accomplished not by city missionaries, but by working-class women. She asked St Giles's resident missionary in Bloomsbury whether he could recommend a suitable candidate; he suggested a woman named Marian, and so the Biblewoman movement, formally called the London Bible and Domestic Female Mission, was born. Characterized by its reliance on the poor as the dispensers as well as the recipients of charity and missionary endeavour, the movement spread not only to other English towns, but also to south-east Asia, Australia, and North America. 
Over the years Ellen Ranyard expanded her operations to include mothers' meetings, at which working-class mothers would listen to 'Bible' readings, sew, and converse; bed and clothing clubs; a dormitory for young watercress-sellers and needlewomen; a rescue home; and, in 1868, a district nursing scheme. Like the Biblewomen, the nurses dispensed spiritual aid and were expected to carry a 'Bible' with their medical supplies. The combination of spiritual and medical assistance, which the Ranyard nurses dispensed, continued well into the mid-twentieth century. 
Ellen Ranyard wrote extensively on her mission and its workers. Principal among her publications were 'The Missing Link, or, Bible-Women in the Homes of the London Poor' (1859); 'Life Work, or, The Link and the Rivet' (1861); 'London and Ten Years' Work in it' (1868); and 'Nurses for the Needy, or, Bible-Women Nurses in the Homes of the London Poor' (1875). She also edited the mission's journal, the 'Missing Link Magazine'. 
Ellen Ranyard died from bronchitis at her home, 13 Hunter Street, on 11 February 1879, and was buried in Norwood cemetery. Her husband survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 23143


Raper, Henry (1767-1845), naval officer, entered the navy in February 1780, on board the 'Berwick' (74 guns), which in July joined Sir George Rodney in the West Indies. After returning in 1781, he took part in the battle on the Doggerbank on 5 August and was wounded. He afterwards served in the 'Cambridge' (74 guns), and in her was at the relief of Gibraltar by Lord Howe in October 1782. He then joined the sloop 'Marquis de Seignelay' (14 guns), a captured French privateer, with Commander John Hunter (1738-1821), his former shipmate in the 'Berwick', and remained in her until 1785. From 1785 to 1788 he was in the 'Salisbury', the flagship of Rear-Admiral John Elliot, at Newfoundland, and afterwards in the 'Impregnable' (98 guns) and 'Queen Charlotte' (100 guns) in the channel until 22 November 1790, when he was promoted lieutenant. Through 1791 he served in the bomb (i.e. mortar) vessel 'Vesuvius', and in October 1793 he was appointed to the 'Queen Charlotte', flagship of Earl Howe, to whom he acted as signal lieutenant in May and on 1 June 1794. On 4 July he was promoted commander, and in September, on the recommendation of Howe, he was appointed signal officer on the staff of Vice-Admiral A. J. de Valle, of the Portuguese squadron serving with Howe. On resigning this post in December, he was presented with a diamond-hilted sword. In November 1795 he commanded the brig-sloop 'Racoon' (16 guns) in the Thames; and on 1 February 1796 he was posted to the small frigate 'Champion' (24 guns), employed on the coast of Ireland and afterwards in the North Sea. In January 1798 he assisted in the seizure of a Swedish convoy, which was brought into the Downs; and the following May he took part in the attempt to destroy the locks and sluice-gates of the Bruges and Ostend Canal. 
From January 1799 to September 1802 Raper commanded the frigate 'Aimable' (32 guns) in the West Indies and on 1 February 1799 he was promoted captain. In 1810 he declined an offer of the rank of vice-admiral in the Portuguese service; and in November that year he was appointed to the 'Mars' (74 guns), which he commanded until February 1813, on the Lisbon station and in the Baltic. Despite repeated applications he had no further employment, but was promoted in due course rear-admiral on 12 August 1819, vice-admiral on 22 July 1830, and admiral on 23 November 1841. He published 'A New System of Signals, by which Colours may be Wholly Dispensed with' (1828). He married, in 1798, a Miss Craig, and they had children. He died, after a very protracted illness, at South Audley Street, London, on 5 April 1845. His eldest son was Henry Raper (1799-1859). 


@@@@@


doc= 23144


Raper, Henry (1799-1859), naval officer and writer on navigation, was the eldest son of Admiral Henry Raper (1767-1845) and his wife, formerly a Miss Craig. After attending Charterhouse School he entered the navy in November 1811 on board the 'Mars', his father's ship. He joined the Royal Naval College at Portsmouth in March 1812, passing out with distinction in 1814, and being awarded the silver medal for proficiency in mathematics. After a short time in the frigate 'Nymphen' as a midshipman, he was appointed in October 1815 to the 'Alceste' with Captain Murray Maxwell, conveying William Pitt Amherst, Earl Amherst, as envoy to the emperor of China. The mission was not a success; and on the homeward passage, on 18 February 1817, the 'Alceste' struck a rock in the Strait of Gaspar, off the south-east coast of Sumatra. Raper bore his full share of the hardships experienced by the crew from weather, thirst and pirates. Between 1817 and 1820 he was a midshipman in the 'Tyne' (26 guns) on the South American station, and the frigate 'Seringapatam' at home and in the Mediterranean. In January 1821 he was appointed to the sloop 'Adventure', with Commander William Henry Smyth, surveying in the Mediterranean, though he did not join her until the spring of 1822; he was placed in charge of the chronometers, and had exceptional opportunities for the scientific study of navigation, nautical astronomy, and surveying. On 17 May 1823 he was promoted to lieutenant, and was appointed to the 'Euryalus', and then to the brig 'Dispatch'. In January 1825, when Captain Frederick William Beechey commissioned the 'Blossom' for hydrographic surveys in the northern Pacific, he offered Raper the post of first lieutenant at the suggestion of Smyth, all three having served together in the 'Adventure'. Raper, however, imagined that his father had been undeservedly slighted by the Admiralty, and declined Beechey's offer, thus virtually retiring from active service. 
From that time Raper devoted himself to nautical science, greatly encouraged by Smyth. He became a fellow of the Royal Geographical and Royal Astronomical societies, repeatedly served on their councils, and was secretary of the latter society from 1839 to 1842. In 1832 he was appointed by the Admiralty to a committee that was to consider the method of measuring the tonnage of ships, and the report was drawn up principally by him. In 1840 he published his 'Practice of Navigation and Nautical Astronomy', for which he was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society; the East India Company supplied copies to their ships, and -- an unusual distinction -- the Admiralty in January 1843 ordered a copy to be supplied to each of her majesty's ships. It remained a standard work for many years, the twenty-first edition being published in 1920. Other published works were 'Rules for Finding Distances and Heights at Sea' (1831), and 'Sailing Directions for the Western Coast of Africa' (1849). 
Raper married in November 1850 the daughter of the Revd Frederick Ekins of Morpeth. He suffered severely from rheumatism and neuralgia during the last eighteen months of his life, but continued his labours up to the last, submitting a paper, 'An improvement in clearing the lunar distance', to the Royal Astronomical Society shortly before he died at Torquay, Devon, on 6 January 1859. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 23145


Rapin de Thoyras, Paul de (1661-1725), army officer and historian, was born in Castres, France, on 25 March 1661, the third of the six children of Jacques Rapin, sieur de Thoyras (1613-1685), an advocate, and Jeanne Pelisson (died 1706). He came from a protestant Savoyard family who had emigrated to France in the reign of Francois I and settled in Languedoc. His father practised law in the chamber of the edict of Castres, and his mother was a daughter of a councillor in the same court. The young Rapin, reportedly a serious and studious child, was educated at the Huguenot academies of Puylaurens and Saumur. In 1679 he was received as an advocate, although in all his life he is said to have only pleaded one case. The same year the court of Castres, which had been set up as a result of the edict of Nantes, was abolished and the Rapin family moved to Toulouse. 
In 1685 Rapin's father died, and the revocation of the edict of Nantes forced the family to flee Toulouse for the country. In March 1686 Rapin and his younger brother Salomon went to London, where the connections between his uncle Paul Pelisson and the French ambassador, Paul Barillon, secured a favourable welcome. Despite the best efforts of his uncle, the ambassador, and the ambassador's circle, Rapin resisted conversion to Catholicism, and as a result failed to gain advancement in the England of James II. In 1688 he went to the Netherlands where he enlisted in a company of French refugee volunteers at Utrecht commanded by his cousin, Daniel de Rapin. In November 1688 this company formed part of the army that landed with William of Orange at Torbay. For both British whigs and Huguenots, William was the focus of protestant resistance to French and English Catholicism, and Rapin's part in the battles of the revolution of 1688 did much to form his version of British history. He became an ensign in Lord Kingston's regiment of foot and was part of the force sent to Ireland under the duke of Schomberg. He fought at Carrickfergus and the Boyne, and was shot in the shoulder with a musket-ball in the unsuccessful assault on Limerick in August 1690. In June 1691 he took part in the capture of Athlone, and was stationed at Kinsale. Rapin later wrote that it was here, under the influence of the governor of Kinsale, James Waller, that he first had the idea of writing a history of England, to explain to the other peoples of Europe the significance of the events he was taking part in. 
In 1693, while still at Kinsale, Rapin was offered, at the recommendation of the marquis de Ruvigny, the post of governor to the eleven-year-old Lord Woodstock, the son of Hans Willem Bentinck, first earl of Portland. Rapin was described at this time as having 'un certain air du beau monde et ces manieres nobles et aisees qu'on n'attrape qu'avec gens de qualite' (Trevor-Roper, 7). It was apparently at the urging of William III himself that Rapin accepted the post, and he spent the next thirteen years living in England and The Hague. In 1698, after the treaty of Ryswick, he accompanied Portland on an embassy to the court of Versailles. In 1699 he married Marie-Anne Testart ('c'.1674-1749), who was described as 'jeune, riche et surtout vertueuse' (ibid., 9); she came from a Huguenot family in St Quentin which had sought refuge in the Netherlands. In January 1700 Marie-Anne gave birth to Jeanne-Henriette (1700-1782), the first of twelve children, seven of whom survived infancy. But in 1701 the family life was disrupted, as Rapin was obliged to accompany the eighteen-year-old Lord Woodstock on his grand tour through Germany, Austria, and Italy -- an experience which, Rapin's surviving letters in Nottingham University Library suggest, he found something of a trial. 
The time Rapin spent at The Hague provided him with the company of distinguished Huguenot scholars and intellectuals. As a member of a literary club known as La Pleiade (later La Feaute), which met at Rapin's elegant house in The Hague, he regularly met Abel Rotolp, sieur de la Deveze, Henri Basnage de Beauval, Jacques Basnage, and Jean Rou (who gives an account of Rapin at this time in his 'Memoires'). Rapin wrote an unpublished poem, 'Satire on la societe de la Haye', in 1706, and so was clearly nursing literary ambitions. In 1702 his pension of 1100 florins a year, granted him by William III, ceased upon the monarch's death. In 1704 his employment with the Portlands ended when Lord Woodstock married, moved to England, and became MP for Southampton. Rapin now had the freedom to pursue his historical studies, which he appears to have begun in 1705, although his circumstances now required a less expensive way of life, especially in the light of his ever-expanding family. In 1707 he moved to Wesel with his wife and children, a cheaper although less cosmopolitan and sophisticated alternative to The Hague. 
Rapin's Huguenot connections, however, continued to support him. In 1704 Jean Leclerc (with whom Rapin had studied at Puylaurens) received the first volume of Thomas Rymer's 'Foedera', a collection of transcripts of British treaties, letters, and acts which Rymer had compiled, and was now sending for a review in Leclerc's 'Biblioteque choisie'. Leclerc reviewed the first volume but sent the subsequent ones to Rapin, whom he described as 'a gentleman of merit who is working on the history of England' (Trevor-Roper, 12). Rapin produced abstracts of these acts for Leclerc's publication, and by 1708 had completed the first eight volumes. By 1725 he had completed seventeen, and these abstracts were published in an English translation by Stephen Whateley as 'Acta regia, or, An account of the treaties, letters and instruments between the monarchs of England and foreign powers, published in Mr Rymer's Foedera' (1726). This privileged access to historical material provided the source for Rapin's history. 'I am convinced', he wrote, 'that there is not one piece in the 'Foedera' but what may be of use, especially to such as would write the History of England' ('Acta regia', 104), and he was spurred on to a more ambitious history than he had hitherto envisaged. 
In 1717 Rapin's first effort to formulate his vision of the pattern of British history came in his 'Dissertation sur les whigs et les tories' (La Haye, 1717), in which he attempted to explain, for the benefit of continental Europeans, the British party system. The translation of the work into German, Dutch, Danish, Spanish, and English provides some indication of the work's accessibility and lucidity. But it was apparently at the instigation of an Englishman, Andrew Fountaine, that Rapin published the work, and in England it became a standard, if whig-slanted, elucidation of a post-revolution construction of the national past. 
Rapin had let it be known in 1714 that he was working on a history of England, and by 1717 he had written at least the first two volumes covering the Anglo-Saxons to the reign of William the Conqueror; in 1722 he had reached the year 1640. After publishing extracts in Leclerc's 'Biblioteque germanique' and in 'Biblioteque ancienne et moderne', Rapin published the first eight volumes of his 'Histoire d'Angleterre' in The Hague in 1723. Two more volumes were published in 1725, taking the history down to the coronation of William and Mary. Rapin, however, did not live to see the full extent of his success as in 1725 he fell ill with a stomach condition and a fever. He died after a week's illness on 16 May 1725 in Wesel and was buried there. He was survived by his wife, six daughters, and one son, Jacques-Benjamin (1707-1763), who became a Prussian official. Details of Rapin's life were published first in an essay by his elder brother, Charles Rapin-Puginier (1658-1730), and later in the laudatory history of the Rapin family by Raoul de Cazenove, which reprints a great deal of Rapin's correspondence. 
Rapin's contemporaries depicted him as 'naturally of a serious temper' ('Life of Rapin', no pagination), a man of culture, music, and reason, as well as adept in Italian, Spanish, English, Greek, and Latin. His stern features, with his robust and strong complexion, and his penetrating gaze, can be seen in his portrait, appended to numerous editions of the 'History of England', in which he rests his armoured arm on a pile of his own history books. 
The subsequent history of Rapin's magnum opus in England is no less remarkable than his life. His text was politically suited to the times, and stylistically amenable to the British public. The 'History' formulated the English past as an essential struggle between the 'prerogatives' of the crown and the 'privileges' of the people. When the two are in balance 'liberty' is maintained. The perfect system of government was parliamentary and constitutional, and had been established by the Saxons in England, who, after their invasion in the fifth century, established a 'Wittenagemote', which Rapin depicts as an early form of parliament. All upheavals since that establishment were simply instances of the ongoing struggle to maintain this Saxon system, of which the revolution of 1688 was just the most recent example. Although intended for 'foreigners', the work simplified the system for the English market, and Rapin's eclectic style, veering between the painstaking elucidation of historical documents (for instance his essay on the Salic law) and the bloodthirsty sensationalism of a novelist, endeared him to London booksellers. The first translation, by Nicholas Tindal, appeared in fifteen volumes between 1725 and 1731, and was challenged by a translation by John Kelly (1732-6). The text was issued in all the possible forms that booksellers had at their disposal, including part-books, continuations by David Durand (1734-5), Thomas Lediard (1736 onwards), and Tindall (1744-5), and a schoolbook adapted from Rapin by John Lockman, 'The History of England by Question and Answer' (1739). The wealth of romantic and gory stories in the original text made it an attractive option for illustration, and the first versions provided work for London's illustrators. George Vertue's 'Heads of the Kings of England Proper for Rapin's History' (1736) fulfilled a Georgian taste for grangerization, while the elaborate decorations for the third edition (1743-7) were important forebears of the British 'history painting'. Artists such as Angelica Kauffman later cited Rapin as the source for their subjects. 
Rapin's initial critics objected to the clear whig slant of the 'History', as in the case of the splenetic 'Defence of English History Against the Misrepresentations of M. de Rapin-Thoyras' (1734), which criticized the history as anti-monarchical, anti-church, and 'the sweet singing of anarchy and levelling' ('Defence', 8). Rapin's chief political champion was Lord Bolingbroke, who plundered the 'History' for his own 'Remarks on the History of England', directed towards the political struggle against Robert Walpole. The wide distribution given to Rapin's text and ideas in the 1730s established the 'History' as a classic, and continued versions were appearing until the 1780s. Rapin's hegemony in British historiography was ultimately usurped by David Hume, whose own 'History of England' (1754-62) superseded Rapin's as the standard work. Hume later described the Frenchman as 'despicable' ('Letters', 258), both in style and content, and ultimately it was the more literary, less politically engaged, philosophical tenor of Hume's 'History' that was appreciated by the later Georgian readership. Nevertheless, Rapin's work remains a key milestone in British historiography, political thought, and bibliography, and its author as deserving of scholarly attention as his successors. 


@@@@@


doc= 23146


Rasbotham, Dorning (1730-1791), antiquary and playwright, was born at Manchester and baptized on 10 May 1730 at Cross Street Presbyterian Chapel, Manchester. The son of Peter Rasbotham and his wife, Hannah, daughter of John Dorning, of Birch House, Farnworth, in the parish of Dean, Lancashire, he was educated at the Manchester grammar school. On 24 July 1754 he married Sarah, eldest daughter of James Bayley, of Withington, near Manchester, granddaughter of Samuel Peploe, bishop of Chester. They had five children; a son, the Revd Dorning Rasbotham, became a fellow of Manchester collegiate church. 
Rasbotham was chairman of the quarter sessions at Manchester for twenty-five years, and high sheriff of Lancashire in 1769. He made extensive collections for a history of Lancashire, and his manuscripts, partly written in Byrom's shorthand, proved of great use to Edward Baines when compiling his history of Lancashire. In 1774 Rasbotham wrote 'Codrus, a Tragedy', in five acts and in verse, which although refused by two London managers was successfully performed at Manchester in that year. He published it anonymously to test the public's reaction to this verdict. It was produced again at Manchester in 1778 for the benefit of Younger the actor, when Kemble, Lewis, and Mrs Siddons took part in the performance. In 1782 he printed 'Verses originally intended to have been spoken at the breaking-up of the free grammar school in Manchester'. He is also thought to have written 'A Dissuasive from Popular Rioting Directed Against Mechanical Manufacturing Improvements' (1779). Rasbotham died on 7 November 1791 and was buried at the parish church of Dean, where a mural tablet was placed to his memory, with an inscription by Thomas Barnes DD. 


@@@@@


doc= 23147


Rashleigh, Philip (1729-1811), mineralogist and antiquary, was born on 28 December 1729 at Aldermanbury, London, the eldest son of Jonathan Rashleigh (1693-1764), a London merchant, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Clayton. Rashleigh matriculated from New College, Oxford, in 1749 but left without taking a degree. Members of the family, owners of estates throughout Cornwall, had represented the borough of Fowey in parliament for generations. On the death of his father, Rashleigh was elected member for Fowey in 1765 and sat continuously, despite various contests and disputes, until retiring in 1802, by which time he had become the 'father' of the House of Commons. 'A thoroughly independent country gentleman, critical of general reform and of radicals'; only three speeches of his are reported, all of very minor importance (Namier, 3.348). 'His attendance was poor'; in 1796 he wrote, 'I have no inclination to fling away $50 on a journey to add one more to a majority' (Thorne, 5.9). 
The expansion of tin and copper mining during his lifetime led to Rashleigh's interest in mineralogy. Initially through his own efforts, he amassed a significant mineral collection, but later added to it by exchange and purchase from British and European collectors and dealers. It was, and still remains, unrivalled for its content of Cornish specimens. The upper zones of the rich Cornwall deposits were being exploited when Rashleigh formed the collection and he obtained a tremendous variety of unusual and rare minerals, many of them known only from this region and several only from his specimens. He was ahead of his time in cataloguing the source and locality of the specimens. He attempted moderate scientific experiments and analysis, but as the science became more technical he declared, 'I think we shall Refine Mineralogy too much' (letter, 22 March 1789, Russell bequest, NHM); but he assisted in its development by providing material for others. In 1797 Rashleigh published the first volume of his 'Specimens of British Minerals', with the second volume appearing in 1802. In this he achieved his ambition to provide accurate coloured illustrations of minerals -- the first successful attempt in Britain, which has also become bibliographically significant owing to its typography (Bethel). His knowledge of mineralogy led to his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1788. The threat of invasion by Napoleon made him consider giving up collecting and the increase in competition and prices reduced the number of acquisitions but he continued to make substantial purchases up to 1809. 
Rashleigh had an interest in antiquities, particularly artefacts obtained from tin streamworks that related to the prehistory of Cornish mining and his collection once contained the late Saxon hoard of metalwork from Trewhiddle (later moved to the British Museum). He became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and published several papers in 'Archaeologia'. 
From 1756 Rashleigh virtually retired to Cornwall, and upon inheriting the estates he was forced to live modestly while he restored the family's position and by prudent management cleared the debts arising from his father's excesses. He managed the estate and finances of his several wards until they came of age. To settle the family's finances he exploited the family's involvement in local mining activities. Such financial difficulties had reduced his own marriage prospects but on 17 April 1782, at the age of fifty-two, he married his first cousin, Jane Pole (1720-1795). 
Letters reveal that Rashleigh was often confined to the house, Menabilly, near Fowey, during the latter years of his life: 'My time of Life draws fast to an End and my Infirmities grow likewise' (10 July 1792, Russell bequest, NHM; 6 April 1804, Sowerby archive, NHM). However, he remained active until 1811, when he died at his home on 26 June 'without a single groan or Struggle' (Charles Rashleigh, Antony House Archives, CC/M/44), having made meticulous bequests to all his relatives, friends, and servants. He was buried at Tywardreath, Cornwall. Through his management the Rashleigh family was reinstated as one of the leaders in mining and agricultural reforms within the county and, his being childless, his estates passed to a nephew, William Rashleigh (1777-1855). 


@@@@@


doc= 23148


Raspe, Rudolf Erich (1737-1794), writer, was born at Hanover, the first child and only son of Christian Theophilus Raspe, an accountant in the Hanoverian department of mines and forests, and Luisa Catherina von Einem, the daughter of a Prussian landed family. He had two younger sisters, Dorothea Frederica and Catherina Maria Sophia. Nothing is known about Raspe's early schooling, but he and his family maintained close ties with the mining communities of Goslar and Clausthal in the Harz. Visiting often, they absorbed both the practical knowledge of the miners and the regional tradition of extravagant folklore. 
In 1755, aged eighteen, Raspe entered the university at Gottingen to study law, remaining for a year. Having become the tutor and companion of a young well-to-do Prussian named von Luden he transferred to Leipzig, a centre of German rationalism. After three years there of living beyond his means Raspe returned to Gottingen for his master's degree; on graduation in 1760 he accepted a clerical position in the manuscript department of the Royal Library at Hanover. During a tenure of seven years, he cultivated masonic friends, explored the library's large collection of Leibniz papers, and began to publish. 
The Lisbon earthquake of 1 November 1755, coincident with Raspe's first year at university, was for Europeans an intellectual as well as physical shock and did much to establish increasingly naturalistic interpretations of geological phenomena. For his part Raspe was led by the Lisbon catastrophe to rediscover the posthumous, almost forgotten 'Lectures and Discourses of Earthquakes' (1705) by Robert Hooke, which had been written in 1668. In 1763 Raspe published in Latin, as a 191-page 'specimen' of a larger work -- often promised but never to appear -- 'Specimen historiae naturalis globi terraquei' ('An Introduction to the Natural History of the Terrestrial Sphere'). In it he compiled an impressive catalogue of new islands and mountains that had emerged within historical times, summarized classical and more recent attempts to explain their formation, and gave special prominence (though not unqualified approval) to Hooke's theory, which emphasized the constructive power of earthquakes. In a blatant attempt to win British recognition for his accomplishments, Raspe dedicated his book to the Royal Society of London and its fellows. He was duly elected to membership in 1769. Raspe wrote three papers for the 'Philosophical Transactions', one each on fossil elephants (1769), German marble quarries (1770), and the origin of basalt (1771). He also published on geology and other topics in German periodicals, one of which he edited (1772). 
In addition to his geological researches, Raspe attempted to gain a reputation as a man of letters. No literary works were of greater immediate interest at this time than the several attempts by James Macpherson to authenticate his supposed discoveries (in fact, forgeries) of 'ancient' epics by a fictitious Scottish poet named Ossian ('Fingal', 1762; 'Temora', 1763). These spurious works enjoyed a tremendous vogue throughout Europe and were championed in Germany by Raspe in a five-part periodical essay (1763). In 1766 he twice reviewed, for another German periodical, Thomas Percy's 'Reliques of Ancient English Poetry' (1765), which were authentic ballads and destined to become influential. That same year Raspe ventured on poetic creation himself with 'Hermin und Gunilde', an allegory in verse. This well-received attempt had been preceded in 1764 by two anonymous publications, one a poetic comedy and the other a celebration in verse of his sister's wedding. In 1765 he published an anonymous translation into German of a French comedy by Charles-Simon Favart. More important were Raspe's signed article on the manuscripts of Leibniz (1762) and his 1765 edition of six previously unknown essays by the great philosopher. 
Though Raspe was becoming known as a man of letters, his standard of living required more money than the Royal Library was paying him. He found the patron he sought in General Count von Walmoden, the illegitimate but influential son of George II and the countess of Yarmouth. Having a very large collection of pictures and antique sculptures, the count invited Raspe to catalogue it. A 42-page listing of his was published in 1767. By then, however, a much better situation was available to Raspe, who accepted the curatorship of collections belonging to Frederick, the landgrave of Hesse-Cassel; with that position came the chair of antiquity at Kassel's university, the Collegium Carolinum, and a seat on the Hessian privy council as well. 
On 27 March 1769, in attestation to the diligence for which he was known, Raspe presented to the landgrave a twelve-volume manuscript catalogue in which he had enumerated and described more than 15,000 coins, medals, and other curiosities. The finest of these objects, moreover, were now displayed in some innovative glass cases, transforming the previously cluttered Museum Fredericianum into one of the model collections of Europe. By now seriously in debt, Raspe took the occasion to request a modest increase in his salary -- and was brusquely refused. That autumn, desperate for money, he began to pilfer and pawn some of the coins and medals entrusted to his care. 
In 1770 Raspe visited Berlin, hoping to garner the Prussian king, Frederick II, as his next and more generous patron. In lieu of that employment he met and married, on 9 April 1771, Elizabeth Langens, the daughter of a wealthy Berlin doctor, with a useful and much needed dowry. Before she divorced him in 1780 they had two children, Friederich and Philippine Caroline. Raspe's wedding brought with it a token increase in his salary. However, Raspe's burden of indebtedness remained and, despite a growing literary reputation, he lived in constant fear that his thefts from the landgrave's collections would be discovered. 
In September 1774 Raspe was appointed Hessian resident in Venice. Forced to leave Kassel and the keys to the landgrave's collections behind, he went immediately to Berlin and that October obtained a loan from his father-in-law equivalent to about half his debts, which were becoming known. But in his absence there had been an investigation, and on 15 November he was ordered back to Kassel for an accounting. Dawdling as long as he could, Raspe returned only late in February 1775, was exposed, lost everything he had, and to avoid imminent incarceration was obliged to flee Germany for ever. The warrant for his arrest described him as being of medium height, long-faced, and small-eyed with a prominent, beaky nose and red hair. 
Raspe is next heard of in Holland, where he wrote former friends in Kassel two long, ineffectual letters of apology (both eventually published) before going on that August to Britain, a country he henceforth saw as his own. Ever resourceful and beyond the reach of German law, Raspe approached Lockyer Davis, the Royal Society's printer, in London and contracted with him to undertake a series of translations from German and Italian sources on behalf of English science. Though Raspe was expelled from the Royal Society on 7 December 1775, by reason of deficient character, his arrangement with Davis was maintained. 
The first volume in the series was a translation of one that Raspe himself had published in German (1774): 'An account of some German volcanos and their productions with a new hypothesis of the prismatic basaltes established upon facts' (1776). The second volume, by John James Ferber (praised in the first for the quality of his observations), was 'Travels through Italy, in the years 1771 and 1772, described in a series of letters to Baron Born' (1776); and the third, logically enough, was Baron Inigo Born, 'Travels through the Bannat of Temeswar, Transylvania, and Hungary, in the year 1770, described in a series of letters to prof. Ferber' (1777). By then, however, Davis was no longer the publisher. Other volumes were announced but did not appear. 
In 1779 Raspe toured parts of England as the travelling companion of a Baron von Offenburg from Lithuania. Equipped with letters of introduction from influential friends who had not abandoned him, Raspe was admitted to a number of prestigious country houses. At Cambridge he discovered in the manuscript rooms of the university library a medieval treatise proving ('contra' Vasari) that artists preceding the Van Eycks had painted in oils. Having suggested the same thing in his 'Anecdotes of Painting' (1762), Horace Walpole began to take an interest in Raspe -- and was soon called upon to bail him out of debtors' prison. Raspe was served with Prussian divorce papers about the same time. Even so, he struggled on to complete 'A Critical Essay on the Origins of Oil Painting' (1781), the costs of which were underwritten in part by Walpole. Though favourably reviewed, the book was highly opinionated, as monks, Vasari, and Raspe's former, now hopelessly alienated patron, the landgrave Frederick, were pilloried in turn. 
Raspe next tried unsuccessfully to publish English translations of German literary works, well before German literature was fashionable in England. His first attempt, 'Tabby in Elysium' (1781; original, 1757) by the obscure J. F. W. Zacharia, was a light verse mock epic of a cat's adventures in the underworld. Raspe's second attempt, Lessing's play 'Nathan the Wise' (1781; original, 1779), derived from a more worthy source, but both translations were thoroughly pedestrian and deserved to fail, as they did. On 30 November 1781 Raspe proposed by advertisement in the 'Monthly Review' a 'literary expedition to Egypt' led by himself to collect and decipher hieroglyphic inscriptions, but nothing came of it. Depressed and alone, he had lost all sense of direction. 
A year later, after twelve months of obscurity, Raspe appeared at Cosgarne House, near Chacewater mine in Cornwall, the local headquarters of Boulton and Watt. He had been in Cornwall for some time, visiting mines, inspecting their machinery, and buying mineral specimens (but where he got the money is unclear). Raspe lived in Redruth for several years as an associate of the firm, eventually becoming its assay master. In October 1783 a German periodical essay surely by him provided eyewitness accounts of the Cornish mining industry and its steam engines. 
In June 1784 Raspe visited London and while there sat to James Tassie in Leicester Fields for a medallion portrait, the only one of him that exists. Seven years later Raspe published an extensive catalogue in two volumes of the 'Ancient and Modern Gems' cast by Tassie in paste from loaned originals. He listed and described almost 16,000 entries, together with a learned preface. 
For all of Raspe's prodigious accomplishments as a compiler and translator -- for all of his contributions to periodicals and the science of geology -- he is now remembered primarily for a short 'jeu d'esprit' chapbook of only forty-two pages called 'Baron Munchausen's Narrative of his Marvellous Travels and Campaigns in Russia' (1786). Published anonymously, the work was not definitively identified as Raspe's until 1824, by which time it had been reprinted, expanded, illustrated, and translated in a vast number of editions; the editions continue to this day, and it has also been adapted for the cinema. 
Though the greatest of all travel liars, Raspe's Munchausen was based on a real German original, Karl Friedrich Hieronymus, Freiherr von Munchausen (1720-1797), who during his youth had fought in Russia against the Turks. Years afterward, as a country squire at Bodenwerder, near Hameln, he regaled his guests (Raspe supposedly among them) with droll recitations of incredible personal adventures, adding straight-faced assurances of their veracity. Seventeen tales attributed to him were published in the German periodical 'Vade Mecum fur lustige Leute' between 1781 and 1783, some or all of which have been attributed to Raspe. The latter's five examples of the baron's stories, rendered into English in 1786, include Cornish mining slang and scenery. Later augmentations added topical allusions and adapted fantastic plots from earlier tellers. 
In 1786 the Boulton and Watt assay office in Cornwall was closed, and Raspe returned to London, finding work in Tassie's shop as his catalogue moved to completion. He also translated Baron Born's treatise on the amalgamation of gold and silver ores (1791). From 1789 to 1790 Raspe was in Scotland, where he had been commissioned to make a mineralogical survey of the highlands. He visited the Hebrides and went as far north as Thurso. But his assurances of mineralogical richness seemed unlikely to some: he was accused of salting barren moors with specimens of Cornish ore, and was later caricatured as the dishonest Hermann Dousterswivel in Walter Scott's novel 'The Antiquary' (1816). 
After two more years of routine business and failing health in London (with excursions to Scotland, Wales, and Cornwall), Raspe visited Ireland in November 1793 to see a number of its mines. He died in 1794 at Muckross, near Killarney, of scarlet fever and was buried in the hillside graveyard of Killeaghy Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 23149


Rastell, John (c.1475-1536), lawyer and printer, was the son of Thomas Rastell (died 1505?); he was probably born in Coventry, though John Bale later claimed Rastell was a Londoner by birth. Rastell's father and grandfather both had civic and legal responsibilities in Coventry, and in 1489 Rastell was admitted to the city's Corpus Christi Guild (fourteen being the normal age for admission). The first instalment of his guild fee was paid by Joan Symonds, widow of a former mayor of Coventry, who acted as godmother to Rastell's daughter (probably named after her), and may well have been his aunt; in 1507 Rastell benefited significantly by her will. 
Rastell acquired French and Latin, requisites for a legal career that was furthered at Middle Temple, London, where he was an 'utter' (outer) barrister by 1502, with Christopher St Germain of Coventry as a companion. (Anthony Wood's later claim that Rastell matriculated at Oxford conflates Rastell with a contemporary namesake.) Perhaps as early as 1497 Rastell married Elizabeth (1482-1537), daughter of Sir John More and sister of Thomas More; they had three children: Joan (who later married the playwright John Heywood), John ('b'. 'c'.1497), and William Rastell (d. 1565). By 1504, Rastell was residing in Coventry, where, in 1506 after an interim, he succeeded his father as coroner, an office that involved presiding over the court of statute merchants and acting as clerk of recognizances of debts. About this time, Thomas More visited his sister and brother-in-law in Coventry. 
Possibly discouraged by Coventry's economic decline and castigated for Lollard tendencies, Rastell resigned as the coroner in 1508, and by the following year he had taken his family to London, where he ran a successful legal practice for over twenty years; something is known of his involvement in chancery suits during 1529-32. From about 1509 he also seems to have begun to print and publish: initially where he was dwelling 'at the Fleet Bridge at the Abbot of Winchcombe's Place', then by 1515 near St Paul's (where his premises comprised a room for the press, a shop, and living quarters), and eventually from Michaelmas 1519 at Paul's Gate, Cheapside. Rastell's shop sign was a mermaid; one of his two printing devices included a merman and mermaid. 
Perhaps the first book Rastell printed was a Thomas More translation, 'The Lyfe of Iohan Picus' (with related material) ('c'.1509) -- the unspecified author being Gianfrancesco Pico. Also of this early phase of Rastell's printing was his compilation of the statutes of Edward V and Richard III. He concentrated on producing law books, and over the years came increasingly to edit or write the books his press produced. Over his career his publication list came to comprise over fifty titles (a few he re-edited, some reprinted), including, in 800 folio leaves, the ambitious 'La grande abbregement de la ley' (1514-16) by Anthony Fitzherbert -- appointed Coventry's recorder in 1509 -- in three volumes and priced at 40's'. (Only the first volume was printed by Rastell, his small press being utilized for humanistic texts of More's circle); its 'Tabula', compiled by Rastell, appeared in February 1517. Other publications (most, seemingly, from his own press) included a liturgy, of which only two leaves survive; works on literacy and astrology; 'A C. Mery Talys' ('c'.1524-5), compiled if not written by Rastell, and apparently the earliest printing of the so-called 'Shakespeare's jest book'; and 'The Pastyme of People' (1529-30). This last work, more familiarly known as 'Rastell's chronicle', was based by Rastell on Robert Fabyan's chronicle, its second part enhanced with eighteen full-page woodcut portrait effigies of English monarchs from William I to Richard III, thereby forming the first English printed portrait-book. 
Some time between November 1519 and mid-1520 Rastell printed his 'New Interlude and a Mery of the Nature of the.iiij. Elements', a moral play that not only was apparently the first English printed work to define the New World as America but also, in its inclusion of a three-part song, 'Tyme to pas', with music, marked the first attempt anywhere in Europe to print a musical score. About 1525-7 he also provided music for the ballad 'A Wey Mornynge' on a printed broadside. Music printing normally required each page to be printed twice; however, Rastell's music type -- cut for him probably in northern Europe -- was specially cast, enabling him to be the first printer to print music in a single impression. Innovative, too, was his 1513 introduction from Rouen of small secretary-type for law books in French; the font, much worn, was still in service in 1528. A 1535 reference to a 'castynghowse' suggests that Rastell was able to cast at least some of his types in-house (Devereux, 29). 
Rastell's move to London in 1508-9 may have been encouraged by Sir Edward Belknap, formerly of Coventry and then a privy councillor with court influence, as Belknap engaged Rastell in an organizational capacity during the 1512-14 French war. In January 1515 Rastell leased a country house and grounds at Monken Hadley, near High Barnet, where he cleared land and pursued gentlemanly recreations; Thomas Cromwell was among the guests. As master of wards, on 7 October 1515 Belknap also secured for Rastell lands and goods of the Lollard heretic Richard Hunne, on the understanding that, as ward of Hunne's two daughters, Rastell provided the crown with their dowries. Rastell defaulted in this, his American venture having failed, and in May 1523 Hunne's property was granted to another, though Rastell managed to retain possession until 1529, when he finally lost the lawsuit. Rastell was litigious by nature and was prone to financial misjudgements: he lost his estate at Monken Hadley in a court case in 1534, when he brought a suit against Dame Alice ['see 'More, Alice], his mother-in-law, and Richard Staverton, his brother-in-law, for mismanaging his property during a forced absence in Ireland. That same year he was involved in a court case regarding his Paul's Gate premises. 
Late in 1516 More's 'Utopia' was printed in Louvain, and this may have inspired Rastell to undertake a commercial and explorative venture to 'this newe landys founde latley / Ben callyd America by cause only / Americus dyd furst then fynde', the object being to settle the land claimed for England in 1497, and to search for the north-west passage to Asia ('Four Elements', lines 838-40). Royal letters of recommendation were granted to him and two London merchants, with a small loan, on 5 March 1517. The expedition starting late in the summer was assigned at least one royal ship and comprised at least four vessels with supplies. However, the venture proved a financial disaster. Rastell's ship, with the printer Thomas Bercula on board, reached Waterford, where the sailors abandoned him, and then sold his cargo in Bordeaux. As a result Rastell sojourned in Ireland from the summer of 1517 for some two years, taking the opportunity to write his 'Four Elements'. 
Belknap was also responsible for Rastell's involvement in the beautifying of the roof of the temporary royal pavilion at the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520; in the same year and in the same capacity Rastell probably painted the roof of the Roundhouse in Calais. In 1522 Rastell wrote and choreographed the pageant performed in London at the king's meeting with the emperor; five years later he did the same for the opening entertainment, on 5 May 1527, at the theatre at Greenwich, a theatre which he had helped decorate. In August 1524 he served as 'trenchmaker' under Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk, during the French campaign. In the same year he took a forty-year lease on an acre or so of land at Finsbury Fields, where he built a house and the earliest known permanent Tudor stage, at which he held public performances. (He later initiated a lawsuit against the theatrical manager, John Walton, over damage to stage properties.) 
More was probably instrumental in returning Rastell in 1529 to the so-called Reformation Parliament for the Cornish borough of Dunheved, and Rastell was commissioned to print the statutes passed by the parliament's first session. Initially, Rastell opposed religious change: he had already published Christopher St Germain's neutral 'Dialogus de fundamentis legum Angliae et de conscientia' (1528) and in 1529 he published More's 'Dyaloge' concerning heresies, which was directed against the rising tide of Lutheranism in England. That year he spent some six months in France on government business, probably seeking support from the academics of Paris University for the king's divorce. In October 1530 he printed his own 'New Boke of Purgatory', backing More's 'Dialogue'. A printed exchange with the young John Frith followed, with the resulting conversion of Rastell to the reformed faith marking the parting of the way with his brother-in-law. Rastell became an agent to Thomas Cromwell, and in 1533 was appointed to investigate legal fraud in London; that same year, he shared a lead-mining lease (which proved unsuccessful) in Dartmoor with Cromwell and others. In 1534 he served on a commission investigating lawlessness in Wales. 
Rastell's printing and publishing apparently brought him a steady income until the early 1530s. Following his conversion in 1531, he began issuing protestant treatises: the business declined to the extent that a young servant of his, William Mayhewe, eventually took over its operation, and by summer 1533 half the shop was leased out to the bookseller John Gough, known for selling heretical publications. Sending a draft of his 'Book of the charge' to Cromwell, probably in 1534, Rastell petitioned for permission to print it as issued by the king for distribution to all judges and officials in legal courts, so they would learn the true faith. In spring 1535 he daily visited the Charterhouse seeking to convert its monks. Increasingly radical, he looked in vain to Cromwell for privileges to print and publish protestant tracts, including one on allowing priests to marry, while his type appears to have been used for the anonymously printed 'Dyaloge betwene Clemente and Bernarde' ('c'.1532), opposed to convocation's taxation powers. Consistent with these views, Rastell himself denied clerical rights to tithe in 1535; he appeared before Cranmer and was committed to prison. He was still in custody on 20 April 1536, six days after parliament was dissolved, when he made his will, in which he named Henry VIII as one of his executors, as 'I am moste in daunger to the kings grace by bondes and oders of his comyn lawe' (Plomer, 'Abstracts', 5). Rastell died in poverty in the Tower about 25 June, a prime example of the turn of fortune's wheel in Tudor England. 


@@@@@


doc= 23150


Rastell, John (1530-1577), author and Jesuit, was born in Gloucester of a family prominent in local commerce and administration. He was admitted to Winchester College in 1543 and later attended New College, Oxford, graduating BA before his election as fellow in 1549, and proceeding MA on 26 June 1555. Rastell's career at Oxford ended in 1560, when he fled England for Louvain, joining other fellows of his college in exile for religion's sake. 
Marking the period immediately preceding Rastell's flight was the so-called 'challenge sermon', preached at Paul's Cross in November 1559 and March 1560 by John Jewel, bishop of Salisbury, who attacked various Roman Catholic practices and beliefs as things unknown during the first six hundred years of Christianity. Before leaving England, Rastell wrote his 'A Confutation of a Sermon, Prounounced by M. Juell, at Paules Crosse'. On account of the censorship of Roman Catholic authors in England, Rastell wrote (as he says in a preface) for 'one frind alone, to auoyde feare of foes' (Rastell, 'Confutation', sig. A2'v'). The book was published at Antwerp in November 1564, after Rastell had become a candidate in theology at Louvain. 
Rastell's book was ignored by Jewel and other protestant controversialists, who concentrated their fire against Catholic doctors of divinity (especially Thomas Harding, another former Winchester and Oxford scholar). Nevertheless Rastell continued to publish books opposing Jewel. In January 1565 he issued a partly satirical challenge to Jewel, 'A Copie of a Challenge', originally the final section of his 'A Confutation'. Two months later appeared Rastell's 'A Replie Against an Answer (Falslie Intitled) In Defence of the Truth', taking issue with a book by the Oxford protestant Thomas Cooper, who had in 1562 attacked an anonymous Catholic answer to Jewel. Like Jewel, Cooper never answered Rastell. Nevertheless Rastell continued his side of the book war, in early 1566 answering one of Jewel's responses to Harding with 'A Treatise Intitled, Beware of M. Jewel', in two books, followed in November 1566 by 'The third booke, declaring by examples out of auncient councels, fathers, and later writers, that it is time to beware of M. Jewel'. Still failing to provoke any response, in 1567 Rastell published one more controversial work, 'A briefe shew of the false wares packt together in the named, apology of the Churche of England', supporting Harding's 'Confutation' (1565) of Jewel's 'An Apologie, or, Answere in Defence of the Churche of Englande' (1564). Rastell's final effort too was disregarded by subsequent controversialists; not until 1579 was any notice taken of him, when William Fulke published 'A refutation of Maister John Rastels confutation', one part of a book bracketing answers to three Catholic writers. Fulke cites yet another work by Rastell, 'Rastels returne of untruths', which (Fulke says) was 'answered by M. Jewell', although neither book is extant or mentioned anywhere else. 
Ordained a priest in 1566 Rastell later left the Spanish Netherlands for Rome, entering the Society of Jesus on 4 April 1568, three weeks after his younger brother Edward had also become a Jesuit novice there. Both brothers were posted to Bavaria in 1569, John to assist Peter Canisius at Dillingen in writing his book against the Magdeburg Centurists. Rastell served also at Augsburg and Halle; he was appointed vice-rector at Ingolstadt before May 1576 and died there on 5 June 1577. 


@@@@@


doc= 23151


Rastell, William (1508-1565), printer and legal writer, was born in Coventry, a younger son of the printer and adventurer John Rastell (c.1475-1536) and Elizabeth (1482-1537), sister of Sir Thomas More. According to Wood, he went to Oxford University in 1525, aged about seventeen, though this seems unlikely since he was already working in his father's printing business. Rastell became a prominent member of Thomas More's circle. He set up his own press in 1529, and was More's principal publisher, venturing also into drama, for instance with John Heywood's 'The Play of Love'. His main contribution as a law printer was the first edition of the register of writs ('Registrum omnium brevium') in 1531; and he produced in 1534 an omnibus student handbook combining, in small print, the 'Natura brevium', the old and new tenures, the book for justices of the peace, 'Novae narrationes', 'Returna brevium', and 'Carta feodi', described in the preface as 'compacte into one volume, ryght studyously corrected'. 
Rastell ceased printing in 1534, having by then turned to legal studies. Admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1532, no doubt with More's support, he was called to the bar in 1539 and to the bench of the inn in 1546. He gave his first reading in the autumn of 1547 on the statute 'Quia emptores' (1290). Soon after being elected as treasurer of the inn, in 1549, he quit the country on 21 December for religious reasons and remained in Louvain until the accession of Mary I. While in Louvain, in July 1553, his young wife, Winifred, the daughter of Sir Thomas More's adopted daughter, Margaret Giggs, and the physician John Clement, whom he had married in 1544, died of a fever. Rastell may have spent part of his time in exile composing the table to Fitzherbert's 'Natura brevium', which was included in the new edition of 1553 and all subsequent editions. 
Rastell returned to England in 1553, and served for three years in parliament as member for Hindon, Ripon, and Canterbury respectively. In 1555, patronized by Cardinal Pole, he was created a serjeant-at-law, and the following year became standing counsel to the city of Canterbury. The Canterbury connection was William Roper, a fellow bencher of Lincoln's Inn, and his second patron as a serjeant, who was the husband of Sir Thomas More's daughter Margaret. According to Plowden, Rastell had a home in Kent. During the 1550s Rastell completed an edition of More's collected English works, which was published in 1557, with a dedication to the queen. It is a valuable resource, including material that would otherwise have been lost. 
Rastell's appointment as a justice of the queen's bench on 27 October 1558, three weeks before the queen's death, was renewed the following month by Elizabeth I, but he was unable to reconcile himself to the new religious settlement and on 3 January 1563 he again fled to Louvain. An inventory of the books seized from his study in Serjeants' Inn included a selection of classical authors. Rastell lived in Louvain until his death on 27 August 1565, when he was buried in the church of St Pierre beside his wife, Winifred. During this second exile Rastell is said to have written a life of More. Only a fragment of it, mostly concerning John Fisher, has survived for certain; though a Latin account of More's condemnation ('Ordo condemnationis Mori') has also been attributed to him. Rastell had no children, and by his will (registered in Antwerp) left his property in North Mimms, Hertfordshire, and his gold locket with More's portrait, to his nephew, the Jesuit Ellis Heywood. 
Rastell made two significant contributions to legal literature, both of which were developments of his interest in reference materials which began when he was printing law books in his youth. Perhaps inspired by his father's 'Magnum abbreviamentum statutorum Anglie' (1528), William Rastell published in 1557 a more ambitious 'Collection of All the Statutes', containing texts of all the public legislation still in force, abridged under alphabetical headings, with tables and catchwords. As in the 1528 abridgement, he left the old statutes in their original language, 'for feare of misse interpretation'. The 'Collection' was such a valuable reference tool that it enjoyed an enormous success, and was reprinted at the end of almost every session of parliament until the 1620s, when it was overtaken by Pulton and the precursors of the 'Statutes at Large'. Rastell's other compilation, the 'Colleccion of Entrees', was the best source of precedents of pleading and court-forms printed in the sixteenth century. It combined precedents from the manuscript collections of his grandfather Sir John More (d. 1530), of Edward Stubbe (died 1533), chief protonotary of the common pleas, whose son married Rastell's niece, and of John Lucas (died 1525), secondary of the king's bench under William Roper, adding a few of his own. The book was compiled in Louvain ('out of England, and lacking conference with learned men'), where the preface was written on 28 March 1564, and was published posthumously in 1566, with new editions in 1574, 1596, and 1670. Rastell also published a chronological 'Table' of the monarchs of England (1558), reprinted several times down to the reign of Charles I. 


@@@@@


doc= 23152


Rastrick, John (1650-1727), Presbyterian minister, son of John Rastrige ('bap'. 1616?) and his wife, Afling, was born on 26 March 1650 at Heckington, Lincolnshire, where he was baptized the following day. His father was a yeoman and fellmonger. Rastrick was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated on 5 June 1667, graduated BA in 1671, and proceeded MA in 1674. In 1672 he was curate at Wyberton, Lincolnshire. Ordained priest on 25 May 1673, he became in 1674 the conscientious vicar of Kirton, near Boston, Lincolnshire, where he showed himself a clergyman of puritan stamp. The parish, which included Kirton Holme and Skeldyke, was 'four to five Miles in Length', and the congregation 'large'; thus he felt 'a very sensible Concern' (Rastrick, 'Account', 3). Fearful of profaning the sacraments, he would not baptize illegitimate children until their parents demonstrated repentance; not all did so. Likewise he withheld communion from persons manifestly unprepared. 
Eventually inquiries into Rastrick's practices led to his appearance, in April 1687, before the ecclesiastical court at Lincoln, charged with several irregularities, including not always wearing a surplice when required, and refusal to baptize. The court, however, disconcerted that day by James II's declaration of indulgence, required only a written defence forthwith; Rastrick supplied one, and heard no more. Nevertheless, uneasy with conformity, later that year, on 27 November, he took advantage of the declaration to resign his incumbency, intending to resume office in the church should its long-discontinued protestantization recommence. He preached as a nonconformist from February 1688. He recorded that 'The sober Dissenters' of Spalding invited him to become minister there, to counter 'the Quakers and Arminianiz'd Anabaptists... [who] grew so much there they were like to carry all before them'; and he added that he had seen his role as to withstand this 'Sectarian Spirit': 'For were it not better to keep the people in a posture of Readiness to return to the Communion of the Church of England whensoever Providence should by a Reformation make way for it' (BL, Rastrick, 'Account', 1705, 38, marginalia). For himself, the failure of the comprehension schemes of William III's ecclesiastical commission was to make the chances of such a return seem hopeless. Rastrick ministered at Spalding for nine years from Lady day 1688, and then at Rotherham. From 1701 until his death he was Presbyterian pastor at Spinner Lane, King's Lynn, Norfolk, initially as colleague to Anthony Williamson. In the account of his nonconformity, which he wrote at the request of Edmund Calamy, first published in 1705, Rastrick stressed how he had 'a high Value, Honour and Reverence for able worthy Men of either Way', conformist or dissenter: 'Tho' I exceedingly disgusted some of the Dissenters thereby, as I had done some on the Church side before. So that I often thought and said, (as the state of things is in 'England') that I was neither fit for Church nor Meeting. But who can help it? (Rastrick, 'Account', 37)' Of the numerous children of Rastrick's marriages, only those who survived to be mentioned in his or his third wife's last wills (1725 and 1733 respectively) are listed here. Rastrick married on 25 June 1672 at Wyberton, where he was curate, Jane Wilson (died 1684): their daughter Elizabeth became the wife of Edmund Burton of Wisbech (Norfolk RO, will of John Rastrick, 1725); the Rastricks' sons were John, a 'Stocking-weaver', 'now or late in Carolina' (ibid.), and Samuel, a London silk-dyer (ibid.). 'A narrative, or, An historicall account of the most materiall passages in the life of John Rastrick' (Huntington Library, HM 6131) portrays Rastrick's marriage to Jane and the depression from which she suffered. He married Mary Harrison (died 1687x92), a widow, on 26 March 1685. On 1 September 1692 at Moulton, near Spalding, he married Elizabeth Horn (died 1740), whose will shows she was a cousin and legatee of Lynn grammar school's distinguished master John Horn or Horne, son of the Arminian founder of Lynn's Presbyterian interest, John Horne (1614-1676). Their children included daughters and son, William (died 1752), the Lynn preacher and savant (Norfolk RO, will of John Rastrick, 1725; will of Elizabeth Rastrick, 1733). 
Rastrick was moderate and eirenic, a figure in the Baxterian tradition. At Kirton he redeemed, and restored to their owners, goods distrained in persecution from earnest Baptists. Through preaching during a vacancy in 1699 at Mill Hill Chapel, Leeds, he met the antiquary Ralph Thoresby, who noted that in religious discussions Rastrick stressed only 'the essentials of religion, wherein all are agreed' ('Diary', 1.332). In 1714 Rastrick enunciated a middle way belief that two ostensibly opposed doctrines, namely of special election and of general grace available to all, must be held simultaneously (Rastrick, 'Sermon', 68). Yet, at Lynn, he experienced hostility. His congregation once included a party that angrily rejected the discipline he had carefully explained, and locked him out of the chapel (ibid., iv). A continuing hyper-Calvinistic faction maintained that the elect, sure of salvation, need not keep God's moral laws. About 1720 Rastrick digested his teaching, given at Lynn and elsewhere, against this modish antinomianism into a book-length manuscript, 'Plain and easy principles of Christian religion and obedience'. Acquired by William Richards (1749-1818), whose 'History of Lynn' (1812) describes it (2.1058-62), it disappeared after Richards's executors ignored their duty to send the latter's manuscripts to Brown University, Rhode Island. Its appendix treated of a sub-Athanasian Christology apparently like that of James Peirce (1674?-1726), which Rastrick had come to favour after studies that the Salters' Hall clash over the Trinity (1719) had prompted him to make. The same appendix contained his theory concerning comets (which resembled that of Cotton Mather); these he considered former worlds, ablaze through divine judgment, their impenitent populations having rejected their respective saviours -- Christ, in Rastrick's belief, was earth's saviour only. Rastrick's ode 'The Dissolution' portrays deserted earth's consumption by eschatological fire. Richards's recension in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1st ser., 59, 1789, 1033-4) seems full; the version in his 'History of Lynn' (2.1065-6) omits six lines; John Evans's in 'Memoirs of... William Richards' (1819, 160-63), again full, is faulty, but he preserves another poem (p. 163). Other works Rastrick left in manuscript have been lost. 
Indubitably Rastrick's mind was lively and cultivated. His will mentions his books, manuscripts, mathematical instruments, telescopes, double barometer, and 'picture done by Deconing' (De Koninck?) -- he collected pictures. His intelligence, like his goodness, impressed Ralph Thoresby, to whom he sent archaeological information, coins, and astroites. His letter to Hans Sloane about the discovery of Roman coins at Fleet, near Spalding, a communication echoed in Edmund Gibson's later editions (1722, 1772) of William Camden's 'Britannia', appeared anonymously in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' (23, 1702, 1156-8); the same volume (pp. 1158-60) carried Thoresby's letter quoting, still unattributed, Rastrick's account of discoveries at Spalding (later amended by Thoresby, 32, 1723, 344-6). 
William Rastrick's holograph 'Index' (1734) records that John Rastrick died on 18 August 1727, aged seventy-seven (probably at his home in Spinner Lane, King's Lynn). He was buried on 21 August in Lynn's medieval St Nicholas's Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 23153


Rastrick, John Urpeth (1780-1856), civil engineer, was born at Morpeth, Northumberland, on 26 January 1780, the eldest son of John Rastrick, engineer, mill wright, and pump and patent churn maker, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Urpeth. At the age of fifteen he was apprenticed to his father, but about 1801 he entered the Ketley ironworks in Shropshire to gain experience in the use of cast iron for machinery. He remained there for approximately seven years before joining in partnership with John Hazeldine of Bridgnorth, to establish a mechanical engineering business. Rastrick took special charge of the iron foundry. During the partnership he continued to practise independently as a civil engineer. He married, at Codshall, Staffordshire, on 24 December 1810, Sarah, 'nee' Jarvis. They had at least four sons and two daughters. 
In 1814 Rastrick took out a patent for a steam engine (no. 3799), and soon engaged in experiments on traction for railways. In 1815-16 he built a cast-iron bridge, with 112 foot span, over the Wye at Chepstow. On the death of Hazeldine, about 1817, Rastrick became the managing partner in the firm of Bradley, Foster, Rastrick & Co., ironfounders and manufacturers of machinery at Stourbridge, Worcestershire. Rastrick himself took the principal engineering part in the design and construction of rolling mills, steam engines, and other large works. At this time he designed ironworks at Chillington, near Wolverhampton, and at Shut End, near Stourbridge. 
In January 1825 Rastrick was sufficiently well known as an engineer to be engaged by the promoters of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, along with George Stephenson and others, to visit collieries in the north of England, and report on their tramroads, and engines both locomotive and stationary. In the following April he was the first witness called before the parliamentary committee in support of the railway company, which was opposed by the canal companies. From that time onwards Rastrick was employed to support, in parliament, a large portion of the principal railway lines in the United Kingdom. In 1826 and 1827 he constructed a line about 16 miles long between Stratford upon Avon and Moreton in Marsh, the first line laid with Birkenshaw's patent wrought-iron rails. On 2 June 1829 he completed and opened the Shutt End Colliery Railway from Kingswinford to the Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal, working it with a locomotive engine built under his own superintendence. This engine had three flues in the boiler, and, in economy, speed, and accuracy of workmanship, excelled any engine previously made. 
Rastrick, as a manufacturer of locomotive engines himself (the most notable being the 'Stourbridge Lion' shipped to New York in August 1829), played an important part in stimulating uncertainty among the directors of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway as to their choice of motive power. Until the late 1820s steam locomotives had been employed on short colliery lines, except for the Stockton and Darlington Railway, which opened in 1825. That company had experienced substantial problems with locomotive traction, and although they had been largely resolved by 1829, they were sufficient to give pause for thought on the part of a railway, which envisaged substantial light freight traffic. In November 1828, therefore, the Liverpool and Manchester directors commissioned Rastrick and his fellow engineer, James Walker of Limehouse, to assess the respective merits and capabilities of 'Fixed Engines and Locomotive Engines'. As part of their brief Rastrick and Walker inspected several operational railways, principally in the north-east of England, paying particular attention to the reliability and efficiency of the differing modes of traction. Their recommendations, submitted to the Liverpool and Manchester directors on 9 March 1829, proved to be inconclusive, both in respect of cost and efficiency. While the capital cost of installing a fixed engine system was relatively high compared with locomotive haulage, running costs would be lower. Steam locomotives may have been the subject of recent design improvements, which held out the prospect of greater efficiency in operation, but the existing technology of fixed engines would ensure safer and more reliable working of the line. Confronted by these qualifications, and prompted by those board members favourably disposed towards locomotives, the directors decided to offer a premium of $500 'for a Locomotive Engine, which shall be a decided improvement on those now in use, as respects the consumption of smoke, increased speed, adequate power, and moderate weight' (Carlson, 214). The resulting Rainhill trials were held early in October 1829. Rastrick was appointed as one of the judges, and on 6 October he and his colleagues decided in favour of George Stephenson's 'Rocket'. 
In 1830 Rastrick worked with Stephenson in surveying the line from Birmingham to join the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, afterwards called the Grand Junction. He also marked out a line from Manchester to Crewe, thereby paving the way for the Manchester and Cheshire Junction Railway project, which was brought forward in 1835, with Rastrick as the engineer. This line was opposed by a competing project called the South Union Railway, but after two years of parliamentary inquiry, the act was obtained for the original line. With Sir John Rennie, in 1837, Rastrick carried the direct Brighton line against several competing projects. Towards the close of that year he was appointed superintendent of the line, with responsibility for the Shoreham branch, and also for the heavy works, comprising the Merstham, Balcombe, and Clayton tunnels, and the Ouse Viaduct of thirty-seven arches at an elevation of 100 feet. These works were completed by the autumn of 1840. Rastrick later constructed extensions, which eventually were to form the series of lines known as the London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway. 
Possessing a very resolute character, Rastrick was always a shrewd and cool witness before parliamentary committees. He was a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers from 1827, and a fellow of the Royal Society from 1837. With James Walker he published in 1829 'Report on the Comparative Merits of Locomotive and Fixed Engines as a Moving Power'. He retired from active work in 1847, and died at his residence, Sayes Court, near Chertsey, Surrey, on 1 November 1856; he was buried in the extra-mural cemetery at Lewes Road, Brighton, where a large granite monument, modelled on a railway turntable, was placed over the family vault. 


@@@@@


doc= 23154


Rastrick, William (bap. 1697, d. 1752), Presbyterian preacher, was baptized on 14 March 1697 at Spalding, Lincolnshire, a son of John Rastrick (1650-1727), then a nonconformist minister in Rotherham, and his third wife, Elizabeth Horn (died 1740). He was probably educated by his father, on whose death he succeeded as minister to King's Lynn's divided Presbyterian congregation, some of whom were combatively hyper-Calvinist. By disposition retiring, he eschewed ordination, although this meant exchanging, at communion times, with the minister at Wisbech, 13 miles away. Eventually the hyper-Calvinists seceded from his congregation, reportedly in 1744, to form an independent body that about 1777, after his death, became a Particular Baptist church, with William Richards (1749-1818) as minister. Richards, who arrived in Lynn in 1776, when William Rastrick's immediate successor, Anthony Mayhew, was in post, was friendly with Mayhew's own successor and son-in-law, William Warner, and portrays Rastrick sympathetically in his 'History of Lynn' (1812). His character, says Richards, was virtuous, his interests scholarly; and because of his local pre-eminence in knowledge, 'especially the mathematics', 'his superior skill and judgement would accordingly be resorted to on such difficult occasions as required extraordinary scientific expertness or accuracy' (W. Richards, 2.1067). 
By continuing a preacher, Rastrick had fulfilled the conditions of his father's complex will and so inherited John Rastrick's mathematical instruments, telescopes, and library. He sent the Royal Society's vice-president, Martin Folkes, who had local connections, his Latin report of displays during 1723-7 of the aurora borealis; this, 'Registrum observationum de lumine boreali per quadriennium', appeared in the 'Philosophical Transactions', 34 (1727), 255-6. Rastrick's plan of Lynn, 'Ichnographia burgi perantiqui Lennae regis in agro Norfolciensi accurate delineata', published in 1725 and dedicated to Sir Robert Walpole, Lynn's MP, is impressive and important. It includes his prospect of Lynn from the west and his drawings of Henry Bell's custom house (1685) and market cross (1710). 'Index eorum theologorum aliorumque... alphabetico ordine ac secundum gradus suos dispositus', Rastrick's manuscript index of ejected ministers of 1662, used material from Edmund Calamy's 'Account' of them, Calamy's 'Continuation of the Account', and from the 'valor ecclesiasticus' (1535), and was employed in 'The Nonconformist's Memorial' of Samuel Palmer, who had access to the copy Rastrick had presented to Calamy. A holograph of the 'Index', dated 1734, is in Lynn's central library. 
Apparently never married, Rastrick lived in his father's house in Spinner Lane. He died in early August 1752, and was buried on 9 August in Lynn's St Nicholas's Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 23155


Ratcliffe, Henry (1808-1877), actuary and friendly society administrator, was born at Tyldesley, Lancashire, on 4 November 1808. Nothing is known about his origins, except that he had one brother. Henry spent his whole career with one friendly society, the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows, whose Chowbent division he joined in 1833. Ratcliffe became provincial grandmaster in 1836, and by 1848 was corresponding secretary of the whole order. He displayed great administrative ability, and played a key role in establishing the Manchester Unity, one of the largest friendly societies, on a sound actuarial basis. His most important contribution stemmed from his work on vital statistics, at the time a comparatively new study. 
In 1850 Ratcliffe brought out his 'Observations of the Rate of Mortality and Sickness Existing among Friendly Societies', which at once became a standard authority. The monetary tables which were appended were thenceforth known as the Ratcliffe tables, and the data dealing with thirty-one trades proved of permanent value. They became the guiding light of every other order that adopted financial reforms. In 1852 Ratcliffe issued a supplement, giving further financial details, and recommending a quinquennial valuation of the assets and liabilities of all friendly societies -- a suggestion which was adopted by government in 1870, when it put the activities of friendly societies on a statutory basis. 
In 1862 Ratcliffe republished his actuarial tables, basing them on far wider calculations. In 1871 he undertook a special valuation of his own society. He was nominated a public valuer under the 'Friendly Societies Act' of 1870. Ratcliffe, who was a widower and a congregationalist, died at the society's offices in Manchester on 25 May 1877. He was survived by a son, John, and was buried at Brooklands cemetery, near Sale, where the Manchester Unity erected a monument to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 23156


Ratcliffe, John (1707-1776), book collector, was born at Bermondsey on 20 November 1707, the son of Thomas Ratcliffe, a victualler of the parish of St Mary Magdalen, Bermondsey, and his wife, Ann. He was baptized on 7 December at St Mary Magdalen. Little is known of his life, but an account derived mainly from T. F. Dibdin and printed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1812, and later augmented by John Nichols in his 'Literary Anecdotes', claims that Ratcliffe's love of books was kindled by studying the leaves and scraps of books which, as a chandler, he purchased as waste paper, or which were brought into his Bermondsey shop for his use in wrapping cheese. These sources, too, paint a curious picture of him later in life: corpulent, with very thick legs, walking very slowly from his house in East Lane, Rotherhithe, to the Presbyterian chapel in Jamaica Road when Dr Roger Flexman was the minister there, wearing: 'a fine coat, either red or brown, with gold lace buttons, and a fine silk embroidered waistcoat, of scarlet with gold lace, and a large and well-powdered wig. With his hat in one hand and a gold-headed cane in the other, he marched royally along, and not unfrequently followed by a parcel of children, wondering who the stately man could be.' Ratcliffe evidently prospered in his trade; he married (though the identity of his wife is not known) and had two children, who both died young. He found himself able to indulge his passion for books, spending days at a time in the warehouses of booksellers, sending out for food at intervals. In his last thirty years he amassed in his house a formidable collection, which included some very rare items. On Thursday mornings he would show his latest acquisitions to other book and print collectors of the day, such as James West, Anthony Askew, and Topham Beauclerk. 
Ratcliffe died early in 1776 and was buried on 3 February in the great vault of the church of St Andrew by the Wardrobe, in the City of London, which also contained the bodies of his two children. His will, made in 1770, contained elaborate and detailed arrangements for his interment, and probate was granted in the prerogative court of Canterbury five days before his funeral. The will makes clear that he held leasehold property in Shoe Lane, off Fleet Street. His widow was well provided for, as were other relatives and friends -- but, curiously, his library was not mentioned. The entire collection was sold by Christies on nine successive evenings, beginning on 27 May 1776. Entitled by the catalogue 'Bibliotheca Ratcliffiana' and described as 'the elegant and truly valuable library of John Ratcliffe, Esq... collected with great judgment and expence during the last thirty years of his life', the library was sold in 1675 lots, many of them comprising up to 100 items. It was particularly strong in the productions of early English printers and in books of the sixteenth century. At least 100 incunables are individually mentioned, including forty-eight Caxtons, twenty of which were acquired by George III. There were also many manuscripts including (lot no. 1674) Ratcliffe's own four-volume catalogue 'of the rare old black letter, and other curious and uncommon books'. Copies of the sale catalogue, with prices, exist in both the British Library and the Bodleian. They show that one of the highest-priced lots (no. 1373), at $9, was the dedication manuscript copy, made for Humfrey, duke of Gloucester, of the English verse translation of Palladius, 'Opus agriculturae', with, fixed to its upper cover, a painted enamel miniature purporting to be a portrait of Duke Humfrey's wife, Jacqueline of Hainault (Bodl. Oxf., MS Duke Humfrey d. 2). Ratcliffe's books, though now scattered, can often be identified by collation and other notes in his hand on the flyleaves. 


@@@@@


doc= 23157


Ratcliffe, Thomas (d. 1599), Church of England clergyman, was admitted as a pensioner to Peterhouse, Cambridge, on 10 January 1573; his matriculation in June that year was mistakenly registered under the forename Robert. He migrated to Trinity College, Cambridge, and graduated BA in 1578. On 20 October 1582 he was licensed to teach grammar in the diocese of Norwich. In 1585 he was elected a chaplain of St Saviour's, Southwark, where for a yearly salary of $13 13's'. 8died he took services and 'caterkised on the saboth day afternoon'. His 'Short Summe of the Whole Catechisme' continued this work among 'the common people and children'. According to its preface, signed from Southwark, 22 October 1592, the book was intended 'to be diligently read in your houses, for hereby ye your selves, your children and servants, may profit more in the principal points of your salvation'. It was republished in 1619 and 1620. Ratcliffe died at Southwark on 6 February 1599 and was buried at St Saviour's. In his will, drawn up on 26 December 1598 and subsequently added to, Ratcliffe named his wife, Elizabeth, as his executor and residuary legatee. She had evidently been a widow when he married her, since he bequeathed $20 to 'Stephen Fitche, my wives sonne'. Other legacies went to a sister, two nieces, a cousin, and a brother-in-law, and Ratcliffe also remembered neighbours, servants, and three of his fellow clergymen, including 'Mr Harryson mynister of Saint Thomas hospitall', who received 'my best coate' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/93, fol. 149'r'- 'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 23158


Rathbone, Hannah Mary (1798-1878), writer, was born into a Quaker family at Ketley, near Wellington, Shropshire, on 5 July 1798, the fourth of seven children of Joseph Reynolds ('b'. 1768, died after 1857), an ironmaster, who had married his own master's niece Deborah Dearman (1770-1803). After their mother's death in childbirth the children were cared for by her sister Ann Dearman; Hannah Mary and her two sisters were educated at Mrs Herrick's school in Leicester. Hannah Mary Reynolds had been named after and was close to her father's half-sister Hannah Mary (1761-1839), who in 1786 had married the prominent Liverpool Quaker cotton merchant William Rathbone (1757-1809). The familial connections were strong, and on 8 April 1817 the young Hannah Mary Reynolds married the Rathbones' second son, Richard (1788-1860). Nearly ten years older, he was now helping to run the family firm, and Hannah Mary initially felt isolated because of the long hours that her husband worked. The couple had three sons and three daughters, born over twenty years. The family lived first in Liverpool, and then outside the city. 
Hannah Mary Rathbone was a talented artist. In the early 1830s she published drawings from Pinelli's etchings of Italian peasantry and contributed twenty paintings of birds to 'The Poetry of Birds' (1833). Later she edited a poetry anthology on childhood: it featured many writers -- including Wordsworth, Coleridge, Shelley, Hemans, 'L. E. L.', Scott, Tennyson, and Barrett -- as well as Rathbone herself. It was published in 1840 as 'by a lady', and in 1841 with a preface over Rathbone's own name. In 1858 she would bring out a collection of her own original but indifferent poetry. 
Mother-child relations were also central to Rathbone's most important publication, 'The Diary of Lady Willoughby'. She had read many histories and memoirs of the civil war and adjacent periods, and in 1844 produced a diary -- fictitious, but based on the life of Elizabeth, Lady Willoughby, whose husband had supported parliament and then the royalists during the civil war and its aftermath. This covered the period from 1635 to 1648; a second volume (1848) took the story into the 1660s. Rathbone's Lady Willoughby is characterized by her devotion to her mother, husband, and children, as well as to her (moderate Anglican) faith; she takes a humanitarian rather than a partisan approach to political and religious conflict. While her personality reflects her creator's strong family ties and Quaker outlook, Rathbone also skilfully shows Lady Willoughby self-censoring some potential criticism of others. 
The 1844 'Diary' came out anonymously, and the publisher, Thomas Longman, presented it with seventeenth-century typeface and binding. Some assumed it was a genuine diary, others attributed it to Southey, Lord John Manners, or John Murray, but a preface to the third edition (1845) explained its fictitious nature. The 'Diary' went into several editions, the last in 1873. It fostered a minor vogue for first-person historical narratives in contemporary typefaces, notably Anne Manning's 1850 account of Mary Powell (Milton's first wife), and Thackeray's 'Henry Esmond' (1852). 
Rathbone said in 1845 that she wrote for relaxation. In 1852 she produced a life and letters of her paternal grandfather, the philanthropist Richard Reynolds (1735-1816), partly as a respite from family troubles. Financial difficulties in the mid-1840s had forced a return to Liverpool, but this had also aggravated the always fragile health of both Rathbone and her eldest daughter. Meanwhile the Rathbones' son Basil's business failures and drinking caused anguish and shame to his parents. By late 1853 both the invalid daughter and the long-estranged Basil were dead. On the other hand, financial improvements, helped by the profits from the 'Diary', had enabled the family to buy a country property, Woodcote. Rathbone lost her husband in 1860, and later moved to Garston in Liverpool. She died at her home there, Ivy Lodge in Aigburth, aged seventy-nine, of paralysis aggravated by apoplexy, on 26 March 1878. 


@@@@@


doc= 23159


Rathbone, John (c.1750-1807), painter, was born in Cheshire. Of his parents, nothing is known. He is thought to have been self-taught and spent his early years variously in Manchester, Preston, and Leeds. His landscapes at this time earned him a reputation as 'the Manchester Wilson'. In 1774 he submitted three of these to the Society of Arts exhibition at 30 John Street, Liverpool, the catalogue listing him as 'now at Preston'. He passed a brief period in Leeds in 1775 where a commission from a local merchant to paint the Turkish Arms on the contents of an export consignment tested Rathbone's resourcefulness and enterprise. He was settled in London by 1785, sending work to the Royal Academy that year from 78 Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square. His output proved to be considerable and between 1785 and 1806 he exhibited no fewer than forty-eight landscapes at the Royal Academy, showing a further two at the Society of Arts in London. He continued to travel extensively and through his paintings has become associated with areas such as the Lake District and Northumbria. He was often in the company of George Morland and J. C. Ibbetson, both of whom contributed figures to Rathbone's landscapes. For a short period he gave instruction to T. C. Hofland and Earl Harcourt is said to have received lessons from Rathbone too. 
A number of his works are held in national public collections. There are three watercolour drawings by Rathbone in the British Museum and another in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and both the Walker Art Gallery and Royal Salford Museum have two oils each. Rathbone worked on panel, too, and an example is in Leeds City Art Gallery. Rathbone died in London in 1807. The painter Mary Rathbone ('fl'. 1795-1802) is thought to have been a relative, possibly his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 23160


Rathbone, William (1757-1809), merchant and philanthropist, the eldest son of William Rathbone (1726-1789) and his first wife, Rachel Rutter, was born at Liverpool. The family, originally sawyers from Gawsworth, Cheshire, migrated to Liverpool before 1730 to become timber merchants and ultimately shipbuilders and shipowners. By 1868 four generations of the family had been engaged in trade, having fulfilled a critical role in the commercial expansion of Liverpool as a port city. The vehicle for their entrepreneurial activities was the firm of William Rathbone & Sons, founded in Liverpool in 1746. During the succeeding fifty years the firm was to gain a notable place in the Liverpool merchant community as a result of its external trading connections with Europe, North America, and the West Indies. In 1784 it imported the first consignment (eight bales and three barrels) of raw cotton to be grown in the United States. Previously, virtually all cotton imports had come from the West Indies, and the new consignment was seized at the custom house as an evasion of the navigation laws on the grounds that cotton was not grown in North America. The importation of raw cotton proved to be a lucrative business both for the Rathbones and other Liverpool merchants in the heyday of expansion of the Lancashire cotton industry before 1850. Their links with North America remained dominant, although they maintained a diversity of trading interests. In addition to raw cotton, turpentine, tar, ashes, flour, and tobacco were imported from the USA, hides from South America, wool from Australia, mahogany and sugar from the West Indies, and oats, barley, and butter from Ireland. 
Rathbone was a birthright member of the Society of Friends and received a Quaker education. Well read in the classics, eloquent and energetic, he complemented his business interests with strong adherence to public causes of a liberal nature, both local and national. On 17 August 1786 he married Hannah Mary (died 1839), the only daughter of Richard Reynolds (1735-1816); they had four sons and one daughter. 
In 1792 Rathbone was prominent in efforts to avert the war with France, and in that year, and again in 1809, led a campaign against the monopoly of the East India Company. He also advocated freedom of trade with the United States and gave evidence before parliament on that subject. Equally controversially, he participated in the early anti-slavery movement and lent powerful support to his fellow Liverpudlian William Roscoe in calling for the abolition of the slave trade. In view of Liverpool's leading role in the trade, it was to Rathbone's credit that he was prepared to endure the censure of his fellow merchants. 
In religious terms Rathbone was an early critic of some fundamental aspects of Quaker discipline. He objected especially to the disownment of Friends for mixed marriages and to the voluntary payment of tithes. He also argued in favour of wider latitude of behaviour in relation to Quaker doctrinal principles. Thus in 1792 he became a subscriber to the Unitarian Book Society of London, an action which produced a remonstrance (31 August 1793) from an Irish Friend, Job Scott. In the later 1790s Rathbone became embroiled in a doctrinal dispute emanating from Irish Friends, focusing on the infallibility of scripture. Abraham Shackleton took the side of heterodoxy, and the emergent controversy was fomented by Hannah Barnard (died 1828) from New York. The heterodox party was then labelled the 'Barnard schism'. On 30 March 1804 Rathbone published a 'Narrative' of the schism, 'correct in regard to documentary facts', for which action he was disowned by the Hardshaw (St Helens) monthly meeting at Manchester on 28 February 1805, on the grounds that he had expressed opinions contrary to Friends' doctrine on the immediate teaching of Christ and to the reverence due to the scriptures. Rathbone did not appeal against the decision, nor did he join any other religious body. He did, however, worship occasionally with the Unitarian congregation presided over by Robert Lewin at Benn's Garden, Liverpool. His close associate William Roscoe also attended the church. 
Rathbone died at his residence, Greenbank, near Liverpool, on 11 February 1809 and was interred at the Quaker burial-ground in Liverpool. His commercial interests were inherited by his eldest son, also called 
Rathbone achieved public recognition in the 1820s as an advocate of Roman Catholic emancipation. Coincidentally he developed an interest in parliamentary and municipal reform. On 13 January 1836 a public presentation was made to him in recognition of his services in these respects, an event which led to his appointment as mayor of Liverpool the following year. As a local politician he took a keen interest in educational provision and was instrumental in securing the advantages of the corporation schools on terms satisfactory to all denominations. In 1844 he presided at a meeting held in Liverpool to vindicate the actions of the Irish Roman Catholic lawyer Daniel O'Connell in favour of the abolition of the Anglo-Irish union inaugurated in 1801. Rathbone's interest in Irish affairs was further indicated in 1846-7, when he was placed in sole charge of the fund ('c'.$70,000 to $80,000) contributed by the New England states for the relief of suffering consequent on the Irish famine. In Quaker terms he was 'worldly' and, aside from his highly visible public career, possessed a taste for art. 
Rathbone died at Greenbank on 1 February 1868 after an operation for calculus, and was buried in the borough cemetery. Joseph Blanco White had been his guest during his last days. A mural monument to his memory was placed in Renshaw Street Chapel, and a public statue was erected in Sefton Park, Liverpool. His wife, Elizabeth, died on 24 October 1882, aged ninety-two. Their eldest child, Elizabeth, married John Paget, a magistrate of London, in 1839, while their second daughter, Hannah Mary (1816-1872), married John Hamilton Thom on 2 January 1838. Their eldest son, William Rathbone (1819-1902), was at one time MP for North Caernarvonshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 23161


William Rathbone (1787-1868), who inherited his father's philanthropic spirit in full measure and became eminent in Liverpool for his beneficence and altruism. Born in Liverpool on 17 June 1787, he was educated at a school in Hackney, Middlesex, under Thomas Belsham until 1803, when he proceeded to Oxford for private tuition by Theophilus Houlbroke. A unitarian by religious conviction, he maintained his Quaker connections until his marriage in 1812 to Elizabeth, the eldest child of Samuel Greg and the sister of Robert Hyde Greg, Samuel Greg, and William Rathbone Greg. For marrying out of the Society of Friends he was disowned, but was later reinstated. He withdrew finally from the society in 1829. 


@@@@@


doc= 23162


Rathborne, Wilson (1748-1831), naval officer, son of Richard Rathborne, a protestant clergyman, was born at Balnakil, near Loughrea, co. Galway, on 16 July 1748. In September 1763 he was entered as an able seaman in the 'Niger', with Sir Thomas Adams, on the Newfoundland station. As able seaman and midshipman he served for six years in the 'Niger'. He then followed Adams to the 'Boston', and ten months later to the 'Romney', in which he returned to England in 1770. In 1773 he joined the sloop 'Hunter' as able seaman, in which rating he continued for a year. He was then a midshipman for some months, and, seeing no prospect of promotion, accepted a warrant as master of the 'Hunter'. 
It was not until 1780 that Rathborne was allowed to return to England, and, having obtained an introduction to the earl of Sandwich, he passed his examination on 16 March; two days later he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Bedford', with Commodore Edmund Affleck. In the 'Bedford' he was present in the actions off the Chesapeake on 16 March and 5 September 1781, at St Kitts in January, and in Admiral George Rodney's actions under the lee of Dominica on 9 and 12 April 1782. In the summer of 1783 the 'Bedford' returned to England and was paid off. At the time of the armament of 1787 Rathborne was in the 'Atlas', carrying Sir Edmund Affleck's flag; afterwards he was appointed to the 'Colossus', one of the Channel Fleet, in which he remained until 1791. In December 1792 he was appointed to the 'Captain', in which he went to the Mediterranean in 1793, and took part in the occupation of Toulon, the reduction of Corsica, and the action of 14 March 1795, when he was severely wounded in the right arm, and lost his right eye. He was invalided for the recovery of his health, and on 9 November 1795 was promoted to the rank of commander. 
In 1797 Rathborne had command of the 'Good Design', convoying the trade from Leith to the Elbe, or to Elsinore. In December 1799 he was appointed to the brig 'Racoon', which he commanded in the channel, the Mediterranean, and the West Indies. On 18 November 1802 he was promoted captain and posted to the 'Santa Margarita', He returned to England in 1803, and, in the 'Santa Margarita', was attached to the Channel Fleet. On 4 November 1805 he was in company with Sir Richard John Strachan when he fell in with the French ships which, under Dumanoir, had escaped from Trafalgar. Now, harassed by the frigates 'Santa Margarita' and 'Phoenix', they were brought to action and all taken. Rathborne almost immediately afterwards received an appointment to the 'Foudroyant', to which he objected, and on Admiralty orders he was permitted to remain in the 'Santa Margarita' until December 1807, when the ship, being quite worn out, was paid off. For the next two years Rathborne commanded the sea fencibles of the Essex coast, and from 1810 to 1813 he had charge of the impress service in the Tyne. In 1822 he was appointed superintendent of the ordinary at Chatham, a post which he held until 1825. He had married, in 1805, Cecilia Mary, a daughter of John French of Loughrea, co. Galway; the couple had three sons. His sister Hester was the mother of John Wilson Croker, the politician and writer. Rathborne retained a connection with Loughrea all his life, and may have had property there, as well as a house in Kensington, London. He died in the summer of 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 23163


Ratsey, Gamaliel (d. 1605), highwayman, was said to have been the son of Richard Ratsey, gentleman, of Market Deeping, Lincolnshire. Because relevant quarter session and assize records of the period have not survived his career is obscure. According to a contemporary biographer, writing in the 'Life and Death of Gamaliel Ratsey' of 1605, Ratsey's first theft was of a bag containing $40 from an inn in Spalding. Arrested at Market Deeping, he was committed to gaol but escaped 'in his shirt'. This incident seems to have occurred in 1599 for the Market Deeping constables' accounts of that year mention the sum of 32's'. 6died 'laid out for caryinge Gamaliell Ratsey to Lincoln goale' (Market Deeping parish officers' accounts, 1570-1647, section D, fol. 13'v'). A period of military service followed. Ratsey may have received a pardon on condition of military service or have joined the army as a fugitive. However this may be, he is said to have gone to Ireland with the army of Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, in 1599. He distinguished himself there, attaining the rank of sergeant in Captain Roger Langford's company of foot, stationed at Carrickfergus, and then, in 1603, returned to England with Charles Blount, eighth Lord Mountjoy. Thereafter, unable to settle to peaceful pursuits, he turned to highway robbery. 
Nothing is known of Ratsey's exploits beyond what is alleged in contemporary pamphlet literature. However, he seems to have operated mainly in the east midlands, sometimes alone and sometimes in confederacy with two thieves named Henry Shorthose and George Snell. 'Shorthose' is often supposed to have been a nickname but, like Ratsey, this man is said to have hailed from Market Deeping, and bishops' transcripts and other records of the period do document the existence of a family of that name in the parish. The pamphlets depict Ratsey as bold, artful, generous to the poor, and possessed of a rough sense of humour. In one tale he bestows 40's'. upon an old couple on the road to St Ives, declaring that he would 'favour and pitie them that are poore... for the rich can helpe themselves' (Atkins, sig. C3'v'); in another he robs two clothiers near Stamford and then knights them as Sir Walter Woolsack and Sir Samuel Sheepskin. A few of these stories, like that recounting his robbery of nine men on Helpston Heath, Northamptonshire, may be embroidered versions of genuine incidents, but most appear to be fictitious. The tale of Ratsey and the poor farmer appears in different guises in the literature of many famous outlaws, including Robin Hood and Dick Turpin. 
Ratsey was convicted of highway robbery and sentenced to death at the Lent assizes for Bedfordshire in 1605 and executed in Bedford on 26 or 27 March 1605. He achieved a measure of contemporary fame. Two pamphlets appeared in the months following his execution. 'The Life and Death of Gamaliel Ratsey, a Famous Thief of England', was entered on the Stationers' register to John Trundell on 2 May 1605, and 'Ratseis Ghost, or, The Second Part of his Madde Prankes and Robberies', was printed by Valentine Syms and entered to John Hodges of St Paul's Churchyard on 31 May. Two ballads, of which no copies survive, were also entered at Stationers' Hall to Thomas Pavyer on 2 May 1605. Ratsey was the subject of two epigrams in Jacob Johnson's 'Epigrammatum libellus' (1615). A number of other curious allusions to him occur in seventeenth-century literature. Ben Jonson, in 'The Alchemist' (1610), speaks of 'a face, cut for thee, worse than Gamaliel Ratsey's' (Herford and Simpson, 5.298) and Thomas Randolph's 'Hey for Honesty' (1651) carries this reference to an old painted lady: 'Take but the white-loam from this old mud-wall, And she will look worse than Gamaliel Ratsey' ('Poetical and Dramatic Works', 2.470). It is speculated that these allusions may have been inspired by a grotesque mask worn by Ratsey during robberies to terrify his victims into submission. Gabriel Harvey's reference to Gamaliell Hobgoblin in 'Pierces Supererogation' (1593), commonly explained in the same way, is, however, too early to be an allusion to Ratsey. 


@@@@@


doc= 23164


Rattee, James (1820-1855), woodcarver and mason, was born at Fundenhall, Norfolk. Of his parents, nothing is known. He was apprenticed to a carpenter and joiner of Norwich, named Ollett. He became interested in ecclesiastical art, frequenting the cathedral and other churches in the city and its neighbourhood; at his request his employer taught him carving, in which he soon demonstrated a remarkable skill. In 1842 he left Norwich and went into business as a woodcarver in Sidney Street, Cambridge. His talent was recognized by the Cambridge Camden Society which employed him on the famous restoration of Holy Sepulchre Church (the Round Church) in Cambridge (1841-3), under the direction of Anthony Salvin. The continuing patronage of members of the society enabled him to expand his business and in 1850 he established large-scale workshops, with steam-powered plant, on the Hills Road, Cambridge. 
Rattee worked with A. W. N. Pugin in restoring the choir of Jesus College chapel (1846-9); some of the design work was carried out by Rattee and submitted to Pugin before execution. In the choir of Ely Cathedral, beginning 'c'.1850, he carried out the designs of George Gilbert Scott, and his work on the oak screen, stalls, organ-case, and restored tomb of Bishop William de Luda (died 1298) was of the highest quality. In 1852 he was sent abroad for his health and travelled in Belgium and Germany, studying the work of such medieval artists as Quinten Metsys (1466-1530). On his return he was commissioned to construct an elaborate new reredos at Ely Cathedral to Scott's design, incorporating carved alabaster and inlaid work. His work, on a more modest scale, is found in numerous churches in Cambridgeshire and across the country, with examples abroad as far away as Newfoundland Cathedral. 
Rattee died at his house in Hills Road, Cambridge, on 29 March 1855, and was buried on 6 April in the cemetery in Mill Road. He had no children, but his widow, Caroline, kept an interest in his business which, renamed Rattee and Kett, continued under the direction of another Norfolk woodcarver, George Kett (1809-1872), and his descendants until it was sold in 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 23165


Rattray, Sylvester (fl. 1650-1666), medical writer, a native of Forfarshire, Scotland, was probably descended from Sir Sylvester Rattray, of Rattray Castle, Perthshire, who in 1463 was one of the ambassadors sent to London to treat with Edward IV, and exerted great influence at the Scottish court. Rattray may have been the son of a later Sylvester Rattray who had two sons, David and Sylvester. The latter is said to have been 'bred to the church', and on the title-page of his 'Prognosis medica' he is credited with a theological degree as well as with that of MD. 
Rattray was author of 'Aditus novus ad occultas sympathiae et antipathiae causas inveniendas: per principia philosphiae naturalis, ex fermentorum artificiosa anatomia hausta, patefactus' (1658), dedicated to Johannes Scotus. The 'Aditus novus' was reprinted in 'Theatrum sympatheticum variorum authorum de pulvere sympathetico' (1662). Rattray's second book, 'Prognosis medica ad usum praxeos facili methodo digesta', (1666) was dedicated to Dr John Wedderburn. 
In May 1652 Rattray married at Cupar, Fife, 'Ingells, Kynggaskes daughter' ('Diary of Mr John Lamont', 42). He had a son, Sylvester, a student of medicine at Glasgow in 1680. 


@@@@@


doc= 23166


Rattray, Thomas, of Craighall (1684-1743), Scottish Episcopal bishop of Dunkeld, was the eldest son of James Rattray (died 1692), laird of Craighall, near Blairgowrie, Perthshire, and Elizabeth, daughter of Sir George Hay of Megginich. He succeeded as laird at his father's death on 13 July 1692. In 1713, when he was twenty-nine, Rattray sought baptism by immersion and confirmation from Bishop John Falconer, probably as the necessary canonical preliminary to ordination. By 1724 at least he was one of the clergy in the former diocese of Brechin. He married Margaret ('c'.1690-1737), daughter of Thomas Galloway, second Lord Dunkeld, and they had two sons, including the golfer and physician John Rattray, and three daughters. 
Rattray came to prominence in the Scottish Episcopal church as a theologian. In 1716 he assisted Bishop Nathaniel Spinckes in translating into Greek the English nonjurors' abortive proposal for a union between themselves and the Greek Orthodox church. In 1718 the English nonjurors appealed to the Scottish bishops for a ruling in their dispute over the use of ancient eucharistic ceremonies and prayers for the dead. The Scottish bishops offered only to mediate rather than to decide the issue and turned to Rattray as a recognized expert in the matter. He advised the occasional use of the opposite form by both parties, but this was unsatisfactory to both sides. The same controversy also divided the Scottish Episcopal church where it was further complicated by the usagers' support for the Scottish communion office, a liturgy derived from the Scottish prayer book of 1637. 
In 1720 this growing division among episcopalians was deepened by disagreement over whether the episcopate should govern the church as a council of non-territorial bishops, or as diocesan bishops. The issue was inflamed in that year when Bishop John Fullarton accepted election to the diocese of Edinburgh. Diocesan episcopacy had been avoided by episcopalians since the revolution of 1688, the bishops governing their church collectively as a college. Fullarton's unilateral acceptance of a diocesan title was seen by the anti-usager bishops as a usurpation of the royal nomination of bishops which, as Jacobites, they accorded to the son of James Stuart, claimant to the British throne. The bishops managed to thrash out some agreement for the sake of their disorganized church by circulating a pastoral letter in February 1723 against the liturgical usages as ill-advised in the present predicament of their legally proscribed church. They also required the clergy to sign an agreement to that effect. Rattray responded in the tract 'Some Remarks on the Circular Letter of the Edinburgh Bishops'. In this he set out his arguments for diocesan episcopacy as the only recognized form in the early church, asserting that a non-diocesan bishop could not claim authority over the clergy and laity within that district. In common with the usager party among the English nonjurors, he claimed that the usages were necessary for the celebration of the eucharist because their use in the early church pointed to their institution by Christ himself. Rattray also opposed the subscription required of the clergy as beyond the jurisdictions of non-diocesan bishops; as valuing peace more than truth; and as illegitimate because there was no authorized single form of liturgy and ceremonies in the Episcopal church. 
After the death of Bishop Falconer in July 1723, Rattray became the leader as well as the theologian of the usager and diocesan party of Scottish Episcopalians. Consequently he was chosen by the majority usager clergy and laity of the diocese of Brechin to succeed Falconer. However, the college bishops' majority resulted in the appointment of their candidate, Robert Norrie, though Rattray lodged a long and learned protest against overturning the clergy's election. On Norrie's death in 1727 the usager party grew in strength among the bishops when the Brechin clergy repeated their election of Rattray. He was consecrated at Edinburgh on 4 June 1727 by Primus Arthur Millar, and bishops James Gadderar and Andrew Cant, despite protests from the college party. Rattray's elevation was one of a series of rival consecrations by both parties designed to augment their respective strengths. 
As bishop of the diocese encompassing Angus, the Mearns, and Perthshire east of the River Tay, Rattray experienced the same divisions that he was partly responsible for among the bishops. Leading male managers of the congregation in Perth had become accustomed to controlling their church, regarding the clergy as paid employees who carried out their instructions. They opposed Rattray on the apparent grounds of an anti-usages position, but underlying the division was a conflict between attitudes to lay and ordained authority in which Rattray's high theology of ordained authority inevitably conflicted with the managers' desire for unimpeded control of the Perth congregation. Rattray initially sought to avoid conflict by being cautious about his episcopal authority, but in 1740 a schism occurred over the managers' unilateral appointment of a new incumbent, with the managers refusing Rattray's offer of a neutral referee. Consequently Rattray proceeded to the deposition of the incumbent, being unprepared to accept public flouting of his divine authority as bishop. 
Rattray had already set out his theology of episcopacy as divinely instituted in his 'Essay on the nature of the church, and a review of the elections of bishops in the primitive church' (1728), which became a standard theological work in episcopalian circles. The ability of determined laity to oppose Rattray ostensibly from an anti-usage position demonstrates that a concordat in 1731 between the two parties of bishops had not resolved episcopalian divisions. In that document the declining power of the collegers was evident in their agreement to divide Scotland into ten dioceses and in their acceptance of appointment to dioceses through the principle of election rather than royal nomination. Diocesan episcopacy having been achieved, the usages controversy was resolved in an agreed compromise to permit both the Scottish and English liturgies. Rattray relinquished his claim to be bishop of Brechin to the leading colleger bishop, John Ochterlonie, and was henceforth accepted as bishop of Dunkeld (1732). However, it did require a visit by Rattray to his old diocese to reconcile his supporters there to being governed by the leading college bishop. 
After many years of bitter and conscientious division, rancour still continued among the bishops and their clerical and lay supporters. Rattray therefore proposed to Primus David Freebairn that an episcopal synod be held to reconcile the bishops' divisions. In 1738 the bishops, in Edinburgh for this proposed synod, divided along the usual lines over whether or not Bishop Gavin Dunbar could send a priest as his proxy, to which the collegers objected. Consequently the diocesans met separately and, as now they were the majority of the bishops, they proceeded to elect Rattray as primus in place of Freebairn. It meant that a younger and more vigorous man replaced an old and infirm one, but the partisan election only exacerbated the differences between the leaders of a dwindling church. This impasse was only solved by default with the death of Freebairn in 1739. Rattray then offered his resignation as primus, which was unacceptable to the bishops of his party who now virtually monopolized the episcopate. 
As primus Rattray endeavoured to embody in his church the findings of his theological scholarship, and to develop a working structure for his disorganized church. However, he only had a free hand for this following the death of his able opponent Ochterlone in 1742. His scholarship and his authority were consistently behind the use of the Scottish communion office as against the eucharistic liturgy of the English 'Book of Common Prayer'. His proposed code of canons formed the basis of the original code accepted after his death by the episcopal synod in 1743. But in a reversal of his earlier views as primus, Rattray objected to independent action by the clergy as, for example, in 1739 when the Edinburgh clergy maintained their rights against the episcopal synod in an election for their new bishop. 
Most of Rattray's theological works were published posthumously, including his edition of 'The Ancient Liturgy of the Church of Jerusalem' (1744). Rattray believed this liturgy to be so ancient that he was anxious for the Scottish communion office to conform to it. A liturgical adaptation along these lines was actually produced by Rattray, although probably only used in his private chapel on his estate at Craighall, Perthshire. It was published as an appendix in the 1748 edition. His liturgical work was more influential in shaping the definitive edition of the Scottish communion office of 1764. Another posthumous work was 'Some particular instructions concerning the Christian covenant, and the mysteries by which it is transacted and maintained' (1748). These and other unpublished sermons and dissertations were published in 1860 by the high-church episcopalian theologian George Forbes through his private Pitsligo Press. Rattray died on 12 May 1743, probably in Edinburgh, aged sixty. 


@@@@@


doc= 23167


Matteo Rauzzini (1754-1791), composer and singing teacher, was also in Munich; Matteo later worked in Venice and in Dublin, where he died. According to Michael Kelly, Venanzio Rauzzini was advised to leave Munich in 1772 after 'an exalted personage became deeply and hopelessly enamoured of him' (Kelly, 1.10) and he appeared in operas at Milan, Venice, Padua, and Turin. In Milan he created the role of Cecilio in Mozart's 'Lucio Silla', first performed in December 1772, and Mozart then composed the virtuoso solo motet 'Exsultate, Jubilate' for him. 


@@@@@


doc= 23168


Rauzzini, Venanzio (1746-1810), singer and music teacher, was born in Camerino in the Roman Apennines on 18 December 1746 and studied singing and composition at Rome. During the carnival seasons in 1764-6 the handsome young castrato sang in intermezzos at the Teatro della Valle, taking female roles, for in Rome women were not allowed to appear on the public stage. He sang the title role in Pietro Guglielmi's opera 'Sesostri' in the Ascension festival at Venice in 1766 and entered the service of the elector of Bavaria, who spent lavishly on opera at Munich. Rauzzini was permitted to sing in opera at Vienna and Venice in 1767 but otherwise remained in Munich, where Charles Burney found him 'a charming singer, a pleasing figure, and a good actor' as well as an excellent performer on the harpsichord and a skilful composer of comic operas and 'opera seria' arias (Burney, 'Present State', 1.128). Rauzzini's brother 
Rauzzini made his London debut at the King's Theatre in November 1774 as Rinaldo in the pasticcio 'Armida', singing arias which he himself had composed. He sang with 'the disadvantage of a terrible cold' ('Early Journals and Letters of Fanny Burney', 2.187), but 'his taste, fancy, and delicacy, together with his beautiful person and spirited and intelligent manner of acting, before the season was over, gained him general approbation' (Burney, 'Hist. mus.', 4.501). David Garrick, impressed by Rauzzini's acting in the title role of Antonio Sacchini's 'Montezuma', is said to have rushed backstage to embrace him. Rauzzini remained as primo uomo at the King's Theatre for three seasons and also composed for the company. His most successful opera, the two-act tragedy 'Piramo e Tisbe', had its premiere on 16 March 1775, with Rauzzini as Piramo, and was revived in three later seasons. His pastoral 'L'ali d'amore' was produced in 1776 and 1777, with his pupil Nancy Storace as Cupido. Rauzzini also sang at concerts in aid of the Fund for the Support of Decayed Musicians and the Lock Hospital, at the Three Choirs meetings in 1775-7, and festivals at Oxford, Winchester, and Salisbury. 
In autumn 1777 Rauzzini was replaced by Francesco Roncaglia as principal man at the opera, but he was in demand as a performer in private concerts and as a teacher of gifted amateur and professional singers. From autumn 1777 he worked with the violinist Franz Lamotte in three winter subscription series in Bath, at the Rotunda in Dublin (summer 1778), and in two spring subscription series in London. Lamotte, in debt, fled to the continent in summer 1780 leaving Rauzzini in financial difficulties for the next few years. In London in 1781-2 he sang at benefits for his pupil, the composer and pianist Jane Guest, and had his own concert series in spring 1781. That September and Christmas he took part as composer and singer in lavish entertainments given by the young William Beckford at Fonthill, Wiltshire. During the next few years he composed four operas, an act of a pasticcio, and ballet music for the King's Theatre. The 1781-2 season was marred by a dispute with his colleague Sacchini over the authorship of some opera arias. The company was in artistic and financial disarray and Rauzzini's last opera, 'La vestale' (1 May 1787), had only two performances. After this he lived permanently in Bath, having been in sole charge of the concerts there since at least January 1781. 
Rauzzini lived in a town house in Bath and in the summer at Perrymead Villa, Widcombe, overlooking the city. Haydn visited him there in August 1794 and composed the canon 'Turk was a Faithful Dog' as a gift for his host, taking the words from the garden memorial to Rauzzini's favourite dog. Rauzzini was acknowledged as 'the father of a new style in English singing, and a new race of singers' ('Monthly Mirror', 1807, 232), teaching Elizabeth Billington, John Braham, Elizabeth Clendining, Charles Incledon, Rosemond Mountain, and Nancy Storace. In Dublin in 1778 he had given lessons to the tenor Michael Kelly and advised him to study in Italy; Kelly writes glowingly of Rauzzini's hospitality and the devotion of his pupils, telling of how Mrs Billington renounced profitable engagements to perform gratis at Bath. Rauzzini remained a prolific composer of instrumental pieces and vocal music in English and Italian. In 1808 he published 'Twelve Solfeggi', with an introduction 'To my Scholars' which is full of sound advice. He died at his home, 13 Gay Street, on 8 April 1810, while preparing for the Bath June music festival. Four days later the 'Bath Chronicle' wrote: 'In private life few men were more esteemed; none more generally beloved. A polished suavity of manners, a mild and cheerful disposition, and a copious fund of general and polite information, rendered him an attractive and agreeable companion.... In Mr. Rauzzini, this city has sustained a public loss.' He was buried in Bath Abbey, where there is a memorial to him erected by 'his affectionate Pupils Anna Selina Storace and John Braham'. 


@@@@@


doc= 23169


Raven, John Samuel (1829-1877), landscape painter, was born on 21 August 1829, probably in Preston, the son of the Revd Thomas Raven ('c'.1795-1868), the minister of Holy Trinity Church in Preston, and his wife, Susanna Horrocks; he was baptized at St John's, Preston, on 5 October 1829. Thomas Raven, who later lived in Torquay, was himself a painter, and produced watercolours of mountain and coastal subjects; he is represented by a group of six drawings of Welsh and Devon subjects which he presented to the Victoria and Albert Museum. It seems that the Raven family were financially independent, although it is not known how this fortune originated. According to J. S. Raven's obituary in 'The Academy', he was descended on his mother's side from the astronomer Jeremiah Horrocks. 
John Samuel Raven seems to have had no other professional instruction beyond that which he received from his father and what he learned from looking at the works of earlier British landscape painters. According to the author of the introduction to the catalogue of the 1878 Burlington Fine Arts Club exhibition of Raven's paintings, Raven, as a young man, studied the work of John Crome and Constable; certainly his early paintings have a breadth of handling and harmonious balance of tone reminiscent of the Norwich school. Raven is also believed to have looked carefully at works by the Scottish painter the Revd John Thomson of Duddingston. 
Although there is no indication of direct contact by Raven with artists such as Millais, Holman Hunt, or Ford Madox Brown, the influence of Pre-Raphaelitism is strongly felt in his landscape paintings of the 1850s. Works such as 'Saint-Foin in Bloom' (exh. RA, 1859; priv. coll.) are characterized by extraordinary elaboration of detail, rich and intense colour, and poetic feeling. Admired by John Ruskin, it was perhaps 'Saint-Foin in Bloom' that the author of the 1878 catalogue introduction had in mind when writing of him: 'he has attained a level, which is superior to any school or special method, and has shown a consummate skill in realising, by original means, effects which none but a poetical mind could have conceived' ('Collected Works of the Late John Samuel Raven', 4). The artist's instinct towards meticulous detail crossed with intense mood was maintained at least until the end of the 1860s. The view at Dunkeld on the River Tay that he exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1869 (Perth Museum and Art Gallery) was looked on with favour by the reviewer of the 'Art Journal': 'J. S. Raven, an artist of much promise in years gone by, we had almost lost sight of... The study is most conscientious, and really, in these days, to come upon one remnant of the now wholly obsolete Pre-Raffaelitism of the past, is a delightful curiosity. ('Art Journal', 1869, 172)' During the early and mid-1850s Raven lived at St Leonards, Sussex. From 1856 he seems to have moved from place to place, sending paintings to exhibitions from addresses in Torquay (Lansdown Hall, where perhaps Thomas Raven was living in retirement), and Bedale in Yorkshire (where his brother, the Revd Milville Raven, was rector). On 15 June 1869 he married Margaret Sinclair, daughter of Peter Dunbar, an Indian army officer, and in that year he seems to have settled in London, living first at James Street, Westbourne Terrace, and then at Westbourne Park. In 1871 alpine and north Italian subjects by Raven appeared at exhibition, presumably the result of a honeymoon tour. 
Raven was represented at the Royal Academy summer exhibitions most years from 1849 through to the year of his death. None the less, according to 'The Academy', he 'was one of the painters who had reason to think themselves other than handsomely treated by the Royal Academy'; the writer added, as a comment on the academy's well-known prejudice against progressive landscape painting, 'in this, indeed, he had plenty of landscapists to keep him company' (1877, 75). Raven worked chiefly in oils, but occasionally also in watercolour. He was not a prolific artist, and many of his recorded works, including 'Midsummer Moonlight' (said by 'The Academy' to be his finest painting), remain untraced. 
Raven drowned while bathing at Harlech in north Wales on 13 July 1877. He left one son, and his widow later married the painter William Bright Morris; Raven's sister Kate had married the painter and designer Henry Holiday in 1864. A memorial exhibition of Raven's paintings and sketches was held at the Burlington Fine Arts Club in 1878. 


@@@@@


doc= 23170


Ravenet, Simon Francois (1721-1774), engraver, was born in Paris and trained there with Jacques Philippe Le Bas. Little of his early work is known, but he must have been well respected at an early age, since he was among those chosen to engrave reproductions of Charles Le Brun's decorative paintings at Versailles for Jean-Baptiste Masse's 'Grande galerie de Versailles' (1731-51); the engravers involved in this ambitious volume are described on the title-page as 'les meilleurs Maitres du tems'. Engravers trained in the virtuoso techniques developed in seventeenth-century Paris were still unsurpassed in the mid-eighteenth century, and in 1743 when William Hogarth wanted to publish high-quality reproductions of his 'Marriage a la mode' paintings he went out of his way to commission French engravers. Ravenet travelled to London to engrave the fourth and fifth of the series (the others were engraved by Bernard Baron and Gerard Scotin), and he appears to have settled into the emigre community, never returning to France. 
In 1745-6 Richard Dalton employed Ravenet to engrave a series of large prints of classical sculpture in Italian collections and, with Jean Baptiste Claude Chatelain, to engrave a scene from book 6 of Milton's 'Paradise Lost'. In 1752 he engraved the first of the large plates after John van Rymsdyck's drawings showing the dissection of a woman in an advanced stage of pregnancy for William Hunter's 'Anatomy of the Human Gravid Uterus', eventually published in 1774. In 1753 he engraved Benjamin Wilson's painting 'David Garrick and Miss Bellamy as Romeo and Juliet', which was sold by subscription, possibly at the painter's instigation. 
The majority of Ravenet's work was produced for large-scale publishers: Robert Sayer, John and Paul Knapton, and, especially, John Boydell. In 1759 or 1760 Ravenet was working again with Hogarth on two illustrations after the artist for the second edition of Laurence Sterne's 'Tristram Shandy' (vol. 1, 1760; vol. 4, 1761). Hogarth hoped that Ravenet would also engrave his controversial painting 'Sigismunda Mourning over the Heart of Guiscardo', but the subscription was stopped on 26 March 1761 after about three weeks, evidently because Ravenet was committed to a project for Boydell. He had already been employed by Boydell to engrave Andrea Casali's 'Gunhilda' (priced at 7's'. 6died), one of five prints issued to subscribers in April 1761 after paintings at the first exhibition of the Society of Artists (the other four were engraved by William Woollett). In 1763 Boydell advertised for subscriptions to 'A Collection of Prints, Engraved from the most Capital Paintings in England'. The series was published in three volumes from 1769 to 1773 under the title 'Sculptura Britannica', and its huge international success marked the beginning of the domination of the European art world by British print-publishers. Ravenet produced about a quarter of the prints in the first volume and most of those in the second. 
Ravenet played a significant part in the London art institutions that were coming into being in the late eighteenth century, sitting on the committee of the Society of Artists in 1767 and in 1770 joining the Royal Academy as one of only six associate engravers. In 1772, after the artist's death, Ravenet engraved Hogarth's paintings of 'The Pool of Bethesda' and 'The Good Samaritan' at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, working with Victor Marie Picot and Jean Marie Delattre, who were partners in a printselling business in St Martin's Lane. Picot was married to Ravenet's daughter Angelique. About this time Ravenet retired to Kentish Town, then a suburban village. He died there on 2 April 1774. 
Ravenet's son, also Simon Francois Ravenet (1748-1814), followed in his father's footsteps as an engraver. It is possible that a number of small portraits and book illustrations signed 'Ravenet' may be his juvenile work rather than that of his father. He moved to Paris in the mid-1770s and studied under Francois Boucher. In 1779 he was appointed engraver to the duke of Parma, became director of the academy in Parma, and made a series of engravings of the paintings of Correggio in that city. 


@@@@@


doc= 23171


Ravenscroft, Edward (fl. 1659-1697), playwright, was the sixth son of James Ravenscroft of High Holborn, and descended from the Ravenscrofts of Ravenscroft, Flintshire, where a kinsman was high sheriff (dedication of 'The Anatomist'). While there is no extant evidence of his early education, he was admitted to the Inner Temple on 28 November 1659, and to the Middle Temple on 2 April 1667. There is no record of his attending or not attending learning exercises, or of being called to the bar (Hutchinson, 202). In 1671 he wrote his first play, having, according to its prologue, feigned two weeks of 'sickness'. Two years later, on 30 May 1673, his chamber was seized for arrears in rent (C. T. Martin, ed., 'Middle Temple Records: Minutes of Parliament, 1501-1703', 1905, 3.1274). 
The first known performance of Ravenscroft's 'The Citizen Turned Gentleman', sometimes performed as 'Mamamouchi', was produced on 4 July 1672 at Dorset Garden. It was published the same year with a dedication to Prince Rupert. The play was taken from Moliere's 'Le bourgeois gentilhomme', which was performed in 1670. The character of Sir Simon Softhead was borrowed from Moliere's 'Monsieur de Pourceaugnac' (1669). 'The Citizen' was a great success with an outstanding performance by the famous comedy actor James Nokes. It ran for nine consecutive days with full houses, was acted at least thirty times before 1675, and became a stock comedy for several decades. In the original prologue, Ravenscroft attacked John Dryden's sense of comedy, praising the audience for their discernment in disliking Dryden's 'Assignation' (1672). The play ridiculed the pretensions of London's puritan 'cits' (a parody on citizens) during the Third Anglo-Dutch War when theatres were more dependent on them for patronage. 
Ravenscroft's next play, 'Careless Lovers', performed in Lent 1673 and printed that year, also premiered at Dorset Garden. A genteel comedy with satire and farcical intrigue, it was written to expose marital servitude, portraying women as intellectually equal or superior. Careless, an 'atheist in love' who asks for everything and promises nothing, is eventually defeated by Hillaria, an attractive 'mad' woman with no rules of propriety who brings him to marry her by beating him in the game of wits. Ravenscroft continued the attack on Dryden in its prologue, accusing him of plagiarism (the play itself borrows and reworks a plot from Dryden's 'Secret Love'). 

'The Wrangling Lovers, or, The Invisible Mistress', was acted at Dorset Garden in 1676 (its first known performance was 25 July) and was published in the same year. It proved a popular comedy of intrigue, bordering on farce. Ravenscroft displayed his versatility in producing 'Scaramouch a Philosopher' (1677) at the Theatre Royal in May 1677, using the old 'commedia dell'arte' in a Gypsy plot. Presented as an Italian play, it was based on Moliere's 'Le mariage force' (1664) and 'Les fourberies de Scapin' (1671), and showed Ravenscroft's continued fascination with Moliere's 'Monsieur de Pourceaugnac'. According to the prologue the play was held up in production by actors who opposed French farce, which curtailed its success, although Thomas Otway's rival version of 'Les fourberies', 'The Cheats of Scapin', which reached the stage first (probably the previous November), might also have caused the delay. 
Perhaps the problems with 'Scaramouch' caused Ravenscroft to adopt a new mode later that year, when his historical tragicomedy 'King Edgar and Alfreda' reached the stage (probably no later than October). (In the prologue Ravenscroft claimed that the play had been written 'at least Ten Years ago', but could not be staged until public tastes had changed; it is impossible to know whether this was the case.) Some critics complained that it had been plagiarized from William Shakespeare. His next play, staged at the end of 1677 and published in 1678, was 'The English Lawyer', an adaptation of George Ruggle's Latin comedy 'Ignoramus' (1615). 
Ravenscroft returned with a more contemporaneous play in the 1678-9 season with 'Titus Andronicus, or, The Rape of Lavinia', acted at the Theatre Royal. Derived from Shakespeare's original, it adapted the concept of rape as an invasion of the right of princes to the duke of Monmouth's exile into Holland in September 1679. Again accused of plagiarism, by Gerald Langbaine and others, Ravenscroft claimed to be putting 'right' Shakespeare's version. Where the play marked new ground, however, was in the rape scenes. Ravenscroft used the growing fashion for female actresses to display the human body in extreme forms. 
The playwright built on shock values in his outrageous farce 'The London Cuckolds', first performed at Dorset Garden about November 1681, and published in the following year. The play focuses on three 'old puritan cheats' called 'cits' who brainwash their wives to stay home like pets or slaves in order to keep them out of trouble while the cits pursue their business in the city fearful of losing a deal. The husbands are mocked throughout the play as cuckolds, while some of their wives fall prey to young men's healthy appetites. All parts are one-dimensional, both sexes are ridiculed, and no morals are drawn. A romp replete with smutty dialogue and abundant consummations, it was so effective that 'Cuckolds' became the stock comedy performed on lord mayor's day annually until 1752. There were twenty-five performances between 1685 and 1714, and eighty from 1714 to 1747. Revived in 1782 at its centenary, it was eventually banished. 

'The London Cuckolds' was followed in May 1683 with the comedy 'Dame Dobson, or, The Cunning Woman' (published in 1684), which Ravenscroft called his 'Recantation' play. Trying to reverse the wit and amorality of the former, he tried to placate the 'moral element' in his audiences with a 'sympathetic comedy' that highlighted civility (Hume, 60-63), as well as closing with an epilogue that attacked the whigs. The play failed. Ravenscroft produced no more plays for a decade. In September 1694 he brought to the Theatre Royal a comedy called 'The Canterbury Guests, or, The Bargain Broken' (published in 1695), which was cobbled together with some scenes from earlier pieces of his own. It too 'met with only a very indifferent success' (Genest, 'Eng. stage', 2.517-18). 
Ravenscroft's last successful play was his comedy or farce 'The Anatomist, or, The Sham Doctor', which was performed at Lincoln's Inn Fields in autumn 1696 and published the next year. Based on Noel le Breton de Hauteroche's popular play 'Crispin medecin' (1680), it was a great success. The short farce was performed with Peter Motteux's musical extravaganza 'The Loves of Mars and Venus', with music by John Eccles and Gottfried Finger. Often given as an after piece, it had 131 performances between 1714 and 1747, and 165 between 1747 and 1779. While Ravenscroft regarded it as 'the most trivial' of his plays, its story-line of witty servants helping young men keep young women away from old dotards, spiced with bawdy and lively music, enabled it to appeal to all ages. Revised in 1743, having been compressed first into two acts and then into a single act, it was reproduced repeatedly until performed apparently for the last time in 1801. 
Ravenscroft's last play, 'The Italian Husband', was a tragedy performed at Lincoln's Inn Fields in November 1697 and published in the next year. Based on Thomas Wright's 'The Glory of God's Revenge Against Murther and Adultery' (1685), it was a defence of farce as a serious dramatic genre. The adultery plot did not work, and according to some contemporaries required too much compassion on the part of the audience (Kewes, 220). 
While Ravenscroft's career extended over more than a quarter of a century, he seems to have died comparatively young. He is not known to have produced any play after 1697. Most of his plays were written for the Duke's Company, managed by Thomas Killigrew and Sir William Davenant. He had few if any superiors among his contemporaries in farce, and as a writer had considerable cleverness in adaptation, skill in construction, and an unusual fluency and ease in dialogue. His quarrel with Dryden obtained for him a greater posthumous notoriety than he deserved. But since he borrowed so freely from others, the vituperations of Laingbaine, Dibdin, and other critics that his plays are 'a series of thefts from beginning to end' (Dibdin, 4.204) have given him a press that has held the field in the absence of any critical edition of his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 23172


Ravenscroft, Thomas (b. 1591/2), music theorist and composer, was quite probably one of the Flintshire Ravenscrofts: on a flyleaf of the copy of 'A Briefe Discourse' (1614) that he presented to Sir John Egerton, whose mother was Elizabeth Ravenscroft of Bretton, the author described himself as 'the meanest of a name soe much honored by you'. The Hawarden parish register does not support the claim, made by Venn (3.424) and others, that Thomas was baptized on 13 June 1592, the son of Roger Ravenscroft, canon of Chester. 
By 1598 Ravenscroft was a chorister at St Paul's Cathedral under Thomas Giles, and he was still there in 1600 when Edward Pearce became organist and master of the choristers. Ravenscroft was involved in the activities of the St Paul's company of child actors, which, like the children of the Chapel Royal, catered for more sophisticated audiences by including in their plays specially written songs performed by trained voices and instrumentalists. According to a marginal note in his 'Briefe Discourse', he graduated MusB from Cambridge at the age of fourteen: since a poem in this source gives his age at that point as twenty-two, it is likely he was the Thomas Rangcrofte of Pembroke College who so graduated on 21 June 1605. He was also a student at Gresham College, to whose 'most worthy and Grave Senators' he dedicated 'A Briefe Discourse'. 
In 1609 Ravenscroft published the first edition of 'Pammelia', the earliest English printed collection of rounds and catches, 'Art having reformed what pleasing tunes injurious time and ignorance had deformed' ('To the reader', 'Pammelia'). Its 100 examples comprise settings of sacred texts, tavern songs, vendors' cries, sol-faing pieces, traditional ballads, and songs from the contemporary theatre. The contents of 'Deuteromelia' (also 1609) were similarly 'made truely Musicall with Art by my 'correction'', the aim being not only to entertain but to preserve, for 'pittie were it, such Mirth should be 'forgotten' of us' ('To the reader', 'Deuteromelia'). Among its fourteen 'Freemen's Songs' and seventeen catches are 'Hold thy peace, knave', sung in 'Twelfth Night', and 'Three blind mice'. 'Melismata' (1611), dedicated to his kinsmen Thomas and William Ravenscroft, contains twenty-three settings of which nine are 'Citie' and 'Country' rounds; appropriate dramatic contexts have been suggested for a number of its songs. 
Whereas the music of these collections is anonymous, of the songs appended to Ravenscroft's treatise 'A Briefe Discourse' to illustrate his theoretical ideas, twelve are attributed to him, six others are by John Bennet, and two are by Edward Pearce. The work itself laments the contemporary abuse of mensuration signs, and advocates a return to medieval practice. The music includes play songs, madrigalian pieces, and a jig-like series of pieces in which Hodge Trillinde woos Malkyn in a broad west-country dialect. Ravenscroft may have maintained his youthful links with the theatre, for early in 1618 he witnessed the will of the actor Richard Cowley. From January 1618 to November 1622 he was music master at Christ's Hospital, where he was paid $10 annually 'to teach the children of this house pricksong'. 
Ravenscroft's 'The Whole Booke of Psalmes' (1621), to which he contributed fifty-five of its 105 settings, is one of the most important psalters of the period, though it contains much music from earlier publications. A number of his vocal and instrumental compositions, as well as a 'Treatise of musick', survive in manuscript. His part-writing often lacks fluency, and his powers of melodic and harmonic invention rarely achieve a consistently high level of inspiration. The date of Ravenscroft's death is unknown and no will has been traced. Presumably he was still alive in 1633 when the second edition of his psalter appeared. 


@@@@@


doc= 23173


Ravenser, Richard (d. 1386), administrator, was one of a large family clan of royal servants who came from the parts of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire on either side of the Humber; its members included John Thoresby, archbishop of York (died 1373), and John Waltham, bishop of Salisbury (died 1395). Waltham was Thoresby's great-nephew, while Ravenser and Waltham's father were cousins. In 1343 Ravenser was attorney to Queen Philippa (died 1369), and by October 1353 was described as a chancery clerk. He was keeper of the hanaper of chancery, an office to which he was appointed on 1 September 1357, and which he had vacated by 11 July 1359, and in 1363 he was promoted to the rank of greater clerk of chancery. Twice he was one of a commission who took charge of the great seal: in 1372 when the chancellor, Sir Robert Thorpe, was dying, and in 1377, during the last days of Edward III. Concurrently with his chancery duties he served three royal ladies: Queen Philippa, for whom he was attorney, receiver of rents and debts, and, from 1362 to 1367, treasurer; the queen mother, Isabella (died 1358), for whom he performed similar duties and administered her goods after her death; and Princess Isabella (died 1379), whose employment he had entered by 1364. In 1370 he founded a chantry at Beverley for the souls of Queen Isabella and Queen Philippa. Ravenser continued in chancery service until at least December 1384, and died between 17 May and 1 June 1386. He was buried in Lincoln Cathedral. 
Ravenser's secular career was rewarded by ecclesiastical preferment; after 1349, when he was granted Anderby rectory, Lincolnshire, royal patronage brought him a succession of presentations. But he exchanged most of his benefices, showing a preference for those in Lincolnshire and south Yorkshire, an area to which he remained attached; he founded a hospital in Beverley, as well as a chantry there, three chantries in Lincolnshire, and, with relatives, gave generously to churches in Beverley and Hull. Notable appointments included the provostship of Beverley (1360-68) and the archdeaconry of Lincoln (from 1368 until his death). Ravenser was involved in controversy at both places. He inherited a claim, advanced by the previous holder, to exceptional powers of jurisdiction in the archdeaconry of Lincoln, and on appeal secured a ruling very favourable (though personal) to himself; one of the appeal judges was the previous archdeacon, William Wykeham (died 1404). At Beverley he led the resistance to Archbishop Alexander Neville's proposed visitation in 1381, giving shelter at Lincoln to other rebels. For this Neville deprived him of his prebends in Beverley (St Martin's, from 1363) and York Minster (Knaresborough, from 1371). Though it cannot be computed with any accuracy Ravenser's wealth was considerable at the time of his death, and he maintained homes in Yorkshire, Lincoln, and London. 


@@@@@


doc= 23174


Ravis, Christian (1613-1677), oriental and biblical scholar, was born on 25 January 1613 at Berlin, Brandenburg, the son of Johann Raue, deacon at the Nikolaus-Kirche, and his wife, Margarete Guericke. After attending the Berlin Gymnasium, in 1630 he entered Wittenberg University, where he studied oriental languages under Trostius (author of a Syriac lexicon and a Hebrew grammar), and graduated MA in 1633. From 1636 he visited the universities of Leipzig, Konigsberg, and Rostock, and travelled in Denmark and Sweden, before going to Holland in 1637 to study Arabic under Golius. He there made the acquaintance of the eminent scholar G. J. Vossius and of Johann Elichmann, a physician interested in oriental languages. 
In July 1638, supported by recommendations from these and the English ambassador William Boswell, Ravis (as his name became Anglicized) went to England, whence he wrote to Archbishop Ussher in Ireland, requesting support for proposed scholarly travels in the east. Ussher, acting through Samuel Hartlib, granted him an annual stipend of $24 in return for a promise to look for manuscripts that Ussher wanted. Ravis set out for Constantinople in 1639, travelling via Paris, where Hugo Grotius introduced him to Cardinal Richelieu, who, according to Ravis, tried to recruit him into his service. He also made the acquaintance of Mersenne and Desargues, and issued as Christianus Ravius (the name by which he was known in the continental scholarly world and which he himself adopted) his first publication, a pamphlet pompously entitled 'Dissertatio mathematica proponens novum summumque totius matheseos inventum problemata omnia certa methodo inveniendi, & inventa solvendi', which praised John Pell. Taking ship from Marseilles, Ravis reached Constantinople in July, almost destitute. But the Arabist Edward Pococke, who was living with the English ambassador Sir Sackville Crowe, arranged for him to be taken into that household. He began to study Turkish and Arabic, and to collect manuscripts. In September he travelled to Smyrna with Edward Stringer, who had been appointed English consul there, but soon returned to Constantinople, where he remained until early 1641 when he embarked on a tour of Asia Minor in the company of Charles Cavendish, son of the earl of Devonshire. 
A four-month voyage from Smyrna brought Ravis to London late in 1641. He carried with him some 300 manuscripts, mostly oriental, of which the most notable was an Arabic version of Apollonius' 'Conics'. He also brought Nicolaus Petri, an Arabic-speaking Greek from Aleppo, whom he had persuaded to be his amanuensis. Nicolaus's Arabic letters to Pococke and Golius paint a vivid picture of Ravis's penury, duplicity, and vain attempts to find employment in England and later in Holland. Ravis petitioned parliament to set up a college for converting the Jews and oriental learning, with no result. He was given money by John Selden, but was forced to pledge or sell a number of his manuscripts to Sir Simonds D'Ewes, Richard Holdsworth, and others, and, despairing of finding employment in England, moved to the Netherlands. Ravis was in Leiden in March 1642, but had no greater success there or in Denmark. Subsequently he was permitted to give lectures (some of which he published) on oriental languages at Utrecht (1643-4) and Amsterdam (1645-6), and was rewarded with an occasional honorarium, but his requests for a permanent appointment, although supported by Vossius, were unsuccessful. 
In June 1647 Ravis returned to England, ostensibly to redeem his manuscripts, but in fact encouraged by Hartlib with the prospect of a new post teaching oriental languages in London. This was established in July by the provincial presbyterian synod of London, centred on Sion College, and was probably subsidized by Thomas Adams and other wealthy citizens of London. Ravis began to lecture in August at London House; the content of his lectures, some of which were in English, may be surmised from his book, 'A Generall Grammer for the Ebrew, Samaritan, Calde, Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic Tongue', which went into several editions from 1648 to 1650, and was published with his 'Discourse of the Orientall Tongues', and a collection of letters from scholars. In this work he propounded his peculiar theory that these six languages are not merely related, but are in fact the same language (which may be called 'Arabic'). Among his pupils in London were Hanserd Knollys and Thomas Danson. However, the financial basis of this lectureship was shaky, and an appeal by the ministers of London to parliament for support (seconded by a personal appeal by Ravis to an influential parliamentarian, John Selden) was unsuccessful, so Ravis sought other prospects. 
When it seemed likely that Pococke would lose his Arabic professorship at Oxford for royalist sympathies, Ravis aspired to replace him, but was warned off by Selden and Ussher. However, he had sufficient influence in the parliamentary committee supervising Oxford University that on 5 March 1649 he became one of those chosen to replace almost the whole body of fellows of Magdalen College. He was also made librarian of the college and Hebrew lecturer. 
Ravis was soon (if not already) negotiating for a better post. Johannes Matthiae, bishop of Strangnas, who was a friend of Hartlib and of Ravis's brother Johannes (professor at Rostock), persuaded Queen Kristina of Sweden (whose tutor he had been) to offer Ravis employment. In February 1650 he travelled to Sweden via Amsterdam, where he bought the Hebrew press of Menasseh ben Israel on behalf of Kristina. The queen appointed him professor of oriental languages at Uppsala University in November 1650. In 1651 he married Matthiae's niece, Christina Andreae. Nevertheless, his financial difficulties continued. He had left his books and manuscripts behind in England as pledges for his debts, but Selden redeemed them in 1652. In January 1654 Ravis was glad to accept $5 from the English ambassador Bulstrode Whitelocke, to whom he expressed regret for leaving England. He was quarrelling with the theological faculty, who resented his intrusion into their territory by publishing on biblical matters. In 1655 he was appointed royal librarian, moving to Stockholm in 1656. In 1659 King Karl Gustav reappointed him professor of oriental languages at Uppsala, where he remained until 1669. His quarrels with the theologians worsened, particularly after he began to propound his peculiar theories on biblical chronology. After leaving for Kiel in 1669, he published these as 'Unica vera et infallibilis chronologia biblica' (1670), which met with almost universal derision. He devoted the rest of his life, and several publications, to defending this. While at Kiel he also (1669) published a bad Latin translation of part of the Arabic 'Conics', and a catalogue of his manuscripts which he was offering for sale. In 1672 the elector of Brandenburg appointed him professor of oriental languages and biblical chronology at the University of Frankfurt an der Oder, where he died of scurvy on 21 June 1677 and was buried in S. Marien-Kirche. He was survived by his wife (who died on 21 March 1678) and four children. Most of his manuscripts survived in Berlin, but his treasured Apollonius went to the Bodleian Library, Oxford. 
Ravis was a facile linguist (his English writings are thoroughly idiomatic), but not a profound one. He strove for the original, but usually achieved only the bizarre. Except for the books he wrote in England, most of his numerous publications were issued by himself in minuscule editions, paid for by himself, and are extremely rare: of some only one copy, or none, is known. His acquaintance among European scholars was large, but his friends few: his assiduous flattery was offset by his boastfulness, extravagant promises of the unattainable, and duplicity -- his amanuensis called him a 'treasury of lies' (Houtsma, 92). 


@@@@@


doc= 23175


Ravis, Thomas (b. in or before 1560, d. 1609), bishop of London, was born at Malden, Surrey, probably the son of Thomas Ravis and his wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Lisle of Reigate and widow of Robert Benson. Educated at Westminster School, he was elected to Christ Church, Oxford, on 6 July 1575. When the college at first refused him entry, alleging that Westminster scholars, though well grounded in grammar, were less proficient in logic than other candidates, Ravis wrote an appeal to Lord Burghley, whose patronage secured his admission. He duly graduated BA on 12 November 1578, and proceeded MA on 3 March 1582, and BD on 6 July 1589. He served as proctor in 1588 and vice-chancellor in 1596/7 and 1597/8. He had been ordained in 1582 and spent some years preaching in and around Oxford, but no benefice is recorded until he obtained the rectory of Merstham, Surrey, in 1591, and the London vicarage of All Hallows Barking by the Tower, on 27 December the same year (vacating in May 1598). On 20 February 1593 he was installed as canon of Westminster, a post he retained until 1607 (his successor being installed on 10 May). He served as chapter treasurer in 1593/4 and for three other yearly terms, and as steward in 1595/6. 
After gaining the DD in 1595, Ravis was, on 19 June 1596, appointed to the deanery of Christ Church at the request of Lord Buckhurst, who, as chancellor of Oxford University, felt entitled to exercise the crown's patronage. Ravis's nomination was also supported by Sir Robert Cecil against a nominee of the earl of Essex. Ravis at once introduced unpopular reforms, replacing traditional commons allowances with cash payments. Dudley Carleton, reporting the dean's 'great tyranny', said that Ravis had the support of Archbishop Whitgift, and that some of the college had been sent before the privy council, others imprisoned ('CSP dom.', '1595-7', 361). Carleton was still at odds with the dean over his own income in 1603. 
On 15 May 1598 Ravis was presented by the dean and chapter of Westminster to their prime living, the vicarage of Islip, Oxfordshire, to which he was instituted on 7 July. On 19 October that year he also became vicar of Wittenham Abbas, Berkshire. Before 11 October 1602 he had married Alice, later wife of Sir John Borlase, master of the ordnance of Ireland. He was suggested for the bishopric of Norwich by Whitgift in October 1602, but it was still as a dean that Ravis attended the Hampton Court conference in 1604. His notes were used by Bishop Barlow in his published account of the proceedings. Subsequently Ravis sat on the committee which translated the gospels, the 'Acts of the Apostles', and the book of 'Revelation' for the Authorized Version of the 'Bible'. He was also prolocutor of the lower house of the convocation of Canterbury in 1604, being confirmed as such on 23 March. On 30 May he claimed he had been maliciously subpoenaed by those whose real target was Bancroft; his accusers were themselves promptly arrested by the crown's officers. When in September 1604 it became known that Ravis was to be made bishop of Gloucester and might be allowed to retain his deanery 'in commendam', the canons of Christ Church protested strongly that their head of house ought to be permanently resident. Nevertheless on 15 February 1605 Ravis duly received licence to hold his deanery, canonry of Westminster, and livings of Islip and Wittenham along with his bishopric. He was consecrated on 17 March and, notwithstanding his dispensation, resigned the deanery of Christ Church (to which a successor was appointed on 1 August 1605). He retained the canonry of Westminster: the prebendal house was a valuable perquisite for a bishop without an official London residence. On 24 March 1606 he preached the accession day sermon at Paul's Cross. His translation to bishop of London was anticipated (suit being made for his Islip living) on 10 April 1607, and came with election on 29 April and confirmation on 18 May. 
In his successive episcopates Ravis was a diligent administrator; though an unreconstructed Calvinist, he was a scourge of nonconforming clergy. At Gloucester he won the respect of clerical and county society with his hospitality and careful ministry, at his primary visitation in 1605 reserving almost fifty cases for further consideration. Three nonconformist clergy were eventually ejected. He later rarely missed sessions of his consistory court, save in parliament time; he brought sanitation and other improvements to the episcopal residences, and at London personally examined ordinands and encouraged training for non-preaching clergy, sending at least a dozen to the archdeacons for this purpose. He continued to press for conformity, and reported the worst cases to the high commission. 'By the help of Jesu', he told Richard Rogers, 'I will not leave one preacher in my dioces that doth not subscribe' (Knappen, 31). Five lecturers were suspended, and as many beneficed clergy deprived. 
Ravis's wife was the sole executor named in his will of 12 November 1609; the overseers were his brother-in-law, Thomas Edwardes LLD, and Nicholas Kempe. Ravis died on 14 November 1609, probably in London, and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 23176


Rawdon, Christopher (1780-1858), businessman and benefactor of a fund for Unitarian ministers, was born at Halifax on 13 April 1780, the eldest son of Christopher and Sophia Rawdon. His father (died 1822), the sixth in succession with this name, owned mills at Underbank, near Todmorden, Yorkshire. Rawdon was educated in Switzerland (1787-90) and at Mr Catlow's school at Mansfield, Nottinghamshire ('c'.1790-1793). In 1793 his father met a Portuguese gentleman at Falmouth, and, in order to improve their children's knowledge of foreign languages, they agreed to exchange sons for a year. The elder Rawdon dispatched home the following letter: 'Dear Wife, -- Deliver to the bearer thy first-born. Christopher Rawdon'. His wife 'knew too well the decision of her husband's character to hesitate a moment in yielding obedience' ('Christian Reformer', 1858, 738). After a year at Lisbon and further schooling at Mansfield (1794-7), Rawdon in 1797 became manager at Underbank. In 1807 he went to Portugal as representative of his father's firm, and held this position until 1823, when he settled in Liverpool. He married, on 23 October 1821, Charlotte ('b'. 'c'.1796), daughter of Rawdon Briggs, banker, of Halifax, and his wife, Ann. 
Rawdon was a successful man of business, a member of the Liverpool town council for three years, and a borough and county magistrate. In politics he was an active Liberal, in religion an assertive Unitarian. The 'Dissenters' Chapels Act' of 1844 finally established the right, after decades of litigation, of Unitarians to the possession of their old meeting-houses together with associated endowments. However, the act did not prevent the removal of Unitarians from the Lady Hewley Trust, and many ministers suffered financial hardship as a result. Rawdon therefore decided to create a new fund for the benefit of Unitarian ministers serving congregations in the north of England. The successful formation of the trust from the will of Robert Hibbert in 1853, which fostered the best entrants to the Unitarian ministry, prompted Rawdon and his brother James (1782-1855) to donate $1000, which was later doubled, towards the creation of a fund to aid poorer ministers. In the following year appeals in the press and elsewhere soon increased the total to nearly $19,000. This large sum was made into the Ministers' Stipend Augmentation Fund in 1856, in the control of trustees, to benefit Unitarian ministers serving congregations north of the River Trent. A pioneering venture at this time within dissent, the trust still continued to fulfil its original purpose some 150 years later. 
Rawdon died at Elm House, Anfield, Liverpool, on 22 October 1858, and was buried at Toxteth Park Chapel, Liverpool. His obituary in the 'Christian Reformer' stated, 'Many a poor minister, in his struggles and discouragements, will think in gratitude of him'. 


@@@@@


doc= 23177


Rawdon, Sir George, first baronet (1604-1684), army officer and politician, was born in November 1604, the only son of Francis Rawdon (1581?-1668) of Rawdon Hall in the West Riding of Yorkshire and Dorothy (died 1660), daughter of William Aldborough. 
At the age of twenty-one George Rawdon became private secretary to Edward, Viscount Conway, secretary of state, and after Conway's death in 1631 he acted as secretary and agent to his son, also Edward, second Viscount Conway. Increasingly Rawdon was to reside on Conway's Ulster estates, particularly at Brookhill, near Lisburn, co. Antrim, leasing and purchasing Irish land on his own behalf. He proved an active agent, recruiting tenants from England for Conway's estates, engaging in legal activity, and drawing up plans for 'improvement', a recurrent theme in his career. An extensive correspondence he conducted with members of the Conway family has survived, covering several decades from the 1630s, and treating of all manner of aspects of life in east Ulster and beyond. 
Rawdon married (probably in 1635) Ursula, daughter of Sir Francis Stafford of Portglenone, co. Antrim, and his wife, Anne ('nee' Grogan), and widow of Francis Hill. She and their only child died the following year. In 1639 he was involved in enforcing the 'black oath' repudiating the national covenant upon the Scottish inhabitants of Ulster. He was returned for Belfast to the Irish parliament of 1640. He had held a captaincy in the Irish army since 1635, and with the outbreak of the 1641 rising he returned from London to assist in the assembly of local forces to counter the insurgents. His own residence, at Brookhill, was pillaged and burnt. He participated in successive campaigns, attaining the rank of major. In the aftermath of the cessation negotiated between Charles and the Catholic confederates in September 1643 his reports that Ulster officers sought peace in England but war in Ireland, appear to have reflected his own views. Certainly he engaged in the renewed fighting in Ulster from 1644, and by 1647 was in London seeking additional support from parliament for the protestant forces in Ireland. 
By the late 1640s tensions within the protestant camp in Ulster were high, and Rawdon won praise for his support of the English parliamentarian interest against the Scots in the province from parliament's commander, George Monck, with whom he was to sustain a friendship. He held a series of offices in Ulster in the 1650s including those of commissioner for confiscated lands, revenue commissioner, and JP and participated in schemes for ecclesiastical reform. He was elected for the combined counties of Antrim, Down, and Armagh to the 1659 protectorate parliament. He rebuilt Brookhill, consolidated his landholdings, especially around Moira, co. Down, and was rewarded by the state with further land grants. Like his neighbour Arthur Hill he combined service to the Commonwealth regimes with a departure from their religious preferences, the only point of contact being a common suspicion of presbyterianism. Instead, at Conway's request, he gave shelter to the future bishop, Jeremy Taylor, and remained in close contact with him after his elevation to the see of Down and Connor in 1661. 
In the summer of 1659 Rawdon journeyed to Scotland to consult Monck on political developments. In the following spring he was elected to the Irish Convention for co. Antrim and, with the restoration of Charles II under way, travelled to London to represent the interests of the military in Ireland and subsequently the convention itself. He was elected in 1661 to the Irish parliament for Carlingford, and was appointed a privy councillor and a commissioner to execute the proposed land settlement. Following his own representations he was created a baronet on 20 May 1665. Retaining the confidence of the new government, he continued to oppose presbyterian activities in Ulster. Ongoing concerns about covenanter insurgency in Scotland lent force to his suspicions and his hostility to any policy of indulgence. As late as 1681 he remarked to Conway, concerning an application to build a presbyterian meeting-house, that it 'is near 50 years we have lived here in peace and I shall not willingly admit any such interruption in my days' (Bailie, 8). 
Rawdon's lands, principally in co. Down, but also in counties Louth, Meath, and Dublin were confirmed to him, and further augmented, by the Restoration regime. He undertook additional purchases, and the construction of the co. Down market towns of Moira and Ballynahinch. He persisted with efforts in agricultural improvement and industrial diversification, both on his own property and as agent for Conway. Although not all his ventures proved successful, his efforts at road improvement won him contemporary praise as 'the Best High Way man in the kingdom' (Hill, 385). His energetic engagement was crucial to the rise of Lisburn as a commercial centre in south Antrim and the site of the new cathedral and a leading local school. 
On 4 September 1654 Rawdon had married his second wife, Dorothy Conway (died 1676), eldest daughter of the second viscount, and his wife, Frances ('nee' Popham), with whom he had seven sons and three daughters. He died on 18 August 1684 and was buried in Lisburn Cathedral ten days later. Only one of Rawdon's sons survived him, Sir Arthur Rawdon, second baronet, who was in turn grandfather of John Rawdon, fourth baronet and first earl of Moira. 
George Rawdon's career draws together many of the strands of English settlement in seventeenth-century Ulster: the acquisition of land and the harnessing of resources in economic improvement, building, and the construction of an urban and communications network; the blending of military and civil office; and a commitment to the fortunes of the established church. In his case such aims were pursued with unusual energy and an interpretation of the 'English interest' which would allow for co-operation with the interregnum regimes, but also a hostility towards presbyterianism which caused him to remark, using the language of 'Daniel' 8, that his 'troublesome neighbours' 'the Scots presbetry... esteem me one of the horns against the Kirk' ('CSP Ire.', '1647-60', 662). 


@@@@@


doc= 23178


Rawdon, Marmaduke (bap. 1610, d. 1669), traveller and antiquary, was baptized at St Crux Church, York, on 17 March 1610, the youngest son of Laurence Rawdon (1568?-1626), a merchant and alderman of the city who was descended from a younger branch of the family of Rawdon, Yorkshire, and his wife, Margery Barton (1570?-1644) of Cawton in the same county. He almost certainly attended St Peter's Grammar School in York. On the death of his father in 1626 he was adopted by his uncle Marmaduke (later Sir Marmaduke) Rawdon, a prominent London wine merchant. 
From 1627 Rawdon was stationed at Bordeaux, where he dealt with his uncle's business and those of other wine merchants. In 1631 he was entrusted with the management of his uncle's affairs on the island of Tenerife, and he lived in the Canary Islands, principally at La Laguna, Gran Canaria, with brief intervals, for over twenty years. During this period he supervised the English factory established on the island and engaged in trade on his own account; he also ascended the peak of Tenerife. 
In 1656, in consequence of England's rupture with Spain, Rawdon returned to England, and during most of the remainder of his life lived with his cousin and namesake Marmaduke Rawdon of Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire. His biographer describes how in the early 1660s he passed some of his time 'att home, for the most part in his closet reading or writinge, beinge naturally inclind to studdie' (Davies, 92). He compiled a number of commonplace books, journals, and accounts, among them a genealogical memoir of the Rawdon family and a history of cathedrals. In 1712 Ralph Thoresby was permitted to inspect the collection, and extracts from some of the manuscripts are made use of in his 'Ducatus Leodiensis' (1715). 
According to his biographer, Rawdon was as inclined to action as he was to study, 'followinge booth with some earnestnesse' (Davies, 196). He undertook many journeys. These were largely within England, but in 1662, for instance, with his cousin, he visited the Low Countries, recording his observations of Flemish and Dutch churches, gardens, hospitals, and trade. Rawdon did not completely neglect his mercantile activities in later life, and in the mid-1660s he was admitted a member of the short-lived Canary Company, in which he invested $1500. 
Rawdon died, unmarried, at Hoddesdon on 6 February 1669 and was buried, probably on 20 February, in the chancel of the church at Broxbourne. By his will he left to the corporation of York funds to enable the chief market place, the Pavement, to be enlarged, the gold 'poculum caritatis', or loving cup, and money to purchase the gold chain still worn at the close of the twentieth century by every lady mayoress of York. 


@@@@@


doc= 23179


Rawes, Henry Augustus (1826-1885), Roman Catholic priest and convert, was born at Easington, near Durham, on 11 December 1826 and educated at Houghton-le-Spring grammar school, of which his father, the Revd William Rawes (1764-1827), was sometime headmaster. On 26 March 1845 he was admitted as a sizar to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1849 and MA in 1852. After ordination in 1852 he became curate of St Bartholomew, Moor Lane, London, in June 1853, and warden of the House of Charity, Soho, in May 1854. 
Rawes was received into the Roman Catholic church in March 1856, and the following year joined the Oblates of St Charles on the foundation of that congregation by H. E. Manning. After receiving Roman orders in November 1857 he had charge of the Notting Hill district, where he built the church of St Francis. In 1874 he was appointed prefect of studies in St Charles's College, the grammar school opened by Manning in North Kensington. Created DD by Pius IX in 1875, he was elected superior of the Oblate fathers in 1879. For twenty-eight years he was well known in London as a preacher and writer, and was the author of many devotional works and religious poems. He died at Brighton on 24 April 1885, and was buried at Mortlake Catholic cemetery, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 23180


Rawle, Francis (c.1660-1727), writer on trade and finance, was probably born in Plymouth, the son of Francis Rawle and his wife, Jane. He was descended from an old Cornish family of some wealth and standing, once settled near St Juliot on the north Cornish coast and later in the Plymouth region. Both father and son were Quakers, and were persecuted for their religious belief and imprisoned together at Exeter in 1683. On this account they obtained a grant from William Penn, left Plymouth in the 'Desire', and arrived at Philadelphia on 23 June 1686. 
Rawle first settled on 2500 acres in New Plymouth, where he founded the society known as the Plymouth Friends. He married Martha, daughter of Robert Turner, an Irish merchant, in 1689; they had ten children. The family moved to Philadelphia, where Rawle's substance and talents, and wealth from his marriage, soon brought him to note. In early 1689 he became a justice of the peace and judge of the court of common pleas; under the charter of 1691 he was one of six aldermen of Philadelphia; and in 1692 he became deputy registrar of wills and in 1694 commissioner of property. He sat in the assembly between 1704 and 1709, and was appointed again from 1719 to 1726. As a member Rawle participated in most of the important committees of the house, including that dealing with currency issues. 
It was for contributions to this field that Rawle is principally remembered. Pennsylvania, like other colonies at the time, faced a continual shortage of hard currency in the form of gold and silver coin due in part to laws forbidding the export of British coinage. Attempts by colonial governors to attract hard currency by raising its value had led Westminster to introduce paper money as the principal means of trade. In 'Some Remedies Proposed for Restoring the Sunk Credit of the Province of Pennsylvania' (1721), Rawle called for the issue of a limited amount of paper money secured by land, and for its acceptance as full legal tender to prevent future depreciations of value. He was fully involved in the currency committee's drafting of the 'Paper Money Act' (1723). 
In two further works, 'Ways and Means for the Inhabitants of Delaware to Become Rich' (1725) and 'A Just Rebuke to a Dialogue betwixt Simon and Timothy' (1726), Rawle stressed the importance of achieving a favourable balance of trade, by stimulating exports and controlling imports through tariffs on such items as West Indian rum. Rawle died in Philadelphia on 5 March 1727. 


@@@@@


doc= 23181


Rawle, Richard (1812-1889), bishop of Trinidad, born at Plymouth on 27 February 1812, was a son of Francis Rawle (1778-1854), an attorney at Liskeard, who on abandoning practice had settled at Plymouth; his mother, Amelia, 'nee' Millett, died on 6 October 1814. Rawle was educated at Plymouth new grammar school, and on 7 February 1831 was admitted pensioner of Trinity College, Cambridge, under the tutorship of William Whewell. On 19 April 1833 he obtained a scholarship at his college, and in 1835 he graduated BA, being third wrangler and fourth classic. He was elected minor fellow of Trinity College on 3 October 1836, and major fellow on 3 July 1838, in which year he proceeded MA and became sub-lector 'tertius'; he acted as assistant tutor from 1836 to 1839. In 1839 he was ordained both deacon and priest, and accepted the rectory of Cheadle in Staffordshire. He resigned his post in 1847, though he returned to marry on 14 January 1851 at Cheadle parish church Susan Anne Blagg, daughter of John Michael Blagg, of Rosehill in that parish. 
From 1847 to 1864 Rawle was principal of Codrington College in Barbados; about 1859 he declined the offer of the bishopric of Antigua. In 1864 he returned to England, and after refusing the offer of an honorary canonry in Ely Cathedral he acted as vicar of Tamworth, from 1869 to 1872. On 29 June 1872 he was consecrated in Lichfield Cathedral as bishop of Trinidad, where he worked with great energy until his resignation in 1888. His wife died on 1 March 1888 at Bournemouth, and was buried at Cheadle churchyard on 5 March. Rawle reaccepted the post of principal and professor of divinity at Codrington College, where he died on 10 May 1889; he was buried next day in the college burial-ground. 
Rawle was the last male representative of the family of Rawle owning the farmstead of Hennett and other property in the parish of St Juliot, on the north coast of Cornwall, and his generosity raised the income of the benefice, restored the church, and built new schools. 


@@@@@


doc= 23182


Rawle, Samuel (1775/6-1860), engraver and draughtsman, was the son of George Rawle; his family came from Dunster in Somerset. By the age of seventeen he was apprenticed to Thomas Bonnors, an engraver of Gloucester, and in January 1796 was working in the London branch of his business, which was run by John Bonnors. A number of his plates appeared in the 'European Magazine' and 'Gentleman's Magazine', and in 1801 his first landscape painting was exhibited at the Royal Academy; it was followed by another in 1806. He married Mary Purkess (1776-1860) on 28 April 1801 in St Pancras Old Church, and by 1815 they had had at least six children, who were listed by age in a return made to the Artists' Annuity Fund on 22 December 1836. 
Rawle began a long association with important topographical works, producing illustrations on copper for such publications as E. W. Brayley's 'Beauties of England' (1801-17), J. C. Murphy's 'Arabian Antiquities of Spain' (1816), and James Hakewill's 'Picturesque Tour of Italy' (1818-20); he also did two plates for T. D. Whittaker's 'A History of Richmondshire' (1823) and others for J. P. Neale's 'Views of the Seats of Noblemen' (1818-24). At this time he was living at 3 Tottenham Street, Tottenham Court Road, London. His best work was the five plates on steel engraved between May 1828 and November 1829 for William Brockedon's 'Illustrations of the Passes of the Alps' and three plates for William Westall's 'Great Britain Illustrated' (1830). The engravings in this latter work were under the direction of Edward Finden, for whom he undertook other work such as etching and finishing plates, receiving small payments. 
Rawle also worked for Mr Parker on plates for William Pinnock's 'Geography' ('c'.1830) and engraved for some of John Britton's works. His engravings were precise and well finished, but he seems to have had difficulty in adapting to steel, and it is possible that he later worked more as an architectural draughtsman to provide an income. Credits did not always appear on his engravings, and hence his contributions tend to be overlooked and are revealed only through other evidence, such as two notebooks, together with three letters, preserved in the St Bride Printing Library in London. These also show a son, who may be G. Rawle, apprenticed to his father, doing much of the preparatory work on plates. Samuel Rawle is known to have engraved several portraits, including those of Robert Burns, Sebastian Cabot (1824), and William Shakespeare. He probably retired about 1841, and is described in his will as a gentleman, although his death certificate proclaims him a landscape engraver. He died on 1 November 1860, after a prolonged bout of bronchitis, at his home, 19 Leverton Street, Kentish Town, London. His wife predeceased him by a few days, so his meagre property went to his other executor, George Dobree. 


@@@@@


doc= 23183


Rawlet, John (bap. 1642, d. 1686), Church of England clergyman, was baptized at St Editha's Church, Tamworth, on the Warwickshire-Staffordshire border, on 27 March 1642, the son of William Rawlet (died 1643) and his wife, Margery. His father was killed fighting in the civil war (probably as a parliamentarian soldier) in late 1643. From his mother Rawlet received a 'pious education' (Rawlet, 3). He probably attended Tamworth grammar school, where the presbyterian Samuel Shaw became master in 1656; when Shaw became curate of Moseley chapel in the parish of Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, in 1657 Rawlet followed him, perhaps continuing as his pupil. He was admitted sizar to Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 30 November 1658, matriculating on 1 December 1659. However, owing to poverty he did not graduate, though he was later created BD, on 23 June 1676 by royal mandate. The apparent coincidence of his withdrawal from Cambridge with the establishment of the Restoration settlement, his connections with presbyterian ministers before and after 1660, and the long period before he received Anglican ordination suggest that conscientious scruples as well as financial reasons may have terminated his Cambridge education. 
After Cambridge Rawlet spent some time 'at my Cozen Woods alone' (Manuell, 'John Rawlett, BD', 3), probably his cousin John Wood, curate of the chapel of St Leonard's in the parish of Aston Clinton, Buckinghamshire. After some years he moved to London to serve as tutor and (although he had not apparently yet taken holy orders) chaplain in the household of John Pynsent, protonotary of the court of common pleas, in Bartlett's court in St Andrew's, Holborn. He was there at the time of the great plague of 1665; in the 'consolatory letter' which he wrote to his mother at this time he expressed his fear of dying from the pestilence. In 1667 Rawlet published 'A Treatise of Sacramental Covenanting with Christ' (in the first edition anonymously under the initials M. M.); it had reached eight editions by 1736. Richard Baxter, who may have known Rawlet from his Moseley days, provided the preface, dated 6 September 1666, describing the book as 'high and excellent' in its aim 'to convince poor, impenitent, unholy souls, of the absolute necessity of a speedy, resolute, faithful consent to the Covenant of Grace' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.53). 
Through the Pynsent connection Rawlet evidently preached at Hulcott in Bedfordshire, where Pynsent's daughter Anne lived. In late 1669 or late 1670 Rawlet became curate of Dunton in Buckinghamshire. In the spring of 1670 he was ordained and became curate of Wigan, Lancashire, a rectory held 'in commendam' by the bishop of Chester, John Wilkins; he also acted for a short time as Wilkins's chaplain. Rawlet noted in a letter to Baxter concerning his move to Wigan, 'I table in a good honest family, with one Mr Herle, son to him [Charles Herle] who was sometime prolocutor of the [Westminster] Assembly'. He went on to describe how he was $20 poorer for his move, but was rewarded by having twenty times more people to preach to than at Hulcott and Dunton (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.89-90). John Tillotson suggested that Rawlet apply for the position of lecturer in Baxter's old parish of Kidderminster, Worcestershire, and Rawlet went as far as delivering a trial sermon in September 1671. But he concluded that his services were better employed in Wigan, where 'beside the too large parish with which I am in some sort charged, there are few holy daies but I am engagd to preach somewhere about us', for which he had Wilkins's 'free leave' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.119). On 18 September the nonconformist minister Oliver Heywood heard one such sermon when Rawlet preached outside his parish at Bolton. In 1672 Rawlet published 'An explication of the creed, the ten commandments and the Lord's Prayer', like his first work a devotional work designed for the use of the poor. 
From 1673 to 1682 Rawlet was minister of Kirkby Stephen, Westmorland. On 25 June 1679 he succeeded John Marsh in the lectureship of St Nicholas, Newcastle upon Tyne, and then was spoken of as 'a very pious and charitable man' (Longstaffe, 418). From early 1682 he was appointed to the newly restored chapel of St Ann's in the slum area of Sandgate, with responsibility for catechizing the children in the school that the council had established there. Evidently a popular minister, in March 1682 he declined the offer of Simon Digby, Lord Digby, of the vicarage of Coleshill in Warwickshire because the people of Newcastle 'so earnestly beset him with their intreaties, not to leave them', and instead he recommended Thomas Kettlewell to the vacancy (Bray, preface). Rawlet remained in Newcastle for the rest of his life. He was described as 'the happy instrument of gaining more souls to God, by his plain, pathetic and practical preaching, and by an uncommon exemplariness in life and conversation, than most others in the days he lived in' (Bray, sig. C). He continued his work of proselytizing the poor in print. In 1685 he published 'A Dialogue betwixt Two Protestants, in Answer to a Popish Catechism', and the following year 'The Christian Monitor', which went through many editions in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (seven alone in its first year) and was translated into French and Welsh. The twentieth edition, published in 1696, claimed that 95,000 copies had by then been sold. Rawlet hoped that it would be 'scattered abroad upon pedlars stalls and thence come into the hands of the common people' (Green, 357), and while it was normally sold at 3died, it was also offered in job lots of 100 copies for $1 to the charitably disposed to give away. 
When close to death, on 25 September 1686 Rawlet went through the ceremony of marriage with Anne (1650/51-1703), the daughter of Thomas Butler, a merchant of Newcastle who had been sheriff there in 1652. The marriage took place at her request, and they had apparently 'been some time in love together' (Longstaffe, 54). He died in Newcastle three days later, on 28 September 1686, and was buried on 30 September at St Nicholas's. In his will he left landed property in Tamworth, yielding an annual income of just over $23, and his library of over 900 books to his native town, in the hope of benefiting its school and inhabitants. 


@@@@@


doc= 23184


Rawley, William (c.1588-1667), Church of England clergyman and literary editor, was born in Norwich, of unknown parentage. On 22 January 1600 he was admitted 'Bible' clerk of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he was tutored by a Mr Chapman, and, after graduating BA in 1605 and MA in 1608, was elected fellow and tutor on 19 March 1610. Ordained at Peterborough on 18 April 1611, on 10 December 1612 he was instituted by the university to St Michael's in Bowthorpe, Norfolk, a post he held until his death, the church being 'neglected and laid in decay, without any Service, it being esteemed as a Sine-Cure' (Blomefield, 1.638). He proceeded BD in 1615. His fellowship was briefly suspended in April 1616, after he protested against the enforced appointment of the master's son as fellow. 
By this time Rawley was chaplain and 'amanuensis, or daily instrument' to Sir Francis Bacon (Bacon, 'Opuscula', (a) 2'r'), aiding him in preparing texts for publication; Bacon's influence caused Corpus Christi to give Rawley the Cambridgeshire rectory of All Saints, Landbeach, in 1616. After his fall in 1621 Bacon recommended Rawley, who that year proceeded DD, to his successor as lord keeper, John Williams, but Rawley remained with Bacon. In 'A Sermon of Meekenesse, Preached at the Spittle upon Easter Tuesday' (1623), he claimed that 'whatsoever is any way eminent either in my Estate, or Name, I am ready to ascribe it to your Lordship, from whence I have received it' (A2'r'- 'v'). After Bacon's death Rawley devoted his life to creating an unblemished portrait of his master, compiling a volume of commemorative verse, and editing, translating, and publishing selections of his work, culminating in the 'Resuscitatio' (1657) and 'Opuscula varia posthuma' (1658), which contained (in English and Latin respectively) his hagiographical but highly influential life of Bacon. His editorial endeavours led to correspondence with intellectuals including John Selden, Isaac Gruter, and Elie Diodati. 
During much of this period Rawley served as chaplain to Charles I, and attracted the patronage of Elizabeth of Bohemia. He returned to Landbeach in 1638, and married Barbara Weld, widow, daughter of a former Cambridge alderman, John Wicksted; they had two children, Mary, who died in infancy, and William. During the civil war Rawley encountered dissent within his flock, perhaps on political grounds: in 1644 twelve Landbeach men petitioned at Cambridge against him, and in 1652 he leased the rectory, presumably leaving the village. 
At the Restoration Rawley was appointed chaplain to Charles II. In 1661 he was elected to convocation as proctor of clergy for the Ely diocese, and subscribed the revised 'Book of Common Prayer'. His son, who had graduated BA from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1660 and been elected a fellow there in 1663, forfeited his fellowship in 1666 by failing to take deacon's orders, but the king intervened to persuade Corpus Christi 'to suffer William Rawley still to employ his fellowship there' ('CSP dom.', '1665-6', 386). However, William the younger, Barbara Rawley, and several servants of the family died of the plague the same year. Rawley himself died at Landbeach on 18 June 1667, and was buried in his church there. Beneficiaries of his will, drawn up on 12 January 1667, included his brother, Alderman Rawley of Norwich, numerous nieces and nephews, his stepsons Wicksted, Martin, John, and Matthew Weld, and Corpus Christi College, which received several of his books. 


@@@@@


doc= 23185


Rawlin, Richard (1686/7-1757), Independent minister, was probably the son of Richard Rawlin, the dissenting minister at Linton, Cambridgeshire, and subsequently at St Neot's, Huntingdonshire, and Stroud, Gloucestershire. He received his ministerial training at the small private academy run by William Payne at Saffron Walden. After completing his studies there he was appointed domestic chaplain to the family of Andrew Warner of Badmondisfield, Suffolk, where he also ministered to a congregation meeting in a registered barn on Warner's estate. In 1716 he accepted the invitation to become pastor of the Independent meeting at Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, commencing his ministry there on 5 November. He was a popular preacher and has been described by Walter Wilson as 'a judicious, practical and experimental devine; a serious, affectionate and solid preacher' (Wilson, 2.456). According to the 'Evans List' he had a congregation of 600 hearers and 40 county voters. He remained at Bishop's Stortford until 1730 when he succeeded Thomas Tingey as minister at the Independent meeting in Fetter Lane, London. 
Rawlin continued as minister at Fetter Lane for the remainder of his life. After he had been there for two years a new and larger meeting-house was built for him on the opposite side of the street. The congregation continued to grow and a succession of ministers was engaged to assist Rawlin. The first was John Farmer, followed by Edward Hitchen and finally Edward Hickman. In 1738 Rawlin was chosen to succeed Robert Bragge as one of the six Merchants lecturers at Pinners' Hall. His first contribution was a series of seven sermons on the doctrine of justification. These were subsequently published under the title 'Christ the Righteousness of the People' (1741), which ran to several editions. However, this was one of only two published works by Rawlin, the other being an address delivered at the ordination of Thomas Gibbons at Haberdashers' Hall in 1743. 
Rawlin died in St John's Square, London, on 15 December 1757 and was buried in the same vault in Bunhill Fields as his wife (1693-1749), a daughter of Joseph Brooksbank of Hackney, who had died in 1749. His funeral sermon was preached by John Guyse at the chapel in New Broad Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 23186


Rawlins, Richard (c.1460-1536), college head and bishop of St David's, was elected bachelor of Merton College in 1480. In 1484 he incepted MA and became a fellow, subsequently serving as the college's almoner, dean, and (in 1492) king of the beans, master of the Christmas revels. He was admitted BTh in 1493 and had his doctorate by 1495. On 1 March 1488 Rawlins was ordained acolyte to the title of his fellowship in the chapel of Durham College, the Oxford house of the Benedictines of Durham Priory; he became deacon on 19 December 1489 and was priested on 6 March 1490. He then embarked on a lucrative clerical career centred on London and the court. Admitted rector of St Mary Woolnoth in 1494, Rawlins became a canon of St Paul's (with the prebend of Willesdon) in 1499 and vicar of Hendon in 1504. He collected several further benefices, including canonries both of Howden, Yorkshire (presented 1506), and St George's Chapel, Windsor (appointed 1508). As chaplain to the king, Rawlins attended Henry VII's funeral and distributed several hundred pounds' worth of alms. He preached at the funeral of the infant Prince Henry in 1511, and was among those who received 20's'. for preaching in 1521; his fellow royal chaplain and immediate successor as warden of Merton, Rowland Philipps, appears as vicar of Croydon in the same list. 
On 17 February 1509 Rawlins was admitted warden of Merton, his return to college celebrated with a service in chapel, a play in the hall, and drinking and part songs. Judging by the theologically conservative standards of Richard Fitzjames, warden between 1483 and 1507, Richard Rawlins was a cautious reformer. But he maintained good relations with Fitzjames, by now bishop of London, lending him two censers and other plate from his own household in 1516. Rawlins's impact as warden is best measured by the college fabric. He presented a 1505 Venetian edition of Euclid's 'Elementa' to the library, and constructed the bridge from the hall to the sacristy tower which still bears his punning rebus, the letters 'RAW' with some lines carved beneath. New heraldic windows were installed in the hall on Richard Nele's benefaction in 1517; one of these 'glasyngs', the arms of the see of Rochester impaling those invented for Walter de Merton, survives in the chapel. The following year Katherine of Aragon visited the college during her pilgrimage to the shrine of St Frideswide, prompting a rather gushing speech from Rawlins comparing the queen to Juno and Minerva. He was well known to the king, accompanying Henry VIII to France in 1513 and again in 1520. Perhaps this familiarity provoked envy among the fellows; certainly they resented his periods of absence from college. In winter 1520-21 Rawlins was accused of misappropriating revenues and alienating land. He had evidently struck a private deal with Bishop Richard Fox of Winchester, whose new foundation of Corpus Christi was arising on Merton property next to the college in return for an annual rent of $4 6's'. 8died (a sum still paid to Merton each Lady day). Rawlins also, the fellows added peevishly, kept three unauthorized horses in his stables. The warden blustered, refused to co-operate with the archbishop's commissary who had been sent to investigate, and was finally deposed by Warham in his capacity as the college visitor on 19 September 1521. 
His Oxford career over, Rawlins was forced to look further afield for a position of equivalent rank. He found it in St David's, the largest of the Welsh sees: its cathedral housed the shrine of the national saint and drew in many pilgrims. Rawlins was consecrated bishop of St David's at Lambeth on 26 April 1523. He was now in advancing years, and any earlier interest in the cause of reform had deserted him. Although Rawlins took the 1534 oath renouncing papal jurisdiction, he resented the imposition of the evangelical zealot William Barlow as prior of Haverfordwest that same summer. Bishop Rawlins's resistance to the protestant prior's anti-papal good news goaded Barlow into a general denunciation of the 'enormous vices, fraudulent exactions, misordered living and heathen idolatry' of the diocese (Williams, 64). Worse was to come in 1535, when Cromwell appointed Barlow as suffragan bishop. Rawlins found himself forced to define his opinion on the fate of souls: while 'not minding to revive again a popish purgatory' of candles and paternosters before altars, he restated his belief that it was meet to pray for the souls of the dead ('LP Henry VIII', 10, no. 225). The final indignity came after Rawlins's death on 15 February 1536: William Barlow was his successor at St David's. 
The British Library catalogue attributes one letter to Richard Rawlins. Addressed to Warham and dated 14 June 1527, it refers approvingly to the archbishop's recent campaign to buy up 'all the bokes of the newe testamente translated into Englisshe and prynted beyonde the see' ('BL cat.'), principally William Tyndale's 1526 Worms edition, in order to destroy them. The writer, certainly a bishop, subscribed 10 marks to offset Warham's expenses of $66 9's'. 4died and sent a note of congratulation: 'Surely in myn opynion you have done therin a graciouse and a blessed dede and god I doubt not shall highly rewarde you therfore' (BL, Cotton Vitellius B.ix., fol. 131). The signature is indistinct, but bears similarities to that of Richard Nix, bishop of Norwich (died 1535). Nix was a staunch opponent of Lollardy; the source of the letter (Hoxne in north Suffolk, where Nix had his palace and from which he addressed most of his correspondence in his last years) confirms that he, and not Rawlins, was Warham's correspondent. 


@@@@@


doc= 23187


Rawlins, Thomas (c.1620-1670), engraver, medallist, and playwright, is of unknown origin. Best known for his skills and services as an engraver, he initially made his name as a playwright in 1640 when he published 'The Rebellion', a tragedy set in Seville, which he dedicated to Robert Ducie of Aston, Staffordshire, a relative. The title was to prove prophetic, since it was during the 'great rebellion' that he achieved prominence as an engraver and medallist. This occupation commanded his full attention, and it is not known when the two comedies published after his death were written. 'Tom Essence, or, The Modish Wife' was licensed to be performed at Dorset Gardens on 4 November 1676 and printed in 1677, and 'Tunbridge Wells, or, A Day's Courtship' was printed in 1678. A series of poems entitled 'Calanthe' of 1648, signed 'T.R.', are attributed to him, and he also wrote verses to introduce Nathaneal Richards's 'Tragedy of Messallina' and Richard Lovelace's 'Lucasta'. 
Rawlins is believed to have served as an apprentice goldsmith and gem-engraver in London before taking employment at the royal mint working under Nicholas Briot, the renowned French engraver and medallist who went to England in 1626. His earliest known work is a medal of William Wade of 1641. At the commencement of the civil war the Tower mint came under the control of parliament. The king initially settled at Shrewsbury and, anxious to establish a mint, ordered Thomas Bushell to come up from Aberystwyth with all dies, puncheons, and machinery from that mint, which had been established in 1637 as a satellite to the Tower to coin the Welsh silver. After three months Charles I moved to Oxford, to which place members of the Tower mint loyal to him repaired: Thomas Rawlins was one and Sir William Parkhurst, warden of the mint, was another. On 3 January 1643 the equipment from Shrewsbury arrived at Oxford, where Rawlins was to do his best work. Plate, both gold and silver, was ordered in or voluntarily supplied by the king's adherents to be melted for coining. To accomplish this as expeditiously as possible, the largest denominations hitherto current in both gold and silver were struck. These were the gold triple unite (a $3 piece) and the silver pound and half-pound pieces, all of which had initially been produced at Shrewsbury by Bushell. 
Rawlins was appointed graver of seals, stamps, and medals at Oxford in 1643. While he was responsible for all denominations, his best works were the pound and crown of 1644, the former showing the king riding a spirited horse over arms and armour and his declaration in a cartouche on the reverse with the date below, and the latter showing the king riding over a view of the city of Oxford, the declaration within scrolls, the date in script, and 'OXON' below. This fine piece, comparable to continental city thalers, has become known as the 'celebrated Oxford crown'. Rawlins was appointed chief engraver at the Tower and elsewhere in 1645. 
Rawlins also produced medals and badges at Oxford, significant being the gold Shrewsbury medal commissioned on 23 January 1643 for award to a select few who had afforded considerable support to the king while he was there. The obverse depicted the conjoined busts of Charles I and Charles, prince of Wales, and was used again to produce the 'forlorn hope badge', which was commissioned on 18 May 1643, taking the form of a uniface silver cliche with holes pierced near its edge to enable it to be stitched to the tunics of all who served in that body. By a commission of 1 June 1643 it finally formed the obverses of the gold medals awarded to Captain Sir John Smith and Lieutenant Sir Robert Welch for their retrieval of the royal standard at Edgehill: the reverses were named to the recipients. Rawlins produced a medal for the reunion of the king and queen at Kineton on 13 July 1643 and the 'peace or war medal', showing an olive branch and sword crossed, on the fall of Bristol to Prince Rupert on 26 July. In 1644 he produced a portrait medal of Sir William Parkhurst, showing him holding one of Rawlins's civil war badges. Rawlins produced a series of badges which were cast and chased and may have been awarded for acts of valour or merely made for wear by the king's supporters. 
Oxford surrendered on 24 June 1646. Little is known of Rawlins's movements during the next year or so, but he surfaced to produce badges and medals in memory of Charles I. It seems he then went to France, but he did return to England and is known to have been imprisoned for debt. At the Restoration he was restored as chief engraver, with appropriate lodgings, and produced a medal for the coronation. Thomas Simon, however, was responsible for the great seal and the hammered coinage of the first two years and was himself eclipsed by John Roettier, who was responsible for the milled coinage introduced in 1662 and most of the subsequent medals. Rawlins's incarceration for debt is thus perhaps explained by a seeming lack of employment during the interregnum. 
Little is known of Rawlins's private life other than that he married Dorothea Narbona. He died in 1670, presumably in London. His signature was variously 'T. Rawlins', 'T.R.', or 'R.'. The last has caused confusion because it was also the signature of David Ramage, an engraver to the Commonwealth, who produced a number of farthing tokens and was known as the farthing maker. 


@@@@@


doc= 23188


Rawlinson, Christopher (1677-1733), antiquary, was born at Springfield, Essex, on 13 June 1677, the second son of Curwen Rawlinson (1641-1689), landowner and MP, of Carke Hall in Cartmel, Lancashire, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1691), daughter of Nicholas Monck, bishop of Hereford. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 14 June 1695; there he was one of the group of Anglo-Saxon scholars who worked with Edward Thwaites, fellow of the college. He published in 1698 an edition of King Alfred's translation of Boethius, 'De consolationis philosophiae', from a transcript made by Francis Junius (Bodl. Oxf., MS Junius 12); this was printed at Oxford University Press with the Junian types. Thwaites dedicated his 'Grammatica Anglo-Saxonica ex Hickesiano thesauro excerpta' to Rawlinson in 1711. 
Rawlinson, having inherited his father's estates, died unmarried and intestate in Holborn Row, London, on 8 January 1733; he was buried in the abbey church of St Albans, Hertfordshire, on 31 January. His landed estates passed to the children of his father's sisters Anne and Katherine. The furniture of Carke Hall was sold by auction and his manuscripts were disposed of in bundles and bought for pence by the villagers. Rawlinson had made valuable collections for the history of Lancashire, Westmorland, and Cumberland, none of which appear to have survived. Sir Daniel Fleming had however copied extracts from the portion relating to Westmorland, and these extracts, in the collection of manuscripts at Rydal Hall, were used by Joseph Nicolson and R. Burn in their 'History and Antiquities of the Counties of Westmorland and Cumberland' (1777). 


@@@@@


doc= 23189


Rawlinson, Sir Christopher (1806-1888), judge in India, was born at Combe, Hampshire, on 10 July 1806, the second son of John Rawlinson (1777/8-1847), of the Middle Temple and Combe and Alresford, Hampshire, police magistrate at Marylebone, Middlesex, and his wife, Felicia, 'nee' Watson. He was educated at Charterhouse School, London (January 1819 to December 1823) and at Trinity College, Cambridge (matriculated 1824, BA 1828, MA 1831). Admitted at the Middle Temple on 28 March 1828 and called to the bar on 25 November 1831, he joined the western circuit in 1832, and was recorder of Portsmouth from 1840 to 1847. On 27 May 1847 he married Georgina Maria, younger daughter of Alexander Radclyffe Sidebottom, barrister; they had three sons and one daughter. 
Rawlinson was recorder of Prince of Wales Island, Singapore, and Malacca from March 1847 to April 1850. On 24 February 1847 he was knighted. From April 1850 he was chief justice of the supreme court of judicature at Madras until he retired in 1859. In his charge to the grand jury on 5 January 1859 he expressed his belief that great benefits would accrue from the recent transfer of the government of India from the East India Company to the crown, and denied the assertion then commonly made by British officials in India, that no materials for self-government existed there. On 9 February 1859 he was presented with a farewell address by the Indian community of Madras at an entertainment at which the governor, Lord Harris, was present. 
Rawlinson published 'The Municipal Corporation Act 5 & 6 Will. IV c. 76' (1842 and later editions). He died at his home, 33 Eaton Square, London, on 28 March 1888. 
Rawlinson's eldest son, Christopher Rawlinson (1850-1916), was born in London on 13 March 1850, educated at Winchester College and Trinity College, Cambridge (BA 1871, MA 1874), admitted at the Inner Temple on 9 April 1870, and called to the bar on 26 January 1874. He was on the western circuit, became a revising barrister in 1883, and died on 2 September 1916. The second son, Albemarle Alexander Rawlinson (1853-1930), was born in Madras on 27 September 1853 and educated at Winchester. He was admitted at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1872, but left for the 18th hussars (sub-lieutenant 1874, major 1883) and served in the Second Anglo-Afghan War. He died on 25 September 1930 at Shiplake, Oxfordshire. 
The youngest son, John Frederick Peel Rawlinson (1860-1926), was born at Airsford on 21 December 1860 and educated at Eton College and Trinity Hall, Cambridge (LLB 1883, LLM 1887, honorary LLD 1920). He was an association football blue and played for England in 1882. He was admitted at the Inner Temple on 18 June 1881 and called to the bar on 25 June 1884; he was appointed QC in 1897, bencher in 1907. He represented the Treasury in the inquiry after the Jameson raid. He was recorder of Cambridge from 1906 to 1926, and Conservative MP for Cambridge University from 1906 until his death, unmarried, on 14 January 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 23190


Rawlinson, Sir Henry Creswicke, first baronet (1810-1895), Assyriologist and diplomatist, was born at Chadlington, Oxfordshire, on 11 April 1810 into a north Lancashire family. He was the second son of Abram Tyzack Rawlinson, a breeder of racehorses, who married Eliza Eudocia Albinia Creswicke, of Gloucestershire, and settled in Chadlington in 1805. Educated at Wrington in Somerset and at a well-reputed school in Ealing, Rawlinson was entered for the East India Company's service and set out for India in 1827, sailing in the company of Sir John Malcolm, the well-known diplomatist and oriental scholar whose influence on him was profound. He outdistanced all his contemporaries in the acquisition of Persian and Indian vernacular languages. He received early promotion and was recognized as a smart officer, an outstanding horseman, and an exceptional linguist. From 1833 to 1839 with others he was engaged in reorganizing the Persian army. During this time he undertook tours in Susiana and Persian Kurdistan, for which explorations he was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society in 1839. He returned to India and was appointed assistant to Sir W. Macnaughton in Afghanistan, where he saw much action and fought with distinction in 1842 at Kandahar, where he had become political agent for lower Afghanistan. These operations marked the successful end of his military career. 
In 1843 Rawlinson was appointed political agent of the East India Company in Turkish Arabia and a year later also consul in Baghdad. His account of the cuneiform inscriptions of Bisitun was published in the 'Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society' in 1846, after a close and difficult examination of the site, which he had first inspected in 1836. He was elected a member of the society in 1847, and contributed many papers to its journals and addressed many of its meetings on different subjects of historical and literary importance. He was director of the society from 1862 until his death, and president from 1878 to 1881. He was also a long-time member and president of the Royal Geographical Society, and a contributor to its journal. Moreover, his brother George Rawlinson acknowledges in his 'History of Herodotus' (the first volume of which was published in 1858) that 'Sir Henry exercised a general supervision over the Oriental portion of the work', which was crucial to its success. It was said of him: 'Few have left such a roll of continuous literary activity', particularly when he was a man of action rather than of the study. He was promoted to the post of consul-general in 1851 in Baghdad and was involved with Sir Henry Layard in his Assyrian excavations; when he came home in 1856 he was made a KCB. 
Rawlinson is often referred to as the decipherer of cuneiform Akkadian, but this owes much to the adulatory biography published after his death by his scholar brother, George, and to his friendship with Sir Wallis Budge. In fact Rawlinson, though a fine scholar in Persian and Indian languages, was not well equipped to do so since he had no training in Semitic languages nor had he followed the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphs. He made copies of the old Persian rock inscription at Bisitun in 1836-7, but the similar inscriptions from Persepolis had already been deciphered in part in 1805 by Grotefend, whose work became available in English in 1833. Rawlinson's copy from Bisitun with an edition was published in 1847, by which time Edward Hincks, a poor clergyman in co. Down eighteen years his senior, had already solved the main problems in the old Persian script. The two men were rivals in deciphering Akkadian cuneiform, both the language and the script. Rawlinson made a copy of the Akkadian version from the Bisitun trilingual inscription in 1847 and published it in 1852, but was hindered by treating the signs as alphabetic, while Hincks had already discovered their syllabic and logographic functions, thanks partly to his familiarity with Egyptian, and partly to his understanding of Semitic grammar. Layard, excavator of Nineveh, shared his finds with both scholars, and Rawlinson was put in charge of excavations when Hormuzd Rassam took over as field director. Rawlinson entered the competition organized at the Royal Asiatic Society in 1857 to submit a sealed translation of an Assyrian inscription, as did Hincks, Fox Talbot, and Jules Oppert. The four results were sufficiently alike to show that basic decipherment had genuinely been achieved. Rawlinson actively suppressed Hincks's work on Akkadian inscriptions in the British Museum, where he had a powerful ally in Budge. His disparagement of Assyrian art and architecture, his treatment of Rassam as an inferior and a foreigner, and his failure to deliver the results of his work to Layard eventually caused Layard to prefer Hincks, whom Rawlinson unjustifiably called 'an unscrupulous poacher'. Rawlinson was anxious to prove his own priority in discoveries, and claimed credit for others' work on several occasions: the five great volumes 'The Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia', published under his name between 1861 and 1884, were in fact mainly the work of Edwin Norris, George Smith, and Theophilus Pinches. 
Rawlinson was returned on 4 February 1858 as conservative MP for Reigate, and was member for Frome from 1865 to 1868. On 12 September 1858 he became a member of the newly created Council of India but resigned on being appointed minister to Persia with the rank of major-general. His uncompromising attitude towards Russia led to his resignation the following year, though he attended the shah, Nasir al-Din, during his visits to England in 1873 and 1889, and maintained good relations with him. His publication of 'England and Russia in the East' (1875) stirred controversy with its outspokenness. He served as a trustee of the British Museum from 1876 to 1895. He was a commissioner for the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1878 and the Indian and Colonial Exhibition of 1886. He was president of the London Oriental Congress in 1874. He received many academic awards in this country and abroad. He was given the grand cross of the Bath on 23 July 1889, and created a baronet on 6 February 1891 on Lord Salisbury's recognition of 'his distinguished service to the state, stretching over a long series of years'. 
On 2 September 1862 Rawlinson married Louisa Caroline (died 1889), daughter of Henry Seymour of Knoyle, Wiltshire; they had two sons, of whom Henry Seymour Rawlinson succeeded to the baronetcy. Rawlinson died on 5 March 1895 at his London home, 21 Charles Street, Berkeley Square. He was buried in Brookwood cemetery, Woking, on 9 March. Among contemporaries, he enjoyed a fine reputation and though to some he seemed imperious in manner, others found his company 'delightful and profitable', and convivial without pretension. His undoubted energy, wealth, scholarship in languages, and high social standing promoted public interest in Assyriology, and gives reason for Budge, in 'The Rise and Progress of Assyriology' (1925), to call him 'the father of Assyriology'. 


