@@@@@


doc= 23191


Rawlinson, John (1576-1631), Church of England clergyman and college head, was the son of Robert Rawlinson, merchant tailor of London. Admitted to Merchant Taylors' School in 1585, and as a scholar to St John's College, Oxford, on 28 June 1591, he matriculated on 15 October, aged fifteen, graduated BA on 5 July 1595, and proceeded MA on 21 May 1599. He was a college lecturer in 1599 and the following year became master of Reading School. He contributed verses to William Vaughan's 'The Golden-Grove Moralized' (1600), and left other poems (BL, Royal MS 12.A.LXIV, fol. 24) composed at St John's, where he was elected a fellow on 12 November 1605. 
Rawlinson's sermon at Paul's Cross on Rogation Sunday, 5 May 1605, was published as 'The Foure Summons of the Shulamite' (1606). Although not licensed to preach until 26 February 1606 he quickly gained a reputation as a fluent, florid, and edifying preacher, together with powerful patronage and lucrative preferment. Through Archbishop Richard Bancroft he was rector of Taplow, Buckinghamshire, from 1606 to 1610 and, having proceeded DD on 1 June 1608, vicar of Asheldam, Essex, and canon of New Sarum from 1609. The provost and fellows of Queen's College, Oxford, elected him principal of St Edmund Hall on 1 May 1610; he resigned his fellowship at St John's on 13 December with a gratuity of $10. Soon after he married, and his daughter Joyce was born within a few years; it is not known whether the Catherine named in his will was his first or a later wife. Certainly by 1611, and probably before 1609, when he dedicated his 'Fishermen Fishers of Men' (preached at the Mercers' Chapel) to Sir John Egerton, Rawlinson was chaplain to Thomas Egerton, Lord Ellesmere. As chancellor of the university and a favourer of Calvinism, Ellesmere supported Rawlinson's candidature in 1611 for the presidency of St John's, the latter having nailed his anti-Catholic colours to the mast the previous year with 'The Romish Judas' (1611), preached at the university church on 5 November. Narrowly defeated by William Laud, Rawlinson appealed unsuccessfully first to the college visitor and then to the king, but he retained the backing of the Egertons. In dedicating to Ellesmere his 'Mercy to a Beast' (1612), 'an egg of your own laying', he acknowledged his long-standing gratitude. He acquired the rectories of Selsey, Sussex, in 1613 and Whitchurch, Shropshire, in 1614, and in time royal favour was also forthcoming. 'Vivat rex' (1619), delivered at Paul's Cross on 24 March 1615, the twelfth anniversary of James's accession, stressed that the king must 'voluntarily submit his will to the direction of the law', but does not seem to have caused offence. James admitted Rawlinson to the prebend of Netherbury in Ecclesia at Salisbury and by 1619 he was a royal chaplain. 'The Dove-Like Soule', preached before Prince Charles on 19 February 1619, was one of his four Lenten sermons at Whitehall published in 'Quadriga salutis' (1625). 
Despite his manifold commitments elsewhere Oxford remained Rawlinson's base. His 'Unmasking of the Hypocrite' (1616) was preached at the university church. In 1623 he was among those before whom Gabriel Bridges was summoned for preaching a university sermon against absolute predestination. Two daughters, Elizabeth and Dorothy, were buried respectively in 1624 and 1629 at St Peter-in-the-East, adjacent to St Edmund Hall. In the interim Rawlinson built a new house on the High Street nearby. On 26 December 1627 William Juxon, now president of St John's, wrote elliptically to Rawlinson's erstwhile rival William Laud, now bishop of London, reporting the fact. In the course of conversation Rawlinson had suggested to Juxon several new ecclesiastical appointments, including Juxon's to the see of Worcester and his own to the see of Oxford 'for which his new house was well fitted'. Juxon 'trouble[d] the Bishop with these particulars that he may read the good conceit we have of ourselves at Oxford' ('CSP dom.', '1627-8', 479). 
Rawlinson's daughter Joyce married Richard Alport at Whitchurch on 23 January 1630 or 1631. On 29 January 1631 Rawlinson drew up his will in the presence of Alport, leaving his Oxford house and property at Cassington, Oxfordshire, and Limbury, Dorset, to his wife, Catherine, during her widowhood, with reversion to Richard and Joyce, who also received property at Whitchurch and all her father's books. Bequests were also made to Rawlinson's sister Elizabeth Heale and her children, and to St Edmund Hall and St John's. The overseers were Rawlinson's 'sister-in-law' Ellen Alport and Richard Zouche, principal of St Alban Hall. Rawlinson died on 3 February 1631, and was buried at Whitchurch on 10 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 23192


Rawlinson, Richard (1690-1755), topographer and bishop of the nonjuring Church of England, was born on 3 January 1690 at his father's house in the Old Bailey, St Sepulchre's, London, eighth of the fifteen children of Sir Thomas Rawlinson (bap. 1647, d. 1708), vintner and lord mayor of London, and his wife, Mary Taylor (1661/2-1725). He was educated at St Paul's School, probably from 1697, at Eton College from 1702, and at St John's College, Oxford, whence he matriculated in 1708, graduating BA in 1711 and proceeding MA in 1713. His early interest in topography is demonstrated by his compiling while at Eton a historical account of the places on the road between Eton and London. He early acquired from his older brother Thomas Rawlinson (1681-1725) an enthusiasm for book collecting and while a student he began to collect editions of the classics, books on English history, topography, and drama. His enthusiasm for antiquarian studies was encouraged at Oxford where he came under the influence of the second generation of Anglo-Saxon scholars and where the collections Anthony Wood had made the previous century for the history of Oxford and Oxford men made a lasting impression. He consulted manuscripts at the Ashmolean Museum from 1710 and at the Bodleian Library from 1711. In the latter year he published a 'Life of Anthony Wood', whose interests in topography and biography he was already emulating, travelling out of Oxford as an undergraduate to copy monumental inscriptions in neighbouring parish churches. 
After 1711 Rawlinson began to share his brother Thomas's rooms in the Middle Temple, then followed him to Gray's Inn. The young antiquary developed 'a gift for editing other men's work and acted as foster-parent to many orphaned books' (Ward and Waller, 351). Many of the antiquarian books published by Edmund Curll were seen through the press by Rawlinson, among them Tristram Risdon's 'Survey of Devon' (1714), Elias Ashmole's 'Antiquities of Berkshire' (1719), John Aubrey's 'Natural History and Antiquities of the County of Surrey' (1719), and accounts of the cathedrals of Hereford, Worcester, Lichfield, and Rochester all in 1717, and of Salisbury and Bath in 1719. In 1720 there appeared 'The English topographer, or, An historical account of all the pieces that have been written relating to the natural history or topographical description of any part of England'. Considered by John Nichols as Rawlinson's principal work, it provided the pattern for Richard Gough's 'Anecdotes of British Topography' (1768 and 1780). 
In the summer of 1712 Rawlinson began his extensive journeys throughout England, during which he made antiquarian notes and copied monumental inscriptions. In 1718 he visited, in the company of Edmund Curll, most of the parishes of Oxfordshire, with the intention of compiling a history of the county, which was to include Anthony Wood's history of the city of Oxford. The plan never materialized, but the collections were preserved and, like so many of his antiquarian papers, survive in the Bodleian Library. In 1713 he became a governor of Bridewell and Bethlem hospitals in London and was in 1714 elected a fellow of the Royal Society. Rawlinson was, like his father, a staunch Jacobite and nonjuror. He was ordained deacon and priest in the nonjuring Church of England by Jeremy Collier in 1716, and, though he sought to keep his ordination secret, was active ministering among the nonjurors. 
After travelling extensively in England, Rawlinson was keen to go abroad, to study foreign languages, to meet continental scholars, and to add to his collections. As a nonjuror in a church which was becoming increasingly divided over its liturgical practices, he was interested to see for himself foreign liturgical traditions. As a Jacobite he wished above all else to visit the court of James Stuart, the Pretender, at Rome. In 1719 he travelled in France and the Netherlands, and was enrolled as a student at the universities of Utrecht and Leiden. Oxford created him DCL the same year. In 1720 he began his tour of the continent, visiting the Netherlands, France, Germany, Italy, Sicily, and Malta; he matriculated at Padua University in 1722 and spent many months resident in Rome. He kept a diary of his tour, which survives among his manuscripts in the Bodleian Library (MS Rawlinson D. 1179-87). 
Rawlinson decided to return to England on receiving news of the death of his banker, a long-time family friend whose executor he was, and at Genoa he read a newspaper account of the death of his brother Thomas. During Rawlinson's absence abroad Thomas had neglected his estates, accumulated huge debts in the course of adding to his collections of books, manuscripts, and prints, married unwisely, and finally disinherited his siblings by breaking the entail on the family estates and settling an allowance on his widow. It was his brother's unenviable task to reach a settlement with Thomas's widow, to set the management of the estates in order, to sell Thomas's vast collections, and to pay off his creditors. The arrangements for the auctions dominated Rawlinson's life for seven years from 1726, but the proceeds of the sales were much smaller than anticipated, and he was not free of debt until 1748. These financial difficulties forced him to live frugally and prevented him from travelling, from publishing or collecting on the scale he desired, and even from visiting Oxford for many years. 
Rawlinson settled in London in 1726, first at his old rooms in Gray's Inn, then from 1734 at the apartments that were formerly his brother's in London House, Aldersgate Street. He was admitted a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1727 and about this time became a freemason. By 1732 he was master of the lodge in Ludgate Street, warden of another, and member of two more. He was grand steward in 1734. He briefly returned to editing and publishing, with a 'History of Sir John Perrott' (1728) and his own translation of Du Fresnoy, 'New Method of Studying History' (1728). Both attracted more criticism than praise and thereafter Rawlinson confined himself to the publication of private reprints and facsimiles. 
In 1728 Rawlinson was consecrated bishop by bishops Gandy, Doughty, and Blackbourne. With them he signed a declaration against the rituals advocated by Collier, among other 'usagers', and in favour of the continued use of the liturgy of the Church of England. He was party to the negotiations which culminated in the reunion of 1732, but the communion service remained a matter of controversy and the rift in the ranks of the nonjurors was only partially healed. Of lasting significance, however, was Rawlinson's role in preserving the records of the nonjurors, many of whose letters, sermons, and other papers survive in his manuscript collections at the Bodleian. He was tireless in his researches into the history of the nonjurors and sent out biographical questionnaires to all known nonjuring clergy and academics, arranging and binding the returns for safekeeping. Rawlinson's nonjuring and Jacobite loyalties never wavered. They eventually led to his falling out with colleagues in the Royal Society and then the Society of Antiquaries. His interest in antiquities and in early English history was stimulated, as it was in other nonjuring scholars, by his desire to find precedents and tradition to justify their position. The nonjurors' emphasis on the importance of Anglo-Saxon studies probably influenced Rawlinson's endowment of a lecturer or professor in Anglo-Saxon at Oxford. 
With the deaths of Thomas Hearne and Thomas Tanner in 1735, Rawlinson regarded the study of antiquity as at a low ebb, but this only increased his own determination to 'provide for posterity without regard to this ungrateful age' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ballard 2, fol. 48'v') by collecting books, manuscripts, and historical materials. In particular he devoted much of his last twenty years to collecting biographical information about living or recently deceased Oxford men, in continuation of Anthony Wood's 'Athenae Oxonienses'. Thomas Tanner, who had inherited Wood's own collections on Oxford writers of 1500 to 1690, had published a supplementary volume in 1721. Rawlinson preferred merely to collect materials from 1690 to his own day, and to leave them to the Bodleian for a future editor to digest and publish. This project prompted his return to Oxford, made him many friends, and strengthened the ties between him and his 'dearest Oxford'. 
Rawlinson took as his episcopal motto 'I collect and I preserve', words which accurately reflect his consuming passion, the love of collecting inspired by his conviction that materials must be acquired and preserved for future generations. Before he went abroad in 1719 his collections were small, but in the course of his travels he acquired not only books and manuscripts but also coins, medals, seals, and miscellaneous curiosities. It was a severe disappointment on his return to learn that he was not to inherit his brother Thomas's magnificent library and a bitter task to oversee its dispersal in a series of eleven sales. His meticulous records, compiled to satisfy the scrutiny of his sister-in-law's new husband, John Tabor, provide interesting insights into the mechanics of eighteenth-century book auctions. Prevented by his agreement with Tabor from simply withholding from sale those items which he wished to own, Rawlinson had to match the highest bid at auction. He nevertheless acquired considerable numbers of his brother's books and manuscripts. 
Rawlinson's move to London House in 1734 marked the resumption of his collecting, particularly of manuscripts, on a grander scale. He frequented auction rooms and booksellers' premises and bought widely in all periods. His collections include many early charters, several monastic cartularies, hundreds of medieval liturgical, biblical, and classical manuscripts, an important group of medieval Irish manuscripts including the famous 'annals of Inisfallen', a series of some 250 poetical miscellanies mainly of the seventeenth century, over 100 volumes of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century literary and scholarly correspondence, and a wide range of manuscripts relating to topography, history and biography, heraldry and genealogy, theology, law, and medicine. 
Rawlinson did not confine himself to the traditional means of purchasing manuscripts through auctioneers and booksellers. He vastly increased his collections by seeking papers of historical interest which had been sold for scrap, scouring grocers' and chandlers' shops, and purchasing by weight important seventeenth-century archives. He also developed unrivalled skill in locating papers which had strayed and were thought to have been lost -- most notably the state papers of John Thurloe and the Admiralty papers of Samuel Pepys. He systematically sorted all the collections he bought as discarded bundles of loose papers and had them bound into volumes to reduce the risk of their being unwittingly or carelessly thrown away a second time. 
Although increasingly convinced that his contemporaries did not value these materials as they ought, Rawlinson was always generous both in lending items from his collection to scholars who expressed an interest in their contents and in presenting them to institutions which could be relied on to preserve them. From the 1730s his gifts of books and portraits to the Bodleian Library became almost an annual event. As the fame of his collections grew, and he never married, speculation about their eventual fate became a matter for public discussion. Rawlinson's own loyalties were divided between the two institutions which seemed still to encourage the study of history and antiquities, the Society of Antiquaries and the University of Oxford, and his first will left part of his collections to each. Humphrey Owen, Bodley's librarian from 1747, was assiduous in his proper acknowledgement of Rawlinson's gifts already received and in offering space in the refurbished picture gallery for some of the bulkier items in his collections. Then the society, having elected him vice-president in 1753, in 1754 removed him from the council on account of his Jacobite loyalties, and Rawlinson revoked his bequest to the antiquaries. 
Rawlinson's health was already failing by then and he died on 6 April 1755 at Islington. Following his instructions his body was buried in St Giles' Church in Oxford and his heart in the chapel of St John's College, on 14 April. To the Bodleian, that 'sanctuary for use and curiosity' as he described it (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. lett. 31, fol. 444), he bequeathed all his manuscripts, charters and seals, and a selection of his printed books. To St John's he bequeathed the bulk of his landed property, some of his books, and his coins and medals. In addition to his earlier endowment of a chair in Anglo-Saxon at Oxford, he made provision for the salary of the keeper of the Ashmolean Museum. 
Rawlinson's political and religious views were at odds with the majority of his contemporaries, many of whom judged him only as a stubborn nonjuror and Jacobite. The intensity of the dislike his principles engendered is illustrated in the abusive attack on his character published in the 'Evening Advertiser' of 19 November 1754, which labelled him a misanthrope, 'an opposer of our established religion' and 'abuser of the present government', one who pretended to be an antiquarian 'out of sheer hatred to the present generation' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 9.617-19). Those who shared his enthusiasm for antiquity and his scholarly interest in preserving historical materials for the future acknowledged him as a generous patron who did all in his power to assist scholarly antiquarian enterprises. He was one of the greatest collectors of the eighteenth century and his lasting monument is the vast accumulation of 5000 manuscripts which have furnished material for all manner of historical, theological, and literary studies since they came to rest in the Bodleian in 1756. 


@@@@@


doc= 23193


Rawlinson, Sir Robert (1810-1898), civil engineer, was born at Bristol on 28 February 1810, the son of Thomas Rawlinson, a builder, of Chorley, Lancashire, and his wife, Grace Ellice of Exeter. He was educated at Lancaster, where his father moved shortly after his birth, and for a time assisted his father in his business as a builder, contractor, and millwright. He married in 1831 Ruth, daughter of Thomas Swallow of Lockwood, Yorkshire, and in the same year joined the civil engineering contractor Jesse Hartley, where he remained until 1836, working mainly on dock and harbour construction. He then worked under Robert Stephenson on the building of the London and Birmingham Railway. 
In 1840 Rawlinson returned to Liverpool, becoming assistant surveyor to the corporation, and from 1843 to 1847 was employed as chief engineer under the Bridgewater trust. During this period, means of improving Liverpool's water supply were under discussion, and he advocated the utilization of Bala Lake in Wales as a reservoir for the city. A form of Rawlinson's scheme was eventually realized in the 1890s. 
In 1848 Rawlinson was appointed a government public health inspector under the 'Public Health Act' and later became head of the department. It was, however, through his dedicated and technically innovative work as head of the sanitary commission which was sent out by the government to the Crimea to investigate the sanitary conditions of the British army at Sevastopol that the foundations of Rawlinson's most important and enduring work in the field of public health and sanitation were laid. On his return from the Crimea Rawlinson took up his duties as chief engineering inspector under the Local Government Board, and prepared and published some highly influential guidelines for improved town sewerage and domestic drainage systems, intended for the engineers and surveyors to local boards, which contributed greatly to the development of urban sanitation for the rest of the nineteenth century. 
In 1863 Rawlinson served as a member of the army sanitary committee. In April of that year, during the cotton famine in Lancashire, he was sent by Lord Palmerston, the prime minister, to organize relief works for the thousands of men and women thrown idle by the stoppage of the cotton supply from America owing to the civil war. The works he then started occupied his attention until 1869. In 1865 and in 1868 he was chairman of the commissions appointed to inquire into the best means of preventing industrial river pollution; and in 1876 he served on another commission considering town sewerage. In 1884 he was president of the congress of the Sanitary Institute of Great Britain held at Dublin, and published the address he delivered in that capacity. 
For his many valuable services in connection with public health and sanitation Rawlinson was knighted on 24 July 1883, and in January 1888 he was made KCB. In that year he retired from the office which he had held for forty years as chief engineering inspector to the Local Government Board. He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in March 1848; he served on its council for many years and became president in May 1894 when he was eighty-four. His presidential address was published in the same year. He died at his home, Lancaster Lodge, 11 The Boltons, South Kensington, on 31 May 1898, and was buried in Brompton cemetery on 4 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 23194


Rawlinson, Sir Thomas (bap. 1647, d. 1708), local politician, was baptized in the parish of St Dionis Backchurch, London, on 1 April 1647, the second son of Daniel Rawlinson (1614-1679), and his wife, Margaret Pever (died 1666). His father was a London vintner who kept The Mitre tavern in Fenchurch Street. Young Rawlinson followed his father's business; he was admitted a freeman of the Vintners' Company on 12 October 1670, and emulating his father, later served as master, in 1687 and in 1696. In 1680 he married Mary (1661/2-1725), eldest daughter of Richard Taylor of Turnham Green, who kept the Devil tavern by the Temple. They had fifteen children, among them Thomas Rawlinson (1681-1725), a noted book collector, and Richard Rawlinson (1690-1755), antiquarian and likewise a noted collector of manuscripts and books. Shortly after marriage, the couple moved to the Old Bailey, which remained the principal family residence for the rest of Rawlinson's life. 
Rawlinson first entered public life as a common councillor for Farringdon Without in 1683, and two years later was a juror in the tory-orchestrated trial of Henry Cornish. Under James II Rawlinson emerged as an important figure in the capital, both in political and business circles. In 1685 he gained election to the committee of the East India Company, on which he served to 1689, at which time he held $3750 stock. He later held a seat on the board in 1690-92, 1693-8, and 1700-07, and was a manager of the united East India trade in 1703-5. His tory loyalties were rewarded with appointment to the aldermanic bench in April 1686, and further honours duly followed. On 6 August 1686 he was knighted at Windsor, and in the following month was appointed sheriff of London and Middlesex by the king. However, he was removed as alderman in September 1687, presumably for giving less than wholehearted backing for the king's controversial religious policies. Despite this personal setback he remained loyal to the throne, and at the height of the revolution of 1688 defied the City whigs when they moved to send a laudatory address to William, prince of Orange, proposing instead that thanks be sent to James II for his return to London. 
Although reviled by the whigs for his association with the discredited Stuart regime, Rawlinson proved a loyal subject under William, whom he later described as 'a gracious King' (Rawlinson letters 63, fol. 10'v'). He served as a common councillor in 1688-9, made two substantial loans to the government, and was appointed a colonel of the City's newly raised auxiliary forces during the invasion scare of July 1690. He regained a seat on the aldermanic bench in December 1696, and in the same year was appointed a commissioner for the abortive land bank. Under Anne, his civic honours multiplied, he being appointed a colonel of the White regiment on 21 June 1705. Three months later he became president of Bridewell and Bethlem hospitals, and the following Michaelmas day was chosen lord mayor. During his mayoralty the City celebrated Marlborough's victories in Flanders, and at Rawlinson's request, the queen presented the trophies and colours taken at Ramillies and other engagements to be hung in the Guildhall. His surviving papers reflect the meticulous care with which he performed his public duties, and he was later celebrated for being 'easy and sedate' (Rawlinson MSS, D862, fols. 90-91) in the mayoral chair. 
Rawlinson died on 9 November 1708 at his house in the Old Bailey, and was buried on 18 November in the church of St Dionis, in the tomb of his father. His will, dated 20 January 1700, suggests a considerable personal fortune, listing properties in Warwickshire, London, Essex, and Lancashire. His widow twice remarried, and was buried in St Dionis Backchurch on 1 March 1725. 
Rawlinson's kinsman, 


@@@@@


doc= 23195


Rawlinson, Thomas (1681-1725), book collector, was born on 25 March 1681 in the Old Bailey in the parish of St Sepulchre, London, the eldest son of Sir Thomas Rawlinson (bap. 1647, d. 1708), vintner and later lord mayor of London, and Mary (1661/2-1725), the eldest daughter of Richard Taylor of Turnham Green, Middlesex. His brother, the nonjuror antiquary and collector Richard Rawlinson (1690-1755), was the fourth son. Thomas was educated at Mr Day's school in Cheam, Surrey, and at Eton College until 1698. While still at Eton he was admitted a member of the Middle Temple in January 1696 or 1697. He matriculated from St John's College, Oxford, on 25 February 1699 and stayed until December 1701, but did not take a degree. After a tour through England and the Low Countries he returned to study municipal law at the Middle Temple. On 19 May 1705 he was called to the bar and the next year he was appointed a governor of Bridewell and Bethlem hospitals, of which his father became president soon after. He was made governor of St Bartholomew's Hospital on 7 July 1712. His inclination to practise law was minimal. It had been his passion for some time to collect books and manuscripts (he received an annuity for books from his grandfather Richard Taylor) and he pursued this occupation almost exclusively after inheriting his father's estates, becoming the ''Leviathan' of book-collectors during nearly the first thirty years of the eighteenth century' (Dibdin, 458). 
Rawlinson collected both at home and abroad, mainly in the Netherlands and Flanders, operating within a wide circle of antiquaries and collectors. He later fell out with rival collectors Edward Harley and John Murray, but worked closely with John Bagford, Thomas Hearne, Michael Maittaire, and Richard Mead. In 1712 Bishop William Nicolson asked him for corrections for a new edition of his 'English Historical Library' (1714), and Maittaire acknowledged his assistance in his edition of Juvenal (1716). Joseph Ames and Maittaire owed much to Rawlinson's collections for their studies of early printing. Rawlinson also had a formative influence on the collecting and antiquarianism of his younger brother Richard. In 1717 he joined Hearne in a tour of Berkshire, and the next year both Rawlinsons undertook a perambulation of Oxfordshire for Richard's proposed antiquarian history of that county. Richard's 'English Topographer' (1720) is largely a catalogue of Thomas's topographical materials. In 1713 Thomas became a member of the Royal Society and in 1724 of the Society of Antiquaries. 
Rawlinson had a close relationship with the Oxford antiquary Thomas Hearne. They shared a love of antiquarian study and collecting and, as nonjurors and Jacobites, a deep-seated disaffection with the age they lived in. Both had outspoken and acrid temperaments: 'This Age (says my Friend) wants Monitors to Goodness, God knows; nay, ev'n severe ones, to scare thm out of ill Practises. I do my part in speaking; You, whose Pen is happier, by your Immortal Writings' ('Remarks', 7.178). They corresponded regularly, though unfortunately most of Rawlinson's letters to Hearne are not extant. Rawlinson almost every month sent boxes filled with books, manuscripts, and fragments for Hearne to evaluate. Hearne copied parts of Rawlinson's notebooks into his diaries and thus preserved some impression of Rawlinson as a bibliographer. Hearne much appreciated Rawlinson's classical, antiquarian, and bibliographical knowledge, and depended to an important extent on his information and judgements. 
Rawlinson attached great importance to Hearne's scholarly output, and acted as one of his agents, finding new subscribers, distributing books in his London circles, and advising his friend on his publishing projects. He provided Hearne with critical comments and materials for his edition of Leland's 'Itinerary' (1710-12), and with the manuscript for 'Beverly' (1716). He was closely involved with the preparations and production processes of the editions of Camden's 'Annals of Queen Elizabeth' (1717) and William of Newburgh's 'Chronicle' (1719). On a personal level he repeatedly offered Hearne a place in London to help solve his friend's political problems at Oxford. Hearne dedicated the preface of his edition of John Rouse (1716) to Rawlinson. His diary entry for 4 September 1725 is a warm and appreciative biographical account of his friend. 
In 1716 Rawlinson moved from London's Gray's Inn, where his chambers could no longer accommodate his collections and where he was forced to sleep in the passage, to the roomier London House in Aldersgate Street. Rawlinson's collecting activities were so intense that he accumulated vast debts and was forced to sell parts of his collections. He had neglected the administration of the Rawlinson estates, and, if information from William Oldisworth to Hearne can be relied upon, a late attempt to remedy his financial problems through investing in the disastrous South Sea stock only aggravated the situation. Six sales took place between 4 December 1721 and Rawlinson's death. 
On 22 September 1724 Rawlinson married his servant Amy Frewin, formerly a servant in an Aldersgate Street coffee house. The marriage appears to have embarrassed his family, angered his creditors, and, according to Richard's account of his brother, led to 'the hastening of his own death' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. J 4 degree 4, fols. 148-50). It also caused friends to speculate about his wife's character and questionable reputation. Rawlinson was much plagued by the creditors, and under the increasing pressure his health deteriorated fast. Hearne reflected that the booksellers should be more lenient and should in fact erect a statue to him, as Rawlinson had furthered their trade by driving up the prices of books through his frequent and high bidding. He died on 6 August 1725 in London House, and was buried on 12 August in the parish of St Botolph, Aldersgate. 
After Thomas's death his brother Richard returned from his travels in Europe. Under the terms of their father's will the entailed estates now devolved upon him. Thomas's will, however, complicated matters, as he had made over the family property to a nonjuror friend as his executor to hold in trust for his widow and possible heirs (there were no children). In order to secure the administration of the Rawlinson estates, Richard challenged the validity of the will. Forced to settle Thomas's debts and sell the entire collection, he organized eleven further auction sales in seven years. Nevertheless he was able to buy (and later retrieve) a great part of Thomas's books and manuscripts himself. What Richard thus salvaged finally came to the Bodleian Library, Oxford, in his great bequest to that institution and to the nation. Among other prominent purchasers at the sales were Lord Coleraine, Edward Harley, and James West. 
The auction sales of Rawlinson's collections of books and manuscripts took place at St Paul's Coffee House, Bedford Coffee House, and London House, between 4 December 1721 and 4 March 1734, the last being the sale of the manuscripts. His paintings were sold separately in April 1734; his prints may have been sold individually or retained by Richard. Thus there were seventeen sales in total, each auction lasting on average twenty days; the auctioneers were Charles Davis and Thomas Ballard, the latter assisted by Anthony Barker. The Bodleian holds copies of all the sale catalogues, annotated with the prices realized and a few of the buyers' names. According to De Ricci it was 'the largest library as yet sold in England and, with the Heber library, the largest sold to the present day' and comprised over 200,000 volumes (De Ricci, 45); Enright quotes 50,000 volumes and over 1000 manuscripts for the later sales (Enright, 'Later auction sales', 113). Among them were invaluable manuscripts and incunabula (his noteworthy collection of Caxtons), and choice Elzevier and Aldine editions of the classics, many with Rawlinson's characteristic collation mark, 'C&P' (collated and perfect). Prices at the sales were disappointingly low. This has been attributed to such factors as the sale arrangements, the great number of books released onto the market, the position and role of the booksellers, the condition of the items (often bad or imperfect), and the sales of other important collections in those years. 
The value and 'omnigenous' character of Rawlinson's collections, often praised by Hearne in his publications, long remained difficult to appreciate because of their sheer size and lack of organization (despite the sale catalogues compiled by Thomas) and the subsequent dispersal of the library. Rawlinson's reputation as an antiquarian collector also suffered because of the general lack of appreciation for the work of antiquaries, bibliographers, and collectors in the Augustan age. Well known is Joseph Addison's satirical description of Tom Folio in 'The Tatler' (no. 158, 1710), which was reputedly a portrait of Thomas Rawlinson. Hearne robustly countered this view in his affectionate account of his friend: 'Some gave out, & published it, too, in printed Papers, that Mr Rawlinson understood the Editions and Title-pages of Books only, without any other Skill in them, and thereupon they stiled him 'Tom Folio'. But these were only Buffoons, and persons of very shallow Learning. 'Tis certain that Mr Rawlinson understood the Editions and Titles of Books better than any Man I ever knew (for he had a very great Memory), but then, besides this, he was a great Reader, and had read abundance of the best writers ancient and modern throughout, and was intirely master of the Learning contain'd in them. ('Remarks', 9.20)' 



@@@@@


doc= 23196


Sir Thomas Rawlinson (c.1710-1769), also served as lord mayor of London. He was son of the Revd Robert Rawlinson (1680-1747) of Charlwood, Surrey, and his wife, Margaret Ray ('b'. 1677). His grandfather Daniel Rawlinson was the first Sir Thomas Rawlinson's first cousin. By 1735 he had married his first cousin Dorothea (1704-1743), daughter of the Revd Richard Ray of Haughley, Suffolk; he soon established himself as one of the City's most prominent grocers. He was elected a common councillor in 1741-4, alderman of Broad Street ward in 1746, and sheriff of London and Middlesex two years later. He rose rapidly within the Grocers' Company, and in 1746-7 served the office of master. On the death, on 27 November 1753, of lord mayor Edward Ironside, Rawlinson took the chair for the remainder of the year. He was knighted in 1760, was colonel of the Red regiment of trained bands from 1762 to his death, and was a prominent member of the Honourable Artillery Company, to which he presented in 1763 a 'sheet of red colours'. He was elected vice-president of the company in July 1766 and held the presidency of St Bartholomew's Hospital from 1767 to his death. He lived latterly at his estate of Stowlangtoft Hall in Suffolk, which he bought in 1760, but died at his house in Fenchurch Street, London, on 3 December 1769, his body being returned to Suffolk for burial at Haughley. His son, Sir Walter Rawlinson, inherited his Suffolk estates and married Mary, daughter of Sir Robert Ladbroke, lord mayor of London; they had no children. Walter Rawlinson became a partner in the banking firm of Ladbroke, Robinson, and Parker. He was elected alderman of Dowgate in 1773, and resigned in 1777. He was also president of Bridewell and Bethlem hospitals in 1773-7, was knighted in 1774, and represented Queenborough in parliament from 1774 to 1784, and Huntingdon from 1784 to 1790. He died at Devonshire Place, London, on 13 March 1805. 


@@@@@


doc= 23197


Rawlinson, Sir William (1640-1703), lawyer, was born on 16 June 1640 at Graythwaite, Lancashire, the second son of William Rawlinson (1606-1680) of Graythwaite and Rusland Hall, Lancashire, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1683), daughter of Anthony Sawrey of Plumpton, Lancashire. Rawlinson attended Hawkshead School, run by a Mr Bordley. On 13 April 1655 he was admitted to Christ's College, Cambridge, and on 20 February 1657 he was admitted to Gray's Inn. Rawlinson was called to the bar in 1667, where he emerged as a regular pleader in chancery cases, being the third most frequent pleader in 1680. 
In April 1686 Rawlinson was made a serjeant-at-law, being sponsored by Laurence Hyde, first earl of Rochester, and Sir John Trevor. Following the revolution he was named on 1 March 1689 as one of three commissioners of the great seal, and knighted on the 5th. When Sir John Maynard (his wife's grandfather) was removed as a commissioner of the great seal in May 1690 and Sir Anthony Keck resigned, Rawlinson was continued in post along with two new appointees, Sir John Trevor and Sir George Hutchins. In November 1690 Rawlinson appeared before the House of Lords to oppose a bill regulating the court of chancery. He continued as a commissioner until Sir John Somers was made lord keeper in March 1693. Somers was instrumental in denying Rawlinson promotion to be chief baron of the exchequer, arguing that his inexperience in the 'course of the exchequer' (Sachse, 93) rendered him unfit for the office. Instead the incumbent, Sir Robert Atkyns, remained in post, and by late March Rawlinson had resumed his private practice in chancery. In February 1694 he appeared before the Lords in the high-profile 'Montagu v. Bath' case. On 8 March that year Rawlinson appeared before a committee of the Lords considering the bill for settling the estate of Sir John Maynard, and he appears to have secured a clause on his wife's behalf. In May 1695 Sir John Lowther of Lowther, second baronet, the future Viscount Lonsdale, was promoting Rawlinson to succeed Atkyns as chief baron, but again to no avail. In April 1697 Rawlinson again appeared before the Lords as counsel in the 'Montagu v. Bath' case, and in October 1697 he appeared as counsel when the duke of Devonshire and the marquess of Normanby went to chancery over the purchase of Berkeley House. 
Rawlinson died in Hendon of apoplexy on 11 May 1703 and was buried in the church at Hendon, where he had purchased the old mansion owned by the Whichcotes in Brent Street. He was survived by his second wife, Jane (died 1712), daughter of Edward Noseworthy of Devon and his wife, Honora, daughter of Sir John Maynard. He had two daughters by his first wife (whose identity is unknown): Anne, who predeceased her father and who in 1694 married John Aislabie; and Elizabeth, who married in 1687 William Lowther, a barrister of the Middle Temple and the son of Sir John Lowther of Lowther, first baronet, by his second wife, and, secondly, in 1702 Giles Earle, son of Sir Thomas Earle, MP and mayor of Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 23198


Rawson, George (1807-1889), hymn writer, was born in Park Square, Leeds, on 5 June 1807 into a Congregationalist family. Educated at Clunie's School, Manchester, he was articled to a firm of Leeds solicitors, and ultimately practised for himself. Retiring from business, he went to Clifton, Bristol, where he attended Highbury Chapel. He died at Clifton on 25 March 1889. 
Rawson was an active Congregationalist layman and hymn writer. His earliest verses appeared anonymously, under the signature of a Leeds Layman, because he refused to allow his name to be appended to his hymns. In 1853 he assisted the Congregationalist ministers of Leeds in compiling the 'Leeds Hymn-Book', to which he contributed six hymns. He wrote twenty-seven compositions for the 'Psalms and Hymns for the Use of the Baptist Denomination' (1858). He also published two notable collections of his own verses: 'Hymns, Verses and Chants' (1876) and 'Songs of Spiritual Thought' (1885). His best-known hymns are 'By Christ redeemed', 'Father in high heaven dwelling', and 'We limit not the truth of God'. 


@@@@@


doc= 23199


Rawson, John, Viscount Clontarff (1470?-1547?), prior of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem in Ireland and administrator, was descended from a family long established at Water Fryston in Yorkshire. His father, Richard Rawson, was an alderman of London in 1476-7, senior warden of the Mercers' Company from 1478 to 1483, and sometime sheriff of London. His mother was Isabella Craford (died 1497). His brother Richard (died 1543) was chaplain to Henry VIII and archdeacon of Essex. John was the eldest son, and in 1492 was admitted free of the Mercers' Company. However, he joined the order of the knights of St John before 1497. In 1510 he was dispatched to Rome on a mission representing his order and 'en route' was received by the doge at Venice. The following year he was appointed prior of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem at Kilmainham, Dublin. This office carried with it the headship of the order in Ireland and a seat in the Irish house of peers. At that time, Rawson was sworn a member of the privy council. He also held the preceptories of Quenington, Gloucestershire, and Swinfield. 
In 1515 Rawson and the earl of Kildare dined with the king at Greenwich, and in that year he was commended by Fabrizio del Carretto, grand master of the order, for his good management at Kilmainham. In 1517 he was appointed treasurer of Ireland. The following year he was summoned to the defence of Rhodes, then besieged by the Ottomans. In 1519 he obtained a licence from the king to travel abroad for three years but he apparently did not leave England since his licence was revoked and he was obliged to return to Ireland in July 1520 with Lord Lieutenant Surrey. Further to Cardinal Wolsey's representations on his behalf, Rawson was appointed treasurer in February 1522. He remained in Ireland until March of that year and then appears to have travelled to Rhodes, as his name features at the head of the list of English knights reviewed there by the grand master, Philippe Villiers de l'Isle Adam in 1522. Following the surrender of Rhodes on 20 December 1522 Rawson returned to Ireland. In 1525 he again received a licence to travel abroad for three years and to retain his benefices and revenues in his absence. In June 1527 he accompanied Villiers de l'Isle Adam to Corneto in Italy and that same month he was appointed turcopolier or commander of the turcopoles or light infantry of the order. This office carried with it the headship of the English 'langue' of the order and responsibility for the coastal defences of Malta. 
In September 1528 Henry VIII reappointed Rawson treasurer of Ireland and in 1529 he served as under-treasurer. From September 1529 to August 1530 Rawson was a member of the secret council of Ireland which served as deputy lieutenant to Henry Fitzroy, duke of Richmond. In 1532 he travelled to England for consultations with the king and he also participated in the proceedings against Sir William Skeffington. He remained loyal to the crown during the Kildare rebellion. During the revolt his property was plundered by the insurgents and he was present at the surrender of Old Ross Castle in Wexford. In August 1534 he was at St David's in Wales, 'en route' to inform Henry VIII of recent events in Ireland, but was unable to travel to the court as he was 'much diseased with the palsy, and may not well endure to ride' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', vol. 2, pt 3, p. 201). In September 1535 Sir William Brabazon recommended Rawson to Cromwell as a suitable candidate for the lord chancellorship, but his advice was ignored. 
By 1538 Rawson was elderly and very feeble. However, he was sufficiently active to arouse the animosity of George Browne, archbishop of Dublin, who termed him 'the pecuniose prior of Kilmainham'. He was also still shrewd enough to anticipate the monastic suppression campaign by leasing parcels of the property of Kilmainham Priory at low rates, particularly to family members. In September 1540 Lord Deputy St Leger and the Irish council requested that Rawson be elevated to the honour of Viscount Clontarff. After prolonged negotiations he surrendered the priory of Kilmainham on 22 November 1540 and subsequently received a pension of 500 marks. In December of the same year he was granted an annuity of 200 marks for life, payable out of the dissolved possessions of the order's property in Gloucestershire. On 20 June 1541 he was created Viscount Clontarff for life and was granted an annual fee of $10. He assumed the arms of his maternal family. In 1542 he is said to have been unlikely to live much longer, 'not well able to live... being now in manner impotent' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', vol. 3, pt 3, p. 438). Yet he continued to attend council sessions until 1543. The date of his death is uncertain. He is thought to have died in 1547 when Oswald Massingberd was appointed grand master to succeed him as titular prior of Kilmainham. Some peerages state that he died in 1560 but his age makes this improbable. He had at least one natural child: a daughter named Katherine who married Rowland, son of Patrick White, baron of the Irish exchequer, and it has been suggested that the Sir John Rawson who frequently appears in Irish records during Elizabeth's reign may have been his son. Upon Clontarff's death the peerage became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 23200


Adams, Sir William (1783-1827), oculist, was born at Stanbury, Morwenstow, Cornwall, on 5 December 1783, the youngest son of Henry Adams (died 1811) and his wife, Demaris (1736/7-1788), daughter of Simon and Anne Cottle. He bore the name Adams throughout his professional life until, shortly before his death, he took his wife's surname of Rawson. Adams began his medical training as assistant to John Hill, a surgeon at Barnstaple, and about 1805 went to London to complete his education at St Thomas's and Guy's hospitals. The London Infirmary in Charterhouse Square for curing diseases of the eye had recently been established by John Cunningham Saunders, the demonstrator in anatomy at St Thomas's; Adams attended his demonstrations and assisted him in the surgical operations at the infirmary. In 1807 he was elected MRCS and shortly afterwards moved to Exeter. There he helped to establish the West of England Infirmary for curing eye disease on the lines of the institution at which he had been trained in London, and practised as the surgeon there. From 1807 to 1810 he lived and worked for the most part in Exeter and Bath, but he claimed to have operated successfully also in Dublin and Edinburgh. In 1810 he returned to London to establish a practice there. His subsequent career seems to have been extraordinarily active both in his profession of oculist and in other, sometimes surprising, fields. But often his actions provoked controversy, and he had enemies. 
At this time Egyptian ophthalmia (a conjunctival disease, principally trachoma) was a serious and widespread problem in Europe, following Napoleon's Egyptian campaign: many soldiers had been dismissed from the army as blind from this cause, and the disease spread rapidly to the civilian population throughout Europe. Although the London Infirmary already existed to treat the ophthalmia, Adams proposed the founding of another similar institution exclusively for the treatment of the military pensioners. In 1813 he encouraged the belief that he had discovered a cure for the complaint, although his enemies claimed that the discovery had been made by John Vetch. Adams performed several operations in the hospital for seamen at Greenwich, and controversy raged for several years over whether they had been successful, and on the originality of his treatment. Other operations by him, well publicized at the time, are reported to have been helpful or harmful in about equal measure. 
Nevertheless Adams was successful in his profession at this time, being made surgeon and oculist-extraordinary to the prince regent and to the dukes of Kent and Sussex, and he was knighted in 1814. In 1817 an ophthalmic institution was established for him in part of the York Hospital at Chelsea, but was found to be inconvenient for the purpose. Instead, from 1817 to 1821 he gave free treatments at Regent's Park (in a building then used as a hospital, although he had himself originally built it for the manufacture of steam guns). Adams pressed a claim for public money to support this institution, being strongly supported in this by Lord Palmerston, and following a report by a select committee parliament voted him $4000. The post of ophthalmic surgeon to the army was created for him, at a salary of $1500, which greatly offended the military surgeons. 
Adams married Jane Eliza, fourth daughter and coheir of Colonel George Rawson, MP for Armagh; they had five children. In 1825 Adams inherited a considerable sum of money from his wife's family, and in compliance with the will of Colonel Rawson's widow, changed his name by royal licence to Rawson. He invested much of this money in silver mines in Mexico and other South American mines, encouraging his family and friends to do likewise. Many Mexican mines had lain derelict since the years of revolution after 1810, and needed investment to bring them back into production. When he lost heavily on these ventures Rawson published two pamphlets on the state of mining in the region, one with a letter to the directors of the Anglo-Mexican Mine Association, complaining that share prices fluctuated in response to inaccurate statements put out regarding the likely yields from these mines, the other a letter to George Canning. He died at his house, Upper Gloucester Place, Dorset Square, London, on 4 February 1827 and was buried in St John's Wood cemetery five days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 23201


Ray, Benjamin (1703/4-1760), antiquary and Church of England clergyman, was born in Spalding, Lincolnshire, the son of Joseph Ray, merchant, and his wife, who died early in 1736. He was educated at Spalding grammar school under Timothy Neve, and proceeded to St John's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted a pensioner on 10 October 1721, aged seventeen; he graduated BA in 1725 and MA in 1730. Having left the university he took holy orders and was made perpetual curate of Cowbit and Surfleet, Lincolnshire. From 1723 to 1736 he was master of the grammar school at Sleaford, where he also held a curacy. 
In September 1723 Ray was elected a member of the well-known Spalding Gentlemen's Society, in whose foundation his former teacher Neve and his kinsman Maurice Johnson played a prominent part. Ray was secretary in 1735, and afterwards vice-president, and William Stukeley recorded that he exhibited many objects of antiquarian interest at the society's meetings. He composed several unpublished essays, including papers, which he sent to his friend and fellow antiquary Samuel Pegge, on Virgil's fourth eclogue and the ancient numismatic and epigraphic evidence for the coming of the Messiah. Out of these grew a paper delivered to the Spalding Gentlemen's Society entitled 'The truth of the Christian religion demonstrated from the report propagated throughout the gentile world about the birth of Christ, that a Messiah was expected, and from the authority of heathen writers, and from the coins of the Roman emperors'. Some of Ray's notes on specific ancient coins appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. To the Royal Society he sent an 'Account of a waterspout raised upon land in Lincolnshire', of which an abstract was published in 1751. He also composed an unpublished account of the Lincolnshire fens, though his native loyalty to that region was not undiluted by resentment, as he held its climate in part responsible for his poor health and the lack of visitors. 
Apart from dabbling in poetry (a sample entitled 'Manners: a Satyr' survives among his letters to Pegge in the Bodleian Library) Ray also had a penchant for cataloguing and listing. In 1735-6 he composed 'A catalogue of the Italian princes and their palaces, & of the Italian painters and their celebrated performances', which survives in manuscript in the library of Spalding Gentlemen's Society, and also produced 'Catalogue of household goods removed out of the Presence Chamber, 26 Chas. II, Dec. 14, 1668'. In 1743, after a visit to Houghton Hall, the earl of Orford's house, he felt moved to send Mrs Pegge a lengthy description of the house and the more prominent works of art in it. 
Ray never married, although he had been deeply attached to an unknown party in the 1730s, describing her as 'adeo modesta, adeo venusta, ut nihil supra' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. d. 46, fol. 183). She, however, had at length rejected him, partly it seems on the grounds that his living of $80 a year was no better than a porter's wages. This rankled for some years. Repeated approaches to superiors in the hope of gaining richer preferment outside the fens elicited warm compliments on his abilities but no success. His letters to Pegge, many of them entirely antiquarian in content, support the assessment of him in Chalmers's 'Biographical Dictionary' as a 'most ingenious and worthy man, possessed of good learning, but ignorant of the world, indolent and thoughtless, and often very absent' (Chalmers, 26.73). As an example of the last characteristic Pegge cited the occasion when Ray had jotted down a recipe for punch on one of the pages of the sermon that he was composing for the following Sunday; in delivering the sermon he got halfway through the recipe before realizing what he was saying. He died at Spalding on 26 August 1760. 


@@@@@


doc= 23202


Ray, James (fl. 1745-1746), chronicler, was a native of Whitehaven in Cumberland. On the advance from Edinburgh of the Jacobite army under Charles Edward Stuart in the autumn of 1745, Ray marched with others from his town to join the royal garrison at Carlisle. The surrender of Carlisle to the Jacobites prior to his arrival led Ray then to follow the Jacobite advance to Derby as closely as he was able. All the information he obtained concerning them he reported to the duke of Cumberland, whose forces he met at Stafford on 5 January 1746. He continued with the duke's army until the final victory at Culloden in April. In the same year he published a 32-page pamphlet, 'The Acts of the Rebels, Written by an Egyptian' (2nd edn, 1746). About the same date he published 'A Complete History of the Rebellion in 1745', which passed through nine editions by 1760. It remains a useful account of the campaign and of the state of feeling in England at this time. 


@@@@@


doc= 23203


Ray, John (1627-1705), naturalist and theologian, was born at Black Notley, near Braintree, Essex, on 29 November 1627, the third child of Roger Wray ('bap'. 1594, died 1655), a blacksmith, and his wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1600-1679), who was noted for her piety and her knowledge of medicinal herbs. Until 1670 he spelled his surname with an initial W, which he dropped in order to facilitate the Latinizing of his name. 
Wray was sent to the grammar school at Braintree, and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on 12 May 1644. On 28 June he moved to St Catharine's College, where he became the pupil of Daniel Duckfield. Following the death of his tutor and the expulsion of the master, Ralph Brownrig, Wray transferred to Trinity, where he became a sizar on 21 November 1646 under the tuition of James Duport. Wray took his BA degree in 1647/8, and on 8 September 1649 was elected to a minor fellowship. He held a succession of college positions thereafter, being elected Greek lecturer in 1651 (the year in which he graduated MA) and 1656, mathematical lecturer in 1653, humanities lecturer in 1655, praelector in 1657, junior dean in 1658, and college steward in 1659 and 1660. With Duport, Wray had honed his skill in Latin and Greek, and perhaps also Hebrew. He composed several Latin poems, including contributions to collections published in honour of Cromwell (1654) and Charles II (1660). In addition to college lectures and exercises, he also preached at Trinity and in Great St Mary's, including, in 1659, the funeral sermons of John Arrowsmith, master of Trinity, and John Nidd, a senior fellow. With Nidd and others Wray began to develop interests in natural philosophy during the 1650s, in particular through the study of embryology and chemistry. At this time Wray took pupils of his own, among them Philip Skippon and Timothy Burrell. He also came into contact with two fellow-commoners with similar interests, Francis Willughby, another pupil of Duport, and Peter Courthope. 
Between 1650 and 1658 Trinity suspended the normal requirement that its fellows should take orders, but by January 1659 Wray was actively considering his position. He was offered the living of Cheadle in 1659, and in 1661 that of Kirkby Lonsdale. He complained to Courthope on 26 September 1660 that 'they have brought all things heer as they were [in] 1641', and asserted that 'I am long since come to two resolutions, 1. No promise of conformity 2. No orders rebus sic stantibus [as things stand]' (Ray to Courthope, 26 Sept 1660, E. Sussex RO, MS Danny 346). Yet the determination of his college to keep him persuaded Wray, and he was ordained by Robert Sanderson, bishop of Lincoln, in his chapel at the Barbican on 23 December 1660. Wray's personal piety was never in question, indeed it contributed to the sense of the duties of a priest which informed his later writings in natural theology, and which, at this time, led him to consider taking up a country living. However, several of his friends leaned towards nonconformity, and Wray himself had hopes for a more comprehensive settlement of the church than that achieved after the Restoration. Moreover, he was 'so nicely scrupulous about oaths' (Dale, Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. Essex 21, fol. 379'r'), that he felt unable to accept the terms of the abjuration of the solemn league and covenant required by the 'Act of Uniformity'. On 24 August 1662 he thus forfeited his fellowship at Trinity, although he remained a loyal member of the Church of England. Wray cast himself 'upon Providence & good friends', resolving that 'Liberty is a sweet thing' (Ray to Courthope, 13 Aug 1662, E. Sussex RO, MS Danny 358). The prospect of support from Courthope, Willughby, or Skippon may have been one reason for Wray's decisions. The main explanation was, however, his determination to travel in pursuit of natural philosophical observations, in particular botanical specimens. 
Wray had kept a small garden at Trinity in which he planted specimens that he had collected or which his friends had sent to him, and where he was able to investigate the differences between specific varieties of plants and trees. His activity as a cultivator reflected his broader interest in the recording and collection of plant types and specimens, which had been stimulated by rides and walks taken in his youth. He had already acquired considerable familiarity with the existing English botanical literature and its limitations, and was struck by the absence of anyone who was proficient in the subject at the university. He thus decided in the early 1650s to embark on a catalogue of all the plants that he had found during his long walks in the countryside around Cambridge. He received encouragement from Nidd, Willughby, and Courthope, as well as assistance from John Worthington, master of Jesus College, who procured a manuscript of Joachim Jungius's as yet unpublished 'Isagoge phytoscopica' for him from Samuel Hartlib. His 'Catalogus plantarum circa Cantabrigiam nascentium' (1660) described 558 species of native plant which he had recognized, as well as the crops growing in Cambridgeshire. An appendix was published in 1663. The catalogue was arranged alphabetically, with the titles used by Gerard, Parkinson, and Jean and Gaspard Bauhin also included. The circumstances and uses of the plants were described and the English names of their locations given. Wray added natural philosophical observations, for example concerning the behaviour of caterpillars, at appropriate points, and an index allowed the English reader to identify plants by their common names. The 'Catalogus' demonstrated the meticulous nature of his approach to botany. It identified several new plants but reconciled many descriptions to avoid the unnecessary multiplication of species. Compared with his descriptions of flowering plants, however, those of trees, shrubs, and grasses were less satisfactory. Moreover, the catalogue contained only a very brief outline of the structure and classification of plants, which drew heavily on the work of Jean Bauhin, although its preface expressed the hope that similar studies might be undertaken in other localities, allowing the eventual composition of a complete 'Phytologia Britannica'. 
On 9 August 1658 Wray had embarked on his first botanizing itinerary outside Cambridgeshire, riding to Northampton and then on to Warwick before journeying through the Peaks and into north Wales, returning to Cambridge on 18 September via Shrewsbury, Worcester, and Gloucester. On this tour he had collected botanical, natural philosophical, and topographical observations. By February 1660 his plans to undertake a new catalogue of all English plants led him to write to friends across the country asking for their assistance and to contemplate further itineraries of his own. That year he and Willughby embarked on a northern tour, probably taking in parts of Yorkshire, Cumberland, Westmorland, and the Isle of Man. In July the following year Wray set out on a further journey, this time in the company of Skippon. Much of this trip was devoted to visiting places of antiquarian interest in Lincolnshire, the north-east, and Yorkshire, but he also made observations of plants and sea creatures. On 16 August he entered Scotland, travelling on to Edinburgh and Glasgow, before returning via Carlisle. In spring 1662 he spent some time in Sussex as Courthope's guest, returning via London where he inspected Robert Morison's work in St James's Park. In the months immediately preceding the end of his fellowship, Wray undertook his most ambitious itinerary yet, this time in the company of both Willughby and Skippon. 
Setting out from Middleton Hall in Tamworth, the seat of the Willughbys, the three men travelled through the midlands into north Wales and continued on to Anglesey, and thence to Snowdonia, before turning south along the Welsh coast. On the way they described antiquities, local customs and legends, recorded plants, and observed fishes and birds, notably the puffins of Prestholm. Once they returned to England, Willughby split from the party, but Wray and Skippon went on together as far as Land's End before returning to London by way of Stonehenge. After a brief stay in Essex, Wray returned to Cambridge at the end of August to settle his affairs. Thereafter he stayed with friends, from October serving as a tutor in the household of Thomas Bacon at Friston Hall, near Saxmundham in Suffolk. 
On 18 April 1663 Wray, Willughby, Skippon, and Nathaniel Bacon sailed from Dover for the continent. At Willughby's instigation they had planned a tour which would allow Wray to collect and catalogue plants that were not native to England and Willughby to observe birds, beasts, fishes, and insects. From Calais they travelled into Flanders and the Netherlands, then up the Rhine, and across southern Germany to Munich and Vienna, before heading by coach for Venice. After spending the winter in Padua, where Wray attended the anatomy lectures of Pietro Marchetti, they toured northern Italy. Travelling by Milan and Turin, they took a boat from Genoa along the coast to Lucca, Pisa, Leghorn, and, finally, Naples. There Wray and Skippon parted from Bacon and Willughby (who later travelled to Spain on his own) and went on together to Sicily and Malta, later returning by sea to Leghorn and thence to Florence. On 1 September 1664 they set out for Rome, where, in December, Wray made observations of the comet (published in the 'Philosophical Transactions', 1707). With Skippon he left Rome on 24 January 1665, returned to Venice, and then entered Switzerland via the lower Engadine. They eventually reached Geneva on 20 April and spent the summer there, botanizing in the mountains nearby. In late July they entered France, travelling to Montpellier where they remained for some time, and in the autumn and winter exploring southern France. On 1 February 1666 all English visitors were ordered to leave France within three months. Wray and Skippon headed north to Lyons and then stayed for a while in Paris where they met a number of prominent botanists. Wray embarked for England from Calais on 1 April 1666. 
After his return Wray spent his time either in Essex or with his friends in Sussex, and also visited Cambridge. He conducted a programme of reading in natural philosophy, passing most of the winter with Willughby at Middleton before travelling with him to the west of England in summer 1667. On 7 November Wray was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, having been proposed by John Wilkins. Later that month Wray went to stay with Burrell in Sussex; he remained there until the spring, when he set out to travel between the homes of various friends and in the process traversed north Yorkshire and Westmorland, where he located several new species of plants. He wintered again at Middleton, conducting experiments of the rise of sap in trees and making observations of snails and of spiders' threads. In April 1669 Wray and Willughby visited Wilkins near Chester, and the former dissected a porpoise which had been caught by some fishermen. These activities were later written up and communicated to the Royal Society and accounts of them were published in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. Until Willughby's premature death on 3 July 1672 Ray (as he now called himself) and his friend worked together for much of the time at Middleton on their respective projects in natural history. In July 1671, however, Ray was absent for a time on a further simpling tour with Thomas Willisel in the north of England. 
Ray's travels had established the basis for his collaboration with Willughby, the fruits of which occupied him for much of the rest of his life. They provided information on birds, fishes, and insects, initially intended for use by Willughby, but later written up by Ray. They also generated evidence about antiquities, customs, and language, which Ray shared with Willughby and deployed himself in the 'Collection of English Proverbs' (1670; rev. 1678) and the 'Collection of English Words' (1674; rev. 1691). The 'Observations Topographical, Moral, and Physiological' (1673) which Ray published of his and Willughby's continental journeys contained extensive discussions of these topics, as well as interventions in contemporary natural philosophical debates, such as that about fossil shells generated by Steno's 'Prodromus' (1669). Furthermore, Ray's journeys had allowed him to expand his knowledge of plants, and build up a formidable collection of specimens. 
In 1666 Wilkins sought the collaboration of Ray and Willughby in drawing up the tables of plants and animals to be published in the 'Essay towards a Real Character' (1668). This work, which took Ray a mere three weeks and which was harshly criticized by Morison, improved on the classifications given in Christopher Merret's 'Pinax' but was limited by the need to conform to the existing schemes laid down by Wilkins. For a time Ray was occupied with an abortive Latin translation of the 'Essay' but by 1670 he was ready to publish his 'Catalogus plantarum Angliae', which he dedicated to Willughby. A second edition was published in 1677, and an appendix of newly observed plants by 'John Ray and his friends', 'Fasciculus stirpium Britannicarum' (1688), printed when Ray was unable to persuade the booksellers who held the copyright to issue a third edition. Ray's work was notable not only for its thoroughness but also for the extensive medical and pharmacological notes which accompanied the descriptions of plants. The preface to the volume made clear Ray's conviction that the divine creation of plants implied a purpose to their existence, which might be discovered by putting them to use. Ray's work on classification and on the nature of plant species was continued in the 'Catalogue of plants not native of England' which he appended to the 'Observations' and articulated more fully in the 'Methodus plantarum nova' (1682). 
This work rejected classifications based on localities or properties in favour of ones based on the structure of plants, drawing on Ray's own studies of seeds and the specific differences of plants (sent to the Royal Society on 30 November 1674) and on the discoveries of Marcello Malpighi. It also developed the views of a paper on the number of plants which Ray had composed for communication to the Royal Society, probably in 1674, but which was never sent. This made clear Ray's belief in the importance of essential, rather than accidental, characteristics in identifying a species, and his conviction that all local species were likely to be preserved by providence somewhere in the world. Ray anticipated Malpighi in making a distinction between monocotyledons and dicotyledons, and he later developed his observations of the invariability of the seed vessels of plants into the basis for his system of classification. In this he followed both Morison and Andrea Cesalpino, although he also asserted the importance of the form of the petals and calyx, and the arrangement of the plant's leaves, and was indebted to Jungius for his treatment of flowers. Ray's attempts at classification were, however, marred by his retention of a primary division of plants into herbs, shrubs, and trees, despite an awareness of the difficulties associated with it. His treatment of shrubs and trees remained less satisfactory than that of herbs. Even there, Ray's ignorance of marine and exotic plants led him into frequent errors. 
The culmination of Ray's career as a botanist came with the publication of his 'Historia plantarum', whose two folio volumes appeared in 1686 and 1688, with a further supplementary volume eventually being published, after abortive attempts to raise subscriptions, in 1704. The first two volumes described approximately 6100 species of plant, many of which Ray had seen or had had described for him by his botanical correspondents, who now included Samuel Dale, Tancred Robinson, and Hans Sloane; the third volume was more of a compilation, detailing a further 10,000 species, largely on the evidence of printed sources. Despite the excellence of his contacts, Ray's work was hampered by increasing old age and infirmity, which in particular prevented him from visiting the gardens being cultivated at Oxford and Chelsea which might have allowed him to observe many exotic plants at first hand. Despite its ambitions to completeness Ray's herbal lacked illustrations, in part due to scruples about the potential inaccuracy of woodcuts, but mainly because of anxieties about their cost. 
In 1690 Ray published 'Synopsis methodica stirpium Britannicarum', of which a second edition appeared in 1696, and a third, expanded by Johann Jakob Dillenius, in 1724. This work followed the classificatory system of Ray's 'Methodus'. With Sloane's encouragement Ray produced an edition of Leonhart Rauwolf's travels (1693); he drew up all but one of the English county lists of plants for Edmund Gibson's edition of Camden's 'Britannia' (1695); and, with the support of the Royal Society, he issued a further catalogue of European plants ('Stirpium Europaearum extra Britannias nascentium sylloge') in 1694. This included a defence of his own method of classification against that of Rivinus (A. Q. Bachmann), which was based on differences in the shape of the flower. An exchange of letters with Rivinus appeared in the second edition of the 'Synopsis', where Ray referred to the writings of Joseph Pitton de Tournefort, also criticized in his 'Dissertatio brevis' (1696). Ray took the work of both Rivinus and Tournefort into account in the composition of 'Methodus plantarum emendata' (1703), which revised his classifications and introduced divisions between flowering and non-flowering plants. 
Willughby's death in 1672 deprived Ray of both a collaborator and a patron but provided him with an annuity of $60, and hence a measure of financial independence. Ray also acquired fresh obligations as an executor of Willughby's will, charged with the care of his two young sons and the publication of his incomplete works in natural history. For three and a half years Ray lived at Middleton, and helped to educate the children. With this end in mind he published 'Dictionariolum trilingue' (1675), later reissued as 'Nomenclator classicus', which went through four editions by the time of his death. More demanding work was required to turn Willughby's observations, notes, and descriptions into coherent treatises. Initially Ray embarked on revising Willughby's 'Ornithology', writing up its author's notes into proper descriptions, collating authorities, and imposing a method of classification which might make sense of the whole. Ray's descriptions gave detailed accounts of plumage, and his classification drew on the divisions according to habit in the tables which Willughby had provided for Wilkins, developing them by concentrating on structural and anatomical differences, for example in beaks or claws, which could be observed between species. In all Ray and Willughby described more than 230 species which they had themselves observed. The work was published in Latin in 1676, with illustrations paid for by Willughby's widow, Emma. These were largely re-engraved from other books and Ray found many of them unsatisfactory; nevertheless he reissued the 'Ornithology' in English in 1678, with additional descriptions of seabirds and discussions of falconry and fowling. 
On 5 June 1673 Ray married Margaret Oakeley ('c'.1653- 'c'.1727), daughter of John Oakeley of Launton, near Bicester in Oxfordshire, and a member of the household at Middleton. The couple left Middleton during the winter of 1675-6, moving initially to Coleshill, and then settling at Sutton Coldfield in April 1676. By this time Willughby's mother had died and his widow had married Sir Josiah Child, bt, in the process quitting Middleton with her children, who were finally removed from Ray's charge by order of the lord chancellor in 1677. Ray's relations with Emma Child worsened over the next few years, in which she declined to assist with the costs of Ray's edition of her late husband's work on fishes and quarrelled over the administration of the trust resulting from his will. Ray refused to act as a cipher to enable her to manage the trust 'more securely & unaccountably then if you had been appointed Sole Executrix' (Ray to Lady Child, 6 Sept 1680, Nottingham University, MS Mi E4/32). Unable any longer to fulfil his duties to Willughby's children, and deprived of the library at Middleton, Ray initially considered going abroad as a tutor, but instead moved back to Essex where he lodged at first in Faulkbourne Hall, near Witham, as a guest of Edward Bullock. In autumn 1677 he turned down the offer of the secretaryship of the Royal Society, in a letter to John Aubrey the following March giving as his reasons 'the consciousness of my inability to manage it, but chiefly its inconsistency w[i]th my profession' ('Further Correspondence', 159). The death of his mother on 15 March 1679 allowed Ray and his wife to move back to Black Notley, and to settle in the family house at Dewlands, where they lived for the rest of their lives. They had four daughters, Margaret and Mary ('b'. 1684), Catharine ('b'. 1687), and Jane ('b'. 1689), all of whom later assisted their father in the collection of insects during the 1690s. Ray felt Mary's death from jaundice in January 1698 as 'a sore blow', writing to Edward Lhwyd on 12 March 1697 that she 'was very ingenious, & helpfull to me, & upon that account the more dear too' (ibid., 268). 
During the later 1670s and the early 1680s Ray was extensively engaged in the revision of Willughby's notes for a natural history of fishes. He began in earnest in December 1674, starting to gather further information from books, notably the works of Gesner and Rondelet, and from his friends. The resulting 'Historia piscium' (1686), which was largely Ray's own work, was finished some time before 1685, when Tancred Robinson brought it to the attention of the Royal Society. At the urging of Robert Plot, the society decided to commission new, engraved plates for the work, to be paid for by subscription, and to pay the costs of having it printed by the Oxford University Press. Samuel Pepys, the society's president, subscribed $50, which financed seventy-nine of the 187 plates. The expense so strained the resources of the society that it was forced for some time to pay its officers in multiple copies of the work. Even so enough of the 500 copies of the first edition remained unsold for it to be reissued only as late as 1743. The book was perhaps more of a success intellectually than financially. Ray was respectful towards Aristotle's classification of fishes, making further distinctions himself principally on the basis of fin structure, but again eschewing the unnecessary multiplication of species. He rejected the view common among his contemporaries that molluscs and other invertebrates should be classified as fish, but nevertheless continued to number cetaceans in that category. 
On 18 April 1684 Robinson had prompted Ray to embark on 'a general history of nature' ('Correspondence', 141), and during the early 1690s Ray worked on synopses of his treatments of quadrupeds and snakes (published in 1693) and of birds and fishes (largely completed by 1694, but not published until 1713). The first of these drew extensively on Willughby's work, his own observations, and the work of contemporary anatomists, notably in Paris. It rejected elements of Aristotle's system of classification and attacked the Cartesian theory of the beast machine. Ray agreed with the work of Francesco Redi in rejecting spontaneous generation. Inclining towards an ovist position, he was sceptical about some of the conclusions of the microscopist Antoni van Leeuwenhoek concerning spermatozoa, and also articulated his acceptance of the role of a plastic spirit in forming animals according to the divine plan. In this he followed the teachings of Ralph Cudworth and others of the Cambridge Platonists. 
The last years of Ray's life were devoted to preparing a 'Methodus' (1705) and 'Historia' (left unfinished at his death, but published in 1710) of insects. Ray's work, which again drew on his collaboration with Willughby for its inspiration, was notable for its close observation of the various stages of an insect's life, and for its identification of many British species of butterflies. The activity of insects was prominent in Ray's consciousness for a different reason for most of the last eighteen years of his life. Ray suffered from chronic ill health during this period, in particular from incurable ulcers on his legs which, he reported in a letter to Sloane, he took 'to proceed from invisible insects' and from tumours 'which may be the nests of these insects (like ant-hills), they seeming to be gregarious' ('Correspondence', 343). Whatever the cause of his infirmity, Ray was lame and in great discomfort much of the time. He died at Dewlands on 17 January 1705. 
During much of the 1690s Ray was engaged in correspondence with Edward Lhwyd and others about the nature of fossils. In general he was inclined to accept that they were the remains of once-living creatures, and he also suggested that their current distribution might owe something to observable changes in the nature of the surface of the earth. He qualified these opinions, however, by stressing that the fossils which had so far been discovered were not unlike known plants and animals, and that their burial might owe something to the action of the biblical flood, as well as to natural effects. He argued that those remains which seemed to be unfamiliar might represent species of which the surviving representatives had not yet been discovered. Although fossils were mentioned in the preface to his 'Synopsis' (1690), his fullest treatment of them was in 'Miscellaneous Discourses Concerning the Dissolution and Changes of the World' (1692). This was reworked and expanded as 'Three Physico-Theological Discourses' (1693). Ray completed further revisions early in 1704, but the publication of a third edition was delayed until 1713 by the death of his bookseller, Samuel Smith. The work was also translated into Dutch (1694, 1783) and German (1698, 1732). In it Ray revisited lectures which he had delivered at Great St Mary's some thirty years earlier on the text of '2 Peter' 3: 11. The publications of Thomas Burnet had rendered their subjects current, and Ray used them to provide a framework for his own discussion of creation, the deluge, and the future dissolution of the world. 
In 1691 Ray had published another work which drew on the preaching of his Cambridge years, 'The Wisdom of God Manifested in the Works of the Creation'. Three further editions appeared in his lifetime, and many more thereafter, and the book was also translated into French (1714) and German (1717). Basing himself on sermons he had delivered in the chapel of Trinity College, Ray produced a coherent natural theology in which the evidence of the heavens, geology, botany, zoology, and human anatomy suggested the providential action of a benevolent deity who was responsible for the creation of all things. He was critical of those ancient and modern authors, including Aristotle and Descartes, whose work appeared to give succour to atheists or deists. 
Both 'The Wisdom of God' and the 'Miscellaneous Discourses' testified to Ray's skill in constructing an account of nature which remained compatible with orthodox interpretations of scripture. Although they were the most complete statements of his natural theology, Ray had referred to the theological benefits of contemplating the glories of creation many years before, for example in the preface to Willughby's 'Ornithology'. Similar sentiments are also expressed in the preface to his own 'Synopsis', which also made clear his sense of relief following the revolution of 1688. As a result of the changed political and religious circumstances of the 1690s, exemplified by Archbishop Tillotson's offer of ecclesiastical preferment for him in 1691, Ray felt himself free to publish on matters of religion, and compelled to do so by the nature of contemporary debate. At the instigation of Edmund Elys, he composed the devotional 'A Persuasive to a Holy Life' (1700). He had always believed that 'Divinity is my Profession' ('Further Correspondence', 163), and argued that 'I know of no occupation which is more worthy or more delightful for a free man than to contemplate the beauteous works of Nature and to honour the infinite wisdom and goodness of God the Creator' ('Ray's Flora', 26). 
After Ray's death his widow complained to Sloane of her straitened circumstances, estimating that she had been left only $40 p.a. to support her family (Margaret Ray to Sloane, 19 Nov 1706, BL, MS Sloane 4040, fol. 255). Ray bequeathed his papers to Dale, from whom many of them eventually passed to William Derham who published an edition of Ray's correspondence in 1718 as 'Philosophical Letters'. Ray gave instructions that he should be buried privately in the churchyard at Black Notley, asking that his corpse be 'nailed up that none might see him' (Dale, Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. Essex 21, fol. 380'v'). His friends erected a monument over the tomb. Ray's library was sold at auction in March 1708, making up nearly 1300 lots. His writings in natural theology proved influential throughout the eighteenth century, and were echoed in the work of William Paley. Despite this, it was as a botanist that Ray achieved most lasting fame. Linnaeus was so aware of his stature that he misrepresented his views in order to cite him as a fellow proponent of classification by a single variable. He also followed Plumier in naming a genus of yams after Ray. In the twentieth century Ray's most effective biographer, Charles Raven, co-opted him in an attempt to heal the perceived breach between science and religion, deploying the concept of organic design to suggest the unfolding of divine purpose through evolution. 


@@@@@


doc= 23204


Ray, Martha (1742?-1779), singer and murder victim, was born near Covent Garden, London, probably in 1742, though some sources suggest 1745. When she was about fourteen her father, a stay maker, apprenticed her for five years to Mrs Sarah Silver, a maker of mantuas (cloaks) in Clerkenwell. At some point between 1760 and 1762 John Montagu, fourth earl of Sandwich (1718-1792), made her acquaintance through a procurer, said to be Mrs Harding, and paid Martha's father $400 for 'the purchase of his daughter's honour', as it was put at the time of her death ('Westminster Magazine', April 1779, 7.171), and $30 p.a. thereafter to her mother. Sandwich and his wife, Dorothy Fane, had been separated at least since 1755; she experienced serious mental disorder and became a ward of the state in 1767. He and Ray had nine children, five of whom survived to adulthood, including the literary figure Basil Montagu. 
Ray and Sandwich lived in large part as husband and wife for about eighteen years. While he was known to keep a distance between her and aristocratic ladies, she served as hostess at his estate, Hinchingbrooke House, near Huntingdon, and accompanied him to London, to public engagements, and on trips to naval events. However, the earl refused her entreaties to make a settlement upon her because he wanted to live more expensively than his modest means could permit. Ray clearly contemplated leaving him, either to marry or to make a career as an opera singer. The musician Joseph Cradock reports discussing with her an attractive offer tendered her by the King's Theatre towards the end of her life. 
Through her relationship with Sandwich, Ray received the full education appropriate to a woman of social standing. Musically she was trained by two of the most important figures of the time, the composer Felice Giardini and the conductor Joah Bates, and came to be regarded as one of the best singers of her time. She took a unique path by performing almost exclusively at Sandwich's estate or in churches in the area, seemingly never in public concerts or the theatre. The earl's concerts, especially those held during Christmas week, were performed by the best of London's musicians and drew hundreds of guests, including the powerful musical intelligentsia. Known chiefly for singing music by G. F. Handel, Ray played an important role in the process by which his oratorios, odes, and masques became established as permanent and, indeed, canonic repertory, accomplished on a scale seen for no other deceased composer before that time. Sandwich was the main leader of the movement for 'ancient music', founding the Catch Club (1761) and the Concert of Antient Music (1776). For her part Ray established the most prominent interpretation of Iphis's famous aria 'Brighter scenes I seek above', from the oratorio 'Jephtha', and her repertory included a wide range of Italian and British music. 
Ray also participated in Sandwich's political career by dint of her being accused of colluding in his alleged corruption. As first lord of the Admiralty and one of the chief advisers to George III, he was attacked for handing out political and financial favours, especially in the naval dockyards, and it was claimed that Ray had made deals for him. Historians have since that time largely cleared the earl of these accusations. 
In 1771 Ray met James Hackman when he visited Hinchingbrooke as one of the many army officers whom Sandwich invited to the estate. The two were observed together by the Tahitian prince Omai, and details of that encounter were reported to the earl; it is likely that Ray seriously considered leaving Sandwich for Hackman, since she approached Joseph Cradock to discuss the question of a settlement shortly thereafter. She did, however, distance herself from Hackman, who subsequently left the army and was ordained deacon in February 1779. His continued passion for Ray led him into what later came to be called stalking. On 7 April 1779 Ray was followed by Hackman to Covent Garden Theatre, where she was attending a performance of Isaac Bickerstaff's 'Love in a Village'. There she was seen talking with Lord Coleraine, whom a distraught Hackman suspected of being her new lover. On leaving the theatre she was approached by Hackman, who killed her with a gunshot to the head. Hackman then failed to take his own life in the same manner before being arrested and taken, along with Ray's body, to the Shakespeare tavern on St James Street. She was buried on 14 April in the chancel of the parish church at Elstree, Hertfordshire, and her body was later moved to the cemetery there. 
In the ensuing press debate opinions were sharply divided over the murder, though Hackman probably drew more sympathy than Ray. Two publications, both entitled 'Case and Memoirs of the Late Rev. Mr James Hackman', argued the case from opposite perspectives, claiming either Ray's wilful duplicity or Hackman's determination to seek revenge. In 1780 the young Herbert Croft published an epistolary novel, 'Love and Madness', based on letters that he claimed were composed by the two protagonists. Unfortunately for Hackman the court had by then rejected Croft's strong suggestion of insanity and sentenced him to be hanged for murder on 19 April 1779. 


@@@@@


doc= 23205


Ray, Thomas Mathew (1801-1881), political organizer, was born in Dublin, the eldest son of Mathew Ray, a master cooper, and his wife, Sarah Carton. Brought up a Catholic, he received a classical education at Dublin schools. In 1842 Ray was admitted to both the King's Inns, Dublin, and Gray's Inn, London, but there is no record of him practising at the bar. Similarly, in 1843 he became a student at Trinity College, Dublin, but never graduated. 
Ray worked as a scrivener before becoming secretary of the National Trades Political Union in 1832 and the Trades Union election committee. He was active in registering voters for Daniel O'Connell's return for Dublin in the 1832 election. In 1835 Ray published 'A List of the Constituency of Dublin'. Appointed an official of O'Connell's General Association of Ireland of 1836, his stipend was continued by O'Connell when he dissolved the association in 1837. Ray was the linchpin of O'Connell's new Precursor Society in 1838. Detained elsewhere, O'Connell told Ray, 'you must prepare and have everything ready to commence operations on my arrival in Dublin'. Ray was told to establish a committee by attending parish meetings ('Limerick Standard', 19 Oct 1838). Such remote control through Ray also characterized the celebrated Repeal Association set up by O'Connell in 1840. Ray happily undertook the details of party management, printing and distributing addresses, campaigning in the country, handling donations and the O'Connell rent, enrolling members, and furnishing the necessary returns. O'Connell even charged Ray with ordering his suits ('Correspondence of Daniel O'Connell', 6.369). 
Ray's letters to O'Connell sometimes bordered on the obsequious: 'Pardon me, my dear Liberator, for I fear in my anxiety I may trespass more than needful on your time' ('Correspondence of Daniel O'Connell', 8.38). One of Ray's sons was christened O'Connell. Nevertheless, behind such deference Ray exercised very considerable influence. For his part, O'Connell had 'unlimited confidence' in Ray (ibid., 7.68). Advising his son John in 1840, O'Connell declared: 'Give your best support to Ray who is just the best man in his station I ever met with, beyond comparison the best' (ibid., 8.38). The 'Liberator' was aware that Ray's health was brittle and that he was beset by the problems of a large family. O'Connell told his son to shield Ray tactfully from a jealous opponent (ibid., 6.360). Publicly, O'Connell declared him 'a RAY to illumine the dark pages of our country's wrongs (cheering)' ('Limerick Reporter'). Ray's daughter Mary sometimes acted as O'Connell's personal secretary and was lauded by the 'Liberator' as the first female Repealer ('Freeman's Journal', 5 Jan 1841). 
In late 1844 the Peel government placed O'Connell and his lieutenants, including Ray, on trial for sedition, arising out of a series of 'monster' repeal meetings in the previous year. Ray's counsel, J. Hatchell QC, maintained that it was 'a monstrous thing to include Mr. Ray in this indictment'. As the paid organizer, working for the support of his family, he had attended only two meetings as a spectator. Ray's indictment deliberately precluded his citation, with the books of the Repeal Association, as a defence witness (Shaw, 335). The jury, containing no Catholics, found against Ray, who was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment and a fine of $50. Ray was comfortably incarcerated in the Richmond bridewell with O'Connell and other leaders from 30 May to 6 September, when the House of Lords acquitted all the accused. 
In 1845 and 1846 O'Connell was increasingly challenged within the Repeal Association by William Smith O'Brien and the Young Irelanders. Ray strongly opposed the dissidents, rejecting 'The Nation''s defence of a healthy difference of opinion ('The Nation'). As the chief promoter of repeal reading rooms, Ray was glad to see 'The Nation' barred from them. When the Young Irelanders withdrew in opposition to O'Connell's condemnation of all violence in achieving reform, Ray dispatched sharp letters of exclusion. The Young Irelanders retaliated by demanding the removal of paid officials from repeal committee decisions. 
Heart-broken by O'Connell's death in May 1847, Ray blamed Young Ireland: O'Connell's 'balmy nature could not endure the sting of ingratitude' (NL Ire., MS 22,482). He continued as Repeal Association secretary under John O'Connell. Like John O'Connell, whom he persuaded to delay his rejection, Ray remained aloof from the Irish League, intended to reunite Young Irelanders and repealers in July 1848. The unsuccessful rising by Smith O'Brien later that month ended negotiations. When John O'Connell tried to revive the Repeal Association in October 1849, Ray subscribed but remained inactive before the association's final collapse in 1850. 
Ray's last years were spent mainly in the office of deeds, of which he was assistant registrar, 1865-80. He was interested in the secretaryship of the Home Government Association in the early 1870s, but was politely rejected. He died at 5 Leinster Road, Rathmines, Dublin, on 5 January 1881 and was buried at Glasnevin cemetery two days later, mourned by his son, T. M. Ray junior. His wife, Mary, predeceased him in 1851, dying at the age of forty-nine. Their marriage was marred by the death of three children in infancy: Kate and Emma in 1839 and Jane in 1844. 
Ray was responsible for many repeal reports. His most important publication was the 'Report on the Irish Coercion Bill, the causes of discontent in Ireland, condition of the people, comparative criminality with England, remedial measures' (1846). According to Fergus O'Ferrall, the Repeal Association was the most sophisticated of O'Connell's organizations and 'Ray had it organised as a model of efficiency in different departments and committees' (O'Ferrall, 116). 


@@@@@


doc= 23206


Rayman, Jacob (b. in or before 1596, d. in or after 1658), violin maker, was probably born in Faulenbach in Fussen, a town in the Tyrol well known for its lute makers, who had established instrument-making workshops throughout Europe. At an unknown date he left Faulenbach, possibly travelling via Brabant in the Spanish Netherlands, for England, where he is the earliest recorded maker of violins whose instruments survive into the twenty-first century. Sophere Rayman, widow and surgeon -- stated to have been born in 's-Hertogenbosch, Brabant, and listed on 16 September 1618 as a stranger living in Blackman Street in the parish of Newington, Surrey -- was probably a close relative; she married Nicholas Haynes at St Gregory by Paul in 1626. The earliest violin label bearing Rayman's name is reported to have been dated 1630, with the maker's address given as Bell Yard, Southwark, while the earliest surviving example, dated 1641, comes from Blackman Street, Long Southwark. Jacob Rayman's son, also Jacob, was baptized on 27 November 1642 at St Saviour, Southwark, and Rayman seems to have remained at Bell Yard or Blackman Street until at least 1658. Rayman was not associated with viol making, which was the principal occupation of stringed instrument makers in London at this date. Also in Southwark at this period was the distinguished English viol maker, Henry Jaye, and although no specific address is known for him, it is likely that the two men would have been at least aware of each other's work. Nothing is known of Rayman after 1658, although his son is supposed to have been working as a violin maker in 1691. 
Modern interest in Rayman's work has mainly focused on the catalogue of the sale of the collection of Thomas Britton in 1714 (published in John Hawkins's 'General History of the Science and Practice of Music' in 1776), which included four separate lots described as 'an extraordinary Rayman', offered for sale with examples of all the leading London makers of the time. James Fleming noted in 'The Fiddle Fancier's Guide' (1883) that Rayman's instruments were 'neither scarce nor dear'. They continued to appear with some regularity in nineteenth-century saleroom catalogues, but very few examples have been identified today. This is possibly because their similarity to highly prized Brescian work and that of other better known Fussen trained makers has led to much misattribution and deliberate relabelling over the centuries. A further difficulty is the irregular size of his violins, one small and one over-large pattern, much like the Brescian instruments with which they are often compared. This may have made them awkward for professional musicians of the nineteenth century, and less likely to be conserved. Hawkins also stated that Rayman was particularly prized for his tenors (violas), and two recorded examples are interestingly decorated with an intriguing carved design around the scroll reminiscent of Celtic strapwork. His instruments also frequently bear ornate purfling motifs, fashioned from inlaid strips of dyed hardwood, augmented with pokerwork similar in style to contemporary instruments made from the Netherlands to southern Germany. A small unlabelled violin attributed to Rayman has a Tudor rose surmounted by a crown inlaid in the centre of the back in this manner. A bass violin (or cello), which has a viol-like carved head in place of a scroll, has also been tentatively identified. The general form of Rayman's instruments is distinctively elongated with rather straight centre bouts and extended soundholes. The workmanship is however irregular and quickly executed. 
Rayman's influence on subsequent early English violin makers such as William Baker of Oxford and Thomas Urquhart is clearly evident, but by the end of the seventeenth century the leading makers in London, among them Robert Cuthbert and Ralph Agutter had turned to more sophisticated Italian models and a more refined style. 


@@@@@


doc= 23207


Raymond, Robert, first Baron Raymond (1673-1733), judge, was born on 20 December 1673 in London, the only son of Sir Thomas Raymond (1626/7-1683), judge, and his wife, Anne (1633-1715), daughter of Sir Edward Fishe, baronet, of Southill, Bedfordshire. At his father's request he was formally admitted to Gray's Inn at the age of nine, in 1682; he subsequently attended school at Eton College and became a pensioner of Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1689. Despite the early start to his legal career he was not called to the bar until November 1697, and his early entry into business suggests the fruits of sustained and conscientious study. Indeed, his common-law reports begin in 1694, and in Michaelmas 1698 he reported his own argument for the defendant in 'Pullein v. Benson' (1698), an action of debt on a bond. The extent of his early success is evidenced by his retention as junior counsel for the crown in the 1702 trial of Richard Hathaway, a Southwark blacksmith's apprentice who had been exposed for a malicious prosecution of witchcraft. In April 1704 he appeared for the defence in the trial for high treason of the Scot David Lindsay, who was indicted under a statute enacted after the treaty of Ryswick which was designed to minimize the threat of Jacobites returning from France. Although Lindsay was convicted, Raymond made an ambitious and learned argument to the effect that 'pace' 'Calvin's case' ('State trials', 14.1007-15) as a Scot he was not within the scope of an act passed by the English parliament which referred to English subjects. Two years later he opened for the prosecution in the trial of Robert (Beau) Fielding, who was indicted for bigamy, having married the notorious Barbara Villiers, duchess of Cleveland, while his first wife was still alive. 
Raymond's standing as a rising barrister was confirmed by his appearance in 1709 before the House of Lords against the Naturalization Bill, on behalf of the City of London, but there is little evidence of any early political commitment on his part. Certainly in December of the same year he was retained as one of the counsel for the defence of Dr Henry Sacheverell, but in the event he was not prepared to countenance Sacheverell's provocative high toryism, and in January 1710 he and Serjeant John Pratt returned their fees after reading their client's intemperate 'Answer' to the articles of impeachment. Nevertheless, on 13 May he was named solicitor-general in succession to Robert Eyre, and at the October general election he was brought into parliament for Bishop's Castle in Shropshire on the nomination of Robert Harley. Raymond was subsequently knighted and voted with the tory administration during the last years of Queen Anne, being returned again for Bishop's Castle by Harley in 1713; but although he was not especially active in parliament, at the accession of George I he was replaced as solicitor-general on the recommendation of Lord Cowper. 
After the 1715 election, having been elected on the tory interest for Yarmouth in the Isle of Wight, Raymond spoke on behalf of the tory opposition and defended his former patron Oxford against the charge of treason brought against him under articles of impeachment. Although he was unseated by petition on 12 April 1717, the delivery of a major speech against the 'Septennial Bill' in 1716 suggests Raymond had established his parliamentary voice. He was sufficiently important to attract an offer of a seat from the whig government, and pliable enough to accept, returning to the Commons as MP for Ludlow in 1719, and being elected for Helston at the general election of 1722. Indeed, Raymond was one of the leading barristers in chancery and the House of Lords during 1720, and became attorney-general on 9 May 1720. In that capacity he conducted the proceedings arising out of the Atterbury plot, including the prosecution of Christopher Layer in king's bench at the end of 1722, but in parliament his previous tory affiliation was an embarrassment when it came to promoting the bill of pains and penalties against his former ally Atterbury, and he retired to a puisne judgeship in king's bench at the beginning of January 1724. 
Despite his former toryism and limited parliamentary usefulness, Raymond clearly enjoyed the confidence of the Walpolian regime. In 1725 he was named one of the lords commissioners who had custody of the great seal for six months between the resignation of Lord Chancellor Macclesfield and the appointment of Lord Chancellor King, and on the death of Sir John Pratt he was advanced to be lord chief justice of king's bench (2 March 1725). He presided there for eight years, and evidently gave satisfaction, being reappointed on the accession of George II and raised to the peerage in 1731 as first Baron Raymond of Abbots Langley, Hertfordshire. As lord chief justice he is remembered for elaborate and very learned judgments which applied the common law carefully and conservatively. Certainly he helped to develop the law's distinction between murder and manslaughter. In 1727, giving judgment on a special verdict found against Major John Oneby for killing a man after a gambling argument, Raymond determined that an 'act of deliberation' on the part of the protagonist which occurred after the first quarrel showed that he was not deprived of his reason and therefore was guilty of murder. And two years later in 'R. v. John Huggins' ('State trials', 17.370-82), which arose out of the parliamentary inquiry into the condition of the prisons (Huggins was warden of the Fleet prison), he held that an officer could not be held criminally responsible for the acts of his deputy in the absence of his express consent, and Huggins was therefore not guilty of murdering an inmate who had died after ill treatment. He also had some impact on the law of libel, establishing the principle in 'R. v. Curl' (1728) that publication of an obscene book is punishable as a libel at common law, if it 'tends to disturb the civil order of society', and temporarily shoring up the orthodox defences of government against criticism of the press in the important case of 'R. v. Francklin' (1728), where the publisher of 'The Craftsman' was indicted for criticizing the ministry's foreign policy. On this occasion Raymond reaffirmed the seventeenth-century principle that the jury were judges only of the defendant's responsibility for the publication and of its application to the king's ministers, and it was an issue of law for the court to determine whether the words were libellous. He also insisted that in seditious libel the truth of the matter alleged was no defence: 'it is not material whether the facts charged in a libel be true or false, if the prosecution is by indictment or information' ('State trials', 17.658-9). This was the position later followed by Lord Mansfield. 
Raymond was manifestly dedicated to the common law: near the end of his life he spoke in the Lords against the bill for recording legal proceedings in English; he also told his fellow peers that as a judge he would commit any one of them who claimed privileged immunity from giving evidence on oath. His reports continued to within a year of his death. He had married Anne (died 1721), daughter of his colleague Sir Edward Northey, attorney-general when he was solicitor-general, and when he died at his London home at Red Lion Square on 18 March 1733 he left his estate of Langley Bury, at Abbots Langley in Hertfordshire, to their only son, Robert. He was buried at Abbots Langley church. His reports were published in 1743 and reached a fifth edition in 1832. 


@@@@@


doc= 23208


Raymond, Sir Thomas (1626/7-1683), judge, was the son of Robert Raymond ('c'.1583-1636), rector of Bures, Suffolk, and probably his second wife, Margaret, probably Margaret Harding, whom a Robert Raymond married in 1622. His father, having made clear his wish that Raymond be sent to the university, made provision for this in his will and appointed his wife, Margaret, executor. Raymond was duly educated at the school at Bishop's Stortford and then entered Christ's College, Cambridge, on 5 April 1643, aged sixteen, and graduated BA in 1646. Meanwhile he had entered Gray's Inn on 6 February 1645, and was called to the bar on 11 February 1651. By December 1673, when his son Robert Raymond was born, he had married Anne (1633-1715), daughter of Sir Edward Fishe, second baronet, of Southill, Bedfordshire. They also had two daughters who died in infancy. Raymond was created serjeant-at-law in October 1677, one of his sponsors being the earl of Danby. Elevation to the bench, as a baron of exchequer on 1 May 1679, was followed by a knighthood on 26 June. He was transferred to common pleas on 7 February 1680 and to the king's bench on 24 April 1680. 
Raymond sat with Scroggs at Westminster during the trials of Elizabeth Cellier and Roger Palmer, earl of Castlemaine, and as an assessor to the House of Lords at the trial of Lord Stafford. He concurred with Chief Justice Sir Francis Pemberton in overruling, on 11 May 1681, the plea to the jurisdiction of the king's bench set up by Edward Fitzharris, and with Chief Justice Sir Francis North in passing sentence on 18 August the same year on Stephen College. He also concurred in the judgment on the 'quo warranto' against the corporation of London in June 1683. 
By this date Raymond must have been ill, because it was reported on 21 June 1683 that he was 'on the mending hand' ('Third Report', HMC, 246). However, he died on 14 July, while on circuit. He was buried in Downham church, in which parish was situated his seat, Tremnall Park. To Roger North he was 'a mild, passive man, who had neither dexterity nor spirit to oppose a popular rage' (North, 1.131), such as accusations of witchcraft. Raymond left in manuscript a valuable collection of reports first printed in 1696 under the title 'Reports of divers special cases adjudged in the courts of king's bench, common pleas, and exchequer in the reign of King Charles II'. A second edition appeared in 1743, with further editions in 1793 and 1803. 


@@@@@


doc= 23209


Raynald, Thomas (fl. 1539-1552?), printer, was active from 1539. He used printing material that had previously belonged to the Southwark printer Peter Treveris. A deposition by three of his former servants on 20 August 1540, which noted that Raynald was recently resident at Hallywell near Finsbury, listed a number of books and engraved plates then in his possession, including an anatomical print 'graven in copper the one the man the other woman with their Intrayles thereto belonging' (Plomer, 21). 'STC' suggests that his earliest printed work may have been an edition of Colet's 'Accidence', probably printed in 1539. In 1540 he published 'The Byrth of Mankynde', a translation of Eucharius Roesslin's midwifery manual and the first such text published in English; it was also the first work in England to include copper engravings. 
The printer should be distinguished from his namesake, the physician 
A namesake, and possibly a son of the printer, 


@@@@@


doc= 23210


Rayner, Lionel Benjamin (1787-1855), actor, was born in Heckmondwike, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, on 10 October 1787. His father was a farmer and cloth manufacturer, and died before Rayner was seven years old. Not much is known of his early life except that a performance of 'Speed the Plough' and 'The Naval Pillar' at Leeds inspired him to take an interest in the theatre. At the age of nineteen he joined Crisp's company at Cheadle, Staffordshire, where he opened as Clodpole in the farce 'Barnaby Buttle' and later played Jeremy Diddler in James Kenney's farce 'Raising the Wind'. 
Frustrated by his manager, who took many of the light-comedy parts which he sought for himself, Rayner then joined another company at Stone, also in Staffordshire, with which he remained for three years. He played with it at Stratford upon Avon, became as well known for his singing as for his acting, and by his performance of Solomon Lob in 'Love Laughs at Locksmiths' raised his position and his salary. He appeared in Manchester as Robin Roughhead in 'Fortune's Frolic', and then joined the Nottingham company. While in this part of the country he married, at Shrewsbury on 25 December 1812, Margaret Remington, the daughter of the proprietor of the York circuit; they had one son. In the Nottingham company Rayner played Zekiel Homespun in Coleman's 'The Heir-at-Law' to the Dr Pangloss of Bannister, who recommended him to the manager of the Haymarket Theatre. He consequently made his first appearance in London at the Haymarket, in June 1814, as Frank Oatland in Thomas Morton's 'A Cure for the Heartache'. He went on to play other characters with great success, such as Sam in 'Raising the Wind' and Stephen Harrowby in Coleman's 'The Poor Gentleman', and was given the opportunity to perform at Brighton, under the management of Trotter. Rayner was devoted to Shakespeare and instituted a celebration of the anniversary of his birth in Sunderland in 1817, which was presided over by his friend Stephen Kemble. 
Around 1820 Rayner became a member of the York company and established a reputation for playing rustic characters in low comedy. He also visited Stamford, King's Lynn, Louth, Manchester, and Huntingdon. At Birmingham he became great friends with John Emery. At the end of 1822 he received an offer from R. W. Elliston to appear at Drury Lane as Dandie Dinmont in 'Guy Mannering'. This was the only part he played at that house, however, as Elliston did not seem to want him for any other character. He was forced to retire to King's Lynn, until Arnold, the proprietor of the English Opera House (later the Lyceum), engaged him to play the part of Fixture in Morton's 'A Roland for an Oliver' in July 1823. Emery's death in 1822 gave Rayner the chance to step into the latter's shoes and perform his celebrated role of Giles in 'The Miller's Maid'. As a result of his success Charles Kemble engaged him at Covent Garden Theatre for three years, and he opened there in October 1823 as Tyke in Morton's 'The School of Reform'. Other parts he went on to play include Sam Sharpset in Morton's 'The Slave', Pan in 'Midas', Friar Tuck in 'Ivanhoe', and Caliban in 'The Tempest' (1825). 
About 1831 Rayner purchased the lease of Burford's Panorama and proceeded to build on its site the Strand Theatre, initially naming it Rayner's New Subscription Theatre in the Strand. But faced with the opposition of the patent houses, and unable to obtain the lord chamberlain's licence to run the theatre, he was obliged to close it down within a few months. He then worked in the provinces, and achieved great success particularly as Lubin in the domestic drama 'Love's Frailties', written for him by J. J. Stafford and tailored to his strengths as an actor. The Strand Theatre had to be leased out to a Miss Kelly, but Rayner did not stop campaigning exhaustively for a lease until at last it was granted in 1836. However, the long struggle left him financially almost ruined, so that he was unable to continue as a theatrical manager. He resorted to writing for sporting newspapers and magazines, having been long interested in horse-racing. He also tried his hand at poetry. While engaged at Covent Garden he had had the prudence to subscribe to its Theatrical Fund, so on reaching the age of sixty he was able to claim from it an annuity, which supplemented his income from journalism. Some time after this he married again. He died on 24 September 1855, at his home, 17 Acton Street, Gray's Inn Road, London, from a disease of the throat which prevented him from swallowing. He was buried on 1 October 1855, in the old burial-ground at Camberwell, near his only son. 
Rayner was 5 feet 8 inches in height, stout, with a dark complexion and hazel eyes. He was a good serio-comic actor whose gift for impromptu speech and talent for comic singing were perhaps his chief attractions. 


@@@@@


doc= 23211


Rayner, Samuel (1806-1879), watercolour painter and lithographer, was born on 15 April 1806 in Colnbrook in Buckinghamshire, the third of the five children of Samuel (died 1817) and Margaret Rayner. In 1812 Rayner's parents moved to London, where they established an ironmonger's business at 7 Blandford Street, Portman Square, Marylebone. His grandfather Thomas Rayner was probably himself an artist and may have helped to teach the young Sam, as he was known, to draw. In 1821, at the age of fifteen, Rayner had a picture of Malmesbury Abbey accepted for exhibition at the Royal Academy. By this time he was studying architectural draughtsmanship in the studio of John Britton, where he became a close friend of a fellow student, George Cattermole. 
On 2 October 1823, after an elopement, Rayner married Ann Manser (1802-1890), the daughter of William Manser, a London publisher, who was herself an artist and engraver in black marble. They settled at 11 Blandford Street, and in 1827 they exhibited together two drawings of Westminster Abbey at the Royal Academy (a catalogue entry -- 'S. A. Rayner' -- has resulted in mistaken references to Samuel A. Rayner). After receiving an inheritance from his grandfather and 'a VERY handsome order' from the sixth duke of Devonshire at Chatsworth, Rayner moved to Museum Parade, Matlock Bath, where he started business as publisher and printer. 'Rayner's Sketches of Derbyshire Scenery Part 1', lithographed by J. D. Harding, was published in 1830, and his 'History and Antiquities of Haddon Hall' six years later, after Rayner had moved his business to 17 Friar Gate, Derby. He also opened the Cornmarket Gallery, which dealt in the family's pictures until the 1920s. Works by Rayner from this period include 'The Derby Mechanics' Institute Exhibition, 1839' (Derby Museum and Art Gallery) and 'Drawing Room in a Town House' (V&A). 
Rayner's family were Baptists, but in 1835 he, his wife, and children joined the Irvingite Catholic Apostolic church. The failure of an illustrated publication entitled 'The History, Antiquities and Topography of the Town of Derby' (only three out of twenty-four projected parts appeared) may have induced Rayner to return to London in 1842. In 1844 he and his family moved to 15 Berners Street which was to be the family home for sixteen years. 
In February 1845 Rayner was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours, exhibiting twenty-nine drawings with the society between 1845 and 1850. Most of his drawings were architectural studies of abbeys and scenic buildings -- including six of Haddon Hall -- and were sold at between 10 and 35 guineas. His monogram was 'SR' usually with a date. J. L. Roget commented of Rayner, perhaps unfairly, that 'his studies were cleverly handled and agreeable in colour, but obviously based upon the manner of George Cattermole, whose work they sometimes resemble so closely they may easily be taken for his' (Roget, 2.299). As well as making sketching trips around Britain, Rayner also travelled to France and Italy; some of his pictures were exhibited in Rome in 1839. 
In 1851 Rayner became involved in an action in the court of queen's bench which related to a promissory note, which he had endorsed, drawn by William Manser for $2000, in favour of his daughter Ann (Nancy) Rayner ['see below']. Manser pleaded that his signature was a forgery but the jury decided against him (which presumably obliged him to honour the bill). The case brought severe strain upon the family and seems to have resulted in the temporary separation of Rayner from his wife, who had appeared as witness for her father. Rayner was also expelled by unanimous vote from the Society of Painters in Water Colours. The Rayner family were eventually reunited, and lived in Brighton from 1859 until 1864 when they returned to London. 
By nature, Rayner was a kindly but impulsive man: on one occasion, according to family tradition, he was offered less for a picture by a client than he was asking, and responded that if that was all the picture was worth to him, he was not to have it, promptly putting his foot through it. A drawing by Nancy Rayner of about 1840 shows her father with strong features, an open, fresh face, and thick black hair which, in subsequent photographs, turned white. Rayner died in Windsor on 19 August 1879. 
Between 1821 and 1872 Rayner had exhibited twenty drawings at the Royal Academy, four at the British Institution, and nineteen at Suffolk Street. The British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the Sheffield, Derby, and Stoke-on-Trent art galleries have collections of his work. Rayner's son, Richard Manser (1834-1908), and five daughters -- Nancy, Rhoda, known as Rose (1828-1921), Frances (1834- 'c'.1890), Louise ['see below'], and Margaret (1837-1920) -- all became professional artists. The eldest daughter, 




@@@@@


doc= 23212


Rea, John (d. 1681), nursery gardener, lived with his daughter, Minerva, and her husband, Samuel Gilbert, author of the 'Florist's vademecum' (1682), at Kinlet, Shropshire, near Bewdley, Worcestershire. Rea describes the place in his 'Flora' (1676) as 'a rural district where it was my unhappiness to plant my stock'. He was said to have had the largest collection of tulips in England and it was he who introduced 'Corylus colurna' in 1665. Rea planned the gardens at Gerard's Bromley, Staffordshire, the seat of Charles, fourth Baron Gerard. 
Rea published 'Flora, seu, De florum cultura', with a second engraved title-page, 'Flora, Ceres, and Pomona', in 1665 (3rd edn 1702); the work was dedicated to Sir Thomas Hanmer and members of his family, and to Baron Gerard's son. This was intended as a revision of John Parkinson's 'Paradisi in sole paradisus terrestris' (1629), and includes designs for gardens, and many pages on fruit and tulips. 
Rea died at Kinlet in November 1681, leaving his holding to his daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 23213


Reach, Angus Bethune (1821-1856), journalist, was born at Inverness on 23 January 1821, the son of Roderick Reach (died 1853), a solicitor, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Bethune. He was educated at the Inverness Royal Academy and then at Edinburgh University, where he contributed literary articles to the 'Inverness Courier', which his father had formerly owned. 
In 1842 the family moved to London, where Charles Mackay, then sub-editor of the 'Morning Chronicle', found work for Reach as a reporter at the central criminal court and afterwards in the House of Commons gallery. In 1848 he contributed to the 'Morning Chronicle' most of a series of articles entitled 'Labour and the poor', which Fox Bourne described as 'an unparalleled exploit in journalism' (Fox Bourne, 2.154). They helped inspire Henry Mayhew's 'London Labour and the London Poor' (1851, 1862), which also began life as a series of articles in the 'Morning Chronicle'. 
Besides the 'Morning Chronicle', Reach wrote for the 'New Monthly Magazine' (January-October 1845), 'Bentley's Miscellany' (February 1853 - October 1854), 'Chambers's Journal', 'The Era', and the 'Sunday Times'. He was associated with two short-lived imitations of 'Punch', Henry and James Vizetelly's the 'Puppet Show' (1848) (on which his leading colleagues were Henry Sutherland Edwards and James Hannay) and the 'Man in the Moon' (1847-9), which he edited in collaboration with Albert Smith and which for a time threatened to rival 'Punch' itself. He joined the staff of 'Punch' in 1849. His pioneering gossip column in the 'Illustrated London News' (1850-51), 'Town talk and table talk', was the forerunner of the paper's famous column 'Echoes of the week', edited for many years by George Augustus Sala. Between 1847 and 1850 he published several short humorous monographs, including four 'natural histories' of society in the style of Albert Smith's 'physiologies', and 'A Romance of a Mince Pie' (1850), which was illustrated by Phiz. A sensational romance, 'Clement Lorimer, or, The Book with the Iron Clasps', with twelve etchings by Cruikshank, was published in monthly parts in 1848-9, in a single volume in 1849, and as a two-volume novel, 'Leonard Lindsay, or, The Story of a Buccaneer', in 1850. As a 'special commissioner' he wrote a much admired series of letters to the 'Morning Chronicle' on the vineyards of France, republished in book form as 'Claret and Olives' in 1852, and also reported on the manufacturing and coal-mining districts of the north of England. For more than ten years he was a musical, theatrical, and art critic, as well as principal book reviewer, for the 'Morning Chronicle'. In addition he was London correspondent of the 'Glasgow Citizen' and, after his father's death in 1853, of the 'Inverness Courier', a role in which first Shirley Brooks and then Edmund Yates succeeded him. He wrote many dramatic farces, of which only one, 'Jenny Lind at Last, or, The Swedish Nightingale' (1847), appears to have been published. 
Early in 1855 Reach was incapacitated by what Edmund Yates described as 'an attack of softening of the brain' (Yates, 1.270). Shirley Brooks obtained grants for him of $50 and $100 from the Royal Literary Fund and the Royal Bounty Fund respectively. On 31 March 1855 members of the Fielding Club led by Albert Smith and Yates staged a benefit pantomime at the Olympic Theatre to raise money for him and his wife: the audience included Dickens and Thackeray, and a repeat performance was given at Drury Lane Theatre before the queen, the prince consort, and the prince of Wales. For a year before his death Shirley Brooks carried out Reach's work for the 'Morning Chronicle' and the 'Inverness Courier', handing the proceeds to Reach's wife. 
Reach died at Camberwell Green, London, on 25 November 1856 and was buried in Norwood cemetery. Sala spoke of his 'brilliant talents', to which 'not half enough justice' was done in the forty years after his death, and described him as 'one of the most laborious and prolific writers' he had ever met with. But Reach still found time for late-night revelry with Sala and his bohemian circle at the Cafe de l'Europe in the Haymarket ('Life and Adventures', 164-5), and it can probably be assumed that drink contributed as much as overwork to his early death. Yates remembered him as 'an earnest-faced long-haired young man' (Yates, 1.216). His name was pronounced as a disyllable: Re-ach. 


@@@@@


doc= 23214


Read, Katharine (1723-1778), portrait painter, was born on 3 February 1723 in Dundee, Forfarshire, the daughter of Alexander Read of Turfbeg, a Dundee merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Wedderburn (1699-1756), daughter of Sir John Wedderburn, baronet. The family's strong Jacobite connections and the ensuing failure of the 1745 rising may have been a contributing factor in the decision to send her to Paris in 1745 to study crayon painting under Maurice-Quentin de La Tour. She remained in Paris until 1751, when she moved to Rome with the financial support of her brother, Captain Alexander Read. Her chaperone was the Abbe Peter Grant, the Roman agent for the Catholic church in Scotland. It was through the Abbe Grant's connections that she was able to establish a clientele from the Italian aristocracy and the transient British expatriate community who were in Rome on the grand tour. She was hopeful that her stay in Rome would enable her to establish herself as a professional artist in Britain, stating in a letter of 1752 to her brother, 'I have staid one year in Rome for Improvement, I must certainly stay in it another for Name, and then you'll see I'll top it with the best of them' (K. Read to A. Read, 6 Jan 1752, priv. coll.). 
Read returned to Britain and set up her studio in London in 1753, establishing a reputation as one of the most fashionable portrait painters in crayon which she sustained for over twenty years. Inevitably she was compared to her male counterparts, as one critic stated: 'After 'Cotes', our best painter in crayons, (and perhaps the only good one) is Miss Read. She likewise paints very well in oil. Her pencilling is free and easy, and her colouring has a great deal of truth' ('Observations on the Pictures now in Exhibition at the Royal Academy, Spring Gardens, and Mr Christie's', 1771, 6). She painted members of the royal family, including 'A Portrait of her Majesty [Queen Charlotte] with the Prince of Wales' (exh. Free Society of Artists, 1763) and 'The Two Young Princes of Wales' (exh. Free Society of Artists, 1765) which depicts the prince of Wales with his brother, Frederick. An example of her oil painting is 'The Countess of Sussex' (Ranger's House, Greenwich, London). An indication of the prices paid for her work is revealed in a letter of 1772: 12 guineas for a Madonna; 20 guineas for a portrait in crayon; 35 guineas for a half-length portrait in oils (Read to Lord (?), 17 Feb 1772, priv. coll.). She also appears to have had connections with literary circles, painting the actor David Garrick and executing two portraits of his wife, Eva Maria Garrick (Victoria and Albert Museum, London). 
Katharine Read remained unmarried and lived for some years with her niece, Helena Beatson. Beatson demonstrated much artistic talent, a fact noted by Frances Burney on one of her visits to Read's studio ('Early Diary', 284). In February 1777 Read, accompanied by her niece, travelled to India in the hope of establishing a practice for herself in Madras. In October 1777 Helena Beatson married Sir Charles Oakley, bt, governor of Madras. With her health failing, Read set sail for the Cape in 1778, and 'en route' died on a Dutch ship on 15 December 1778; she was buried at sea. Her will of 1777, revised on 29 January 1778, details her substantial assets, accrued through her earnings as a professional crayon painter. 


@@@@@


doc= 23215


Read, Charles Anderson (1841-1878), writer, was born on 10 November 1841 at Kilsella House, near Sligo, the son of a gentleman who became a schoolmaster of Hilltown, near Newry. Charles was destined for the church, but family misfortunes led him to be apprenticed to a merchant of Rathfriland. He continued to study Latin and, with his mother, Irish, and at thirteen contributed to local journals. He subsequently became partner in and eventually proprietor of the firm, but it failed about 1863. Read, who had married Rebekah Harriette in 1862, obtained an appointment in the London publishing office of James Henderson. To Henderson's 'Our Young Folks' Weekly Journal' he contributed from the first number in 1871 sketches, poems, and stories from the classics and nine successful serial stories, two of which, 'Aileen Aroon' (1867) and 'Savourneen Dheelish' (1867), were published separately. He also wrote for the 'Dublin University Magazine' and produced some passable verse. Read suffered from consumption, and a voyage to Australia in 1873 was beneficial. His deep interest in Irish literature led to his best-known work, 'The Cabinet of Irish Literature' (4 vols., 1876-80), which comprises selections from the writings of the most prominent Irish authors, from the earliest times to the date of publication. The fourth volume was completed by T. P. O'Connor. Read died prematurely on 23 January 1878 at his home, Ingoldsby Villa, Bensham Manor Road, Thornton Heath, Surrey. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 23216


Read, David Charles (1790-1851), etcher and painter, was born at Boldre, near Lymington, Hampshire, on 1 March 1790. He went to London at an early age and was apprenticed to the engraver John Scott; but, his health suffering, he returned to the country, and there produced woodcuts for several works, including an edition of 'The Pilgrim's Progress' published by William Sharp at Romsey (1816-17). In January 1820 he settled at Salisbury, where he continued to reside in the close until 1845, building a successful, though unremunerative, practice as a drawing-master. Read showed only one work at the Royal Academy, a landscape in oil, in 1823; this was followed by seven works at the British Institution and six more at the Suffolk Street gallery of the Society of British Artists before he ceased exhibiting in 1840. During this period he spent his spare time sketching in pencil, watercolours, and oils, working chiefly in the open air, and he prided himself on the fidelity with which he rendered weather and atmospheric effects. 
Read made his first experiments in etching in 1826, and the works for which he is now best remembered were first published in 1828. He was a rapid draughtsman, and between that date and 1844 he produced 237 plates, mainly after his own works. Sixteen of them were portraits, including two of Goethe, and one of Handel, after Hogarth; the remainder were landscapes, many of views around Salisbury. Their merit is very unequal, however. At their best they recall the work of Rembrandt, especially in their extensive use of drypoint -- unusual with English artists of this date. But in others the drawing is often faulty, and a black and harsh effect is produced by the mechanical cross-hatching of the shadows and an excess of roulette work. Read was scrupulous in his attention to the technical production of his work. Thus, although he sent his earliest plates to be printed in London, he soon obtained a press and pulled all the impressions himself. Moreover, he was careful not to print impressions from plates which showed signs of wear; he destroyed sixty-three of his plates in 1845, and the rest were cancelled by his family after his death. 
Read published six series of etchings between 1829 and 1845. These include thirty-one views of 'Wiltshire Scenery' (1837), a set of twenty-three 'Etchings from Nature Designed to Illustrate a Few of the Leading Features of English Scenery' (1845), and a series of thirteen views of 'Lake Scenery' (1840). Although he complained about the lack of attention his etchings attracted, Read was flattered to note the appreciation of Goethe and Mendelssohn, and he gained the support of a number of patrons. These included Chambers Hall, whose collection of his prints is now at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and the first earl of Ellesmere. Read himself presented the British Museum with two volumes containing 168 of his etchings. 
On leaving Salisbury in 1845 Read spent more than a year in Italy, and on his return he devoted himself to painting in oils, producing some of his best works for Dr Coope between 1846 and 1849. His health became seriously impaired towards the end of 1849, and he died, unmarried, at his home, 24 Bedford Place, Kensington, London, on 28 May 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 23217


Read, John (fl. 1588), surgeon, is presumed to have been a native of Gloucestershire. He was apparently in practice in Gloucester in 1587, since he describes his involvement in the prosecution of a Flemish quack in that year, although 'the matter was excused by way of charitie to be good to straungers'. Read probably came to London later that year. He was licensed by the archbishop of Canterbury on 6 January 1588, and on 24 June that same year was licensed to marry Cicely, daughter of John Banister, lecturer in anatomy to the London Company of Barber-Surgeons. Banister had been admitted to the company as a foreign brother in 1572, but Read never joined, although he was on friendly terms with some of its leading members. He was one of a group of late sixteenth-century London surgeons, including Banister, William Clowes, and Thomas Gale, who endeavoured to raise the status of their profession. His principal claim to fame is his 'A most excellent and compendious method of curing woundes in the head, and in other partes of the body', published in 1588 but evidently completed in the preceding year; it was entered in the Stationers' register on 10 November 1587. It is for the most part a translation of 'De recta curandorum vulnerum ratione' by Franciscus Arcaeus, but also includes John Arderne's 'Treatise of the Fistula', as well as an English version of the Hippocratic oath, various miscellaneous pieces, and substantial interpolations by Read. The dedication, addressed to Banister, Clowes, and William Pickering, described as 'my very good and loving friends', reiterates Read's beliefs 'that all chirurgians ought to be seene in phisicke [examined in medicine]: and that the barbors crafte ought to be a distinct mistery from chirurgery'. The latter of these desiderata came to pass in 1745 when the barbers and surgeons became separate companies, and the former in 1868 when the royal colleges of Physicians and Surgeons introduced reciprocal representation on their examining boards, followed in 1884 by the establishment of the conjoint examining board. Read further stresses his belief in the unity of medicine and surgery in a six-page poem entitled 'A Complaint of the Abuse of the Noble Arte of Chirurgerie'. The other theme running through Read's work is his opposition to the activities of quacks, and he refers several times to the earlier writings of John Hall of Maidstone on this subject. 


@@@@@


doc= 23218


Read, Nicholas (c.1733-1787), sculptor, was a pupil at the St Martin's Lane Academy, London. He was then apprenticed to Francois Roubiliac, who is said to have accepted him following entreaties from Read's father, despite his declared wish not to take apprentices. According to his obituary, Read finished one of Roubiliac's busts in his master's absence and on his return the sculptor was so delighted that 'they continued inseparable friends ever after and all distinction was lost in the affection he bore him' ('GM', 1st ser., 57, 1787, 644). While this anecdote may be a variant of a familiar type, it seems to indicate rightly the important place that Read had within Roubiliac's small studio. In 1750 George Vertue mentioned a 'young man, an apprentice of Mr. Rubbilac' (with the name Nicholas added in the margin), and noted with approval a drawing of an academy figure which 'shows great skill & fire & spirit extraordinary' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.152). Read's abilities as a carver were evidently valued by Roubiliac, and he was reported to have carved the skeletal Death on the monument to Joseph and Elizabeth Nightingale (commissioned 1758; erected 1761; Westminster Abbey), the most dramatic figure in one of Roubiliac's most celebrated works. After Roubiliac's death Read announced in January 1762 that, as 'a Person who for sixteen years past has studied under him, and executed a great Part of his most capital Works' he 'means to succeed him' (H. Walpole, 'Book of materials', I, 154, MS Lewis Walpole Library, Yale University, Farmington, Connecticut). This bid to continue the workshop did not succeed, for in March he was advertising casts from Roubiliac's 'Moulds for Busts', stating that 'these Moulds will shortly be disposed of by publick Auction' (ibid.). 
Read executed (and signed) the monument to Francis Hooper in Trinity College, Cambridge, with its bust by Roubiliac, and is likely to have played a major role in the completion of some of the sculptor's later small monuments, such as those to Lucretia Betenson (died 1758; Wrotham, Kent) and John Wale (died 1761; Earl's Colne, Essex). But Read's activity as an independent sculptor following Roubiliac's death failed to live up to his early promise, though he was certainly not lacking in ambition. In the early 1760s his talent was recognized by the Society of Arts, which awarded him two of the largest premiums given for sculpture, the first of 100 guineas for a 'life-sized figure in marble of Actaeon and his dog' in 1762 and the second for $147 for a 'Diana by a Rock' two years later (Dossie, 440). From about this date until 1780 Read was a frequent exhibitor at both the Society of Artists and the Free Society. During the 1760s he received commissions for a number of small monuments, such as those to James Kendal (West Horsely, Sussex), incorporating motifs used earlier in Roubiliac's workshop. He also enjoyed some success in attracting those patrons who admired the dramatic narrative qualities of his master's later work. The monument to the merchant Nicholas Magens (died 1764) at Brightlingsea, Essex (described in the 'Ipswich Journal' for 8 November 1766), combines elements from Roubiliac's Warren, Hargrave, and Argyll monuments, albeit in an undisciplined way. A rather less elaborate but still dramatic monument at Probus, Cornwall, to Thomas Hawkins (died 1766), with mourning widow and descending angel, may also be attributed to him. His best-known work, however, is the vast machine high on the south aisle in Westminster Abbey commemorating Admiral Tyrell (died 1766). This represents the almost naked figure of the admiral being summoned from the deep at the last trump in an illusionistic scene involving billowing waves, the admiral's ship, allegorical figures, and much else. Described in the 1783 guide to the abbey as a 'magnificent monument', it was already being ridiculed in the same year not only for its 'pancake' clouds but also for the way it combined so many disparate elements 'that we are no more tempted to dream of symmetry and arrangement at the view, than we should be at the sight of a broker's-shop in Moorside' (Ralph, 11-12). It was partially demolished in the later nineteenth century. 
In 1779 Read unsuccessfully submitted a design for the monument to Lord Chatham, a commission given to John Bacon. He died on 11 July 1787, having been 'totally deprived of reason a short time before his death' ('GM', 1st ser., 57, 1787, 644). A posthumous sale included plaster casts of busts, reliefs, and 'a small monument complete' (Gunnis, 318). Read was described by J. T. Smith as 'a conceited spark who used to annoy the great sculptor'. His larger monuments strive for the drama of his master's work but lack their intelligence; they are distinguished by their fine passages of carving, even if they are uncontrolled in their design. Rather than adapting Roubiliac's handling of the surfaces of marble sculpture to a new neo-classical aesthetic, as did Wilton and Bacon, Read continued to rework in an exaggerated way the scenic effects of his teacher, to the detriment of his own reputation. 


@@@@@


doc= 23219


Read, Richard (1745?-1790?), engraver, of unknown origins, was a pupil of the London engraver James Caldwell when in 1771 he gained a premium of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce for his drawing. He gave his address as Birmingham in 1777, when he exhibited the mezzotinto print 'A Storm' with the Society of Artists. This, his most ambitious plate, reproduced 'Perdita Found by an Old Shepherd and a Clown', a scene from 'The Winter's Tale' after Paul Sandby, and was published by Valentine Green, another artist from the west midlands. Read did not engrave many prints of consequence, and his principal employment may have been in some other aspect of design. Dodd's verdict that 'he became a slovenly practitioner both in the chalk style and in mezzotint and eventually abandoned his practice to become a dealer and printer of some of Bartolozzi's worn out plates' is hardly unfair (Dodd, fol. 35). Read is thought to have died in 1790. 


@@@@@


doc= 23220


Read, Samuel (1815-1883), watercolour painter, was born at Needham Market, Suffolk, where he was baptized at the Congregational church on 20 December 1815, the eldest of ten children of Thomas Read (1787/8-1878), bootmaker, and his wife, Mary (1789/90-1885). Educated at Theobald's Grammar School in Needham Market, he was articled late in 1830 to John Eddowes Sparrowe, attorney of the Ancient House, Ipswich, and town clerk. Sparrowe was ousted from his borough office for his involvement in bribery during the 1835 parliamentary election, but Read remained in his office until early in 1839, when he moved to that of William Mason, borough surveyor. Between May 1837 and December 1838 Read made eighty pencil portraits of the principal men of Ipswich, mostly drawn during court sessions or at meetings at which he accompanied Sparrowe. It was for Sparrowe, the leading Blue of the town, that he designed several effective anti-Yellow caricatures for publication in 1835-6. 
In 1841 Read went to London to learn wood-engraving with Josiah W. Whymper; he also studied with W. C. Smith, the watercolour painter. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1843, showing a drawing, 'The Vestibule of the Painted Hall, Greenwich', and he continued to exhibit there annually until 1857. By 1872 he had exhibited eighteen architectural drawings there, mainly interiors of English and Belgian churches, including several in Antwerp. He was the illustrator of several books, the first of which seems to have been 'Zoological Studies', published by the SPCK in 1844. In the same year he also began to do sketches for the 'Illustrated London News': his contributions to this paper included illustrations for stories and a series of large views of English cathedrals. In 1853 he was sent to Constantinople and the Black Sea, just before the outbreak of the Crimean War, as the first special artist for the 'Illustrated London News'. In the 1860s architectural sketches from his travels in Europe appeared in the paper; some were republished as 'Leaves from a Sketchbook' (1875). 
Read was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours (the Old Watercolour Society) in 1857, and a member in 1880. He contributed to every exhibition from 1857 onward, showing 210 paintings in all. In the 1870s he painted some landscapes, especially Scottish and Irish coastal views, but these were less successful than his European church interiors. On his way back from a sketching trip on the continent, he narrowly escaped death in the Staplehurst railway disaster of 9 June 1865: part of the train from Folkestone to London rolled off the embankment into a river, and the artist was trapped underwater. Charles Dickens was also a passenger on this train. 
Read married, in Inverness on 26 June 1860, Isabella ('b'. 1831), a daughter of Robert Carruthers, the proprietor and editor of the 'Inverness Courier'; the couple had one son and one daughter. During the later years of his life he lived at Parkside, in Bromley, Kent; he was unofficially retained in old age as art editor of the 'Illustrated London News'. He died on 6 May 1883 at Fort Cottage, Sidmouth, Devon, following a stroke. The Victoria and Albert Museum, London, has seven of his watercolours, including 'The Corridor, the Brewer's Hall, Antwerp' (1860), and the British Museum has several engraved proofs by the Dalziel brothers of his drawings. A characteristic drawing of Read's shows a cathedral, church, or castle, possibly ruined and covered in thick undergrowth, and 'delightfully dank and gloomy' (Houfe, 273). 


@@@@@


doc= 23221


Reade, Thomas (1606/7-1669), royalist army officer and civil lawyer, was born at Linkenholt, Hampshire, the second son of Robert Reade (died 1626?) and his second wife, Mildred (died 1630/31), sister of Sir Francis Windebank, Charles I's secretary of state from 1632 to 1640. Thomas was schooled in Hampshire before in 1624, at the king's request, he was awarded a scholarship at New College, Oxford, where he was elected a fellow two years later. Despite his appointment Reade was a recalcitrant student, causing his uncle and the college warden concern both over his feckless behaviour and his religious conformity. After his mother's death (her will is dated 15 August 1630), and the receipt of his inheritance, Reade turned to civil law and graduated BCL on 11 October 1631. Windebank sent his son, John, from Winchester to New College in 1634, to be under Reade's tuition. The warden, Robert Pink, promised to keep a watchful eye over both of them: Reade, he commented, 'is very able and to spare' ('CSP dom.', '1634-5', 230). As late as 1636 Reade had reason to confess to Windebank that, 'Evil fate has made him appear Rash and ungrateful' ('CSP dom.', '1636-7', 550). Reade corresponded with his uncle, chiefly in Latin, primarily about John's progress and welfare, until 1638, the year in which John graduated and Reade proceeded DCL. 
When the civil war broke out in 1642 Reade proved himself a zealous royalist. He enlisted at Oxford under Captain William Holland, son of Thomas Holland, the regius professor of divinity at Oxford. With a few other doctors and many undergraduates he was drilled in 'the parke' of New College and at Christ Church, probably as a pikeman. Reade was appointed to provide for the maintenance of the kings' troop in Oxford, and was ordered to disburse the sum of $5 in the provision of bows and arrows. He was among about 100 other university men who left Oxford on 10 September 1642 attempting to serve as volunteers with Sir John Byron's troops. At Chipping Norton they were waylaid by a troop of horse under John Fiennes, son of Lord Saye and Sele, but Reade escaped to Worcester. 
Reade returned to Oxford before 1643, and was admitted, by the king's mandate of 16 October 1643, principal of Magdalen Hall, replacing the parliamentarian Thomas Wilkinson who had already left the university. When Oxford surrendered to parliament in 1646 Wilkinson was restored. A warrant was issued on 7 July 1648 for Reade to be apprehended and brought with his papers and writings before the committee of both houses of parliament; another was issued in February 1649. Reade had gone to Paris before the first warrant was issued. He was received into the Catholic church and entered Douai College, where he took the oath of the profession of faith on 14 May 1648 and that of the alumni on 29 March 1649. He probably entered the Carthusian monastery of Nieuwpoort for some time with the intention of joining the order, but does not seem to have been ordained priest. He wrote in a reply to Edward Boughen's 'Account of the Roman Church' (1653) in defence of Catholicism. His work was printed in Paris in 1659 under the initials R. T., but no copy seems extant. 
At the Restoration, Reade returned to London, where he was quietly or clandestinely admitted into the college of advocates on 8 May 1661 'to obtain a bare livelihood' and allowed to live in Doctors' Commons (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.831). He was appointed surrogate to Sir William, judge of the prerogative court of Canterbury. Early in March 1669 he died, aged sixty-two, in poverty at Exeter House on the Strand, where Doctors' Commons had moved after the great fire in 1666. On 7 March he made his deathbed dispositions, 'his speech not being Cleare, and he being slowe of utterance', leaving all that he had to his brother Robert in Paris, 'whose purse was open to him and... he could not have subsisted without him' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/330, fol. 154'r'). Anthony Wood presumed that Thomas Reade was buried in the church attached to the Savoy Hospital, the parish in which Exeter House lay. Robert Reade was for a time secretary to Sir Francis Windebank. 


@@@@@


doc= 23222


Read, Sir William (d. 1715), itinerant oculist, was the son of an illiterate shoemaker in Halesworth, Suffolk. He was a man of little education, who flamboyantly advertised his medical and surgical skill, becoming the object of both high honours and considerable lampooning. Through self-promotion and the publication of handbills he established a well-placed London clientele, eventually becoming very wealthy and mixing in the very best London society. By 1694 he was living and practising in the York Buildings, the Strand (later moving to Durham Yard in the Strand), and between 1689 and 1693 he claimed to have performed many cures in provincial towns, including Oxford, where he said he restored thirty blind people to sight by couching. According to one handbill, he offered to treat gratis all wounded soldiers after the battle of Malplaquet (1709), provided their officers certified their participation in the battle. In 1705 Read was rewarded with an appointment as oculist to Queen Anne, and a knighthood for treating seamen and soldiers gratis. In the same year an anonymous poem celebrating his skills and magnanimity appeared, entitled 'The Oculist, a Poem Address't to Sir W. Read'. 
It is difficult to assess the validity of Read's claims, though many in his day considered him a fraud. Some said that he was illiterate, although he published a book and a number of handbills. It is certain that he did extensively plagiarize earlier writings, even to the point of repeating detailed case histories. This is evident in his book published about 1705, which circulated under two titles, 'A Treatise on the Eye' and 'A Short but Exact Account of All the Diseases Incident to the Eyes'. The first part of the book is an unacknowledged reprint (with a few spelling changes) of the 'Breviary of the Eyes', written by Richard Banister in 1621. Every detail of every case history recorded by Banister is repeated by Read as if the patients were his own. Read did omit, however, the chapter by Banister titled 'Of proud quacksalving montebanks, that would undertake all cures and performe few', perhaps because it too closely described his own practices. The second part of Read's book was a reprint (again unacknowledged) of the English translation of 'Traite des maladies de l'oeil qui sont en nombre de cent treize' by Jacques Guillemeau, originally published in 1585. Only the final third of Read's book appears to be his own composition, and it is a forty-page discourse promoting his manual dexterity and his styptic water. 
It is evident that, in addition to practising as an oculist, Read also sold various ointments, purges, and styptic waters during his travels throughout the country. A number of his flamboyant advertisements are preserved, including 'Post nubila Phoebus, nihil absque Deo' issued about 1695 (concerned with his remarkable cures of blind people in Oxford, Windsor, Bath, and elsewhere, and with other conditions, such as breast cancer, cured by styptic water) and 'Read's true and faithful experiments, lovingly communicated for the good of his countrymen, being a catalogue of those medicaments he sold off his stages during the time of his eighteen years travelling in England, Scotland, Ireland, and many foreign kingdoms', printed about 1705. These self-promoting handbills were cleverly satirized in a political broadsheet of 1710 entitled 'Dr. Sacheverel turn'd oculist, or, Sir W -- m R -- d's lamentation for the loss of his business'. Read was also lampooned in 'The Spectator' (no. 547), along with some other oculists and quacks of his day. 
In London Read appears to have been considered by some to be skilful, despite his humble origins, irregular education, and boastful advertising. His lavish entertainment of guests prompted Jonathan Swift to write to Stella (5 April 1711): 'Henley would fain engage me to go with Steele, Rowe, &c., to an invitation at Sir William Read's; surely you have heard of him; he has been a mountebank, and is the queen's oculist. He makes admirable punch, and treats you in golden vessells. ('Journal to Stella', 1984, 155)' Read died in Rochester, Kent, on 24 May 1715 and was buried there in the churchyard of St Nicholas. It is said that his widow, Augustina Read, continued his business in Durham Yard, presumably selling his various proprietary potions. Available evidence suggests that Sir William was a more effective self-promoter and plagiarist than he was an oculist. 


@@@@@


doc= 23223


Read, William (1795?-1866), poet, was born in co. Down, and at an early age became a contributor of poems to the first numbers of the 'Literary Gazette', under the pseudonym of Eustace. Read particularly impressed the then editor of the journal, William Jerdan, and went on to have a reasonably successful career as a poet. In 1818 he published at Belfast a lament on the death of Princess Charlotte, and a well-received volume, 'The Hill of Caves and other Poems'. He followed this first success with a second volume three years later, containing poems on a variety of themes ranging from a vigorous denunciation of gambling to the beauty of the palace at Versailles. Read published one final volume of poetry in 1859, 'Sketches from Dover Castle' which again featured both descriptive sketches and narrative poems. In the second half of his life, Read resided at Tullychin, co. Down, and was more concerned with military discipline than poetic metre, rising to the rank of lieutenant-colonel in charge of the North Down Rifles. He died on 26 December 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 23224


Reade, Charles (1814-1884), novelist and playwright, was born on 8 June 1814 at Ipsden House, Oxfordshire, the seventh son and tenth and youngest surviving child of John Reade (died 1849) and his wife, Anna Maria (died 1862), eldest daughter of Major John Scott (later Scott-Waring) MP, a former associate of Warren Hastings in India. Reade's mother, a devout evangelical, was a friend of Samuel Wilberforce, G. S. Faber, and other leading low-church clergymen and public figures. Charles was her favourite child and many of his most distinctive qualities as a writer, including his crusading humanitarian zeal, his dogmatism, and blind conviction of his own rightness, and even his brusque prose style, have been plausibly attributed to her influence. His father, a tory squire of the old school, had little in common with his wife and youngest son. Reade professed to believe that the best of his Reade blood came from a great-grandmother who was the daughter of a village blacksmith. 
As a small boy Reade depended for emotional support on his mother and an elder sister, Julia, rather than on his father. Julia, who may have been the model for Julia Dodd in his novel 'Hard Cash', married when he was nine, and he was sent to a private school at Rose Hill, Iffley, run by the Revd John Slatter. Reade nicknamed Slatter Scourger, but other old boys of the school denied that he was a ferocious disciplinarian, a possible prototype of the sadistic gaoler Hawes in 'It is Never too Late to Mend'. After four years at Rose Hill, Reade spent two happier years (1827-9) at Staines Lodge, a private school in Staines conducted by a curate named Hearn. He then studied with a crammer, a Mr Durham. His mother wished him to go to Oxford, expecting that he would enter the church after graduation, and in 1831 he won a demyship at Magdalen College with an essay on ambition and virtue. In 1835, according to the memoir by his son and elder brother, a college fellowship reserved for men born in Oxfordshire fell vacant unexpectedly, spurring him to sit for his final examinations after only three weeks' preparation (Reade and Reade, 1.143). Although a third-class degree -- in Greats -- was the best he could manage in the circumstances, he was elected probationary fellow on 22 July 1835, Vinerian scholar on 1 December 1835, and fellow of Magdalen in the summer of 1836. His choice as fellow was challenged by a man with a better degree, and his parents and their friends were said to have secured him the Vinerian scholarship by bringing in MAs from miles around to vote for him. He remained a fellow of Magdalen for the rest of his life, serving as junior dean of arts in 1841 and 1843, bursar in 1844 and 1849, vice-president in 1851, and junior bursar in 1859. Once he had taken his MA degree (on 26 April 1838) his fellowship did not require him to reside in Oxford, but in the years of his fame, and particularly in the early 1860s, he did much of his writing in his rooms at Magdalen, using them as a retreat. His tenure of the fellowship was contingent on his remaining unmarried, a stipulation he complained of bitterly but continued to put up with, even when he was earning thousands a year as a writer and would hardly have missed the annual stipend of $250 (which may eventually have risen to $600). 
As an undergraduate Reade laid the foundations of his lifelong reputation for eccentricity and nonconformity. He wore his hair unfashionably long, dressed colourfully, devoted all his time to reading, and abstained totally from alcohol and tobacco -- as he was to do throughout his life. He was tall and burly, with a tiny head and ungainly gait (Elwin, 38). There is nothing to indicate that he ever intended to fall in with his mother's wishes and become ordained. His subsequent life and literary career leave no doubt that he would have found it impossible to submit to the discipline and decorum of the church and to subscribe to all of its teachings, especially those relating to sex. Both his fellowship and his Vinerian scholarship were lay awards, intended to enable him to read law (although later, in 1837 or 1838, he may also briefly have tried medicine, in Edinburgh). While he never actually practised law, litigation became one of his fiercest passions, and his legal training must also have played a significant part in developing the ostentatious reliance on 'facts', documentary evidence presented in the style of a courtroom advocate, which became the trade mark of his novels and plays 'with a purpose'. After being entered at Lincoln's Inn on 20 November 1835, he first read in chambers with Samuel Warren, the novelist, soon to score a hit with his novel 'Ten Thousand a Year', which Reade greatly admired and perhaps tried to imitate in some of his own fiction. Subsequently, from 1838 to 1842, he read with another barrister, Matthew Fortescue. On 17 February 1842, immediately after being called to the bar, he was elected to a Vinerian fellowship worth $80 a year which he thereafter held in conjunction with his college fellowship. He proceeded to the degree of DCL on 1 July 1847. 
From the time he began reading with Fortescue, if not earlier, Reade lived in Soho, near Leicester Square, and pursued a mildly Bohemian existence, eating in out-of-the-way taverns and haunting the theatres. He was elected to the Garrick Club, of which he became a stalwart, on 14 December 1839. In the summer of 1839 he made his first trip abroad, to France and Switzerland. After his return he for the next few years 'oscillated between London, Ipsden, and Scotland' (Reade and Reade, 1.237). In London he collected, repaired, and traded in Cremona violins, about which he later published four learned articles in the 'Pall Mall Gazette' (19-31 August 1872). At Ipsden he hunted and shot, played cricket, or boated and fished. In Scotland, where his elder brother William married and settled in 1837, he acquired a herring fishery (which proved unprofitable); more momentously, he fell in love with a pretty young woman, the prototype of his fictional heroine Christie Johnstone, and probably contracted a Scottish (common-law) marriage with her. If Reade's mother found out about the relationship, it can be assumed that she strongly opposed it, just as the mother of Christie's lover opposed his. But Reade continued to live with the young woman, when he could, from 1838 or 1839 until 1848, when she died giving birth to their son. The boy was called Charles Liston, presumably taking his mother's surname; he was passed off as Reade's godson until just before Reade's death, when he took the name Charles Liston Reade and was declared Reade's heir and literary executor. 
According to Reade he 'began to make notes with a view to writing fiction' in 1835 (Reade and Reade, 2.159). However, his first published novel, 'Peg Woffington', did not appear until December 1852, when he was thirty-eight, and he was forty-two by the time he achieved his first great success as a novelist with 'It is Never too Late to Mend' (1856). At the outset he had tried to make his mark as dramatist rather than novelist, producing no fewer than five plays that were staged in London in 1851-2 and several others that remained unacted. Most were translations or 'adaptations' from the French, including the first of his plays to be performed, 'The Ladies' Battle' (Olympic Theatre, 7 May 1851), which was adapted from a play by Scribe and Legouve that he had seen during one of his many visits to Paris as a dealer in violins. His first three novels were all initially written as plays and then turned into novels. 'Christie Johnstone' (1853), which he said he wrote in 1849 or 1850, never saw the light of day in its dramatic form, but 'It is Never too Late to Mend' was based on one successful play, 'Gold', which had opened at Drury Lane on 10 January 1853, and was later turned into another, 'It's Never too Late to Mend' (Princess's Theatre, 4 October 1865). 'Peg Woffington' was based on the highly popular sentimental comedy 'Masks and Faces' (Haymarket Theatre, 20 November 1852), which Reade wrote in collaboration with his friend Tom Taylor, already an established dramatist; the collaboration proved difficult and Taylor completed the final draft on his own, Reade having withdrawn to Malvern to undergo a course of hydropathic treatment for his nerves. Dedicated to Taylor and published less than a month after 'Masks and Faces' opened, 'Peg Woffington' dealt with the same subject and appropriated much of Taylor's dialogue without his permission. This was one of the first and most notorious manifestations of what Edmund Yates described as Reade's 'odd notions of literary 'meum' and 'tuum'' (Yates, 2.164). Previously, like other English dramatists at the time, Reade had shown no compunction about adapting or translating French plays without permission; in 'The Eighth Commandment' (1860), the impassioned plea for the sanctity of 'literary property' which he claimed cost him $1000 to publish, he made out that he ceased doing so as soon as the 'International Copyright Act' of 1851 came into force, but the facts suggest otherwise. Besides further adaptations from the French -- including some for which he really did obtain the authors' permission -- his early plays included a dramatized version of 'Peregrine Pickle'. This opened in November 1854 at St James's Theatre, which he had leased for the season of 1854-5, installing his friend the actress Laura Seymour as manager. 
Reade boasted that all his major novels -- 'It is Never too Late to Mend', 'The Cloister and the Hearth' (1861), 'Hard Cash' (1863), 'Griffith Gaunt' (1866), and 'Put yourself in his Place' (1870) -- were written on a scientific 'Baconian' system of induction from documented 'facts'. The subtitle 'A matter-of-fact romance' which he used for 'It is Never too Late to Mend', 'Hard Cash', and several of his shorter fictions reflects this aspiration to a documentary adherence to the 'truth', especially in the treatment of social problems. His principal source of facts was newspaper cuttings, which he began collecting in 1848 and continued to accumulate in hundreds of notebooks throughout his writing career. But he also drew unashamedly, often verbatim and at length, on facts set out in other people's books. In 'It is Never too Late to Mend', for example, the materials for his famously graphic exposure of the sadistic torture of prisoners, including the psychological torments caused by the 'silent and solitary' system in vogue at the time, were drawn partly from his own on-the-spot research at Durham, Oxford, and Reading gaols, partly from newspaper articles -- including an opportune report of brutalities at Birmingham gaol in 'The Times' (12 September 1853), but quite largely from a book by Hepworth Dixon, 'The London Prisons' (1850). Some of the most admired details of the gold-digging scenes in the same novel were taken from William Howitt's 'Land, Labour, and Gold, or, Two Years in Victoria', and from other books. (Reade himself suffered from seasickness and never travelled further abroad than continental Europe.) He claimed to have toiled through eight volumes for the portrayal of Isaac Levi in 'It is Never too Late to Mend', but according to Wayne Burns (p. 143) Levi is virtually the same in the novel as he had been in the play 'Gold', written before this copious research was undertaken. For 'A Good Fight' (1859), the short novel which grew into 'The Cloister and the Hearth', Reade said that he read seventy-nine books; while for 'The Cloister and the Hearth' itself he filled three 'gigantic cards' with notes about hermits, and for 'Hard Cash' no fewer than forty notecards containing 107,000 words. In the eyes of many reviewers the authenticity Reade laid claim to, especially when exposing social evils, was largely vitiated by his sensationalism and melodrama, which he defiantly defended, and which made it a simple matter for him to turn his novels into plays and his plays into novels. Several of his novels, particularly 'Hard Cash', 'Griffith Gaunt', and 'A Terrible Temptation' (1871), also transgressed Victorian notions of sexual propriety. When 'Hard Cash' (or 'Very Hard Cash' as it was initially titled) reached the end of its serial run in 'All the Year Round' (26 December 1863), Dickens took the extraordinary step of inserting a signed note after the final instalment effectively dissociating himself, as editor, from its 'statements and opinions', and although professing a high regard for Reade he privately considered some of the sexual episodes in 'Griffith Gaunt' 'extremely coarse and disagreeable' (Burns, 261). But Reade's gift for rapid, exciting narrative, lively dialogue, and vivid, often horrific description ensured his popularity. For 'Hard Cash' and 'Griffith Gaunt', the two novels that immediately followed his most acclaimed work, 'The Cloister and the Hearth', Reade probably received total rates of payment unequalled at the time by any other novelist except Dickens, George Eliot, and Wilkie Collins. He became proverbial for his vigilance and bargaining skills in his dealings with his publishers. The sales of his novels in their initial multi-volume form suffered from a virtual boycott by Mudie's Library, which rejected several of them on the grounds of indecency, but he compensated by obtaining large prices for the serial rights and for the cheaper, one-volume editions, particularly those issued in America where he was the first major English novelist to negotiate directly with publishers. 
Reade's personal life during the years of his rise to fame and prosperity is not well documented. His passion for the theatre, dating back at least to his days as a law student, evidently had much to do with his attraction to actresses. One such was the acclaimed comic actress Mary-Anne (Fanny) Stirling, under whose management his first play was produced in 1851, who later appeared in it herself, and who spent a week with him at Oxford before being driven away, it was said, by his mother (Burns, 38-9); as she was already married Reade's fellowship cannot have been seriously at risk. A few years later, in 1853, he fell in love with another married actress, Laura Seymour; they began living together then or soon after and continued to do so until Seymour's death in 1879. Though known as Reade's 'housekeeper' she went on practising her profession until the onset of her terminal illness. 
Reade's literary career reached and passed its zenith about 1870. The year before, he and Laura Seymour had moved into a red-brick mansion at 2 Albert Gate, Knightsbridge, beside Hyde Park. In addition to the leasehold of this house he owned three freehold properties in the Brompton Road. All were purchased, presumably, with the huge proceeds of his novels 'Hard Cash' and 'Griffith Gaunt' and his play 'It's Never too Late to Mend', his first for eight years, which had its London opening at the Princess's Theatre on 4 October 1865, enjoyed a long run there, and was frequently revived afterwards. Reade and Seymour had previously resided first at 193 Piccadilly, and later, from 1856 to 1868, at 6 Bolton Row, Mayfair. In his new house Reade had a spacious writing-room overlooking the park and ample accommodation for a variety of animals, including at one time a 'small antelope or gazelle' (Maxwell, 324). 'Put yourself in his Place', the last three-volume novel written on Reade's 'great system' of laborious fact-gathering, was published in June 1870. It sold well and was received kindly by the reviewers because of its lurid exposure of outrages allegedly committed by trade unions. Subsequently, however, both the quality of his fiction and the lump-sum payments he received for it began to fall away. 'A Terrible Temptation' (1871) achieved a modest 'succes de scandale' after being savagely attacked for its 'indelicacy', and the novelette 'The Wandering Heir' (1873) successfully cashed in on the excitement generated by the Tichborne claimant. But neither these nor any of the other five novels he produced in the 1870s and 1880s did anything to enhance his critical standing. His greatest hit was scored with a play, 'Drink' (Princess's Theatre, 2 June 1879), adapted from Zola's 'L'assommoir'. Some of his earlier plays were also revived with considerable success, for example 'Masks and Faces', with Squire and Marie Bancroft, in 1875, and with other actors in 1881 and 1883; 'It's Never too Late to Mend', with Ellen Terry in 1874, and with other actors in 1878 and 1881; and 'The Courier of Lyons' (1854), revised as 'The Lyons Mail', with Henry Irving in 1877. But other theatrical ventures cost him dearly. In 1867 both 'Dora' (Adelphi, 1 June), with Kate Terry, and 'The Double Marriage' (Queen's, 24 October), with Ellen Terry, had failed miserably and no theatre would stage his dramatic adaptation of 'Griffith Gaunt'. And in 1870 he was said to have lost $5000 when he staged 'Free Labour', adapted from 'Put yourself in his Place', at the Adelphi Theatre (28 May) under his own management, and subsequently at the National Standard Theatre and in the provinces. He was more successful with his stage version of 'The Wandering Heir', first performed in London at the Queen's Theatre, under Laura Seymour's management, on 15 November 1873; Ellen Terry began appearing in it on 28 February 1874 and remained with Reade's and Seymour's company when the play was subsequently transferred to Astley's Amphitheatre, then toured the provinces in repertory with several of Reade's other plays. Reade seems to have been infatuated with Terry, on stage at least. 
Reade continued to indulge his propensity for litigation, almost regardless of the cost. With a few exceptions, including his earliest recourse to the courts, in March 1857, when he had unsuccessfully sued the publisher Richard Bentley for issuing a cheap edition of 'Christie Johnstone' without his permission, he frequently acted on flimsy, if not vexatious grounds. One of his greatest victories, in a libel case against a New York paper which had branded 'Griffith Gaunt' indecent -- a charge Reade had responded to in a pamphlet entitled 'The Prurient Prude' -- returned him only a derisory six cents' damages. He did better later when similar complaints were made against 'A Terrible Temptation', suing and winning $200 damages from a 'cabal' of reviewers whom he branded 'the Licensed Victuallers', because they consorted in clubs and pubs where they learned 'the art of naughty interpretation and distortion of honest words' (Elwin, 240). 
Allegations of plagiarism continued to dog Reade, the best-remembered of them arising from 'Shilly-Shally', his unauthorized dramatization of Anthony Trollope's novel 'Ralph the Heir', first performed at the Gaiety Theatre on 1 April 1872. Trollope protested angrily and publicly, and for several years afterwards he and Reade did not speak to each other even when playing whist or cribbage together at the Garrick Club. Closer friends like Tom Taylor were more forgiving, not doubting the sincerity of Reade's long campaign for the protection of literary and dramatic copyright in spite of his apparent double standards. At various stages of his career he waged many other campaigns with equal vehemence, and often with an almost laughable one-sidedness. Among the causes he took up were animal welfare and ambidexterity -- which he believed all children should be taught. His favourite targets included the incompetence and obfuscations of the medical and legal professions and the institutionalized cruelties practised in prisons and lunatic asylums. He propagated his messages, indiscriminately, in novels, plays, pamphlets, and journal articles, once even employing a fifteenth-century soldier as his mouthpiece for a diatribe against the dangerous and ridiculous practices of the Victorian medical profession ('The Cloister and the Hearth', chap. 26). His representations of the punitive tortures inflicted on inmates of prisons and lunatic asylums, which reached a blood-curdling climax in the play 'It's Never too Late to Mend', set a new standard of gruesome naturalism for the mid-Victorian period and reveal a vicarious sadism also evident, in a milder form, in many of the other scenes of violence in his novels and plays. For all his polemical combativeness and rhetorical violence, however, Reade seems to have been a soft-spoken man in private, and most of his contemporaries were perhaps more amused than affronted by his public pugnacity and conceit, viewing them, along with his odd physique and unconventional dress, as manifestations of an eccentric individualism that valuably enriched and enlivened the literary scene. Few would have dissented from Justin McCarthy's judgement that Reade: 'had a fine and noble nature under all his defects of temper and his inordinate self-esteem. No man was more chivalrous to stand by a cause which he believed to be just, or a friend whom he believed to be injured (McCarthy, 1.419)' Convinced of his own genius, Reade made no secret of his scant regard for distinguished rival novelists such as George Eliot. He privately ranked 'A Good Fight' above 'A Tale of Two Cities' -- even though he thought Dickens 'the greatest genius of the century' (Elwin, 191). A hundred years after his death his novels were all out of print. Opinions about his literary stature differed widely during his lifetime, but then and for a while afterwards 'The Cloister and the Hearth', with its endless succession of boisterous adventures in a sketchily picturesque medieval setting, and its topical theme of the evils of clerical celibacy, was regarded by some leading critics as perhaps the greatest historical novel in English. 
Reade moved to 3 Blomfield Villas, Uxbridge Road, London, in 1881 and died there, after a long illness, on 11 April 1884, Good Friday. He was buried in Willesden old churchyard, alongside Laura Seymour and her husband, on 15 April. In his last years he was ostensibly 'converted' by a Presbyterian minister, Charles Graham. 


@@@@@


doc= 23225


Reade, Edward Anderdon (1807-1886), administrator in India, born at Ipsden, Oxfordshire, on 15 March 1807, was the fifth son of John Reade of Ipsden and his wife, Anna Maria, daughter of Major Scott-Waring, MP for Stockbridge. His youngest brother was Charles Reade (1814-1884), the novelist. His four elder brothers, like himself, joined the East India Company's service. The eldest, John Thurlow (1797-1827), went to Bengal in 1816, and, attached to the revenue department, helped to frame the famous regulation VII of 1822, the basis of the periodical revision of land revenue settlements in the North-Western Provinces. He died in 1827, shortly after his appointment as the magistrate of Saharanpur. 
Educated at the prebendary school at Chichester, Edward was nominated in 1823 to a writership in the East India Company's service, and studied at the East India College, Haileybury, where he distinguished himself as a linguist. Initially delayed by ill health, in June 1829 he was made assistant to the magistrate and collector of Gorakhpur district. Promotion and transfer to Cawnpore followed in 1832, where, to the government's satisfaction, he introduced the cultivation of the opium poppy to the district. In 1835 he returned to Gorakhpur as the magistrate and in 1841 completed the settlement of that district. In 1846 he was made commissioner of the Benares division, a post which he held until his further promotion in 1853 to the Sudder board of revenue, based in Agra. 
Wherever he served, Reade cultivated good relations with the local gentry and respected their social pretensions. In the 1830s and 1840s such an affinity with the propertied classes was out of step with the revenue policy of the government of the North-Western Provinces, which aimed to circumvent landlord interests and make settlements directly with the peasant cultivators. After the 1857 uprising, however, Reade's inclination to patronize 'respectable native gentlemen' became the norm for a government chastened by the social upheaval its policies had apparently unleashed. He was in many ways the archetypal district officer: self-sufficient, plain-speaking, and somewhat opinionated. He privileged local knowledge far above provincial perspectives and often criticized his seniors for the abstraction of their political designs. He prided himself on his refusal to mystify Indian traditions as inscrutably exotic, disparaging as 'nervous' or 'excitable' those of his fellow officers who did. 
At the outbreak of the uprising in 1857 Reade was in Agra as the senior member of the board of revenue, with John Russell Colvin as the lieutenant-governor of the North-Western Provinces. Reade knew Colvin well and considered him a timid man; his administration during the crisis, Reade thought, swung perilously between battle-shyness and imprudent bravado. Unlike Colvin, Reade did not fear widespread rebellion around Agra and he was confident that local merchants and landlords would side openly with the British if only given sufficient encouragement. He was furious, therefore, when Colvin ordered a forced loan from the city's bankers, which ruptured his own delicate negotiations with them for a voluntary loan, and he fumed at the siege mentality of the local military authorities, which, in early July 1857, saw European soldiers holed up in the Agra Fort while straggling bands of mutineers plundered the European station at will. He broke openly with Colvin over the fate of the government's papers and against his orders personally arranged for the conveyance of the huge bulk of the revenue records to the safety of the fort -- an act of foresight which later won him favourable mention in a dispatch to the secretary of state. Colvin died on 9 September, whereupon Reade took temporary charge of the government and grasped the opportunity to curb the European instinct for indiscriminate revenge with relief. In May 1858 Lord Canning appointed him as one of the special commissioners to try rebels because, as Reade himself put it, the 'Sudder Judges... passed sentences of death so continually'. He repeatedly urged on government the loyalty of the propertied classes and subsequently received grateful testimonials from the bankers and merchants of several towns. 
Reade's last official act at Agra was to read the proclamation transferring the government of India from the East India Company to the crown. In April 1860 he retired and returned to his ancestral home in Oxfordshire. He was made a Companion of the Bath and a magistrate for Oxfordshire and Berkshire. For twenty years he was chairman of the county bench at Wallingford. In retirement his appreciation of locality, always in evidence in India, flourished. He presented the Bodleian Library with several essays on local topography, along with court rolls, deeds, and copiously annotated transcripts of the Ipsden parish registers. He maintained an affectionate correspondence with the maharaja of Benares, Ishri Prasad Narayan Singh, who had looked upon Reade as a friend and adviser since his days as the commissioner of Benares. In 1863 the maharaja established a public well for the villagers of Stoke Row, a hamlet on the upper portion of the Ipsden estate. In charge of the well's construction, Reade was wryly amused that an Indian prince should thus give a lesson in charity to the English gentry. 
Reade had married on 7 April 1838 Eliza, the youngest daughter of Richard Nossiter Burnard of Crewkerne and Colyford in Somerset. Five of their ten children survived him. He died at his home, Well Place House, Ipsden, on 12 February 1886, and was buried in Ipsden churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 23226


Reade, John Edmund (1800-1870), poet and novelist, was born at Broadwell, Gloucestershire, the son of Thomas Reade (1762-1837) of Barton Manor, Berkshire, and his wife, Catherine (died 1830), daughter of Sir John Hill. His grandfather Sir John Reade (1721-1773) was fifth baronet. Reade was educated at a school at Doulting Sheepslate, near Shepton Mallet. His first work, a collection of poems entitled 'The Broken Heart', was published in 1825. From that time until the close of his life he devoted himself to writing, and developed a remarkable capacity for imitation that often verged on plagiarism. Byron was his chief model, but his poems and plays are full of sentiments and phrases taken undisguisedly from the best-known writings of Scott, Wordsworth, Ben Jonson, and others. His ablest work, 'Cain the Wanderer', was published in 1829, and it obtained for its author an introduction to Coleridge and a eulogy from Goethe. Although Reade claimed to have made a sketch of a 'Cain' while still a boy, the work is redolent of Byron's play. In 1838, after a long stay in the south of Europe, he published 'Italy: a Poem', which while huge was shortened through the editing of Leigh Hunt and others. It bears a close resemblance to 'Childe Harold', reproducing even the dying gladiator. 
Altogether Reade published nine volumes of poetry, mostly on sacred subjects, together with successively enlarged collected editions, beginning in 1852. To these were added five verse dramas, three novels, and a book of travels, 'Prose from the South' (1849). His early poetry shared with the painter John Martin a histrionic attraction to biblical catastrophe, and was dismissed by Thomas Lister as theatrical 'clap-trap' in the 'Edinburgh Review' (Lister, 109). Thirty years later 'Wait and Hope' was included in H. L. Mansell's 'Quarterly Review' survey of 'sensation novels', along with the works of Braddon and Collins, only to be found a 'very dull tale' full of 'insufferably tedious conversations' ('QR', 113, 1863, 501). Reade was perceived as an inept sycophant by some other poets; his Bath acquaintance W. S. Landor savaged 'A Record of the Pyramids' in 1842, especially the lengthy preface, full of 'unwearied flatteries' and 'piteous complaints', and he concluded that 'we would rather that a friend of ours should have written the three worst pages of Mrs. Hemans' than the nine thousand lines of 'A Record' ('Blackwood', 114). Macready claimed in 1839 that Reade, a 'ludicrously wretched fellow' attempted 'to 'bribe' me by a promise of dedicating his miserable play to me, to act it'. The Drury Lane manager was also annoyed that the manuscript was a palimpsest of previous attempts at dedication ('Diaries of William Charles Macready', 1.498). Despite the contempt of the literary world, Reade's works did have an audience, chiefly among the religious. 
Most of Reade's life was spent in Bath and the west of England, but he was in the habit of making long journeys to central and southern Europe. He married his cousin, Maria Louisa, elder daughter of George Compton Reade, on 1 October 1847; they had a daughter, Agnes Coralie. Reade died of heart disease on 17 September 1870 at Budleigh Salterton, Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 23227


Reade, Joseph Bancroft (1801-1870), microscopist and experimenter in photography, was born on 5 April 1801 at Kirkgate, Leeds, Yorkshire, the eldest of six sons and two daughters of Thomas Shaw Bancroft Reade (1776-1841) and his wife, Sarah (died 1825), daughter of Richard Paley. His father was a merchant who was active in the British and Foreign Bible Society and author of several Christian pamphlets, and his mother was related to the natural theologian William Paley. He was educated at Leeds grammar school, and also had private tuition at Hull, before entering Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1821, from where he migrated to Gonville and Caius College in the following year. Immediately after graduating BA in 1825, he was ordained deacon as curate of Kegworth, Leicestershire. In the same year, on 25 July at St Paul's Cray, Kent, he married Charlotte Dorothy Farish (1796-1882), niece of Professor William Farish of Cambridge. They had three children, the longest-lived of whom, a daughter, died when she was twenty-one. In 1826 Reade took holy orders, and in 1828 proceeded MA. 
From 1829 to 1832 he was curate at Halifax parish church, where began a lifetime friendship with an amateur meteorologist, John Waterhouse, remembered by photographers as inventor of 'Waterhouse stops'. After a part-time curacy at Harrow Weald from 1832 to 1834, Reade became proprietor of a school at Peckham, south-east of London. In December 1839, under the patronage of Dr John Lee of Hartwell, Buckinghamshire, and the Royal Astronomical Society (who owned the right of appointment), he became vicar of Stone, Buckinghamshire. At the vicarage a small school for about twenty pupils was established and an observatory was built in the garden. After twenty years at Stone, by invitation of Lady Franklin Russell who lived at nearby Chequers, he became vicar of Ellesborough, Buckinghamshire, from 1859 to 1863, and from then until his death rector of Bishopsbourne, near Canterbury. 
Reade's first scientific paper, 'Observations and experiments on the solar rays that occasion heat', was read at the Royal Society in December 1836 ('Proceedings' 3, 1830-37, 457; and manuscript at RS, AP.20. 14). In this paper he proposed the use of two convex lenses adjusted to condense sunlight onto a microscope specimen while defocusing the harmful rays of heat. He was greatly interested in the design of optical devices of the microscope, devising a hemispherical condenser, commonly known as 'Reade's kettledrum' (1861), and an equilateral prism (1869). 
In several of his earliest papers Reade combined his optical interests with his love of chemistry by carrying out micro-incineration experiments on botanical specimens. His 'Observations of some new organic remains in the flint of chalk', published in November 1838 in 'Annals of Natural History', contains the first microscopic illustrations (from drawings) of microfossils, then named xanthidia, that more than a century later finally became identified as planktonic dinoflagellate cysts (important in identification of geological strata relating to petroleum). A wide-ranging interest in the chemistry of metal salts led in 1846 to his obtaining a patent for inks. 
Reade described his small observatory and telescope at Stone in the 'Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society' in 1853. His astronomical interests were strongly influenced by his association with Lee and the Meteorological Society at Hartwell House a few miles from Stone. However, his publications in this field are not extensive. Between 1844 and 1850 he contributed a series of observations of comets to the Royal Astronomical Society. He also designed a 'solid eyepiece', which received a medal at the Great Exhibition of 1851. 
Reade conducted some early experiments in photography, and he is noticed in the histories of photography. It has sometimes been suggested that he may have used photographic preparations of silver salts with oak-galls (gallic acid) and fixation with hyposulphite in 1836 or 1837. However, letters written by him early in 1839 provide evidence that he did not carry out such experiments before that year, and that his use of hyposulphite for fixing photographs followed Sir John Herschel's paper on photography read at the Royal Society on 14 March 1839. At the end of that month Reade used an infusion of nut-galls to make photographic paper more sensitive. This, together with the influence of Herschel, led to the discovery by W. H. F. Talbot that gallic acid developed the latent image. His early use of gallic acid led to the appearance of Reade (but not of Herschel) in 1854 as a defence witness in a lawsuit, 'Talbot v. Laroche', relating to Talbot's calotype patent, and his part in this case brought him attention in the photographic world during the rest of his life. He joined the Photographic Society in 1855 and as vice-president in the late 1860s often chaired its meetings. 
Reade was a life member of the British Association from its beginning in 1831, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1838. In 1839 he was a founding member of the Microscopical Society, in which he was especially active during his last years and of which he was president at the time of his death. The Revd Reade suffered from cancer during his last months and died from jaundice at his home, the rectory, Bishopsbourne, on 12 December 1870. He was buried four days later at St Mary's Church, Bishopsbourne. 


@@@@@


doc= 23228


Rede, Robert (d. 1415), bishop of Chichester, was a Dominican friar, probably of the house at Langley, Hertfordshire, much favoured by Richard II, to which the bishop would make extensive bequests. The house at Hereford was also singled out particularly in the bishop's will, but so too on a smaller scale were many other houses, perhaps suggesting that Rede achieved an office embracing the whole province of the order at some time. His brother, William, was in turn archdeacon, chancellor, and treasurer of Chichester, all in his own gift. One Thomas Rede had a small bequest. Of most interest, he identified his distinguished predecessor at Chichester, Bishop William Rede, as a kinsman, and asked to be buried at his feet. 
Rede was a doctor of theology. It is not known where he studied, even though Bishop William had made such a mark at Merton College, Oxford. He also had collections of civil- and canon-law books. His public career is very obscure, but possibly he had a longer and closer connection with Richard II's court than is apparent. On 9 September 1394, for example, he was papally provided to the see of Lismore and Waterford, and accompanied Richard II on his expedition to Ireland in that year. On 26 January 1396 he was translated at the king's request to the see of Carlisle, overriding the election of William Strickland; he obtained the temporalities on 30 March, with retrospective effect from the beginning of the vacancy, usually a sign of personal royal favour. However, on 5 October 1396 he was translated once more, to Chichester, with the temporalities restored on 6 March. This was a somewhat wealthier see, and if Rede did also have some personal affection for it through his predecessor, the move is understandable. He certainly managed to spend long periods of time there, even though he was a frequent attender at Richard II's court, and on the council of regency the king left behind when he went to Ireland again in 1399. 
The revolution of September 1399 did not incite the public and popular animosity against Rede that it did against other ecclesiastical associates of the late king, but it made him an entirely resident diocesan, mainly at Amberley and Drungewick. In April 1400 Archbishop Arundel reproached him sharply for having ceased to wear a friar's habit. Rede apologized. In January 1401 he sent proctors to convocation, pleading serious ill health and other obstacles. He attended parliaments fairly regularly in the following years, but had no active role in government. He was on bad terms with the cathedral chapter, upon whom he imposed critical visitations as often as canon law allowed, but such friction was not unusual at Chichester. From November 1412 Rede was entirely at Aldingbourne, perhaps in declining health. He made his will on 10 August 1414 and died the following year, before 21 June, having asked to be buried before the altar in the choir of the cathedral, at the feet of Bishop William Rede. 


@@@@@


doc= 23229


Reade, William Winwood (1838-1875), traveller, novelist, and controversialist, the eldest son of William Barrington Reade (1803-1881) and Elizabeth Reade (1810-1895) (daughter of Captain John Murray RN), of Ipsden House, Oxfordshire, was born at St Finan, near Crieff, Perthshire, on 26 December 1838. He was educated at Hyde House, Winchester, and for a brief period at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, although he left the university without a degree. His early attempts to master the art of fiction, in emulation of the literary success of his uncle Charles Reade, whom he adored, met with disappointment. Both 'Charlotte and Myra' (1859) and 'Liberty Hall, Oxon' (1860) received very poor reviews. His scepticism about established Christianity found romantic expression in 'The Veil of Isis, or, The Mysteries of the Druids', published in 1861. In the same year he embarked on a tour of west Africa, which resulted in the publication of 'Savage Africa' (1863), a miscellany of observations on the people and wildlife of that region, in which he paid particular attention to arguments then current about the character of gorillas and the existence of cannibalism. This work was essentially that of a dilettante, a romantic tourist who represented himself as a 'flaneur' rather than a man of science. 
On his return to England, in 1863, Reade read papers on his travels to a range of scientific societies, notably the newly formed Anthropological Society, with which he was to be associated for the next few years. In 1865 he became embroiled in a controversy over his views on the futility of Christian missions and the necessity of polygamy in west Africa, during which the explorer Richard Burton came to his defence. Seeking to broaden his knowledge of science and medicine, he entered as a student at St Mary's Hospital, London, in 1865, and in 1866 volunteered his services at a cholera hospital in Southampton. During this period he also visited North America and contributed to several literary and scientific periodicals published there. His ambition to follow in the footsteps of more famous African travellers was realized in 1868 when, with the aid of the Royal Geographical Society and Andrew Swanzy, a British trader, he undertook a second journey to west Africa. His attempt to explore the Asante kingdom having failed, he was encouraged by Sir Arthur Kennedy, governor of the British West African settlements, to undertake a journey from Sierra Leone to the upper Niger, including a visit to the goldmines of Boure, a region not previously visited by Europeans. The fruits of this journey were to form the material for a large part of 'The African Sketch Book', an extraordinary medley of romantic fiction, popular anthropology, and travel narrative, published in 1873. In the same year he returned for the last time to west Africa, as the 'Times' correspondent on the Second Anglo-Asante war, a conflict also covered by Henry Morton Stanley and G. A. Henty. 
Reade's lasting reputation as a writer rests not on his novels, nor on his travel writing, but on a single epic work, 'The Martyrdom of Man', first published in 1872. This book, which has been described as a 'bible for secularists', defies easy categorization. According to Reade, his original intention was to restore Africa to a central place in world history through a consideration of such themes as the role of Islam, the history of the slave trade, and the evolution of mankind -- an ambition shared by subsequent writers such as W. E. B. Du Bois. The book which actually emerged is a somewhat romantic study in universal history, treating the evolution of civilizations in the Mediterranean and the Near East in terms of the impact of war, religion, liberty, and the intellect on human life. Reade's militant agnosticism is manifest in his provocative account of the role of science in the modern world, in which Christianity itself is dismissed as the product of a passing age of superstition. Such sentiments were too radical for the orthodox press, as well as for many of his friends and family. Yet, despite unfavourable reviews, the book was to sell extremely well, especially after the publication of a cheap edition by the Rationalist Press Association in 1924. 
Reade's final work, 'The Outcast', a reputedly autobiographical novel, was completed shortly before his death, in the house of Humphry Sandwith, at Church Street, Wimbledon, on 24 April 1875. He was buried in St Mary's Church, Ipsden, where a window is dedicated to his memory and to that of his brother, Malcolm. His uncle Charles Reade penned an epitaph shortly after his death which reveals as much about his time as it does about his life: 'The writer thus cut off in his prime entered life with excellent prospects; he was heir to considerable estates, and gifted with genius. But he did not live long enough to inherit the one or to mature the other. His whole public career embraced but fifteen years; yet in another fifteen he would probably have won a great name, and cured himself, as many thinking men have done, of certain obnoxious opinions which laid him open to reasonable censure. ('Daily Telegraph')' 



@@@@@


doc= 23230


Reader, William (d. c.1680), portrait painter, was the son of a Maidstone clergyman. After studying under Gilbert Soest, he was supported and patronized by a nobleman in the west of England (perhaps the earl of Aylesford; in 1937 a number of Reader's portraits appeared in the Aylesford sale). His portrait of the composer John Blow was engraved by T. Beckett. A portrait by Reader of Robert Plot is in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. There may also be as yet undiscovered portraits by him, under the names of more eminent artists. He is described by Waterhouse as 'a clumsy portraitist of some character' (Waterhouse, 223). Vertue noted that Reader died impoverished about 1680 as an inmate of the Charterhouse (Vertue, 'Note books', 4.83). 


@@@@@


doc= 23231


Reader, William (1782-1852), newspaper proprietor and topographer, was born on 28 December 1782 at High Cross, near Rowington, Warwickshire, one of eleven children of William Reader (1752-1808), farmer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' White (1758-1837). The young William was adopted 'c'.1785 by his great-uncle the antiquarian James Kettle, minister of the Presbyterian chapel at Warwick, and his wife, Martha. After an education at the academy of the Revd John Kendall, vicar of Budbrooke, William was in 1797 apprenticed to Noah Rollason, printer-proprietor of the 'Coventry Mercury'. He was made a partner in 1808, and became sole proprietor on Rollason's death in 1813. In 1815 he married Elizabeth Hadley (died 1870), with whom he had seven children. Admitted to the freedom of the city of Coventry in 1804, he played an active part in civic affairs, and rose in 1823 to the office of chamberlain. 
Reader's business, in difficulties by the 1820s, failed in 1833. Forced to sell much of his property, he moved in 1835 to Birmingham, where not only did his financial position deteriorate further but also he suffered the loss of two of his daughters; a third daughter had earlier died in Coventry. In 1837 he settled in Shoreditch, London. His fortunes never rallied, but he managed sporadically to continue collecting for his projected history of Coventry. In 1844 one of his sons died. Reader himself died on 3 October 1852 at 42 Maria Street, Shoreditch, and was buried at St John's Church, Hoxton. He was survived by his wife and by only two sons. 
An intense interest in his adopted city led Reader to amass material relating to Coventry's history, some of which formed the basis of articles in his newspaper and in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', to which he contributed until his death. His most successful work, 'The History and Antiquities of the City of Coventry' (1810), was a popular history and guidebook which ran to several editions. He produced several other works devoted to Coventry and, like many antiquaries of the period, collected assiduously for a major work which he never quite completed: the draft of a greatly expanded history of Coventry survives in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. 
Reader belonged to a generation of antiquaries which differed from its seventeenth- and eighteenth-century predecessors in having an urban and commercial, rather than a gentry, background, and correspondingly wider concerns. Hence its new-fashioned interest in the history of towns, in providing guidebooks for a new, travelling, public, and in addressing a more popular market generally. Reader's collections relied heavily on printed sources, but in making use of his official position to search corporation records he made an original contribution in particular to Coventry's institutional and topographical history. While he played a part in advancing the scope of antiquarian studies, his work nevertheless was imbued with a very traditionalist political and religious sensitivity. His newspaper adopted a decidedly conservative stance, as did some of his pamphlets; the same convictions pervaded, in a less obtrusive form, his historical collections. Some of Reader's collections housed in Coventry's central library were destroyed by bombing during the Second World War; others survive in the Bodleian Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 23232


Reading, Burnet (1749/50-1838), engraver and draughtsman, was born in Colchester of unknown parents. By 1770 he was working in London, producing engraved portraits for booksellers. Some of his portraits were printed in red, according to the fashion of the time, and he often worked in stipple. All his portraits are lively and bold in their style. His subjects tend to be contemporary celebrities, from the actor David Garrick to the painter Benjamin West and the socialite Emma Hamilton. He produced a set of six portraits of members of the Royal Academy from drawings by Peter Falconet. Many of his portraits appeared in Bell's 'British Theatre' (1776-86) and the 'European Magazine' (1783-93). Reading's love of theatrical subjects in particular is reflected in the fact that he executed a series of twelve etchings from drawings by Mortimer, 'Characters to Illustrate Shakespeare', published by T. and H. Rodd, and produced some of the plates to Boydell's 'Shakespeare'. He also engraved various portraits of politicians and historical figures. In 1783 he produced a set of portraits of members of the American congress, and he was responsible for many of the portraits in Granger's 'History of England' (1820 and 1822), including that of Oliver Cromwell. Other engravings included 'Lavinia and her Mother', after W. Bigg, and 'Charlotte at the Tomb of Wether', which was executed after his own design. The British Museum holds a collection of sixty-two examples of his portrait engravings, one of which is a self-portrait. 
Reading was employed as drawing- and riding-master by the earl of Pomfret at Windsor, although there is no evidence as to when he held this position. A portrait of him was etched by Samuel De Wilde in 1798. This shows him as a young man, wearing a broad-brimmed hat. He sits in a chair, leaning one arm on the back of the chair; his flamboyant pose and direct gaze are an indication of his confidence and hint at a slight arrogance in his character. His last engravings were published in 1822; he died in north London late in 1838 and was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 23233


Reading, John (1587/8-1667), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born in Buckinghamshire of 'sufficient parents' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.794). He matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 4 May 1604, aged sixteen, graduated BA on 17 October 1607, and proceeded MA from St Mary Hall on 22 June 1610. In February 1612 he was ordained deacon by the bishop of Oxford and on 19 June 1614 he was made a priest. About the same time he became chaplain to Edward la Zouche, Lord Zouche, from July 1615 warden of the Cinque Ports and governor of Dover Castle. He moved to Dover, where on 2 December 1616 he was made minister of St Mary the Virgin at the request of the parishioners who were, according to Wood, 'very much taken with his preaching' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.794). In 1621 he described this congregation as 'zealous' ('Old Mans Staff', sig. A2'r'). Some time after 1625 he seems to have been appointed chaplain-in-ordinary to Charles I and to have received a BD from one of the universities. By 1627 he had married: a son, William, was baptized at St Mary's on 14 December that year. 
In the 1620s and 1630s Reading published a number of pamphlets based on sermons that he had given at St Mary's. 'A Faire Warning' (1621), dedicated to Lucy Russell, countess of Bedford, indicates that he had recently recovered from a serious illness. 'The Old Mans Staff' (1621), a meditation on 'the dignitie belonging to the aged', was dedicated to Lord Zouche. On election day 1626 he preached a sermon which argued that the 'late visitations' of God were the punishment for the 'cursed libertie of sinning' ('Moses and Jethro', 1626, sig. A2'r'- 'v'). 'Davids Soliloquie' (1627), dedicated to Lady Sara Hastings, a member of his congregation, seems to suggest that he had been (and perhaps still was) plagued with melancholy -- it is possible that this is the illness to which he referred in 'A Faire Warning'. On 21 September 1637 he preached the funeral sermon of Alice Percivall, the wife of his friend Anthony Percivall, controller of customs for Kent, later published as 'Characters of True Blessednesse' (1638). In 1638 he questioned a suspected Catholic priest who had arrived in Dover from Flanders, and in the following year he informed Archbishop William Laud about a freemason who had 'spread sundry opinions repugnant to the doctrine of the Church of England' ('CSP dom.', '1638-9', 156; '1639-40', 80-81). 
Reading, a 'severe Calvinist', was a good preacher 'very much resorted to for his frequent and edifying sermons, and held in great esteem by the neighbourhood, especially by the puritanical party' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.794). During the early 1640s, however, he preached forcefully against rebellion and in favour of the king. On 23 August 1641 he delivered an assize sermon at Maidstone in Kent, published as 'A Sermon Delivered' (1642), which condemned the 'state-threatening schismaticks' and took as its motto 'Romans' 16:17, 'I beseech you brethren, marke them who cause divisions and offences, contrary to the doctrine ye have learned, and avoid them' (pp. 1, 4). The address seems to have caused offence to many of those who heard it and Reading subsequently claimed that his only desire had been to 'perswade to an holy unity in Christ'. He dedicated this pamphlet to the royalists Sir Thomas Mallet and Sir Edward Dering, and added his 'hearty prayers for the good successe of... [their]... prudent endevaours' in the Commons (sig. A3'v', A4'r'). 
In April 1642 Reading's 'study of books' was plundered by the Kent militia and in November of the same year he was 'taken violently by soldiers out of his study... and sent to prison and banishment for a year and seven months' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.'). He may have been imprisoned in the Tower during this period. On 27 January 1643 the king wrote to Archbishop Laud asking him to bestow the parsonage of Chartham, Kent, upon Reading 'now beneficed at Dover but deprived of his small livelihood by the perverse disposition of some of his turbulent parishioners' ('CSP dom.', '1641-3', 440). The Commons blocked this appointment and, at the same time, passed an ordinance sequestering Laud's temporalities. Reading was then appointed to a prebend in Canterbury Cathedral, but does not seem to have taken possession of this office. His 'A Grain of Incense', which George Thomason bought on 8 April 1643, called for God's blessing upon the king and asked him to grant 'an happy Understanding and Accord' between the king and 'His great Counsell the Parliament' (sig. A3'v'-4'r'). Reading's 'Evening Sacrifice or Prayer', which Thomason bought on 5 August 1643, called for God's blessing on the royal family but did not make any mention of parliament. 
In July 1644 Sir William Brockman presented Reading to the parsonage of Cheriton, Kent, and about the same time he was appointed by the assembly of divines to be one of the nine clergymen to write annotations on the 'New Testament'. At some point in late 1644 or early 1645 the authorities discovered a royalist plot to seize Dover Castle, and Reading was 'inhumanely seized on in a cold winter night in his house' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.'). He was held overnight in Dover Castle and then consigned to Leeds Castle where he wrote 'A Guide to the Holy City', which was published in 1651. On 8 January 1647 he was a prisoner in the Fleet. The parliamentary committee for Kent ordered his release at an unspecified date, and although his personal goods were returned to him his livings were sequestered. However, despite the refusal of the committee for plundered ministers on 24 August 1647 to entertain his petition to be restored, his son William claimed in an exchequer deposition of 1652 that Reading was rector of Cheriton and had been for eight years. 
Donald Wing attributes 'Little Benjamin, or, Truth Discovering Error' (1649) to Reading, but this is unlikely because 'Little Benjamin' is a forceful defence of the regicide. Wing's attribution of 'The Ranters Ranting' (1650) to Reading is more convincing, however. On 10 March 1650 he publicly debated with an Anabaptist named Samuel Fisher in Folkestone, Kent, concerning the right of Christians to 'preach the gospel without ecclesiastical ordination, or contrary to the commands of the civil magistrate' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.'). Fisher argued for the motion and apparently took most of his arguments from Jeremy Taylor's 'Liberty of Prophesying'. This experience led Reading to pen 'An Antidote Against Anabaptism' (1654), an attack on the 'curiously impartial' ('DNB') section of Taylor's book which examined the opinions of the Anabaptists on infant baptism. Reading published an enlarged edition of 'An Antidote' under the title 'Anabaptism Routed' in 1655: both editions were dedicated to Sir William Brockman and his wife, Anne. 
On 24 May 1660 Reading made a short speech and presented Charles II with a 'large 'Bible' with gold clasps' in the name of the corporation of Dover upon the king's return to England. Soon after he was restored to his prebend of Canterbury and the rectory of Chartham. He was restored to Cheriton on 18 July 1660, but resigned this living at an unknown date before August 1662. In October 1660 the king wrote to Oxford University requesting that Reading be awarded a DD. In 1660 he wrote 'Christmas Revived', a defence of 'the observation of a day in memorie of [the birth of] our Saviour' (p. 1), and three years later he published 'A Sermon Lately Delivered' in Canterbury Cathedral in defence of 'Church-Musick'. He died on 26 October 1667 and was buried four days later in the chancel of Chartham parish church. Anthony Wood provides interesting details of a number of manuscripts written by Reading but never published. 


@@@@@


doc= 23234


Reading, John (c.1645-1692), musician and composer, of unknown parentage, is listed among the choristers of St Paul's Cathedral in 1661, and it is likely that it was he who became a junior vicar-choral in 1667 (10 October) and poor clerk (28 November) at Lincoln Cathedral. He became master of the choristers there in 1670 but in 1675 moved to Chichester Cathedral, where he was appointed organist and master of the choristers on 4 January, with the additional emolument of a Sherburne clerkship. On 25 March 1675 he applied for a licence to marry Ann Micklethwayte of Lincoln, from which it appears that he was a widower of about thirty. 
Less than a year after his appointment to Chichester, Reading succeeded Randolph Jewett at Winchester Cathedral, becoming organist, lay clerk, and master of the choristers on 25 November 1675. On 9 September 1678 he was admonished for giving 'undue and over severe correction to some of the Choristers' and told 'to take greater care and diligence in the improvement of the Choristers in Musick than hitherto he hath done' (Matthews, 'Organs and Organists', 22). This may have hastened his departure to Winchester College, where he appears as organist between 1681 and 1692. During his time there the organ was rebuilt by Renatus Harris (1683-5), and his stipend as organist was considerably increased from $5 to $50 a year. 
Reading was the composer of the Winchester College song 'Dulce domum' and the college Latin graces (see Philip Hayes, 'Harmonia Wiccamica', 1780). The survival of his church music is rather patchy. There are remains of an anthem and burial service at Chichester, and the top and bottom parts of several anthems by him in an organ book (partly autograph) originally from Winchester and now at the University of California, Berkeley. The latter's anthems are not in such a condition as to enable a fair estimate of them to be made, apart from an agreeable setting of the responses and litany. Quite a number of his songs came out in popular miscellanies such as Playford's 'Choice Ayres and Songs' (1681) and some instrumental pieces were also published. Reading died in Winchester in 1692. 
Reading was one of three musicians of that name active in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. John Reading (c.1685-1764), organist and composer (and from 1702 to 1708 like his namesake master of the choristers at Lincoln Cathedral), was probably his son or nephew. The third John Reading, a bass singer, seems to have sung in James II's Catholic chapel and gone on to perform in a number of Purcell's works. 


@@@@@


doc= 23235


Reading, John (c.1685-1764), organist and composer, was perhaps the son of the John Reading (died 1692) who was master of the choristers at Lincoln ('c'.1670-1675) before becoming organist at Winchester, first at the cathedral (1675-81) and then at the college (1681-92). But there were other musical Readings in London who might also have been the boy's father: Balthazar, bass in the Chapel Royal, Valentine, a string player in the private musick (both 'fl'. 1685-8), and another John ('fl'. 1684-1717), a bass theatre singer. The younger John Reading was a choirboy in the Chapel Royal and a pupil of John Blow; warrants at his dismissal are dated 22 December 1699. Although not officially appointed because of difficulties with his predecessor, he was organist at Dulwich College between March 1700 and 26 September 1702 and retained a close and friendly association with the college all his life. From 21 November 1702 he served as a junior vicar and poor clerk at Lincoln Cathedral, becoming master of the children there on 5 October 1703. No further mention of him at Lincoln occurs after 1705. 
On 13 April 1703 John Reading of St Margaret's, Lincoln, married Ann Corbet of St Andrew's, Holborn, at St Mary Magdalen, Old Fish Street, London. On 1 December 1707 he witnessed the death of Jeremiah Clarke, who shot himself in his house in St Paul's Churchyard; Sir John Hawkins records that Reading 'was passing by at the instant the pistol went off, and entering the house found his friend in the agonies of death.' He was elected as organist at St John's, Hackney, on 28 January 1708. In 1718 questions were raised about his absence from his post, and on 12 December 1719 he was threatened with dismissal, having been reprimanded concerning 'irregularities relating to the execution of his Office as Organist of this Parish, and particularly for playing the Voluntary too long, and using persistently too light, Airy and Jyggy Tunes, no ways proper to raise the Devotion Suitable for a Religeous Assembly. (LMA, P79/JNI/140)' Having promised 'to amend' (ibid.) at a hearing on 19 April 1720, he continued serving at St John's until 4 April 1727, when he was ordered 'to provide himself with another place' (LMA, P79/JNI/141, fol. 63'r') within three months. 
In 1719 he became the first teacher of John Stanley. During his time at St John's he had published 'A Book of New Songs (after the Italian Manner)' ('c'.1710), when he was living at Arundel Street, Strand, and 'A Book of New Anthems' ('c'.1715), by which time he had moved to 'Swan passage in Orrange Street near Red-Lyon Square in Holborne' ('A Book of New Anthems', title-page). In his early years he was an enthusiast for the Italian style and hoped that his 'Book of New Songs' would 'incite our Great masters to improve the Design to such perfection that our English Composers might be inspired with the utmost delicacy of a 'Roman Genius'' ('A Book of New Songs', preface). The 'Book of New Anthems' comprises six multi-movement works in modern style, employing solo voices and incorporating elaborate instrumental interludes. The reprimand received by Reading for his 'light, Airy and Jyggy Tunes' is at odds with his keyboard music, sober in nature and skilfully written. His organ voluntaries helped set the pattern for later composers like Stanley, with a slow opening movement followed by a brisk or fugal one. Reading was not only a composer but also an assiduous compiler of collections of keyboard music and of songs. Seventeen manuscript volumes of these collections survive, some very large, most of which Reading bequeathed to Dulwich College. They include some of the most important sources for English organ music of the period. 
On 30 June 1727 Reading became organist at St Mary Woolnoth with St Mary Woolchurch, with an annual fee of $20 (which dropped to $12 in 1758), and on 9 April 1731 he added the position of organist at St Dunstan-in-the-West (fee $21 p.a.); he held both places until his death. He was a founder member of the Royal Society of Musicians in August 1739. Reading died on 2 September 1764, aged eighty-seven according to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', but this seems about ten years too old for his service as choirboy in the Chapel Royal. 


@@@@@


doc= 23236


Reading, Robert (d. 1317), Benedictine monk and historian of Westminster Abbey, wrote part of his house's continuation of the 'Flores historiarum' of Matthew Paris. Reading is mentioned in the infirmarer's accounts in 1294 and 1298, in the list of monks imprisoned on suspicion of robbing the king's treasury in 1303, in the Westminster treasurer's accounts for undertaking a journey to York in the same year, and as one of the monks protesting at the deprivation of Prior Hadham in 1307. The almoner's accounts for 1317 mention his death in that year. According to a note in the Chetham's Library manuscript version of the Westminster 'Flores', inserted at 1326, this was the point at which both his chronicle and his life ended; but the note, which must have been written after 1347, cannot be relied upon for strict accuracy on the portion of the chronicle to be attributed to Reading, even though it provides evidence that he wrote some of it. Most probably, like his fellow monk John Bever, who seems to have composed the section ending in 1307, Reading was one of a group of annalists engaged in recording contemporary events, and the evidence of the almoner's account must be preferred to that of a much later note in the 'Flores'. As one of the chroniclers of Edward II's reign he adopts, like his predecessor, a rhetorical and homiletic style, and does not hide his disappointment with the policy and achievements of the king, his contempt for Edward's stratagems to avoid taking the advice of his nobility, and his loathing for Piers Gaveston, whose murder in 1312 he describes as a just proceeding. His lively prejudice against the Dominican friars allowed him to include a pamphlet circulated in London against them. As he cannot be credited with the annals for 1317-26, he cannot have been writing at the behest of Queen Isabella and Roger Mortimer as has been suggested, but he and his successor as annalist agree in their low view of Edward II. He maintained the Westminster tradition of monastic chronicle writing in a period when many other abbeys seem to have diminished or abandoned their keeping of independent annals, and his part of the 'Flores' was circulated with the rest to other monastic houses in place of the latter's own efforts. 


@@@@@


doc= 23237


Reading, William (1674-1744), librarian, was born on 17 September 1674 at Swin in the parish of Wombourne, Staffordshire, the son of William and Joan Redding. He describes his father as 'a refiner of iron'. He was educated at Halesowen School by Josiah Read and Robert Durant. He matriculated from University College, Oxford, on 1 June 1693, graduated BA in 1697, and proceeded MA from St Mary Hall on 28 June 1703. He was ordained deacon on 19 September 1697 and priest, by Henry Compton, bishop of London, on 21 December 1707. 
Reading's appointment as library keeper at Sion College, London Wall, on 15 November 1708, upon the recommendation of Bishop Compton, may well have been connected with the conferment of legal deposit status on the library, as this was currently being discussed by parliament, and became law under the 'Act for the Encouragement of Learning' on 10 April 1710. The act, as the other libraries of deposit discovered, was not wholly effective in securing deposit by the Stationers of the kind of book that the libraries required. Reading's librarianship, however, saw a substantial increase in the stock and use of the library. In addition to deposited books, there were large gifts or bequests of books from Bishop Compton (1707 and 1713-14), Mrs Eleanor James (1711), Edward Waple (1712), and Francis Bugg (1717?). Having brought the vellum book of benefactors up to date, Reading submitted to the college court a proposal for settling the library and putting it in good order (5 September 1720). He was able to extend the shelving of the library, so that it could be arranged in a classified order with space for accessions, and to remove the chains from the books. These improvements are apparent in the 'Bibliothecae cleri Londinensis in Collegio Sionensi catalogus', a volume in folio which Reading brought out in 1724. The first part, printed by John Watts, the best printer of his day, is in classified shelf order, with detailed entries which include the printer's name and the name of the benefactor (when this was known to the cataloguer). The second part is an index by author and subject, and the third a history of the library (in English). Modelled on the 1693 catalogue of Charles Maurice Le Tellier's collection, Reading's elaborate catalogue was highly valued for its classifications at a time when very few English libraries boasted published catalogues. 
Reading had married by 1714, when his eldest son, Thomas Granger Reading, was born to his wife, Catherine (died 1730). The births of six children are recorded in the registers of St Alfege's Church. The family lived in a house adjoining the college, and his wife and later his eldest son assisted Reading in the library. Catherine Reading died in 1730 and was buried in the church on 28 August. 
Reading held lectureships in several London churches, including St Alfege, St Michael, Crooked Lane, and Christchurch, Newgate Street; in the dedications to Archbishop William Wake of his volumes of sermons he nevertheless displayed some disappointment at the lack of preferment in the church. The office of clerk or register of the college, and that of librarian, had been split at the time of his appointment; they were reunited in 1724, and the additional burden that fell upon Reading is clear from the minutes of the college court. 
In addition to the achievement of the 1724 catalogue, Reading published an edition of the ecclesiastical historians -- Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, and others -- in three volumes at Cambridge in 1720. Three volumes of sermons were published in his lifetime, and they were collected as 'One Hundred and Sixteen Sermons' in 1755. 
Reading continued to write the minutes of the court until 17 April 1744. He died on 10 December 1744. In his will he left bequests of $20 apiece to his younger children, and $30 to the eldest child, Thomas. He asked to be buried in the porch of St Alfege's Church near the grave of his wife, Catherine. Thomas Reading evidently hoped to succeed his father as librarian, but an improvement in the finances of the college enabled the court to appoint William Brakenridge as principal librarian, while Thomas Reading was continued as assistant register or clerk. He did, however, remain in the house his father had occupied. 
William Reading left at his death a reputation for his plain and honest manner of life and preaching, according to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1st ser., 14, 1744, 676). The catalogue of 1724 also shows how ably he had built upon the library's status as one of deposit, augmented by important benefactions, to become one of London's richest and most accessible resources for scholarship. 


@@@@@


doc= 23238


Ready, William James Durant (1823-1873), marine painter, was born on 11 May 1823 in London, the son of a customs clerk. He taught himself painting, before moving to the United States for five years. He painted in oils and watercolours, mainly scenes of the south coast of England. Ready did not exhibit any paintings until 1861, when a watercolour, 'View on the Thames', was shown at the Suffolk Street Gallery in London. He exhibited three paintings at the British Institution -- 'Gorlestone Pier, Suffolk' in 1861, 'Dirty Weather Clearing off' in 1862, 'Coast Scene Near Harwich' in 1865, and two at the Royal Academy in 1867. His pictures are usually signed W. F. R., but the Royal Academy paintings are signed W. F. Durant. The painter David Roberts is said to have admired his work. He died in Brighton, Sussex, on 29 November 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 23239


Reay, Stephen (1782-1861), orientalist, only son of the Revd John Reay, born at Montrose, Forfarshire, on 29 March 1782, studied at the University of Edinburgh under the philosopher Dugald Stewart, and graduated in 1802. After ordination in 1806, he was licensed to several curacies, but later in life he resumed his studies at Oxford, where he matriculated in 1814 at St Alban's Hall, graduating BA in 1817, MA in 1823, and BD in 1841, and becoming for some time vice-principal of his hall. In 1828 he was appointed sub-librarian of the Bodleian Library, where he had charge of the oriental books, particularly Hebrew volumes. He retired on a pension in 1860. He had been in poor health since at least 1855 and unable to carry out his duties effectively alone. In 1840 he was made Laudian professor of Arabic at Oxford and held this office until his death at Oxford on 20 January 1861. 
Though contemporary writers paid high tributes to his learning and scholarship, Reay published only three works: a pamphlet entitled 'Observations on the defence of the Church Missionary Society against the objections of the archdeacon of Bath' (1818) under the pseudonym of Pileus Quadratus; 'Narratio de Josepho e sacro codice' (1822); and lastly 'Textus Hebraicus' (1840). He is also referred to in the 'Scripturae linguaque phoeniciae monumenta' (2 vols., 1837) of Wilhelm Gesenius, who obtained from Reay copies of the Phoenician inscription at Oxford. 
Reay was in build tall, spare, and handsome, if bowed as his health deteriorated. In character he was mild and ineffectual, although remembered by colleagues with affection for his habits of pottering around the library in search of his spectacles and hovering over hot-air gratings in search of warmth. 


@@@@@


doc= 23240


Rebecca, Biagio (1734/5-1808), painter, was born at Osimo in the marches of Ancona, Italy. Of his parents, nothing is known. He studied at the Accademia di San Luca, Rome, and while there he met the painter Benjamin West, who remained his lifelong friend. Rebecca went to England in 1761 with the portraitist James George, with whom he was in partnership for a short time. On 31 January 1769 he was one of the first students to enter Royal Academy Schools and was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1771; he exhibited history paintings there for only two years, his historical subjects being of little merit. He painted portraits, for example six whole lengths of Sir John Griffin Griffin's ancestors (1774; Audley End, Essex). He was commissioned to produce watercolour cartoons for painted glass in the chapels at Audley End and New College, Oxford (the latter are now in the City of York Art Gallery), and he was one of the artists who worked on the decoration of the new rooms at Somerset House. Edward Croft-Murray noted that Rebecca subscribed to George Richardson's 'A Book of Ceilings, Composed in the Style of the Antique Grotesque' (1776), and designed the admission ticket for the first performance of the Handel Commemoration in Westminster Abbey on 26 May 1784 (Croft-Murray, 258). He also contributed illustrations for John Bell's 'The Poets of Great Britain Complete from Chaucer to Churchill' (1779-88). 
Rebecca was especially skilled in decorative painting and became one of the most prolific and talented of the Adam school, working not only for the Adam brothers but also for James and Samuel Wyatt and Henry Holland. He gained a considerable reputation for his grotesque painting (at Heaton Hall, Lancashire, and Lansdowne House, now in the Philadelphia Museum of Art), and feigned bas-reliefs (at Harewood House, Yorkshire, and Kedleston Hall, Derbyshire). With West he was employed at Windsor Castle, where the royal family were much amused by his eccentricities, such as painting a silver coin, placing it in one of the rooms, and laughing 'to exhaustion' at a courtier running to pick it up (Thornbury, 2.2). Reports on Rebecca's character vary from 'infinite belief in himself and infinite contempt for everyone else' (ibid., 2.2-3) to 'simplicity of manners and a humane disposition' ('The Examiner', 28 Feb 1808, 141-2). 
Reduced to poverty during his last years, Rebecca obtained a pension from the Royal Academy and died at his lodgings in Oxford Street, London, on 22 February 1808. Joseph Farington noted in his diary that West's account of him would appear in 'The Examiner', where it was reported that 'he was handsomely buried at the direction of Mr West, and at the expense of the Royal Academy in St. Pancras churchyard' (Farington, 'Diary', 9.3230, 27 Feb 1808). His son, John Biagio Rebecca (died 1847) was an architect. 


@@@@@


doc= 23405


Thomas Raynald (fl. 1542-1552), was an apprentice of the London printer and member of the Drapers' Company, Thomas Petyt, between 1542 and his freedom as Thomas Reynolds in 1548. Distinguishing the works of the two printers is not straightforward, although it seems that the presumably younger man may have been responsible for a number of religious and theological publications between 1548 and 1552, including works by John Bale, Thomas Becon, Erasmus, John Mardeley, William Tyndale, and Zwingli as well as an edition of the Matthew 'Bible' in 1549. If so, he was based first in the parish of St Andrew by the Wardrobe from 1548 to 1549, and at the sign of the Star in St Paul's Churchyard from 1549 to 1551. It is not clear which of the two printers published the 1552 edition of 'The Byrth of Mankynde'. No further biographical details are known about any of these three men. 


@@@@@


doc= 23449


Rhiwallon ap Cynfyn (d. 1069) was the brother of Bleddyn ap Cynfyn, with whom he shared authority until his death in the battle of Mechain in 1069. Rhiwallon had two sons, one of whom, Meilyr, was killed at the battle of Mynydd Carn in 1081; one of his two daughters, Gwladus, married Rhys ap Tewdwr, king of Deheubarth (d. 1093). 


@@@@@


doc= 23457


Rhodri ab Owain Gwynedd (d. 1195), prince, was the younger son of Owain and Cristin. In 1175 he was imprisoned by Dafydd but escaped and expelled his brother from Gwynedd west of the Conwy; he was ruling there in 1188 when he met the archbishop of Canterbury and his party in Anglesey, but, according to Gerald, none of his 'teulu' or retinue was willing to take the cross. He appears to have been ejected from Anglesey, possibly by the sons of Cynan ab Owain Gwynedd, about 1190; in 1193 he returned with Manx aid in a campaign described as 'haf y Gwyddyl' ('the summer of the Gaels'), but before the end of the year he was again driven out. 'Brut y tywysogyon' states that he took part in the campaign of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and the sons of Cynan against Dafydd in 1194 but this is not certain; in the same year Llywelyn won victories at Porthaethwy and Coedana in Anglesey, presumably over him. He died in 1195 and was buried at Holyhead. His wife was a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd of Deheubarth; he was subsequently betrothed to a daughter of the Manx king Ragnvald I but the marriage does not seem to have taken place and Llywelyn ab Iorwerth was later to seek a papal dispensation to marry her. He had three sons; some of his descendants were in the service of the thirteenth-century princes of Gwynedd and his great-granddaughter Senena was the mother of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. 


@@@@@


doc= 23948


James [i] Roettier (1663-1698), born in London, and 


@@@@@


doc= 23949


James [iii] Roettier (1698-1772), who was born in London and served as engraver-general of the Low Countries. He died in Brussels on 15 July 1772. 
Of the five Roettiers employed at the English mint, John was undoubtedly the most important, being described in 1678 by John Evelyn as 'that excellent graver... who emulates even the ancients in both metal and stone' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 20 July 1678). Samuel Pepys, who visited John Roettier in the Tower, recorded that there he saw 'some of the finest pieces of work, in embossed work, that ever I did see in my life, for fineness and smallness of the images thereon' (Pepys, 'Diary', 26 March 1666). All five produced medals, on which they sometimes co-operated, notably on the 'Felicitas Britanniae' (1660), for which Joseph is credited with the head and John with the reverse. To Evelyn, 'Christ's Hospital' (1673), struck to commemorate the foundation of a mathematical and nautical school, was a 'glorious medallion' and 'one of the finest, rarest, and most valuable of all the works of John Roettiers' (Forrer, 5.167). Other commissions included jetons by Joseph and Philip, the great seal of 1667 by John, and the Britannia for the reverse of the farthing issues, also by John, for which the model is said to have been Charles II's favourite, Frances Stewart, later duchess of Richmond. Dies and puncheons of John Roettiers and his family were presented to the British Museum in 1829. 


@@@@@


doc= 23950


James [ii] Roettier (1707-1784), was born on 20 August 1707 at St Germain-en-Laye, France; James Stuart, the Old Pretender, acted as his godfather. He first practised medal engraving but later became a goldsmith and was appointed goldsmith to Louis XV. After his father's death in 1727 he was appointed 'Engraver to the Mint of the Pretender'. He travelled to London with the intention of striking medals from the dies of his grandfather John Roettier, and in 1739 he produced medals of John Locke and Sir Isaac Newton. His signature was 'Jac Roettiers'. He became a member of the Academie de Peinture et de Sculpture in Paris and in 1772 obtained 'lettres de confirmation de noblesse'. James [ii] Roettier died in Paris on 17 May 1784. 
James [i] Roettier deputized alone in London until February 1697, when he was dismissed because he had allowed dies which were in his custody to be misappropriated. He died in 1698 at Bromley in Kent, following a horse-riding accident. He and his wife (1663-1698) had a son, 


@@@@@


doc= 23951


John Roettier (1631-1703), who was born in Brussels (or possibly Antwerp) on 4 July 1631 and trained under his father. In 1658 he married Catherine Prost, with whom he had five daughters and three sons. The eldest, John ('b'. 1661?), is not known to have been a medallist and is remembered as a suspected conspirator in the plot by Ambrose Rookwood to kidnap or assassinate William III, though the other two, James [i] and Norbert ['see below'], followed in their father's footsteps. The family was Roman Catholic, John himself being described as a 'violent papist' ('DNB'). In 1661 he was duly invited by Charles II to England, not long after he had executed his first known medals, of Leopold William, governor of the Low Countries, and Charles Vanden Bosch, bishop of Ghent. With his two brothers, 


@@@@@


doc= 23952


Norbert Roettier (1665?-1727), born either in London or in Antwerp. Although he wanted to return to Brussels when his employment at the mint ceased on 30 September 1689, he remained in London, drawing his life grant and living in his house in the Tower, where he died in 1703; he was interred in the Tower in 1703. Many dies and puncheons executed by him are now in the British Museum. A list of his principal medals is given in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
James [i] and Norbert did not officially succeed their father as chief engraver but, on the death of the new incumbent, George Bowers, in 1690, in practice they did. Between 1690 and 1695 both men deputized for Bowers's successor, Henry Harris, who took $150 per annum for himself, and left the rest of the engraver's remuneration to them. James, with Harris, also received $100 per annum as engraver of dies for the tin coinage of 1690-91 and possibly also of 1694-6. Norbert left in 1695 for France, where he succeeded his uncle Joseph in 1703 as engraver-general of the French mint. He had married, first, Elizabeth Isard and, second, Winifred Clarke, a niece of the duke of Marlborough. He died at Choisy-sur-Seine, France, on 18 May 1727 and was succeeded by his cousin Joseph Charles Roettier (1691-1779), the fourth child of Joseph Roettier. 
Norbert's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 23954


Roger the Poitevin (b. c.1065, d. before 1140), the third surviving son of Earl Roger and Mabel, was probably born in the mid-1060s. In 'Domesday Book' he appears as Roger the Poitevin ('Pictavensis'), by reason of his marriage, made on his father's advice, to Almodis, sister of Boso (III), count of La Marche (died 1091); but the 'Domesday' entries for his large honour present problems. In five counties (Hampshire, Nottinghamshire, Lincolnshire, Essex, and Suffolk) he is entered as a normal tenant-in-chief; but in four others (the land between the Ribble and the Mersey, Derbyshire, Yorkshire, and Norfolk) his tenure is entered as a thing of the past: thus at the end of his Derbyshire fee is a note that Roger used to hold the lands, but they are now in the hand of the king. This and other entries suggest that Roger's lands were all ordered to be taken into the king's hand late in 1086, but that in some cases the order was not known locally in time to be recorded in 'Domesday', or recorded in full. In view of his age, Roger cannot have held this honour for long; why he should so soon have lost it, at a time when as far as is known he and his father were loyal to the Conqueror, is not stated. The land between the Ribble and the Mersey was later enlarged to become modern Lancashire. By 1086 Roger had installed a body of tenants and built a castle at Penwortham, at a crossing of the Ribble which might be used by an invading king of Scots; at Lancaster he later founded a priory with the aid of monks from his parents' foundation at Sees. 


@@@@@


doc= 24241


Ruadan mac Fergusa Birn (d. 584). He was counted, along with Colum, Brendan, and Cainnech, as one of the twelve apostles of Ireland and, like them, was supposedly taught by Finnian of Clonard. According to the genealogies of the saints his father was Fergus mac Echdach (or Fergus Birn) of the Eoganacht, while his mother may be the otherwise unknown Cael, mentioned in the tract 'On the mothers of the saints'. Although Ruadan is mentioned in only one collection of annals, his feast day is commemorated on 15 April in the martyrologies. Of his life, three Latin recensions are extant, and a lost version formed the basis for the Irish life: none is later than the twelfth century. Genealogically Ruadan was of the Eoganacht Chaisil, and his monastery remained strongly pro-Munster in its politics. A tenth-century Munster poem portrays him as an advocate of the province's rights. 


@@@@@


doc= 24336


Richard Russel (1714?-1771), physician, possibly born on 18 December 1714 at Selmeston, Sussex, the son of the Revd Richard Russel MA, vicar of Alfriston and of Selmeston, and his wife, Juliana. After eight years at Westminster School Russel studied medicine for seven years, in hospitals and with an apothecary in London, by taking the MD degree at Rheims in June 1738, and finally with the famed man-midwife Gregoire in Paris. He started to practise at Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire, and in early 1741 was appointed physician to the branch of Christ's Hospital at Ware, Hertfordshire, but failed to obtain the appointment at the Hertford branch in 1742. On 4 August 1741 he married Elizabeth Wilkins of Hoddesdon at Christ Church, Newgate Street, London, and he was admitted an extra licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, London, on 23 July 1742. About 1747 he moved to Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, and about 1750 to Reading, Berkshire. There he became involved in a dispute with Anthony Addington, the father of Lord Sidmouth, in connection with which he published two pamphlets, 'A letter to Dr. Addington of Reading, on his refusal to join in consultation with a physician, who had taken his degree abroad, and was approved and licensed by the College of Physicians' (1749), and 'Letter to Mr. Thomas Bigg, late surgeon of St Bartholomew's Hospital, occasioned by his having written a defamatory letter to Dr. Addington against Dr. Russel of Reading' (1751). He died at Reading on 5 July 1771. 


@@@@@


doc= 24525


Horatio Saker (1824-1861), born in London on 27 May 1824, also gained experience with the Wyndhams at Edinburgh before he and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Gamage (whom he had married on 29 October 1844), joined Charles Kean's company at the Princess's Theatre, London, in the early 1850s. They continued there under the management of Augustus Harris. Saker played a number of pantomime kings and such roles as Flute in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', Launcelot Gobbo in 'The Merchant of Venice', and Pistol in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', and appeared many times as one of the witches in 'Macbeth'. He died at 23 Cardington Street, St Pancras, London, of smallpox on 3 April 1861. 


@@@@@


doc= 24679


Sir Abdullah David Sassoon, first baronet (1818-1896), was born in Baghdad; he was known later, particularly after his father's death, as Albert. His younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 24716


Sir John (V) Savage (d. 1492), who fought for Edward IV at Tewkesbury, became a royal carver and knight of the body, and was second in order of precedence when Edward was buried. He received many important grants, including that of the constableship of Hanley Castle, Worcestershire. As such close supporters of Edward IV, and associates of the Stanleys, it is not surprising that John (V) and his father seem to have been mistrusted by Richard III. Thomas Savage may have been abroad during the latter's reign and possibly acted as the Savages' direct contact with Henry Tudor. According to Polydore Vergil, John (V) was one of those who 'invited' Tudor to invade. He certainly played an important role at Bosworth, where he commanded the left wing. The author of 'Bosworth Feilde' described him and his men, clad in their distinctive white livery hood: '
Sir John Savage, that hardy Knight, 

deathes dentes he delt that day 

with many a white hood in fight, 

that sad men were at assay. 
(Hales and Furnivall, 3.255)' As a result of this support, in 1486 he received an extensive grant in the north midlands of the forfeited estates of John, Lord Zouche, and Francis, Viscount Lovell, valued at $158 p.a. or more. He also received extensive grants of office, especially in Worcestershire and Gloucestershire. The support of the Savages for Henry Tudor guaranteed them a growing prominence at court, and at eight out of eleven council meetings for which evidence survives during the period June-July 1486 either John (V), or Thomas, or both, were present. Sir John (V) Savage led the force that seized Humphrey Stafford from sanctuary at Culham in 1486. He married Dorothy, daughter of Sir Ralph Vernon of Haddon, and the marriages of his daughters suggest the extending interest of the family: Alice married Sir William Brereton; Felicia married Robert Milward of Eaton, Derbyshire; Ellen married John Hawarden; and Maud married Sir Robert Needham of Shenton, Shropshire. Sir John (V) Savage was also notable for his illegitimate offspring: George Savage, parson of Davenham, who himself fathered several illegitimate sons, including George Savage, chancellor of Chester, John Wilmslow, archdeacon of Middlesex, and perhaps Edmund Bonner, bishop of London. John (V)'s brothers also enjoyed successful careers: Sir Humphrey established a position in Staffordshire and served in the parliament of 1491-2 as knight of the shire for the county; Sir Edmund was knighted at Leith in May 1544 and married Mary, widow of Roger Legh of Ridge, and daughter and heir of William Sparke of Surrey. 
Yet the Savages suffered the same difficulties as the Stanleys, in spite of their support for the king. When Richard Savage, brother of John (V), failed to appear on a murder charge, his father was imprisoned. Sir John (V) was killed at the siege of Boulogne in 1492, and Sir Humphrey was already suspected of involvement in the activities of Perkin Warbeck in September 1493, when his house was attacked by two royal servants. The Savage family's remarkable success in winning office and land in the north midlands had already made them enemies, most notably (and in spite of John (V)'s marriage) the Vernons of Haddon. For a few years immediately after 1485 the Savages could rely on the support of others with influence in the region, including the Stanleys, to whom they were related. But by March 1494 this alliance had dissolved, as the Stanleys moved to support the Vernons; Stanley violence, most clearly seen in the murder of William Chetwynd in June 1494, may have helped to forge an alliance between the Savages and Henry Willoughby. Yet Savage and Stanley interests had already clashed, most obviously in the Pilkington-Ainsworth dispute over the manor of Mellor on the Derbyshire-Cheshire border. The Savages, and particularly Bishop Savage, pressed the claims of John Ainsworth, although his adversary Robert Pilkington, who relied on the good lordship of the earl of Derby and his heir, claimed to be able to show his ancestors in possession for eight generations. Conflict flared in 1493, when Sir John (IV) Savage distrained the tenants for rents and evicted those who would not pay, and trouble continued intermittently into the next century. The attack on Sir Humphrey in that same year may also reflect his family's residual loyalty to the Yorkist succession, and fears aroused in Cheshire by the intrusion of the council in the marches of Wales into the palatine administration. 
Sir John (IV) Savage died on 22 November 1495 at the age of seventy-three. His grandson 


@@@@@


doc= 24717


John Savage (d. 1586). This man had served with Parma's army in the Netherlands. Returning home via Rheims, he had met Ballard and William Gifford, a leading secular priest, who entangled him in a plot to murder the queen. He was then brought into touch with Babington, who had by then acquired a small group of fellow plotters, all of them, according to the memoirs of the Jesuit William Weston, 'young men of his own rank, zealous and adventurous catholics, bold in danger, earnest for the protection of the catholic faith, or for any enterprise intended to promote the catholic cause' (Pollen, cvi). All were known to the government. 


@@@@@


doc= 24835


Petronilla Melusina Stanhope, 'suo jure' countess of Walsingham, and countess of Chesterfield (1693-1778), courtier, was the daughter of Ehrengarde Melusina von der Schulenburg, duchess of Kendal (1667-1743), the mistress of George I. She was baptized as the child of Friedrich Achaz von der Schulenburg and his wife, Margrethe Gertrud, but her real father was George I (1660-1727). Her paternity was never formally acknowledged and she passed as the duchess's niece. Her elder sister, Anne Louise, was born in 1692, and her younger, Gertrud, in 1701. She became maid of honour to Sophia, electress of Hanover, in 1711, and with her sisters travelled to England in 1714. She retained all her life a heavy German accent. In 1722 she was made a British citizen and created countess of Walsingham for life. After her marriage to Philip Dormer Stanhope, earl of Chesterfield on 5 September 1733, she was known as Lady Chesterfield. The countess and her husband led rather separate lives, but she accompanied him to Dublin when he became lord lieutenant and did the honours when he fell ill. There were no children of the marriage. Lady Chesterfield died on 16 September 1778 and was buried in the South Audley Street Chapel with her mother and sister Anne. 


@@@@@


doc= 24883


Sir John Scott (1423-1485), and a younger son, William [ii] Scott (died 1491), among other children. 
The family rose to national prominence through Sir John's unshakeable commitment to the house of York. His career in Lancastrian service demonstrated his potential: he appeared on Kentish commissions from 1450, and together with John Fogge and Robert Horn he spent over $333 in suppressing Cade's uprising; king's esquire by 1456, he was frequently involved in Kentish musters and arrays. He first sat as a Kentish JP in 1458, and the following year he was appointed deputy to the earl of Shrewsbury as chief butler of Sandwich. But the turning point in his career came in June 1460, when, with Fogge and Horn, he gave support to the Yorkist earls that proved crucial to their success in Kent. Rich rewards followed within a year of Edward IV's accession, including annuities totalling $73 6's'. 8died, a knighthood, the offices of tronage and pesage in the port of London, joint chirographer of common pleas, deputy to Lord Wenlock as chief butler of Sandwich, the lieutenancy of Dover under the earl of Warwick, and the plum position of controller of the household. This did not exhaust a grateful king's largess: in 1462 he was among those granted the custody of the lands of the attainted earl of Oxford, and of the bishop of Durham's temporalities; he was also made keeper of Higham, Buckinghamshire. The same year he was granted the reversion in fee simple of the castle and manor of Chilham and the manors of Wilderton and Molash with extensive lands: these were the jointure of Margory, widow of the attainted Thomas, Lord Ros of Helmsley (died 1464). In 1464 the king granted him an interest in further Ros property at Chilham, Godmersham, and Throwley. He had to wait until 1478 for the remainder to fall in with Lady Ros's death, but in the meantime she had agreed that he could occupy the properties, and he was residing at Chilham Castle by 1476, when he had a grant of a weekly fair, annual market, free warren, and court of piepowder there. In 1463 he was granted in fee two thirds, with reversion of the remaining third, of the manors of Old Swinford (with its advowson) and Snodsbury in Worcestershire, in royal hands by the attainder of the earl of Wiltshire. The same year he was included in the group entrusted with the keeping of all the wardships, marriages, and ecclesiastical temporalities coming into royal hands, the profits to maintain the royal household. The following year he was to be reimbursed from the London tonnage and poundage the $256 3's'. 6died he had expended on ships for the Scottish expedition. His pension as controller was exempted from resumptions in 1463 and 1467, and in the latter year he was given the custody of the Kentish lands of Sir Robert Poynings (died 1461), the marriage of whose son and heir, Edward Poynings, he had purchased in 1466. He later married Edward to his daughter Isabella (died 1528). 
In addition to fulfilling his household duties, Sir John Scott served his king at home and abroad. He was appointed sheriff of Kent in September 1460, and thereafter was a ubiquitous commissioner in the county. He continued as a Kentish JP until his death, apart from the period of the readeption. He also sat on the Buckinghamshire bench between 1479 and 1484. He represented Kent in the parliament of 1467-8, and probably also in 1461-2, 1463-5, and the first parliament of 1483, as well as sitting for Appleby, Westmorland, in 1472-5. 
In September 1467 Sir John helped negotiate the marriage between the king's sister Margaret and the duke of Burgundy, and he accompanied Margaret to her wedding the following year. He was at Brussels in November 1467 negotiating a commercial treaty with Burgundy, and from May 1469 to February 1470 he was involved in negotiations with the Hanse in Flanders. In April 1471 he succeeded the earl of Warwick as lieutenant of the Cinque Ports and by March 1472 was marshal of Calais. In 1473 and 1474 he was sent on diplomatic missions to Burgundy, Utrecht, and Bruges. 
Sir John was busy in Edward IV's defence in the climactic years from 1468 to 1470, as a frequent commissioner of muster and array in Kent and Buckinghamshire. He almost certainly went into exile during the readeption, and returned to fight at Barnet and play an important part in the suppression of Fauconberg's rebellion in May 1471. His position as controller of the household was not renewed in 1471, perhaps because of his new commitments in Calais, but he continued to enjoy the king's trust: in February 1473 he was appointed as one of the tutors to the prince of Wales. Scott remained loyal to Richard III, at least until the end of 1484. In March 1485 he was bound in $1000 to appear before the king and council to answer concerning the matter of debt, so he too may have become alienated from the regime by then. He continued to draw his pension under Henry VII, until his death on 17 October 1485. 
Sir John Scott married Agnes (died 1486/7), daughter of William de Beaufitz of The Grange, Gillingham, Kent (and probably also citizen and fishmonger of London), with whom he had two daughters and a son and heir, William [iii]. Sir John and Agnes were buried in the north wall of Brabourne church. At his death he held lands in Calais, and the manors of St Cleres, Essex, 'la Moote', Sussex, in addition to his properties in Kent. Here he held the manor and advowson of Orlestone, and the manors of Capel, Hayton, Hall, and Mead. He also held the manor of Bournewood, near Orlestone, and land in Romney Marsh given to him by Sir John Cheyne in 1457 as satisfaction for a debt. 
Sir John's younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 24931


Sir William [iii] Scott (1459-1524), of Brabourne and Iden, Sussex, followed in his father's footsteps in much of his public life. He helped to suppress Buckingham's rebellion, being present at the siege of Bodiam Castle in October-November 1483, and was a commissioner of array for Sussex and Essex in 1484. His loyalty to Richard III was pardoned by Henry VII and by November 1489, when he was knighted with Prince Arthur, he had been appointed a member of the council and controller of the household. Sitting on numerous Kentish commissions of array, oyer and terminer, and gaol delivery, he was also appointed sheriff in 1490, 1501, and 1516, and JP from 1494 to 1506. He represented Kent in the parliament of 1495. Scott was appointed marshal of Calais in 1491 and the following year lieutenant of Dover. In 1501 he attended the reception of Katherine of Aragon, and in 1520 he was at the Field of Cloth of Gold. In May 1522 he was among those who received Charles V at Dover. 
In 1495 Sir William [iii] Scott found himself the beneficiary of a settlement that his father had made thirty years earlier with Sir John and Joan Lewknor, whereby Sir John Scott and his heirs were granted a remainder interest in the manor of Brabourne in the event of the Lewknors' dying without surviving issue. The childless Joan was widowed at the battle of Tewkesbury and with her death twenty-four years later Sir William became lord of Brabourne. 
William's wife was Sybil (died 1528), daughter of Sir John Lewknor of Goring, Sussex. He died on 24 August 1524 and was buried in the chancel of Brabourne church. He was succeeded by his heir, John Scott (d. 1533). 


@@@@@


doc= 24958


Scrope, Henry, first Baron Scrope of Masham (1312?-1392), soldier and administrator, was born on 29 September, probably in 1312 (the inquisitions taken after his father's death give his age variously, between twenty-five and twenty-eight 'and more'). He was the eldest son of Geoffrey Scrope and his first wife, Ivetta, most likely the daughter of William Roos. He was first armed in the Scottish campaign of 1333; he was knighted before Berwick, and fought at Halidon Hill. He served in Scotland again in 1335, and in 1340 took part in the sea battle at Sluys. His father died in that year, and he obtained livery of his inheritance in March 1341. In 1342 he was in Brittany, and was present at the sieges of Vannes and Morlaix. During the justiciarship of Ralph Ufford (1344-6) he saw service in Ireland. He was in Flanders, with Edward III in 1345, and in 1346 (according to depositions at the 'Scrope v. Grosvenor' trial in 1386) he fought as a banneret both at Crecy (26 August) and at Nevilles Cross (17 October). In 1347 he was at the siege of Calais; and in 1350 he fought in the great sea battle off Winchelsea, known as Espagnols-sur-mer. 
In November 1350 Henry Scrope was for the first time summoned individually to parliament as Lord Scrope (the designation 'of Masham' appears after 1371, when his cousin Richard Scrope of Bolton was summoned, to distinguish the branches of the family). After this his position became more prominent. In 1354 he was one of the ambassadors to Innocent VI seeking to arbitrate between England and France. He served on Edward III's Picard expedition in 1355, and at the siege of Berwick in 1357; and in August 1357 he was a member of the commission to treat with the Scots for the liberation of David II, king of Scots, and for a truce. In 1359 he served under John of Gaunt in the great 'chevauchee' toward Rheims, and in 1361 he was appointed to the important post of warden of Calais and Guines, which he seems to have held, officially, until 1370. He also served on a number of important diplomatic missions, including those which treated (unsuccessfully) for a marriage between Edmund of Langley, Edward III's fifth son, and Margaret, daughter of the count of Flanders (1362 and 1364). In 1369 he served, at the reopening of the war, under John of Gaunt in France; and in 1370-71 he was for a year warden of the western march towards Scotland. From January to November 1371 he was also steward of the king's household. During the Good Parliament of 1376 he was one of the peers on the committee that the Commons requested to advise and 'intercommune' with them ('RotP', 2.322). In October 1377 he was named in parliament as a member of the first 'continual' council of Richard II's minority. He served at this period on a number of significant commissions in Yorkshire and Northumberland, the last important ones being those to preserve the peace and put down rebels in Yorkshire (14 December 1381 and 8 March 1382). His later years seem to have been spent in retirement on his estates; although Gilbert Talbot in his deposition in 'Scrope v. Grosvenor' alleged that he served in Scotland in 1383 and 1385, this is unconfirmed, and probably arises from a confusion with his cousin Richard Scrope. He died on 31 July 1392. 
Henry Scrope enjoyed a high reputation as a warrior, as a tourneyer, and later as a councillor and administrator. In his early years his principal connection seems to have been with William de Bohun, earl of Northampton, in whose retinue he served in 1333, 1340, 1342, 1346, 1347, and 1355. Later his most important connection seems to have been with John of Gaunt, under whom he served in 1359 and 1369, though he was less intimately associated with him than his contemporary and cousin Richard Scrope of Bolton. As arms he bore the famous family coat, azure a bend or, with a label of three points argent for a difference. He was married twice, first to Agnes and second to Joan; the surnames in both cases are uncertain. With Joan he had five sons; Geoffrey, who was killed on crusade in Prussia (1362); William, who fought against the Turks at Satalia (1361) and died in the East; Stephen, who likewise went on crusade and who ultimately succeeded him; Richard Scrope, who rose to be archbishop of York and was executed in 1405; and John. He had two daughters, Joan, who married Henry, Lord Fitzhugh, and Isabel, who married Sir Robert Plumpton (1341-1407) of Plumpton ['see under 'Plumpton family (per. c.1165-c.1550)]. 


@@@@@


doc= 24959


Scrope, Henry, third Baron Scrope of Masham (c.1376-1415), soldier and administrator, was the eldest son of Stephen, second Baron Scrope of Masham (died 1406), and Margery, widow of John, Lord Huntingfield. Little is known of his career before the accession of Henry IV. During his youth he gained some military experience overseas, receiving payment of $20 from Richard II in 1390 for his expenses in serving in Barbary. In August 1397 he was in receipt of an annuity of $40 from Richard II, an award immediately continued by Henry IV following the deposition of Richard II. The transition to the new regime was a smooth one for Scrope, who may have sympathized with the opponents of Richard II, since in his will of 1415 he asked that masses be said for the soul of Thomas, duke of Gloucester (died 1397), and bequeathed to the bishop of Winchester a small breviary given to Scrope by the duke. 
Scrope's commitment to the new regime was obvious by 1403, when he was styled 'king's knight' and went on active military service in Wales. Given custody of Laugharne Castle in Carmarthenshire, he helped to defeat the rebels at the battle of Shrewsbury in 1403, and received a share of their forfeited possessions. He was still serving in Wales in 1406, when he came into his inheritance on the death of his father, while from 1408 he was employed on diplomatic service to the crown. In that year Scrope accompanied the king's daughter Philippa to Denmark for her marriage, and in 1409 he travelled to Paris for negotiations with French ambassadors. He was made knight of the Garter in 1410. 
In January 1410 Scrope was appointed treasurer of England, an office he held until December 1411. Since this office was normally held by individuals with substantial personal means, the appointment is an indicator of Scrope's political reliability and of his wealth, a wealth that enabled him to make large loans to the crown. Scrope's political standing is shown by his being granted the towns of Hampstead and Hendon in July 1411 for the lodging of his men, servants, and horses during his attendance at parliament and at the king's council, a grant confirmed on 23 May 1413 by Henry V. The accession of Henry V made no obvious alteration to Scrope's position. In 1413 he was sent on diplomatic missions to Paris, Leulinghem, and Calais, and in 1414 he was involved in negotiating the crucial alliance with the Burgundians. In February 1415 he attended the council meeting at which the arrangements for Henry V's forthcoming expedition to France were discussed, though he absented himself from the council meeting of 27 May 1415 for no apparent reason. 
Henry Scrope's career in royal service ended unexpectedly on 6 August 1415 when he was executed for high treason in Southampton on the eve of Henry V's Agincourt campaign. His head was dispatched to York and displayed on Micklegate Bar, a particular humiliation since the family held property on Micklegate. Scrope's involvement in the 'Southampton plot' has never been fully explained. There were no obvious signs of disaffection towards Henry V, and no evidence that the king was neglecting him. Earlier in 1415 Scrope had made an indenture to serve with the king in France, and in his will he bequeathed to the king an image of the Virgin and asked him to be a good lord to his mother, his wife, and his heir. Scrope's implication in the plot is most likely to have been the result of his close family and financial ties with the other plotters, Richard, earl of Cambridge, Edmund (V) Mortimer, earl of March, and Sir Thomas Grey. Once the plot was discovered he claimed that he had intended to reveal it, but had not done so by the time the earl of March himself betrayed the conspirators to the king. He may, however, have felt that his prospects might improve if the younger and more easily influenced earl of March were on the throne. 
Scrope had made a will before his anticipated departure for France which is revealing both in its religious sentiments and as evidence of his wealth. The austere tone of its preamble was probably due less to Lollard sympathies, for which there is no evidence, than to the serious nature of his religious commitments. As well as works by the Yorkshire mystic Richard Rolle -- the 'Incendium amoris' and 'Judice me Deus' -- he owned copies of the 'Revelations of St Bridget', the 'Prick of Conscience', and a primer with the matins of the Blessed Virgin Mary in English. Ownership of such books placed Scrope in the van of contemporary tastes. He was extremely generous in his gifts to religious houses, and especially to hermits and anchorites. His bequests to St Bridlington Priory may have been partly a family tradition, but are likely to have been stimulated by the new cult of St John of Bridlington (died 1379), who had been canonized in 1401 largely through the efforts of Scrope's uncle Archbishop Richard Scrope (died 1405). Scrope himself had anticipated burial in an alabaster tomb in York Minster, where members of his family were afterwards buried. 
Precise estimates of Scrope's wealth are difficult to make, but it is revealing that he should have tried to settle $2000 on his second wife, Joan, in lieu of her claim on his estate, while in 1413 he claimed to have been robbed of goods to the value of $5000. In his will he made numerous cash gifts to religious houses, relatives, and members of his household, while the inventory of his goods enumerates hundreds of ecclesiastical vestments. 
Henry Scrope married twice, first, by 1399, Philippa Brian (died 1406), and second, by July 1411, Joan (died 1434), the widow successively of Edmund, duke of York (died 1402), and William, Lord Willoughby (died 1409). There were no children of either marriage, and Scrope's heir was the third of his four brothers, John (died 1455), who had succeeded to the barony by 1426. Nevertheless, Scrope's execution in 1415 effectively destroyed the economic and territorial power base of his family. His estates were forfeit to the crown, and were rapidly granted to Henry V's more loyal supporters. The North Riding estates were granted to Lord Fitzhugh, but there was some doubt as to whether they had been entailed or not, and it was on this basis that John Scrope commenced a lengthy lawsuit for their recovery in 1424. Although the sentence of forfeiture for treason was never reversed, John Scrope finally obtained the permanent recovery of the lands in 1442, when he paid William Fitzhugh $1000 in return for them. 


@@@@@


doc= 24960


Scrope, Henry, ninth Baron Scrope of Bolton (1533/4-1592), soldier, was the second, but eldest surviving, son of John Scrope, eighth Baron Scrope (died 1549), and Lady Katherine Clifford (died 1598), eldest daughter of Henry Clifford, first earl of Cumberland. His father took part in the Pilgrimage of Grace, but in 1548 was serving in Protector Somerset's army in Scotland in command of 200 foot. His son may have accompanied the expedition, but there is no other evidence of early military service. He married, first, Mary North (died 1558), daughter of Edward North, first Baron North, with whom he had a daughter Mary, who herself married William Bowes of Streatlam, near Barnard Castle. His second wife, whom he married before 10 September 1565, was Lady Margaret Howard (died 1591), daughter of the poet Henry Howard, styled earl of Surrey. They had two sons, Thomas and Henry. 
The ninth baron was summoned to parliament from 1555 to 1589. In 1556 he was instructed to assist the president of the council of the north, the earl of Shrewsbury. In March 1560 he became marshal of the army sent by Elizabeth to assist the anti-regent Scots in the siege of Leith. The English intervention resulted in the French evacuation of Scotland by the treaty of Leith (6 July), leaving the field open for the triumph of the Scottish protestants. By 20 January 1561 Scrope had been appointed to the council of the north, and remained a member until his death. In April 1563 he became captain of Carlisle Castle (salary of $221 per annum), where he conducted building work, and warden of the west marches (salary of $424 annually), holding these positions until his death. That he occasionally attended court is suggested by his presence at Shane O'Neill's submission to the queen on 6 January 1562. 
In September 1563 Scrope and other English commissioners negotiated a border treaty with the Scots. As warden, he rejected the Scottish offer of Hermitage Castle in exchange for an English alliance in 1564. In October 1565 he provided sanctuary to James Stewart, earl of Moray, following his defeat by his half-sister Mary, queen of Scots, in the chaseabout raid. In 1568, when news of Mary's arrival in Carlisle reached London, the privy council ordered Scrope and Sir Francis Knollys north to take charge of the charming refugee. The baron spent 20 marks weekly on his foreign guest. On 15 June he accompanied her outside Carlisle Castle to attend a football match. However, the proximity of Carlisle to Scotland, and the constant flocking of English Catholic nobles and gentry to the exiled queen, necessitated a move to Scrope's castle at Bolton in Wensleydale, Yorkshire, on 13 July. Lady Scrope conveyed messages from her brother the duke of Norfolk, encouraging Mary and probably making the first suggestion of a match between the queen and Norfolk. Her husband, however, warned London in November about the plans by Lord John Hamilton, commendator of Arbroath Abbey, to rescue the queen. Suspicious of his wife's communications with Mary, he moved Lady Scrope to a house 2 miles away from Bolton. Worries about the short distance (60 miles in a straight route) to Scotland and the prevalence of Catholicism among the local gentry led to Mary's move further south to Tutbury on 26 February 1569, allowing Scrope to return to his duties to the border. 
While Scrope attended a hawking party hosted by the duke of Norfolk at Tattershall in June 1569, his loyalty to Queen Elizabeth was unquestioned. When the earls of Northumberland and Westmorland rebelled later that year, he forwarded Westmorland's appeal to his sister-in-law Lady Scrope to Cecil. He took active measures to repress the rebellion, but failed to prevent the earls' escape to Scotland. He preserved order in Cumberland during Leonard Dacre's uprising in February 1570, and in March he had a commission to assess treason fines against the supporters of the northern earls. In April he received a reinforcement of 500 foot and 100 horse with which to raid the defeated Dacre's Scottish allies. Although he burnt Ecclefechan and several villages in Eskdale and Annandale, Scrope's forces met significant Scottish resistance and wreaked less havoc than in the middle and east marches. Nevertheless, Scottish raiding ceased for a time as a result of the incursion. 
Scrope maintained good relations with his Scottish counterparts (lords Maxwell and Herries and the earl of Angus) between 1573 and 1579; such partnerships were essential for maintaining good order in the borders. By February 1581, however, the situation had deteriorated and he requested a reinforcement of 100 foot and 100 horse. That June he gave refuge to followers (including Angus) of the recently deposed regent Morton in Carlisle. In company with the warden of the middle march he invaded Liddesdale in November. By July 1582 Scrope was refusing to meet the Scottish middle warden on account of his failure to redress the slaughters committed in Bewcastle Dale and Gillsland by Liddesdale Scots, although he remained willing to meet the western warden. The breakdown in order led him to suggest that the government provide 450 men to defend the borders, action which would force all the raids north. In 1585 he served as a commissioner inquiring into the murder of Francis, Lord Russell. The lack of co-operation in Scrope's area continued until March 1586 when James VI allowed him to raid north against Scottish outlaws. However, in August he complained to the privy council about the failure of the Scottish warden Lord Maxwell to provide justice against the Grahams of Esk. When an English party under Scrope's orders captured three Grahams, Maxwell's brother attacked them. Meanwhile the queen had nominated Scrope for the Garter, and he was installed by proxy on 15 April 1585. By October 1590 he had established good relations with Sir John Carmichael, Scottish west warden. A year later he reiterated his complaints about the constantly unruly Liddesdale men; the Scottish middle march warden Sir Robert Kerr failed to subdue them, and the grievance remained unresolved. 
Scrope died in Carlisle on 13 June 1592 and was buried in the cathedral there on 22 August. Queen Elizabeth commented, 'we have great cause to be sorry in respect of the honourable service he has long time done us in that office' ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1580-1625', 332). George MacDonald Fraser considered him 'one of the best Wardens in Border history' (Fraser, 248). He was succeeded as tenth baron by his son Thomas (died 1609). Thomas's son Emmanuel Scrope became earl of Sunderland on 19 June 1627 and died on 30 May 1630, the last of his line. 


@@@@@


doc= 24961


Scrope, John, fifth Baron Scrope of Bolton (1437/8-1498), soldier, was the eldest of the three sons of Henry, fourth Baron Scrope (1418-1459), and Elizabeth (died in or after 1498), daughter of his kinsman, John, fourth Baron Scrope of Masham, and Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Chaworth of Wiverton, Nottinghamshire. He was born on 22 July 1437 or 1438. He was first summoned to parliament from July 1460, the year following his father's death, and regularly thereafter, and was knighted at about the same time. Scrope was a supporter of the earl of Salisbury from the very early 1450s, supported his son the earl of Warwick at the battle of Northampton in 1460, and fought for Edward IV at Towton in March 1461, where he was seriously hurt. He then took part in the reduction of the northern Lancastrian strongholds. In 1462-3 he was admitted, with his first wife, Joan, to the Guild of Corpus Christi in York. He was made knight of the Garter before April 1463, captain of Newcastle from December 1463, and was probably at the battle of Hexham in May 1464. He was regularly on the commission of the peace for Cambridgeshire (in which county he held lands) from 1461 until 1484 and frequently on that for the North Riding of Yorkshire. 
However, by March 1469 Scrope was supporting the earl of Warwick and was fomenting a rising in Richmondshire on Warwick's behalf. On the collapse of this he submitted to Edward IV and was pardoned, although he again supported Warwick during the short Lancastrian restoration, helping to raise troops in the eastern counties. He seems not to have fought at the battles of Barnet or Tewkesbury though, and to have been quickly forgiven by Edward because on 11 May 1471, that is only a week after Tewkesbury, he was reappointed to the commission of the peace for Cambridge. On 3 July 1471 he was one of those who swore allegiance to Edward, son of Edward IV. In 1474 he was one of the commissioners to negotiate a marriage between the king's youngest daughter, Cecily, with James, son and heir of James III, king of Scots, and stood proxy for her at the betrothal in October of that year. In 1475 he accompanied the king to France with 20 men-at-arms and 200 archers, although before he went he was ordered in May to abstain from using the arms of the Isle of Man for the duration of the expedition, without prejudice to his right to use them, if any. As heir of the attainted William Scrope, earl of Wiltshire, his great-great-uncle, he claimed these arms, which were used by Thomas, Lord Stanley, as the current Lord of Man. 
In 1475-6 Scrope went on a mission to Milan and Rome with Earl Rivers. He continued to be appointed to various commissions, for example as commissioner of oyer and terminer in Middlesex in 1477 and of array in the North Riding of Yorkshire in 1480. He was one of the commanders in the army of Richard, duke of Gloucester, invading Scotland in July 1482, leading the van with the earl of Northumberland, and was one of the commissioners who treated with the ambassadors of Alexander, duke of Albany, brother of James III of Scots, in London in February 1483. 
Scrope had been a councillor of Richard of Gloucester since at least 1475, and continued in that role after the duke's accession as Richard III. He attended the coronation on 6 July 1483, receiving velvet as a special gift from the king for the queen's coronation and on 24 July was made chamberlain of the duchy of Lancaster for life. In November 1483 he was appointed to a commission of array to resist the rebels and a commission to arrest them. Although he had no previous connection with the area, in December 1484 he was granted a number of manors in the western counties and made constable of Exeter Castle for life, thus becoming one of the northern supporters planted by Richard III in parts of the south to help control them. He was also responsible for the defence of the western coast. He was regularly appointed to the commissions of the peace in Devon and Cornwall in Richard's reign as well as to those of Cambridgeshire and the North Riding of Yorkshire as he had been in previous years, although not after the death of Richard III. He was at sea in March 1484 for the defence of the realm, but was almost certainly with Richard at the battle of Bosworth, although he was not attainted afterwards and he was allowed to attend the Garter banquet in York in April 1486. Scrope supported Lambert Simnel in June 1487, attacking York with his cousin Thomas, Lord Scrope of Masham. After this he was imprisoned in Windsor Castle, and received a pardon in February 1488, although even by July 1489 he was still not allowed to go further north than the River Trent. By 1492 however Scrope was apparently completely rehabilitated and in May 1492 he was retained to go abroad with Henry VII in his invasion of France, and was appointed to the commission of the peace in Norfolk from 1494 until he died. In August 1497 he assisted the earl of Surrey in raising the siege by the Scots of Norham Castle. 
Scrope married three times. His first wife, whom he married after 22 November 1447, was Joan, daughter of William, fourth Lord Fitzhugh (died 1452), and Margery, daughter of William, Lord Willoughby. With her he had one child, his heir, Henry. She died before 1470 and he married second, before 10 December 1471, Elizabeth, daughter of Oliver St John and Margaret Beauchamp, daughter and heir of Sir John Beauchamp of Bletsoe, and widow of William, fifth Baron Zouche. She was living in 1489 and died before 3 July 1494. They had one child, Mary, who married Sir William Conyers (1467/8-1524) of Hornby ['see under 'Conyers family]. Scrope married third, after 9 February 1491, Anne, daughter and heir of Sir Robert Harling of East Harling, Norfolk, and Jane, daughter and heir of Edmund Gunville, and widow of Sir William Chamberlaine and Sir Robert Wingfield. They had no children and Scrope died, possibly at East Harling, on 17 August 1498. In his will, dated 3 July 1494 and 8 August 1498 (proved on 5 November 1498 at York), he asked to be buried in St Agatha's Abbey, Easby (as had several of his ancestors), or in the Dominican priory at Thetford, depending on where he died. He left a printed 'Bible' and a volume of chronicles (also printed) to St Agatha's. As his executor he named his wife, who survived him for only a short time, dying on 18 September 1498. 


@@@@@


doc= 24962


Scrope, John (c.1662-1752), judge and politician, was the only son of Thomas Scrope (died 1704), a merchant of Small Street, Bristol, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Hooke, also a Bristol merchant. He was the grandson of Adrian Scrope, MP and regicide. Scrope's upbringing in Bristol took place against the background of radical whig activity in the city where his father was among the leaders of the 'exclusion' campaign to debar the duke of York from succession to the throne; and Scrope himself participated in 1685 with other Bristolians in the Monmouth rebellion. In 1686, the year of his entry to the Middle Temple, he published at Utrecht a personal attack on the pro-Catholic policies of James II in the form of a tract against papal authority entitled 'Exercitatio politica de cive in republica pontificia'. He appears to have continued his underground activities for a while longer, acting as an agent between the whigs and the prince of Orange, and on one journey to the Netherlands was supposed to have disguised himself as a woman. In 1693 Scrope received his call to the bar and in the course of the next decade established himself as a successful member of his profession. His wealth was augmented in 1704 on inheriting his father's estates at Wormsley, Buckinghamhire. 
In May 1708 Scrope was appointed by the Godolphin ministry, probably on Lord Chancellor Cowper's recommendation, as one of the five barons of the newly reconstituted court of exchequer in Scotland. His duties as an exchequer baron at Edinburgh were primarily concerned with the judicial and administrative supervision of the Scottish revenue system and, largely because of his readiness to travel regularly, he soon became the chief, and most influential, instrument of liaison with the Treasury in London. The salary of $500 a year was soon doubled to compensate for his having given up a lucrative barrister's practice, and was further increased in February 1710 to $1500 to keep pace with the expense of journeying between London and Edinburgh. His administrative flair and a sharp nose for financial complexity made him one of the central figures in Scottish administration in the years that followed the union. It was fortunate that he had long been on terms of friendship with Robert Harley, and after coming to power in 1710 Harley treated Scrope as one of his chief Scottish advisers. Scrope acted briefly as a commissioner of the great seal during September and October 1710, and in December 1716 served as a judge at the trial of Jacobite rebels at Carlisle. He retained office at the Hanoverian accession in 1714, and in 1722 was elected to parliament for Ripon. When William Lowndes, the distinguished and long-serving secretary to the Treasury, died on 20 January 1724 Scrope was immediately appointed to succeed, and surrendered his Scottish post on 25 March. At some point, though it is not clear when, he was joint author, with his fellow baron Sir John Clerk of Penecuik, of 'A Historical View of the Forms and Powers of the Court of Exchequer in Scotland'; however, this was not published until 1820. 
Now past the age of sixty, Scrope took charge of the Treasury at Whitehall under the direction of its first lord, Robert Walpole, and was responsible for all detailed arrangements and transactions relating to the government's finances. With Walpole leading the government in the Commons, the demands on Scrope in presenting and defending the government's 'ways and means' measures in parliament were not great, though he was noted for his mastery of factual detail. After his election for Bristol in 1727, in which he obtained a huge majority, he was prompted to give attention to matters of wider fiscal concern bearing on the city's economic interests. These included the Africa Company's attempt to monopolize the slave trade, which he helped to block, and the Bristol-led complaints about the illegal export of Irish wool, on which he chaired a major select committee in 1731. However, his espousal of Walpole's unpopular excise scheme in 1733, contrary to the corporation's instructions, cost him his Bristol seat in the election the following year, and in 1735 he was relieved of the city recordership, which he had held since 1728. He was returned instead for Lyme Regis, Dorset, which he continued to represent until his death. 
Following Walpole's fall from power early in 1742 Scrope was summoned in June as a key witness to the committee of secrecy investigating the administration, but resolutely refused to divulge any information on Walpole's use of 'secret service money' on the grounds that it was accounted for to the king only. Horace Walpole described him on this occasion as 'a most testy little old gentleman', reporting that Scrope had told the committee that: 'he was forescore years old and did not care if he spent the few months he has to live in the Tower or not; that the last thing he would do should be to betray the King and next to him the earl of Orford. (Walpole)' A few weeks later William Pulteney, the former 'patriot' whig leader now in office, was forced to admit the impracticality of dismissing Scrope from the Treasury as some had urged: 'Mr Scrope is the only man I know that thoroughly understands the business of the Treasury and is versed in drawing money bills. On this foundation he stands secure and is immovable as a rock; besides I really take him for an exceeding honest man. ('Correspondence of John, Fourth Duke of Bedford')' Thus Scrope remained in office until his death on 9 April 1752. To his nephew and heir Francis Fane, an MP and a lord commissioner of trade, he left a 'vast fortune' comprising his 'mansion' in Small Street, Bristol, and property in Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire. He was buried in Lewknor parish church, Oxfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 24963


Scrope, Richard, first Baron Scrope of Bolton (c.1327-1403), soldier and administrator, was the third son of Sir Henry Scrope (b. in or before 1268, d. 1336), a lawyer who acquired a considerable estate in north Yorkshire, and his wife, Margaret, who was probably the daughter of either Lord Ros or Lord Fitzwalter. Active as a soldier at an early age, in 1346 he fought successively at Crecy (26 August) and Nevilles Cross (17 October), being knighted after the latter battle; he then took part in Edward III's siege of Calais, concluded on 3 August 1347. On 29 August 1350 he fought in the sea battle off Winchelsea, and late in 1355 he campaigned in France, before returning to England with the king for the relief of Berwick Castle in January 1356. Up to this point he had served under a number of captains, under Henry, Lord Percy, at Nevilles Cross, under either the earl of Warwick or the earl of Northampton at Winchelsea. But he now became increasingly closely connected with the young John of Gaunt, a connection certainly strengthened by the latter's being earl of Richmond. It was in Gaunt's retinue that with five other members of the Scrope family Richard took part in Edward III's French campaign of 1359-60, and he served abroad under Gaunt, in France, Spain, and Scotland, on a further five occasions, in 1367, 1369, 1373-4, 1384, and 1385. On 8 November 1367 he was formally retained by Gaunt, with an annuity of $40 per annum. He also enjoyed the favour of the king, and at his death was able to bequeath to his son Stephen a sword which had belonged to Edward III. 
During the 1360s Scrope was active in domestic affairs, locally and nationally, being appointed to nine commissions of oyer and terminer and of the peace, almost exclusively in the North Riding of Yorkshire, which he also represented in parliament in 1365. Military service had probably helped to make him wealthy -- in the 1360s he was active in buying lands, especially in Wensleydale and Swaledale -- and it is not surprising that on 8 January 1371 he should have received a personal summons to parliament, thereby becoming Baron Scrope of Bolton. Further promotion followed, doubtless owing much to Gaunt's influence, when on 27 March 1371 Scrope was appointed treasurer of England. The demands of the French war had created acute financial difficulties. Scrope's treasurership saw serious attempts at retrenchment, as well as the appointment of a special treasurer at war. For a while order was restored, but it is unlikely that Scrope had any specialized financial skills, and the private dealings with London financiers of William, Lord Latimer, and Richard Lyons, apparently undertaken without the treasurer's knowledge to raise loans for the king, at considerable expense to the latter, led to renewed fiscal confusion, and in 1376 did much to discredit the whole government. But by then Scrope was no longer in office, having resigned on 26 September 1375. 
Scrope showed both integrity and independence during the Good Parliament of 1376. Questioned about the loans made to the king, he refused at first to answer unless he was released from his councillor's vow of secrecy, but once he had been licensed to speak, he gave evidence damning to Latimer and Lyons. His conduct earned him widespread respect, yet did nothing to lose him the favour of John of Gaunt, and following the death of Edward III he was appointed steward of the household to the young Richard II. On 29 October 1378 he resigned this office to become chancellor of England. In spite of considerable difficulties, Scrope showed great skill in office, especially as a spokesman for the government in parliament, delivering a series of speeches to the Commons which have been described as 'models of their kind. They combined firmness with flexibility, and frankness with the occasional but necessary half-truth' (Saul, 50). But continuous failures in the war with France eventually led to the government's collapse, and Scrope resigned on 30 January 1380. At the end of the year he was appointed a warden of the west march, an office he held at first jointly, but later alone, until 14 March 1382, and in which he directed important works on the gatehouse of Carlisle Castle, supplying lead from his own Wensleydale mines. 
Scrope did not remain away from the centre of affairs for long. Following the disasters of the peasants' revolt, on 4 December 1381 he was reappointed chancellor, according to Walsingham, 'at the petition of all the magnates and commons' ('Historia Anglicana', 2.49). But he soon found that popular approval was no substitute for royal favour. His efforts to control Richard II's extravagance were resented, and when he refused to seal charters giving control of the Mortimer inheritance to royal favourites, the king dismissed him, on 11 July 1382. According to Walsingham, Scrope told Richard he would never hold office under him again. This did not prevent Scrope's serving as a warden of the west march from February to July 1384, and in fact he became involved in government on several further occasions, though hardly in the king's interest. In 1385 he was a member of a committee of nine appointed to investigate royal revenues and expenditure, and in November 1386 he was named to the continual committee set up by the Wonderful Parliament to oversee and direct the workings of government in the following year. It is true that in that parliament Scrope spoke in defence of the chancellor, Michael de la Pole, but this was probably on strictly personal grounds -- de la Pole was his brother-in-law. In November 1387 Scrope acted as a spokesman for the lords appellant in their dealings with the king, and at the end of the Merciless Parliament he was one of a committee appointed to watch over the king's actions. Following the Cambridge parliament of September 1388 he became one of a small group of councillors who shared responsibility for government until the king's resumption of power in May 1389. 
Scrope may not have been as totally disaffected from the king as his actions in the late 1380s might suggest; certainly his eldest son, William Scrope, would become one of Richard II's principal supporters, executed as such in 1399. But though he was summoned to a council in London in April 1390 to discuss a proposed embassy to France, Scrope was usually only tangentially involved in government after 1389, for instance being employed in negotiations with the Scots in 1393 and 1394, and acting regularly as a trier of petitions in parliament until 1397. He was, however, active in promoting the welfare of his own soul, being licensed in 1393 to found a chantry of six chaplains in Bolton Castle, and to endow Easby Abbey with the means to maintain first six and ultimately ten additional canons, along with two secular chaplains and twenty-two poor men. Piety was accompanied, for Scrope, by an evident concern for his standing in the eyes of society, lastingly demonstrated by his great castle at Bolton in Wensleydale. Designed by the Durham architect John Lewyn, under an indenture of 14 September 1378, it comprised eight major residential suites, and is said to have cost about $12,000 over twenty years -- evidence, it may be, for the profits of government office as well as of war, since Scrope's landed income, even after he had added substantially to his estates, was only about $600 per annum. 
Equally compelling evidence for Scrope's concern for his rights and status is provided by the famous lawsuit which he initiated in 1385 against the Cheshire knight Sir Robert Grosvenor, over the right to the arms azure a bend or. Referred to the court of chivalry, the action lasted for five years, and heard depositions from 397 witnesses, 246 of whom appeared for Scrope. Drawn predominantly, though not exclusively, from the north of England, the latter included the dukes of Lancaster and York, the earls of Arundel, Derby, Devon, and Northumberland, lords Basset, Clifford, Dacre, and Neville, the heads of many northern monasteries, and large numbers of knights and esquires, including the poet Geoffrey Chaucer. Their testimony provided abundant evidence for the respect which Scrope enjoyed in landowning society, as well as vindicating his claim to the disputed coat of arms. The fact that he was appointed to be one of their executors by the second earl of Arundel, William Ufford, earl of Suffolk, and Archbishop Thoresby of York, and was an attorney for the duke of Gloucester in 1395, similarly shows that he was widely trusted among the aristocracy. In 1399, however, the overthrow of Richard II, and particularly the execution of Scrope's eldest son, seemed to threaten the future of his whole family. Lord Scrope gave his support in parliament to Richard's deposition, and then made an emotional appeal, 'with great humility and bitter weeping', that the judgment on his son should not be used to justify his own and his other children's disinheritance. Henry IV was merciful, reassuring Scrope that he 'regarded him as a loyal knight, and had always regarded him as such' ('RotP', 3.453). 
Scrope served as a councillor in 1401, and attended parliament in 1402, but his commitment to the new regime was never fully tested, since he died on 30 May 1403, and was buried in Easby Abbey. He seems to have spent his later years mostly at his manor of Pishiobury, Hertfordshire, which he bought in 1394, and where he drew up his will on 2 August 1400. As well as showing that Scrope died a very wealthy man, the will also sheds a good deal of light on his personality and preoccupations. The latter centred upon his family. In 1344 or 1345 he had married Blanche, daughter of William de la Pole, who predeceased him, dying some time after 1378; with her he had four sons, William, Roger, Stephen, and Richard. Roger and Stephen he married to two of the three daughters and coheirs of Robert, third Lord Tybotot, having purchased their wardship and marriage. But he showed himself concerned to endow his descendants with a common memory as well as with worldly goods. Thus he bequeathed to Roger, his eldest surviving son, a rosary which had belonged to Scrope's own father, and the missal and breviary that he had himself used to say his morning and evening prayers, and left to him pieces of plate which had belonged to the earls of Arundel and Suffolk, along with instructions that these were to become heirlooms in memory of the earls. His family was the object of his affections as well as of his dynastic ambitions. He left a blessing along with an estate to Roger, as his 'dearest' eldest son, and addressed his namesake, godson, and nephew, Richard Scrope, archbishop of York, as 'my most dear father and son'. But his benevolence extended beyond his immediate family circle, to members of his household, each of whom seems to have been remembered, including every servant in the kitchen of Bolton Castle. 
Scrope showed his religious devotion in his bequests to a wide range of northern monasteries and friaries, as well as in a gift of $40 to the work then in progress on York Minster. The same motive doubtless lay behind the concern he expressed for the poor of Richmondshire, for instance his bequest of $20 to be distributed among his poor tenants there. The residue of his estate was to go to the hospice for the poor and its associated college which he had founded at Wensley. This last project came to nothing, but his lands and title descended in his posterity until 1630. 


@@@@@


doc= 24964


Scrope, Richard (c.1350-1405), archbishop of York, was the third son of Henry Scrope, first Baron Scrope of Masham (1312?-1392), soldier, and his wife, Joan. 
Henry Scrope's distinguished military career had been followed by diligent service to the crown in parliament and council, and family influence probably played a greater part than any spiritual qualities in launching Richard's successful career in the church. His first preferment, as rector of Ainderby Steeple, near Northallerton, in 1368, was at the presentation of his uncle Richard Scrope, Baron Scrope of Bolton. This was followed in 1371 by a Lancastrian connection in the form of a grant of the wardenship of the free chapel of the castle of Tickhill, which belonged to John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. Scrope was still not even an acolyte when he was appointed official to Thomas Arundel, bishop of Ely (died 1414), his future archiepiscopal colleague, in 1375. He was ordained deacon on 20 September 1376 by his brother-in-law, Archbishop Alexander Neville of York (died 1392), and priest on 14 March 1377 by Arundel. In the meantime he had studied arts at Oxford before embarking on the study of law, probably at Cambridge, which was where he presumably became licentiate in civil law by 1375 and a doctor of canon and civil law by 1383. He was chancellor of the university in 1378. From 1382 to 1386 he appears to have been based primarily at Rome, where he served as a papal chaplain and an auditor of the curia. In 1382 he was instituted as dean of Chichester, and in September 1385 he was elected bishop of that see, only for the combined wishes of pope and canons to be thwarted by Richard II's insistence on the advancement of his own confessor, Thomas Rushook, bishop of Llandaff. Compensation followed swiftly with Scrope's provision as bishop of Coventry and Lichfield on 18 August 1386, and consecration by the pope at Genoa on the following day. He had returned to England by 15 November and took up his diocesan duties from 22 May 1387. 
In common with many of his fellow prelates, Scrope combined a significant involvement in secular affairs with his spiritual obligations. As befitted a member of a northern baronial family, he acted as an envoy to Scotland in 1378 and 1392, and served as a conservator of the truce in 1394. In 1397 he was dispatched on a mission to Rome, probably because of his familiarity with the curia, to promote Richard II's scheme for the canonization of Edward II. It may have been in recognition of recent efforts on the king's behalf, as well as of his good standing with the pope, that he was translated to the archbishopric of York on 15 March 1398, while still at Rome. 
Until 1399 there is no evidence that Scrope participated directly in the factional strife that punctuated Richard II's reign. In that year, however, he was compelled to respond to the coup that led to Richard's deposition and the accession of Henry IV. In view of certain procedural similarities between the deposition of Richard and that of the emperor Frederick II by the pope in 1245, it was more probably as a distinguished canon lawyer than as a political partisan that Scrope, with his fellow lawyer John Trefnant, bishop of Hereford (died 1404), was chosen to head the commission appointed to receive the captive king's 'voluntary' abdication on 29 September; and it was he who announced it in a quasi-parliamentary assembly that met on the following day. His prominent role continued when he joined his fellow archbishop, the newly restored Thomas Arundel, in escorting Henry of Lancaster to the vacant throne, although the actual crowning was to be performed a fortnight later by his senior colleague. 
Attempts to assess the nature and development of Scrope's personal affiliations in the turbulent early years of Henry IV's reign tend to be tainted with hindsight. He remained in his diocese except in times of parliaments and great councils. The dominance of Henry Percy, earl of Northumberland (died 1408), and his family and affinity, in northern England, and the Percys' crucial role in helping to put Henry IV on the throne, meant that any archbishop of York was almost certain to become involved with them at the local and national level. Thus in 1400 Scrope headed a commission to collect a loan to help to pay for the expedition to Scotland that Henry had undertaken, it may be assumed, under pressure from his powerful northern allies. Scrope's younger brother John was married to Elizabeth, widow of Northumberland's second son, Thomas, and one of the archbishop's sisters, Isabel, had married Sir Robert Plumpton, who had strong connections with the Percys. However, against any suggestion that these and other relationships had already made Scrope an adherent of the Percys must be set the fact that, at least up to the end of 1402, any personal or professional association with that family was quite compatible with unequivocal loyalty and good service to the crown. 
Nevertheless, when the Percys revolted in the summer of 1403, choices had to be made. The chronicler John Hardyng, himself a Percy retainer, claimed that Scrope was among those who encouraged the Percys in their rebellion, but there is no hint in official sources that he came under suspicion, even though Archbishop Arundel, a firm supporter of Henry IV throughout his reign, found it necessary to declare his own innocence. Thus while rebellion in the Percy cause in the summer of 1405 represented a plausible course of action for almost any member of the clerical or lay establishment in the north, there seems to have been no suspicion that Scrope was about to take that momentous step. 
The problem of accounting for Scrope's decision to rebel is compounded by an absence of convincing motives. Sympathetic clerical writers alleged that Scrope's rebellion was inspired primarily by his growing disapproval of Henry IV's oppression of the church. Although the charges against the king appear to lack any real substance, they were perhaps foreseeable in any attempt to justify the taking up of arms by an archbishop. Scrope's only recorded gesture against a political threat to the church was his predictable support in October 1404 for Arundel's spirited resistance to proposals in parliament at Coventry for the confiscation of ecclesiastical property. Attempts to explain Scrope's rebellion have focused on the manifesto by which he incited the people of York to rise with him. The most plausible version of this document, as reproduced by the chronicler Thomas Walsingham, includes complaints of abuse of church and clergy; excessive taxation of the laity; misappropriation of much of this revenue by unspecified individuals; and unfair treatment of members of the nobility. The latter charge was probably tailored to the grievances of the young Thomas Mowbray, earl marshal, who held lands in Yorkshire, and whose involvement in the rebellion perhaps represented a filial reaction to the disastrous quarrel between his father, Thomas (I) Mowbray, first duke of Norfolk (died 1399), and Henry of Lancaster in 1398, which had resulted in his father's death in exile. The general tone of the manifesto had much in common with the calls for better government, in the shape of greater financial and even political accountability, made by the Commons in Henry's parliaments. This line of 'responsible' sedition contrasted markedly with the Percys' uncompromising attempts to overthrow a king who had ceased to serve their purposes. 
However, it is highly unlikely that Scrope's action at the same time as Northumberland's renewed rebellion was coincidental, and this assumption seems reinforced by the military shortcomings of Scrope's following at York. While it seems agreed that the archbishop marched out of York dressed for combat, the eight or nine thousand townsmen and country-folk who rallied behind his banner had little claim to be regarded as a fighting force. Nevertheless, their militancy virtually destroyed any possibility that they might convince the king of the justness of their cause by peaceful persuasion, yet Scrope and his supporters had no realistic hope of imposing their will by force. The likeliest supposition is that their rising was part of a broader movement in which Northumberland's more militant Yorkshire levies were to have the dominant role. The plan of campaign seems to have been that the earl should make his way down from Northumberland, concentrating recruitment in the Percy strongholds of Cleveland and Topcliffe to the north of York, and those of Tadcaster and Spofforth not far from the city. York was probably designated as the rallying-point for all the Percy forces, which would then march south, inspired by the archbishop's claims on their behalf to the moral high ground against the king. 
The relationship between Northumberland and Scrope remains a matter for speculation: was Scrope a straightforward ally of the earl, cynically using his position to mislead people as to the true purpose of the rising; an unworldly cleric deceived as to Northumberland's intentions; or a naive idealist hoping that he could divert the rebellion into more moderate constitutional channels? But one thing is clear. By lending his respected name to the insurrection, Scrope almost single-handedly transformed its image from that of a conflict between the king and an 'overmighty subject' to that of a 'crusade' for good government. 
All the same, defeat was guaranteed almost from the start by the failure of Northumberland's attempt to capture Ralph Neville, first earl of Westmorland (died 1425), the mainstay of royal authority in the north, as an essential prelude to the rising, and by his subsequent northward flight abandoning the gathering rebels to their fate. The three days that Scrope, Mowbray, and Sir Robert Plumpton's son, William, spent with their followers on Shipton Moor, a few miles outside York, represented a desperate period of waiting for reinforcements that never came. On 29 May they were instead confronted by Westmorland and the king's son John, who had already dispersed the leaderless Topcliffe rebels. Scrope's 'army' was almost certainly incapable of effective resistance, and he had little alternative but to put himself at Westmorland's mercy. While he may simply have surrendered unconditionally in the hope that he might salvage something from the collapse of the rising, several chroniclers claimed that Westmorland deceived him into disbanding his men in exchange for a promise of favourable consideration of his programme of reform. Even when Westmorland arrested Scrope and his chief lieutenants, the archbishop may have hoped that his ecclesiastical eminence would at least save his life. However, Henry IV soon showed that he was determined to make an example of the rebel archbishop. When the king arrived at Pontefract, where Westmorland had imprisoned Scrope, on 3 June, he refused the archbishop's request for an interview, and the king's half-brother Sir Thomas Beaufort (died 1427) was sent to seize Scrope's crozier -- his symbol of office -- a mission only accomplished after a protracted struggle. 
With his resolve possibly strengthened by the anti-clericalism of certain of his household knights, the king seems to have decided at an early stage that Scrope must die. It was probably reports of Henry's intentions that prompted Archbishop Arundel to ride day and night from London, in a desperate attempt to forestall the king -- an attempt in which insistence on the physical inviolability of an archbishop and counsels of political expediency were perhaps subtly interwoven. His arrival, however, seems to have impelled Henry to strike before reasoned opposition to his resolve had time to develop. On the morning of 8 June, while Henry was reassuring the exhausted Arundel at Scrope's official residence of Bishopthorpe that he would not act rashly, a hastily convened commission headed by Thomas Fitzalan, earl of Arundel (died 1415) (nephew of the archbishop), and Sir Thomas Beaufort, deputizing for the king's son John and for Westmorland as constable and marshal of England respectively, was sitting in judgment on Scrope and his fellow insurgents in another room of the same building. Since the chief justice, Sir William Gascoigne (died 1419), had refused to participate in irregular proceedings against Scrope, the minor lawyer Sir William Fulthorpe was assigned the task of condemning him to death for treason. Accepting his fate, according to the chroniclers, with edifying piety and dignity, the archbishop was led through the streets of York to Clementhorpe, just outside the city. Here he was beheaded, it was said, by five blows of the axe representing the five wounds of Christ. He was the first English prelate to suffer judicial execution. 
Scrope's body was taken to York Minster to be buried, with the king's consent. Henry's conciliatory gesture in allowing the archbishop to be buried amid his recent supporters soon led to claims that miracles had occurred at his tomb, and a cult of martyr-worship arose that prompted a series of official reactions culminating in September 1406 in the cordoning-off of the tomb with high barriers. Although this popular veneration, with its attendant myth that Henry's execution of Scrope had caused him to be stricken with leprosy, did not develop into a serious threat to the king, it survived to secure official toleration as a more devotional and less seditious cult as part of Henry V's attempts at political conciliation. In the 1450s the promotion of the claim to the throne of Richard, duke of York (died 1460), led to the representation of Scrope as an early martyr in the cause of Yorkist legitimacy, and an attempt to secure his canonization in 1462, in the wake of Edward IV's accession, was to mark the climax of a political cult, which thereafter seems to have been rendered superfluous by its supporters' success. 
A potentially much greater problem for Henry IV was the sentence of excommunication imposed by Pope Innocent VII ('r'. 1404-6) upon everyone involved in Scrope's execution. However, this solemn edict was reduced to a minor embarrassment when Archbishop Arundel put political stability before clerical outrage and neglected to publish it in England. In 1407 persistent diplomatic efforts combined, according to hostile sources, with generous bribery at the curia, secured Henry a pardon from Innocent's successor Gregory XII ('r'. 1406-15). Benefiting from the fact that Scrope was at least technically guilty of armed insurrection, Henry had suffered few repercussions from a hasty decision regarded by many contemporaries as sacrilegious and scandalous. 
After a long and conventionally successful career in the church, Scrope failed completely both as political reformer and military leader. However, while treating sceptically the chroniclers' simplistic image of the archbishop as a great churchman sacrificed to a noble cause that was essentially his own, historians have tended to give him the benefit of the doubt in suggesting that his motives in 1405 may have been more honourable than those of the self-seeking lords with whom he misguidedly decided to make common cause. 


@@@@@


doc= 24965


Scrope, Thomas (d. 1492), bishop of Dromore, was probably born at Bradley in the parish of Medbourne, Leicestershire, a member of the Scrope family, who were prominent landowners there. As his name does not occur in the records, James Tait suggested that he was perhaps an illegitimate offspring of one of the two sons of Richard Scrope, first Baron Scrope of Bolton (c.1327-1403). Thomas Scrope joined the Carmelites in Norwich, and after completing his studies there, began travelling the countryside preaching repentance, and announcing that 'the new Jerusalem, the bride of the Lamb, was about to come down from heaven' (Bale, 'Cat.', 1.630). Thomas Netter (died 1430), the Carmelite provincial, wrote a letter of complaint to the prior of Norwich, ordering that Scrope be restrained. He retired to a hermitage in the Carmelite house, and contemporary documents in the 1440s refer to 'Friar Thomas, the recluse' there. In the 1430s Scrope translated Philip Ribot's 'The institute of first monks', a classic Carmelite text, into English for his prior, Cyril Garland. On 5 May 1441 he was given a papal indult to choose his own confessor, and on 3 December 1441, at the prompting of his relations, he wrote a short treatise on the Carmelite order, which he dedicated and sent to Pope Eugenius IV ('r'. 1431-47). 
During his time as a hermit, Scrope wrote two further historical works on the Carmelites and probably a life of St Brocard, an early prior-general of the Carmelites, attributed to him and published by Daniel a Virgine Maria in 1680. 
Possibly as a result of further family influence Scrope travelled to Rome, and on 12 January 1450 he was appointed bishop of Dromore in Ireland and consecrated in Rome on 1 February. Bale preserves the text of a letter from the provincial, Nicholas Kenton, written during the summer of 1450 (dated erroneously by Bale to 1448) to the Irish bishops, recommending Scrope and mentioning that he was coming to Ireland. However, any visit there must have been very short as Scrope was given permission to officiate in the Norwich diocese on 12 September 1450, and he was performing ordinations there regularly from this date onwards. On 24 November 1454 he was admitted as rector of Sparham, Norfolk. On 29 July 1457 Richard Misyn, another Carmelite, was appointed bishop of Dromore although Scrope continued to use the title. 
On 3 June 1466 Scrope was admitted rector of Trowse, but he is absent from the diocesan records during the three years following. It is probably during this period that the tradition of his appointment as papal legate to Rhodes by Pope Paul II should be dated. Little is known about his mission except that John Leland records that he met a Franciscan friar there, a convert Jew from Jerusalem, with whom he had frequent talks. Sir James Ware, writing in the seventeenth century, claims that Scrope came into conflict soon after his arrival with the local clergy and people because he failed to learn their language. Scrope reappears in English records on 25 February 1469 when he performed ordinations in Maidstone and again on 1 April in Canterbury. He was back in the Norwich diocese on 17 March 1470 and continued to serve there from then on. In 1477 he consecrated the new Carmelite church in Ipswich. On 21 March 1478 Scrope performed his last ordinations in Norwich diocese, and on 27 May 1478 he was admitted rector of Lowestoft where he appears to have retired. Bale records that in his later years Scrope walked barefoot through the countryside, teaching the commandments to the people and giving away his possessions. He died on 15 January 1492, when he was said to be nearly 100, and was buried in the parish church of St Margaret, Lowestoft. Bale, a fellow Carmelite from Norwich, regarded him as a saintly man and wrote an epitaph for him in 1526. 
Scrope's translation of 'The institute of first monks' survives in Lambeth Palace Library, MS 192. In all he wrote four historical works on his order, three while a hermit and a later one, probably during the 1450s, addressed to Cyril, archdeacon of Dromore. Three of them, severely edited, are printed in the 'Speculum Carmelitanum' (1680). A list of Carmelite saints, noted by Bale, is part of one of these works, but copied by Scrope from an earlier source. His other works, including some sermons on the ten commandments, are lost although a manuscript of liturgical offices, prayers, and other spiritual works which once belonged to him survive as BL, Harley MS 211. 
Scrope's historical compositions are somewhat repetitive, consisting of the same quotations from other authors without any particular literary style or inventiveness. However, they were well known in the order and helped to perpetuate the idea that the Carmelites could trace their origins back to Elijah the Prophet. Scrope's reputation for holiness, though, was more well-founded, and he deserves an honoured place among the mystics of fifteenth-century England. 


@@@@@


doc= 24966


Scrope, William, earl of Wiltshire (1351?-1399), soldier, administrator, and courtier, was the eldest son of Richard Scrope, first Baron Scrope of Bolton (c.1327-1403), and Blanche de la Pole, sister of Michael, earl of Suffolk. He followed in the footsteps of his father in entering the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, joining the latter in expeditions to France in 1369 and 1373, and subsequently serving as seneschal under Gaunt in Gascony in 1390-93. Even as late as 1398 Gaunt appointed William Scrope and Thomas Percy as his executors. Scrope's military experience is also said to have included campaigns in Italy and Prussia. There is no evidence that he held any part of the Scrope of Bolton estates during his lifetime. Instead, to an increasing extent, he made his career in the service of the crown, and the list of grants and annuities made to him from 1384 until his death indicate both his military and administrative skills and the reliance placed on him by Richard II. In 1384 Scrope received $800 as steward of Aquitaine; in March 1385 he received $500 for the stewardship of Calais; in April 1386 he was keeper of Cherbourg; in November 1389 he was keeper of Brest. After 1389 Scrope was more involved in events at home. In February 1389 he was granted the custody of Bamburgh Castle, later given to his brother Stephen Scrope. In April 1392 he bought the Isle of Man from the earl of Salisbury, and in July 1393 he was given Marlborough Castle for life in lieu of an annuity of 200 marks. 
In February 1393 Scrope had begun a more intimate association with Richard II's administration, when he was appointed under-chamberlain of the king's household, and from February 1394 onwards he was given a number of major appointments connected with the Welsh borders and also with the pacification of Ireland, which was one of Richard's objectives in the latter part of his reign. He accompanied Richard II on his Irish expedition of 1394, and became the key official in the crown lands in the west. In February 1394 he was given the keepership of Beaumaris Castle and in March 1394, as under-chamberlain, he was required to examine the castles in north Wales and Chester. In the same year he became a knight of the Garter. In February 1395 he was appointed keeper of the lordship of Uriell, keeper of Drogheda, and keeper of Conwy Castle for $40 per annum. In April 1396 he was appointed justice of Ireland, constable of Queensburgh Castle, joint keeper of Caernarfon Castle, and keeper of Pembroke Castle. In 1397 he was appointed keeper of the castle and town of Barnard Castle which was subsequently granted to him in tail male. He was also appointed keeper of Dublin Castle and of the castle at Painscastle in Wales. In 1398 he was keeper of Richmond Castle in the North Riding of Yorkshire and of the new forest of Richmond. He was appointed surveyor of forests in Cheshire, was given the constableship of Holt Castle, and appointed life justice of north Wales at $100 per annum. 
By this time Scrope was also keeper for life of the Isle of Anglesey, and held a dominant position in north Wales, built up in association with Richard II's plans to create a power base for himself in the region based on the palatinate of Chester, which in 1397 had been elevated into a principality. It was partly to the same end that Scrope benefited considerably from the forfeitures of the magnates hostile to Richard II. In 1397 he was granted the Welsh estates of the disgraced earl of Warwick, and in March 1398 Daliley Castle and Wellington Haye, Shropshire, forfeited by the earl of Arundel; he also became justice of the Arundel marcher lordships. He was given the wardship of the Mortimer lands in north Wales in August 1398. In March 1399 he was given Pickering Castle and the following month was made constable of Knaresborough Castle, both appointments from estates forfeited by Henry Bolingbroke. 
William Scrope had become an invaluable servant to Richard II and he was among the members of a new nobility created by Richard who were closely identified with the king personally. On 29 September 1397 he was created earl of Wiltshire, the highest rank ever achieved by the Scrope family, and he was among those who appealed Gloucester, Warwick, and Arundel of treason in that year. He was subsequently given custody of Warwick on the Isle of Man and was accused of treating him cruelly. In the final years of Richard II's reign Scrope was deeply involved in the day-to-day administration of government. He had been appointed treasurer on 17 September 1398 and, together with a small group of other officers, oversaw most government business, including the retrospective fining of those who had sued for pardon for the events of 1387-8. The events of 1399, when Richard II left for Ireland and Bolingbroke invaded England during his absence, with the resulting collapse of support for the crown, are well known. William Scrope fled to Bristol, but Bolingbroke captured him there and had him beheaded, on 29 July. His head was displayed on London Bridge until November 1400. 
The contemporary view of William Scrope was almost universally hostile. The poem 'Richard the Redeless' of 'c'.1399, which puns on the names of the king's favourites, Scrope's among them, and describes them as 'kytes' battening on the resources of the crown, shows that he was regarded as one of those courtiers to whom the profits of government in the last years of Richard II's reign were almost entirely confined. According to Thomas Walsingham a more wicked or cruel man would not easily be found. Even allowing for Lancastrian bias, Scrope was clearly a man who aroused particular antagonism. In 1389 William Scrope and his brother Stephen were bound over for 10,000 marks to do no harm to Walter Skirlaw, bishop of Durham (died 1406), and on 24 January 1390 William offered a jewel worth $500 to the shrine of St Cuthbert for trespasses done by him and his people in Durham. After Scrope's death several of those who had suffered at his hands appealed against his decisions, including the bailiffs of the exchequer, who had had their allowances of $100 cut to $7 by him. 
The earldom of Wiltshire was a political creation which could not survive the deaths of the holder and his patron. The surviving members of the family did not have the means to sustain such an honour, and it was not until the nineteenth century that any attempt was made to restore it. There were no children from William Scrope's marriage with Isabel, daughter of Sir Maurice Russell of Kingston Russell in Dorset. William predeceased his father, and was survived by his brothers Roger, second Lord Scrope of Bolton (died 1403), and Stephen (died 1409). 


@@@@@


doc= 24967


Scrope, William (1772-1852), artist and writer, was second son of Richard Scrope DD (1729?-1787), and his wife, Anne, daughter of Edmund Lambert of Boyton, Wiltshire. He was a direct descendant of Richard, first Baron Scrope of Bolton, lord treasurer to Edward III, and succeeded to the property of the Scropes of Castle Combe, Wiltshire, on the death of his father in 1787. In 1795 the Scrope estates of Cockerington, Lincolnshire, also passed to him. On 4 January 1794 he married Emma, daughter of Charles Long of Grittleton, Wiltshire. 
Scrope was an excellent classical scholar, a keen sportsman, and one of the ablest amateur artists of his time. He painted views in Scotland, Italy, Sicily, and elsewhere, and exhibited occasionally from 1808 at the Royal Academy, and later at the British Institution, of which he was one of the most active directors. He was frequently assisted in his work by William Simson. None the less, Scrope perhaps achieved more general acclaim for his two well-known books, 'The Art of Deerstalking' (1838) and 'Days and Nights of Salmon-Fishing in the Tweed' (1843), each illustrated with plates after Edwin and Charles Landseer, David Wilkie, W. Simson, and others, and each reprinted thrice, up to 1894 and 1921 respectively. Scrope rented a place near Melrose, where he lived on terms of great intimacy with Sir Walter Scott. He was a member of the Accademia di San Luca at Rome, and a fellow of the Linnean Society. 
Scrope died at his home, 13 Belgrave Square, London, on 20 July 1852. He was the last male representative of his family. His only daughter and heir, Emma Phipps, married, in 1821, George Julius Poulett Thomson, who then assumed the name and arms of Scrope ['see 'Scrope, George Julius Poulett]. 


@@@@@


doc= 24968


Scrimgeour, Henry (1505?-1572), diplomat and book collector, was born in Dundee, most likely in 1505 but possibly in 1508 or 1509, since Andrew Melville gives Scrimgeour's age at death as sixty-three. His parents were James Scrimgeour, burgess, who had died by 23 May 1525, and his wife, Jonet, who was still alive in June 1552. Henry's sister Margaret married John Young, father to Sir Peter Young, later royal librarian to James VI, while another sister, Isobel, married Richard Melville of Baldovie, and was mother to the presbyterian reformer James Melville. Having first attended Dundee grammar school, Henry Scrimgeour then went to St Salvator's College, St Andrews, in 1532. He determined as a bachelor in 1533, and won first place in the examination for licence the following year. Some time later he proceeded to Paris where he studied under Guillaume Bude and Pierre Ramus. The name 'Henricus Scrymgeour' appears twice in the rector's register, on 23 March and 22 June 1538. He incepted under the Scot William Cranston, and shortly afterwards went to Bourges to study civil law for four years under Eguinaire Baron and Francois Douaren. While in Bourges, he formed an acquaintance with Jacques Amyot, professor of Greek, and succeeded the Hellenist in becoming preceptor to the sons of Guillaume Bochetel, the secretary of state, probably for three or four years. In February 1547 he returned to Scotland for a short stay and Bochetel recommended him in a letter to Mary of Guise as an 'homme de honneste vie, de vertu et de grand scavoir tant en lettres grecques que latines' ('a man of honourable life, integrity, and great learning in both Greek and Latin literature'; M. Wood, ed., 'Balcarres Papers', Scottish History Society, 7, 1925, 201). 
Back in France in 1548, Scrimgeour accompanied his pupil Bernardin Bochetel to Padua. Although a Catholic, he was plunged into the controversies of the Italian Reformation when he visited a young lawyer of Cittadella, Francesco Spiera, who was slowly dying of despair, having adopted the new opinions and then been forced to recant. Scrimgeour wrote an essay on piety, published at Geneva (under the name of Henricus Scotus) by Jean Gerard and with a preface by Calvin dated December 1549, entitled 'Exemplum memorabile desperationis in Francisco Spera, propter abiuratam fidei confessionem' (1550). The tract was republished the same year in Basel. None the less, it was some years before Scrimgeour would openly show his adherence to protestantism, and his second publication was a law book, an edition of the 'Novellae', printed by Estienne in Geneva in May 1558 and subsidized by Ulrich Fugger, entitled: 'Impp. Justiniani, Justini, Leonis novellae constitutiones'. The 'Novellae' were fundamental to the teaching of law on the continent at this time, and a new edition was badly needed. Scrimgeour used his contacts with the French ambassador to Venice to gain access to the important Bessarian codex there, and his edition was well received by contemporary lawyers. The period between 1558 and his last visit to Italy in 1564 represents the most energetic part of Scrimgeour's activity in another capacity, that of book collector; it is accepted that the greatest part of the Greek, Latin, and Hebrew manuscripts of the Fugger collection were gathered by Scrimgeour, who frequently travelled between Augsburg and Italy. It is today the core of the Vatican Palatine collection. Scrimgeour also acted as agent in buying books for Otto-Heinrich, the elector palatine. 
Scrimgeour kept his benefices in Scotland all his life, but he also enjoyed an income in France -- there exists an authorization given to him in 1556 by King Henri II to hold and receive benefices in his country of adoption. The Scot had remained close to Bernardin Bochetel, now abbot of St Laurent des Aubats (Pouilly-sur-Loire, near Cosne), and he now engaged on a diplomatic career, travelling to Padua, Venice, Florence, Rome, Milan, Mantua, and Bologna, and also to Bourges, where he tried unsuccessfully to set up a printing press. Bochetel had several times invited him to Vienna, and he finally went there in November 1560. Bochetel may have wanted his diplomatic services at this time to help him in difficult negotiations with the German Lutheran princes, or with the colloquy of Poissy of 1561 between French reformers and Catholics, or with the Council of Trent, which after a ten-year interval had resumed its sessions in January 1562. However, Scrimgeour's stay in Vienna was brief, for by the end of 1561 he was in Geneva. It may be that events in Scotland and the failure of the colloquy of Poissy forced an irrevocable decision upon him. Moreover, Ulrich Fugger, now a Lutheran, had a plan for a public library in Geneva in order to secure his large and important collection of rare books, and Scrimgeour was associated with this project. At the same time, on 30 December, he was honoured by the magistrates of Geneva who received him as a burgess, three years after John Knox, and thanks to Calvin he soon became involved in the city's public life. 
On 18 April 1562, with Calvin's blessing, Scrimgeour married Francoise de Saussure ('b'. 1542/3) in the Genevan church of St Pierre. His wife came from a family of religious refugees from Lorraine, which they had left in 1552, and her father Antoine de Saussure, lord of Dommartin, settled in Lausanne. However, Francoise soon died, on 1 February 1568, aged twenty-five, leaving a three-year old daughter, Marie. In 1563 the Genevan pastors appointed Scrimgeour reader in philosophy, and the same year he was admitted to the town's council of two hundred. Later he started giving lessons in civil law. He was neither an assiduous teacher nor a good one: 'il lit inutilement' wrote Theodore Beza (Borgeaud, 92 n. 4). Moreover he was often away from Geneva, for instance in Padua where 'D. Henricus Schrenzer scottus' is recorded in July 1564 as counsellor to the Scottish nation of jurists. When Calvin died in the spring of 1564 Scrimgeour was witness to his will. About this time he acquired the old castle called Villette, outside Geneva, but his house burnt down and by 1569 Bochetel had caused the French treasury to pay him 200 crowns in assistance. On 3 January 1570 Scrimgeour joined the council of sixty at Geneva, and on 11 May he remarried. His second wife was Catherine de Veillet, daughter of Aubert Veillet, 'maitre des comptes' (chief financial officer) at Chambery. At this time two regents -- the earls of Moray and Mar -- and also George Buchanan tried to attract Scrimgeour back to Scotland to assist in the education of the young James VI, but he regretfully declined, arguing his age and the instability of Scotland. Henry Scrimgeour died in Geneva on 23 September 1572. 


@@@@@


doc= 24969


Scrymgeour, Sir James, of Dudhope (c.1550-1612), administrator, was the eldest son of John Scrymgeour of Dudhope (died 1568) and his wife, a member of the family of Campbell of Auchinbreck. On his father's death in November 1568 Scrymgeour succeeded to the hereditary offices of constable of nearby Dundee and standard-bearer of Scotland. The latter office was ratified to him by the privy council in 1592, and by parliament in 1594 and 1600. 
During the Marian civil war Scrymgeour supported the king's party. From at least the early 1570s to the early 1590s he was linked to the Lyon family, which was powerful in Angus (Forfarshire), and he also supported the Ruthven raiders. Consequently on 23 January 1584 he was ordered into exile, and on 21 April following he was one of the rebel leaders charged to surrender Stirling Castle to the king. However, once King James took personal control of the government in 1585, Scrymgeour, like many others, turned to royal service. He had been charged with several crimes in the late 1570s and 1580s, but his conduct did not go beyond what was generally regarded as acceptable, and his reputation for violence has been exaggerated by some historians. Moreover, the very fact that the king employed him from the mid-1580s suggests a greater degree of self-restraint, since incurably violent nobles were increasingly excluded from power. As early as 1587 Scrymgeour received a grant for good service. In 1589 he held Fintry Castle against the Brig o' Dee rebels, acted as a commissioner to the general assembly of the kirk, and was sent to Denmark to help arrange James's marriage, witnessing the subsequent contract. For such services he won the king's trust, and about 1590 he was knighted. Scrymgeour's reliability and solid protestant credentials brought him many other appointments. He was at various times a collector of taxes, a commissioner against Jesuits, an overseer of parliamentary elections, a commissioner to hold parliament, and a juror at important state trials. He helped bear the pall at Prince Henry's baptism in 1594. In 1597 he was again a commissioner to the general assembly. A commissioner for the union in 1604, between 1605 and 1612 he frequently attended the privy council. 
Scrymgeour was also a figure of considerable local importance in Angus, thanks to his estates there and his office of constable of Dundee, and he devoted much effort to maintaining and enhancing his position. He was admitted a burgess of Dundee in 1576 and from 1588 was frequently provost of the burgh, in which position he actively supported both the interests of individual burgesses and those of the city as a whole. For example, he took a prominent part in defending Dundee's rights against the burgh of Perth in their battle for control of the trade of the Water of Tay. His local power also involved him in burgh politics, as when in 1604 he successfully disputed a burgh election on the ground that it was illegal. 
Scrymgeour married twice. His first marriage (for which there is a contract of 13 June 1565) was to Margaret Carnegie (died 1576), a daughter of Sir Robert Carnegie of Kinnaird. She was the mother of all Scrymgeour's children -- Elspeth, Margaret, John, and Catherine. She died on 9 January 1576, and he was contracted on 23 August 1576 to Magdalene Livingstone, daughter of Alexander, fifth Lord Livingstone, and married her in 1577; she outlived her husband. Sir James Scrymgeour died at Holyroodhouse Abbey, Edinburgh, on 13 July 1612. 
His only son and heir, 
Their eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 24970


James Scrymgeour, second Viscount Dudhope (d. 1644), covenanter and military leader, served in parliament and was appointed to the committee of estates in 1643, and when the covenanters decided to support the English parliamentarians he was appointed a colonel of the Forfarshire foot. On 2 July 1644 he fought at Marston Moor and received a wound from which he died three weeks later. Scrymgeour was admitted a burgess of Dundee on 9 July 1619. He inherited from his father a quarrel with the city of Dundee over his family's rights to hold the first fair of Dundee (first granted in 1384), and over other issues ranging from his contributions to the minister's salary to his attempts to establish a burgh of barony that would challenge the city's trading and industrial privileges. He married (contract, 4 August 1618) Isabella Ker, daughter of Robert, first earl of Roxburghe, with whom he had five children. He died on 23 July 1644, and his widow died after 29 September 1659. 


@@@@@


doc= 24971


John Scrymgeour, first Viscount Dudhope (d. 1643), was a resolute royalist from the very beginning of the covenanters' revolution. He attended every parliament until the covenanting rebellion, and was a lord of the articles in three out of four of them -- in 1612, 1621, and 1633. King James stayed at his house on 20 May 1617 during his visit to Scotland, and Scrymgeour was knighted by 1620. In 1630 and 1631 he was appointed a commissioner for surveying the laws of Scotland, and in 1634 he was appointed to the high commission. On 1 May 1627 he was charged with sheltering James Seton, a Jesuit priest. It is not clear if Scrymgeour was a lifelong Roman Catholic, but some of his actions are consistent with this possibility. In the 1621 parliament he voted in favour of the five articles of Perth and on 1 February 1639 he refused to sign the covenant. One of the 'resolutes' who supported the king in 1639, Scrymgeour was created Viscount Dudhope when Charles I visited Scotland in 1641. In September 1596 he married Margaret, daughter of Sir David Seton of Parbroath, formerly comptroller of Scotland, with whom he had nine children. He died on 7 March 1643. His eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 24972


John Scrymgeour, first earl of Dundee (d. 1668), became a royalist leader and supporter of Charles II. But after his father's death he remained a covenanter until the engagement between the Scots and Charles I in 1648, after which he served as a colonel of horse in the army that was defeated by Cromwell at Preston. He was treated as a 'malignant' in 1649, and in 1650 became a royalist, with an important role in an aborted royalist coup in October 1650. He fought for Charles II at Worcester in 1651 and escaped, then fought again in Middleton's rising in 1654 and was captured. In 1659 he was still a prisoner in Scotland. At the Restoration he was made a privy councillor, and was created earl of Dundee on 8 September 1660. His lands were recovered from the forfeited estates of the marquess of Argyll, but in 1666 both his lands and offices, including the constableship of Dundee, were seized for debt. In 1644 Lord Dudhope married Anna Ramsay, daughter of William, first earl of Dalhousie; they had no children. He died on 23 June 1668. In the absence of direct male heirs his lands reverted to the crown and his titles lapsed: they were successfully claimed in 1952 (Dudhope) and 1953 (Dundee). His widow survived him and remarried on 13 October 1670. 


@@@@@


doc= 24973


Scudamore, Sir Charles (1779-1849), physician, third son of William Scudamore, a surgeon, and his wife, Elizabeth Rolfe, was born at Wye, Kent, where his father was in practice. His grandfather and great-grandfather were surgeons at Canterbury, and were descendants of a family from Ballingham, Herefordshire. Frank Ives Scudmore (1823-1884) was his nephew. He was educated at Wye grammar school and began his medical education as apprentice to his father. He continued his studies at Guy's and St Thomas's hospitals in London, for three years, after which he settled in practice as a surgeon at Highgate, where he remained for ten years. He married, on 24 June 1811, Georgiana Johnson; they had no children. 
Scudamore next undertook further medical study at Edinburgh, from 1813, and graduated MD at Glasgow on 6 May 1814; his thesis was entitled 'De arthritide'. He was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, in London, on 30 September 1814, and began practice as a physician in Holles Street, London. He had some knowledge of chemistry, and in 1816 published 'An Analysis of the Mineral Water of Tunbridge Wells', the first of his several works on mineral waters. In the same year he published the book which established his reputation as an expert on gout, 'A Treatise on the Nature and Cure of Gout'; this was based on his observation of about a hundred cases of gout, and contains one of the first contributions to the study of the distribution of gouty changes throughout the body. Among other observations, he mentions that there were in 1814 only five hackney carriages and less than twenty private carriages in Glasgow, and he attributes the rarity of gout there to the constant walking even of the rich citizens. Scudamore was the first English author to mention the frequent presence of a circular chest, instead of an elliptical one, in persons subject to gout. He showed little capacity for observing disease at the bedside, but had some knowledge of morbid anatomy. 
In 1820 Scudamore was appointed physician to Prince Leopold of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg. During the following decade he wrote prolifically on a variety of medical subjects, and in 1827 published 'A Treatise on Rheumatism', which paints an interesting picture of the period when rheumatic fever was beginning to be separated in medical writings from chronic rheumatism. Scudamore treated rheumatic fever by bleeding, purgatives, colchicum, tartar emetic, opium, and quinine. He went to Ireland, in March 1829, as physician to the duke of Northumberland, then appointed lord lieutenant, who knighted him at Dublin on 30 September 1829. He was also admitted an honorary member of Trinity College, Dublin, during his stay in Ireland. 
Scudamore also spent part of every year at Buxton, and was physician to the Bath Charity there. He published 'An Analysis of the Tepid Springs of Buxton' in 1820. In April and May 1843 he visited Grafenberg, and on his return he published a small book on the water-cure treatment being used there. Scudamore died in his London house, 6 Wimpole Street, of heart disease, on 4 August 1849, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 24974


Scudamore, Frank Ives (1823-1884), writer and Post Office administrator, was born in February 1823 in Eltham, Kent, the son of John Scudamore, a solicitor from a prominent Herefordshire family, and his wife, Charlotte, daughter of Colonel Francis Downman. Educated at Christ's Hospital, he married, in 1851, Jane Ellen Moore Sherwin, daughter of a Greenwich surgeon. 
An individual with a great appetite for work, Scudamore pursued two careers simultaneously. The first was as a writer of light pieces for 'Punch', the 'Comic Times', and other magazines as well as more serious works ranging from orthography to the Eastern question. But it was his second career as an activist civil servant, urging the expansion of the government into areas and pursuits previously considered neither ideologically acceptable nor fiscally appropriate for state action, which was the great cause of his life and the foundation of his historical significance. Scudamore joined the Post Office in 1840, the year of Rowland Hill's penny post, and the beginning of a fundamental reorientation of the department's role in Victorian society. Although Scudamore never served as a departmental surveyor and, therefore, was considered by some of his colleagues to lack necessary field experience, he advanced rapidly. By 1864 he had risen to the position of assistant secretary, having been chosen over his rival, Anthony Trollope, who had more years of service in the department. In 1868 he was named second secretary of the Post Office, and appeared well positioned for future promotions. But it was less his official job titles than the projects which he sponsored which made Scudamore arguably the most important civil servant in the entire government by the late 1860s. 
The first of these projects was government-operated savings banks. Although Scudamore did not conceive the original idea for such a system, he became its most persuasive proponent. The banks, established in 1861 under Post Office direction, offered safe, efficient service and grew rapidly. By 1862 there were 180,000 accounts, and the system ultimately surpassed the Trustee Savings Banks in attracting deposits from the working and lower middle classes, its natural clientele. For Scudamore such results only confirmed his belief that government, in certain instances, could provide economic services more effectively than private initiative. This led him next to advocate the sale of life insurance and annuities through the Post Office. However, in this case the programme, instituted in 1864, never fulfilled Scudamore's projections. Fewer than 25,000 policies were sold between 1865 and 1884. In part this outcome resulted from the fact that certain schemes which Scudamore advocated for bringing the programme to the public's attention, such as government-organized lectures on the advantages of the department's system, were never implemented. In part, however, the programme failed because Scudamore underestimated the strength of competing alternatives offered by friendly societies and private firms. 
Characteristically Scudamore did not waver in his faith in what he termed the 'co-operative society', in which technocrats such as himself would plan and control bureaucracies to ensure social harmony through low prices and efficient management. In 1865 Lord Stanley of Alderley, the postmaster-general, commissioned him to study the condition of the privately owned telegraph companies, and to consider the possible results of nationalization. Over the course of the next five years Scudamore became the great advocate of state take-over of the industry. He made detailed estimates of likely purchase costs and financial results. He lobbied leading politicians, such as W. E. Gladstone, on the wisdom of nationalization, and he formed alliances with Edward Taylor of 'The Guardian' and Edwin Chadwick to rally public support. These efforts bore fruit in 1869 when parliament allocated $7 million for telegraph purchase costs and capital improvements. 
The next year Scudamore assumed direction of the Post Office telegraphs, and moved quickly to expand the system, now charging lower tariffs than under private management. In many ways Scudamore's optimistic predictions of the results of a nationalized system proved to be accurate. The average price of a telegram fell by 6died to 1's'. 1died During the first year of government management, the number of telegrams sent increased by 3 million to almost 10 million. The public was without question pleased with the quality of service provided by Scudamore's department. However, certain problems arose to cloud the picture. For one, the system never fulfilled Scudamore's hopes for savings under centralized management. Wage costs escalated, as more employees at higher salaries than under the pre-1870 system were hired. Accordingly, the system also failed to meet Scudamore's net revenue (profit) projections, and usually incurred large losses. Neither was it clear that government management avoided the pitfalls of employee strife and maladministration, as Scudamore had claimed that it would. In 1871 a telegraphists' strike broke out, which although swiftly crushed still soured labour relations. More seriously, in 1873 it was revealed that Scudamore, in haste to expand a system which he regarded as virtually his own, had spent over $800,000 without Treasury or parliamentary approval. In a crisis which disrupted Gladstone's government and which helped to establish the concept of ministerial responsibility, William Monsell, the postmaster-general, was forced to resign. Scudamore remained in office, but chafed under new restrictions on his independence until his resignation in 1875. 
Scudamore then began a new life when he accepted the offer of the Ottoman government to reorganize the Turkish post office; and in 1877 the order of the Mejidiye was conferred on him. Not surprisingly, he found the pace of improvement in Turkey so slow that he retired, and then occupied his time writing. He died in Therapia in the Ottoman empire on 8 February 1884 and was buried in the English cemetery at Scutari, in the country where he had taken up a self-imposed exile. 


@@@@@


doc= 24975


Scudamore, John, first Viscount Scudamore (1601-1671), diplomat and politician, was born on 24 or 28 February 1601 at Holme Lacy, Herefordshire, the eldest son of Sir James Scudamore (bap. 1568, d. 1619) ['see under 'Scudamore family] and his second wife, Mary (died 1632), widow of Sir Thomas Baskervile (died 1597) and daughter of Sir Thomas Throckmorton of Gloucestershire, and his wife, Elizabeth; Barnabas Scudamore (bap. 1609, d. 1651/2) was his younger brother. His parents' marriage soured, and his father finally repudiated his mother in 1608. John Scudamore married, on 12 March 1615, Elizabeth ('bap'. 1600, died 1651), daughter and heir of Sir Arthur Porter of Llanthony, Monmouthshire, and Hempsted, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Anne; the marriage brought substantial estates, power, and connections to the Holme Lacy Scudamores. After the marriage John continued his studies, matriculating at Magdalen College, Oxford, in November 1616 before being admitted at the Middle Temple in December 1617; in November 1618 he left England for France with a licence to travel for three years. 
Scudamore's travels were cut short by the early death of his father in April 1619; he returned to England where his grandfather, old Sir John Scudamore (1542-1623), oversaw his preferment. His grandfather bought John a baronetcy in June 1620, immediately promoting him to the place of precedence in Herefordshire, a county with no resident peer, and over the next three years old Sir John, with the assistance of the lord lieutenant, the earl of Northampton, and a neighbour, Sir Walter Pye, ensured the smooth transition of the family's power in the southern marches to the baronet. Young Sir John assumed the captaincy of the Herefordshire county troop of horse which his father had previously held, was elected senior knight of the shire for Herefordshire to the 1621 parliament, was appointed to the commission of the peace for Herefordshire in February 1622 and 'custos rotulorum' in May, and in the same year was made a deputy lieutenant in the county. By the time his grandfather died, in April 1623, the still youthful Sir John Scudamore was the most powerful magnate in Herefordshire, witnessed by his appointment to the council in the marches of Wales (under the jurisdiction of which both Herefordshire and Gloucestershire fell) in August 1623 and his election once again as the senior knight of the shire to the 1624 parliament. 
Scudamore was ambitious, however, for further preferment from the king. Using his contacts at court, especially Sir Roger Palmer, cupbearer to Charles I, he pressed his claims to have agitated for royal policies among MPs, to have been zealous in the collection of the subsidy, and to have perfected the trained bands in Herefordshire. The historical record is silent on the first claim, while modern research has shown the slender basis for the second (Atherton, chap. 4), but in the mid-1620s Scudamore was an active local governor and particularly zealous as a deputy lieutenant. He worked hard to fashion an image of martial prowess to follow in the footsteps of his grandfather, a gentleman pensioner to Queen Elizabeth, and father, one of the foremost tilters at court in the 1590s, casting himself as the agent through which the county horse would be improved and trained, and organizing his household servants and retainers into a horse troop. While the king was said to have a 'good opinion' of Scudamore (TNA: PRO, C115/M24/7758), his appeals fell on deaf ears and his position in Herefordshire began to be eclipsed by the rise of others, notably Pye and Sir Roger Harley, both of whom had attached themselves to the favourite the duke of Buckingham. Scudamore was returned to parliament in 1625 for the city of Hereford rather than the shire, and did not stand in 1626. In addition, he faced two further crises in the mid-1620s: financial problems as he tried to raise the money to pay the marriage portions of four of his sisters and the debts of his uncle and mother; and personal tragedy, with the early deaths of his first three children. 
Scudamore was rescued from his troubles by a religious conversion and the patronage of the favourite. By 1622 he had established a warm friendship with William Laud. When the friendship began is not known, though it may have been when Laud was dean of Gloucester between 1616 and 1621. Laud acted almost as a proxy father to Scudamore, fussing over his health and that of his wife, and warning him to beware of the January cold; he was also a friend at court, a divinity tutor, and a spiritual friend to the young baronet. The two men met at Holme Lacy, as Laud travelled between London and diocesan responsibilities (Laud preached at Holme Lacy on Sunday 20 November 1625, for example), and in London when Scudamore's affairs took him there. In January 1627 Scudamore asked Laud's advice for a way out of his problems: could he sell some of his impropriations to pay his debts? Laud's reply, that a layman had no right to possess what belonged to the clergy by divine law, set the baronet on a course of restoring impropriations and avoiding sacrilege that was to dominate the rest of his life. Scudamore found other estates to sell to ease his financial worries. 
Scudamore had identified himself as one of the handful of lay Laudians. He was about to join another select set -- the Buckinghamites -- to restore his political fortunes. He seems to have attached himself to the favourite in 1626, proving his mettle in the efficient administration of the forced loan in Herefordshire in 1627 and vigorously, if ineffectually, defending the duke in the 1628 parliament (in which Scudamore was again MP for Hereford). His reward came in July 1628, when (like so many others that year) he was raised to the Irish peerage, as Baron Dromore and Viscount Scudamore of Sligo, even though, like the others, he had neither estates in nor connections with Ireland. 
Buckingham's death was a severe personal blow -- Scudamore sent an early account of the duke's assassination to Laud -- and according to a later family tradition he attended the favourite's funeral, but he did not, as earlier accounts have suggested, retire from affairs. True, he did not attend the 1629 session of parliament; none the less, when later that year, after sustained complaints from the English nobility about Englishmen like Scudamore with Irish titles but no estates in Ireland, the king removed the Irish viscounts from all commissions in England, Scudamore was retained by Charles I on the Herefordshire commission of the peace, a signal mark of royal favour. In the early 1630s he was added to further commissions in Herefordshire: those for knighthood fines and for raising contributions for the repair of St Paul's Cathedral. On these he was an active commissioner. 
Scudamore also spent the early 1630s restoring the church at Dore in Herefordshire. The estates of the former Cistercian abbey had come to the Scudamores after the dissolution but by the early seventeenth century the abbey church, which formed the parish church of Dore, was badly in need of repair. Between 1632 and 1635 Scudamore restored the building, forming the parish church from the crossing and choir of the abbey; he added a new roof, south porch, tower, belfry, a new bell, and a churchyard wall. The church was also fitted out in full Laudian style with an altar, new woodwork (rails, screen, pulpit, reading desk, and pews), and stained glass. The total cost was more than $425. In addition, he endowed it with the impropriate rectory and all the tithes from the hitherto exempt site and demesne of the abbey, and gave the manor house to the rector to live in (when this later proved liable to flooding he had it pulled down and rebuilt). The restored church was a model of the viscount's high-church or Laudian beliefs, stressing the beauty of holiness, the central place of the eucharist, and the role of ceremonious worship, points all reinforced by the day-long service of consecration on 22 March 1635. Nor was Dore the only church to benefit from Scudamore's piety and fear of committing sacrilege. He built stone parsonages for the ministers of Holme Lacy and Hempsted; he repaired Holme Lacy church and twice gave it a new set of plate; he endowed Hempsted and two other churches with impropriate tithes; and he contributed to the repairs of three cathedrals -- Hereford (of which he was high steward), St Paul's, and Bristol. In his lifetime Scudamore was held up as 'a Worthy Copy for others to write after' and praised for his restoration of church lands and protection of the clergy (W. Carpenter, 'Jura cleri, or, An Apology for the Rights of the Long-Despised Clergy', 1661, 11). 
Early in 1635 Scudamore was appointed as Charles's ambassador to France, though his departure was delayed until August. Lacking diplomatic experience, he was chosen at Laud's behest to uphold the rights of the Church of England abroad, for in 1635 Charles was uninterested in pursuing a French alliance, preferring to seek after Spain and the Habsburgs instead. Shortly after his arrival Scudamore's embassy chapel, furnished with all Laudian trappings and ritual, caused considerable controversy on both sides of the channel. It was later alleged that it was 'adorned according to the newe devise, so that manie Papists there said they were at the English masse' (R. N. Worth, ed., 'The Buller Papers', 1895, 128), but Scudamore received the full backing of both Charles and Laud. 
Scudamore did not, however, have the support of Henrietta Maria, and in April 1636 his mission was seconded by the appointment of the staunchly protestant earl of Leicester as extraordinary ambassador. Immediately the two fell to quarrelling: they could agree on nothing, neither religion (the earl inclining to the Huguenots whom, it was believed, felt snubbed by Scudamore's Laudianism), nor English policy in Europe (the earl wanting an Anglo-French alliance, the viscount supporting the king's pro-Spanish peace). Leicester, a more adroit politician with greater support at the English court, soon triumphed and the remainder of Scudamore's embassy saw his exclusion from negotiations and gradual eclipse in all his other duties by Leicester, who lost no opportunity to ridicule him to the English court as an incompetent, pro-Spanish dullard with no respect in France. 
Nevertheless, others had a higher opinion of Scudamore's intellectual and political abilities. In his native Herefordshire his reputation and power remained undiminished. His reputation for learning in divinity and philosophy earned him the friendship of the philosophers Thomas Hobbes, Sir Kenelm Digby, and others in the circle of Marin Mersenne in Paris, and in particular with Hugo Grotius (the Swedish ambassador to France), with whom he discussed plans for a union of the English and Scandinavian churches. 
Frustrated by the negotiations with the French, humiliated by the triumph of Leicester, and dispirited by the absence of his wife (who had returned to England in September 1638), in November 1638 Scudamore asked for his recall and returned to the English court in March 1639. Though from 1640 he took a house in Petty France, Westminster, to be near the court, no further honours were granted him, despite a tradition that returning ambassadors were generally preferred. The opposition of Henrietta Maria and the king's preoccupation with the rebellion in Scotland counted against him. He apparently spent most of the next three-and-a-half years in Westminster, and was relatively aloof from affairs in Herefordshire, intervening directly only infrequently, such as to sign a pro-episcopacy petition in January 1642, or to secure the election of his son James (1624-1668) as MP for Hereford at a by-election in the spring of that year. In his absence the royalist party in the county formed around others, with Fitzwilliam Coningsby ('c'.1595-1666) securing its leadership. While Scudamore's younger brother Barnabas had joined the king's army by August 1642, the viscount lay low during both the summer (even though he was appointed a commissioner of array in Herefordshire) and the occupation of Hereford by parliamentarian forces (September-December 1642). The resumption of royalist control in Hereford, however, saw a major struggle between Scudamore and Coningsby for leadership of the royalist party. By the end of March 1643 Scudamore, with his better connections in the king's court at Oxford and traditional power base in Hereford (of which he had been high steward since 1630), had won, but only by starving Coningsby's regiment of men, money, and supplies until it was, Coningsby claimed, 'rather like a Constables watch then a Garrison' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 303, fol. 115'v'). The confusion sown in Hereford by the struggle between Scudamore and Coningsby, and the lack of leadership provided by the former, was matched by the incompetence of Lord Herbert of Cherbury, the king's commander in south Wales and the southern marches. Thus it was that when Sir William Waller appeared before Hereford with a small force on 25 April 1643 Scudamore and the royalist garrison promptly surrendered with barely a shot fired in anger. Scudamore was sent to London as a delinquent and placed under house arrest; he was not released until 20 March 1647. He estimated his losses at $22,190, including his composition fine, the plunder of his houses at Holme Lacy and Petty France, and the destruction of two houses at Llanthony at the time of the siege of Gloucester. 
For the remainder of the 1640s and 1650s Scudamore lived peaceably at Holme Lacy and Petty France, devoting himself to agriculture, divinity, and charity. A noted agricultural improver throughout his life, he discovered, grafted, and developed the redstreak apple which became celebrated as the best cider crab in the seventeenth century. It was famed as the 'Scudamore crab' and its cider, for which Holme Lacy became famous, as the 'vin de Scudamore' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Don. f. 5, fols. 36-7; 'Portland MSS', 2.292). Scudamore is also credited with introducing from the Low Countries the ancestors of the renowned white-faced Hereford cattle. 
In 1648 Samuel Hartlib thought Scudamore 'a great schollar' who was 'studying hard continually', while in 1663 the Herefordshire clergyman, philosopher, and horticulturist John Beale called him 'a person learned and greate fautor of sound learning' (Sheffield University, Hartlib papers, 31/22/19B; H. Oldenburg, 'Correspondence', ed. A. R. Hall and M. B. Hall, 13 vols., 1965-86, 2.11). In 1656 Peter Gunning turned down his offer of a $40 annuity to live in his household and tutor him in philosophy. Undaunted, Scudamore secured the guidance of Henry Hammond for his reading. On his wife's death in December 1651 he insisted on tithing his extra-parochial estates at Llanthony. From then until 1662, when he secured a private act uniting Llanthony to the parish of Hempsted, he applied both the accruing tithes and their arrears to the relief of distressed orthodox divines. By 1662 he had dispensed more than $1650 to about eighty clerics, some of them obscure country ministers, others nationally renowned figures, including Matthew Wren, with whom he was close friends, Richard Sterne, Robert Herrick, and John Bramhall. 
At the Restoration Scudamore returned to his former local offices and power, and sought the preferment of his son James. A wayward character and inveterate gambler who had spent the later 1650s hiding first in France and then in the eastern Mediterranean to escape his creditors, James was elected MP for Herefordshire in 1661, but his father's hopes were dashed by James's death on 18 June 1668. The viscount died on 19 May 1671, probably at Petty France, and was buried on 8 June at Holme Lacy. He was succeeded by his grandson, John Scudamore, the second viscount (1649-1697). 


@@@@@


doc= 24976


Scudamore, William Edward (1813-1881), Church of England clergyman and devotional writer, only son of Dr Edward Scudamore and nephew of the physician Sir Charles Scudamore MD (1779-1849), was born at Wye, Kent, on 24 July 1813. Having been educated at a school in Brussels, at Edinburgh high school, and then at Lichfield Cathedral school, he entered St John's College, Cambridge, as a sizar on 6 July 1831, and graduated BA as ninth wrangler in 1835. He was on 14 March 1837 admitted a fellow of St John's, whence he proceeded MA in 1838. After a short time as assistant master at Oakham School, he went to Minto, Roxburghshire, as tutor in the family of Gilbert Elliot, second earl of Minto. Scudamore was ordained priest in 1839, and in March of that year was presented to the living of Ditchingham in Norfolk, then restricted to fellows of St John's. On 20 October 1840 he married Albina (1815/16-7 June 1898), daughter of John King. 
Scudamore's views were largely influenced by the Oxford Movement as expounded at Cambridge by John Fuller Russell. As the first resident rector at Ditchingham for almost a century, he restored the parish church, built a school, and raised subscriptions for a chapel of ease in an outlying portion of the parish. In 1854 he assisted Lavinia Crosse in the foundation at nearby Shipmeadow of a sisterhood and small penitentiary. In 1859 the community, named the Society of All Hallows, was moved to Ditchingham where it flourished under Scudamore's wardenship and took on responsibility for an orphanage and hospital. Scudamore devoted his leisure to patristic and liturgiological studies, which bore fruit in 'Notitia eucharistica' (1872). He was influenced by the works of Richard Hooker and high-churchmen of the seventeenth century, but rejected the ritualist extremism of the English Church Union, with which he engaged in controversy (1872-3). 
Scudamore was most widely known for his devotional works, especially 'Steps to the Altar' (1846), which had gone into sixty-seven editions by 1887, though his personal profit from its worldwide success amounted to only $40. Scarcely less popular was his 'Words to Take with Us' (1859). In addition to other works on church history and controversy he contributed some lengthy articles to Smith's and Cheetham's 'Dictionary of Christian Antiquities' (1875-80). Scudamore died at Ditchingham rectory on 31 January 1881, and was buried in the parish cemetery. He and his wife, who outlived him by seventeen years, were survived by two sons and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 24977


Scudder, Henry (d. 1652), Church of England clergyman and author, was probably born in Horton Kirby, Kent, in the mid-1580s, one of at least three sons of Henry Scudder and his wife, Elizabeth. Having been admitted to Christ's College, Cambridge, he probably graduated BA early in 1603; he proceeded MA in 1606. A near-contemporary at college was William Whately (1583-1639), who became lecturer and from 1610 vicar of Banbury, Oxfordshire. On 7 June 1608 Scudder married, at Banbury, Whately's sister-in-law Bridgett, daughter of George Hunt (1551/2-1633), rector of Collingbourne Ducis, Wiltshire. At some date he acquired the living of Drayton, Oxfordshire; he had resigned it by 22 September 1619. He had joined the local combination of ministers led by John Dod, whose members included Whately, Robert Cleaver, and Robert Harris, and it was perhaps through it, and its lay patrons, that he managed to survive without a parish. His first publication, 'A Key of Heaven' (1620), an application of the Lord's prayer, was dedicated to Thomas Crewe of Steane, the godly lawyer and Northamptonshire gentleman, in thankfulness for 'the many kindnesses you have shewed me' (sig. A4). 
Following the death of his father-in-law, on 28 May 1633 Scudder was presented by the king to the rectory of Collingbourne Ducis. His most celebrated work, 'The Christians Daily Walk with God', had first appeared two years previously. In 1635 it reached its sixth edition, which contained an epistle written by the leading minister John Davenport. A German translation by Theodore Haak appeared in Frankfurt in 1636. There were at least nine further editions; the recommendations by John Owen and Richard Baxter in the 1674 edition are testimonies to the importance of this book to the religious and devotional life of the protestant community and its appeal to a broad range of presbyterian and congregational readers. As Baxter observed, the book is 'so prudent and spiritual, apt and savory the Directions, and all so fully suited to our ordinary cases and conditions, that I heartily wish no family might be without it' (Scudder, 'The Christians Daily Walk in Holy Security and Peace', 1674 edn, A4'v'). 
As a literary executor with Edward Leigh to Whately, who died in 1639, Scudder brought to publication Whately's 'Prototypes, or, The Primarie Presidents out of the Book of Genesis' (1640), and wrote the accompanying life of the author. On 5 May 1642 he was sanctioned by parliament as a lecturer for Warminster and in June of that year he joined the Westminster assembly. He was an active participant in its affairs, reviewing the proofs of the Westminster confession of faith and acting as a member of the committee for scriptures. His name appears at regular intervals in the minutes, but he was often recorded as absent. Preaching before parliament in October 1644 a sermon published as 'Gods Warning to England by the Voyce of his Rod' (1644), Scudder called on members to repent their sins and lead a strictly devotional life to avert God's impending judgments on the nation. That year he also published an edition of Caleb Grantham's 'The Godly Mans Choice', a manual on marriage to which Scudder added his own 'profitable directions how persons should live as becometh Christians in the married state'. 
On 10 May 1645 Scudder was admitted as interim rector of St Mildred Poultry, London, and from there signed that year the petition addressed to the common council of the City by ministers who were dissatisfied with the proposed presbyterian organization of London parishes. By 1647 he had spent a brief period at St Andrew by the Wardrobe, but within a short time he seems to have returned to Wiltshire. He was at Collingbourne Ducis when he drew up his will on 12 February 1652. By this time his first wife had died and he had married Joyce, whose other name is unknown. Evidently a fairly prosperous man, he left land in Hurstbourne Tarrant, Hampshire and in Horton Kirby to his three married daughters -- Jane, wife of Richard Russell, Martha, wife of Thomas Jacob, and Bridgett, wife of John Grayle (1613/14-1651/2) (who may have ministered at Collingbourne Ducis during Scudder's absence in London before moving to Tidworth in the same county). Legacies also went to his granddaughter Elizabeth, daughter of Elizabeth Scudder and John Tombes (1602-1676), the anti-paedobaptist minister, and to a number of relatives who had moved to New England, including his brother Thomas. He lived long enough to make a codicil on 20 March 1652, but died before 31 May when his will was proved, and was buried at Collingbourne. 


@@@@@


doc= 24978


Scully, Denys (1773-1830), barrister and political activist, was the eldest surviving son (with three brothers and two sisters) of James Scully (1738-1816), a prosperous grazier of Kilfeacle, co. Tipperary, and Catherine Lyons (1739-1818) of Croom, co. Limerick. He was born at Kilfeacle on 4 May 1773. After schooling at the Kilkenny Academy (1785-6) he was destined for a commercial career but switched to the law when an act of 1792 admitted Catholics to the Irish bar, to which he was called from the Middle Temple in 1796 after concurrently completing his education at Trinity College, Cambridge. On 25 November 1801 he married Mary (died 1806), eldest daughter of Ferdinand Huddleston of Sawston Hall near Cambridge. Her family were neighbours of the lord lieutenant, Philip Yorke, third earl of Hardwicke, and brought Scully an introduction to the viceregal court. On the renewal of the war with France in 1803 he published a pamphlet urging his countrymen not to side with the French and was seen for a time as a 'Castle Catholic'. When a new Catholic committee was formed in the autumn of 1804, however, he took the lead in thwarting the viceroy's efforts to get a petition suppressed and was a member of a delegation which was received by Pitt on 12 March 1805 and on his refusal of support turned to the opposition. 
During the next three years, marked by the ascendancy of John Keogh, Scully stood aside from the committee. His first wife died without children on 17 April 1806, and on 8 September 1808 he married Catherine (died 1843), daughter of Vincent Eyre of Sheffield Park, who brought him a dowry of $14,000 and with whom he had nine children. The youngest son, William Francis John Scully, made his fortune in land speculation. From 1809 on Scully and Daniel O'Connell were leaders of the popular party, opposed to any form of government veto on the nomination of bishops. While O'Connell steadily established his ascendancy, Scully, a poor speaker and temperamentally inclined to manipulate others, worked mainly behind the scenes. Only in 1811-12 did he achieve momentary fame with his 'Penal Laws', published at the height of an agitation which he himself had fomented by convoking an assembly of elected delegates to test the 1793 'Convention Act' in the courts. Discouraged by repeated failure at Westminster, and distracted by family litigation over his father's will, he became less active after 1817. Fat as a young man, Scully was 'fully as broad as he is long' when he was felled by a stroke in May 1823. In a pamphlet of 1824 he criticized O'Connell for taking up grievances that were not specifically Catholic ones. After another stroke he died at Kilfeacle on 25 October 1830, and was buried in the Scully plot on the Rock of Cashel. 
Scully's second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 24979


Vincent Scully (1810-1871), barrister, was born on 8 September 1810. He rose to be a QC. He sat as a Liberal for Cork in the parliament of 1852-7, showing a special interest in free trade in land. In 1856 his reputation suffered from the Tipperary Bank crash, as he was a nominal director and a cousin of the swindler John Sadleir. In 1859, however, he was re-elected, and sat until 1865. He married Susanna Grogan (died 1874) on 6 September 1841 and died at Grove End, London, on 4 June 1871. He was credited with a punning sense of humour, an example of which is perhaps to be found in the motto inscribed on Scully's Cross, erected by him beside his father's tomb on the Rock of Cashel: 'In hoc signo vincent' ('In this sign shall they conquer'). 


@@@@@


doc= 24980


Seagar, John (d. 1656), Church of England clergyman, was a member of the family of Seagar or Segar of Broadclyst, Devon. He attended Wadham College, Oxford, and was listed on 10 July 1613 as a pupil of a Devon fellow, Matthew Osborne (died 1661). He matriculated on 3 June 1614 and graduated BA as of Wadham on 23 May 1617, proceeding MA from St Mary Hall on 28 June 1620. By 1628 Seagar had returned to Devon, acquiring the vicarage of Lamerton in that year; on 16 July 1631, following the death of Robert Stennings, he was instituted to the rectory of Broadclyst on the presentation of a kinsman, William Seagar. 
During the civil wars, as Seagar reminded his parishioners, there were 'three years of which time I was forced by the violence of soldiers to absent my self from you' (Seagar, preface). But it was as minister of Broadclyst that in June 1648 he signed 'The Joint-Testimonie of the Ministers of Devon', one of a series of tracts issued about that time in which the authors urged the imposition of a presbyterian system and protested that 'a toleration of all blasphemous heresies by a law, is diametrically opposed to the grace and duty of zeal' ('Joint-Testimonie', 32). A few months later, on 19 January 1650, 'A Discoverie of the World to Come According to the Scriptures' (1650) was licensed by Joseph Caryl and signed by Seagar, again as minister of Broadclyst, recalling in the preface the eighteen years of his service in that cure. He published this work 'being desirous before my death to leave among you some token and testimonie of my love towards you' and he expected that the second coming of Christ in the flesh was also imminent. Seagar was not quite right in either prediction. He survived until 13 April 1656 and was buried at Pitminster, Somerset. His will, which left 719 acres of land in co. Tipperary to his nephews William and George Seagar, significant sums to other kin, and $5 to the poor of Broadclyst, was proved by his widow, Dorothie, on 14 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 24981


Seager, Charles (1808-1878), orientalist, was born in Evesbatch, Herefordshire, where he was baptized on 7 April 1808, the son of John Seager (1776-1849), rector of Welsh Bicknor, Monmouthshire, from 1808 until his death on 27 May 1849, and his wife, Mary. John Seager was the translator of several works on Greek grammar and prosody, and published a supplement to Johnson's 'Dictionary' in 1819. Seager matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 30 November 1832 and in 1834 he was elected a scholar of Worcester College. In that year he published an ode in Hebrew to mark the inauguration of the duke of Wellington as chancellor of the university, and in 1836 he gained the Kennicott Hebrew scholarship. He graduated BA on 25 May 1836 (MA, 1839) and was ordained priest in May 1837. He married, in Huddersfield on 25 May 1837, Anna (1806/7-1893), daughter of Walter Smith, curate of Almondbury. 
From 1839 to 1843 Segar was an assistant lecturer in Hebrew, under E. B. Pusey. Closely associated with the Tractarian party he, along with Mark Pattison and J. B. Mozley, lived from 1838 at the house for young writers established in St Aldates, Oxford, by Pusey and J. H. Newman. He was one of the earliest Tractarian converts to the Roman Catholic church. In January 1842 Pusey wrote to Newman asking him to correct Seager's romanizing tendencies, but although Newman made the attempt, Seager was received into the Catholic church on 12 October 1843 at St Mary's College, Oscott. His secession caused Pusey much pain and embarrassment. His wife converted in 1844. 
Having spent many years as an independent scholar, when the Catholic University College was established at Kensington by Cardinal Manning in 1875 Seager was appointed to the chair of Hebrew and comparative philology. His knowledge of oriental languages was extensive, but Hebrew, Arabic, and Syriac were his specialities. During the latter part of his life, however, he turned his attention to the languages of Assyria and Egypt, and he regularly attended the classes instituted by the Society of Biblical Archaeology under A. H. Sayce and P. Le Page Renouf. He was an active member of the council of the society. Shortly before his death he was readmitted a member of the University of Oxford, from which he had been expelled on his secession to Catholicism. A decree was passed enabling him to replace his name on the books without payment of the usual fees. He died suddenly at the Hotel de la Ville, Florence, while attending a congress of orientalists, on 18 September 1878, and was buried in Oxford. His widow died at Ramsgate on 27 March 1893. One of his sons, Ignatius, was ordained priest in 1869 and died in 1870. Another, Osmund (1843-1920), educated at the Jesuit college at Metz and at Newman's University in Dublin, later became an assistant principal at the Admiralty. In addition to his contributions to the 'Transactions' of the Society of Biblical Archaeology, Seager published some eleven works on philology, liturgy, apologetics, and politics, as well as a book of travels in the Rhineland, 'The Female Jesuit Abroad' (1853). 


@@@@@


doc= 24982


Seager, Edward (1812-1883), army officer, was born on 11 June 1812 and, after serving in the ranks for nine years and 188 days from 1832, became a cornet of the 8th light dragoons on 17 September 1841. He was adjutant from 5 October 1841 to 25 October 1854, being gazetted lieutenant on 29 June 1843, captain on 26 October 1851, and major on 31 January 1858. He served with his regiment in the Crimean War of 1854, and up to February 1855, and was present at the battles of Alma, Balaklava (where he was wounded in the charge of the light brigade), Inkerman, and the siege of Sevastopol. On 28 June 1855 he was appointed assistant military secretary to Major-General Lord William Paulet, commanding on the Bosphorus, and he continued in the same office under Sir Henry Knight Storks until the end of the war, when he was awarded the Mejidiye (fifth class). He subsequently served in central India, 1858-9, was present at the action of Boordah, and was mentioned in the dispatches. 
From 5 August 1859 to 5 August 1864 Seager was lieutenant-colonel of his regiment, and was then gazetted a brevet colonel in the army. From 3 November 1864 to 31 January 1870 he was acting quartermaster-general in the Dublin district, and from 1 April 1873 to 3 April 1878 inspecting officer of yeomanry cavalry at York. On 15 January 1870 he became a major-general, and on 1 July 1881 was placed on the retired list with the rank of lieutenant-general. On 10 May 1872 he received a reward for 'distinguished and meritorious services', and on 2 June 1877 he was gazetted CB. 
Seager was married and had a daughter. He was noted as a devoted family man, of firm Christian conviction. He died at his home, Sion House, Scarborough, on 30 March 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 24983


Seagrave, Robert (b. 1693, d. in or after 1755), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born on 22 November 1693 at Twyford, Leicestershire, second son of Robert Seagrave, vicar of Twyford from 1687 to 1720, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Moore), of Morton, Nottinghamshire. He was educated at Oakham School, Rutland -- where 'Orator' Henley (the eccentric London preacher John Henley) was two years his senior -- and matriculated at Cambridge in 1711, having entered as sub-sizar and Leeds scholar at Clare College on 8 November 1710, the year in which he was also a Johnson exhibitioner. He became BA in 1714 and MA in 1718. Seagrave was made deacon on the title of Loseby, Leicestershire, in the diocese of Lincoln, on 26 February 1716; and it is known that from 1720 to 1726 one Robert Seagrave, himself or possibly his father, was rector of Cold Overton, Leicestershire. 
Thus Seagrave was already ordained well before the eighteenth-century evangelical movement had effectively started. In 1731 he began publishing tracts (at least ten by 1755) advocating evangelical beliefs, the first of which won the appreciation of William Grimshaw in Yorkshire soon after his conversion. By 1731 Seagrave had apparently moved to London, and by 1738 he is said to have withdrawn from the established church; but like John Wesley and other leaders better known, he may well not have done so. He became, however, a supporter of George Whitefield, and when Dr Joseph Trapp, vicar of Christ Church Greyfriars, London, preached against Whitefield, on the undesirability of being righteous overmuch, in 1739 Seagrave published an 'Answer', to which Trapp replied, an exchange of views noticed at some length in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' ('GM', 9.418-20, 476). 
In the same year Seagrave began to officiate at regular Sunday evening preaching in Loriners' Hall, London Wall, Basinghall Street, London, later adding Tuesday and Thursday lectures, and 'for some years preached with much success' (Tyerman, 1.212). It was now that his aptitude for writing hymns came to the fore. Seagrave's 'Hymns for Christian Worship' (1742; 4th edn, 1748) included thirty of his own. Two of these, 'Now may the Spirit's holy fire' and 'Rise my soul and stretch thy wings', were still in use in 1892. Seagrave was also among those associated with the erection of Whitefield's Tabernacle (1741); and in 1744 he took charge during the temporary absence of its regular ministers. John Griffith, subsequently an independent minister, was converted ('c'.1743) by Seagrave's preaching at Loriners' Hall. Seagrave was apparently associated with a small body of English Calvinistic methodists about whose activities there is relatively little record. 
In 1749 Seagrave gave up his ministry at Loriners' Hall. In 1751 a fourth edition of his tract addressed to the University of Cambridge appeared. By 1753 he was preaching at a chapel in Bull and Mouth Street, off St Martin's-le-Grand, London, and he contributed to Whitefield's 'Hymns for Social Worship' (1753). His last tract was published in 1755. No reference to later activities has been found; but Seagrave was still remembered with appreciation 100 years later. In 1860 Daniel Sedgwick appealed in 'Notes and Queries' for additional information. A biographical introduction to Sedgwick's edition of Seagrave's hymns appeared without further details. In 1884 an American author, E. F. Hatfield, included Seagrave in his 'Poets of the Church', published both in New York and in London, but with little more detail. An anonymous writer in the 'Evangelical Magazine' said of Seagrave 'He was a good minister of Jesus Christ, a workman who needed not to be ashamed. He was a man of eminent piety, great humility, and remarkable zeal and diligence' (1814, 304). It is not known whether or not he married. 


@@@@@


doc= 24984


Seally, John (1741/2-1795), writer, born in Somerset, was educated at Bristol grammar school, with a view to ordination. He may possibly be identical with the John Sealy, son of John Sealy of Bridgwater, Somerset, who matriculated from Hertford College, Oxford, on 22 May 1760, aged eighteen, and graduated BA in 1764. The death of his uncle and patron obliged him to enter a solicitor's office, which he soon left to learn the business of a merchant under Malachy Postlethwayt. He so disliked his master's strictness, however, that, with some assistance from his mother, he took up authorship and journalism as a means of livelihood. During a visit to Manchester he persuaded a wealthy heiress to elope with him, but was overtaken by the father at Worcester. The lady is said to have died broken-hearted, and Seally consoled himself by marrying, in 1766, a reputedly rich widow of double his age, named Ann Soley Lewis ('b'. 'c'.1728), only to find, some years later, that she had no money and a husband (the Revd William Lewis) still living. In the meantime Seally sought occupation as a writing master and accountant. About 1767 he established a school in Bridgwater Square, Westminster, and after some years' successful tuition took holy orders. After his separation from Mrs Lewis, about 1773, he married Mary Ann, eldest daughter of Joseph Humphreys, rector of Ellisfield, Hampshire, and of North Stoke, Somerset, who survived him. In 1790 he was presented to the vicarage of East Meon with Froxfield and Steep, Hampshire. 
Seally was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 30 June 1791. During a trip to Rome in 1774 he obtained admission to the Roman Academy (Arcadia) by a eulogy on Maria Maddelana Fernandez Corilla, poet laureate of Italy. He was also MA and LLD. 
Seally contributed occasional verses to various magazines, projected a short-lived political paper signed 'Britannicus', conducted for some time the 'Universal Museum' and the 'Freeholder's Magazine', and was involved in the 'St James's Magazine', edited by Robert Lloyd. He likewise published several novels, poems, and encyclopaedias, including: 'The Loves of Calisto and Emira, or, The Fatal Legacy' (1776), of which a French translation was published, at Paris, in 1778; 'Moral Tales, after the Eastern Manner' (1780?); 'The Marriage of Sir Gawaine' (1782), an opera; 'A Complete Geographical Dictionary' in two volumes (1787); and 'The Lady's Encyclopedia' in three volumes (1788). Seally's career also involved producing educational books and handbooks such as: 'The Accountant's Companion, or, Schoolmaster's New Assistant to Practical Arithmetic' (1770); 'New Running Hand Copies, Designed for the Use of Schools' (1770?); and 'A Specimen of Writing, in the Modern Ornamental Hands of Great Britain' (1794). Seally died in Queen Square, Westminster, in March 1795. 


@@@@@


doc= 24985


Seaman, Lazarus (d. 1675), clergyman and ejected minister, was born in Leicester. In 1624 he was admitted sizar at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1628 and proceeded MA in 1631. He appears to have come from a poor family, for Calamy stated that 'as he came in mean Circumstances to the College, so he was forc'd soon to leave it; and to teach School for a Livelyhood' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.16). A contemporary pamphlet also asserted that in the early years of his career Seaman had been 'a country Pedagogue' (Hotham, 'Corporations Vindicated', 58-9). Seaman was ordained deacon on 12 February 1628. He is probably the Lazarus Seaman who married Elizabeth Glasier at Burwash, Sussex, on 26 October 1630, an identification which, by suggesting a possible link with the puritan networks of that county, may help explain why Seaman was later to appear as chaplain to the earl of Northumberland. Elizabeth Seaman died in 1648. 
An occasional sermon at the parish church of St Martin Ludgate, London, procured Seaman a lectureship there in 1634 but in 1638, if not earlier, he was chosen lecturer by the parish of All Hallows, Bread Street, which was in the early seventeenth century a wealthy parochial community in the City. In the latter year, probably at the request of Philip Nye, Seaman edited and published Richard Sibbes's 'A Glance of Heaven'. 'Having some care committed to me by Mr. P. N. whom this businesse chiefly concerned', Seaman wrote in his prefatory epistle to the Christian reader, 'I could doe no lesse then let you understand, here is one rich piece of Spirituall Workmanship, and wrought by a Master-builder, very usefull for building up, and beautifying of Gods Temples'. In spite of this clear indication of his association with the puritan brotherhood there are no known confrontations between Seaman and the ecclesiastical authorities during this period of the Laudian rule in the church. 
Early in September 1642, when the rector of All Hallows, John Lawson, was dying, a group of thirty-six parishioners, some of whom, such as John Venn, Maurice Gethin, Tempest Milner, and William Kendall, were important civic leaders in civil-war London, petitioned the House of Lords to request Archbishop Laud, 'in whose care petitioners cannot confide' ('Fifth Report', HMC, 47), to appoint Seaman to the living. An order was accordingly issued on 9 September. Laud, now in the Tower, still believed that he had 'six months respite by law' and procrastinated, though in the meantime he promised the earl of Northumberland that he 'would give this, out of my respects to his Lp., to Mr. Seaman his chaplain' ('Works', 3.248; 4.14-15). However, on 6 January 1643 the Lords simply ordered Seaman to be the minister of All Hallows. Later in the year he was appointed by a parliamentary ordinance to sit in the Westminster assembly of divines, and in early April 1644 he was chosen by the earl of Manchester as master of Peterhouse, Cambridge, to replace John Cosin, who had been ejected the month before. Seaman had become an eminent presbyterian minister in the City. 
In the following years Seaman played an active role in the Westminster assembly. He sat on several committees and took part in debates over important religious issues such as ministerial ordination, administration of the sacrament, and, above all, the form of church government. He was considered by Robert Baillie to be one of the English divines in the assembly who supported the Scottish position. Indeed, on 25 September 1644, when he was invited to preach a fast sermon before the House of Commons, Seaman reminded the house that 'we have a Covenant' and 'the publique faith of the Kingdome is engaged in it'. And he further admonished that 'it is 'Holy', 'Just' and 'Good'. 'Urge it', 'Renew it', but above all, 'Keepe it'' (Seaman, 'Solomons Choice', 45). He was probably also involved in the concerted agitation in 1645 among the lay and clerical presbyterians in the City for a strong presbyterian church government, though his name was conspicuously absent from the signatories who presented the 'desires' of the City ministers to the common council on 28 November. Four parishioners of All Hallows, Bread Street, signed two citizens' petitions. In any case, later in the year Seaman, as one of the deans of Sion College, London, participated in what a contemporary pamphleteer called 'that Syon-College-conspiracy' ('Divine Observations', 3); according to William Walwyn, this produced the London ministers' letter against the Independents and toleration 'seasonably, and purposely to meet with the Letter from Scotland' ('Writings', 172). Indeed, both the letter from the Scottish kirk and the London ministers' letter were presented to the Westminster assembly on 1 January 1646. On 27 January 1647, when he was invited to preach a fast sermon before the House of Lords, Seaman complained that: 'we are neither so cold as by publique indulgence to tolerate all opinions, nor so hot as to suppresse one Sect. Not so cold as not to admit of Presbyteriall government upon triall, and in part; nor so hot as to receive it wholly in the power, and practice... (Seaman, 'The Head of the Church', 29)' When the sermon was published he told the House of Lords in his epistle dedicatory that their task now was to disband the army, to dismantle the garrisons, to settle the militia in safe hands, and 'for this 'the Vowes of God are upon you' to bring the three Kingdomes unto the neerest conjunction and uniformity in Religion'. 
When the London provincial assembly was eventually convened in May 1647 Seaman, who had been appointed trier by several ordinances, was a delegate from the first classis. A faithful member, he was twice to serve as moderator of the assembly, and to attend its very last meeting on 15 August 1660. In September 1648 he was one of the ministers sent by the parliament to discuss church government with Charles I on the Isle of Wight, 'where his Majesty took particular Notice of the Doctor's singular Ability in the Debates' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.16). In January 1649 Seaman signed the 'Vindication' of the London ministers against the trial of the king. Later in the year he proceeded DD at Cambridge. 'This Degree', said William Jenkyn in Seaman's funeral sermon, 'he took by performing his Exercises appointed by the Statutes of the University'. And according to Jenkyn the thesis Seaman defended in the 'Divinity-Act' was 'to assert the Providence of God in disposing of Political Government' (Jenkyn, 52). This was, indeed, a timely subject in that year of political crisis, and it probably resolved doubts in Seaman's own mind. In any case he was one of the few presbyterian ministers who in future years openly preached submission to and acceptance of the Commonwealth at Cambridge as well as in London, for which he was pitilessly attacked by a pamphlet entitled 'Lazarus's Sores Licked' (1650). 
In the 1650s Seaman enjoyed the trust of the successive governments under the Commonwealth and the protectorate. He was president of Sion College in 1651 and 1652, and vice-chancellor of Cambridge University in 1653 and 1654. In the latter year he was also appointed assistant to the commissioners for London and Cambridgeshire under the new ecclesiastical system of triers. At the same time he was able to speak for the national ministry and in defence of tithes, as in his sermon before the City magistrates at Mercers' Chapel in 1650 or in his testimony before a committee of Barebone's Parliament in 1653. However, troubles arose at Peterhouse. First there was the quarrel in 1651 with Charles Hotham, a senior fellow at Peterhouse, over Seaman's refusal to accept the election of Tobias Conyers to a fellowship. Conyers was to become an Arminian and an associate of John Goodwin's gathered church in London, and his unorthodox views had been known at Cambridge. But Hotham, Conyers's tutor, complained first to a parliamentary committee and then publicly in pamphlets. He spoke against Seaman's single negative voice and absenteeism. According to Hotham, Seaman never resided at Peterhouse and his occasional visits 'will not amount to one of the whole seven years of his employment of that Mastership'. And Hotham observed that 'the Mastership of the Colledge was not intended as... Augmentation to a London Ministers Parsonage' (Hotham, 'Corporations Vindicated', 50). Afterwards, in 1658 and 1659, Seaman encountered strong opposition from the senior fellows of Peterhouse when he gave one of the fellowships to his own son, Joseph. In this case he appears to have gained the favour of both Cromwells. In the unsettling situation of 1659, Seaman was also prominent among the presbyterians who tried to co-operate with the Independents and Baptists in London. 
In 1660, after the return of Charles II, Seaman became 'a little estranged' from his presbyterian brethren who attempted to achieve some agreement with the episcopalians for the future religious settlement. According to Richard Baxter, this was because the court gave him 'no encouragement' and he was 'hardlier spoken of at Court' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 229). Perhaps his earlier close relationship with the Commonwealth and the protectorate put him now in an unfavourable light in the eyes of the royalists. He was ejected from his mastership of Peterhouse in August 1660 and two years later from the ministry of All Hallows, Bread Street. In his farewell sermon he spoke of peace, especially 'that 'inward' peace that we enjoy, if our Conscience hath been troubled with terrors of sin, wrath, &c' ('The Second and Last Collection', 4). Perhaps in the same spirit, he persuaded Baxter to refrain from publishing a statement against taking the oath under the 'Five Mile Act' in 1665. He lived mostly at Hammersmith, Middlesex, where he was licensed as presbyterian in 1672. He later built a chapel in Meeting-House Yard, Wood Street, Holborn. He died at his home in Warwick Court, Warwick Lane, Newgate Street, on 3 September 1675 and was buried at All Hallows, Bread Street, four days later. Seaman was a learned man, and William Jenkyn praised him emphatically for his 'Casuitical' theology 'both for directing and easing of Conscience' (Jenkyn, 53). In his will, made in the parish of Christ Church, London, on 2 June 1675, Seaman put his library of over 5000 volumes in trust and laid down stipulations for its sale. It was the first to be sold by public auction in England. He was survived by a daughter, Elizabeth Seaman, and a brother, Caleb Seaman, in Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 24986


Seaman, William (1606/7-1680), orientalist, was probably born at Upton Scudamore, near Warminster in Wiltshire, the son of William Seaman, 'gentleman' (died 1660), who rented the manor farm, known as Acres Farm, in the same year, and bought the lease in 1636. Seaman matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, on 7 February 1624, aged seventeen, graduating BA at the same time, and proceeded MA on 6 July 1626. In 1628 he was appointed rector of Upton Scudamore, a living which afforded him about $100 a year. Shortly after his institution he went to Constantinople in the service of Sir Peter Wyche, English ambassador from 1628 to 1639. He there learned Turkish and possibly also Arabic. There is no information about the date or the length of his stay, but it cannot have been very long since he was officiating at Upton Scudamore in 1628 and, it would seem from the bishops' transcripts, from 1631 onwards. On 24 October 1634 he married Mary Hollimar (died 1671) from Ashton Gifford in Codford St Peter. The couple had at least one son. 
Seaman gradually obtained a reputation as a Turkish expert -- his position in the republic of letters was confirmed by his correspondence with the French scholar Louis Picques -- while he proved his capabilities as an Arabist with his translation of the index of a codex on Islam, entitled in English the 'Splendour of the exhorter', in the archbishop of Canterbury's library at St Martin's (BL, Add. MS 24858). His first publication in the domain of Turkish studies was his translation into English of a historical work, the initial part of Sadettin Hoca's 'Tac ut-tevarih' ('The crown of histories') published as 'The Reign of Sultan Orchan, Second King of the Turks' (1652). Here, as in his other works, he stressed the utility of Turkish for historians. The translation was dedicated to Jane, Lady Merick, formerly the widow of Sir Peter Wyche, to whose family he remained devoted after Sir Peter's death in 1643. 
In December 1655 Seaman was appointed secretary of the trade committee (which met at Westminster) at a yearly salary of $100. Some years later he became involved in an international project of evangelization of the Levant, originating in the circle of Samuel Hartlib, whose millenarian convictions included belief in the imminent conversion to Christianity of the Muslims and a determination to hasten the process. In England the plan was fostered by Hartlib himself, Henry Oldenburg, John Durie, and above all Robert Boyle, with Edward Pococke and John Worthington taking a marginal role. It obtained even more support in the Netherlands, thanks mainly to the Bohemian scholar Jan Amos Comenius and the French refugee Petrus Serrarius. A fundamental role was to be played by the translation of the 'Bible' into Turkish. The Dutch, who relied on a Polish convert to Islam in Constantinople, were slow, however, and only the 'Old Testament' was completed. Boyle then turned to Seaman, who had already translated the Johannine epistles into Turkish in 1659, asking him to translate the entire 'New Testament'. By 1664 Seaman had done so and two years later his translation was published at Boyle's expense in Oxford, making Seaman the first European to publish a Turkish translation of the 'New Testament'. In the meantime, also at the instigation of Boyle, Seaman had translated into Turkish John Ball's 'Short Catechisme'. It was published in 1660, the first Turkish work to be issued at Oxford. Copies were distributed by Robert Huntington, chaplain to the Levant Company in Aleppo. 
In 1670 Seaman published his 'Grammatica linguae Turcicae'. Boyle undertook to buy $20 worth of copies, and Sir Cyril Wyche (Sir Peter's youngest son) also contributed. Seaman had hoped to publish a Turkish-Latin lexicon on which he had been working for some years (and on which he continued to work until the year of his death), but the dictionary remained in manuscript (Bodl. Oxf. MS Rawl. Or. 58). He did, however, assist Edmund Castell in assimilating the contents of Ni'matullah's Persian-Turkish dictionary in the 'Lexicon heptaglotton' published in 1669. In his study of Turkish, Seaman was a pioneer in England. He was the first Englishman to produce a grammar, but not the first European. In contrast to Seaman's, however, few other Turkish grammars were printed in Ottoman characters. 
The quality of Seaman's work was widely criticized, at the time and later. Jacobus Golius, professor of Arabic at Leiden and with a sound knowledge of Turkish, reported the devastating judgement of Seaman's 'New Testament' by the Armenian Shahin Kandy. There was little point in circulating the translation in the Ottoman empire, he said, since it would probably be considered incomprehensible, so 'artificial' were 'the nature and the use of the language' (Kleerkoper and Stockum, 1243). The grammar hardly fared better. It lacks any form of systematic approach to Turkish, contains numerous errors, and includes a thoroughly unreliable guide to the pronunciation of the language. Less than forty years later Thomas Vaughan could truthfully say of his own Turkish grammar that, although it could not compete with the lexicographical work of the imperial interpreter Meninski (which was published in 1680 and remained unsurpassed until the nineteenth century), at least it was 'an Improvement of Mr Seaman's'. But he nevertheless acknowledged his debt to a predecessor to whom his grammar owed 'its Form, and well-nigh all the Substance too' (Vaughan, xvi). Seaman had also had trouble with his Latin, and had applied to Samuel Clarke, the architypographus of the Oxford University Press, and to Clarke's master, Edward Pococke, to improve his style and correct his preface. 
Seaman, whom Edward Pococke's biographer Leonard Twells described as a moderate nonconformist and 'a sober, discreet, and modest man' (Twells, 276), was profoundly committed to the conversion of the Muslims and the propagation of protestantism in the Levant. He spent much of his time in London, where he owned a house in Whitecross Alley, Moorfields, and consorted with the 'Turkie merchants' and members of the Levant Company who provided numerous subscribers to his Turkish 'New Testament' and saw to the distribution of his translations in the Ottoman empire. Yet he appears to have been a conscientious rector of his living. He died at his London house on 7 November 1680, and was buried two days later at Upton Scudamore at his church of St Mary the Virgin. 


@@@@@


doc= 24987


Searchfield, Rowland (1564/5-1622), bishop of Bristol, was probably born in London. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1575 to 1582, when, aged seventeen, he went to St John's College, Oxford, of which he was later made a fellow. He graduated BA on 11 October 1586 and proceeded MA on 2 June 1590. 
Granted leave of absence by his college in February 1594 to preach in London, Searchfield reportedly delivered about twenty sermons, including one at Paul's Cross. On his return to Oxford he became university proctor in April 1596 and gained his BD degree on 30 June the same year. John Manningham described him, while at Oxford in 1602/3, as 'a dissembled Christian, like an intemperate patient which can gladly heare his physicion discourse of his dyet and remedy, but will not endure to obserue them' (11). However, when Searchfield resigned his fellowship on 26 November 1606 St John's granted him $10 'in consideration that he hath taken great pains in writing of many things for the college, and done many good and commendable services for the college' (Stevenson and Salter, 362). In his thesis for his DD degree, gained on 1 June 1608, Searchfield argued that various forms of religion were incompatible with unity of faith, that no one could be saved by the faith of another, and that heretics should be compelled to conform outwardly. 
In 1600 Searchfield had become rector of Eastleach Martin, Gloucestershire, an incumbency he held for the rest of his life. On 3 December 1600 he was also presented to the living of Emly, but resigned ten months later in 1601 and became vicar of Evenley, Northamptonshire, and rector of Burthrop, Gloucestershire. The distractions of Oxford no doubt underlie an indictment for prolonged absence from his parish during Bishop Thomas Ravis's 1605 visitation of Gloucester diocese. In 1606 Searchfield became vicar of Charlbury, Oxfordshire, where he was made a JP. Having been earlier unsuccessful in an attempt to gain appointment as a chaplain to the new archbishop, Richard Bancroft, he became a chaplain-in-ordinary to James I before whom he preached Lenten sermons on 8 April 1617 and 17 March 1622. 
Searchfield was nominated bishop of Bristol on 12 March 1619 and consecrated on 9 May. During his primary episcopal visitation, on Holy Cross day 1619, he consecrated the chapel of Chantmarle Manor near Cattistock, Dorset, 'where he confirmed five hundred people, young and old, until he was so weary that he left some unconfirmed, and escaped to his bed at Melbury' (Fincham, 128). Searchfield supported his clergy's ultimately unsuccessful attempt to increase their inadequate stipends by appealing to the citizens of Bristol for a contribution towards their maintenance. With his wife, Anne, daughter of Ralph and Mary Hutchinson of Oxfordshire, Searchfield had a son, also Rowland, who later became a prominent Bristol citizen. Searchfield died on 11 October 1622, probably in Bristol, and was buried in the sanctuary of Bristol Cathedral. Following renovations there in the 1680s, a memorial stone to him was placed in the north transept wall. 


@@@@@


doc= 24988


Searle, Thomas (1777-1849), naval officer, son of James Searle of Staddlescombe, Devon, was born in Devon on 29 May 1777. He entered the navy in November 1789; served on the Mediterranean, home, and Newfoundland stations; and in 1796 was in the 'Royal George', flagship of Lord Bridport, by whose interest he was made lieutenant, on 19 August, in the fireship 'Incendiary'. In November 1796 he married, at an early age, Ann, daughter of Joseph Maddock of Plymouth Dock and Tamerton Foliot, Devon. They had a large family: eight daughters survived their father. 
In 1797 Searle was in the 'Prince', flagship of Sir Roger Curtis; in 1798 he was in the frigate 'Nemesis', on the North American station; and in 1799 he commanded the cutter 'Courier' (12 guns) in the North Sea. On 22 November 1799 he was made commander on the recommendation of Lord Duncan, who was greatly pleased with his activity during the year, and especially with his gallant capture of a large French privateer on 23 November. From June 1800 to October 1802 he was employed in the transport service, and from July 1803 to April 1804 with the Portsmouth division of sea fencibles. From 1804 to 1806 he commanded various small vessels off Boulogne and the north coast of France, and in December 1806 was appointed to the brig 'Grasshopper' (18 guns) for service in the Mediterranean. His service in the 'Grasshopper' was marked, even in that age, 'as dashing in the extreme'. On 11 December 1807, off Cape Palos, he engaged a heavily armed Spanish brig of war with two settees (Mediterranean lateen-sailed vessels) in company; he captured the brig and drove the settees to seek safety in flight. Lord Collingwood officially reported the affair as 'an instance of the zeal and enterprise which marked Searle's general conduct' (O'Byrne, 'Naval biog. dict.'). On 4 April 1808, in company with the frigates 'Alceste' and 'Mercury', he assisted in destroying or capturing a convoy of merchant vessels at Rota, near Cadiz, after dispersing or sinking the gunboats that escorted them, and silencing the batteries of Rota, which protected them. This last service was performed by the brig alone 'by the extraordinary gallantry and good conduct of Captain Searle, who kept in upon the shoal to the southward of the town so near as to drive the enemy from their guns with grape from his carronades, and at the same time kept in check a division of the gunboats that had come out from Cadiz to assist the others engaged by the 'Alceste' and 'Mercury'. It was a general cry in both ships: 'Only look how nobly the brig behaves'. (Murray Maxwell to the secretary of the Admiralty, 'LondG', 23-26 April 1808, 570)' Following Maxwell's letter Searle was advanced to post rank on 25 April 1808, though the promotion did not reach him until July. Meanwhile, on 23 April, in company with the brig 'Rapid' on the south coast of Portugal, he fell in with two richly laden Spanish vessels from South America, under convoy of four gunboats. The merchant ships ran in under the batteries of Faeroe, by which they were protected. However, the brigs, having captured two of the gunboats, driven the other two on shore, and silenced the batteries, brought off the ships which were carrying cargoes of the value of $60,000. 
On leaving the 'Grasshopper', Searle was presented by the crew with an 80 guinea sword and, shortly after, by Lloyd's with a piece of plate worth 100 guineas. In 1809 he commanded the 'Frederickstein' (32 guns) in the Mediterranean, in 1810-11 the 'Elizabeth' (74 guns) in the North Sea and at Lisbon, and in 1811-12 the frigate 'Druid' in the Mediterranean. On 4 June 1815 he was made a CB. 
From 1818 to 1821 he commanded the frigate 'Hyperion' (42 guns) in the channel (in attendance on George IV) and in a voyage to South America, from which he brought back specie worth half a million sterling. From 1836 to 1839 he was captain of the 'Victory' (104 guns), at that time guardship at Portsmouth; and on 9 November 1847 he was promoted rear-admiral. He died at his home, Kingston House, Portsea, Hampshire, on 18 March 1849 and was buried at the garrison chapel in Portsmouth. Searle, a handsome, strongly built man of middle height, with black hair and dark complexion, had a remarkable career, made by exceptional skill and courage. 


@@@@@


doc= 24989


Seaton, Edward Cator (1815-1880), public health administrator, was born at Rochester, Kent, the son of an ex-naval surgeon. His early medical career followed the classic pattern of the ambitious young medical practitioner. He received his initial medical training from his father, took his MD at Edinburgh University in 1837, and briefly studied in Paris. He then joined his father in practice in Rochester, supplementing his income by working as a poor-law surgeon in the north Aylesford area. In 1841 he purchased a small practice and moved to Sloane Street, London. In addition to his private practice Seaton held posts at the Chelsea, Brompton, and Belgrave dispensaries. He was active in a number of medical societies and was a founding member of both the Western Medical Society and, in 1850, the Epidemiological Society; later he held the president's post in each. He was also a member of the London Pathological Society. 
Seaton owed his career in public health to his membership of the Epidemiological Society, then the foremost forum for the discussion of public health matters; its members acted as 'ex officio' advisers to government. In 1850 Seaton was appointed secretary to its committee on smallpox and vaccination. The committee's report was drawn up by Seaton and presented to parliament in 1852 ('Parl. papers', 1852-3, 101, no. 434, and 1854-5, 45, no. 88). It recommended that voluntary vaccination be replaced with a compulsory system. The report proved highly influential, its appearance coinciding with the introduction of a bill to make vaccination compulsory; the report was consequently greeted as timely expert advice on the subject. A number of its suggestions were subsequently incorporated into the 'Compulsory Vaccination Act' of 1853. 
The report established Seaton as an authority on vaccination and began his lifelong collaboration with John Simon, a fellow member of the Epidemiological Society and medical officer to the General Board of Health and later to the privy council. Both men were eager to expand the government's role in public health and to bring public health under expert supervision. Seaton's career mirrored the development of this central government role. In 1858 Seaton was appointed as one of the first medical staff at the privy council. As a temporary inspector (paid 5 guineas per day) Seaton investigated rates of vaccination in London. The following year this local study was expanded and it became a national survey, providing Seaton with sufficient work to allow him to give up private practice. The study concluded that much public vaccination practice was incompetent -- a finding used to justify the creation of a permanent inspectorate to supervise the work of vaccinators. Seaton was appointed as one of the four inspectors and given a salary. Over the next few years, in addition to his routine inspection work, he produced a 'Handbook of Vaccination' (1868) as well as reports on the viability of calf-lymph (1870) and on the 1871-3 smallpox epidemic (1875). He was probably involved in drafting the 'Vaccination Bill' of 1871, and he also conducted inspections into the sanitary state of various towns and cities. With the dissolution of the medical office of the privy council in 1871, Seaton moved to the Local Government Board and became assistant medical officer under Simon. In June 1876 he succeeded Simon as medical officer. Seaton was noted for his administrative abilities -- his meticulous eye for detail, his capacity for work, and his sound judgement -- qualities which balanced John Simon's more visionary character. 
Seaton's career brought professional honours and increasing wealth. In 1872 he was made a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. He moved to Surbiton in 1862 and to Gordon Square, London, in 1877. Seaton was the father of four sons and four daughters, one of whom became the second wife of Sir George Buchanan (1831-1895). Seaton became ill in 1878 and was greatly affected by the death of his favourite son in the same year. He suffered a stroke in late 1879, and died at his son-in-law's house, 48 Ladbroke Grove, Notting Hill, London, on 21 January 1880; he was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


