@@@@@


doc= 24990


Seton, John Thomas (b. c.1735, d. in or after 1806), portrait painter, was born in Scotland, the son of Christopher Seton (died 1768), a gem engraver, who was a pupil of Charles Christian Reisen. Christopher Seton practised in London, became a director of the Society of Artists in 1765, and died on 6 October 1768. John Thomas Seton was a pupil of Francis Hayman and studied at the St Martin's Lane Academy in London. He was in Rome in 1758-9 and helped to buy pictures for Lord Bute's collection. In 1759 he is 'listed in the 'Stato delle Anime' for the Parish of S. Lorenzo in Lucina as living in the Strada della Croce near the Piazza di Spagna (Archivio del Vicariato of the Vatican)' (Ford, 74 n. 12). On 3 March 1759 Richard Dalton wrote: 'Young Seaton and one Navy mind their studys much and hope will succeed in the portraits very well' (ibid., 68 n. 6). 
Seton exhibited paintings at the Society of Artists in London between 1761 and 1772, and was elected a fellow of the society in 1769. His conversation pieces, painted about this time, are similar in style to Johan Zoffany's. His painting of the Chambers family (exh. Society of Artists, 1763) was sold at Sothebys on 13 March 1985 (lot 56). Walpole's description of it as 'A young lady sitting at a harpsichord, but talking, the mother sitting knotting, and a young lad standing at the other end of the harpsichord' (Graves, 'Soc. Artists', 229) leaves out the figure on the right, Sir Robert Chambers, chief justice of Bengal, and on the left, his brother Richard, mayor of Newcastle. Seton lived for some time in Bath, but was in Edinburgh between 1772 and 1774. In 1772 he painted an informal portrait of Elizabeth, countess of Leven, with her great-granddaughter Lady Anne Hope (priv. coll.). Another good example of his work is his portrait of John Carmichael, fourth earl of Hyndford (1773; priv. coll.). In 1774, when he exhibited three half-length portraits of ladies at the Royal Academy, his address was listed as St Andrew's Street, New Town, Edinburgh. 
In 1773 Seton painted William Fullerton of Carstairs, East India Company surgeon in Bengal, and Captain Ninian Lowis (NG Scot.) in a work that: 'is perhaps indicative of the robust but somewhat stolid and banal style with which he was later to render his sitters in Bengal. Characteristic are the diagonal shadows which slant down from the top left, a rectangular mass of darkness on the right hand side, strong highlights... careful skill in depicting features and a puritanical relish for sparse, unorganised settings. (Archer, 109)' K. E. Maison noted that Seton's work 'shows a few invariable particularities: his sitter's eyes are always wide open and painted very minutely, but their gaze is nearly always oblique. Whenever possible, a dog... is introduced into the picture', and his figures 'are somewhat wooden and inactive' (Maison, 59). 
In 1775 Seton applied to the East India Company and on 22 November was granted permission to go to Bengal to practise portrait painting. He arrived in Calcutta, probably on the 'Lioness', at the end of August 1776. He was in Bengal for nine years, and 'returned to England after an easy time... with twelve thousand pounds in his pocket' (Williamson, 142). In 1777 he exhibited a 'Portrait of a Gentleman', painted in Calcutta, at the Society of Artists. Seton bought a house in the avenue behind the residence of the governor-general of Bengal, Warren Hastings, for 33,000 rupees in October 1783 (Foster, 67). By that time his reputation was growing, and he was commissioned to paint the commander-in-chief, Lieutenant-General Sir Eyre Coote (1783; BL OIOC), and the governor-general, Hastings (1784; Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta; replica the basis for the mezzotint engraving by John Jones, 1785). 
Seton subsequently returned to Edinburgh, where he practised with repute as a portrait painter, and was living in 1806; it is presumed that he died there. Portraits by Seton are in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery and the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh. A portrait of Sir David Dalrymple, Lord Hailes ('c'.1766-7), which was thought to be a companion piece to Seton's portrait of Dalrymple's second wife, Helen Fergusson (both Newhailes collection, National Trust for Scotland), has been reattributed to Allan Ramsay. 


@@@@@


doc= 24991


Seaton, Thomas (1684-1741), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was born at Stamford, Lincolnshire. He was probably the Thomas Seaton who was baptized there on 2 October 1684, the son of John and Dorothy Seaton. He was admitted a sizar of Clare College, Cambridge, on 6 May 1701, under the tuition of Mr Clarke, bedel of the university. He graduated BA in 1705; he was elected a fellow of his college in the following year, and proceeded MA in 1708. Having been ordained deacon on 9 March 1707 and priest on 29 September 1709 he was appointed chaplain to Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham. He became vicar of Madingley, Cambridgeshire, in 1713 and was presented, by Nottingham, to the vicarage of Ravenstone, Buckinghamshire, on 9 November 1721, whereupon he resigned his fellowship. 
By his will Seaton bequeathed his estate at Kislingbury, Northamptonshire, to the University of Cambridge, on condition that out of the rents a prize should be annually awarded to a master of arts of that university who had composed the best poem in English on the attributes of the supreme being or some other sacred subject. The prize would be judged by the vice-chancellor, the master of Clare College, and the professor of Greek. Publication of the winning poem has continued since the first was printed, in 1750, apart from 1766, 1769, and 1771. Many of these compositions are collected in 'Musae Seatonianae'. 
Seaton published a number of religious writings. He contributed to the theological controversy provoked by William Whiston's heterodox views on the Trinity and prophecies, publishing his first work, 'The Divinity of our Saviour Proved', in 1719. He continued his defence of orthodoxy in 'The defects of the objections against the New Testament application of the prophecies in the Old, exposed' (1726) and 'A Compendious View of the Grounds of Religion, both Natural and Revealed' (1729). His other works addressed moral and devotional issues; in 'The Conduct of Servants in Great Families' (1720), dedicated to his patron, Nottingham, he advised householders to hold family prayers and closely supervise the moral conduct of their servants. 
Seaton, who was unmarried, died on 18 August 1741 at Ravenstone, where he was buried on 23 August. A large tombstone with a Latin inscription was erected to his memory in the churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 24992


Seaton, Sir Thomas (bap. 1806, d. 1876), army officer in the East India Company, was baptized on 28 May 1806, the eldest son of John Fox Seaton of Pontefract and his wife, Anne. In 1822 he obtained a cadetship in the East India Company's service, and on 4 February 1823 he was commissioned as ensign in the 10th Bengal native infantry. In July he was transferred to the 2nd battalion of the 17th native infantry, stationed at Ludhiana in the Punjab. This battalion was soon afterwards converted into the 35th Bengal native infantry. He served with the 1st battalion (which had become the 34th) from October 1824 until July 1825, then returned to the 35th, and remained in it until 1857. His commission as lieutenant was dated 1 May 1824. He took part in the siege of Bharatpur, and was afterwards stationed at Meerut and in the Lower Provinces, where, at Barrackpore on 21 August 1831, he married Caroline, fourth daughter of J. Corfield of Knowle Lodge, Taunton, Somerset. On 2 April 1834 he was promoted captain. In 1836, his wife having died on 14 November 1835, he went to England on furlough for three years. He married, on 27 July 1838 at Edinburgh, Elizabeth, daughter of John Harriman of Whitehaven, Cumberland. She died on 12 November 1872. 
Seaton returned to India in 1839. His regiment was serving in the First Anglo-Afghan War, and he hastened to join it. After crossing with a convoy the Shikarpur Desert to Bagh in the intense heat of June, he rejoined his regiment at Kabul on 8 September 1839. He remained there two years, except for a short expedition to Bamian. In October 1841, when the regiment was about to return to India as part of Sale's brigade, the Afghan rising erupted. The brigade fought through the Khurd Kabul Pass, and to Jalalabad, reaching it on 12 November, then held it. 
During the defence of Jalalabad Seaton showed his resourcefulness. Sent to destroy an outlying fort which might give cover to the enemy, he diverted a stream to it, and so demolished it. In the first two months of the defence the wine and spirits were all consumed, but Seaton made a still with some washermen's pots and a matchlock barrel, and supplied his mess with spirits as long as there was sugar left. After the siege he was made CB. He was given the local rank of major on 4 October 1842. 
From 1842 to 1851 Seaton was brigade major at Agra. In November 1852 he was promoted major, and in June 1854 brevet lieutenant-colonel. After three years' furlough in England he took command of his regiment at Sialkot on 31 January 1855. In May 1857 he went to Simla on account of his health, but within a week he was sent to Ambala to take command of the 60th native infantry. On 10 June the regiment mutinied, drove away its officers, and marched to join the mutineers in Delhi. The officers went to the British camp, where there was much surprise at their safe arrival. 
Seaton served as a field officer during the earlier part of the siege. On 23 July he was dangerously wounded, and after the fall of Delhi he was sent up to Simla. In November he was again fit for duty, and was made lieutenant-colonel of the 1st Bengal (European) fusiliers, his commission dated 27 June. He was promoted brevet colonel on 13 October. With a force of 2300 men, including his own regiment, he escorted a large convoy from Delhi through the Doab, to join the commander-in-chief. He fought the mutineers near Bibrahan, at Patiali, and at Mainpuri, defeating them by skilful tactics with little loss. 
Seaton joined Sir Colin Campbell at Fatehgarh on 7 January 1858, and was left in command there as brigadier during the siege of Lucknow. He had only a small force, but finding that the mutineers were gathering in large numbers in the neighbourhood, he marched out on the night of 6 April, attacked a force of them at Kanker, and routed them, capturing their guns and baggage, so that the main road to the north-west was no longer in danger. 
In June Seaton was sent to Shahjahanpur, and on 8 October he surprised and defeated the Oudh mutineers at Buragaon. In the following spring, as the fighting was at an end, his brigade was broken up. 
In March 1858 he was made KCB, and in June 1859 he retired with the rank of major-general. He published his two-volume autobiography, 'From Cadet to Colonel', in 1866, and 'A Manual of Fret Cutting and Wood Carving' in 1875. After several years in England he settled in France on account of the milder climate, and he died at Chatou, Paris, on 11 September 1876. 


@@@@@


doc= 24993


Seaward, John (1786-1858), civil engineer, was born at Lambeth, London, in January 1786, the son of a builder. After studying classics and mathematics with equal proficiency, he began working with his father as a surveyor and architect. He was afterwards engaged by Grillier & Co. to supervise the erection of Vauxhall Bridge, one of the first to be built with cement. 
This position brought Seaward the acquaintance of Jeremy Bentham and the engineers Ralph and James Walker. He then managed some lead-mines in Wales, acquired a knowledge of chemistry, and became friendly with Arthur Woolf, Richard Trevithick, and other mechanical engineers. On his return to London he superintended the construction of Gordon's, Dowson's, and other docks on the Thames, and became agent for the Gospel Oak ironworks in Staffordshire. He was also connected with the Imperial and Continental Gas Company, which introduced gas lighting into several towns in France, Belgium, and the Netherlands. In 1823 he made drawings for a new London Bridge and published a treatise on suspension bridges, which gained the attention of Sir Humphrey Davy and other scientists. In 1824 he established the Canal ironworks, Millwall, Poplar, for the construction of machinery. He joined the Institution of Civil Engineers as a member in 1826, and frequently attended its meetings. 
A younger brother, 
In 1825 the Seawards patented a mechanism for propelling steam carriages on common roads, but thereafter concentrated on marine engines. They produced machinery for every part of the world, and made the name of Seaward widely known. Their first vessel, the 'Royal George', was intended to run between Dover and Calais. In 1829 they helped to form the Diamond Steam Packet Company, and built the engines for the boats which ran between Gravesend and London. Of these, the Ruby and the Sapphire were types for speed and for accommodation. 
In 1836 the Seaward brothers brought out the direct-acting engines for the 'Gorgon' and 'Cyclops', known as Seaward's engines, nearly dispensing with the heavy side-beam engines which up to that period were in general use. Their success was complete, and the saving obtained in the consumption of fuel by the double-slide valve, for both the steam and the exhaust, with other improvements, caused the government to entrust the Seawards with the building of twenty-four steamboats and some smaller vessels. They also adapted their engines to the vessels of the East India Company, the steam navigation companies, and the ships of foreign governments. They early advocated the use of auxiliary steam power for East India sailing vessels, and experimented with the 'Vernon' in 1839 and 1840 with great success. They also designed large swing-bridges, dredging machines, cranes, and other dock apparatus, besides machinery for lead, saw, and sugar mills. Among the improvements and inventions for which the Seawards were personally responsible were the tubular boilers, which became standard in the Royal Navy, the detachable cranks for paddle-wheel engines, the telescopic funnel, the self-acting nozzles for feeding and for regulating the saturation of the water in marine boilers, the double passages in cylinders for both steam and eduction, and the cheese-couplings used to connect and disconnect the screw propeller to and from the engines. 
John Seaward published treatises on bridge construction and high-pressure steam engines, and with Samuel wrote 'Observations on the advantages and possibility of successfully employing steam power in navigating ships between this country and the East Indies' (1829). For 'The Steam Engine', published by Thomas Tredgold in 1850, he contributed articles on 'Steam navigation', 'Vessels of iron and wood', 'The steam engine', and 'Screw propulsion'. 
The death of Samuel Seaward at 13 Endsleigh Street, London, on 11 May 1842 threw upon John Seaward the entire management of the Canal ironworks, yet with the assistance of his former apprentices he persevered. Among his most perfect works were the engines of the 'Amazon', 800 horsepower, which he believed would be a lasting monument to his fame. The vessel unfortunately was destroyed by fire on her first passage to the West Indies on 4 January 1852. After an extended illness, John Seaward died of bronchitis at his home, 20 Brecknock Crescent, Camden Town, London, on 26 March 1858. He was survived by his wife, Mary Elizabeth Seaward. 


@@@@@


doc= 24994


Samuel Seaward (1800-1842), joined John in 1825. He had sailed to Bombay and China in the service of the East India Company, and completed an apprenticeship with the Maudslay ironworks in London. He published a 'Description of an improved gauge for ascertaining the pressure of highly compressed steam, gases, and fluid bodies' (1824), and was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 10 June 1841. He also joined the Institution of Civil Engineers, serving as member of council. 


@@@@@


doc= 24995


Saebbi (d. 693/4), the son of King Seaxred. They seem to have divided the kingdom between them. Sigehere and his portion of the East Saxon people reverted to paganism after the outbreak of the great plague of 664, and incurred the wrath of their overlord King Wulfhere of the Mercians, who seems to have interpreted rejection of Christianity as rejection of his own authority. Jaruman, bishop of the Mercians, was dispatched to restore the true religion. Saebbi, in contrast, appears to have been an enthusiastic convert who considered renouncing his throne to become a monk, earning the comment from Bede 'that a man of his disposition ought to have been a bishop rather than a king' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 4.11). In the end Saebbi became a monk only when he fell ill shortly before his death in 693 or 694. He was buried in St Paul's, in a stone sarcophagus which apparently miraculously lengthened in order to accommodate the king's body. He was subsequently regarded as a saint. 
Although Sigehere does not seem to have had the same inclinations as his co-ruler, a cult did develop around his wife, Osgyth (Osyth), the founder of a nunnery at Chich, Essex. Charters surviving from the time of Sigehere and Saebbi reveal that there were other sub-kings of the East Saxons during their reigns who may have had charge of dependent territories. The area that is now Surrey was sporadically under East Saxon control in the late seventh century, and Sigehere's wife was reputedly the daughter of Frithuwald, who had been a Mercian under-king of the province. The East Saxons also attempted to extend their control into west Kent. Sigehere may have ruled there briefly, perhaps in collaboration with Caedwalla of Wessex ('r'. 685-8). Saebbi's son Swaefheard was more successful and ruled as king of part of Kent for a number of years (687/8-692x4), until Wihtred, who had shared rule with him, gained complete control. However, in spite of these successes charter attestations suggest that Sigehere and Saebbi generally recognized Mercian overlordship, apart possibly from a brief interlude of West Saxon authority during the reign of Caedwalla. Sigehere probably predeceased Saebbi and when the latter died he was succeeded by his two sons 


@@@@@


doc= 24996


Saeberht (d. 616/17) recognized the overlordship of his uncle. At the instigation of AEthelberht, Saeberht was converted to Christianity in 604, and Mellitus, one of the second wave of Italian missionaries dispatched by Pope Gregory to Kent, was appointed the first bishop of the East Saxons. It was AEthelberht, not Saeberht, who was remembered as the founder of St Paul's in London for Mellitus's episcopal seat, although London was apparently regarded as part of East Saxon territory. When Saeberht died in or soon after 616, he was succeeded by his three sons, two of whom (as is known from the East Saxon genealogies) were called 


@@@@@


doc= 24997


Sebright, Sir John Saunders, seventh baronet (1767-1846), politician and agriculturist, was born in Sackville Street, Westminster, London, on 23 May 1767, the elder son of Sir John Sebright, sixth baronet ('bap'. 1725, died 1794), MP for Bath (1761-80), and Sarah (died 1812/13), daughter of Edward Knight of Wolverley, Worcestershire. The family, originally from Essex, had settled in Worcestershire in the fourteenth century, and the baronetcy was conferred on Edward Sebright of Besford, Worcestershire, in 1626. From the late seventeenth century, when Sir Edward Sebright, third baronet, married Anne Saunders, the heir of Beechwood, near Hemel Hempstead, their main residence and sphere of influence shifted to Hertfordshire. 
After attending Westminster School, Sebright entered the army in 1785, but retired, as a lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards, on succeeding his father in the title and estates in February 1794. On 6 August 1793 he had married Harriet (died 1826), the daughter and heir of Robert Croftes of Harling, Norfolk; they had one son, Thomas Gage Saunders Sebright (1802-1864), Sebright's successor as eighth baronet, and eight daughters, of whom five died in their father's lifetime. 
Nothing came of a notion of Sebright's standing for parliament at Bath in 1789. At the general election of 1807 he stood for Hertfordshire, which his uncle Sir Thomas Saunders Sebright, fourth baronet, had represented from 1715 to 1736. He came in unopposed, as he did at the next six general elections. At the seventh, in 1832, when he was persuaded to defer his intended retirement, he was returned at the head of the poll. He retired at the dissolution in 1834. In seeking Lord Spencer's support in 1807 he declared that he was 'not devoted to any party' and would 'always consider myself at liberty to act as I may think proper' (Sebright to Earl Spencer, 26 April 1807, HoP, 'Commons, 1790-1820', 5.117). He mostly acted up to these professions in the Commons, where he was a frequent and sometimes tiresome speaker, fond of proclaiming his virtuous independence. As a sincere and steady supporter of religious toleration, particularly Catholic emancipation, and of parliamentary reform, and a critic of excesses in public expenditure, he more often than not sided with the Foxite whig opposition until late 1830, but they could not take his support for granted, especially on questions of law and order, on which he could be an alarmist. He favoured relaxation but not drastic revision of the corn laws, and was a consistent advocate of reform of the game and usury laws. In a deliberate departure from his usual practice of studied neutrality, he declared his support for Canning's ministry in May 1827; but a year later, with typical perversity, he voted against the financial provision for Canning's widow and family. On 1 March 1831 he broke the 'dead silence' which had fallen on a stunned house at the close of Lord John Russell's speech detailing the Grey ministry's 'Reform Bill' by seconding the motion for leave to introduce it and giving it his personal blessing (Aspinall, 13). Both inside and outside parliament he was a zealous supporter of reform during the following fifteen months, although later in March 1831 he published a short letter entitled 'County Reform', in which he expressed misgivings about the effect of enfranchising tenants with short leases. He had similar anxieties about the susceptibility to landlord influence of the tenants-at-will enfranchised by the Chandos amendment, but he accepted that the enactment of reform was the paramount consideration. On 4 February 1832 he belatedly joined Brooks's Club, thereby signifying his final adherence to the whigs. An improving agriculturist, with a deep interest in and love of animals, he published works entitled 'The Art of Improving the Breeds of Domestic Animals' (1809), 'Observations upon Hawking' (1826), and 'Observations upon the Instincts of Animals' (1836). Sebright, who built and endowed a school at Cheverell's Green and erected almshouses at Flamstead, Hertfordshire, died at Turnham Green, Middlesex, on 15 April 1846. 
Sebright's oddness and bluntness made him one of the minor celebrities of the Commons. Although Brougham, nettled by his support for repressive legislation in 1818, cursed him as 'Jack Gabble' (Brougham to Lambton, HoP, 'Commons, 1790-1820', 5.119), Le Marchant referred to him in 1831 as 'a sagacious, hardheaded man', whose 'opinion is generally esteemed of much weight' (Aspinall, 168). Frances Calvert, wife of his Hertfordshire parliamentary colleague Nicolson Calvert, wrote that he had 'some good qualities' but 'also a great many disagreeable ones', including 'a violent temper' (Blake, 20). Maria Edgeworth, who described his eyebrows as 'prodigious natural curiosities', stayed at Beechwood in 1822: 'Sir John Sebright is one of the most entertaining characters I ever saw. He is very clever, very vain, very odd, full of fancies and paradoxes and with abilities to defend them all... notwithstanding his philosophical tenderness principles about dogs and horses... he has been violent with his children... his daughters... all look under abject awe of him... They all have dogs faces... They do not seem to live happily together and in the midst of luxuries and fine house and park this perception chills their guests. ('Letters from England', 325-6)' 



@@@@@


doc= 24998


Secker, Thomas (1693-1768), archbishop of Canterbury, was born at Sibthorp, a small village in the Vale of Belvoir, in Nottinghamshire, on 21 September 1693; he was the second of three children of Thomas Secker ('bap'. 1631, died 1700) -- son of Leonard Secker, a butcher from Marston, Lincolnshire -- and his third wife, Abigail (1665/6-1707), daughter of George Brough, a gentleman farmer from Shelton in Nottinghamshire. His father's elder brother William, in an interesting anticipation of the career of his more famous nephew, conformed to the Church of England and became vicar of All Hallows-the-Less, London, in 1663, and in 1667 rector of Lee, Essex, where he died in 1681. Secker's father was a nonconformist with a small income that enabled him to get by without pursuing any regular employment. The names of his first and second wives remain unknown. With his second wife he had a daughter, Elizabeth, who married Richard Milnes, a member of a well-established Chesterfield family. With his third wife, whom he married in 1685, his eldest child was Abigail-Anna, born in 1690, and his youngest, George, born in 1696. Having acquired a young family to support at a relatively late age he rented a farm at Sibthorp from John Holles, duke of Newcastle, for $100 p.a., which led him to be designated a yeoman in contemporary records; he died at Sibthorp in 1700. According to Secker his father had been 'a pious & virtuous & sensible man' ('Autobiography', fol. 3), who, although he had resisted becoming a dissenting minister, had had high hopes that his son Thomas would do so. Later commentators indeed discerned that something of the archbishop's dissenting background and upbringing remained with him for the rest of his life, finding a perceived 'shyness in his behaviour' and an 'affected quaintness in the tone of his voice' (Hasted, 12.511), which they associated with his nonconformist roots. After his father's death his mother married William Allen and continued to manage the Sibthorp farm until she died in 1707, aged forty-one. 
In 1699 Secker was sent to live with his half-sister Elizabeth and her husband, Richard Milnes, in Chesterfield. He went to the free school there, where the master, Richard Brown, was a staunch supporter of the Church of England. An almost certainly apocryphal story recounts how, after Secker had done well in his lessons, Brown had congratulated him, saying 'If thou wouldst but come over to the Church, I am sure thou wouldst be a bishop' ('GM', 38.451). At the age of fifteen Secker was sent in 1708 to a dissenting academy at Attercliffe, near Sheffield, which was run by Timothy Jolly, an Independent minister; this was because, as he later recalled, 'some of my Acquaintance entic[ed] me, sometimes to drink, & sometimes to go to Church' ('Autobiography', fol. 4). By then he had acquired a competent knowledge of Greek and Latin. He was, however, unhappy at Attercliffe, which was not a particularly scholarly establishment, and he noted tartly: 'I lost much of this Learning there, & acquired but little instead of it. For only the old Philosophy of the Schools was taught there: and that neither ably nor diligently. The morals also of many of the young Men were bad. I spent my time there idly & ill. (ibid.)' He left after about eighteen months.To offset this unprofitable educational experience Secker, while at Attercliffe, had become acquainted with Henry Etough, who would later conform to the Church of England; Matthew Leesom, later a dissenting minister at Thame; and Joseph Sills, afterwards an Independent minister at Henley. More importantly he became friendly with John Bowes, a future lord chancellor of Ireland. In 1710 he went to lodge in Bowes's father's house in London and there he learned geometry, conic sections, algebra, and French, and he studied Locke's 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding' (1690). He met the celebrated nonconformist divine and hymn-writer Isaac Watts, who also boarded at the Bowes's house. Watts advised Secker to go to an academy in Gloucester in the house of Joseph Wintle, a distiller, which was run by Samuel Jones, a dissenting layman. Jones had studied at Leiden and was a distinguished orientalist; under his tuition Secker soon regained his knowledge of Greek and Latin, and added to it Hebrew, Chaldee, and Syriac, which stood him in good stead in later life in his studies of the 'Old Testament' and early church history. He was also taught Jewish antiquities, logic, and mathematics. His fellow students at Jones's academy included several who would later be influential in eighteenth-century religious circles: Joseph Butler and Isaac Maddox, who like Secker later conformed to the Church of England and became bishops; and Samuel Chandler, Daniel Scott, and Jeremiah Jones, who became leading nonconformist divines. In 1713 Jones moved his academy to Tewkesbury, borrowing $200 from Secker to do so, but he soon took to drink and his teaching suffered as a result. Both Butler (February 1714) and Secker (June 1714) left the academy. While at Tewkesbury, Secker was privy to the correspondence between Butler and the influential latitudinarian Church of England clergyman Samuel Clarke about the latter's 'A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God' (1705). To make sure that no one else knew of the correspondence Secker acted as a go-between, delivering Butler's letters by hand to the post office at Gloucester and bringing back Clarke's replies. 
Having left Jones's academy Secker returned to Chesterfield. During the winter of 1714-15 he was living at Nottingham with his sister Abigail-Anna when his brother-in-law, Samuel Wildboare, died; Secker helped to put her affairs in order. He was by now having serious reservations about being a dissenter. During this period he read up about various theological subjects, such as the doctrine of the Trinity, on which for the time being he agreed with Clarke's liberal and decidedly Arian views; the inspiration of scripture, where he was influenced by Richard Simon's 'Sentiment de quelques theologiens d'Hollande sur l'histoire critique du Vieux Testament' (1685), which questioned the historicity of parts of the 'Old Testament'; and subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', about which he corresponded with Butler, who was now studying at Oriel College, Oxford. Secker also read the principal writers on lay and ministerial conformity, and he went through the 'New Testament' in the original Greek, with the help of commentaries. By the autumn of 1715 he was living in London, where he studied various theological works, particularly those concerning the primitive church, including the apostolic fathers, Eusebius's 'Ecclesiastical History', and William Whiston's 'Primitive Christianity Revived' (1711), all of which were central to the debates between conformity and dissent. 
Secker now found himself accepting conformity to the Church of England as a layman but he was as yet unsure whether he could be ordained within the church. Because he needed more time to think matters through he began to apply himself to the subject of medicine, explaining his decision as 'a small change in my studies... from the spirit to the flesh' (Secker to John Fox, October 1716, in 'Monthly Repository of Theology and General Literature', 16.569). During the winter of 1716-17 he took some anatomy courses with the leading surgeon William Cheselden. According to Secker, Cheselden was 'occasionally much given to irreligious talk' ('Autobiography', fol. 5). Mixing in such company allowed later opponents of the archbishop to criticize him for mocking religion in his youth. He was keen to stress in his autobiography -- which he wrote to ensure that 'Some Facts and dates may prevent certain Falsehoods, & perhaps injurious falsehoods, from being spred concerning me hereafter' (ibid., fol. 1) -- that he had not shared his mentor's views, although letters from 1716 to 1718, which were printed in volume 16 of the 'Monthly Repository' (1821), do indicate a certain irreverent tone. Secker then went to live with a Mr Bakewell, an apothecary who had a house in King Street in Cheapside and who taught the future archbishop the rudiments of medical prescriptions and practice. 
In January 1718 Secker left for Paris, where he lodged with the renowned anatomist Jacques-Benigne Winslow. Secker also learned dissection at the Salpetriere -- a hospital that specialized in the care of poor patients and prostitutes. That an archbishop of the Church of England had dissected bodies was not mentioned by his future chaplain and biographer, Beilby Porteus, probably because this was considered an unseemly career path for one who had reached the highest position in the church. Secker's critics, on the other hand, made great play of this period in his life, accusing him of having received an unsuitable early training for an archbishop. While with Winslow, Secker worked at the Hotel Dieu Hospital and studied with J. F. A. Gregoire, the man-midwife and founder of the first obstetrics clinic. During his stay in France he also met Bernard-Sigefroi Albinus, professor at Leiden; Father Montfaucon, the patristic scholar; and Martin Benson, his future brother-in-law and, later, bishop of Gloucester. 
Though primarily studying medicine Secker continued to read theology and kept up his correspondence with Joseph Butler, who had by then taken orders with the Church of England. Butler's close friend was Edward Talbot, archdeacon of Berkshire and son of the bishop of Salisbury, and Talbot thought that Secker should be persuaded to be ordained within the Church of England. He assured Butler that if Secker took orders his father, the bishop, who himself had had liberal theological opinions, would find him a living. Butler let Secker know of this scheme and Secker contemplated it for two months. His theological scruples about becoming ordained had in any case grown weaker following the Salters' Hall dispute of 1719, which had split the dissenting camp, and, as he admitted in his autobiography, he was increasingly concerned about the financial risks of taking on a medical career. In August 1720 he returned to England; he met Edward Talbot and they got on well. In December Talbot unfortunately died of smallpox but, true to his promise, he had recommended his friends to his father. Secker was advised by Thomas Rundle, another theological liberal and at the time chaplain to Bishop Talbot, that he should take an Oxford degree before proceeding to holy orders and that this would be made easier if he first took the degree of doctor of physic at Leiden. Secker graduated MD from Leiden in 1721 and his thesis, 'De medicina statica', was printed there later in the same year; it was reprinted by Haller in 1748 as part of his 'Disputationum anatomicarum selectarum', volume 3. The thesis was a critical study of the pioneering metabolic work of the Italian physician Santorio Sanctorius, and in it Secker demonstrated Sanctorius's dependence on previous authorities and challenged his experimental method for not being rigorous enough. 
Secker returned to England and on 1 April 1721 entered Exeter College, Oxford, as a gentleman-commoner. Martin Benson, his friend from France, was a student of Christ Church; Rundle introduced him to John Conybeare, then a fellow of Exeter and later its rector and bishop of Bristol, who became Secker's 'nominal tutor' ('Autobiography', fol. 11); he also became acquainted with Arthur Charlett, master of University College, and William Delaune, president of St John's College. Secker soon became aware of the tory bias of the university: 'I soon found, that the Whigs could procure me no Academical Favour, & therefore cultivated the Tories, particularly Dr Delaune' (ibid.). He also moved in non-juring circles for a time, mixing with the likes of Samuel Jebb, Thomas Carte, Sir John St Aubyn, and John King; in later years he was anxious to assert his loyalty to the government, claiming that though they did drink to the duke of Ormond they never drank the Pretender's health. 
Secker lived in Oxford only as long as was needed to fulfil the residence requirements and was introduced to London society by Samuel Clarke, by then rector of St James's, Piccadilly, and George Berkeley, who became a close lifelong friend. There he spent much of his time at the houses of Bishop Talbot and of Mary Talbot, the widow of Edward. She had given birth to a daughter, Catherine, five months after her husband's death and lived with her companion, Catherine Benson, the sister of Secker's friend Martin. On 6 July 1722 Secker was admitted to the degree of BA as a result of a letter of recommendation from the chancellor. Talbot, now bishop of Durham, ordained Secker as deacon in St James's, Piccadilly, on 23 December 1722. On reviewing his relationship with the Church of England at the time of his ordination Secker stated in his autobiography that he had never officiated as a dissenting minister nor ever put himself forward as a candidate for the dissenting ministry, nor had he taken communion as a dissenter, and that he had constantly attended Anglican services since his return from France in 1720. Quite when Secker actually left dissent is not clear. Francis Blackburne later thought that the future archbishop gave up on nonconformity when he matriculated at Exeter College in 1721, because this necessitated subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'; Secker's brother, George, however, suggested that he conformed when he was about seventeen. Secker's odyssey from dissent to conformity, and even the taking of orders within the Church of England, was common among nonconformists of his generation. In any case it may be misleading to draw too hard and fast a line between nonconformity and conformity in this period, given that it was not unusual to attend both the nonconformist meeting-house and the parish church. Even after his ordination it is likely that Secker retained his former liberal theological opinions and only slowly became a staunch defender of orthodox views. His ordination to the priesthood followed on 10 March 1723, again by Talbot in St James's, and it was here that he preached his first sermon, on 28 March. In July he went to Durham as joint chaplain to Bishop Talbot with Thomas Rundle, and preached the assize sermon at Newcastle upon Tyne. He was appointed to the valuable rectory of Houghton-le-Spring, near Durham, to which he was instituted on 12 February 1724, having first taken his MA at Oxford on 4 February. During the same year he helped his friend Joseph Butler to prepare for publication the sermons that he had earlier delivered at the Rolls chapel. 
Secker's thoughts now turned to marriage. He proposed to Catherine Benson in April 1725 -- her mother died from consumption shortly after the announcement -- and Bishop Talbot officiated at their marriage on 28 October in King Street Chapel, London. Though now married Catherine Secker did not want to stop sharing a house with Bishop Talbot's widowed daughter-in-law and her child, and so the two families lived together, both in the lodgings in Dover Street, London, and also at Houghton-le-Spring, where Secker was proving to be a hard-working rural incumbent. His medical knowledge came in handy in his northern parish and he regularly visited his sick parishioners, but Houghton was damp and Mrs Secker's health soon deteriorated; a plan was drawn up whereby Secker gave up Houghton for the more salubrious and prestigious rectory of Ryton, near Newcastle upon Tyne, where Dr Finney, the rector, was infirm and about to relinquish the living. For some reason the scheme was blocked by Thomas Rundle, whom Secker had for some time suspected to be 'selfish' and 'jealous' ('Autobiography', fol. 13), and he advised the bishop to give Ryton to someone else. In the end the exchange went through and on 3 June 1727 Secker was instituted at Ryton and to the third prebend of Durham. He now lived mainly at Durham but went over every weekend to officiate at Ryton and spent three months there in the summer. 
Mrs Secker's ill health continued to cause her husband concern and Secker took her first to London and then to Bath, where they stayed until 8 April 1728. There Secker met Ralph Allen and was present at the deathbed of George Stanhope, a leading high-church figure in Queen Anne's reign; he also cemented his friendship with George Berkeley and his wife. On returning to Durham, Secker was responsible, with Benson, for organizing the books and deeds of the cathedral; he paid methodical attention to ecclesiastical records throughout his career. Bishop Talbot died on 10 October 1730 and Secker preached the sermon at his funeral. He was now becoming well known as a preacher and, not unexpectedly, he was appointed a royal chaplain on 28 May 1732, on the recommendation of both Thomas Sherlock, bishop of Bangor, who had heard him preach in Bath, and Benson, who was also a chaplain to George II. This was to prove an important step in Secker's career, as his preaching abilities reached a wider circle, and he gained an increasing reputation; on 27 August he preached before Queen Caroline at St James's Chapel Royal. She was impressed by his performance and later invited him to attend her 'philosophical parties'. In July 1733 he was invited to preach the Act sermon at Oxford, entitled 'On the advantages and duties of an academical education', before taking the degree of doctor of civil law. This otherwise well-regarded sermon was later attacked in print by William Webster, clerical editor of the 'Weekly Miscellany', for not including enough scriptural quotations, although Secker later gave Webster some support. 
Secker's career as a prominent cleric was confirmed on 18 May 1733, when he was instituted as rector of St James's, Piccadilly, through the influence of Edmund Gibson, bishop of London. Secker continued to keep Ryton, and appointed a curate there. His methodical approach to work, his concern for accuracy and for keeping records in good order, and his evident business ability were soon seen at St James's, where immediately after his arrival he took vestry business in hand. He stopped the habit of spending money on treats for the parish and examined all the accounts of the officers, putting them in order and making rules for their use in the future. Not all the parishioners, however, were enamoured of Secker's business acumen and attention to detail. In his autobiography he noted that this became a running sore throughout his incumbency; in particular he remembered the trouble caused by Henry Fane, a wealthy parishioner, and Thomas Bonney, an assistant preacher in the parish, when he attempted to rent out part of the land belonging to the rectory to make the churchyard larger. He preached usually three Sundays a month at the parish church and, on the fourth, at each of the chapels of ease. 
In December 1734 Secker unexpectedly received a letter from Bishop Gibson, informing him that George II had 'pitched' on him for the bishopric of Bristol. 'I had made no Application for it to any Person,' he later claimed, 'as indeed I never did for any thing, either before or afterwards' ('Autobiography', fol. 21). He was consecrated at Lambeth Palace on 19 January 1735. As was to be characteristic of Secker on obtaining a new appointment he immediately investigated the diocese's records, and discovered that those for the county of Dorset housed at Blandford had been destroyed by fire. A new diocesan survey was needed and he immediately undertook a visitation of his see. He began the visitation at Shaftesbury and confirmed in fifteen places, reaching Bristol on 10 September, where he gave 20 guineas for the erection of a statue of William III in Queen Square. He also contributed to church building in the diocese. The speculum, or diocesan book, that emerged from his visitation was used by his successors until the early nineteenth century. 
In 1737 Secker was offered the bishopric of Oxford, which at first he refused because accepting it would, he felt, have been financially disadvantageous. He finally agreed to accept after being told that he would get a handsome sum of money for a life lease for lands at Hook Norton on account of the death of Lord Chancellor Talbot. At Oxford he proved as diligent and hard-working as at Bristol. His first major task was to organize a visitation of the diocese, which he undertook in 1738; the answers to his queries have been published in a modern edition and are an invaluable window into church life in the period. Secker collected information pertaining to the see and he composed, as he had done at Bristol and as he would do at Canterbury, a speculum of the diocese, which unfortunately is now lost. His letters to the clergy while bishop of Oxford, many of which survive, reveal him to have been a conscientious pastor -- a stickler for standards who demanded that clergy should give the best pastoral provision possible and who reproved clergy who did not live up to these ideals. The editor of his letters concludes that 'his approach as diocesan was generally vigilant, exacting and authoritarian, indeed severe to backsliders' ('Correspondence', xx). Secker insisted that as far as possible clergy should perform 'full duty' -- that is, give both morning and evening services on Sundays -- and he encouraged residence in the parish. He held five visitations during his time at Oxford (1738, 1741, 1749, 1750, and 1753). The charges to his clergy that he delivered on these occasions gave advice on all manner of topics, ranging from study, ordination, relations with dissent, preaching, the importance of holy communion, and the importance of keeping up church fabric to the perils of having an unsupervised church choir. To a certain extent the charges demonstrate his reflections on issues and problems raised by the clergy in their day-to-day business. Secker paid particular attention to the ways in which confirmation was administered and began the practice of issuing confirmation tickets in order to help make these events more orderly. He was also keen to make sure that his clergy received a suitable income -- supporting applications to Queen Anne's Bounty and urging his clergy to defend their rights to the full monetary worth of their livings. In the summer he resided at the bishop's palace at Cuddesdon, where he preached on Sundays, read lectures on the catechism, and held a public dinner every Thursday. He spent about $600 on the house and gardens, $180 on the chancel, and nearly $30 on the chancel of Wheatley chapel during his time as bishop. At Oxford he had frequent contact with members of the university, which, as a stronghold of high-churchmanship, regarded the whig bishop with some suspicion; he did well to avoid falling out with some of its members. One of his unofficial roles was to keep an eye on the politics of the university, which was rather ironic given that the ministry during the 1740s had some cause to doubt his loyalty. He was also brought into close contact with Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, as Blenheim Palace was within the diocese. Secker frequently visited her there and was made one of her executors. He officiated at her funeral service in 1744 and she left him money in her will. 
Though successively bishop of Bristol and Oxford, Secker continued to hold both his prebend at Durham and the rectory of St James's 'in commendam' until 1750, on the grounds that both Bristol and Oxford were rated as poor bishoprics financially. But he did not neglect his parish, spending most of the year in London, where he was a frequent preacher in the parish church, and employing a curate, Charles Linde, so that he could reside during the summer months in his dioceses. It was, for instance, while rector of St James's that Secker wrote his thirty-nine 'Lectures on the church catechism' for the use of his parishioners (published after his death in 1769 in two volumes). It was here too that he delivered some of his most influential sermons, such as the 1750 sermon following the London earthquake, where Secker accused Londoners of being degenerate and in need of moral reformation. In his own estimation at least he was a model cleric in the parish. During the harsh winter of 1739-40 he played a large part in the distribution of poor relief in the parish. He improved the parsonage house (spending over $500 in repairing it), instructed children in the catechism, gave out religious tracts, paid his curate a satisfactory wage, and paid for the reading of early-morning and late-evening prayers. He also helped obtain the 'Watch Act' for the parish in 1735, despite initial opposition from some of the parishioners. 
As rector of St James's, Secker's most illustrious parishioner was Frederick, prince of Wales, particularly after the prince had left the court, following the rift with his father, George II, in 1737 and had come to live at Norfolk House, which was within the parish boundaries. Secker had impressed the king with his sermon on the death of Queen Caroline in that year and he realized that the king had hoped that he could have done more to improve relations with his son. Secker, however, felt that he had little influence over the prince. Indeed he asked Robert Walpole whether he should visit the prince whenever he resided in the parish, as he did with every other person of rank, but Walpole advised him against doing so, even though Francis Ayscough, the prince's clerk of the closet, invited him to pay his respects. The first time that the prince came to St James's Church, Thomas Bonney, the assistant preacher, began the service with the scriptural quotation 'I will arise and go to my Father' ('Luke' 15: 18-19), which was taken in London gossip circles to be a direct hint to the prince, and it was also inaccurately rumoured that Secker himself had preached at the same service on the fifth commandment ('Honour thy Father and thy Mother'). According to Secker's own testimony his relations with the prince were cordial but not close. He did bow to the prince in church and he even altered the time of morning prayer from 10.30 to 11 for his convenience. In return the prince always gave an Easter offering of $21 and Secker baptized seven of the prince's nine children. At the baptism of the future George III in 1738 the prince gave Secker a gold snuffbox with his portrait in it. Yet Secker felt that it was because of his failure to do much to patch up relations between father and son, and because he sometimes voted against the court, that George II did not speak to him for several years. It was widely believed that his bad relations with the king ensured that he had a 'protracted tenure' of the relatively poor dioceses of Bristol and Oxford (Sykes, 64). His voting against the court was, he claimed, also a reason why his friend and now fellow bishop Joseph Butler became more reserved towards him during the late 1730s and early 1740s. 
Secker's position in the House of Lords illustrates that eighteenth-century bishops were not simply ministerial voting fodder. From his appointment to the bishopric of Bristol in 1735 until the late 1740s he regularly attended debates within the Lords, making notes (later used by William Cobbett as a source for his 'Parliamentary History'), using the shorthand that he also used on other occasions, particularly when he wanted to keep information private (BL, Add. MS 6043 has Secker's reports on debates, 1735-42). On several major pieces of legislation he did vote against the government. His first protest at government policy was to vote, with Edmund Gibson and other bishops, against the 'Quaker Tithe Bill' of 1736, which would have relieved Quakers from some of the pains of non-payment of tithes and which was regarded as an attack on church interests. His opposition to ministerial policy seemed confirmed when, on Easter Monday 1738, he preached the Spital sermon and praised Sir John Barnard, lord mayor of London, who had voted against the ministry on a number of occasions. He next voted against the government in 1739, after the Lords debate about the Pardo convention with Spain, in which the ministry appeared to sacrifice British to Spanish interests. But something of Secker's ambivalent attitude towards outright opposition can be seen when on 13 February 1741 he and Benson voted against the proposal in the House of Lords to ask the king to remove Sir Robert Walpole 'from his presence and counsels for ever'. Yet they also voted against the motion for censuring this proposal. On 28 January 1742 Secker voted with 'formed opposition' in favour of a secret committee to enquire into the conduct of the war with Spain, especially into the alleged lack of reinforcements for Admiral Vernon's expedition. His criticism of the ministry was also demonstrated in 1741 and 1742, when Secker (with other bishops) voted for a 'Pension Bill' that would make it compulsory for MPs to declare whether they had government pensions, and a place bill, which sought to bar MPs from having a court office. In the same year he abstained from voting on the second reading of the bill for indemnifying people who should make discoveries concerning Walpole's conduct. His next anti-government move was to vote against the 'Spirituous Liquors Bill' of 1743, which would have reduced the duty payable on gin. Secker called the bill evil: 'the most unchristian bill that was ever brought in by any government; and therefore I think it incumbent on me as a Christian bishop to give my testimony against it in the most open and express manner I can' (Taylor, 'Church and state in England', 174-5). To counter this oppositional stance, on other occasions Secker could be a reliable supporter of the government. In 1744 he made a powerful speech in defence of 'an act to make it Treason to hold correspondence with the sons of the Pretender to the Crown, and for attainting them of High Treason in case they should land or attempt to land in Great Britain'. Early in 1745 his support for the government was also seen in the anti-Jacobite sermon that he preached at St James's in both February and October and that was later published. Nevertheless his pro-Hanoverian stance could be softened by his compassion for fellow clergy. In November 1743 he received a letter asking for his support for the Scottish clergy widows and children in their attempt to have a bill passed for their maintenance. His autobiography reveals some co-ordination of church policy on this issue; he remembered that 'No Bp opposed [it]... And we took Care that a Bp shd be present at each of its 3 readings in the House of Lords' ('Autobiography', fol. 32). In 1748 Scottish Episcopal clergy protested against their persecution in the wake of the repressive legislation following the rising of 1745-6; Secker spoke in their defence. In 1753 he expressed reservations about Lord Hardwicke's 'Marriage Act', which he pressured Hardwicke to amend. His last major parliamentary intervention came in 1754. In the previous year he had supported the government's 'Jewish Naturalization Bill', although he did speak for a clause to disable Jews from being patrons of livings. But after the public clamour that followed the passing of the act, the duke of Newcastle was anxious to have it repealed and Secker was chosen as the bishop who would second the motion. His speech was very well received, though so moderate and judicious were his comments that some thought he was still supporting the bill. Staunch whig that he was Secker could also transcend party politics, as can be seen in his suggestion to Lord Hardwicke (probably in 1740) that it might be prudent, in forming a new ministry, to bring in some of the 'better' tories (ibid., 29). 
By 1750 Secker was on better terms with George II, and on 11 December he was promoted to the deanery of St Paul's. The king had been convinced that Secker had renounced his links with any oppositional tendencies: he 'has acted like a gentleman, and I know has declared it to the opposition themselves. He has told Lord Limerick that he would never be for a secret committee again as long as he lived' (Newcastle to Pelham, 23 Aug 1750, BL, Add. MS 32722, fol. 223). Having been made dean Secker recalled that the king did occasionally speak to him, although 'never with any Mark of Distinction' ('Autobiography', fol. 49). On account of his promotion Secker resigned both his Durham prebend and the rectory of St James's, and when he preached his farewell sermon at the latter the congregation is said to have dissolved into tears. As dean he was extremely hard-working and went to St Paul's twice a day. Characteristically one of his first major tasks was to sort out the records and finances of the cathedral. During 1753-4 he examined the accounts of the surplus that had been left unspent after the cathedral had been rebuilt in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries and that was meant to have been reserved for repairs; he was concerned that the principal was being diminished and he made sure that it would be safeguarded in future. He had the documents about the cathedral put in order and personally indexed and corrected a copy of the statute book, and examined the registers and chapter books, extracting from them useful material for his successors. He was also instrumental in the repair programme, which put the cathedral in a better condition. 
During the 1750s Secker was involved in some of the intellectual debates of the time, and a number of writers on behalf of the church sought his opinion of their work. His grounding in early Christian history was put to use in 1749-50 in helping Thomas Church in his controversy with Conyers Middleton over the existence of miracles after the time of the apostles, and in 1755 he commented on Church's 'Analysis of the Philosophical Works of the Late Viscount Bolingbroke'. Secker was also a promoter of the work of Benjamin Kennicott (whom he made vicar of Culham, in the diocese of Oxford, in 1753), encouraging him in efforts to collect and collate Hebrew manuscripts and defending his scholarly methods against the critiques of the Hutchinsonians. He also read through Thomas Sharp's drafts in his disputes with the Hutchinsonians, and from 1749 he had encouraged the bluestocking Elizabeth Carter, daughter of the rector of Deal and an intimate of Catherine Talbot, in her edition of 'Epictetus', which was finally published in 1757. 
On 19 March 1758 Archbishop Matthew Hutton died and the duke of Newcastle proposed that Secker should succeed him. George II apparently asked whether Secker had been connected with the Leicester House opposition and the duke assured the king that he had not. The king consented to the appointment on 22 March and Secker was confirmed archbishop at Bow church on 21 April. Later that summer the University of Oxford presented an address to George II and, given the king's former suspicion of the university, Secker intervened to make sure that he received it kindly. Secker's warmer relations with the monarchy were cemented in 1760, when George III (whom he had baptized) succeeded his grandfather. Horace Walpole sniped that at the young king's accession Secker attempted to make himself 'first minister in a court that hoisted the standard of religion' (Walpole, 1.16) and tried to elbow out leading aristocratic families. There is little evidence of this, although Secker did hope that the new court would set a standard for religious practice. As archbishop he presided over George's coronation in 1761, revising the coronation service, and officiated at the marriage ceremony between George and Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz earlier in the same year. 
Secker's archiepiscopate has claims to be one of the most, if not the most, distinguished in the eighteenth century. As archbishop he continued to be as hard-working as he had been in his former posts in the church, and he aimed to have a detailed grasp not only of diocesan business but also of the wider role that his post demanded. If there is a central feature about his occupation of the see it was perhaps his near obsession with paperwork in trying to keep up with developments on all fronts. The headquarters of his administrative machine was Lambeth Palace, which, being near the court and parliament -- and in the absence of convocation -- was the hub of national church life. Secker used Lambeth as a meeting place for bishops and also for interviewing and entertaining Kentish gentry and clergymen in his diocese. This could be costly and household expenses took over half his income, accounting for $4692 6's'. 2died in 1767. Testimony to the importance of Lambeth in Secker's archiepiscopate is the large archive that he amassed at Lambeth Palace Library. With his encouragement there was a thorough re-ordering of the archival and printed collections of his predecessors, and their act books, by the Lambeth librarian, Andrew Coltee Ducarel. 
As archbishop Secker made some attempt to create a national policy. He worked particularly closely with his fellow archbishop Robert Hay Drummond of York to co-ordinate responses to problems facing the church, and they acted together over the administration of Queen Anne's Bounty. His concerns for the well-being of the national church were, however, tempered by the existence of what he considered to be a laity suspicious of clerical power. In 1761 he warned against the opening of convocation to do any real business, since 'in whatever way we act, we will excite great offence' (Taylor, 'Bishop Edmund Gibson's proposals', 185). During the last decade of his life Secker had to prioritize his engagements and cut down on his public appearances. He was no longer so involved in parliament as previously. This was partly because since 1754 he had been a supporter of the duke of Newcastle; in his new role he was consulted by successive ministries on promotions and he did not want to suggest that his previous connections indicated disloyalty to governments that did not include Newcastle or his circle. Furthermore by the time of his appointment to the archbishopric he found the long days and the heat of the upper chamber too much. One of his last parliamentary interventions was to speak, on 8 May 1765, opposing repeal of the 'Marriage Act' and the passing of a new 'Marriage Bill'; in 1767 he ceased attending the Lords altogether. He had been one of the most popular preachers of the day, and from the mid-1730s he could be found speaking on all manner of occasions and at all kinds of fund-raising meetings for the church. He himself noted that he had preached 'about' fifty-six charity sermons alone in and around London. He decided therefore, in 1760, not to accept any more requests to preach at similar events. 
A hallmark of Secker's archiepiscopate was his attempt to strengthen links with foreign protestants. His own concern for the plight of persecuted protestants living in continental Europe reflected his belief that England, as the leading protestant nation, should look after its protestant brethren abroad. Even before he had become archbishop Secker was known to sympathize with their cause. In 1757 the congregation of the protestant church at Thorn, in Prussia, many members of which had been massacred by neighbouring Catholics, successfully petitioned Secker for help to publicize their cause in England in their attempt to rebuild their church. As archbishop Secker secured relief for the Vaudois community in 1767-8 and launched a national brief for their support. He seems to have particularly favoured financial aid to Hungarian protestants, giving $10 p.a. to the professors of Debreczen and to Johannes Uri, a Hungarian specialist in oriental languages. A related issue was the position of foreign protestants who now lived in England. At least as early as 1752 Secker had contributed to the maintenance of Huguenots living in London; as archbishop he was also keen to establish links with French Huguenot congregations and corresponded with John James Majendie, especially over financial aid. He also used his position to try to persuade Huguenots to conform to the Church of England, and he promoted several of those who took orders to Canterbury livings. 
One issue that did become important during Secker's archiepiscopate was the question of a bishop for the American colonies. As early as 1741 he had stressed in a sermon to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts that it was essential to have a resident bishop in North America, and in 1749 he was involved with drafting a petition for a bishopric in Nova Scotia. In 1751 he wrote a letter to Horace Walpole (which he did not want published until after his death), which replied to an earlier letter of Walpole's to Bishop Thomas Sherlock attacking such a scheme as being against the colonists' wishes. Secker put forward the view -- much influenced by his correspondence with Samuel Johnson, president of King's College, New York -- that the colonists wanted bishops of their own and that a bishop (or bishops) would be essential to the maintenance of the church in North America. Not surprisingly the issue of the plans for an American bishopric was used by some of Secker's opponents in the 1760s. Thomas Hollis had formerly been an admirer of Secker, even presenting him with a head of Socrates made from green jasper at the time of his promotion to the bishopric of Oxford, but seems to have fallen out with Secker after the 1741 sermon. Hollis co-ordinated opposition on both sides of the Atlantic to what were considered to be Anglican encroachments and he encouraged the Boston congregationalist Jonathan Mayhew to write a polemic against the designs of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts in 1763. In response Secker tried to put the case, as firmly and as judiciously as possible, for the creation of a bishopric in his 'An answer to Dr Mayhew's observations on the charter and conduct of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts' (1764). 
Secker's views on the need for an American bishopric aroused criticism from within the ranks of his own clergy. In 1766 Francis Blackburne, archdeacon of Cleveland and a vigorous low-churchman, published 'The Confessional'; it appeared anonymously and was part of a wider attack on the requirement that Church of England clergy should subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. Blackburne argued for a further reformation of what he considered to be popish elements within the church; not only did he accuse Secker's predecessor, Archbishop William Wake, of foregoing protestant principles in his talks with the Gallican church but he criticized Secker's aims to create an episcopate in the colonies as being evidence of the popery that remained within the church, going so far as to compare Secker to Archbishop Laud. Secker found out who was behind the publication and encouraged Gloster Ridley to write against it in 'Three Letters to the Author of the Confessional' (1768), providing much of the text for it himself and defending Ridley in the press. The archbishop tried to clear his predecessor of the charges that Blackburne had made against him, carefully going through Wake's papers in Oxford and elsewhere to prove him innocent. As part of his attempt to clear the Church of England's hierarchy from the imputation of popery, a year earlier Secker had written an article to the press under the pseudonym Misopsuedes, refuting the charge that Bishop Butler had been a closet papist. 
At the diocesan level Secker was an energetic archbishop. True to form his first major task was to set out on his primary visitation from 10 to 27 July 1758. He followed this up with visitations in 1762 and 1766 but he needed to be convinced that archbishops of Canterbury were only required to visit their diocese once every four years rather than triennially. The charges delivered on these occasions continued his policy at Oxford of advising his clergy on pressing pastoral difficulties. The returns to his queries from the first visitation, with information added from the later visitations, were digested by him in his speculum. He was the first archbishop since the early part of the century to undertake a thorough visitation of the peculiars and, as at Bristol and at Oxford, he took especial care to regulate the organization of confirmations and encouraged the taking of communion. He was keen to be candid and was generous and benevolent when he felt that his clergy were trying their best but he could be quite sharp with clergy whom he considered were not fulfilling their pastoral duties. Some clergy seem to have resented the new archbishop's obsession with detail and his attempt to tighten up pastoral care in the diocese, seeing this as undue interference. 
Secker paid particular interest in those ordained to a Canterbury title and refused to ordain those whom he thought lacked satisfactory theological knowledge; it was said that he had a black book containing the names of those whom he would not ordain or promote. He took a particular interest in those who acted as curates in the diocese. During his time as archbishop very few clergy were dismissed for misconduct, though he frowned on beneficed clergy who fell below his ideal of clerical behaviour. Only Samuel Bickley, vicar of Bapchild, was deprived by Secker; this was in 1764, on a charge of attempting to commit sodomy (though characteristically the archbishop gave Bickley some money in recompense). 
One of the most time-consuming aspects of diocesan administration was the management of the archiepiscopal estates. A particular concern for Secker was the estate that had belonged to St Gregory's Priory, with the earls of Chesterfield as tenants. He tried (unsuccessfully) to get the tenants to pay pensions to the curates, and this may explain the fourth earl's much quoted assertion that Secker 'signs his own name, when he writes 'Thomas Cant.'' ('GM', 53/2.1032n.). In the end Secker paid the pensions himself. He took care to monitor, and if needs be to take a firm line with, estate officials who might bring the name of the church into disrepute. Likewise he took care over the woodland owned by the archbishopric and lands owned by the three hospitals for the poor in the diocese. The wealth of clergy was an especial concern of his and he urged incumbents to preserve, and if necessary regain, their financial rights of the church but at the same time not to appear contentious. During his archiepiscopate Sir Philip Boteler was encouraged by Secker to augment thirty-eight parishes in the diocese through Queen Anne's Bounty. 
During Secker's archiepiscopate Methodism made a slow but significant impact on the diocese. As one reared among dissenters Secker realized that the Anglican clergy might learn much from the Methodists. He was aware that Methodism might divide the church but thought that the best way to curb its growth was for the clergy to emulate its best features. In his charge of 1762 he told the clergy of his diocese that 'a chief reason why we have so little hold on our people is that we do not converse with them'. He pointed out that continental protestants, Catholics, and 'both the Old Dissenters from our Church and those who are forming new separations, gain and preserve a surprising influence amongst their followers by personal religious intercourse' ('Eight Charges', 269). He recognized that there was some truth in the Methodists' criticisms; in his attempts to improve the pastoral performance of the clergy it could be argued that he had ends in view similar to those of the early Methodist leaders. In a proposed article of 1759 he exhorted his clergy to 'preach diligently the doctrines of justification by faith in Christ; warning against the abuses of that doctrine and of separating themselves from the Church to follow unauthorised teachers' (LPL, MS Secker 7, fol. 99'v'). Secker was aware of the tendency for rationalistic sermons yet he wondered whether the Methodists did not exaggerate the wrongs of the Anglican clergy. He realized that one reason why they did well was because leaders like Wesley could portray Methodism as a movement from within the church. He understood the aversion of many Methodists to separatism and told the vicar of St John's, Thanet, in 1765 that if the Methodists in his parish had a place where they met they ought to be licensed as dissenters: 'yet possibly some of them may be unwilling to call themselves Dissenters, and to be esteemed such by other persons. And in that case, it may be worthwhile to try what effect the fear of law will have upon them. (Secker to Harrison, 11 Oct 1765, LPL, MS Secker 3, fol. 242)' Secker suffered from ill health for much of his life, which makes his commitment to hard work even more impressive. Montagu Pennington, nephew of Secker's protege Elizabeth Carter, later observed that 'Dr Secker's manners were not usually considered as prepossessing (one satisfactory apology for which may be found in his constant bad health)' (Pennington, 1.161). Secker recorded his various bouts of illness in his autobiography. The entry for 1724 (the first time that he noted his state of health) recalled that he had 'for some Years had a very troublesome Cough in the Winter: & felt a Weakness and Pain in my Breast, on speaking much or loud' ('Autobiography', fol. 14). In July of that year he went to the Hot Well in Bristol and stayed there until September. The only remedy that seemed to have any effect was to discharge blood from an opening in his arm, which he left open until the end of his life. From the early 1740s he also suffered from the stone and tried various remedies, including Mrs Stephen's medicine, first in liquid and then in solid form. From 1761 to 1764 he suffered from 'dangerous fits of the stone' but these seem to have been cured by soap pills. An increasingly frequent and serious illness was gout (probably related to the hearty quantities of wine that he bought), from which he first suffered in 1742. This was always exacerbated when he was tired or under pressure, and he had an attack every two years or so. In the 1760s the condition became particularly severe. In 1762 he was so afflicted with it that he could not visit the diocese in person and delegated the responsibility to John Green, bishop of Lincoln. From 1764 onwards, he had especially long periods of gout, and in that year had a fainting fit when resident in Canterbury for the deprivation of Samuel Bickley. 
The last year of Secker's life was acutely painful. He was suffering from a cancerous thigh bone and arthritis but continued to discharge much business as well as furthering schemes for the relief of foreign protestants and writing against those who criticized his archiepiscopate. On Easter Tuesday 1768 all the bishops, as usual, dined at Lambeth and Secker encouraged them to make lists of those clergy in their dioceses who were resident and non-resident, which illustrates how he wanted to improve the pastoral provision of the church as a whole. He died at Lambeth Palace, of a caries of the femur, on 3 August. He was buried in a covered passage leading from the palace to the north door of Lambeth church, and in his will he requested that his remains should have neither a monument nor an epitaph erected over them. 
Secker's will -- which named Catherine Talbot and Daniel Burton, an Oxford associate, as executors -- was characteristically well thought out, and his bequests rewarded people and causes with whom he had long been connected. Mrs Talbot and Catherine, with whom he had lived since 1725 and who had effectively kept house for him since his wife's death, were given $13,000 in consols, to be managed by his chaplains and to be distributed to charities when they died. He left $1000 to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts for general purposes and another $1000 to help establish a bishopric in North America. The Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge was left $500. Secker had earlier given handsome donations to both these bodies. He also left $500 to the corporation of the sons of the clergy (and $200 to the corporation's society of stewards) and $500 to the Irish protestant working schools. His early medical training was reflected in the $500 each that he left to the hospitals of Croydon; St John, Canterbury; St Nicholas, Harbeldown; to St George's, London, to the Lying-in Hospital, and to the incurables of St Luke's Hospital. It was reflected too in the $400 that he left to the asylum at Lambeth, and in the $300 each that went to the Magdalen, the Lock, the Smallpox, and the Inoculation hospitals. He donated $2000 to help rebuild and repair houses belonging to the poorer parishes in the diocese of Canterbury and $500 to Bromley College, Kent. $1000 was to be given out to his servants and $200 to people who had helped him. He left all his personal books and papers, as well as his manuscripts, to Lambeth Palace Library. His literary executors were his chaplains Beilby Porteus and George Stinton. 
Secker had earlier made substantial gifts to his relatives and particularly to his nephews John Frost (who died in 1765) and George Secker, both of whom received preferment in addition to substantial financial assistance. He was also generous to the children of friends, including George Berkeley, son of the philosopher bishop. If anything Secker's family connections and ties of friendship appear to have grown stronger with age. Perhaps one reason why he clung to his extended family is that his close friends and fellow bishops Benson, Berkeley, and Butler, as well as his wife, Kitty, who died in 1748, departed this life within five years of each other. Secker's account book shows that apart from these gifts he dispersed a considerable amount of his income in charity to the poor and needy. 
Secker was a tall man with an imposing presence. Several contemporary portraits of him convey something of his commanding personality, most notably that by Sir Joshua Reynolds, which was completed in 1764 and which was placed in the gallery at Lambeth, a copy of which can be found at St Edmund Hall, Oxford. In addition to his autobiography Secker left a voluminous correspondence, as well as the specula and account books already mentioned. Besides the charges he published a large number of sermons, which, together with his 'Lectures on the catechism', the 'Oratio, quam coram synodo provinciae Cantuariensis anno 1761 convocata habendam scripserat, sed morbo praepeditus non habuit, archiepiscopus', and his 'Instructions given to candidates for orders', were collected and printed after his death. He did not publish any major piece of scholarship, although manuscripts at Lambeth Palace Library show detailed work on the book of 'Daniel', which demonstrates his potential as an 'Old Testament' scholar. 
Secker's life illustrates some of the salient features of the Church of England during the eighteenth century. The very fact than an erstwhile dissenter from a relatively unpromising social background rose to the highest position within the church's hierarchy indicates the generally open nature of the church in this period. His time as a Church of England cleric and as a member of the church's hierarchy challenges some of the adverse judgements surrounding the church at this time. As a pastor, preacher, and administrator he was exemplary, and for these qualities he was revered by both contemporaries and successors. His charges, widely read both in his lifetime and later, went some way to make up for the lack of pastoral training in the period before the 1830s; they covered a wide range of topics, from how to deliver a sermon to the ways in which clergy should deal with refractory parishioners. They articulated the central tension in the clergy's role as Secker envisaged it: the need to win the support of society without sacrificing clerical ideals. He nevertheless received some criticism for what were perceived to be his strong views and authoritarian nature. Yet despite the accusations of popery and high-handedness already quoted others saw him as an example of moderation in the mould of Archbishop Tillotson. Secker himself highly regarded his predecessor Thomas Tenison. Secker's churchmanship is not easily characterized, and in any case reflects an eighteenth-century meshing of what are sometimes called high-church and low-church views. Though he came to be seen as a high-churchman and a defender of orthodoxy his dissenting background and his former religious liberalism endeared him to a wider range of views and people. Something of the range of his qualities, which could be used to support both high-church and evangelical positions, was listed by George Huntingford, bishop of Hereford, in 1828: 'I have always admired Arch-bishop Secker for his learning, his piety, his vigilance, his firmness, his mildness, his moderation, his discretion' (Huntingford to Howley, 1 Aug 1828, LPL, Howley papers). Secker certainly seems to have been able to retain contact with people whose views he did not share, such as Philip Doddridge, Isaac Watts, John Leland, Nathaniel Lardner, and Samuel Chandler. If in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries he was well thought of both by high-churchmen and by evangelicals, in the late twentieth century he was increasingly admired for his aptitude for administration, sheer hard work, and managerial abilities. 


@@@@@


doc= 24999


Secker, William (d. 1681?), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, of whose parentage and education nothing is known, does not appear in the published admission records of either Oxford or Cambridge. 
In 1658 (or possibly early 1659; George Thomason marked his copy as acquired on 24 March and so immediately on the eve of the change of year in old style dating) Secker published a wedding sermon that he had delivered at Edmonton, Middlesex, as 'A Wedding Ring Fit for the Finger, or, The Salve of Divinity on the Sore of Humanity'. A second publication, 'The nonsuch professor in his meridian splendour, or, The singular actions of sanctified Christians', based on seven sermons which he had given at All Hallows, London Wall, followed in 1660: George Thomason acquired his copy in October. Secker dedicated the book to Sir Edward Barkham of Tottenham, Middlesex, and his wife, Dame Frances, praising their godliness, their constancy to true religion, 'when others have sailed with every wind of Doctrine', and their loyalty to the king: 'you cast more propicious aspects upon Religion, then ever to think it a friend unto Rebellion, & lookt upon Fear God, and honour the King, as a couple that God had joyned together, and that no man might put asunder. (Secker, 'Nonsuch', sigs. A4'r', A3'v')' Both these works of practical divinity were published by the presbyterian Thomas Parkhurst, and 'The Nonsuch Professor' at least has a Calvinist tone. Both books were reprinted many times well into the nineteenth century in Britain and America, sometimes together in one volume. 'A Wedding Ring' had gone through ten editions by 1730, and was later translated into Welsh and German. 
The religious writer is very possibly the William Secker who was admitted to the rectory of Leigh (now Leigh-on-Sea) in Essex on 30 August 1667 upon the presentation of Charles Rich, earl of Warwick. Circumstantial evidence lends plausibility to the suggestion that the writer and the incumbent are the same men. Neither seems to have possessed university degrees, while the puritan piety displayed in the books is in line with that patronized by Warwick's wife, Mary. Secker's successor was admitted to the living, made vacant by his death, on 12 November 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 25000


Seckford, Thomas (1515/16-1587), lawyer and administrator, was the second son of Thomas Seckford ('c'.1495-1575), of Great Bealings in Suffolk, and Margaret, daughter of Sir John Wingfield of Letheringham in the same county. A monument erected by him to his parents at Great Bealings reveals his age as sixty-seven in 1583. The Seckfords had been lords of the manor of Great Bealings since the fourteenth century, and the elder Thomas rebuilt Seckford Hall there. The son was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1540, at the same time as William Cecil (later Lord Burghley), perhaps after a spell at Cambridge and an inn of chancery. Although he was called to the bar, and in 1556 delivered a reading and became a bencher, little is known of his legal practice save that he is mentioned as counsel in the court of requests in the 1550s. He became a member of parliament in 1554 and served (for four different constituencies) in seven parliaments between then and 1572. On 6 September 1558 he was appointed deputy chief steward of the duchy of Lancaster, for the northern parts, and on 9 December 1558 the new queen appointed him a master of requests, which was followed by the stewardship of the Marshalsea. At about the same time he was added to the commissions of the peace for Middlesex and Suffolk, and he was also put on the high commission for ecclesiastical causes. Indeed, he became an indefatigable administrator, arbitrator, interrogator, and commissioner in all kinds of business. 
Rather late in life, in 1567, Seckford married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Harlow and widow successively of William Billingsley and Sir Martin Bowes (died 1566); she predeceased him in 1586. In 1579 he acquired another lucrative office, as general surveyor of the court of wards and liveries under Burghley's mastership. In that capacity he became involved with the cartographer Christopher Saxton, whom he employed at his own expense to prepare between 1573 and 1579 the celebrated county maps, which bear Seckford's arms. They were the first of their kind. He also assisted William Harrison in his description of Britain, and Harrison dedicated to him his 'Description of Scotland' in Holinshed's 'Chronicles'. It was no doubt through his offices and his land dealings that he acquired his considerable fortune, which he used in building the Great House (or Seckford House) in St Matthew's parish, Ipswich, and two houses in Clerkenwell, Middlesex, one of them next to St John's Priory. He bought the dissolved priory of Felixstowe, and owned various manors and lands in Suffolk. After his wife's death, without children, he made the plans for founding the Seckford Almshouse for thirteen poor men at Woodbridge, Suffolk, which was supported by the revenue from the Clerkenwell properties; the trustees were, in addition, to make grants to Woodbridge School. Seckford was also responsible, as steward of the liberty of St Etheldreda, for building the new sessions house in Woodbridge, which is now part of the shire hall and still displays his arms. He died at Clerkenwell on 19 December 1587 and, after a temporary burial at Clerkenwell, was reinterred in the family vault at Woodbridge. The plain tomb, without inscription, which he had built before his death in the north aisle, was broken up in 1839. 


@@@@@


doc= 25001


Securis, John (fl. 1550-1580), physician, was born in Salisbury. His name was a latinized version of the English surname Hatchett. Securis was educated at Winchester College, and studied at the University of Paris for two years about 1550, while still very young. He attended and admired the lectures of Jacobus Sylvius, and studied pharmacy in the shops of several apothecaries. He afterwards studied at Oxford, although not at New College as was stated by Wood ('Ath. Oxon', 1.458), and in 1554 published his first book. Entitled 'A gret galley lately com into England out of terra nova laden with phisitions, poticaries, and surgions', it is a dialogue attacking foolish and misguided physicians. 
Securis returned to live in Salisbury, and seems to have been licensed to practise medicine by the bishop, to whom he presented a memorial on the granting of episcopal medical diplomas. It contained seven proposals: that every one who wished to practise in the diocese, and was not a graduate of a university, should only do so on receipt of a diploma from the bishop or his chancellor; that surgeons should be required to show that they could read and write; that apothecaries should not prescribe medicines; that no unlicensed person should practise; that no one should assume a university degree which he did not lawfully possess; that midwives should be sworn before the bishop; and that apothecaries' shops should be inspected from time to time by physicians. He mentions the College of Physicians in this memorial with great respect. 
In 1561, and perhaps earlier, Securis began to publish 'A Prognostication' for the year, a small black-letter book, containing definitions of legal terms, advice on suitable times for letting blood, weather forecasts, and suchlike information. He seems to have continued these until 1580. 
In 1566 Securis published 'A Detection and Querimonie of the Daily Enormities and Abuses Committed in Physick', a small book in an idiomatic, informal style. It discusses physicians, surgeons, and apothecaries, laying down rules for the education and conduct of each. Securis expresses his belief in the power of the royal touch of the kings of England and of France. The book contains a Latin dedication to the universities of Oxford and Cambridge. It was reprinted in 1651, together with Robert Record's 'The Urinal of Physick'. 
The date of Securis's death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 25002


Michael Securis (fl. 1545), a physician who lived in the 'new borough of Sarum', was author of 'Libri septem de antiquitate ac illustri medicinae origine', extant in 'Digbt MS 202' in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, together with some other medical opuscula by the same author. 


@@@@@


doc= 25003


Sedding, Edmund (1836-1868), architect and musician, was born on 20 June 1836, the son of Richard and Peninnah Sedding of Summerstown, near Okehampton, Devon. John Dando Sedding (1838-1891) was his younger brother. At an early age he displayed antiquarian tastes, which led to his visiting cathedrals, abbeys, and churches in England and France. In 1853 he entered the office of George Edmund Street, where he devoted himself to the study of Gothic architecture. For some time he resided as an architect in Bristol, and, after again spending a period in London, moved about 1862 to practise in Penzance. He married, on 18 August 1862, Jessie, daughter of John Proctor, chemist, of Penzance; they had four children, one of whom, Edmund Harold (1863-1921), was articled to J. D. Sedding and set up an independent practice in Plymouth in 1891. In Cornwall, Sedding rebuilt or restored the churches of Gwithian, Wendron, Altarnun, North Hill, Ruan, St Peter, Newlyn, and St Stephen by Launceston, while he had in progress at the time of his death a new church at Low Marple, Cheshire, a rectory, and two churches in Wales, the restoration of Bigbury church, Devon, and a mansion at Hayle, Cornwall, for W. J. Rawlings. 
Sedding was a performer on the harmonium and organ, and an admirer of ancient church music. He was closely involved with two leading ritualistic churches, being for a time cantor of the church of St Raphael, Bristol, and organist of St Mary the Virgin, Soho. He greatly exerted himself in the revival of carol singing, and his books of Christmas carols were very popular. His chief musical compositions included: 'A Collection of Nine Ancient Christmas Carols for Four Voices' (1860), which ran to six editions; 'Jerusalem the Golden: a Hymn' (1861); and 'Seven Ancient Carols for Four Voices' (1863). To F. G. Lees's revisions of J. Purchas's 'Directorium Anglicanum' (2nd edn, 1865) he supplied fifteen quarto pages of illustrations. In 1865 Sedding's health failed, and he died at Penzance on 11 June 1868. He was buried in Madron churchyard on 16 June. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25004


Sedding, John Dando (1838-1891), architect, was born on 13 April 1838 at Eton, the second son of Richard and Peninnah Sedding. In 1858 he joined his elder brother Edmund Sedding (1836-1868) in the office of G. E. Street, where William Morris, Philip Webb, and Richard Norman Shaw were also pupils. All reacted against Street's hard-edged style in favour of later, more gentle idioms. After leaving Street's office in 1863 Sedding inclined towards decorative work, concentrating on the study and design of embroidery, wallpapers, and metalwork. From 1865 he worked with Edmund in Penzance, then moved to Bristol after Edmund's death in 1868 and to London in 1874; there he established himself at 18 Charlotte Street before transferring in 1880 to 447 Oxford Street, next door to Morris & Co. 
In 1872 Sedding married a kindred spirit, Rose Catherine Tinling (died 1891), daughter of Edward Douglas Tinling, canon of Gloucester, and through her brother the Revd G. D. Tinling came his first major commission, for St Clement's Church, Bournemouth. After his move to London, and with his wife's support, the architectural side of his practice, hitherto limited to schemes for hypothetical houses, began to develop steadily. He had learned much about building texture by copying plates in Ruskin's books, and in 1876 he submitted sketches to Ruskin, who encouraged him, saying that 'if you would be a real architect, you must always have either pencil or chisel in hand' ('The Works of John Ruskin', ed. E. T. Cook and A. Wedderburn, 1903-12, 37.199). Believing architecture to be, not a commercial venture, but a divinely inspired art inseparable from handicraft, he formed a school of masons, carvers, and modellers from nature, and exerted a powerful influence over them by his friendly enthusiasm and close working knowledge of their craft. 
Sedding's church restoration work, principally in and around London and in Somerset, Devon, and Cornwall, drew on his understanding of the organic nature of old churches acquired during his time in Cornwall. There too he had developed a response to the spirit of place, made clear in three new churches: Holy Redeemer, Clerkenwell (1887-95), for the Italian quarter, is in the Renaissance style; at Holy Trinity, Chelsea (1888-90), for an artistic locality, he attempted to create a synthesis of furnishings by leading artists; and for St Peter's, Earling (1889; built by Wilson in 1892-3), for a prosperous suburb, he devised a broad open chamber lit by a large west window with flowing Perpendicular tracery. Nor did he shun modern materials: Clerkenwell has concrete columns enclosing steel girders. His Catholic churchmanship (he was sidesman and later churchwarden at St Alban the Martyr, Holborn, from 1878) ensured that his church plans are focused on a prominent altar. His other principal new churches were St Dyfrig's, Cardiff (1885-93; dem. 1961), St Edward's, Netley (1886), St Elwyn's, Hayle, (1886-90), All Saints', Falmouth (1887-90); and St Augustine's, Highgate (1885-8). 
Sedding's church furnishings, especially silversmith's work, embroidery, and woodwork, were ornamented, not with conventional symbolic devices, but with details drawn from nature: animals and birds enliven lush foliage on screens, doors and reredoses in churches such as Meavy (1884), Holbeton (1887), and Ermington (1889) in Devon, all restored for the Mildmay family, for whom he designed a lodge at Flete, a rare secular commission. Other examples are found in four silver pastoral staves designed around 1890. 
Although elected FRIBA in 1874 and appointed diocesan architect for Bath and Wells, Sedding showed little interest in architectural politics and held few formal appointments; but he joined the committee of the Art-Workers' Guild at its founding in 1884 and became its second master (1886-7). His influence was exercised through training his pupils, including the jeweller John Paul Cooper, the cabinet-makers Ernest Barnsley and Ernest Gimson, and the ceramicist Alfred Powell, as well as the architect C. A. Nicholson. His chief assistant was Henry Wilson (1864-1934), who after Sedding's death completed several of his works, adding towers at Bournemouth and Clerkenwell. 
In 1888 Sedding moved to West Wickham, Kent, and developed his affection for the old English style of gardening, with formal plans and clipped yew hedges, which he championed in 'Garden-Craft Old and New' (1891). After his death was published 'Art and Handicraft' (1893), embodying views on architecture originally formulated in a paper read before the Edinburgh Art Congress in 1889. 
Sedding was a simple, impulsive, warm-hearted man with a sense of fun, who inspired undying devotion in his friends and pupils. His published writings show the spontaneity and freshness of his thought, and are characterized by elegance and feeling. He died suddenly at Winsford vicarage, Somerset, where he was engaged on the restoration of the church, on 7 April 1891 and was buried in West Wickham churchyard with his wife, who died (probably of grief) a few days later. They had four sons, but his practice was inherited by Edmund Harold Sedding (1863-1921), son of his brother Edmund, who practised in Plymouth, carrying out church building and restoration in Devon and Cornwall, and published 'Norman Architecture in Cornwall: a Handbook to Old Cornish Ecclesiastical Architecture' (1909). The nephew's new churches of St Peter, Shaldon (1893-1902), and St Mary, Newton Abbot (1904-8), show how thoroughly he had absorbed his uncle's ecclesiastical style, just as his care for craftsmanship is mirrored in his repairing of the chancel screens at St Buryan and St Winnow and the exuberant naturalistic woodwork at Crantock, by Pinwill of Exeter. 


@@@@@


doc= 25005


Seddon, Felix John Vaughan (1798-1865), orientalist, was a younger son among the fourteen children of William Seddon (1756/7-1808), attorney in Manchester, and his wife, Penelope, 'nee' Watson. He was probably born at his parents' residence in Pendleton, and was educated at Manchester grammar school from 1806. In 1815 he went to India in the service of the East India Company, and while there devoted himself to the study of oriental languages, particularly Persian and Hindustani. After passing the revenue board examinations he was in 1820 appointed registrar of Rangpur, Bengal, where he familiarized himself with Bengali and Sanskrit. At the outbreak of the First Anglo-Burmese War, in 1824, he accompanied the army to Assam as translator and accountant to the governor-general's agent on the north-eastern frontier. He was chosen because of his ability, through the medium of Sanskrit, to acquire the local languages, especially Manipuri, which he was the first European to learn. He translated the articles of war and artillery exercise for use of the Manipuri levy, and prepared a grammar and dictionary of Assamese. In 1830 failing health forced him to return to England and abandon his work on a comparative dictionary of Manipuri, Thai, and Burmese. 
On 12 July 1833 Seddon was elected professor of oriental languages at King's College, London, and in 1835 published 'An Address Delivered in King's College... on the Languages and Literature of Asia'. He also assisted in translating the 'Bible' into some Eastern languages. In 1837 he returned to India, intending to found a college at Lucknow, with the support of William IV, but when he arrived there he found that the king of Oudh was dead, and his successor was opposed to the plan. This and other difficulties obliged him to abandon the undertaking. He was afterwards appointed preceptor to the titular nawab of Bengal. The latter part of his life was spent at Murshidabad, Bengal, where he died, unmarried, on 25 November 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 25006


Seddon, John (1643/4-1700), writing-master, was probably born in London but nothing is known of his early life or parentage. During his lifetime he was much admired for a level of ornamental penmanship which was notable for its enormous flourishes produced with one continuous stroke of the pen. Indeed, Seddon's calligraphy was characterized by the unusually imaginative monsters and dragons with which he embellished his compositions and it was for this reason that he gained a reputation as a virtuoso penman. He published a number of copy-books, but the first was a modest production entitled 'The Ingenious Youth's Companion' (1690) and engraved by J. Sturt. 'It contains an alphabet of two-lines copies, in a small round hand, with great variety of flourishes, which... were performed 'a la volee'' (Massey, 2.129), that is without pencilled guide lines. This was followed by 'The Penman's Paradise' (1695) and the posthumously published 'The Penman's Magazine' (1705), both of which contained such highly ornamented writing and were, according to both William Massey's and Mark Noble's interpretations, viewed more as a form of art than as exercises for students to copy. He became master of Sir John Johnson's Free Writing School in Priest's Court, Foster Lane, Cheapside, a post he held until his death. Though the circumstances remain unknown John Seddon died on 12 April 1700 at the age of fifty-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 25007


Seddon, John (1719-1769), dissenting minister and religious controversialist, was born at Lomax Fold, Little Lever, near Bolton, Lancashire, the son of Peter Seddon (1689-1731), dissenting minister at Penrith, Cumberland (1717-19), and later at Cockey Moor, in the parish of Middleton, Lancashire (1719-31). On his father's death Seddon's education was undertaken by the congregation of Cross Street, Manchester. He attended Stand grammar school under William Walker from 1731 to 1733 and subsequently Caleb Rotheram's academy at Kendal, where in 1733 he was one of the first three students to be admitted. He remained there at least until Christmas 1738 before completing his education at Glasgow University, whence he matriculated in 1739, but there is no evidence of him being awarded the MA degree with which he is often credited. 
On leaving Glasgow, Seddon became assistant at Cross Street to Joseph Mottershead, and was ordained there on 22 October 1742. In 1743 he married Mottershead's eldest daughter, Elizabeth (died 1765). He was a preacher of facility and power and was the first minister of Cross Street to preach Socinianism instead of, then the prevalent form of anti-Trinitarianism, Arianism. Joseph Priestley, when a tutor at Warrington Academy (1761-8), spoke of Seddon as 'the only Socinian in the neighbourhood', adding, 'we all wondered at him' (Rutt, 1.59). He embodied his views in a series of six sermons, of which the first was preached on 27 May 1761. In these he declared that the 'New Testament' provided no foundation for a belief in the Trinity. His utterances caused a good deal of excitement, but while his outspokenness may have won him increased respect it gained him few converts. The sermons were not published until 1793, by which time they were out of date, but they are noteworthy for their time as anticipating the historical argument advanced by Priestley. 
Seddon, despite his heterodox views, lived on good terms with neighbouring clergy, especially with John Clayton (1709-1773), the Jacobite fellow of Manchester collegiate church, and with his colleague and father-in-law, Joseph Mottershead. His amiable disposition and charity to the poor made him a popular preacher. He was not, however, a prolific writer, and the sermons mentioned above and a preface to Thomas Dixon's 'The Sovereignty of Divine Administration' (1766) seem to have been his only publications. 
After a long illness Seddon died in Manchester on 22 November 1769, and was buried in Cross Street Chapel. His library was sold on 26 February 1770. 


@@@@@


doc= 25008


Seddon, John (1724-1770), dissenting minister and tutor, was born at Hereford on 8 December 1724, the son of Peter Seddon (died 1760), dissenting minister successively at Ormskirk and Hereford, and his wife, Elizabeth Eckley. He was a second cousin of John Seddon (1719-1769), minister at Cross Street, Manchester, with whom he has often been confused. In 1742 he was admitted to Kendal dissenting academy, under Caleb Rotheram, and in 1744 he matriculated from Glasgow University, where he was a favourite pupil of Francis Hutcheson and William Leechman. On finishing his studies he succeeded Charles Owen as minister of Cairo Street Chapel, Warrington, and was ordained there on 8 December 1747. He proved to be a popular minister and soon attracted the attendance of the Percival family, who left the established church and later engaged him as private tutor to Thomas Percival (1740-1804). Percival later wrote of Seddon 'As a gentleman, a scholar, a preacher, a companion and a friend, he was almost without an equal' ('Monthly Repository', 1810, 430). 
Following the closure of the dissenting academies at Kendal in 1753 and Findern, Derbyshire, in 1754, a project was launched in July 1754 to establish by subscription a dissenting academy in the north of England, primarily to educate candidates for the ministry. Seddon was a prime mover in the scheme and his skill and perseverance at drumming up support from local merchants no doubt contributed to the trustees' decision to locate the school in Warrington rather than Ormskirk. On 30 June 1757 he was elected secretary and Hugh Willoughby of Parham accepted the invitation to become president of the academy. When the academy opened on 20 October, Seddon was appointed librarian; his former pupil Thomas Percival was the first student to be enrolled. In addition to divinity students Warrington also took fee-paying private pupils, who were offered an education that would prepare them for a professional or commercial career. On 19 July that year Seddon married Sarah Hoskins at St Philip's, Birmingham; according to Job Orton she was the daughter of a deceased equerry to Frederick, prince of Wales. They had no children. 
Seddon soon fell out with John Taylor, professor of divinity and moral philosophy at Warrington, whose prickly character was such that he took offence at what he saw as Seddon's interference. As secretary, Seddon liaised between the tutors and the management committee and sat in on the tutors' meetings; and as librarian he approved every book purchase. Moreover Taylor did not share the high opinion of Hutchesonian metaphysics that Seddon had acquired at Glasgow and they took opposing sides in a local controversy respecting forms of prayer. On 3 July 1750 a group of dissenting ministers from the north-west met at Warrington to consider introducing set forms into dissenting worship and a subsequent meeting at Preston on 10 September 1751 declared in favour of 'a proper variety of public devotional offices'. 
The following year the provincial assembly set up a committee to decide the matter and a long controversy ensued. When on 16 October 1760 a number of dissenters in Liverpool, led by the porcelain manufacturer Thomas Bentley, decided to build a chapel for liturgical worship and invited several dissenting ministers to prepare a prayer book, Taylor declined and Seddon accepted. On 6 January 1762 at a meeting at the Merchants' Coffee House in Liverpool, Seddon submitted 'the new liturgy', which was published as 'A form of prayer and a new collection of psalms, for the use of a congregation of protestant dissenters in Liverpool' (1763). Edited by Seddon, the new liturgy was written by Philip Holland and Richard Godwin (1722-1787), minister at Gateacre, near Liverpool, and was used in the Octagon Chapel, Liverpool, which opened in 1763. Seddon declined to become minister at the Octagon Chapel and chose not to use the liturgy in his own ministry, preferring extempore prayer. 
Seddon regarded Warrington Academy as 'his favourite child' and Taylor's complaints about his interference may have been justified for, according to William Turner, Seddon was 'somewhat too meddling, and perhaps occasionally assuming, in his intercourse with the Tutors' ('Monthly Repository', 8.190). However, his dynamic influence on the academy was a crucial factor in maintaining its success. In 1762 he toured the major cities in England, visiting dissenting congregations, in an attempt to encourage subscriptions and to recruit more fee-paying pupils. His carefully kept accounts and minutes show that the academy's fortunes revived, albeit temporarily, and he turned his attention to another problem. Discipline was always a difficulty at the academy and in 1767 he was appointed to the newly created office of 'rector academiae'. One of his new duties was to take a weekly register of the students in order to encourage regular attendance. At the same time he succeeded Joseph Priestley in the chair of belles lettres, with a salary of $100 plus the fees from private pupils attending his lectures. Despite his own financial problems (he had lost his wife's fortune by investing it in a calico-printing works at Stockport) Seddon accepted only half of the salary as he was aware that the academy could little afford to pay the full salary. An excellent orator, he lectured on language, oratory, theology, and philosophy. 
Outside the academy Seddon was a co-founder and the first president of Warrington Public Library (1758) and the first secretary of the Lancashire and Cheshire Widows' Fund (1764). He died suddenly after suffering a seizure while out riding at Warrington on 23 January 1770 and was buried in Cairo Street Chapel; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 25009


Seddon, Thomas (1753-1795/6), Church of England clergyman and author, was born at Acres Barn, Pendleton, Lancashire, the son of John Seddon, farmer, of Pendleton. He received his early education at a number of local schools, including the Manchester grammar school. He was intended by his father for the medical profession and at the age of seventeen was entered for training at the Manchester Infirmary. His own aspirations, however, lay towards the church and while still at the infirmary he received an education in the classics under the tutorship of the Revd John Clayton of the collegiate church in Manchester. Encouraged by a promise of preferment from a certain baronet, he entered Magdalen Hall, Oxford, as a gentleman commoner, matriculating in 1776. He does not seem to have taken any degree and according to his own account was not much benefited by an academic education but he obtained a testimonial and without difficulty was ordained a deacon in 1777 and priest in 1778. The original promise of preferment was not fulfilled, and a combination of improvidence and the expense of his education left Seddon in debt. He sought to resolve his financial difficulties by making an advantageous marriage and on 2 October 1777 married Margaret Sidebottom, a young lady of good family near Manchester. The marriage seems to have proved a disappointment to both parties -- there were no children -- and seems effectively to have terminated by separation before 1786. 
Seddon's early career in the church was also a disappointment. In 1779 he was licensed as incumbent of Stretford, a small living in which he had served as curate since 1778, and in 1781 was also offered the new living of St George's, Wigan. However, his living at Stretford was sequestered for debt after he had been there two or three years, while opposition from an influential group of parishioners in Wigan obliged him to give up St George's. His reputation was further damaged by his publication in 1779 of 'Characteristic strictures, or, Remarks on upwards of one hundred portraits, of the most eminent persons in the counties of Lancaster and Chester: particularly in the town and neighbourhood of Manchester'. This work, penned under the influence of multiple disappointments and published anonymously, consisted in a number of satirical and libellous sketches of local notables and gave great offence. 
After the sequestration of Stretford, Seddon appears to have sought to supplement his income by writing and by serving as chaplain to the earl of Lonsdale. In 1786 he published his most significant work, 'Letters written to an officer in the army on various subjects, religious, moral, and political, with a view to the manners, accomplishments, and proper conduct of young gentlemen', in two octavo volumes. This work, probably addressed to his brother the future Lieutenant-General Daniel Seddon, together with his other published output (a number of sermons and a volume of 1780 entitled 'Impartial and Free Thoughts on a Free Trade to the Kingdom of Ireland') reveal him generally to have been a man of conventional high-church tory views. 
Although in the autobiographical introduction to the 'Letters' Seddon described himself as retired from all professional engagements and without hope of succeeding to any, his career seems to have revived in 1788, when he was nominated to the perpetual curacy of St Anne's Lydgate in Saddleworth, which he held in plurality with Stretford. The living was poor, however, and his debts continued to increase. In the 1790s he was prominent in co-ordinating anti-radical activity in the area and in 1794 he became chaplain to the 104th regiment of foot, the Royal Manchester volunteers, before leaving in 1795 to join the regiment at Belfast. He met his death by drowning, possibly with men from the regiment who had been transferred to an expeditionary force to the West Indies and whose transport was lost in a gale on 18 November 1795 near Portland. No notification of his death, however, reached Manchester before May 1796, and its precise date remains uncertain. 


@@@@@


doc= 25010


Seddon, Thomas (1821-1856), landscape painter, was born on 28 August 1821 at 150 Aldersgate Street, London, the eldest of the nine children of Thomas Seddon (bap. 1793, d. 1864), cabinet-maker ['see under 'Seddon family], and his wife, Frances Nelson, 'nee' Thomas (1800-1880). After indulging his passion for drawing at a boarding-school in Epsom, Surrey (later removed to Stanmore, Middlesex), which he attended from 1828 for about ten years, parental opposition to the professional pursuit of fine art led him to enter his father's firm, Seddon & Sons; in 1841-2 he studied ornamental art in Paris. He returned to Seddon & Sons and began to design furniture, and to attend life classes at Charles Lucy's studios at Tudor Lodge in Mornington Crescent, London; there he met Ford Madox Brown, who was to become his artistic mentor. From about 1848 to about 1852 he took classes at the Artists' Society in Clipstone Street. 
Seddon's first landscape sketches date from the summer of 1849, during a visit to Betws-y-coed in Caernarvonshire, Wales, where he was already asserting the value of painstakingly transcribing nature. In 1852, a year after taking up painting professionally, his first oil, 'Penelope' (priv. coll.), was shown at the Royal Academy. The earliest of his landscapes to be traced, 'Lehon, from Mont Parnasse' (exh. RA, 1854; Museo de Arte de Ponce, Ponce, Puerto Rico), was executed in Brittany in the summer of 1853. By this date Seddon and William Holman Hunt -- an equally devout Christian -- were planning a trip to the East. 
Seddon landed in Egypt on 6 December 1853, met the explorer Richard Burton, and executed a watercolour of him, 'An Arab Shakyh in his Travelling Dress' (exh. Art Gallery and Museum, Brighton, 1983; priv. coll.). Hunt arrived in January 1854; although reliant on Seddon's gifts as a linguist, he took exception to his adoption of Arab costume and propensity for practical jokes. In the following month the artists encamped close to the pyramids, which Seddon painted at sunset (retouched 1855; exh. 14 Berners Street, London, 1855, and the Fine Art Society, London, 1978; priv. coll.). Their first sight of Jerusalem, on 3 June 1854, was, for both artists, a deeply moving religious experience: Seddon camped at Aceldama and for five months worked on 'Jerusalem and the Valley of Jehoshaphat from the Hill of Evil Counsel' (1854-5; exh. 14 Berners Street, London, 1855; Tate collection). 
On 19 October 1854 Seddon left Syria for Dinan in France, where he became engaged to Emmeline Bulford; they married in Paris on 30 June 1855, and a daughter was born to them in 1856. On his return to London in January 1855, Madox Brown observed that Seddon's pictures 'present quantities of drawing and truthfulness seldom surpassed but no beauty, nothing to make the bosom tingle. Could I but have seen them in progress -- I will do all I can to make him improve them yet' ('Diary', 117). From 17 March to 3 June nine of these works were exhibited at Seddon's studio at 14 Berners Street, including 'Dromedary and Arab at the City of the Dead, Cairo' (priv. coll.) and the watercolours 'The Great Sphinx at the Pyramids of Gizeh' (Ashmolean Museum, Oxford) and 'Interior of a Deewan, Formerly Belonging to the Copt Patriarch, Near the Esbekeeyah, Cairo' (also exh. RA, 1856; priv. coll.), all of which are dated 1854. A larger one-man show was held at 52 Conduit Street in May and June of 1856. 
Although Seddon completed many of his orientalist pictures in Europe, where he also painted replicas and new compositions such as 'Arabs Return to their Tents on the Border of the Egyptian Desert' (exh. Society of Arts, 1857; priv. coll.), which was commissioned by William Marshall of Preston in 1856 and which was Seddon's last finished painting, he was passionately committed to painting in the East and thus returned to Cairo in October 1856. He died there of dysentery on 23 November and was interred in the protestant burial-ground in the city. His tragic demise galvanized the Pre-Raphaelites into organizing a subscription to buy 'Jerusalem' for presentation to the National Gallery. It formed the centrepiece of an exhibition of over one hundred of Seddon's works at the Society of Arts in London on 6 May 1857, which John Ruskin opened with a memorable speech sealing the artist's reputation as the quintessential 'prosaic' Pre-Raphaelite, committed to faithful transcription of historic landscape ('Journal of the Society of Arts', 360-62). 


@@@@@


doc= 25011


Sedgwick, Adam (1785-1873), geologist, was born on 22 March 1785 in the vicarage at Dent, Yorkshire, the third of seven children of Richard Sedgwick (1736-1828), the local vicar, and his second wife and cousin, Margaret, 'nee' Sturgis, ('bap'. 1752, died 1820). From an early age Sedgwick attended the grammar school at Dent, between the ages of eight and sixteen under the instruction of his father. In 1801 he was sent to the grammar school at Sedbergh conducted by the Revd William Stevens. 
In 1804, after a summer of tutoring from the self-taught mathematician John Dawson, Sedgwick entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a sizar, a position which allowed poorer students to pay reduced fees in exchange for doing menial duties. Unsophisticated, untravelled, and uncouth, Sedgwick gradually began to make an impression at Cambridge, despite a near-fatal attack of typhoid in 1805. He was elected to a college scholarship in 1807, and graduated fifth wrangler in the following year. He took private pupils and read for a Trinity fellowship, which he finally obtained in 1810. Overworked in preparing for the position and dissatisfied with its duties, in 1813 he burst a blood vessel and his health broke down completely. Sedgwick recovered during the next few years, but suffered thereafter intermittently from poor health. He became an assistant tutor in mathematics at Trinity in 1815, and was ordained a year later, when he also travelled for several months on the continent. 
In 1818 Sedgwick was elected to the Woodwardian professorship of geology at the University of Cambridge, a post which he was to hold with great distinction for the next fifty-five years. He had previously attended the mineralogical lectures of Edward Daniel Clarke and read a few works on the subject, but he was elected on the strength of his character, connections, and general ability. The new appointment galvanized Sedgwick into action. He undertook his first geological excursion in that summer and became a fellow of the Geological Society of London. In 1819 he delivered his first course of lectures, and joined with John Stevens Henslow and others to encourage scientific pursuits within the university by founding the Cambridge Philosophical Society. 
Sedgwick's most immediate concern after taking up his chair was to build up the geological collections of the university. He collected rocks and fossils during systematic tours in the British Isles and elsewhere in Europe, and he also purchased rare specimens, either with his own funds or through public appeals. The collection quickly outgrew its original accommodation, and in 1841 spacious new quarters were at last made available. By this time the Woodwardian had a reputation as one of Europe's outstanding geological museums. 
In connection with his summer collecting tours, Sedgwick became an accomplished field geologist, learning much from Henslow and William Daniel Conybeare. His earliest papers, read in 1820 before the Cambridge Philosophical Society, discussed the structure of the ancient rocks of Devon and Cornwall. An important monograph published in the Geological Society 'Transactions' in 1829 used the Magnesian Limestone as a key for working out the structure of New Red Sandstone of north-east England. Sedgwick correlated the rocks with their counterparts in Germany, showing that these strata formed an uninterrupted succession from the Lias down to the Coal Measures. 
In 1828 Sedgwick accompanied the wealthier but less experienced Roderick Murchison, whom he had met at the Geological Society, on a tour of Scotland. Opposing the work of John MacCulloch, they concluded that the ancient sandstones of the north-west highlands could be correlated with the Old Red Sandstone to the east, a finding which geologists abandoned in the second half of the century after much controversy. The two men became close friends, and during the following summer travelled in the eastern Alps, aiming to find a continuous succession to bridge the notorious gap between the fossil faunas of the Secondary and Tertiary strata. 
As these early papers show, Sedgwick believed that the remaining 'lost pages' in the record of the rocks would be found, and that geologists could hope to obtain a comprehensive picture of earth history. Two eloquent presidential addresses to the Geological Society in 1830 and 1831 expressed his theoretical views. Discussing Charles Lyell's recently published 'Principles of Geology' (1830-33), Sedgwick agreed that geologists had demonstrated the need for a vastly expanded time-scale. He abjured his support for fellow cleric William Buckland's attempt to find empirical evidence for a universal flood, and attacked those, like Andrew Ure and William Cockburn, who interpreted geology in the light of scripture. However, Sedgwick rejected what he saw as Lyell's gratuitous assumption that geological processes had been uniform in intensity throughout all time. He argued that the empirical record of the strata bore witness to catastrophic events without parallel in forces currently shaping the face of the earth. 
From the late 1820s, Sedgwick's chief goal in geology was to complete a big book on the strata below the Old Red Sandstone. Most of his papers over the next two decades were progress reports on this project, as Sedgwick toured the Lake District, Wales, and the southern uplands of Scotland to add to his knowledge of the older rocks. In 1831 he entered north Wales with the young Charles Darwin, who thereby gained his first training in the field. Sedgwick, with his thorough grounding in mathematics, had an unrivalled ability to work out the complex geological structures characteristic of these strata. Particularly important was a distinction, which he emphasized from the late 1820s, between stratification, jointing, and slaty cleavage. Sedgwick was also guided by Leonce Elie de Beaumont's theory of the elevation of mountain chains, which he believed would provide a key to unravelling the older rocks. 
While Sedgwick was in north Wales, Murchison independently began examining the younger and more fossiliferous strata of south Wales and the Welsh borders. Together, their work provided the foundations for a new classification of the oldest rocks with fossils: Sedgwick's strata were called the Cambrian, while Murchison's became the Silurian. This amicable arrangement was threatened when Henry De la Beche discovered Coal plants in rocks which appeared to be of the same age as those which the two friends had been studying. The resulting controversy, in which the two friends collaborated closely, bore fruit in their 1839 announcement of the Devonian system as a distinctive period in earth history. 
The creation of the Devonian, however, also effectively removed any distinctive fauna from Sedgwick's Cambrian. The problem was exacerbated when John Eddowes Bowman, Daniel Sharpe, and finally the official Geological Survey extended its work into Sedgwick's territory during the early 1840s; most of the strata which had been identified as being older than the Silurian proved to be of the same age. Almost all geologists followed Murchison in wiping the Cambrian off the map, ignoring Sedgwick's attempts to create alternatives to what he condemned as a grossly over-extended Silurian. Sedgwick believed that the question involved nothing less than the foundations of proper scientific method. Strata classifications required a secure understanding of geological structure; only then could fossils take their rightful place in establishing correlations. For Sedgwick, the issue was one of first principles. 
By the 1850s, with his book on the older rocks scarcely begun, Sedgwick argued the case for the Cambrian in increasingly intemperate language. He cut off links not only with Murchison, but also with the Geological Society (whose Wollaston medal he had been awarded in 1851) and the metropolitan geological community more generally. The controversy was settled only after Sedgwick's death. The discovery of a fauna below that of Murchison's oldest Silurians -- first in Bohemia and then in Wales -- became the basis for a redefined Cambrian. The uppermost strata of Murchison's expanded system were called Silurian, and the strata in between were termed Ordovician. 
Throughout his life, Sedgwick was an eloquent advocate of the moral basis of scientific enquiry, which he saw as a bulwark against the chilling influence of unbelief. His 'Discourse on the Studies of the University' (1832), originally delivered as a sermon in Trinity College chapel, argued for the place of geology within natural theology, opposing what he condemned as the misuse of the science by scriptural literalists. The sermon reserved its strongest fire for the utilitarian philosophy of John Locke and William Paley, eliciting a savage reply from John Stuart Mill in the 'Westminster Review'. 
Sedgwick passionately opposed all attempts to explain the origin of new species through natural laws. He was particularly concerned about Robert Chambers's anonymous best-seller, 'Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation' (1844), which introduced an evolutionary cosmology to a wide public. Such views threatened to undermine the moral and spiritual basis of Christian society, and Sedgwick condemned them in a long review for the 'Edinburgh Review' and in even longer additions to the bloated fifth edition of his 'Discourse' (1850). By the time Darwin sent him a copy of the 'Origin of Species' in 1859, Sedgwick's reaction was predictably one of dismay: 'You have 'deserted' -- after a start in that tram-road of all solid physical truth -- the true method of induction, and started off in machinery as wild, I think, as Bishop Wilkins's locomotive that was to sail with us to the moon. (Clark and Hughes, 2.357)' That Darwin, a former student, should fall from grace was especially shocking. Sedgwick's lectures, like all those in the natural sciences at Cambridge in the first half of the century, were extracurricular and aimed to make geology an appropriate study for the Christian gentleman. 'I cannot teach you all geology', he told his class, 'I can only fire your imaginations' (Clark and Hughes, 2.489). Nevertheless, he must have hoped they would follow his advocacy of proper reasoning: when Sedgwick set his first examination questions in 1851 after the introduction of the natural sciences tripos, he asked students to show that the fossil evidence does not support evolution. 
Sedgwick was a major performer at the British Association for the Advancement of Science, serving as president at its third meeting in 1833 at Cambridge. In this capacity he voiced his belief that science should be extended to working-class audiences. He gave vivid and widely reported lectures throughout the country, serving as an example of the compatibility of truths of religion and science. In 1820 he became a fellow of the Royal Society of London, which awarded him its Copley medal in 1863 as part of an anti-Darwinian campaign. 
Sedgwick was active in university politics and administration. He was appointed senior proctor in 1827, and in 1847 he served as secretary to Prince Albert in his capacity as university chancellor. In politics a firm whig, Sedgwick strongly supported reform of the ancient universities and the abolition of religious tests, and for two years from 1850 he sat on the royal commission appointed to investigate the affairs of the university. His relatively modest income from his chair was supplemented by his college fellowship at Trinity and by his appointment in 1825 to the vicarage of Shudy Camps, Cambridgeshire. In 1832 the whig government offered Sedgwick the valuable living of East Farleigh, which he turned down. Two years later he accepted a prebendal stall at Norwich, which required absence from Cambridge for only two months of each year. Much influenced by the sermons of Robert Hall, Sedgwick had strong evangelical views and opposed innovations in Anglican ritual. 
Sedgwick never married, nor could he have done so without giving up the Woodwardian chair, which stipulated that its holder must remain a bachelor. Contemporaries admired his erratic brilliance, while regretting his inability to produce a sustained argument in prose. He was animated, generous, disorganized, hospitable, and prone to procrastination and hypochondria. By the end of his life he was increasingly lonely and isolated at Cambridge, although he received visitors and maintained a wide correspondence, especially with his nieces. He retained a lifelong connection with his home village of Dent, recalled in autobiographical pamphlets issued in 1868 and 1870. Sedgwick died in his rooms at Trinity College on 27 January 1873, and was buried in the college chapel on 1 February. The Sedgwick Museum in Cambridge was established by his successor, Thomas McKenny Hughes, as a memorial to house the collections he had done so much to bring together. He is also memorialized in the Sedgwick prize, given at Cambridge for a student essay; the Sedgwick Club, the undergraduate geological society; and by a granite memorial fountain in Dent. 


@@@@@


doc= 25012


Sedgwick, Amy (1835-1897), actress, was born in Bristol on 27 October 1835, the daughter of William Gardiner. After acting as an amateur in London in 1852, apparently under the name of Mortimer, she appeared at Richmond Theatre in 1853 as Julia in 'The Hunchback' by Sheridan Knowles, when she took Amy Sedgwick as her professional name. She then went to Bristol to play Mrs White in the farce of that name, but owing to a misunderstanding with the lessee appeared only for one night. She then went to Cardiff, where she took the part of Pauline in Bulwer-Lytton's 'The Lady of Lyons'. Later she played on Moseley's Yorkshire circuit, and then went to Manchester, where she was employed by John Knowles for three seasons and became a great favourite. 
Amy Sedgwick's first professional London appearance was at the Haymarket, under J. B. Buckstone, on 5 October 1857, again playing Pauline. On 7 November she was the first Hester Grazebrook in Tom Taylor's 'Unequal Match', the part with which her name long remained associated. On 16 October 1858 she married Dr W. B. Parkes, who died in 1863. She remained at the Haymarket until 1860, her roles including Beatrice in 'Much Ado about Nothing', Lady Teazle, Rosalind, and Peg Woffington. Among her creations at this period were Kate Robertson in J. Palgrave Simpson's 'The World and the Stage', Una in Edmund Falconer's 'Family Secret', and Lady Blanche in Taylor's 'Babes in the Wood'. 
In June 1861 Sedgwick was at the Olympic, where she was the first Mrs Bloomly in Horace Wigan's 'A Charming Woman', and in February 1863 she played Orelia in Lewis Filmore's 'The Winning Suit'. In 1866 she managed the Haymarket during the summer season, and on 2 October played Lady Macbeth to Barry Sullivan's Macbeth at Drury Lane. Back at the Haymarket, she was the first Blanche de Raincourt in Mead's adaptation 'The Coquette'. On 10 October 1868 she opened the Marylebone, renamed the Royal Alfred, as director (under H. B. Lacy), with 'Pindee Singh' by C. H. Stephenson, in which she played the title role. Despite the presence at the opening of the duke of Edinburgh, the play (and Sedgwick's directorship) was not a success. Another original part followed at the Haymarket: Ida Fitzherbert in Le Thiere's 'All for Money' (July 1869). On 27 May 1873 Sedgwick married a Liverpool solicitor, Charles Pemberton (died 1875). Her last appearance in London was as Constance in Knowles's 'The Love Chase' at the Haymarket in May 1877. Thereafter she took pupils and gave recitals and readings in London and the provinces, more than once reading before Queen Victoria. She married Charles Goostry on 3 August 1878, and lived in Brighton for some years, before finally moving to Hill View, Haywards Heath, where she died on 7 November 1897. She was buried in the churchyard there. A capable actress, she failed to reach the first rank. 


@@@@@


doc= 25013


Sedgwick, Daniel (1814-1879), hymnologist, was born on 26 November 1814 in Leadenhall Street, London, the son of William Sedgwick and his wife, Frances. He was baptized at St Katharine Cree, London, on 25 December 1814. After serving an apprenticeship, he became a shoemaker. In 1839 he married, and joined the Strict Baptist congregation at Providence Chapel, Grosvenor Street, Commercial Road. In 1837 he had given up shoemaking to deal in secondhand books. He gradually worked up a connection among collectors, mainly of theological literature. His shop was at 81 Sun Street, Bishopsgate. 
In 1840 Sedgwick taught himself writing, and acquired a neat and clear hand, but never gained any facility in literary composition. In 1859 he commenced publishing reprints of works by the rarer hymn writers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, under the general title of 'Library of Spiritual Song'. Pursuing his studies in hymnology, he produced in 1860 'A Comprehensive Index of Many of the Original Authors and Translators of Psalms and Hymns', with the dates of their various works, chiefly collected from the original publications; an enlarged second edition appeared in 1863. After this he was recognized as the foremost living hymnologist. He was consulted by men of all opinions -- by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, when compiling 'Our Own Hymn-Book' (1866), and Josiah Miller, when writing 'Singers and Songs of the Church' (1869). When Sir Roundell Palmer was compiling his 'Book of Praise' in 1862 the sheets were submitted to Sedgwick's inspection; he identified the majority of the compositions. In fact, hardly a hymnbook appeared in his later days in which his aid was not acknowledged. Ironically, 'the hymn-books in use in every religious denomination' during Sedgwick's career 'were directly indebted to... a man whom many people would have been ashamed to speak to in the streets on account of his seedy appearance' ('N&Q', 409). His manuscripts were used in J. Julian's 'Dictionary of Hymnology'. Sedgwick died of heart disease at 93 Sun Street on 10 March 1879, and was buried in Abney Park cemetery. His wife, Hannah, survived him; they had had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 25014


Sedgwick, James (1775-1851), author, son of James Sedgwick of Westminster, was born in London. He matriculated from Pembroke College, Oxford, on 30 October 1797, but did not graduate. He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple on 23 January 1801. At this time he published several legal works, including 'Remarks on the Commentaries of Sir William Blackstone' (1800), and edited the sixth edition of Sir Geoffrey Gilbert's 'Law of Evidence' (1801). He wrote for the 'Oxford Review' anonymously in 1807 and 1808. In 1809 he was appointed a commissioner of excise at Edinburgh, and in 1811 chairman of the excise board. In 1815 he was nominated by the Treasury to a seat on the London excise board, but this appointment was cancelled in consequence of the prince regent's having promised the marchioness of Hertford that Colonel Sir Francis Hastings Doyle should have the first vacancy. By way of compensation Sedgwick was appointed examiner of the droits of Admiralty accounts, at his previous salary of $1500 a year. He was promoted on 25 August 1817 to chairman of the board of stamps. At the beginning of 1818 he undertook an inquiry into the conduct of the stamp revenue in Scotland, and discovered great abuses. His effort to secure the permanent dismissal of the officer to whom the disorder was attributable proved, to his irritation, unsuccessful. At the same time he offended Lord Liverpool and the government by publishing 'Observations' and writing on the inquiry in the 'Morning Chronicle'. His fourteen letters were reissued in the form of three pamphlets. When, in 1826, the board of stamps was dissolved, he was the only member denied a pension. In 1828, however, he received a small retiring allowance of $400 a year. 
Sedgwick thus had a grievance, and the greater part of the rest of his life was spent in memorializing successive administrations or petitioning parliament. In 1845 he published a further series of aggrieved letters, including one attacking Sir John Easthope, proprietor of the 'Morning Chronicle', for it had ceased to print his complaints. He was a director of the county fire office. Sedgwick died on 26 January 1851 at his house, 3 Church Street, Kensington, London, from the effects of a fall in Queen Street, Bloomsbury. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. He was married, and left one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 25015


John Sedgwick (1600/01-1643) matriculated (aged eighteen) at Queen's College, Oxford, on the same day as his elder brother, Obadiah, and graduated BA from Magdalen Hall on 6 December 1622, proceeding MA on 7 July 1625 and BD on 9 November 1633. He was vicar of Bisley, Gloucestershire, between 1625 and 1638 but was deprived after accusations of simony. He married Anne Buttery, his second wife (nothing is known of the first), in 1632. He became vicar of Clavering, Essex, and in 1641 rector of St Alfege, London Wall. His earlier success as lecturer at St Giles Cripplegate had angered the incumbent, William Fuller, and divided the parish. 


@@@@@


doc= 25016


Sedgwick, Obadiah (1599/1600-1658), Church of England clergyman, was born in the parish of St Peter, Marlborough, Wiltshire, son of Joseph Sedgwick, the vicar there. With two younger brothers, John ['see below'] and Joseph, he was said to share the characteristic of only 'four fingers on a hand' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.66). He matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 18 June 1619, aged nineteen, but migrated to Magdalen Hall and graduated BA on 5 May 1620, proceeding MA on 23 January 1623. In 1626 he was tutor to Matthew Hale. After ordination he served as chaplain to Horace, Lord Vere of Tilbury, in the Low Countries, in 1628-9. While there he corresponded with John Davenport and was part of a network of reform-minded clergy. He proceeded BD at Oxford on 16 January 1630, and in the same year became curate and lecturer at St Mildred, Bread Street, London, where he attracted a large following. Censured and suspended by Bishop Juxon in 1637, Sedgwick took refuge at Leez, the earl of Warwick's house in Essex. In 1638 he preached a sermon subsequently published as 'Military Discipline for the Christian Souldier' (1639) to the London artillery company. In 1639 Warwick presented him to the vicarage of Coggeshall, Essex, worth $110 per annum; Sedgwick was to remain Warwick's friend and an habitue of Leez. 
After the opening of the Long Parliament, Sedgwick returned to St Mildred's where, in royalist eyes, he confirmed his reputation as a 'scandalous and seditious minister' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.441). In 1642 he was one of the six 'loving friends' to whom Warwick transferred control of his many Essex advowsons; his fellow trustees included John Pym, Edmund Calamy, and Stephen Marshall. Sedgwick's place in opposition councils was already established. On 25 May 1642 he preached his first fast sermon before the House of Commons, and later that year he was briefly chaplain to the regiment of Colonel Denzil Holles and was present at Edgehill. Nehemiah Wharton approved his 'heavenly sermons' to the army ('CSP dom.', '1641-2', 391). 
In 1643 Sedgwick was appointed one of the licensers of divinity books, and he was an original and assiduous member of the Westminster assembly. His sympathies lay with the presbyterians but his views were not rigid. He favoured a Scottish alliance, belonged to a London classis, urged ministerial authority in an orderly church, and deplored the rise of sects: 'every Sectary', he said in 1644, 'makes an Arke of his owne fancie' ('An Arke Against a Deluge', 1644, 19). In 1645 he resigned Coggeshall to become rector of St Andrew's, Holborn, London, and in 1646 he moved to St Paul's, Covent Garden. 
Between 1642 and 1648 Sedgwick preached some fourteen or fifteen sermons to one or other of the houses of parliament. From 1642 to 1644 these sermons served the interests of his old political and religious allies, for example, 'Haman's Vanity' (1643) on the discovery of Waller's plot, 'An Arke Against a Deluge' (1644) making the best of defeat at Lostwithiel, and an unpublished sermon of 18 December 1644 supporting the self-denying ordinance. Thereafter new preachers and new issues took centre stage, and only one of his later parliamentary sermons was published ('The Nature and Danger of Heresies', 1647). In the same year his 'A Short Catechisme' appeared. 
Sedgwick was a successful preacher who reputedly in hot weather 'unbutton[ed] his doublet in the pulpit, that his breath might be longer, and his voice more audible to rail against the king's party' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.442). The style of his printed sermons is clear and easy, less bloodthirsty than that of many of his contemporaries, but marked by vivid images: God's special providence, he said, 'clasps the Church, as the fethers of the hen doth the chicken' ('Haman's Vanity', 1643, 15-16). In person he appears to have possessed the sociability that Warwick valued in his clerical friends. He was uxorious -- though very little is known of his wife, Priscilla -- and, in the judgement of his enemies, 'a sensuall and voluptuous man' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 6.561-2). He opposed episcopacy and believed that the causes of the church and of parliament were interdependent. Despite later disappointment at 'the Crossenesse of events' ('The Shepherd of Israel', 1658, 377), Sedgwick's commitment to the cause he espoused in the early 1640s seems never to have wavered. 
In 1651 Sedgwick urged leniency for Christopher Love, in 1653 he was appointed a trier, and in 1654 an assistant to the ejectors of unsatisfactory ministers, but the sermons published posthumously by literary executors who included his old allies Stephen Marshall and Edmund Calamy suggest that in these years he turned increasingly to the pastoral care of his flock. In 1656, as his health failed, he retired to Marlborough, where 'he died very wealthy' in January 1658 (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.444). He was buried at Ogbourne St Andrew, Wiltshire, beside his father. By his will, dated 17 March 1654, his eldest son inherited land, money, books and plate 'which the King and Queene of Bohemia gave unto mee'. His younger children, Frances, Joseph, Susan, and Priscilla, received a total of $2800, and the 'godly poor' of Covent Garden $20. 


Between 1624 and 1643 John Sedgwick published four sermons and 'Antinomianisme Anatomized, or, A Glasse for the Lawlesse' (1643), a work criticizing those who denied Christians were under 'morall law'. As chaplain in Essex's army his 'famous sermons' impressed soldiers and civilians alike ('CSP dom.', '1641-2', 388, 400). In 1643, turning combatant, he lead a regimental assault on Launceston. He died in October 1643 and was buried at St Alfege on 15 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 25017


Sedgwick, Robert (bap. 1613, d. 1656), merchant and army officer, was baptized on 6 May 1613 in Woburn, Bedfordshire, the son of William Sedgwick (died 1632) and his wife, Elizabeth Howe, and brother of William Sedgwick (bap. 1609, d. 1663/4). He emigrated to Boston, Massachusetts, in 1635, and then to Charlestown, Massachusetts, in 1637; was made a freeman of the colony. He was elected captain of Charlestown's militia and deputy to the general court, the colony's legislature, in 1636, 1638-44, 1648, and 1649. He also served as commander of Massachusetts's artillery company, which he had helped to found, in 1641, 1645, and 1648. In 1645 he commanded Castle Isle, the key to Boston harbour. In 1652 he was chosen major-general of Massachusetts. 
Sedgwick was equally prominent in the colonial economy. Beginning as an importer, especially of cloth, he helped to organize the fisheries. He became a leading dealer in fish, his brother-in-law, London financier Robert Houghton, providing links to London importers. Working through partnerships, Sedgwick invested in the establishment of the famed Saugus Iron Works as well as the building of ships, wharves, and warehouses in the towns around Boston harbour. He also owned the Tide Mill at Charlestown, another of the colony's early major industrial projects. Inevitably involved in land development, he aided in the creation of the town of Woburn in 1642. His commercial and military interests gave him a sophisticated sense of England's imperial opportunities in the Americas. In 1644, for instance, he participated in a company to tap into the Great Lakes fur trade by flanking Dutch New Netherland by way of the Delaware valley. The scheme was thwarted by mismanagement and Dutch counter-measures. He also resisted the colony's isolationist impulses by petitioning in 1643 to repeal laws against Baptists and by protesting a 1645 law restricting residence of strangers to three weeks. 
In 1653 Sedgwick returned to England to lobby for an American offensive against the Dutch during the First Anglo-Dutch War. In February 1654 Cromwell gave him four ships, 200 troops, and permission to raise local militia for an assault on New Netherland. Cromwell wished to impress New England with the protectorate's authority and intention to expand English power in America. In June 1654 the fleet arrived in Boston and soon 700 men were recruited. However, word arrived of the treaty of Westminster, ending hostilities, and though Sedgwick wished to continue the campaign, the New England governments refused and reopened commerce with the Dutch. 
Instead, Sedgwick led his forces against the French in Acadia. From July to early September 1654 the expedition captured and garrisoned French posts at St John, Port Royal, and Pentagoet on the Penobscot, thus ending French penetration of the region for the next thirteen years. Sedgwick, working through his son-in-law John Leverett, then gathered a cargo of masts and sailed back to England. 
Impressed, Cromwell, in June 1655, gave Sedgwick twelve ships and 800 soldiers to reinforce the Western Design, an expedition against the Spanish Caribbean. He found the demoralized army occupying Jamaica after its catastrophic defeat at Hispaniola. Although he lived less than a year from his arrival, Sedgwick, appointed one of the commissioners for civil government of the island, played a major role in laying the foundation for the eventual success of the new colony. He inaugurated the commerce between New England and Jamaica, essential to the future prosperity of both. He discouraged piracy, even against the Spanish, and sought instead permanent agricultural settlers. He failed to recruit New Englanders, but in March 1656 some 1400 planters from Nevis, led by their governor, migrated to Jamaica. 
Nevertheless, Sedgwick was oppressed by a sense of failure, and, soon after receiving word of his appointment as commander-in-chief of English forces in America, he died in Jamaica on 24 May 1656. His secretary claimed the new responsibilities had hastened his death. 'There is so much expected of me', he said, 'and I, conscious of my own disabilities, having besides so untoward a people to deal with, am able to performe soe little, that I shall never overcome it; it will breake my heart' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 5.155). He left a widow, Johanna Blake, and five children in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 25018


Sedgwick, Thomas (d. 1573), Roman Catholic theologian, seems to have been a member of the Sedgwick family of north Yorkshire and co. Durham. His university career began at Peterhouse, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1530. Admitted a fellow of the college on 2 June 1531, he graduated MA in 1533, was ordained deacon in Lincoln on 22 December 1537, and graduated BTh in 1545. Sedgwick was one of the original fellows of Trinity College, Cambridge, being nominated by Henry VIII in December 1546. In June 1550 he publicly disputed with Bucer in Cambridge on justification by faith, defending the orthodox Catholic position. He was instituted to the rectory of Erwarton, Suffolk, in 1552. 
In the following year Stephen Gardiner, the new lord chancellor, recommended both Sedgwick and Andrew Perne for the mastership of Peterhouse, and both were nominated by the fellows, the bishop of Ely selecting Perne for the position. In 1554 Sedgwick graduated DTh and was elected Lady Margaret professor of divinity, holding the chair until 1558, and was one of the team of Cambridge theologians deputed to Oxford to dispute with Thomas Cranmer, Hugh Latimer, and Nicholas Ridley on the nature of the mass in April of that year. In Oxford he was incorporated DTh, and on his return to Cambridge was elected vice-master of Trinity. On 12 March 1556 he was instituted to the vicarage of Enfield, Middlesex, on the presentation of the master and fellows of his college, but resigned it later that year. On 30 May 1556 he was admitted to the rectory of Toft, Cambridgeshire. He was one of the commissioners for religion and the examination of heretical books, and took an active part in the visitation of the university by Cardinal Pole's delegates in 1556 and 1557. 
In 1557 Sedgwick was appointed regius professor of divinity, and in 1558 was collated to the rectory of Stanhope, Durham, by Bishop Cuthbert Tunstall, and was instituted vicar of nearby Gainford on the presentation of the master and fellows of Trinity. On 21 September 1559 he appeared before Elizabeth's royal visitors at Bishop Auckland, co. Durham, where he refused to subscribe to the oath of supremacy. He was thereupon remanded under sureties for four days, and then deprived of his livings. In 1561 he was removed from his professorship and confined to within 10 miles of the town of Richmond, Yorkshire. In 1567 George Neville, master of the hospital at Well, bequeathed him $4. After the northern uprising of 1569 Sedgwick was incarcerated in York Castle, where he died in 1573. Considered very learned by contemporaries (though with the reservation that he was not very wise), he left no known writings. 


@@@@@


doc= 25019


Sedgwick, William (bap. 1609, d. 1663/4), religious and political controversialist, was baptized at Woburn, Bedfordshire, on 17 August 1609, the son of William Sedgwick (died 1632), gentleman, of London, and his wife, Elizabeth Howe. His brother was Robert Sedgwick (bap. 1613, d. 1656), merchant and army officer. 
Sedgwick entered Pembroke College, Oxford, in 1624 and studied under George Hughes, who instructed Sedgwick in the tenets of Calvinism. He matriculated on 2 December 1625, graduated BA on 21 June 1628, and proceeded MA on 4 May 1631. In 1635 he was incorporated at Cambridge. Sedgwick was married, but his wife's name and the date of their marriage are unknown. They appear to have had several children, of whom only three, William, Susan, and Mary, were listed in his will. 
Sedgwick was rector of Farnham, Essex, from 5 February 1635 until 1643. He deplored the advance of Laudian innovation: 'idolatrous, superstitious Arminians carry the ball before them, they have prevailed lamentably these 7 yeares' (Webster, 262). Along with his old tutor Hughes, he promoted puritan ideals and sought spiritual solace in the mid-1630s by leading and participating in weekly fasts with fellow Essex godly ministers such as Thomas Parker, Samuel Rogers, and Nicholas and Thomas Noyes. Sedgwick's willingness to promote worthy religious causes brought him to the attention of John Durie, who was seeking assistance in his plan to effect a theological common ground between Lutherans and Calvinists. 
On 29 June 1642 Sedgwick preached a fast sermon at St Margaret's, Westminster. Entitled 'Zions Deliverance, her Friends Duty' (1642), this sermon established his pattern of using allegorical interpretations of the 'Bible' to explain England's problems. In this respect, Sedgwick was not unlike parliament's more prominent ministers Stephen Marshall and Cornelius Burges; indeed, in reading Hebrew history as an analogue to the English protestant experience he was drawing on a theme commonplace since at least the Geneva 'Bible'. Defining Jerusalem as the church of the Gentiles, he compared the impending war to Israel's deliverance from Egypt. As in ancient Israel during the rebuilding of the Temple, the king had been seduced by 'evill counsell' and the 'Reformation counted Rebellion', but parliament should not be afraid to rise up because 'God hath no more than he gets by conquest' (Sedgwick, 'Zions Deliverance', 7). The Lord would assist in accomplishing the Reformation, but the saints must help by employing qualified servants who valued public service above personal interest. Sedgwick preached another fast sermon in 1643, 'Scripture a Perfect Rule for Church Government' (December 1643), which supported the effort to establish a presbyterian polity in the church. 
Around March 1643 Sedgwick placed a curate in charge of the church at Farnham and served as an army chaplain in the regiment of Sir William Constable until May of that year. From July to December 1644 he was the chaplain at Wisbech garrison, Cambridgeshire, and he may have acted as a courier for Colonel Thomas Ayloffe. Sedgwick was the minister for the cathedral church of Ely from 1645 to 1649, a position to which he was appointed by Edward Montagu, earl of Manchester. His evangelical work there gained him the title the Apostle of the Isle of Ely, and impressed Cromwell, who wrote to the isle's sequestrators that Sedgwick 'fully deserve[d]' the pay owed him despite the committee's financial difficulties (Abbott, 1.325). 
The question of Sedgwick's sanity has been raised by contemporaries and historians alike. Reports vary as to whether he earned the nickname Doomsday Sedgwick after telling some gentlemen at Sir Francis Russell's house in Cambridge that the world would end in one week, or after prophesying in London that the world would end in fourteen days. The story of his London prophecies appeared in a newsletter dated 30 March 1647, which recorded that some ministers were sent to examine him. Sedgwick met with the preachers but refused to discuss his statements, and the paper's report that some thought he was 'distempered in minde', while others observed that 'he talks very sencibly', summarizes the confusing impression one gets when reading Sedgwick's pamphlets ('Clarke Papers', 1.4). 
Wood wrote that Sedgwick 'was a conceited whimsical person', but he displayed a keen sense of objectivity in faulting parliament and the king for the outbreak of the war, and in pointing out the army's errors in 1647 and 1648 (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.335). The equitable distribution of blame appears in most of his pamphlets from 1647 onwards, beginning with 'The Leaves of the Tree of Life' (August 1648). In this tract Sedgwick displayed an ardent nationalism. He acknowledged that the English had human faults, but described them as 'indeed a Race and seed of heavenly Lords', who had created a government that represented 'the highest and perfectest glory of God' (Sedgwick, 'Leaves of the Tree of Life', 3). He urged the powerful interests in the country to include the king in the peace settlement, and condemned the 'Agreement of the People' as a 'covenant with hell' (ibid., 46). Contemporaries disagree as to whether Sedgwick showed this pamphlet to Charles at the Isle of Wight in 1647 or 1648, but according to Wood the king read only part of it before remarking that the author 'stands in some need of sleep' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.336). This treatise and Sedgwick's subsequent pamphlets demonstrate fervid spiritual feeling, but they do not exhibit the disorganization or pathos evident in Lady Eleanor Douglass's writings. 
In late 1648 Sedgwick engaged in a polemical debate, during which he lambasted the army for bringing the king to judgment, and charged that the officers were politicians bent on forwarding their own interests. Recognizing his own notoriety, there was undoubtedly a hint of sarcasm in the title of 'The Spiritual Madman' (20 December 1648), which began by arguing that England was under a military dictatorship, but deteriorated into a confused diatribe in which Sedgwick displayed sympathy for the Levellers' demand for an extended franchise, but advocated restoring the king and establishing some sort of mystical commonwealth wherein property would be shared by all. Support for the king led to accusations that Sedgwick was a royalist, and he refrained from publishing between 1648 and 1656 to disprove the charge. He maintained a lifelong friendship with Joshua Sprigge despite differences with the army, which Sedgwick blamed for the king's execution. 
In 'Some Flashes of Lightnings of the Sonne of Man' (1648) Sedgwick foretold the coming of the kingdom of God, but explained that it was within individuals. This pamphlet demonstrated more spiritual emotion than his preceding tracts, and it perhaps explains his later sympathy with Quakers and Muggletonians. He corresponded with John Reeve from 1652 to 1657 and visited James Nayler in prison in 1656. Sedgwick's name also arose during the committee debates to determine whether Nayler was guilty of blasphemy: Major-General Whalley clearly believed that Sedgwick and Nayler were both suffering from a similar insanity. He recalled an encounter with Sedgwick in which the minister's 'frenzy' caused him to claim that he was God and 'divers horrid things'; later Sedgwick had conceded that he was 'but a man' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 1.103-4). 
With one exception, Sedgwick refrained from political discourse during the protectorate (1654-60). In 'Animadversions upon a Letter' (January 1656), he castigated Vavasor Powell and the Welsh signatories of 'A Word for God' (December 1655) for threatening the peace of the kingdom. Retaining his old even-handedness, he elucidated the strengths and weaknesses of the treatise and of the current government, but reminded the Welshmen that Cromwell was 'a great Man', who had been 'a main pillar of... strength' in all the upheavals since 1642 (Sedgwick, 'Animadversions upon a Letter', 20). Sedgwick also accepted the Restoration, and his support of Charles I in 1648 may partially explain why he was not ejected after 1660. 
In 1661 Sedgwick set out his reflections on the preceding years of upheaval in 'Animadversions upon a Book entitled Inquisition for the Blood of our Late Sovereign', which elucidates and expounds a work he had published the year before. Stung by criticisms from both royalists and parliamentarians, Sedgwick admitted that he had been 'foolish' for anonymously publishing his earlier tract, but had decided at that time to 'own it' if it became controversial (Sedgwick, 1, 2). Consistent with his earlier pamphlets that blamed both sides for the war, Sedgwick indicted the army for executing the king, and commended the protectorate as the only stable Commonwealth government, although it was no more than the 'dressed up... carkase of King, Lords and Commons' (ibid., 61). He condemned the 'Saints' (the army) as a 'confused heap' who mistakenly associated the Good Old Cause with God's cause based on a partial and misunderstood reading of 'Revelation'; God's cause, he scolded, did not include continuous warfare and political strife (ibid., 84, 108). Vilified by royalists and parliamentarians as a 'Fanatick' and 'Courtier', Sedgwick's claim that he had always acted as a mediator (but neither side would compromise, especially on the issue of religion) is perhaps true in light of the recommendation of him to Durie as a suitable collaborator in the 1630s. Believing that good existed in all people and all things, Sedgwick was optimistic that the restoration of Charles II and the monarchy were positive events, and that the former enemies should work towards accommodation. 
Following the Restoration, Sedgwick may have held a living in Lewisham, Kent, where he died between the end of November 1663 and late February 1664. Anthony Wood reported that a 'Dr. S. C.' of Gr[eenwich?], Kent, had reneged on his promise to furnish an account of Sedgwick's death (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.336). Sedgwick's will, dated 28 November 1663, indicates that he owned property at Great and Little Sampford, Essex. It also records the names of four sons-in-law, Nicholas Ashton, Timothy van Vleteren, Nathaniel James, and Francis Commins, of whom nothing further is known. 


@@@@@


doc= 25020


Sedley, Catharine, 'suo jure' countess of Dorchester, and countess of Portmore (1657-1717), royal mistress, born on 21 December 1657 at Great Queen Street, London, and baptized eight days later at St Giles-in-the-Fields, was the only child of Sir Charles Sedley (bap. 1639, d. 1701) and his wife, Lady Catherine Savage (died 1707), daughter of John Savage, Earl Rivers. As early as June 1673 Evelyn spoke of Catherine Sedley as 'none of the virtuous, but a wit' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 4.13). The Countess Cowper later thought that 'Lady Dorchester's Wit makes Amends for her Ugliness' ('Diary', 74). The earl of Dorset, on the other hand, in one of his four poems about her, would dismiss her 'false pretence to wit and parts' ('Poems of Charles Sackville', 44). Her plain appearance was widely reported, but may have been exaggerated, as some of those who commented on it, including Charles II, did so to belittle James II (1633-1701). In 1676 Sir Winston and Lady Churchill were anxious for a match between their eldest son, John Churchill (afterwards first duke of Marlborough), and Catharine, his distant kinswoman, but these negotiations were soon broken off. Two years later she obtained a position at court as one of the maids of honour to the duchess of York and thus came to the attention of the duke. Before long she had supplanted Arabella Churchill as James's principal mistress. Persistent rumours also linked her to James's keeper of the privy purse, James Grahme (1650-1730), and Grahme himself is said to have believed that he was the real father of the children she claimed were the duke's (Walpole, 'Corr.', 18.193). On becoming king in 1685 James broke off the affair as a moral example to the court, doing the decent thing by setting her up with her own house in St James's Square (no. 21, the house formerly occupied by Arabella Churchill). Three months later two of the leading Anglican courtiers, the earls of Rochester and Dartmouth, contrived her return to favour, in the hope that she would be a protestant counterweight to the king's Catholic advisers. Grahme, as keeper of the privy buckhounds, was able to arrange secret assignations for the king while he was supposedly out hunting (E. Campana de Cavelli, 'Les derniers Stuarts', 2 vols., 1871, 2.75, 89). This ploy met with little success, except that James, by a patent of 20 January 1686, created her baroness of Darlington and countess of Dorchester for life. The queen was appalled and made her distress obvious when she next appeared in public. The Catholic advisers, led by the king's chaplain, Bonaventure Giffard, took the hint and demanded that the countess be banished. James almost immediately gave way. Withdrawing first to St James's Square, she refused to go abroad and, as a compromise, agreed to go into internal exile in Ireland. As a generous pay-off, she was granted an annual pension of $3000 to last until 1691, when she was promised quitrents worth $5000 per annum from extensive estates in Ireland. On arrival in Dublin she found it 'intolerable' and the Irish 'mallincoly' (De Sola Pinto, 346). In August 1686 she returned to England, on the pretext of taking the waters at Tunbridge Wells ('CSP dom.', '1686-7', 253), whereupon the king discreetly resumed their affair. Following James's overthrow, her friendship with the Grahmes, Dartmouth, and the Hydes linked her to the most important group of Jacobite conspirators in London. 
The countess certainly made no secret of her lack of respect for the new king and queen. Presented at court in April 1689, she offended Queen Mary by telling her that 'If I have broke one commandement, you have another; and what I did wase more naturall' ('Correspondence of the Family of Hatton', ed. E. M. Thompson, 2 vols., 1878, 2.128-9). A remark made to the earl of Ailesbury at about the same time implied that she wanted William III assassinated ('Memoirs of... Ailesbury', 1.254-5). In July 1690 she was called in for questioning by the government and remained a major suspect. Despite this, she successfully claimed part of her pension, and in 1703 the Irish parliament confirmed her right to her Irish rents. It helped that in August 1696 she had married one of William III's army officers, Sir David Colyear, second baronet (bap. 1657, d. 1730), who was created a baron in 1699 and earl of Portmore in the Scottish peerage four years later. Dorchester retained her caustic wit to the end, for, encountering both the duchess of Portsmouth and the countess of Orkney, mistresses to Charles II and William III, at court during the reign of George I, she famously quipped, 'God! who would have thought that we three royal whores should meet here!' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 18.193). She died at Bath, Somerset, on 26 October 1717, and was buried there. Twelve years later her body was transferred to the new Portmore vault in the church at Weybridge, Surrey, where she had owned a house since the late 1680s. 
With her husband, the earl of Portmore, who survived until 2 January 1730, she had two sons -- David, Viscount Melsington (died 1729), and Charles Colyear, second earl of Portmore (1700-1785). With the duke of York (afterwards James II) she seems to have had several children who died young. The only child who lived to maturity was Lady Katherine Darnley; she married, on 28 October 1699, James Annesley, third earl of Anglesey, from whom, on account of alleged cruelty on his part, she was separated by act of parliament on 12 June 1701 ('Westmorland MSS', 336). After his death, in January 1702, she married, secondly, on 16 March 1706, John Sheffield, first duke of Buckingham and Normanby; she died on 13 March 1743, and was interred, with almost regal pomp, in Westminster Abbey. With her first husband she had an only daughter, Catherine, who married William, son of Sir Constantine Phipps, lord chancellor of Ireland. With her second husband she had a son, Edmund, who succeeded to the title and estates, but, dying unmarried during his mother's lifetime, bequeathed to her all the Sheffield family property. These estates (excluding those successfully claimed in the court of chancery by Buckingham's illegitimate son Charles Sheffield) she left by will to her grandson, Constantine Phipps, first Baron Mulgrave, whose grandson, Constantine Henry Phipps, on his elevation to the marquessate, assumed the title of Normanby. 


@@@@@


doc= 25021


Sedley, Sir Charles, fifth baronet (bap. 1639, d. 1701), writer and politician, was baptized on 5 March 1639 at St Clement Danes in the Strand, London. His place of birth was probably his wealthy family's town house in Shire Lane near by. He was the youngest of nine children of Sir John Sedley, second baronet ('c'.1594-1638), of Southfleet, Kent, who had died on 13 August 1638, and Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1595, died after 1651), daughter and heir of Sir Henry Savile, provost of Eton College. On 22 March 1656, after a private education, he entered Wadham College, Oxford, where his tutor was the poet and epicurean wit Walter Pope. Sedley succeeded to the family title in April 1656 on the death from measles of his brother William, having survived the same malady himself. 
On 9 February 1657 Sedley married Catherine Savage ('c'.1640-1705), daughter of John Savage, second Earl Rivers, and sister to the widow of Sedley's brother Henry, third baronet (died 1641). The couple set up house in Great Queen Street. On 7 March 1660 Sedley was appointed one of the (royalist) commissioners to reconstitute the militia in Kent and in October became a captain of the Kent volunteer horse. Aged twenty-one at the Restoration, Sedley took enthusiastically to the pleasures of the court and town, often in the company of Charles Sackville, Lord Buckhurst, later sixth earl of Dorset. His witty conversation and the fact that he 'never asked the king for any thing' made him a favourite drinking companion of Charles II. On 16 June 1663 Sedley, Buckhurst, and Sir Thomas Ogle provoked a riot through their drunken antics on the balcony of The Cock tavern in Bow Street. Sedley confessed to 'showing himself naked on a balcony, and throwing down bottles (pissed in) 'vi et armis' among the people': second-hand accounts add further enormities (Keble, 1.168; Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1099). For this he was briefly imprisoned and heavily fined. Gossip recorded by Pepys and references to Sedley in the fugitive satire of the time consistently represent him as a debauchee; however, he was also respected as a wit and man of fashion. On at least two occasions Pepys found his chatter in the theatre audience more entertaining than what was taking place on the stage ('Diary', 4 Oct 1664, 18 Feb 1667). Dryden in dedicating 'The Assignation' (1672) to Sedley is at pains to present him as a civilized advocate of ''erudita voluptas'' with no resemblance to the wild wit of legend. Sedley's rhymed oath for the 'ballers', reports of whose libertine behaviour so horrified Pepys, is a relatively temperate document, enjoining fidelity in love 'when one proves truly kind' and avoidance of those 'that know not to say no'. He appears to have liked dancing but not music and was a keen player of royal tennis. 
In 1663 Sedley, Buckhurst, Waller, Sidney Godolphin, and Sir Edward Filmer contributed an act each to a translation in rhyme of Corneille's 'La mort de Pompee', which after a showing at court was given by the Duke's company at Lincoln's Inn Fields during the winter of 1663-4. He may also have contributed to a lost translation of the same dramatist's 'Heraclius'. Three subsequent plays written for the professional stage, 'The Mulberry Garden' (1668), 'Antony and Cleopatra' (1677), and 'Bellamira' (1687), show him to have been a gifted dramatist, though not of the first rank. Sedley's verse of the early Restoration years, written for manuscript circulation, has not survived in any quantity. The satire 'Timon', usually ascribed to Rochester, is given to him in several manuscript sources. The indecent lyric 'In the fields of Lincoln's Inn' is more likely to be by him than by Rochester. Some song lyrics and love poems appear in the printed miscellanies of the 1670s. Sedley's high standing as a critic was acknowledged when Dryden introduced him anagramatically as 'Lisideius', the champion of contemporary French drama, in the dialogue 'Of Dramatic Poesy' (1668). He is named with Buckhurst in Rochester's 'An Allusion to Horace' (1675) as one of an inner circle of trusted literary judges. He was a friend and patron of Shadwell who acknowledged his revising hand in 'A True Widow' (1678). 
In the late 1660s Catherine Sedley, after showing symptoms of insanity, was consigned to a convent at Ghent where she remained until her death in 1705. The daughter of the marriage, the witty Catharine Sedley (1657-1717), became the mistress of the duke of York, who, in 1686, created her countess of Dorchester. In April 1672 Sedley went through a form of bigamous marriage with Ann Ayscough (died 1708), and moved house to Bloomsbury Square. The character Medley in his friend Etherege's comedy 'The Man of Mode' (1676) represents him in his prime as a man of wit and pleasure. A satiric view from two or three years later is more patronizing: '
Expecting supper is his great delight, 

He toils all day but to be drunk at night; 

Then o'er his cups this chirping nightbird sits 

Till he takes Hewitt and Jack Howe for wits. 
('Poems on Affairs of State', 1.411)' The first line quoted is clarified by Carlos (probably another portrait) in 'A True Widow': 'I hate a dinner, 'tis a good meal for a dull plodding fellow of business... but the supper is the meal of pleasure and enjoyment' ('Complete Works of Thomas Shadwell', 3.293). 
Sedley was turned to more serious courses by being injured in the collapse of a tennis court in January 1681 and a major illness in 1686. He seems to have been reconciled with the church at this time, and to have written a now lost poem on the Trinity. A later panegyric of marriage, 'The Happy Pair', may be regarded as penance for his errors of the flesh. It is from this period too that he becomes actively engaged in politics. 
The circle of court wits which included Sedley, Buckhurst, and Rochester were all under the spell of George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham. Sedley and Buckhurst accompanied him on his splendid embassy to Louis XIV in 1670. They followed Buckingham into opposition in 1673 after the fall of the Cabal ministry and were anti-Yorkists at the time of the 'Exclusion Bill' crisis. In February 1677 Sedley was listed by Shaftesbury as 'doubly worthy'. In 1678 he assisted in the translation of Coleman's letters, then regarded as the principal documentary evidence for the alleged Popish Plot (Pinto, 310-11). In 1681 he was the dedicatee of John Crowne's anti-Catholic 'Henry the Sixth: the First Part'. Shadwell's dedication to him of 'The Tenth Satire of Juvenal' (1687) was also a whig political gesture. Sedley had entered the House of Commons in May 1668 as one of two members for New Romney, Kent, and sat in every subsequent parliament during his lifetime with the exception of that of James II (when he declined to stand) and the first of William and Mary. A supporter of the revolution but a whig of the 'anti-court' variety, he spoke with good sense and moderation in the parliaments after 1688. A speech against placemen and heavy war taxation delivered on 31 March 1690 was widely circulated in printed form. Having asked Charles II for nothing he maintained his principled independence under William except in the matter of procuring a knighthood for his son, Charles, with Ann Ayscough. This young man, to whom Sedley was deeply attached, was active in 1695 in opposing press-ganging for William's armies in Flanders. 
Sedley's best writing is found in his lyrical and satirical verse, much of which is of great distinction. His translation of Horace's 'Carmina', 2.8 has been much admired. The love lyrics, which include the much anthologized 'Love still has something of the sea', are consistently inventive and well turned. He shared Dorset's admiration for the power and simplicity of the popular ballad, and could write well in the ballad manner himself. The sombre 'Ballad to the Tune of Bateman', narrating the murder of the whig lawyer John Hoyle, demonstrates how political satire can become more effective through restraint. It is likely that verse written against James II and his court remains unidentified in the manuscript miscellanies of the time. Although Dryden compared him with Tibullus, the strongest classical influence on his writing was that of Martial, whom Sedley imitated and translated with great flair. His sure touch as an epigrammist is apparent from the following distich: 'Thou swearst thou'lt drink no more: kind heaven send / Me such a cook or coachman, but no friend.' His later verse and a few speeches are preserved in the 1702 'Miscellaneous Works' and its enlarged reprint of 1707. 
Sedley died at Hampstead on 20 August 1701 'like a philosopher without fear or superstition' ('Buccleugh MSS', 2.793), and was buried at Southfleet church, Kent, on 26 August. By the time of his death, high living and generosity had left his estate encumbered with mortgages. He never acquired his daughter's art of pillaging the public purse, though a late letter to Dorset quoted by Pinto (pp. 207-8) shows him making an attempt. However, his heirs were able to repair much of the damage. He had descendants through his illegitimate son, Charles (died 1701), who narrowly predeceased him, and the children of the countess of Dorchester. William Oldys claimed to have seen a settlement relating to two illegitimate daughters with the surname Charlot. The eldest of Dorchester's children, Lady Katherine Darnley, later duchess of Buckingham (1679-1743), was acknowledged by James II but may have been the child of Colonel James Grahme. Her other surviving child, Charles, was the issue of her marriage to David Colyear, earl of Portmore. The family tree printed by Pinto (pp. x-xi) shows a remarkable array of distinguished and talented descendants, among them the eugenicist Sir Francis Galton, who would no doubt have seen more than chance in the matter. 


@@@@@


doc= 25022


Sedulius (fl. 7th-8th cent.), religious writer, was probably an Irish exegete who wrote a commentary on Matthew's gospel, of which only a fragment survives. It has been postulated that he existed as a separate individual, earlier than -- and distinct from -- Sedulius Scottus, who flourished on the continent 'c'.850 and also wrote a commentary on Matthew. This earlier Sedulius is known only from a brief citation from his 'Tractatus Mathei', concerning the fig tree cursed by Jesus. He identified the fig as the tree from which Adam and Eve had eaten the forbidden fruit. There is no proof that this earlier Sedulius was an Irishman, but that is likely: the same identification of the fig tree as that from which Adam ate occurs in other insular texts, and the extant fragment is quoted in a 'Genesis' commentary, which itself is of probable Irish authorship. In addition, Sedulius appears to have been a popular name among the Irish at this period: the annals of the four masters (a seventeenth-century compilation from earlier sources) give the obits of six Irish churchmen named Siadhal -- presumably a Hibernicized form of the Latin Sedulius -- between 752 and 855. 
There are two reasons for regarding Sedulius 'senior' as being distinct from the better-known Sedulius Scottus. First, his commentary on 'Matthew' is quoted by a 'Genesis' commentary which itself has been handed down in a manuscript copied on the continent around the turn of the eighth and ninth centuries. Even if the manuscript is dated as late as possible, it would still be exceedingly unlikely that the fragment's author is identifiable with Sedulius Scottus, who was active in Francia 'c'.850. This chronological point led Bernhard Bischoff to dub the 'Matthew' commentator 'Sedulius senior', though care must be taken to distinguish him not only from Sedulius Scottus of the mid-ninth century, but also from the fifth-century continental Sedulius who composed a versified account of Christ's life. A second reason for regarding Sedulius 'senior' as distinct from Sedulius Scottus is that the latter does not identify the forbidden tree from which Adam and Eve ate as a fig tree in his commentary on 'Matthew'. The citation in the 'Genesis' commentary must therefore be from a different work, probably by a different author. 
The case for two separate Sedulii is not absolutely watertight. However, the notion that there could have been a single, long-lived individual who composed two commentaries on 'Matthew', one in Ireland and one on the continent, is highly implausible. Given the evidence for the popularity of the name among the Irish, combined with that for a significant quantity of biblical commentaries being composed by Irishmen at the time, the suggestion that there were two separate individuals is probably right. The floruit of Sedulius 'senior' probably fell in the seventh or eighth century, the heyday of Irish biblical exegesis: the manuscript of the 'Genesis' commentary provides a definite 'terminus ad quem'. There is no evidence that he was ever a 'peregrinus' ('pilgrim') to the continent. 
An Irish Sedulius who was a bishop somewhere in Britain took part in a synod held at Rome under Pope Gregory II in 721. But there is no more reason to identify the author of the 'Matthew' commentary with him than with any of the other Sedulii named in the annals of the four masters. 


@@@@@


doc= 25023


Seebohm, Henry (1832-1895), ornithologist, was born on 12 July 1832 at Horton Grange, Bradford, the eldest of four children of Benjamin Seebohm (1798-1871), a wool merchant from near Bad Pyrmont in Germany, and his wife, Esther Wheeler (1798-1864), of Hitchin, Hertfordshire, a granddaughter of William Tuke and a niece of Sarah Hustler. On marrying, his parents settled on a small farm, Horton Grange, near Bradford, where they remained for several years before moving to Bradford. Seebohm's siblings included Frederic Seebohm (1833-1912), the historian, and Julia Eliza Seebohm (died 1863), who married the cocoa manufacturer, Joseph Rowntree (1836-1925). 
Both Seebohm's parents were active in the Society of Friends, and he was educated at the Friends' school, in York, where he developed a taste for natural history. His father started him early in life as a grocer's shop boy, but ultimately Seebohm settled at Sheffield where he became a manufacturer of steel. On 19 January 1859 he married Maria ('b'. 1839/40), daughter of George John Healey, merchant, of Moss Side, Manchester. 
Seebohm's spare time was devoted to natural history, especially ornithology, and he made a number of journeys to the Netherlands, Greece, Asia Minor, Scandinavia, Germany, and Siberia to collect and study birds in their native haunts. One of his most successful expeditions was in 1875 to the lower Pechora River valley in Russia, with the zoologist John Alexander Harvie-Brown, when the eggs of the grey plover and of many rare species of birds were obtained. The account of this voyage, as well as that to Heligoland, where he went to study bird migration at the house of the ornithologist Heinrich Gatke, was given in his 'Siberia in Europe' (1880). In 1877 Seebohm accompanied the Arctic explorer and merchant navy officer Joseph Wiggins (1832-1905) on a journey to Siberia. They travelled along the Yenisey River, where they made further important ornithological discoveries, recorded in Seebohm's 'Siberia in Asia' (1882). On that voyage, Wiggins's ship was wrecked shortly after reaching the Kureyka, a tributary of the Yenisey. Later Seebohm visited southern Europe and South Africa to study European birds in their winter quarters, and to collect materials for 'The Geographical Distribution of the Family Charadriidae' (1887). 
Seebohm was also author of several other works, including 'Catalogue of Birds in the British Museum, vol. 5, Turdidae' (1881), 'A History of British Birds with Coloured Illustrations of their Eggs' (1882-5), 'Classification of Birds' (1890), to which a supplement was issued in 1895, 'The Birds of the Japanese Empire' (1890), 'Geographical Distribution of British Birds' (1893), and 'Address to the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union' (1893). He also contributed upwards of eighty papers, chiefly on ornithological subjects, between 1877 and 1895, to the 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society', 'Ibis', and other scientific publications. He left unfinished 'The Eggs of British Birds' and 'Thrushes'. His two Siberian expedition narratives were published together as 'The Birds of Siberia' in 1901. 
Seebohm joined the British Ornithologists' Union and the Zoological Society in 1873; he was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1878, and was one of the secretaries from June 1890 until his death. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in December 1879. He was also a liberal contributor of ornithological specimens to the British Museum. He gave the museum his impressive collection of eggs, and compiled the fifth volume of the bird catalogue, published by the trustees in 1881. 
In later years Seebohm resided at South Kensington, London, and Maidenhead, Berkshire. He died on 26 November 1895, following an attack of influenza, at his home, 22 Courtfield Gardens, South Kensington. He was survived by his wife but predeceased by his only son, Ted, who died in New York in unexplained circumstances in 1888. Seebohm's extensive ornithological collections of more than 16,000 bird skins and 235 skeletons were presented to the British Museum (Natural History). 


@@@@@


doc= 25024


Seed, Jeremiah (bap. 1699?, d. 1747), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born at Clifton, Cumberland, and was probably baptized at Askham, Westmorland, the son of Jeremiah Seed (died 1722), who graduated BA from Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1682, and was rector of Clifton from 1707 until his death. 
Seed was educated first at Lowther grammar school, Westmorland, and matriculated on 7 November 1716 at Queen's College, Oxford. He was awarded a BA on 13 February 1722 and an MA in 1725. Having been elected a fellow of Queen's College in 1732, Seed gave eight lectures on the truth of Christianity, human nature, redemption, and the Trinity for the Lady Moyer lectureship at St Paul's Cathedral, London, in 1732-3. From 1732 to 1741 he served as curate to Daniel Waterland, vicar of Twickenham, Middlesex; he preached Waterland's funeral sermon on 4 January 1741. He was also rector of Ridge, Hertfordshire, from 1736 to 1738. Queen's College presented him in 1741 to the living of Knight's Enham, Hampshire, which he held until his death, along with that of Church Oakley, Northamptonshire. 
Contemporaries greatly admired Seed's preaching. Samuel Johnson described his sermons as having 'a very fine style', but added 'he is not very theological' (Boswell, 'Life', 3.248). Towards the end of the nineteenth century the sermons were described as ranking 'among the most elegant productions of the British press, both with respect to their diction and imagery', and as abounding 'in sound argument and in just remarks on human life' (Allibone, 'Dict.', 2.1990). His published works were the 'Discourses on Several Important Subjects' (2 vols., 1743), which included the text of his lectures at St Paul's, and also 'The Posthumous Works' (2 vols., 1750), consisting of sermons, essays and letters. Seed died at Knight's Enham on 10 December 1747. He was survived by his wife, about whom no details are known. 


@@@@@


doc= 25025


Seeley, Sir John Robert (1834-1895), historian, was born in London on 10 September 1834, third son of Robert Benton Seeley (1798-1886), publisher and prominent evangelical, and Mary Anne, 'nee' Jackson (1809-1868), also an evangelical of a publishing family. After preparatory school at Stanmore, Seeley went to the City of London School under Dr G. F. W. Mortimer. A naturally bookish and eager scholar, he made rapid progress, entering the sixth form before his thirteenth year. Of 'slender nervous alert frame', 'small, spare, quick in his movements' (Wormell, 8), his health suffered, and his life's pattern began of intermittent periods of enforced withdrawal from studies. 
In 1852 Seeley entered Christ's College, Cambridge, as a scholar. At a time when modern literature did not figure in educational curricula, his already wide command of the English writers was thought remarkable in one who was becoming an accomplished classicist. A vacation in Dresden to become well-found in German began a lifelong admiration of Germany and things German. By temperament austere, Seeley none the less made his mark in the society of his college contemporaries, who included Walter Skeat, John Hales, Walter Besant, C. S. Calverley, John Peile, and Walter Sendall; and in the university at large he was known through his brother Leonard to Henry Sidgwick and Frederic Farrar. G. W. Prothero, his later colleague in the history faculty, judged Seeley 'one of the ablest of an able set' ('DNB'). Despite being again impeded by nervous illness, Seeley graduated brilliantly in 1857 among the candidates at the top of the classical tripos, and his pre-eminence was marked by the award of the senior chancellor's medal. Christ's promptly elected him to a fellowship, where for the next two years he tutored and lectured in classics. In 1859 he returned to the City of London School as chief classical assistant master; from there in 1863 he went to University College, London (UCL), as professor of Latin. 
Seeley's deep reading in modern English and European literatures (he published anonymously verses and translations in 1859) tended to make him impatient of much of the exclusive claims made for the Greek and Latin disciplines. His distaste for the system of competitive examinations had also by now become a distinctive trait; and UCL, he felt, was too much imbued with the examination-factory ethos then prevalent in the London colleges. All this meant that Seeley's tenure of the London chair would be likely to lead in directions diverging from his formal responsibilities to Latin and Roman studies. His edition of Livy eventually confirmed in 1871 his credentials in conventional classical scholarship; but his most characteristic production at London remained his inaugural lecture, 'Classical Studies as an Introduction to the Moral Sciences' (1864). Here he argued that the educational dominance of Greek and Latin was simply a fact of life, which one perforce had to make the best of. 
Certain trends in his thinking also contributed in these years to a fundamental shift in Seeley's intellectual outlook. The hold of his family evangelical tradition weakened under the influences of Carlyle and the 'Germano-Coleridgean' broad-church school. His scientific colleagues at UCL impressed him by their confidence in the claims for a commanding future role for positivist principles and experimental science. Seeley took an interest in F. D. Maurice's London Working Men's College, where Christian socialists and Comtean positivists led by Edward Beesly were in uneasy alliance, striving to rescue the working classes from the temptations of communism and commercialism. Their shared idealism of a co-operatively based social order at the expense of both competitive disorder and class war appealed greatly to Seeley. His outlook on politics likewise took on a profound distaste for the 'interminable scurrilous brawl' of political parties competing for office. The years of agitation and debate preparing for the second 'Reform Bill' in 1866 and 1867 led Seeley to conclude that critical analysis of Britain's social predicaments pointed to the need for a more disciplined, coherent national morale, wherein a revitalized spirituality would imbue the material components of civic life in the light of a new 'science of politics'. Seeley's professional career would be a quest to determine the necessary religious and intellectual underpinnings of such a science. 
In 1865 appeared, anonymously, 'Ecce homo: a Survey of the Life and Work of Jesus Christ'. Seeley's authorship was known within the circles familiar with the direction and development of his interests. He preferred anonymity for the wider world on the grounds that he judged his enterprise 'audacious and perilous' in the offence it might give both to orthodox Christians and to heterodox non-Christians; and especially to the evangelical piety of his family. His purpose was to suggest by analogy that just as 'the drama of ancient society had been played out', and its traditions and morals and civic values had become obsolete, so too with fretful and distempered modern society. What, he asked, had been 'Christ's object in founding the society which is called after his name', and how was it 'adapted to attain that object?' Seeley concluded that a reconsideration of 'the speculative commonwealth of Christ' would 'add a new chapter to the science of politics'; with implications unmistakably bearing upon the needs of the present. His reconsideration of that commonwealth utilized the new methods of historical and scientific criticism: he confined himself strictly to what the 'facts themselves, critically weighed', appeared to warrant, independently of what the doctors of the church, or even the apostles, had 'sealed with their authority'. He concluded, on this methodological premise, that Christ's object, as a new Moses, founder, legislator, and judge, was to constitute a state in which his laws contained not merely practical rules of life but declarations concerning the nature of God and man's relation to Him; wherein Christianity would begin to mean not mere fidelity or loyalty to Christ's person, but practical obedience to his rules of life and unquestioning acceptance of his theological teaching. Such Christianity would encompass liberally a universal ethic of positive morality and the 'enthusiasm of humanity'; it would encompass also the 'blessed light of science, a light yet far from its meridian and dispersing every day some noxious superstition, some cowardice of the human spirit' (J. R. Seeley, 'Ecce homo', 1866, 33-40, 50, 80, 328). 
Twentieth-century commentators, remote from its world of 'audacity and peril', have drawn attention to the thorough topicality of 'Ecce homo', its sociological subtext, its being 'really an attempt to define the social role of elites' (Rothblatt, 157). Others have pointed to Seeley's seeking to 'reconcile the Positivist faith in science and the conception of a Church of Humanity with Christianity seen as an international ethical society' (Wormell, 22). Seeley himself disclaimed any controversial intent, avowing that the work was a 'fragment' and that a properly theological treatment would be the subject of a further volume. These disclaimers availed little. Christians and secularists alike found cause for offence. Lord Shaftesbury, the evangelical leader, notoriously denounced 'Ecce homo' as a 'pestilential' book, fit to have been 'vomited from the jaws of hell'. Pusey, Newman, and Sidgwick in their different ways found Seeley's treatment objectionable. Public furore was undoubtedly stimulated by the anonymity of the author. W. E. Gladstone, however, had some 'cordial words' to say for it, for which Seeley was grateful. Later, in 1868, Gladstone gave an extensive notice of 'Ecce homo' in 'Good Words', granting Seeley's good faith as a 'most honourable writer'. 
Rather bruised by his ordeal, but nothing daunted as far as his general enterprise was concerned, Seeley shifted the spearhead of his advance towards his goal of a science of politics. Although he developed some of the features set out in 'Ecce homo' (later published in collected form in 'Natural Religion', 1882), Seeley abandoned ethical universalism and positivist scientism as the central thrust of his strategy and regrouped his intellectual forces on decidedly national and historical lines. The writing of 'Ecce homo' had impressed on him the extent to which a valid science of politics was only attainable with the assistance of 'a well-trained historical imagination, active and yet calm'. The intellectual discipline he found lacking in the moral sciences would be supplied by a scientific approach to history. In this Seeley was inspired by the achievements of the German school of critical history, and by the Prussian achievements both of an idealized state and of consequent military prowess. More direct inspiration came from the Coleridgean national church tradition. 'The church as a teacher of morality' was Seeley's contribution to a collection of essays edited by W. L. Clay and published in 1868, 'Essays in Church Policy', designed to examine the nature and future role of the Church of England as a national church. 
Seeley's premise here was that the province of religion was much more national and political, and much less personal, than was commonly supposed. State and church belonged together, and the link between them was nationality. Morals could not be severed from society. Morality made religion, not religion morality. A higher, ideal, view of service both to the state and from the state must be propagated. If society was to be redeemed from demoralization and political malaise, morality must be taught by a trained elite: a version of Coleridgean clerisy, adept not in theology but history. 'Patriotism should be inculcated, national history closely connected with morality, and civil duties carefully explained.' The clergy were better positioned than any other profession for such a duty: 'Carlyle has said that every nation's true 'Bible' is its history. If the Hebrew history be a cosmopolitan 'Bible', or rather the first part of one, I think there should be national 'Bibles' also, and I can imagine no more proper and nobler task for a clergy than the perpetual shaping and elaborating of such a national monument. (Shannon, 242-6)' There was still the positivist touch: 'We should form, as it were, a national calendar, consecrate our ancestors -- keep their images near us' (ibid.). 
From a twentieth-century academic viewpoint, Seeley's scheme for a national clerisy seems far more 'audacious and perilous' than 'Ecce homo'. It is a tribute, in its way, to his unabashed directness of mind. The contrast with the mannered archness of Matthew Arnold's 'Culture and Anarchy' of 1867 could hardly be more marked. It is probable that Gladstone was aware of Seeley's exalted vision of history as a national medium of social morality when, in 1869, on Charles Kingsley's resignation of the regius chair of modern history at Cambridge, the question of replacing him came before the prime minister. That question had come to take to itself a new kind of professional urgency and portent. At Oxford, Stubbs's ambition was to found a historical school in England. His surrogate and eventual successor in the Oxford regius chair, E. A. Freeman, had persecuted Kingsley as an amateur and a romancer. Gladstone was confronted with the task of finding for Cambridge a professor of Stubbsian seriousness of professional purpose. Freeman himself proposed such a person, Adolphus Ward; but Gladstone's principal adviser, Connop Thirlwall, bishop of St David's, had never heard of him. Maurice and Kingsley, both notably Coleridgean churchmen, favoured Seeley; but it was not until Charles Merivale, James Spedding, and Aldis Wright had all declined Gladstone's offers that Seeley's name topped the list of possibles. He was by no means a Stubbs; but a kind of Stubbs might be made out of him. Gladstone assured Maurice that 'Of Mr. Seeley's qualities I think very highly' (Wormell, 42). 
Seeley meanwhile had married on 17 August 1869 Mary Agnes, 'nee' Phillott (died 1921), of Unitarian provenance and a relative of Seeley's mathematical colleague at UCL, Augustus De Morgan. It was while on honeymoon vacation at Geneva in September 1869 that Seeley received Gladstone's offer of the regius chair. In accepting he told Gladstone: 'I believe there is no position in the world in which I could do so much good' (Wormell, 42). 
Seeley lost little time in communicating to Cambridge his new evangel. In his inaugural lecture in February 1870, 'The teaching of politics', he was ready for direct, aggressive confrontation with the academic establishment. Education, he declared, was in its transition state in Britain. An 'artificial value' had for too long been given to classics and mathematics at Cambridge. There had been an illegitimate 'protection of particular studies and prohibition of others', by which 'cultivation' had been preferred to 'knowledge'. The 'old simple routine of Classics and Mathematics' had stifled the claims of those who 'make observations and try experiments', in short, the sciences. Seeley was wholly a believer in Freeman's dictum that 'history is past politics and politics present history'. But more than Freeman he wanted to emancipate historical study from the past. It was time that claims should be made for contemporary history. 'To turn history away from the past to the present is in fact to give it the interest of an experimental study.' Cambridge was a 'great seminary of politicians'. For them history could be made 'the school of statesmanship'. The present consisted of 'problems which still await their solution, questions which the time is still struggling to answer, controversies in which we are called on to take a side'. Condemning what he called 'the 'Waverley' view of other times', Seeley emphasized the pedagogic capacity of historical science to 'study tendencies before they have reached their limit, predict the growth of power not yet mature, or calculate the stages of its decline' (Rein, 101-2, 105, 116-18). 
As the startled classical dons reeled in ribald shock out of the Senate House, their spokesman, Montagu Butler, headmaster of Harrow and later master of Trinity, is credited with what Sir Geoffrey Elton called 'the finest double anti-compliment ever uttered' when he confessed his astonishment 'that we should so soon have been regretting poor Kingsley'. 
It was Seeley's initial duty at Cambridge to guide the emancipation of history from its despised subsidiary place in the law tripos. History had been ejected from the moral sciences tripos in 1867 and divorce from the law tripos was looming. This was effected in 1873 and the history tripos commenced its small and struggling independent existence. Seeley would have preferred its being entitled the politics tripos, in accordance with his oft-proclaimed doctrine that history was best studied as the foundation of a science of politics. But he was not an effective academic politician. His dislike of the examination system integral to the tripos led to his taking a somewhat Olympian position in relation to the debates and wrangles of the faculty. Seeley was unfortunate in that the don most sympathetic to his prescription of a 'Historico-Political Tripos', both practical and scientific, was Oscar Browning, whose idiosyncrasies made it difficult for him to be taken seriously; while the proponents of 'pure' history, of 'history for history's sake', Adolphus Ward, George Prothero, and F. W. Maitland, were all men of acumen. The academic battlelines were drawn, it was said, between Seeley's 'thought without facts' and Ward's 'facts without thought'. Tripos reform in 1885 led to a decisive shift toward purism. Nor were the Seeleys advantageously at the centre of an agreeable social circle: he lacked anything in the way of lightness of touch; Mrs Seeley was notoriously a scold; and they entertained badly. Seeley's meagre professorial salary in his early years in his chair meant, moreover, that he had to devote much time to supplementing it by extra-mural lecturing. The Seeleys did not move house from London to Cambridge until 1880, after extra endowment for the chair was provided in 1879 by Henry Sidgwick. 
All these academic disadvantages would perhaps have counted for less had Seeley made the intellectual impact he intended with his first, if belated, major published production of a historical study avowedly both practical as to end and scientific as to means, 'The Life and Times of Stein, or, Germany and Prussia in the Napoleonic Age', which appeared in three volumes from the Cambridge Press in 1878. With 'Stein', Seeley aimed at pulling all the salient lines of his thinking into coherent form. Having established the moral and ethical foundations of a disciplined, patriotic society and an idealized state, he wanted to offer a model of the statesmanship appropriate to such a polity. His anti-models were, precisely, what was currently on offer in Britain: Disraeli, exponent of bankrupt Palmerstonian Turcophilia, grappling unintelligently with Gladstone, hysterical fomentor of populist sentimentality. 
Seeley lamented the passing in England of 'a national discipline which formed a firm, strongly marked national character'. The old aristocracy had made a virtue of and taken pride in a 'cool contempt for sentimentalism and fine phrases'. Now, instead of this 'massive strength approaching to brutality', a 'masculine grasp of reality', Englishmen had acquired all the contrary qualities: 'loquacity, sentimentalism, helpless confusion and inaccuracy of thought, hysterical weakness, and the habit of thinking in crowds' (Shannon, 249). 'Stein', Seeley hoped, would diffuse a salutary corrective influence. The reconstructor of the Prussian state after its collapse in 1806 was, in his own way, a kind of new Moses. He embodied both an ideal and a moral conception of the state in his resistance to the immorality and lawlessness of the Napoleonic-Jacobinical universal monarchy. Spain and Prussia, the 'immortal ideas of 1808 and 1813', gave the Europe of nations its correct cue; not the so-called 'immortal ideas of 1789'. For Seeley also, a vehement and consistent foe of the papal monarchy, the Prussia of the 'Kulturkampf' was an essential aspect of its ideality. As the Prussia reconstructed by Stein represented the ideal moral state, so her wars were necessarily ideal moral wars: they had 'in a manner reconciled the modern world to war, for they have exhibited it as a civilizing agent and a kind of teacher of morals' (Seeley, 'Stein', 2.96). 
What might be defined as, in Seeley's view, both the Mosaic legation of Stein and its bearing on the priestly attributes of the true historian was exposed in its most unabashed form in an exchange recorded by Lady Caroline Jebb in her biography of her husband, R. C. Jebb, the classical scholar. Jebb asked Seeley whether he intended to fulfil his undertaking in 'Ecce homo' to write a study of Christ's divinity: 'The answer, most unexpected, was to the effect that he had fulfilled this intention already. On being pressed for an explanation, he said that he meant his Life of Stein! His questioner's comment on this... was that if he had heard this statement attributed to Seeley, he would have scouted it as incredible. (Shannon, 248)' Possibly this reflected on Seeley's part defiance of a public which had failed to rise to the intellectual occasion and grasp the point of 'Stein'. It was not, as Prothero remarked, 'one of his most successful productions'. This was all the more irritating to Seeley in that he had taken trouble to ingratiate himself by condescending to the biographical mode. He would have preferred, as a scientist of politics, to have written 'philosophical history', but had elected for 'educative purposes' to engage thereby the English mind (Shannon, 249). It does not seem to have occurred to Seeley that, as Prothero put it, 'the character of Stein hardly lends itself to attractive biographical treatment' ('DNB'). 
It was, however, when, as a scientist of politics, Seeley sketched out a programme for a future English Stein that he achieved plenary engagement with the English mind. 'The Expansion of England', two sets of his lectures delivered in Cambridge, published in 1883, proved an immediate and long-lasting success. (It did not go out of print until 1956: the year, appropriately, as has been pointed out, of the Suez fiasco.) With 'Expansion', Seeley combined brilliantly philosophical history with a winningly epigrammatic and stimulating style. In these lectures he followed the logic he had set out in his 1870 inaugural of studying tendencies with a view to prediction and calculation about the future. This capacity was the essence of the practical object for which scientific method was the means. As he had earlier challenged the classicists, so now Seeley challenged popular historians for whom, he considered, English history was gratification of curiosity about the past by means of a celebration of liberty and democracy. But 'since the future grows out of the past, the history of the past of England ought to give rise to a prophecy concerning her future'. What prophecy could the historians of liberty and democracy offer? All that 'Wilkes and general warrants' could offer was a sense of England's history winding down. Seeley insisted that the 'history of England ought to end with something that might be called a moral. Some large conclusion ought to arise out of it; it ought to exhibit the general tendency of English affairs in such a way as to set us thinking about the future and divining the destiny which is reserved for us. (J. R. Seeley, 'The Expansion of England', ed. J. Gross, 1971, 7)' That general tendency Seeley exhibited as the expansion of the English state as a power in the world; that destiny Seeley divined as being reserved was the gathering together of the imperial components into a coherent entity, a 'Greater Britain', which might, as a 'World Venice' founded on sea power, preserve Britain's role as a world power in the twentieth century, on a par with the other destined world powers, the United States and Russia. 'We seem', as he put it in a famous sentence, 'as it were, to have conquered and peopled half the world in a fit of absence of mind' (J. R. Seeley, 'The Expansion of England', ed. J. Gross, 1971, 12). For Seeley the great imperative was that 'mind' should be henceforth at the centre of Britain's policy. 
Thus Seeley's lesson for the 'school of statesmanship'. Hitherto, Seeley had said many big things on direct, simple grounds. At last, with 'Expansion', the message made the big, direct, simple impact. Seeley had provided a generation disillusioned alike with Disraelian and Gladstonian politics, and puzzled by Britain's drifting uncertainly in a seemingly incoherent world, with fresh bearings both as to the explanatory shape of the past and to the predictive shape of the future. His last major (and posthumous) publications, especially 'The Growth of English Policy' (1895), were developments and variations of these Rankean themes of states and powers. Two great statesmen would emerge as claimants for the Mosaic vocation of the Stein of Greater Britain: Chamberlain and Rosebery. Almost the first thing Rosebery did on becoming prime minister in 1894 was to confer a knighthood in the Order of St Michael and St George upon Seeley. 
Seeley did not live long to enjoy his honour. He died of cancer at 7 St Peter's Terrace, Cambridge, on 13 January 1895. His health had never been sound. The 'slender nervous alert frame' of his youth declined into 'a somewhat lethargic exterior' to which 'ill-health had brought an almost excessive gravity of deportment and bearing which at first sight might almost be mistaken for hesitation or inertness' (Wormell, 8). His wife, it was generally agreed, was no great helpmate; and for domestic comfort he depended increasingly upon their one child, Frances Seeley. In 1882, under new statutes providing for quotas of professorial fellows in colleges, Seeley was elected to a fellowship in Gonville and Caius College, whose amenities he valued greatly. The history faculty he served honestly within his lights. He watched it grow from academic infancy to successful maturity, though he failed to imprint upon it his own vision as to its higher vocation. He was always an acclaimed and popular lecturer, and took an important initiative in establishing a seminar for advanced students. Seeley offended the young George Macaulay Trevelyan by dismissing Trevelyan's revered great-uncle as a charlatan and a litterateur. Yet it would be Trevelyan who would, with his 'English Social History' (1944), write the next great best-seller of the Cambridge school. Trevelyan characterized Seeley as a 'fine old Victorian of a fighting, dogmatic breed' (G. M. Trevelyan, 'An Autobiography and Other Essays', 1949, 17). Certainly Seeley fought for the cause of imperial federation and against the cause of Irish home rule. Certainly he was dogmatic in his conviction as to historical means to political ends. And certainly he was Victorian in the sense that he handed on no professional intellectual legacy to the post-Victorian world other than the abiding popularity of his 'Expansion of England'; which in any case came to be seen as something like the British empire itself, left over from the Victorian era, increasingly disembodied in time and space. By a kind of fatal irony, Seeley failed to predict that his admired Germany would insist on claiming its own destiny in 'Weltpolitik'; that Providence had not ordered the future for the exclusive convenience of Greater Britain. It is Seeley's ironic fate to be of interest now to historians on grounds he would have repudiated as 'curiosity' or 'purism'. Yet it is by no means curiously anomalous that the history faculty library at Cambridge is named in his memory. As one of his most distinguished successors in the regius chair, Sir Geoffrey Elton, pointed out, Sir John Seeley was Cambridge's first truly notable regius professor of modern history. 


@@@@@


doc= 25026


Leonard Benton Seeley (1831-1893), barrister and writer, was Robert Benton Seeley's eldest son. He was educated at City of London School and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1852 and MA in 1855. He was elected fellow of Trinity College in 1854 and called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in the following year. He practised as a conveyancer and equity draftsman, and in addition from 1862 to 1869 he was professor of modern history at Bedford College for Women, London. He wrote a number of popular biographies including 'Horace Walpole and his Works' (1884), 'Fanny Burney and her Friends' (1890), and 'Mrs Thrale, afterwards Mrs Piozzi: a sketch of her life and passages from her diaries, letters & other writings' (1891). He died of a heart attack in the open street across from Chancery Lane, London, on 30 October 1893, leaving a widow, Caroline Blackwell Seeley. 


@@@@@


doc= 25027


Seeley, Robert Benton (1798-1886), publisher and author, was born in Ave Maria Lane, London, and baptized on 30 March 1798 at St Faith's under St Paul's. He was the third of the twelve children of Leonard Benton Seeley, bookseller and publisher, and his wife, Harriet. His parents had come from Buckingham, where his grandfather had sold books since at least 1744. Leonard Benton Seeley's London business, established in 1784, acted as agent for the British and Foreign Bible Society in its early days, and served the more general literary demands of the evangelical community. Robert Seeley entered the business as a child, and continued the family religious tradition when he took control of the Crane Court shop in 1826 in partnership with William Burnside, later moving the business to Fleet Street. About 1830 he married Mary Anne Jackson (1809-1868), also 'an earnest evangelical' (Wormell, 5), whose brother John Henry Jackson was one of the partners in Seeley, Jackson and Halliday; they had four daughters and six sons. The firm established a reputation for 'taste and elegance' ('Publishers' Circular', 15 June 1886, 601-2; Seeley was among the founders of that periodical). Both Daniel and Alexander Macmillan worked for him and Burnside during the 1830s, before starting their own firm. The 'Christian Guardian' and the publications of the Church Missionary Society, as well as numerous theological books, appeared under their imprint. 
Seeley's theology was a premillenarian eschatology and his church party evangelical; his party politics were tory. His authorship centred on history and theology. In 1834 'Essays on the Church by a Layman' argued that scriptural authority justified the established church: 'As [God] gave [England] a pure and scriptural church at first; gave he also wealth, and power, and prosperity, as a closely-connected consequence' (cited in Lewis, 'Lighten their Darkness', 22). Other works were evangelical biographies, such as his lives of Hannah More (1838), John Newton (1843), and Henry Martyn (1855). A leading figure in the Christian Influence Society in the 1830s and 1840s, he helped found the Church Pastoral Aid Society in 1837 and the Society for Improving the Condition of the Labouring Classes in 1844, and supported Shaftesbury's campaign for factory acts. Seeley opposed economic liberal ideas such as 'laissez-faire': he believed they impugned the character of God. 
Seeley remained active in the publishing business until 1857, when it was taken over by his second son, Richmond Seeley. Robert Benton Seeley then embarked on an unsuccessful venture as newspaper proprietor in partnership with his eldest son, Leonard Benton Seeley ['see below']. Also during these retirement years he wrote a popular history of the life and reign of Edward I, 'The Greatest of All the Plantagenets' (1860; rev. edn, 1872), a work that, with his biographical writing, may have influenced his third son, the historian Sir John Robert Seeley (1834-1895). His influence has also been traced to John Ruskin's knowledge of the 'condition of England question' (Harris, 13). Robert Benton Seeley died at his home, 59 Hilldrop Crescent, Camden Road, London, on 31 May 1886. 




@@@@@


doc= 25028


Seeman, Enoch (1689/90-1744), portrait painter, was born at Danzig in Germany, where his father, of Flemish origin, Enoch Seeman ('b'. 'c'.1661), was settled as a painter. It is possible that the famous German virtuoso painter Balthasar Denner, who received some of his early instruction in painting at Danzig, may have been a pupil of Seeman's father, for some of Seeman's early paintings were executed in imitation of Denner's highly detailed style, including a self-portrait at the age of nineteen. 
In 1704 Seeman was taken by his father to London, and practised there as a portrait painter with great success. He resided in St Martin's Lane, and at first styled himself Enoch Seeman, junior. His earliest known portrait, 'Colonel Bissett and his Family' (Forbes Castle, Aberdeenshire), inscribed 'Enoch Seeman pinx. AE 181/2 1708' (Allen, 352) was painted by more than one hand. He was probably helped in its execution by members of his family. Seeman's portraits or portrait groups were sometimes on a very large scale, such as the family group 'Lady Cust and Nine Children' (1743) at Belton House, Grantham, his last recorded work. Seeman frequently painted his own portrait. An example of 1716 is in the British Museum, and was engraved by J. G. Schmidt. Another, with his daughter in boys' clothes, was at Strawberry Hill, Twickenham. A portrait by him of Sir Isaac Newton, formerly in the possession of Thomas Hollis FSA, was engraved in mezzotint by J. MacArdell. From 1717 Seeman received royal patronage, and painted a full-length portrait of George I (Middle Temple, London). He also painted George II and other members of the royal family. Another attributed work ('c'.1711-20) is a dual portrait of the first duke of Marlborough and the military engineer John Armstrong, now at Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire. 
Seeman died suddenly in St Martin's Lane, London, in March 1744. His son, Paul Seeman, painted portraits and still life, and his three brothers were all painters, one of whom, Isaac Seeman, died in London on 4 April 1751. The name is sometimes, but erroneously, spelt Zeeman. Further works by Seeman are in the National Portrait Gallery, London; Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven, Connecticut; the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; Dunham Massey, Cheshire; Belton House, Lincolnshire; and Dalkeith House, near Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 25029


Seemann, Berthold Carl (1825-1871), botanist and traveller, was born on 28 February 1825 at Hanover, the son of a clarinettist at the Court Theatre, and his wife, Caroline. From October 1835 until September 1838 he was educated at the 'Lyceum' at Hanover, then under Georg Friedrich Grotefend, the philologist, from whose son he received his first botanical teaching. At Easter 1839 Seemann became an apprentice gardener at the royal kitchen garden at Linden but apparently found little satisfaction in his work. From 1842 until March 1845 he served as assistant to the master gardener, Wendland, at the royal hill garden. 
Seemann's first botanical paper was written when he was just seventeen. In 1844 he moved to the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, and worked under John Smith, the curator, in order to train himself as a plant collector. In 1846 Sir William Jackson Hooker procured Seemann's appointment as naturalist to HMS 'Herald', then engaged on a hydrographical survey of the Pacific. Seemann left England in August 1846 to join the 'Herald' in Panama. Finding that the ship had not returned from Vancouver he explored the isthmus, finding many new plants, besides hieroglyphics at Veraguas, which he described in a paper read before the Archaeological Institute. He joined the 'Herald' on 17 January 1847, and remained with her until June 1851. Almost all the west coast of America was explored, and three cruises were made into Arctic seas. In Peru and Ecuador, Seemann travelled with Bedford Pim from Payta, Peru, through the desert and over the Andes to Guayaquil, Ecuador; in Mexico he went from Mazatlan over the Sierra Madre to Durango and Chihuahua, narrowly escaping hostile Comanches and Apaches. 
In 1848 the 'Herald' was ordered to the Bering Strait to search for the Arctic explorer Sir John Franklin. Herald Island was discovered, and a higher latitude than any previously attained in that region was reached, while Seemann collected many plants and anthropological specimens relating to the Inuit, visited Kamtchatka and the Sandwich Islands several times, and finally returned home by Hong Kong, Singapore, the Cape, St Helena, and Ascension Island. 'The Botany of the Voyage', which was published between 1852 and 1857, with analyses by Hooker and 100 plates by W. H. Fitch, comprises the floras of Panama, north-west Mexico, 'West Esquimaux-land' (Alaska), and Hong Kong. Seemann's 'Narrative of the Voyage' was published in two volumes in English in 1853, the same year that he was made doctor of philosophy of Gottingen, and was elected a member of the Imperial Academy Naturae Curiosorum (later the Leopoldine Academy) under the cognomen 'Bonpland'. Also in 1853 he began, in conjunction with his brother Wilhelm, to edit a German journal of botany entitled 'Bonplandia', of which ten volumes were published at Hanover between 1853 and 1862. Finding himself increasingly Anglicized, he gave up the issue of this journal, and in 1863 began the publication of the 'Journal of Botany, British and Foreign', in the editing of which, from 1869, he was assisted by Henry Trimen and John Gilbert Baker. In 1857 he went to Montreal, representing the Linnean Society at the meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and took the opportunity to visit the United States. 
In early 1860 Seemann was commissioned by the Colonial Office, with Colonel Smythe, to report on the Fiji Islands, before the British government accepted their cession. In Fiji he made the ascent of Mount Voma and Mbuke Levu. His report was published in 1862 as 'Viti: an Account of a Government Mission to the Vitian or Fijian Islands'. The appendix contained a catalogue of previously described plants of the islands, and some new species were described in 'Bonplandia'. In the same year he contributed an essay, 'Fiji and its inhabitants', to Francis Galton's 'Vacation Tourists'. In 1865 he began at his own expense the issue of a 'Flora Vitiensis', in ten parts with 100 plates, mostly by Fitch. Of this, nine parts, mainly written by himself, were published before his death. It was about this time that Seemann married an Englishwoman; she died about 1870. They had one daughter, Hildegarde Carolina Seemann, who survived him. 
Partly in order to fund the publication of his 'Flora Vitiensis', in 1864 Seemann accepted a commission from the firm of Alexander Mendel at Amsterdam to report on the resources of Venezuela. There, near the Tocuyo River, he discovered a valuable bed of anthracite. From March to August 1866, and during 1867, he accompanied Bedford Pim to Nicaragua for the Central American Association. Seemann's letters to the 'Athenaeum' and to the 'Panama Star and Herald' were reprinted in 1869 as 'Dottings on the Roadside in Panama, Nicaragua, and Mosquito'. One result of these journeys was the purchase by English entrepreneurs of the Javali goldmine, Chontales, Nicaragua, of which Seemann was appointed managing director. He had also the management of a large sugar estate near Panama. 
Seemann became a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1852, and was a vice-president of the Anthropological Society and a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. In botany he made a special study of the genus 'Camellia' (which includes the tea plant), of which he published a synopsis in the 'Transactions of the Linnean Society' (1859), and of the family Araliaceae (which includes ivy), his account of which was reprinted from the 'Journal of Botany' in 1868. He introduced into cultivation the cannibal tomato, once eaten with human flesh in the Fiji Islands, the candle-tree ('Parmentiera cerifera'), and several handsome species of palm. E. Regel dedicated to him the genus 'Seemannia', gesneriads, perennial plants native to the Andes. 
Seemann was a versatile and prolific writer. Besides the works already mentioned, he was the author of several scientific treatises, the most important of which were perhaps his 'Die Volksnamen der amerikanischen Pflanzen' (1851), 'Popular History of the Palms' (1856), and 'The British Ferns at One View' (1860), a coloured chart. He also wrote numerous articles in periodicals in English, German, and other languages. The Royal Society 'Catalogue' lists ninety-eight of those relating to science alone. He was also a composer of music, and was author of three short German plays: 'Wahl macht Qual', 'Der Wohlthater wider Willen', and 'Die gelben Rosen', all published in 1867 at Hanover where they enjoyed some popularity. 
In 1871, at Javali in Nicaragua, Seemann's health failed, and after three weeks' illness he died there of fever with possible cardiac complications on 10 October 1871. He was buried the following day close to his house at the mine. 


@@@@@


doc= 25030


Seffrid (II) (d. 1204), bishop of Chichester, is of unknown origins but, given the unusual name, is likely to have been related to Seffrid (I), bishop of Chichester from 1125 to 1145. Indeed while Seffrid (II) was bishop a nephew, also called Seffrid, became successively canon, treasurer, and dean of Chichester Cathedral, predeceasing his uncle. A Seffrid, possibly Seffrid (II) in his youth, witnessed a charter of Hilary, bishop of Chichester, shortly before 1157. Seffrid (II) studied law at Bologna, the greatest international centre of legal learning in his time, if, as is probable, he is the 'Seffrid the Englishman' whose mother Matilda was commemorated with an annual 'obit', according to a twelfth-century necrology of St Saviour, Bologna, a hostel specially favoured by English scholars. Later, Pope Celestine III referred to Godfrey de Lucy, bishop of Winchester, and Seffrid (II) as 'wise in the law' ('iuri sapientes'). 
Seffrid first appears in English sources in 1172-3 when, as Master Seffrid (the title indicating an extended period of study at a major centre of learning), he became at once both a royal itinerant justice, as recorded in the pipe roll, and also archdeacon of Chichester. He obtained at about this time the rectorship of Westminster Abbey's church at Bloxham in Oxfordshire, which seems to have been reserved for men with good royal connections. He thus provides an example of the expanding opportunities of the time in ecclesiastical and secular administration for Englishmen who had studied abroad, and of the growing tendency to combine posts in both administrations, to which the distinguished canonist Pope Alexander III objected in 1179. It is possible that Seffrid took this objection to heart, for in his few years as dean of Chichester (1176/1178-1180), and in his near quarter-century (from 1180 until his death) as bishop, there is no evidence of his taking any part in royal administration, nor of his playing any but the purely formal role expected of a bishop in politics (for example, attendance at royal coronations, or acting in a minor way as peacemaker between the archbishops and monks of Canterbury). Rather the bishop appears from his charters as an assiduous diocesan, ensuring where possible endowments of vicarages for the material support of priests resident in parish churches, arranging alms for hospitals, regulating the prebendal system of his cathedral, and, not least, throwing himself into its building works. The cathedral suffered a fire in 1187, but was rebuilt and rededicated by Seffrid in 1199, and he also built the hall and chapel of the bishop's palace at Chichester and engaged in work on the episcopal castle at Amberley and the church of St Andrew on his manor of Bishopstone, both in Sussex. He died on 17 March 1204. 


@@@@@


doc= 25031


Seager, Francis (fl. 1549-1563), translator and poet, the son of Nicholas Seager, was raised in a yeoman family in Devon. He began his literary career at the time of the explosion of protestant publication during the reign of Edward VI. In 1549 the London printers John Day and William Seres published 'A brefe declaration of the great, and innumerable myseries, [and] wretchednesses used in courte'. This tract constitutes a new edition and expansion by Seager of William Caxton's translation of Alain Chartier's 'Curial' from the original French. Seager also published 'Certayne psalmes select out of the psalter of David, and drawen into Englyshe metre, with notes to every psalme', which was printed twice by Edward Whitchurch in 1549, by John Harrington in 1549 and 1550, and by William Seres in 1553. Dedicated to Lord Francis Russell, the only son of the first earl of Bedford, this work is a metrical translation of nineteen psalms, together with a poem in the same ballad metre entitled 'A Description of the Life of Man, the World and the Vanities Thereof'. The poet may have been the 'Fraunces Nycholson 'Alias' Seager' who was made free of the Stationers' Company on 24 September 1557. 
During the reign of Mary I, Seager again turned to Seres to publish his 'Schoole of Vertue, and booke of good nourture for chyldren, and youth to learne theyer dutie by' (1557). This popular work consists of twelve chapters of simple, irregular rhyme, each describing a particular 'duty' and the 'degrees' necessary for its achievement. An acrostic that spells out the author's name provides a preface. Amid a flurry of moralistic attacks on poetry Crowley issued a new edition of the 'School of Vertue' in 1582, arguing that poetry plays an important role in the moral education of both children and adults, and is a powerful didactic tool. To Seager's work Crowley added his own metrical 'Prayers and Graces'. The popularity of Crowley's edition among a humble readership is suggested by a comment claiming that this book was 'commonly sold at the stalls of ballad-singers'. An abridged version of 'School of Vertue' also appears in Robert Weste's 'Booke of Demeanor' of 1619, reprinted in 1817, and again in 1868, by the Early English Text Society, as 'The Babees Book'. 
Seager contributed a moralistic poem of forty-four rhyme royal stanzas entitled 'How Richard Plantagenet, duke of Gloucester, murdered his brother's children, usurping the crowne' to the 1563 edition of the 'Mirror for Magistrates'. He found ample evidence of political corruption and tyranny in the story of Richard III and hoped that his history would provide a model of vice that contemporary civil servants might avoid. A prose colloquy appended to the poem acknowledges the irregularity of Seager's rhyme royal but claims that it observes decorum in complementing Richard's unsavoury character. Scholars assume that William Shakespeare incorporated minor details from Seager's poem into 'The Tragedy of Richard III' ('c'.1592). He was married to Anne Sherard with whom he had two sons and one daughter: Francis Segar, who spent his career at the court of the Landgrave Moritz in Hesse; William Segar, Norroy king of arms under Elizabeth and Garter king of arms under James and Charles I; and Jane, who authored, in 1589, 'The divine prophesies of the ten sibills', a bound manuscript intended for Queen Elizabeth (BL, Add. MS 10037). 
Francis Seager is remembered as a versatile man of letters, important in bringing the humanist impetus of much popular poetry of the day into the service of the Reformation. 


@@@@@


doc= 25032


Segar, Francis, the younger (b. before 1564, d. 1615), courtier, was the son of Anne Sherard and Francis Seager (or Segar) of Devon, a poet and translator known for his 'School of Vertue' (1557) and his verses on Richard III in William Baldwin's 'A Mirror for Magistrates' (1563). Francis had a younger brother, Sir William Segar, who became Garter king of arms, and a sister, Jane, who authored 'The divine prophesies of the ten sibills' (1589), a bound manuscript intended for Queen Elizabeth (BL, Add. MS 10037). Jane married Lionel Plumtree, who may have been connected to the Muscovy Company, and lived for a time in Russia (Frye, 102). William and Francis are named in Francis Meres's 'Palladis tamia. Wits Treasury' (1598) as contemporary painters in England (Meres, 287'v'). A number of paintings attributed to Segar survive, but it is unclear whether William was responsible for all of these or whether some were by Francis. 
Little is known of Francis Segar's early life. A reference in the will of Richard Westerfield (dated 4 December 1565) to a house in St Benet Paul's Wharf, 'then in the tenure of Francis Segar, citizen and scrivener', may be to the residence of Francis's father (TNA: PRO, 11/48/411'v'-413). The possibility is strengthened by the fact that two children of William ('b'. 1604) -- who was a son of Sir William Segar and his second wife, Mary -- were born at the College of Heralds and baptized at St Benet: Ann in 1623 and Francis in 1624. Moreover, Westerfield's will indicates that the Segar living in the 'messuage' was a 'citizen and scrivener'; Francis Nycholson, alias Seagar, father to Francis the elder, was made free of the Stationers' Company on 24 September 1557 (Arber, 1.69); and William Segar, Garter king of arms, was also trained as a scrivener. 
On 28 December 1591 Francis Segar's name was recorded in the register of the University of Padua with the notation that he was an Englishman with a scar on the underside of his left hand -- 'cum cicatrice in ima parti manus sinistrae' (Andrich, 133). Entries in Segar's 'album amicorum', or autograph book, indicate that he was a captain (Hunt. L., HM 743), as does an ode written by Hermann Fabronius to 'Franciscum a Segra captaneum Lichtenaviensem' (Universitatsbibliothek Kassel, 2 degree MS poet. et roman. 12, 499-502). An earlier speculation that the younger Francis was the Segar who was captain of the 'Golden Noble' in 1589 (Tenison, 61-3) has proven false (Spies, 'Francis Segar: Die erste Probe'). Because Francis's brother served in the Netherlands in 1586 with the earl of Leicester, it is possible that he served there as well. 
Whatever his military service, if any, Francis Segar spent most of his career in Kassel. From 1594 or 1595 to 1615 he served as gentleman of the bedchamber and counsellor to Landgrave Moritz of Hesse-Cassel, an influential protestant prince who hosted English actors at his court and kept an alchemical laboratory said to be the most impressive in Europe (Universitatsbibliothek Kassel, 4 degree MS chem. 47). Segar was present in 1596 at the baptismal ceremonies for the landgrave's daughter Elisabetha, attended by a delegation from the child's godmother, Queen Elizabeth of England; at the coronation of James I in London in 1604; and at the visit in 1611 of the landgrave's son Otto to England, where the young prince sought a marriage settlement with the king's daughter, Princess Elizabeth. John Stow, recording Prince Otto's visit in his 'Annales', describes Segar as 'chiefe gentleman, and director of his affaires... a sworne Counseller unto prince Morris... and one of his captaines in ordinary' (Stow and Howes, 912-13). 
While at the Kassel court Segar wrote several poems, including, in 1610, his first attempt at poetry in German (1610; Universitatsbibliothek Kassel, 4 degree MS poet. et roman. 1); an autograph sonnet, in English, praising Moritz appears in a presentation copy of the landgrave's translation of the 'Psalms' of David (1595; BL, C.27.e.7). From 1599 to 1611 Segar kept an 'album amicorum', which was later indexed by his great-nephew Simon Segar the elder ['see below'] and then by his great-great-nephew Simon Segar the younger ['see below']. The album contains a wide selection of contributors, including a number of British notables -- Ben Jonson, Inigo Jones, Walter Ralegh, Henry Wotton, Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, Prince Henry, and King James -- some addressing him as 'captain' and some as 'Sir', although no record of his having been knighted has been found. Adam Segar, probably the Adam Segar who was captain of the 'Golden Noble', also signed. 
Segar travelled extensively on behalf of the landgrave. Among several extant letters is one dated 10 May 1597 sent by him from Geneva (Hessisches Staatsarchiv Marburg, Best. 4 g Nr 35), reporting on affairs in France and Italy (while revealing his fluency in French and Italian), and two dated 22 October 1597 sent from Amsterdam by George Webster (Hessisches Staatsarchiv Marburg, Best. 4 g Nr 36 and 37), an English player who, with Robert Brown, fled Kassel during an outbreak of the plague. Segar's '10 ember' 1613 letter to Moritz (the date is only partially legible) reveals that the Englishman, returning from recent travels, had brought one of William's sons with him to Kassel, hoping to secure a place for the boy at Moritz's court (Universitatsbibliothek Kassel, 2 degree MS Hass. 57 (10, 168)). (Subsequent references indicate this was John Segar, who was seventeen at the time.) Segar's many trips abroad, along with correspondence dated 3 August 1607 and 10 June 1610 from Francis Segar to Robert Cecil, first earl of Salisbury, reporting events on the continent (TNA: PRO, SP 81/9 and 81/10), suggest that Segar may have been part of an international intelligence network run by the second earl of Essex, and subsequently by Salisbury. 
Francis Segar was on a mission to England in 1615, carrying papers from the landgrave, when he was stricken with the plague. In a letter to Moritz, dated 9 September that year (Hessisches Staatsarchiv Marburg, Best. 4 f England Nr 58), and another of the same date to Gaspar Muchio at the landgrave's court (Hessisches Staatsarchiv Marburg, Best. 4 f England Nr 59; for a transcript of both letters see Spies, 'Francis Segar: Die erste Probe'), William Segar reported that his brother had died. Francis's belongings in England, he reported, consisted of apparel, books, jewels, medals, and $40 in gold. Among the medals were one from Landgrave Moritz and two from King James; among the jewels were three diamond rings given by the queen (either Elizabeth or James's consort, Anne), Lady Elizabeth, and Prince Henry, a collection suggesting Segar's importance to the English crown. The letters spoke of arrangements for retrieving the remainder of Francis's estate, which, according to an inventory in Francis's hand, was sealed up in a wardrobe in Kassel. William was sending his eldest son, Jacob, and Abraham Vanderdoorf to Kassel to collect Francis's belongings and William's son John, who had been in Kassel under his uncle's care. It is unclear whether John actually returned in 1615; for two or three years he had been a student at the landgrave's Collegium Mauritanum, after which a record of 1616 places him at the University of Marburg. In 1615 John wrote 'Juno, Minerva & Venus', with an acrostic poem dedicated to Landgravine Elisabetha (Universitatsbibliothek Kassel, 4 degree MS Hass. 71); he is probably the 'J.S. Med. D e Coll. Joan. Oxon' who wrote a tribute to the landgrave in 'Monumentum sepulchrale...', published in three parts from 1635 to 1640 (BL, 143.f.141). 
Apparently, Francis Segar had wanted to end his service in Kassel as early as 1607. As he explained in a letter of 3 August 1607 to the earl of Salisbury reporting on the situation in Poland, Moritz would not grant him a pension, which would enable him to 'laye [his] bones' in England (TNA: PRO, SP 81/9). Eight years later he did just that, but he was still in the service of the landgrave who, he claimed, owed him a year's pension (Hessisches Staatsarchiv Marburg, Best. 4 f England Nr 58 and 59). When Segar was in London on what proved to be his final assignment, he received letters from Arthur Barton in Holborn: one dated April was sent to him at Garter House, where he was apparently staying with his brother; one dated September was addressed to him 'at his house at Poplar', in east London, where he died (Universitatsbibliothek Kassel, 2 degree MS chem. 19(2)). His end, his brother reported to Muchio, was 'Christian like and resolved' (Hessisches Staatsarchiv Marburg, Best. 4 f England Nr 59). 
Documents in Segar's hand from his twenty-year stay at the Landgrave Moritz's court are in Kassel and Marburg. These include correspondence, poems, copies of sermons, and treatises on alchemy and agriculture, the latter including instructions on the 'Inglishe practice of corne' ((1595?); Universitatsbibliothek Kassel, 4 degree MS philos. 13). Interestingly, a notebook of Sir Hugh Plat, author of 'The Jewell House of Art and Nature' (1594), contains instructions for cleaning old paintings, sent to him by Francis Segar (BL, Sloan MS 2189, fol. 33) (Spies, 'Francis Segar: Die erste Probe'). 

Simon Segar the elder (d. 1684) was the great-nephew of Francis Segar the younger ['see above'] and the son of Thomas Segar (1607-1670) of St Giles-in-the-Fields, Middlesex, courtier and Bluemantle pursuivant of arms, whose own father was the herald Sir William Segar. Simon the elder entered Gray's Inn, London, on 22 September 1655. On 14 June 1667 he was appointed 'collector of all the dutyes of the house due from the gent: except commons due to the Steward' at Gray's Inn (Fletcher, 1.454). On 27 April 1670 he was appointed third butler, charged with 'collect[ing] the Chappell Readers Roll for this terme'; on 6 November 1674, second butler (and library keeper); and on 22 November 1676, chief butler (ibid., 2.9, 33, 43). On 13 November 1674 Simon was paid for 'setting up the sheilds of the severall Readers armes of this Society in the Library' (ibid., 2.34), and on 23 May 1679 with ensuring that 'papists' were aware of 'an order of the House of Lords' and had conformed to it (ibid., 2.55). Simon Segar the elder was responsible for compiling 'A table showing the number of gentlemen admitted into the society of Gray's Inn in each year from 1521 to 1674, with an alphabetical list of the benchers and treasurers and other matter directly drawn from authentic sources' (BL, Harley MS 1912, fol. 1108, Gray's Inn). According to his will, made on 9 January 1684 and proved on 17 January (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/375/67), Simon Segar, of St Andrew's, Holborn, owned several houses, dwelling in one in Spread Eagle Court. The will names Frances ('b. c'.1650), his widow and executrix, who was apparently pregnant at the time, and three children: a daughter, Anne, and two sons, Simon ['see below'] and Samuel ('bap'. 1682). 

Simon Segar the younger (b. 1675, d. in or after 1715), author and genealogist, of the parish of St Andrew, Middlesex, matriculated at Pembroke College, Oxford, on 28 July 1690, at the age of fifteen. Like his father, Simon Segar the elder ['see above'], who died when he was nine, the younger Simon was interested in titles of honour and nobility. In 1711 he prepared a 'Genealogia familiae Harlaeanae apud Gallos', a genealogy of the Harley family in France (BL, Add. MS 70080). On 18 December 1714, while in the employ of Sir Walter Calverley, he certified that he copied 'divers ancient deeds & scripts & muniments relating to his [Calverley's] estates and family', creating a thick bound manuscript, in his own hand (BL, Add. MS 27412), and a vellum roll of 'The genealogy and arms of the Calverley family' (BL, Add. MS 27414). The project took at least two years, as suggested by correspondence with Sir Walter, at Eshott near Bradford, Yorkshire, bound with the manuscript. Under the title 'Aspidora Segariana' (1586-1633; BL, Add. MS 12225), the younger Simon collated the grants and confirmations of arms for which his great-grandfather Sir William Segar was responsible. His 'Honores Anglicani: or, Titles of Honour of the Temporal Nobility of the English Nation' was published in 1712, reissued as 'Titles of Honour' in 1720. He also wrote a mourning poem on Queen Mary entitled 'Threno-Maria, a Rapsodicall Essay on the Death of Our Late Gratious Soveraign Queen Mary of Ever-Blessed Memory', published in 1695 in a memorial volume (Newberry Library, Chicago, Wing S2413). 
The younger Simon Segar's interest in his own family history is reflected in an annotation in his copy of a fifteenth-century manuscript of the 'Brut Chronicle' (Yale U., Beinecke L., MS 494): 'This book was in the 3d year of Edw. the 4ths time William Nasby's but is now owned 1696 by Simon Segar son of Simon the son of Thomas the son of Sr William Segar Knt Garter principall King at arms (liveing temp Elizabeth Reg. & King James the first) the son of Francis the son of Nicholas [cancelled word] by the daughter of... [Eleanor] Crasanthorpe the son of another Nicholas the son of Gerrard etc. (ibid.)' He also recorded his genealogy in a note inscribed in the 'album amicorum' of his great-great-uncle Francis Segar the younger ['see above'], for which both he and his father before him provided an index. Sadly, as a boy Simon tore out several pages from the album, later confessing to the deed: '
'NB'. There were several Other Autographs as appears by the first Index (made by my father Simon Segar son of Thomas son of Sr Wm Segar younger brother to Sr Francis) wch refers to the Pages divers of wch were torne out by me Simon Segar (son of Simon Segar aforesaid) when a Boy after my fathers decease....' The date and place of the younger Simon's death are unknown. He was alive on 18 December 1714, when, at age forty, he certified that he copied materials relating to the Calverley family and estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 25033


Segar, Sir William (c.1554-1633), herald, was the son of Francis Seagar (Segar) and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Sherard. William had two siblings: Francis Segar, gentleman of the bedchamber to Maurice, landgrave of Hesse, and Jane, who authored, in 1589, 'The divine prophesies of the ten sibills', a bound manuscript intended for Queen Elizabeth. William's precise date of birth is unknown; however, in a deposition in September 1604 he gave his age as 'fifty or thereabouts' (Borukhov, 328). Admitted to Gray's Inn in 1579, Segar, who was trained as a scrivener, was employed by Sir Thomas Heneage, who introduced him to the College of Arms. Segar was created Portcullis pursuivant on 10 June 1585, Somerset herald on 4 February 1589, and Norroy king of arms on 23 October 1597, though the patent was not signed until 2 June 1602 (Noble, 172). On 23 April 1586 he attended the earl of Leicester's festival of St George at Utrecht and later made several voyages abroad, writing accounts not only of the Utrecht journey but also of his sojourns in France (1596) and Denmark (1603). On 16 February 1587, Segar and other heralds carried Sir Philip Sidney's hatchments in his funeral procession. 
At this time, Robert Cooke, Clarenceux king of arms, was encroaching on the traditional privileges of Garter king of arms. In 1595 Segar sided with Sir William Dethick, Garter, criticizing Cooke for his inability to write clearly and for making many grants of arms to 'base and unworthy persons for his private gaine onely' (Wagner, 207). In 1596 he continued to uphold Garter's rights against Cooke's successor, Richard Lee. Segar was appointed deputy Garter in place of the unpopular Dethick to invest Christian IV of Denmark with the Garter in June 1603. In 1604 he proclaimed the Anglo-Spanish peace in London. He was appointed as Garter by a signet bill in January 1604, although Dethick did not resign until December 1606. Segar obtained a great seal patent, confirming him as Garter, on 17 January 1607. In 1612 he invested Maurice, prince of Orange, with the Garter, and the same year was himself granted arms (BL, Harl. MS 1441, fol. 154b). He was knighted on 5 November 1616. 
By 1584 Segar had married first Helen Somers (died 1593x6) of Kent, and had three sons, Jacob, Giles (died 1649), and Anthony ('b'. 1586), and three daughters, Catherine ('b'. 1585), Elizabeth ('b'. 1592), and Penelope, who married first Nicholas Charles (died 1613), Lancaster herald, and then Timothy Cartwright of Marshbone, Gloucestershire, with whom she had Timothy Cartwright, builder of the Royal Exchange. By 1596 Segar had married Mary (Maria), daughter of Robert Browne of Evington, Herefordshire, and had four sons, John ('b'. 1596), who died in Virginia, Frederick ('b'. 1599), William ('b'. 1604), and Thomas (1607-1670), later Bluemantle pursuivant of arms, and three daughters, Ann, later wife of Lewis Latham of Ellonstow, Bedfordshire, Sarah ('b'. 1601), and Alice ('b'. 1603). In December 1616 Segar's rival Ralph Brooke, York herald, tricked him into confirming a concoction of foreign royal arms to Gregory Brandon, the common hangman of London who was masquerading as a gentleman about to embark for the continent. Brooke then reported him to James I, who imprisoned both Brooke and Segar in Marshalsea prison on 30 December 1616. They were released a few days later, the lord chamberlain hoping the experience would make the former more honest and the latter more wise (Wagner, 219-20). 
On 5 April 1617, James I added $10 to the existing $50 paid to Segar's office of Garter. The same year, he and William Camden conducted the heraldic visitation of Northamptonshire. On 16 November 1618 Segar became one of the commissioners to inquire into the condition of Lincoln's Inn Fields. In 1624 he was among those recommended by Edmond Bolton to be members of the projected Academy Royal. In 1627, accompanied by two of his sons, he and Dudley, Lord Carleton, visited The Hague to invest Henry Frederick, prince of Orange, with the Garter. He was represented by Henry St George for the investment of Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden the same year, and by Phillipot for the investment of the elector Charles Louis of the Palatine in 1633. 
Segar is known to have been the author of a number of manuscript and printed works. His poetry includes a volume of satiric anti-Catholic poems (1587), poems praising James I and others in tribute to friends, and Latin and French poems that he 'englished' (Borukhov, 329). His prose works are on such subjects as the arms of the Garter knights, the office of earl marshal, the origins of the princely orders of collars, and the heraldry and genealogy of the English royal family and peerage. Best known for his 'Honor, Military and Civill' (1602), Segar is associated with other works as well. 'Segar's Roll' of armorial bearings (BL, Add. MS 8933), a treatise on heraldry, is so called because it was in his custody in 1605; 'The Cities Great Concern' (1629), sometimes attributed to him, was really by Edmond Bolton. Segar was a conscientious herald and a formidable scholar yet, like many other Tudor genealogists, he authorized many pedigrees giving most improbable descents from fabulous ancestors. His long reign gave the college respite from the jealous controversies over the prerogatives of the three kings of arms. 
Segar was also a painter of significance. In 1598, Francis Meres, in 'Palladis Tamia Wits Treasury', judged 'William and Francis Segar brethren' among the leading painters in England. Some twenty portraits by Segar are known, including those of Robert Dudley, first earl of Leicester, Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, Sir Francis Drake, and Queen Elizabeth (Piper, 300). 
Segar wrote his will on 10 December 1633, describing himself as being of Richmond, Surrey, and appointing Sir John Parsons his overseer. He died the same day and was buried the next in the chancel of Richmond parish church, Surrey. His will was proved on 21 January 1634 by his widow and executor, Maria. On 3 June 1649 administration of the estate was granted to his son Thomas, after Mary's death. Thomas Segar's son was the indexer Simon Segar the elder ['see under 'Segar, Francis, the younger], who was the father of the author and genealogist Simon Segar the younger ['see under 'Segar, Francis, the younger]. 


@@@@@


doc= 25034


Seagrave, Sir Gilbert of (d. 1254), administrator and justice, was the second son of Stephen of Seagrave (d. 1241) of Seagrave, Leicestershire, and Rohesia, daughter of Thomas Despenser. His elder brother, John, having died, Gilbert succeeded to his father's estates in Leicestershire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Nottinghamshire, and Derbyshire on his father's death in 1241. 
The door to royal service was no doubt opened for Seagrave by his father, the justiciar. He was in Brittany before 1232, probably during Henry III's campaign of 1230-31, and in 1233 he escorted from Northampton to Gloucester the proceeds of the fortieth from Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire. As part of the distribution of spoils on the death of Ranulf (III), earl of Chester, Seagrave received custody of the manor and castle of Newcastle under Lyme in December 1232, and in 1233 was granted Burton and part of Horncastle for his maintenance in the king's service. But when the father fell, so did the son; he had to surrender Newcastle and answer proceedings against him in June 1234. Although Stephen of Seagrave was back in the king's favour by 1236, Gilbert seems to have remained outside the favoured circle until after his father's death, when he was pardoned the relief due on his father's lands. He was appointed justice of the forests south of the Trent in May 1242 and governor of Kenilworth Castle from 1242 to 1244. There is no record that Gilbert acted as justice of the forest after October 1245. In 1248 he paid the king 100 marks to be quit of all claims arising from tenure of that office. 
In 1251 Seagrave emerged again from obscurity, sitting as a justice in king's bench and as one of the justices to hear pleas in the city of London. In August 1253 he accompanied the king to Gascony where he continued to act as a justice, and in the following January he was sent home by the king as one of his messengers to ask for money from a parliament. He later rejoined the king, and was in Gascony on 16 June, and at Bordeaux as late as 7 September. Very soon afterwards, on a mission with Simon de Montfort to persuade Alexander III, king of Scots, to support Henry III's Sicilian enterprise, he started home through Poitou in the company of John de Plessis, earl of Warwick, and other nobles. Despite a safe conduct from Louis IX, the party was treacherously seized by the citizens of Pons in Poitou, where Seagrave fell ill, and died in prison before 8 October. On 12 October his wardships, and the wardship of his own lands during his son's minority, were granted to the king's son Edward. 
By 30 September 1231 Seagrave had married Amabilia, daughter and heir of Robert of Chalcombe; she was still living in 1282. They had two children, Nicholas of Seagrave, who became first Lord Seagrave, and Alice, wife of William Mauduit, earl of Warwick. Matthew Paris describes him as 'a man noble and rich and of fine character' (Paris, 'Chron'., 5.463). 


@@@@@


doc= 25035


Seagrave, Gilbert (c.1260-1312), theologian, was probably a member of the Leicestershire baronial family of Seagrave, and if so was possibly a younger son of Nicholas of Seagrave, first Lord Seagrave (1238?-1295). He must have read arts at Oxford from about 1280, and was admitted rector of Harlaxton, Lincolnshire, on 20 November 1282. While studying and teaching at Oxford he was maintained by additional benefices, which he was dispensed to hold on 3 February 1291: he became a canon of Lincoln, with the prebend of Milton Ecclesia, on 8 February 1297; sacrist of the chapel of St Mary and the Holy Angels, York, on 2 August 1303 (but resigned it under royal pressure in 1304); and archdeacon of Oxford on 10 December 1303. By then he had probably left Oxford and was in the service of Thomas Corbridge, archbishop of York (died 1304), as his seneschal (1303) and proctor in parliament (1301). He went overseas, perhaps to represent the crown at the coronation of Pope Clement V, in October 1305; he was certainly at the papal curia at the Chateau St Symphorien d'Ozon near Lyons in 1312, where he died and was probably buried. 
Seagrave's theological 'quaestiones' and quodlibets were said by Leland to be preserved in most Oxford libraries. If so, there is no trace of them now, and they were even unknown to Bale. All that remains of his work is a disputed question with its magisterial determination, and a response to the question of another master, the Cistercian Thomas Kirkeby, in the first quire of the Worcester collection of disputed questions (Worcester Cathedral, MS Q.99). In these debates, which probably took place about 1297, he was associated with Richard Clive, Thomas Sutton, and William of Macclesfield, three luminaries of the brilliant Oxford generation of theologians who included Duns Scotus (died 1308). Seagrave's question, whether the emanation of the Word in divine beings should precede the distinction of ideas, is a characteristically abstract topic of its time. 


@@@@@


doc= 25036


Seagrave, Gilbert (b. before 1258, d. 1316), bishop of London, was the son of Nicholas of Seagrave, first Lord Seagrave (1238?-1295), and his wife, Maud (Matilda). His date of birth is not recorded, although he seems to have been born in the mid-thirteenth century: he received his first benefice in 1279 and if he was then at least twenty-one, as canon law decreed, he can have been born no later than 1258. He received a university education, since he is called 'magister' by the London chronicler describing his enthronement; it is not known where, but Cambridge must be a possibility, since he was chancellor of that university, probably in 1292-3. 
Seagrave's first known benefice was the rectory of Kegworth, Leicestershire, to which he was presented by his father in 1279 when he is described as subdeacon. He was also rector of Aylestone, Leicestershire, from 1293 to 1296. In the early fourteenth century he obtained prebends in the cathedral churches of London, Hereford, and Lincoln, holding the prebend of Portpool at London in 1301, the prebend of Hunderton at Hereford from some time after 1304, and the prebend of St Martin's in Durnstall at Lincoln from 12 August 1302. By 2 June 1306 he was precentor of St Paul's, London, while still retaining his prebends, and the rectory of Fenstanton, Huntingdonshire. A papal letter of 4 June 1306 gives permission for Seagrave to keep the precentorship, which he had obtained without papal dispensation, while retaining the prebends and church mentioned above. 
On 16 or 17 August 1313, perhaps with the benefit of the influence of his brother John Seagrave, Lord Seagrave, Gilbert Seagrave was elected bishop of London. Royal assent was granted on 22 August, the temporalities were restored on 28 September, he was confirmed on 17 September by the chapter of Christ Church, Canterbury, the see of Canterbury being vacant, and was consecrated by Henry Woodlock, bishop of Winchester, on 25 November, on the same day laying the foundation stone for the shrine of St Earconwald. He is reported to have been on bad terms with Archbishop Walter Reynold, but otherwise little is known of his brief episcopate, although he seems to have been conscientious in carrying out his episcopal duties. On 18 April 1314 he began a visitation of his cathedral church and on 26 May of the same year he attended convocation at Blackfriars, London. The extant names of canons of St Paul's during his episcopate do not suggest that he practised nepotism: although two other Seagraves occur, neither was appointed until after the bishop's death. He is known to have kept an episcopal register which would, no doubt, have provided a clearer picture of his activities. However, only a fragment survives, containing an indulgence for those giving towards repairs to the fabric of St Paul's Cathedral and a letter requesting his help in obtaining for Cardinal Raimond de Fargis, a papal appointee, the fruits of his benefice within the diocese. 
The new bishop had little time to exercise his diocesan authority. Seagrave died on 18 December 1316, and was buried on the 30th; the site of his grave is unrecorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 25037


Seagrave, Sir Hugh (d. 1387), administrator and courtier, was, on the evidence of his arms, a junior or bastard member of the baronial Seagrave family, which became extinct in its main line in 1353. He may be the Hugh who was squire to Queen Philippa in 1369, and seneschal of the household to John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, in Gascony before 4 November 1372. He emerges as Sir Hugh Seagrave, knight, negotiating peace with Flanders at Calais in March 1371. On 8 October 1372 he became steward of the lands of Edward, prince of Wales (the Black Prince), whom he served until the prince died in 1376, when Seagrave became one of his master's executors. Confirmed on 6 July as steward of all the lands in England and Wales which the prince had held, he then served the prince's widow, Joan. Following Edward III's death in June 1377, he became steward of the household of Richard II and on 20 July 1377 was appointed to what was effectively a council of regency, serving until 30 October 1378. His pay indicates that he attended the council almost daily. His reward was confirmation of the late prince's grant (made on 8 October 1372) of $100 a year, with 150 marks more from Richard II. In addition to his domestic duties, Seagrave took part in negotiations with France from 1378 to 1380. These proved fruitless; in 1381 he treated more successfully for Richard II's marriage to Anne of Bohemia. 
During the peasants' revolt of 1381, following the murders of Simon Sudbury, the chancellor, and Sir Robert Hale, the treasurer, on 14 June, the king gave the great seal to Seagrave on 16 June, though without the title chancellor. Seagrave advised the abbot of St Albans to concede all that the abbot's people asked; though this gave the appearance of moderation, Seagrave knew that the concessions would not stand. In July the king came to St Albans and harshly judged the rebels. On 10 August Seagrave surrendered the great seal (and the stewardship) to become treasurer; in November he advocated parliament's revocation of the peasants' charters. 
Seagrave held the great seal again, with others, between 11 July and 20 August 1382, after the king had dismissed Richard Scrope as chancellor. When Richard II had a friendlier chancellor, Michael de la Pole, in 1385, Seagrave sat with a commission that fined John Cavendish for defaming de la Pole. Seagrave resigned as treasurer on 17 January 1386, and died on 4 February 1387. He may have had a wife, Isabel, but neither she nor a child is mentioned in sources relating to his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 25038


Seagrave, John, second Lord Seagrave (1256-1325), soldier and baron, was the eldest son of Nicholas Seagrave, first Lord Seagrave (1238?-1295), and his wife, Matilda, who was probably a Lucy. In 1270 John married Christiana, daughter of Hugh de Plessis, and granddaughter of John de Plessis, earl of Warwick. Although his family had been on the side of Simon de Montfort during the civil war of the 1260s, John Seagrave had established links with the future Edward I by way of the crusade. He served in the Welsh campaigns of 1277 and 1282-3, in Ireland in 1287, and in Scotland in 1291. He was summoned to serve in Gascony in 1297 (although he did not go), and was actively employed against the Scots from that year until 1322, during which time he held positions of strategic and military importance. Following the death of his father he was summoned to parliament as a peer from 26 August 1296 to 8 May 1325. 
In 1297 John Seagrave entered into an indenture with Roger (IV) Bigod, earl of Norfolk and the earl marshal, to provide Bigod in time of war with sixteen or, as the occasion demanded it, twenty cavalry. If Seagrave was required in peacetime, his party would receive 'bouche a court' (food and drink), and he, as a banneret, and his knights would be provided with robes equal to any of their rank in the earl's household. As part of the agreement Bigod enfeoffed Seagrave with the manor and advowson of Lodden in Norfolk for the duration of his service. Later that year Seagrave offered Edward I the earl's excuses -- he had been ill -- for not attending in person to serve with the king in Flanders. On 22 August 1297 Seagrave accompanied Roger (IV) Bigod and Humphrey (VI) de Bohun, earl of Hereford, to the exchequer, where they delivered a letter protesting at the levy of an eighth procured by Edward I and complaining of the burdensome nature and unconstitutionality of the king's extension of the traditional obligations of taxation. But Seagrave did homage to Edward I at Carlisle on 30 June 1300 and on 12 February 1301 set his seal to the barons' letter of complaint to the pope. In the same year, following an inquiry and discussion concerning the role of the marshal of England, Seagrave, who had acted as deputy marshal on the Scottish campaign after Bigod's withdrawal in 1298, was paid $100 in place of the customary perquisites of the office, usually an entitlement to booty. This agreement was only reached by the inclusion of a proviso that this would not create a precedent, and that neither the marshal nor his deputy would be regarded as having failed in their duties. 
In August 1302 Seagrave was made constable of the castle of Berwick, and in November became the king's lieutenant in Scotland (positions he held until 1305). With the ending of the truce with the Scots in late September he was ordered to make a mounted foray past Stirling as far up as Kirkintilloch, assisted by various northern lords. In February of the following year he organized a raid through Scottish territory, and was ambushed near Maid's Castle, wounded, and captured, but later rescued. He continued to mount raids against the Scots during the winter of 1303-4, and having taken care to avoid infiltration by Scottish spies, managed to rout a force led by William Wallace and Simon Fraser. Although they escaped capture, Seagrave worked closely with Robert Bruce in tracking them down, and was encouraged by Edward I proverbially to make good the hood as well as they had made the cloak. Wallace was eventually handed over into Seagrave's custody in the summer of 1305, escorted to London, and tried at a special commission of gaol delivery. Seagrave was one of the justices. Following Wallace's conviction and execution Seagrave was given the task of escorting the quarters of the dead man's body north to their final destinations (Newcastle, Berwick, Stirling, and Perth), for which he received 15's'. in remuneration. In 1306, in consideration of the labours and troubles suffered by his wife, Christiana, in living in Scotland while her husband was there in the king's service, they were granted a scutage of 40's'. for each fee held of the inheritance of her late father for the regnal year 1302-3. 
In January 1308 Seagrave was summoned to attend Edward II's coronation, and in March of the same year was appointed constable of Nottingham Castle and justice (or keeper) of the forest north of the Trent. However, he was forced to resign the latter office in favour of Piers Gaveston on 1 October 1310 (for this he was given pecuniary compensation), but he was restored to it for life on 4 September 1312. He was also appointed keeper of Scotland either side of the Forth in 1309, and, four years later, keeper of the marches in Cumberland. In June 1311 Seagrave was warned not to become embroiled in a quarrel between Walter Birmingham and his own brother, Henry Seagrave, who had been sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk and constable of Norwich Castle, and was besieged in Norwich. In 1315 John Seagrave appears to have suffered a similar fate, since he complained that the townsfolk of Nottingham had rung the common bell, broken down the gates of the castle, assaulted his men, and besieged him there for eight days without allowing access for provisions. In August 1318 he was appointed to the continual council set up under the treaty of Leake, which was required to give assent to Edward II's actions outside parliament. 
Two years later Seagrave was made a keeper of the peace in Warwickshire. With the disintegration of relations between Edward II and Thomas of Lancaster, Seagrave was urged in January and April 1321 to avoid illegal or treasonable gatherings, and in November not to attend a meeting of peers. In the same month he was required to muster both cavalry and infantry in the counties of Warwickshire, Leicestershire, and Staffordshire against the rebel forces. In February 1322 he was ordered to raise as many foot soldiers and men-at-arms as possible, and as constable of Nottingham Castle he was to ensure the castle was provisioned and defended. Later in the same year he was commanded to array his men and tenants to appear at York. After the civil war Seagrave's attention was refocused on Scotland, and in late 1322 and early 1323 he was ordered to array men in Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire in preparation for an invasion. In July 1324 he went to Aquitaine as captain of the forces for the duchy, and in November of the same year was summoned to fight in Gascony. 
Over the course of his life John Seagrave acquired numerous lands and perquisites. According to the dictum of Kenilworth the Seagrave lands had an annual value of 500 marks ($330) per annum, which was a figure about the middle of the spectrum for baronial landholding. In a charter dated 4 July 1270 John and Christiana were granted the manor of Stottesdon in Shropshire by Hugh de Plessis 'in free marriage'; it was to be held by Seagrave of the king for one knight's fee. In 1281 Roger of Kingswood conveyed to John and Christiana all the lands held of them in Kingswood in Shropshire in exchange for lands and woods at Cherle and the watermill there. Before receiving livery of his father's lands in 1295 Seagrave held a quarter of a knight's fee at Calvedon in Warwickshire in 1275, one knight's fee in Atterton and Witherley in Lincolnshire in 1282, the manor of Penn in Buckinghamshire in 1289, and Blyborough in Lincolnshire in 1289. Some of these grants may have come from Nicholas Seagrave himself. Royal grants included the right to free warren at Penn in 1296 and at Alconbury in Huntingdonshire six years later. 
In the general eyre of 1299-1300 at Cambridge John Seagrave was required to answer to the 'quo warranto' inquiries concerning his claim to hold view of frankpledge and the assize of bread and ale in Connington, Boxworth, and Fen Drayton. In 1300 he was given twelve oaks for timber from Cannock Forest, and ten oaks from Whittlewood Forest, for the construction of a chapel at Chalcombe Manor. In 1301 he paid $800 for custody of the lands of his wife's father, Hugh de Plessis, together with the marriage of Hugh's heirs. In the same year he was given licence to crenellate his dwelling at Bretby in Derbyshire and, four years later, his manor at Calvedon. In 1305 Seagrave was also given permission to hold fairs and markets at Woodweston in Huntingdonshire, which was extended to his manor at Fenstanton in the same county in 1315, and to Aspel in Warwickshire in 1318. In September 1312 he was given the choice of lands to the value of $100 yearly (for him and his heirs) or the grant of $1000 to buy such lands. Four years later, in the survey known as the 'Nomina villarum', he was described as lord of Newbury, Berkshire, Connington, Boxworth, and Fen Drayton, Cambridgeshire, Repton, Derbyshire, Alconbury, Weston, Stanton, and Hilton, Huntingdonshire, Stottesdon, Shropshire, and Chalcombe, Northamptonshire. In 1318 Seagrave received the lands of his younger brother Henry, which through a reversion clause had passed to him on the latter's death. In 1323 he was allowed to alienate a messuage at Fenstanton near the parsonage there to allow the parson, Thomas Seagrave, and his successors to enlarge the house. 
John Seagrave died some time before 4 October 1325. An account for funeral expenses was rendered by John Grey on 23 November 1325. He was buried at Chalcombe Priory. Christiana survived him, and was still alive in 1331. His brother Nicholas Seagrave was also summoned as a peer from 1295 until his death in 1321, while another brother, Gilbert Seagrave (d. 1316), was bishop of London. John's eldest son, Stephen, who became the third baron, married Alice Arundel, but died some time before 12 December 1325, and was similarly buried at Chalcombe. His younger son and namesake married Juliana, daughter and heir of John Sandwich. The title was inherited by Stephen's ten-year-old son, John, whose wardship and marriage were entrusted to Thomas of Brotherton, earl of Norfolk. John in due course married Margaret Brotherton, the earl's daughter and sole heir, consolidating the family's status and territorial position, but died in 1353, leaving a daughter, Elizabeth ('b'. 1338), who at the age of eleven married John (III) Mowbray (died 1368). 


@@@@@


doc= 25039


Seagrave, Nicholas of, first Lord Seagrave (1238?-1295), baron, was the son of the justice Gilbert of Seagrave (d. 1254) and his wife, Amabilia, ultimately the sole heir of Robert of Chalcombe, and grandson of the justiciar Stephen of Seagrave. Following Gilbert's death in 1254 his lands were granted to Henry III's son Edward, allowing provision for the widow's dower; Nicholas, the heir, was described as sixteen or seventeen years old. On 2 March 1257 Seagrave, described as the king's squire ('valettus'), was ill at Windsor with two other squires, and the king's bailiff was instructed to have necessaries supplied to them until they were well. In July Seagrave was described as receiving allowances in the royal household for three horses and three boys and their shoe money, and for meat, fish, wine, and candles. Still described as squire, he made a fine of 300 marks ($200) to gain seisin of his father's lands and tenements on 18 April 1258, and performed homage. 
Too young and inexperienced for prominence in the struggle between Henry III and the reformers during 1258-9, Seagrave had protection while on pilgrimage to Pontigny in the spring of 1259, and on 28 October protection while crossing with the king to France; protection was renewed until midsummer on 28 December 1259, when he was described as having gone to Pontigny. On 31 March 1260 he was one of over a hundred barons and tenants-in-chief summoned to London three weeks after Easter, and on 16 September 1261 swore to serve the king faithfully. The following month he was summoned with horses and arms. Since he was principally a Leicestershire landowner, perhaps it is not surprising that Seagrave should have chosen to align himself with the supporters of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester, whose following was largely drawn from the midlands, or that on 7 December 1261 he should have been required, along with Montfort, Earl Warenne, Hugh Despenser, and others, to put his seal within fifteen days to the peace made at Kingston between the barons and the king. 
The chronicler Thomas Wykes lists Seagrave among the young lords who were prominent among Montfort's supporters in the spring of 1263; he was involved in the attack on the bishop of Hereford, Peter d'Aigueblanche, on 7 June. Ordered on 25 May 1263 to go to the king at Worcester in August, there to receive knighthood, and join the Welsh expedition, in December that year he was among the barons who agreed to refer their dispute with Henry III to the arbitration of Louis IX. When the French king's award, favourable to Henry, was followed by the outbreak of civil war, Seagrave fought at Lewes in May 1264, where he led the London contingent which was routed by the Lord Edward. From 17 June 1264 until 21 April 1265 Seagrave had custody of the castle of Rockingham and the forests between the bridges of Oxford and Stamford. He was summoned to Montfort's Hilary parliament of 1265. A would-be participant in a tournament at Dunstable planned for 17 February 1265, but prohibited because of its likely threat to public order, he took part in negotiations with the king for the release of the Lord Edward. He fought at Evesham in August 1265 and was taken prisoner. Henry III, describing Seagrave as 'the king's enemy', then gave his lands to his own younger son Edmund. Seagrave must either have escaped or secured his release, for he had a safe conduct to treat for peace in September 1266. Nevertheless, in 1267 he was among the rebels still holding out at Ely, and there was some suspicion that either he or his mother (who had married the royalist Roger de Somery, one of the counsellors responsible for the dictum of Kenilworth) had some responsibility for its fall. Seagrave was one of the rebels admitted to Southwark in April, and had a safe conduct in the summer of 1267 for those whom he would bring to court to make peace. He was finally pardoned on 1 July 1267. The disinherited rebels were allowed to redeem their lands on a sliding scale according to their level of participation in the civil wars, and Seagrave was among those charged five years' annual value. His debt to Edmund on this score was only settled shortly after his death in 1295. 
Once pardoned, Seagrave was rapidly taken into royal favour. In May 1270 he had protection for four years as a crusader, and in January 1271 had four years' exemption from summonses to eyres, and was licensed to appoint attorneys. From 1277 until his death in 1295 he regularly received military summonses, against the Welsh in 1277, 1282, and 1294, and to accompany Edmund in Gascony in 1295; he was also summoned to a military council at Gloucester in 1287 and to parliament in 1283 and 1295. Letters of protection in 1285 covering his going overseas with the king, and his appointing attorneys later that year when 'gone to Ireland', testify to a life of vigorous activity. One reward that came his way was the grant, for 100 marks, of custody of lands of William de Ferrers on 18 May 1288. 
By the late 1280s the distinction was sometimes being made between Nicholas of Seagrave the elder and Nicholas of Seagrave the younger, giving rise to ambiguity in contemporary documentation offering no such identification. The elder Nicholas, who was close to Edward I himself in age, was summoned to parliament and to military service in the latter half of 1295, so it must be assumed that he was thought fit for action until close to his death. T. F. Tout believed that it was the younger Nicholas who probably received the castles of Dumbarton and Ayr from James, the steward of Scotland, in 1291, but the elder was involved in the Scottish Great Cause, and it seems on balance likely that, whichever was involved, it was the same Nicholas who both received the castles from James, and sat with him and the bishop of Glasgow at Ayr receiving Scottish fealties in 1291. On 6 July 1291 Nicholas of Seagrave and Henry son of Nicholas of Seagrave had protection staying in Scotland on the king's service, and the elder Nicholas (named as such) similarly in April 1292. In the procedural discussions of the Great Cause, Seagrave's name is given among those recommending recourse to English rather than imperial law, and the superiority of primogeniture over proximity as a claim. On 20 June 1294 Nicholas of Seagrave was appointed, along with the bishop of Durham, the archbishop of Dublin, and Hugh Despenser, to negotiate with the German king and the archbishop of Cologne. Less strenuous appointments in 1290-92 were to various judicial commissions including investigation of maladministration in the Isle of Man, and to inquire into weirs on the Trent. 
Seagrave's wife, Matilda, was probably a member of the Lucy family. On 26 August 1288 a commission of oyer and terminer was appointed to hear the complaint of Nicholas of Seagrave the elder and Matilda his wife that forty-six named persons of both sexes had assaulted Matilda at Exhall, Warwickshire, thrown her out of her carriage, and taken away her long cart laden with victuals and other goods. The 'Song of Caerlaverock' attributes five sons to Seagrave; the eldest of these was John Seagrave, variously described as over thirty and (more reliably) thirty-nine at his father's death. The second son was Nicholas Seagrave, lord of Stowe. The elder Nicholas had died by 12 November 1295, and John had done homage for his father's lands by 10 December 1295. The terms of a grant on 14 July 1292 of a market and fair at Mountsorrel, Leicestershire, and of free warren on his demesnes, along with the particulars of his inquisition post mortem, show that the estates of the elder Nicholas of Seagrave were concentrated in Derbyshire, Warwickshire, Huntingdonshire, Leicestershire, and Northamptonshire. He was buried at Chacombe Priory, Northamptonshire. At an unknown date before his death Seagrave had relinquished the arms previously borne by his family, and had adopted instead the arms, sable a lion argent rampant crowned or. 


@@@@@


doc= 25040


Seagrave, Nicholas (d. 1321), administrator and soldier, lord of Stowe, Northamptonshire, was the second son of Nicholas of Seagrave, first Lord Seagrave (1238?-1295), and his wife, Matilda de Lucy. He was born later than 1256, the probable year of birth of his elder brother, John Seagrave, second Lord Seagrave. It was probably he, rather than his father, who served as castellan of Dumbarton and Ayr castles in 1291-2. He was first summoned to parliament, as 'Nicholas de Seagrave, junior', in August 1295, and continued to be so summoned until 1321. He was present at Falkirk in 1298, and at the siege of Caerlaverock in 1300, where he served in the retinue of the earl of Hereford. On 12 February 1301 he sealed the barons' letter of grievances to the pope as 'Nicholas de Seagrave, lord of Stow'. 
In 1301 Seagrave was involved in a dispute over the manor of Chrishall, Essex, with Walter Langton, bishop of Lichfield, which was eventually settled before the king at Evesham. In the same year he and his wife, Alice, were accused along with numerous others of breaking houses of Ralph de Monthermer, earl of Gloucester and Hertford, near Kingston, Berkshire. During the Scottish campaign of 1303-4 Seagrave became involved in a heated dispute with John Cromwell. When Edward I refused to allow Seagrave's challenge to trial by combat, he deserted the king's army in order to travel to France, there to seek trial by battle. He managed to cross to France despite the efforts of Robert de Burghersh, warden of the Cinque Ports and constable of Dover, but was arrested at Dover upon his return. Although he was rescued by twenty-one barons of Dover and returned to his manor of Stowe, he was summoned from there by the sheriff of Northampton in January 1305 to appear before parliament at Westminster. He submitted himself to the king's judgment in parliament. He was apparently sentenced to death, but was sent to the Tower of London instead, and later released on the security of his own letters patent and seven mainpernors. He was quickly restored to the favour of Edward I, and he served with the king on his final Scottish campaign in 1307. On 23 February 1308 he was released from his obligations by Edward II. 
Seagrave was one of Edward II's staunchest supporters at the outset of the reign. In the crisis of March 1308 he was appointed custodian of Northampton Castle, and even after the banishment of Piers Gaveston, he was one of four royal councillors singled out to be removed from the court by the Northampton parliament of August 1308. Despite this, there is little evidence that Seagrave played a major role at court. He is very rarely found among the witnesses to royal charters before 1312, and his vilification in 1308 may have had more to do with his adherence to Thomas, earl of Lancaster, still loyal to the king at this time, than to his own activities. 
On 12 March 1308 Seagrave had been appointed marshal of England, although his right to this office was challenged unsuccessfully by William le Mareschal. Indeed, in July 1311 the king forbade both to come to parliament armed, in consequence of their dispute. Seagrave's tenure of this office may also have been the occasion of one early conflict between the earl of Lancaster and the king. As marshal, Seagrave was entitled to appoint the marshal of the exchequer. His first appointee, Elias de Pouger, died in September 1310 and was replaced by Jocelin Brankescombe. Seagrave was in Scotland at the time, but later confirmed the appointment. At Michaelmas 1311, however, the king replaced Brankescombe with Arnald de Tilly, a Gascon associated with Gaveston, who was soon thereafter singled out for banishment in the supplement to the ordinances. The barons of the exchequer were ordered to accept Seagrave's nominee as marshal of the exchequer once again. Although Seagrave himself hardly seems to have been a central player in this drama as reported in the 'Vita Edwardi secundi', it may well have affected his relationship with the king over time. On 20 September 1312, in the tense atmosphere prevailing after the execution of Piers Gaveston by the baronial opposition, Seagrave was part of a delegation including the earl of Pembroke, the elder Despenser, Edmund Mauley, and John Cromwell, that went to the Guildhall in London to ask for increased security in defending the city against the king's enemies. On 20 December he acted on behalf of the king along with the earl of Pembroke and the elder Despenser in witnessing the treaty between Edward II and his barons. He continues to appear occasionally as a witness in the charter rolls in 1313 and 1314, but after 6 December 1314 his name appears only once more, on 20 May 1319 at York. Presumably his continuing service to the earl of Lancaster, whose retainer he remained throughout the reign until his death, made his early position at court increasingly untenable. 
In 1316 Seagrave was deprived of the marshalship, which was granted to Edward II's half-brother, Thomas of Brotherton. In 1317 the king issued orders for Seagrave's apprehension and the seizure of his lands, along with similar orders for other of Lancaster's adherents, but these orders were cancelled on 24 September of the same year. In 1318 he was one of Lancaster's retainers pardoned for all offences committed before 7 August, and he was also named to a committee to set the agenda for the upcoming parliament. In 1318-19 he served with the earl of Lancaster in Scotland with four knights and ten men and was present at the siege of Berwick. He attended the Westminster parliament of October 1320 on behalf of the earl of Lancaster. In January 1321 he was named as one of the magnates empowered to meet with Robert Bruce. On 21 April 1321 he was one of several magnates ordered not to attend illegal assemblies, and on 12 November of the same year was forbidden to attend the meeting of the 'good Peers'. He died on 25 November 1321. 
Seagrave held considerable lands in Northamptonshire, Suffolk, and Essex. He obtained the manor of Stowe through his marriage to Alice, daughter of Geoffrey of Armenters and widow of Gerard Lisle, and the castle at Barton Seagrave. His heir was his daughter Maud, aged twenty-five and more at the time of his death, who married Edmund de Bohun of Church Brampton, Northamptonshire. Seagrave is described in 'The Siege of Carlaverock' as one 'whom nature had adorned in body and enriched in heart'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25041


Seagrave, Sir Stephen of (d. 1241), justice and administrator, was son of Gilbert of Seagrave, who held lands at Seagrave in Leicestershire and in 1166 held Brailes in Warwickshire as a fourth part of a knight's fee, under William, earl of Warwick. Gilbert was an under-sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire during Richard I's reign and acted as a justice itinerant in Lincolnshire and Leicestershire in 1195. Out of regard for Hugh Despenser, Stephen of Seagrave's brother-in-law, King John in 1208 remitted half a debt of 112 marks that, as his father's heir, Seagrave owed the crown. Remaining faithful to the king, he received from him in 1216 custody of the lands of the rebel Stephen de Gant in Lincolnshire and Leicestershire, and the manor of Kineton in Warwickshire in fee, at a yearly rent. Seagrave married first Rohesia, daughter of Thomas and sister of Hugh Despenser, and second Ida, also called Ela, sister of Henry Hastings, who in 1247 was fined $500 for an unlicensed second marriage with Hugh Pecche. He had three sons: John (died 1231), the eldest, who married Emma, daughter and heir of Roger de Caux; Gilbert of Seagrave (d. 1254), who succeeded him; and Stephen; he also had a daughter, Eleanor. 
After the accession of Henry III Seagrave's importance and offices rapidly increased. From 1217 onwards he was prominent as a justice; he sat at Westminster in 1218 and later, and was constantly employed on eyre. In 1219 he was one of the king's proctors at Norham before the papal legate for the hearing of a dispute with the Scottish king. In 1220 he was given the custody of Sauvey Castle, Leicestershire, and received a grant from the king of the manor of Alconbury in Huntingdonshire. He was sheriff of Essex and Hertfordshire from 1220 to 1224, and of Lincolnshire from 1221 to 1223. From 1228 to 1234 he was sheriff of Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and Northamptonshire and from 1229 to 1234 of Warwickshire and Leicestershire. Seagrave's wealth increased, and he purchased lands; and when Henry departed for Brittany in 1230 he was appointed one of the regents. In 1232 he was granted the profits, other than the farms paid into the exchequer, of the counties of Bedford, Buckingham, Warwick, and Leicester for life. On the fall of Hubert de Burgh in that year, the king appointed Seagrave chief justiciar, though he was only a knight, having previously given him custody of the castles of Dover, Rochester, Canterbury, Windsor, Odiham, Hertford, and Colchester. He was violently hostile to de Burgh, and pressed the king to imprison him, and even to put him to death as a traitor. 
Seagrave as chief justiciar became closely associated with the royal favourite Peter des Roches, and in conjunction with him counselled Henry to resist Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke, Gilbert Basset, and other lords who in 1233 were associated against the government. The bishops in October threatened to excommunicate him and others of the party by name for giving the king evil counsel, but finally pronounced only a general sentence against those who turned the king's heart against his natural-born subjects. He accompanied the king's army to Grosmont in November, and lost his baggage when Marshal's adherents surprised the royal camp. The king having made an offer to Marshal in December, provided that he would surrender to his mercy, Seagrave ensured that the earl should be informed that he advised him to do so. In the first days of 1234 Richard Siward, at the head of a company of outlaws, ravaged Seagrave, burnt his fine houses, oxen, and stores of grain, and carried off many valuable horses and rich spoil. Later the same band ravaged Alconbury, and burnt his buildings there. He was much hated, and it was believed that he was concerned in the treachery by which Richard Marshal lost his life in April. When in May the king was reconciled to his lords, Seagrave was dismissed from his offices, and on 14 June was deprived of five of his manors, and was called upon to give an account of his receipts and expenditure. He took shelter in the abbey of St Mary des Pres, near Leicester, where it is said that he resumed clerical tonsure: this may mean that he had taken minor clerical orders early in his career (though he had been knighted by 1219 at the latest). On 14 July he appeared before the king at Westminster, under the protection of the archbishop of Canterbury. Henry called him a foul traitor for having evilly advised him against Hubert de Burgh and his other lords, and demanded his accounts, but, at the archbishop's request, gave him until Michaelmas to make them up. He is said to have attempted to excuse himself by laying the blame on Peter des Roches and Walter Mauclerk. In February 1235 he is said to have paid a fine of 1000 marks to be reconciled with the king, but was not subsequently taken back into favour as he had hoped. 
In June 1236 Seagrave was fully restored to favour, and in 1237 was reconciled by the legate Otto to the lords whom he had offended. He was appointed justice of Chester in June 1237. Henry seems to have again made him one of his trusted counsellors, and it was perhaps because he was on specially confidential terms with the king that, in common with Richard, earl of Cornwall, and the queen, he was exempted by name from the excommunication pronounced by the archbishop of Canterbury in 1239 against certain of the king's advisers. In February 1239 he became a justice of the court 'coram rege', and when William of Raleigh was elected bishop of Norwich in April of that year became senior justice of that court. In the last two years of his life, according to Matthew Paris, he held a dominant position in the administration, though his direction of affairs seems to have been unadventurous. Shortly before his death he entered the Augustinian abbey of St Mary des Pres, where he died probably on 11 October 1241. 
Paris says that Seagrave was easily led by others, that he owed his rise from a humble station to great wealth and high office to his own exertions, that he cared more for his own interest than the public good, but that he did some things that merited the happy end of life that he made. Certain of Seagrave's opinions on points of law are cited with respect by the author of 'De legibus et consuetudinibus Angliae'. He was a benefactor to the abbey of St Mary des Pres, and to the priory of Stoneleigh, and the Cistercian abbey of Combe, both in Warwickshire. His shield, as given by Paris, was blazoned sable, three garbs or, banded gules. 


@@@@@


doc= 25042


Seagrave, Stephen (d. 1333), archbishop of Armagh, was a member of the important Leicestershire house of Seagrave. He studied at Cambridge, became doctor in canon law before 1306, and served as chancellor of the university between 1303 and 1306. In this capacity he witnessed in Bordeaux on 17 June 1306 the settlement of the statute controversy between the university and the friars. From May 1296 he was rector of Aylestone, near Leicester, within the sphere of the family interest, and from 1300 to 1318 he was rector of Stowe, Northamptonshire, the chief seat of his kinsman Nicholas Seagrave (d. 1321), whose son Gilbert had preceded Seagrave as chancellor of the University of Cambridge 'c'.1292-1293. 
The position of his kinsman John Seagrave as warden of Scotland for Edward I and Edward II probably secured for Stephen Seagrave substantial preferment in that country, though he secured the promise rather than the enjoyment of the Scottish revenues. In August 1307 he became dean of Glasgow and in 1309 acquired a canonry in Dunkeld with prebend of Rattray. Robert Wishart, bishop of Glasgow, was one of the heads of resistance to the English. Accordingly on 10 January 1309 Edward II requested Pope Clement V and the cardinals to remove Wishart from his bishopric, and appoint Seagrave in his place, describing him as his 'familiar clerk, of noble birth and sound morals' (Rymer, 'Foedera', 3rd edn, 1, pt 4, 135). Seagrave did not secure the nomination to Glasgow, but on 27 December of the same year he received licence from the pope to hold two more benefices in plurality, as his present preferment had been reduced in value by reason of the war between the English and the Scots. The success of Robert I must soon have deprived Seagrave of all hope of Scottish bishoprics or deaneries. He was forced to borrow largely, owing in 1310 $80 to William Upton, a London citizen, and in 1311 $60 to another. On 29 January 1315 Seagrave was appointed archdeacon of Essex. He was admitted in 1315 to the living of Stepney, near London. Before 1319 he was canon of St Paul's, London, and had resigned his archdeaconry. He was involved in a controversy with Robert Baldock, bishop of London, with regard to his rights over the manor of Drayton. Before April 1318 he was also canon of Lincoln and by 5 December 1320 dean of Lichfield. 
On 16 March 1323 Seagrave was provided by Pope John XXII to the archbishopric of Armagh, vacant since the resignation of the non-resident Roland Jorz, who had been suspended for various offences. His consecration was postponed by the pope for a year. On 31 July 1323 the temporalities were restored. On 28 April 1324 he was ordered by the pope to leave Avignon, and devote himself to his diocese. He had already been consecrated bishop by Raynaldus (Reginaldus) de Porta, cardinal-bishop of Ostia. Previously there had been a rumour in England that Seagrave had resigned his archbishopric to the pope, retaining only the honour of the bishop's office, without its duties or emoluments. On 25 June 1325 he informed the pope from Armagh that he and his suffragan bishops had promulgated the papal condemnation of the excommunicate king of the Romans, Ludwig of Bavaria, in both the English and Irish languages. In July 1328 Seagrave went to the papal curia, with a commendation from Edward II to the pope and permission to cross the sea from Dover with his horses and equipment. On 15 October 1330 he received permission from the pope to hold as a non-resident benefices worth $100 a year. He appears to have made little impact in Ireland, though a number of letters printed by Theiner ('Vetera monumenta') reflect papal recognition of his authority beyond the boundaries of the ecclesiastical province of Armagh. Seagrave died in England on 27 October 1333. 


@@@@@


doc= 25043


Seward, John (1364/5-1435/6), schoolmaster, grammarian, and poet, appears to have originated in the north of England and to have been educated there, perhaps at Norham, Northumberland, and Guisborough in the North Riding of Yorkshire, before studying at Oxford University of which he called himself 'an unworthy subject'; he also wrote respectfully of John Leland (died 1428), the leading Oxford schoolmaster of his day. Seward first occurs in 1404 in London as a schoolmaster and described himself as such until his death. His school was in Cornhill and seems to have been a private establishment for teaching Latin grammar, since it was not one of the authorized public schools of the capital. The Tudor bibliographer John Bale says that Seward at one time kept a school in Norwich, but this has not been substantiated and may have arisen because Seward dedicated one of his works to the local bishop, Richard Courtenay. His will, made on 5 June 1435 and proved in the following January, reveals that he had a brother and sister, a wife called Matilda, whose maiden name may have been Broke, and a married daughter, Sybil Scholdyng. The will does not prescribe a place of burial. 
Seward had a good knowledge of classical Latin literature. He refers in his writings to Cicero, Horace, Ovid, Seneca, and Virgil, among others, and both echoes their style and alludes to their contents. He was also fond of Boethius. His works, which survive in three manuscripts, fall into two groups. His grammatical writings included a 'Compendium super modis significandi' on speculative grammar, and five tracts on metre: 'Hisagoga metrica', 'Mamilla', 'Somnium', 'Metristencheridion', and 'Cathametron', the last of which has been lost. 'Somnium' (written about 1403) is cast in the form of a dream in which the author meets Lady Philosophy (a Boethian figure) who opens to him the secrets of grammar and metre. He also wrote several poems: 'Arpyilogus' and 'Brachilexis sancte Arpyle', moralizations of the story of the Harpies; 'Antelopologia', a description of the properties of the antelope addressed to Prince Henry of Wales, later Henry V, whose badge it was; and 'Ludicra', 'Invectivae', and epigrams. These last three works are poems, often humorous, exchanged with a group of like-minded men in London and sometimes concerned with discussing metrical topics. The group included William Relyk, master of a private grammar school at the Cardinal's Hat in Lombard Street, and some local clergy. Seward may also have written two epigrams in Oxford, Magdalen College, MS Lat. 15, fol. 128. In 1426 he compiled the cartulary of the guild of St Peter Cornhill. Such dates as occur in his works suggest that they were mostly written between about 1400 and 1420, and the names of people to whom they were addressed imply that Seward had contacts outside London, including John Eyton, canon of Repton, Simon Southerey, prior of St Albans, and William Swan, proctor of the Roman curia. He also dedicated or rededicated works to some important figures: Prince Henry, Edward, duke of York, Bishop Courtenay, Robert Hallum, bishop of Salisbury, Philip Repyndon, bishop of Lincoln, and Paul, bishop of Brindisi. Altogether Seward emerges as a man widely read and connected, but it is not clear whether his works ever gained him patronage, and he seems to have spent and ended his days in modest circumstances. 


@@@@@


doc= 25044


John Seguier (1785-1856), younger brother and partner of William Seguier, was his successor as superintendent of the British Institution. Born in London in 1785 he attended the Royal Academy Schools from 1807, and he too first practised as a topographical painter; a pair of views of Watson Taylor's house in Cavendish Square was bought back by William at the Erlestoke Park sale in 1832, and 'Excavating the Regent's Canal' is in the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut. In his brother's lifetime he carried on the picture-restoring business, but also advised his own clients, notably Daniel Mesman (whose collection was left to the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, in 1834); after William's death he continued to serve the queen and Sir Robert Peel. His son with Margaret Seguier ['see under 'Stewart, Anthony (1773-1846)], elder daughter of the miniature-painter Anthony Stewart and herself a miniaturist, Frederick Peter (died 1902), was continued in his father's post as picture-restorer in ordinary to the queen, and compiled the idiosyncratic 'A Critical and Commercial Dictionary of the Works of Painters' (1870). John Seguier died on 7 June 1856 at 1 Camden Terrace, Camden New Town. 


@@@@@


doc= 25045


Seguier, William (1772-1843), picture dealer and art functionary, was born in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 9 November 1772, one of the eldest of nine children of David Seguier, dealer in pictures and prints, and his wife, Elizabeth Thwaites. The Seguiers were descended from Huguenot refugees, one of whom had reputedly made a fortune as a chocolate manufacturer in Soho; one of David's brothers was a topographical and technical printseller in St Giles's between 1777 and 1809, where he went under the name of John Seago; another, Peter, a sculptor who had been apprenticed to Richard Hayward (1728-1800), appears to have practised in Rugby in the late 1780s, and to have had a son of the same name who worked from Coventry between 1816 and 1830. Both sculptors sign their monuments as 'Seager', which is also evidently the way in which David and William pronounced their name. 
Like his younger brother John ['see below'], William Seguier was trained as an artist, reputedly by George Morland, and even -- perhaps as an engraver -- by William Blake. His original pictures were topographical views of London, but he may also have followed his father as a 'pasticheur': the posthumous sale of his pictures at Christies on 4 May 1844 included a work entitled 'A Woody Scene with Trees, Near a Pool of Water', 'admirably painted in the manner of Ruysdael'. According to his nephew, it was Seguier's marriage on 17 February 1797 to a wealthy fellow Huguenot, Anne Magdalene Clowden, with whom he had several daughters, which prompted him to give up painting. No doubt her money enabled him to set up independently of his father, officially as a picture restorer, but in fact primarily as a dealer and agent, early in the new century, initially at 32 Coventry Street, but from the latter half of the 1830s, in partnership with John, at 3 Russell Court, Cleveland Row. His earliest clients included the banker-collectors Henry Hope, John Dent, and Samuel Rogers, but by 1808 he was bidding at auction on behalf of one of the most prodigious buyers of the first third of the century, the commissioner of excise, George Watson (Taylor). In 1806 he was acting for Lord Grosvenor (later first marquess of Westminster) in his purchase of the Agar collection; from then on he steadily acquired a more aristocratic and influential clientele, beginning with the key figure of Sir George Beaumont, who had originally been advised by his father, but going on to act for Sir Charles Long (later Lord Farnborough), the earls of Darnley and Mulgrave, Sir Abraham Hume, Sir Robert Peel, and the duke of Wellington. 
From about 1805 -- with Beaumont, Grosvenor, Mulgrave, the latter's brother General Edmund Phipps, David Wilkie, John Jackson, and Benjamin Robert Haydon -- Seguier came to be part of a convivial group of artists and connoisseurs known to one another as 'the clique'. Haydon's friendship has been unfortunate for Seguier's subsequent reputation, for the prickly painter convinced himself that Seguier had persuaded George IV not to buy his 'Punch, or, May Day' in 1829, and his paranoia broadened this into the conviction that Seguier was the evil genius who had diverted a whole generation of connoisseurs from extending any significant patronage to contemporary British artists. Contrary to Haydon's dark imaginings, however, Seguier seems to have had no agenda of his own, but only the urge to make himself indispensable. Nor do the modest sums realized by the posthumous sales of his collections at Christies in April-May 1844 -- although his Rembrandt prints were remarkable -- suggest that he was venal. 
It was Seguier's private clients who helped him to his official career. Beginning as superintendent of the newly founded British Institution in 1805, he successively and concurrently became surveyor of the king's pictures in 1820, and keeper of the new National Gallery in 1824. Haydon alleged that 'His King does nothing without Mr. Seguier's advice' ('Diary', ed. Pope, 3.455), but this would seem to have been restricted to practical matters of the kind that George IV had consulted him on at Carlton House and Kensington Palace while prince regent. Seguier was continued in the post of surveyor by William IV and Queen Victoria, hanging and publishing a summary catalogue of George IV's pictures in the picture gallery at Buckingham Palace after his death, and, with much less success, re-hanging many of the pictures from Kensington Palace at Hampton Court. At the National Gallery, too, his duties were those of a subordinate of the trustees. Surprisingly perhaps, in view of his original profession, his interpretation of 'attending to the preservation of pictures' never extended to anything more than surface cleaning of them. However, he did re-varnish, and mix the mastic varnish with oil, to combat 'blooming', thus leading to a slow but steady darkening; his brother's removal of the varnish from some pictures after Seguier's death gave rise to the first of many cleaning controversies in which the National Gallery has been embroiled. As keeper of the National Gallery, Seguier was, as his title suggests, an essentially eighteenth-century figure; in striking contrast to the 'Kunstgeschichte'-inspired directorate of his ultimate successor, Sir Charles Eastlake. Seguier died on 5 November 1843 at 92 King's Road, Brighton, Sussex. 




@@@@@


doc= 25046


Ann Childe Seguin (1811-1888), was born in London on 20 April 1811, the daughter of James Waring Childe (1780-1862), miniature painter, and his wife Ann, 'nee' Banfield, of Bath. She was Seguin's fellow pupil, and subsequently a sub-professor at the Royal Academy of Music. The couple were married about 1831. They sang together at the Westminster Abbey festival in 1834. She made her Covent Garden debut in 1835 as Marcellina in 'Fidelio', supporting Malibran. She was second principal soprano at the King's Theatre for two or three seasons, and in 1837 she sang the part of Donna Anna at Drury Lane in the English version of 'Don Giovanni'. In America she continued to perform until her husband's death. After that she devoted herself to teaching music in New York, where she died in August 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 25047


Seguin, Arthur Edward Sheldon (1809-1852), singer, was born on 7 April 1809 in London, the son of (Ralph) Arthur Seguin (1781/2-1865), who served as secretary at Her Majesty's Theatre for over fifty years, and was described as 'the Metternich of English Opera, the great negotiator between managers and prima donnas' ('New York Herald', 7 Nov. 1844). He was of Irish descent; Seguin's mother was Sarah, 'nee' Smythe. Known by the forename Edward, the younger Seguin was educated at the Royal Academy of Music, from which he narrowly escaped dismissal in 1827 for some breaches of discipline. In that year he attracted attention with his fine singing at a students' public concert in the Hanover Square Rooms. He first appeared in opera as Basilio in Rossini's 'The Barber of Seville' at the first dramatic performance of the Royal Academy on 8 December 1828. He sang at the Exeter festival in 1829. On 6 November 1830 he took the part of Ismael in Lord Burghersh's opera 'Catherine', Ann Childe ['see below'], who subsequently became his wife, filling the title role. In 1831 he sang Polyphemus in Handel's 'Acis and Galatea' at the Queen's Theatre, Tottenham Street, under the management of George Macfarren, the elder. The following year Seguin was engaged at Drury Lane, where he appeared as Count Rodolfo in 'La sonnambula' with Maria Malibran. He sang at Covent Garden (1833-4, 1835-7), and was extremely successful with his performance of Masetto in the revival of Mozart's 'Don Giovanni' in February 1833. From 1835 to 1838 he appeared at the King's Theatre and at Drury Lane. On 13 August 1838 he created the part of the Baron in George Macfarren's 'The Devil's Opera' at the English Opera House. 
Immediately afterwards Seguin, his wife, and their three children left England for America, where he made his debut as the Count in W. M. Rooke's 'Amilie' on 15 October at the National Theatre, New York. In America he formed an opera company, the Seguin Troupe, which toured successfully in both the United States and Canada. American newspapers reported that Seguin was elected a chief by an Indian tribe in August 1840, and given the name Wach n-Wachn, which signified an aquatic bird possessing a strong and harmonious note. He died in White Street, New York, on 13 December 1852. His younger brother William Henry (1814-1850) was a bass singer; their sister, Elizabeth Eleanor, a soprano, was the mother of Euphrosyne Parepa-Rosa. 
Seguin's wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 25048


Seiriol (fl. 6th cent.), holy man, is the patron of the churches at Penmon (on Anglesey) and Priestholm (an island off the east of Anglesey). His feast is celebrated on 1 February. According to the Welsh saints' genealogies, he was the son of Owain Danwyn, and thereby of local royal stock, and was numbered among the Seven Cousins (notable saints, said to be related). His cult is restricted to Anglesey; and since there is no surviving life ('vita') or vernacular 'buchedd' for Seiriol, information about him is limited to a series of much later traditions of even less reliability than medieval hagiography. These include the tradition, doubtless fictional, that Seiriol held daily meetings with St Cybi of Holyhead at Clorach, which is roughly midway between their respective churches. Accordingly, Seiriol is said to have faced westwards in the morning and eastwards in the afternoon in order to retain his fair complexion, while Cybi would face in the opposite directions to darken his complexion. Hence they became known as 'Seiriol Wyn a Chybi Felyn' ('White Seiriol and Yellow Cybi'). Of equally dubious historical value is the claim, preserved in material from the early seventeenth century, that Seiriol had a causeway built between his hermitage on Priestholm to Penmaen-mawr on the opposite shore on the mainland, and that he cut a passage through the rock at Dwygyfylchi to Llanfairfechan which became known as the King's Highway. It is also difficult to reconstruct a picture of Seiriol by referring to his two main church sites. Indeed, if the tradition that the church at Penmon was founded by the sixth-century king Maelgwn Gwynedd is rejected, then there is no historical record of the site until 971, when it was sacked by vikings. The surviving archaeological record also begins in the tenth century, with three decorated crosses (one now lost) probably constructed 'c'.950-1000, and a font from the late tenth or early eleventh century (though this is not definitely associated with Penmon). The holy well at Penmon is probably of a later date and the earliest remaining church-buildings are in twelfth-century Romanesque style. The evidence for Priestholm is even slighter, the earliest reference being that by Gerald of Wales (died 1220x23), stating that it was 'a small island inhabited by hermits' (Gerald of Wales, 190). The main church here is again Romanesque, but there is evidence of an earlier chancel (incorporating a long-cist burial) and a monastic enclosure with two phases of huts or cells. 


@@@@@


doc= 25049


Selby, Charles (c.1802-1863), actor and playwright, was in 1832, as Charles Selby, a member of the company at the Strand Theatre, and two years later produced a farce, 'The Unfinished Gentleman', at the Adelphi. He worked out the idea of this piece in a series of papers which appeared in the 'Sunday Times' and were reprinted with illustrations by Thomas Onwhyn in 1841 as 'Maximums and Speciments of William Muggins, Natural Philosopher and Man of the World'. From the quasi-autobiographical revelations in this work (which is in the main a dull and unskilful imitation of the earlier style of Charles Dickens) it appears that Selby was self-educated, had visited Barbados, and had some nautical experience. He worked with his wife, Clara (1796/7-1873) -- whose real name was Sarah Susannah -- under W. C. Macready at Drury Lane during the 1841-2 season. 
During his thirty years as an actor and playwright Selby performed principally character parts and supplied a long series of plays, mainly farces and burlettas -- about ninety in all, according to Allardyce Nicoll -- many of which were adapted from the French. Among his most successful pieces were 'Robert Macaire' (1836), a three-act melodrama which had a long life on the stage and became one of Henry Irving's stock pieces. 'Barnaby Rudge' (1841) was a dramatization of Dickens's novel, put on the stage midway through the novel's serial publication; Dickens was irritated by this, but wrote to Selby that 'if I could give you a patent for dramatizing my productions I would gladly do so; inasmuch as if they 'must' be done at all, I would rather have them done by gentlemanly hands' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 2.333). Most of Selby's dramatic output consisted of one-act pieces of a light and pleasant nature, and several were included in Duncombe's, Webster's, and Lacy's collections of plays. In works such as 'The Valet de Sham' (1838), 'Powder and Ball! or, St Tibb's Eve!' (1845, a 'terpsichorean burletta'), 'Taken in and done for' (1849), and 'The Pirates of Putney' (1863, a 'nautical extravaganza'), Selby provided a considerable number of successful vehicles for himself and his fellow actors, including Frederick Yates, Edward Wright, Henry Compton, Robert and Mary Ann Keeley, Louisa Nisbett, and Harriet Waylett. He was a useful actor, with a good stage presence. He also published a school textbook, 'Events to be Remembered in the History of England' (1851), which ran through many editions, and a skit, 'The Dinner Question, by Tabitha Tickletooth' (1860). He died of dropsy and ague at his home, 17 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, on 21 March 1863, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Selby was survived by his wife, a competent actress who specialized in middle-aged and elderly characters. After Selby's death she took pupils who wanted to go on the stage: they included Ada Cavendish. Clara Selby died on 8 February 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 25050


Selby, Prideaux John (1788-1867), naturalist, was born in Bondgate Street, Alnwick, Northumberland, on 23 July 1788, the eldest son of George Selby (died 1804) of Beal and Twizell House, Northumberland, and Margaret, the second daughter of John Cook, a captain in the mercantile marine. The Selby family settled at Beal in 1588 and took a prominent part in the life of Northumberland and the borders. 
Selby showed a great interest in ornithology from an early age and made his own notes and careful, coloured drawings of the birds in his district. He attended Durham grammar school, and was prepared, by private tuition, for University College, Oxford. He matriculated on 3 May 1806, but left after a few terms. He went to live at Twizell House, near Belford, Northumberland, in 1809. The following year, on 17 December, at Morpeth, he married Lewis Tabitha (1782-1859), the third daughter of Bertram and Tabitha Mitford of Mitford Manor; they had three daughters. 
Selby took an active part in the social and political life of Northumberland. He served as a magistrate, as deputy lieutenant in 1817, and in 1823 as high sheriff for his county. He unsuccessfully contested Berwick at the general election, as a reformer, in 1812. However, his main interests were ornithology, forestry, and entomology. He was a skilful fisherman and an excellent shot. Selby's major work, 'Illustrations of British Ornithology', was published in nineteen parts between 1821 and 1833. It contained some 222 plates etched by Selby (mostly after his own drawings) with the assistance of his brother-in-law Admiral Robert Mitford. In 1819 Mitford was taught to etch by Thomas Bewick in Newcastle; he then taught Selby at Twizell House. Two volumes of text appeared, 'Land Birds' in 1825 (revised in 1833) and 'Water Birds' in 1833. The specimens on which the figures were based were nearly all collected and set up by Selby, aided by his butler, Richard Moffitt. 
From 1825 until 1841 Selby assisted his friend Sir William Jardine (1800-1874) with the descriptions, drawings, and etchings for their joint publication, 'Illustrations of Ornithology' (1836-43). During this period, in 1835 and 1836 respectively, he also wrote the volumes 'Pigeons' and 'Parrots' for Jardine's 'Naturalist's Library'. Together, in conjunction with George Johnston, Selby and Jardine founded the 'Magazine of Zoology and Botany' in 1836, which was widened in scope in 1838 when the name was changed to 'Annals of Natural History'. Selby remained an editor until his death, contributing notes and articles up to 1841. He joined the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club soon after it was founded in 1831 and served as its president in 1834 and again in 1844. Between 1832 and 1859 he contributed many papers to the 'History of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club'. Further papers were published in other journals between 1823 and 1838. 
In 1833 Selby joined a numerous party of students, led by Robert Graham and Robert Kaye Greville, on a tour through Sutherland. The following year he encouraged Jardine and his brother John, Greville, and James Wilson of Edinburgh to go to Sutherland in order to make a more extensive study of the fauna and flora of this largely unknown region. Selby kept detailed records of the fishes, insects, birds, and mammals seen on the tour, and painted some of the fishes in oils. 
Selby also made contributions to entomology from the mid-1830s. He promoted the use of trees and straw bee skeps brushed over with sugar solutions in order to attract insects for collection. Selby collected lepidoptera, coleoptera, and hymenoptera -- the last group then little studied. 
Selby exhibited several paintings at the Royal Scottish Academy, of which he was elected an honorary member in 1827. He became a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1826 and intermittently attended meetings of the British Association for the Advancement of Science from 1833 onwards. In 1839 the University of Durham conferred on him the honorary degree of master of arts. 
Selby's knowledge of botany and particularly of arboriculture was extensive. His practical experience in planting up hundreds of acres of ground at Twizell House with many varieties of trees, often recently imported, resulted in his being asked by Van Voorst to write a treatise on the subject, published as 'A History of British Forest Trees Indigenous and Introduced' (1841-2). 
Selby died at Twizell House on 27 March 1867, and was buried in Bamburgh churchyard. His family regularly attended St Aidan's Church, where there is a memorial window to Selby and his wife, donated by Frances Margaret Antrobus. Selby's collection of coleoptera, hymenoptera, aculeata, and lepidoptera was presented to the University of Cambridge. His collections of 1400 foreign bird skins, including several type specimens, and eggs, were also presented to the university. His collection of British birds was purchased by A. H. Browne of Callaly Castle, but has not survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 25051


Selby, Walford Dakin (1845-1889), archivist and historian, was born at home on 16 June 1845, the eldest son of Thomas Selby of Whitley and Wimbush Hall, Essex, and his wife, Elizabeth, youngest daughter and coheir of Ralph Foster of Holderness, Yorkshire. His great-great-grandfather had taken the name Selby by royal licence in 1783, but the family name was originally Browne, and they claimed descent from the Brownes, viscounts Montagu. Selby once pursued a claim to that dormant peerage, but abandoned it as he was unable to prove a marriage on which the claim rested. He was educated successively at Brighton College, Tonbridge School, and with Dr Stromberg at Bonn, where he studied German and French. 
In 1867 Selby became a junior clerk in the Public Record Office, where he ultimately became superintendent of the literary search-room. In 1882 his standing in the antiquarian world was recognized by a pay rise of $50 a year. In 1883, in conjunction with his friend James Greenstreet, he founded the Pipe Roll Society, of which he was director-in-chief and honorary treasurer until his death. At the Public Record Office he was known for his courtesy and a minute knowledge of the records under his charge. From 1884 to April 1889 he edited 'The Genealogist', and he was a frequent contributor to 'The Athenaeum', 'The Academy', 'The Antiquary', 'Antiquarian Magazine', and other periodicals. His papers on 'The Robbery of Chaucer at Hatcham' and 'Chaucer as Forester of North Petherton' (1886) were published in a series of 'Life-Records of Chaucer', which he edited for the Chaucer Society from 1875. He compiled 'The Jubilee Date Book' (1887) and edited 'Lancashire and Cheshire Records', (2 pts, 1882-3), and 'Norfolk Records', with Walter Rye (1886). In 1875 he published a second edition of the 'Book of Rules and Tables for Verifying Dates' by his colleague John Bond. At the time of his death he was preparing a new edition of the 'Red Book of the Exchequer', which was completed by Hubert Hall, an edition of Queen Elizabeth's manuscript translation of Boethius's 'De consolatione philosophiae', and a new index to the 'Inquisitiones post mortem'. He contracted typhoid fever in November 1888 and while the balance of his mind was disturbed by the illness, he cut his throat and died at his home, 9 Clyde Street, Redcliffe Gardens, South Kensington, on 3 August 1889. It was suggested that the fever had been caused by poor sanitary conditions at the Public Record Office. He was buried on 8 August 1889 at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25052


Selden, John (1584-1654), lawyer and historical and linguistic scholar, was born on 16 December 1584 and baptized on 20 December at West Tarring, Sussex, the eldest son of John Selden of Salvington in the same county, musician and yeoman, and of Margaret, only daughter and heir of Thomas Baker of Rustington, Kent, gentleman. He had two brothers who died in infancy and a sister, Mary. In 1609 his father held over 80 acres with an annual value of $23 5's'. 
After attending the prebendal free school in Chichester, on 24 October 1600 Selden matriculated from Hart Hall, Oxford. He was admitted to Clifford's Inn in 1602 and to the Inner Temple in November 1603. Doubtless helped by the 'humanity, courtesy and affability' of his courtly manners, on which the earl of Clarendon later remarked (Clarendon, 1759, 1.31), Selden made a number of important friends and became well connected in London antiquarian and literary circles. His first close friend was Edward Heyward of Reepham, Norfolk, admitted to the Inner Temple a year later than he. By about 1610 Heyward had erected a row of sixteen chambers, and he and Selden shared rooms on the top storey until 1620, when Selden took over the whole suite. Adjoining the Inner Temple grounds was Whitefriars, the London house of his earliest patrons, Sir Henry Grey (1583-1639), and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Grey (1582-1651) ['see 'Grey, Elizabeth, countess of Kent], sister-in-law of another patron, Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel. Selden also formed an early and lasting friendship with Sir Robert Bruce Cotton, more than a decade his senior, for whom he acted as a copyist and to whose extensive library he had access. Others of his circle included John Donne, Edward Herbert, Lord Herbert of Cherbury, Samuel Daniel, the herald Augustine Vincent, and the travel writer Samuel Purchas. 
Even as Selden engaged in the study of common law, he began scholarly research and writing in other fields. According to Anthony Wood, it was in London rather than in Oxford that Selden acquired his formidable linguistic competence: French, German, Spanish, Italian, Latin, Greek, Old English, Hebrew, Chaldean, Samaritan, Aramaic, Arabic, Persian, and Ethiopic were all cited in his published works. He soon made the acquaintance of Lancelot Andrewes, dean of Westminster from 1601 to 1605 and a long-term promoter of the study of oriental languages, and Andrewes's most notable pupil, William Bedwell, became a friend. Selden claimed to have assembled in 1605 the book on the gods of the ancient Middle East eventually published as 'De dis Syris' (1617), and the dedication (to Cotton) of his work on the governance of England under the Britons, Saxons, and early Normans, 'Analecton Anglobrittanicon' (1615), is dated 1607; probably both had undergone considerable additions and revisions in the meantime. By 1609 he had drawn together a collection of sources and comments on early English governance that appeared long after his death as 'Englands epinomis' (1681). 
In the following year Selden's first books appeared. 'The duello, or, Single Combat' (1610) was a brief work on the history of the single combat, especially as a medieval means of proof. 'Jani Anglorum facies altera' (1610) was a much more substantial Latin treatise on the ancient laws of England, dedicated to Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury. It provided the first relatively systematic and detailed account of the ancient Britons and Anglo-Saxons. It portrayed their constitutions as sharing sovereignty among the monarchs, nobles, clergy (first the druids and later Christian bishops and abbots), and freemen, and stressed the centrality of assemblies as places for the making, remembering, and interpreting of laws. 'These Assemblies do now sit in great State, which with a wonderful harmony of the Three Estates, the 'King', the 'Lords', and the 'Commons', or Deputies of the People ['Trium Ordinum, Regis, Magnatum, remque plebis procurantium harmonia'], are joyned together to a most firm security of the publick'. While ambiguous about the impact of the Norman conquest, sometimes arguing in favour of a major change in the laws of tenure by the conqueror and sometimes stressing the continuity of Saxon institutions and laws, Selden portrayed the parliaments of the early Norman kings as continuing under a new name the witenagemots or micel synods of the Saxons until, 'At length we borrowed of the 'French' the name of 'Parliaments'' (J. Selden, 'The reverse or back face of the English Janus' in his 'Tracts', trans. R. Westcot [A. Littleton], 1683, 94; 'Jani Anglorum', 126). 'Jani Anglorum' first put forward his interpretation of the English constitution as a mixed monarchy that continued to shape most of Selden's relevant writings for the rest of his life. 
Called to the bar on 14 June 1612, Selden worked throughout his life as a barrister in London. His legal career stimulated rather than impeded his other interests. He had a great love of poetry, and his own compositions were sufficiently regarded in his lifetime for John Suckling to include him in his poem 'A session of poets' of 1637, but little of his verse survives. In 1610 he and Heyward provided commendatory verses for the collected poems of their friend Michael Drayton. In 1612 Selden's 'illustrations' of the historical poems in Drayton's 'Poly-Olbion' brought the research already carried out for 'Jani Anglorum' and 'Analecton Anglobritannicon' to a new, wider, English-language audience. Drawing upon a humanist historical method, these notes first articulated Selden's historical method by stressing the importance of 'Synchronisme', the using as primary sources documents from as close as possible to the historical events under analysis (M. Drayton, 'Poly-Olbion', 1612, sig. A2'r'). His scholarly potential had begun to flower as he pursued simultaneous projects. Five years in a row substantial volumes in English and Latin came off the presses, starting with 'Titles of Honor' (1614). In addition Selden wrote three short treatises and the first draft of 'Mare clausum' for King James VI and I. Several of the works published during this decade displayed an extraordinary breadth and depth of learning, and two of them created a highly sophisticated new style of historical works published in the English language. 
In 'Titles of Honor' Selden acknowledged the contribution of his friends to his scholarly endeavour and personal life. He paid tribute to his 'beloved friend that singular Poet M. Ben: Jonson', while Jonson reciprocated with praise for 'his honord friend' in a commendatory verse: '

'Monarch', in 'Letters!'


'Mongst thy 'Titles' showne, 

Of others 'Honors'; thus, enioy thine owne 
(sig. B1'r', 2'r', d1'r')' Selden also gave thanks for 'the Bounteous humanity and advise of theat learned Phisician Doctor Robert Floyd' [Fludd] in helping him overcome a 'dangerous and tedious sicknesse' (sig. A3'r'). The first edition of the work dealt historically with such European honorific titles as king, duke, count, baron, and knight, and also included special chapters entitled ''The beginning of' feuds' and 'Turkish 'dignities''. Breaking away from the genealogical concerns of most heralds and kings of arms, it derived honour from virtue, portrayed all civil honours as granted by the sovereign, and dismissed any claim to a hereditary nobility independent of the state (including the mystique of blood so favoured by some renaissance nobles). Each chapter opened with a discussion of the derivation of a particular title and then detailed its history and variations within a comparative European context, usually beginning with the Roman empire and coming up to the fringes of his own day. Those on dukes and counts observed that under the Romans: ''Dux' then properly was at first the 'Generall of an Armie' under the Emperor' (pp. 182-3). Constantine the Great created the rival office of count by sending out important men from the imperial court to govern in the provinces. Not 'long after 'Constantine'', these two offices became 'equall' in status (p. 184). The successor jurisdictions in France, Italy, and Spain continued to use duke and count as titles for offices until under the Carolingians they became attached to particular territories held by feudal military tenure and inheritable. With the collapse of royal power in France, dukes and counts usurped most of the marks of sovereignty, until strong kings of France claimed back those lost powers in the late middle ages. 
In Saxon England, 'dux' and 'comes' translated the officiary and honorary title of earl, while comes also translated the officiary title of ealdorman. After the Norman conquest, through the introduction of continental laws the new king transformed the nature of an earldom from personal or officiary, 'making it feudall, and hereditarie' (p. 229). Building upon the scholarship of Francois Hotman, Selden represented the inheritable military tenure of the feudal law as originating in the Frankish empire and spreading to Germany and Italy by conquest and elsewhere in western Europe by imitation. Although the Saxons had military tenures, as seen in the laws of King Cnut, 'Those kind of Militarie Fiefs or Fees as wee now haue, were not till the Normans' (p. 301). 'Titles of Honor' displayed a mature and almost unparalleled grasp of continental evidence and scholarship (including works on provincial as well as national history), and an acquaintance with English evidence (including manuscripts); it also reflected on the nature of law itself. 
The project of comparative legal history also informed Selden's notes to Sir John Fortescue's 'De laudibus legum Angliae' in an edition published in 1616. He faced more squarely than most common lawyers the legal consequences of the Roman conquest of Britain, noting that native Britons not only 'affected, we see, Roman language, Rhetorique, Roman habit, Roman pleasures, diet, and the like' but 'were not backward in affecting those laws, for which the languages and rhetorique was most usefull' (notes, 11-12). The normal adjustments of time combined with the succeeding conquests of the Saxons, Danes, and Normans to alter both the society and its laws: 'As succeeding ages, so new nations (comming in by a Conquest...) bring alwaies some alteration' (ibid., 9). This combination of continuity and change deliberately deconstructed Fortescue's seamless web of law, stretching unbroken from the Britons to his own day, into a suitable series of historical events, marked by such collections as the laws of King Cnut, King Edward, and King William. Within this new historical interpretation, the Norman conquest now seemed like just one more conquest that kept old customs and added new ones -- not an unobtrusive or a catastrophic event. 
Selden's notes to 'De laudibus' also articulated a new vision of the English 'state' as grounded in a particular limitation of the laws of nature made at the foundation of the organized society that succeeded Roman rule. The common law of England began when 'naturall laws [were] limited for the conveniencie of civill societie here'. Thereafter those limitations 'have been... increased, altered, interpreted', and became like 'the ship, that by often mending had no piece of the first materialls', but 'yet (by the Civill law) is to be accounted the same still' (notes, 19). This provided a historical model for interpreting the laws of any independent jurisdiction. From the ancient past to the present, societies changed individual laws within the context of an ongoing distribution of powers made at their foundation, but as new laws helped each society to adjust to ever-changing needs, the shape of the 'state' remained the same. In England, this was a mixed monarchy in which the king, nobility, clergy, and freemen had always shared in lawmaking by custom and statute. 
Between two famous English works appeared Selden's 'De dis Syris', a substantial treatise on the gods of the people surrounding the ancient Jews mentioned in the 'Pentateuch' and the prophets, and their relationship to the gods of the ancient Greeks and Romans. In his lengthy prolegomenon he took a remarkably open approach to the belief in multiple gods of the ancients and their instruments of worship. He drew both on the writings of the ancient Jews, Greeks, and Romans (including some inscriptions), and on such medieval Jewish grammarians and commentators as Abraham ibn Ezra, Levi ben Gershon (Gershonides), Benjamin ben Jona, David Kimchi, Moses of Copucy, Solomon Iarchi (Rashi), and Moses ben Maimon (Maimonides). This marked a significant shift in attitude, for in 1610 he had dismissed ''Talmudical' Traditions' as 'Poetick Fictions taken upon trust' ('English Janus', 8). 
In response to an enquiry from Ben Jonson about scriptural arguments adduced against cross-dressing, Selden wrote on 28 February 1616 a learned letter which disclosed several of the novel interpretations developed at length in 'De dis Syris', including the derivation of ancient European gods and goddesses from Asian deities, the report that 'Men did honor and invoke Venus in women's attire, and women the like to Mars in men's armour', the startling theory that 'the greatest names in the Eastern theologie of the Gentiles, were expressly noted by both sexes, and according to that mysterie of community of sexes, were worshipt', the conclusion that 'The self same was in Europe, where nothing of that kind was, if not traduced out of Asia', and the foundation of the origin of Mars and Venus in 'the masculin-foeminin or generative power supposed in the Sunne, or the Sunne and Moon, which were the first creatures idolatrously worshipt' (Rosenblatt and Schleiner, 66-70). No wonder this imaginative and controversial study of comparative religion won accolades from continental scholars. 
The most celebrated of Selden's treatises from this decade, 'The Historie of Tithes' (1618), marked a major refinement in his theory and practice of history. Dedicated to Sir Robert Cotton, it praised his 'inestimable Library', which assured 'a curious Diligence in search after the inmost, least known and most usefull parts of Historicall Truth' (sig. A 2'r'). The preface recommended the scrutinizing of earlier interpretations and of all evidence with a searching, but moderate philosophical scepticism, which helped to clear away unsound interpretations and to promote soundly based truth. Selden also encouraged other scholars to verify his own representations of the past. Also key to his method was his great respect for 'true 'Philologie'' and 'her two Hand-maids 'Curious Diligence' and 'Watchfull Industrie'' who discover 'many hidden Truths' not really accessible to 'any one restraind Profession' (pp. xii, xix). Marginal notes and a full bibliography of manuscript sources provided readers with access to the evidence presented in the text. 

'The Historie of Tithes' offered political advice on an issue of burning contemporary relevance. Between 1605 and 1613 George Carleton (who became successively bishop of Llandaff and of Chichester), Thomas Ridley (a prominent civil and canon lawyer), and Foulke Robarts (a Norwich divine) had drawn upon the interpretation of medieval canon lawyers and some historical evidence to make strident attacks upon the lay ownership of tithes. Selden detected no link between ancient Jewish tithes and those of medieval Christian Europe. During its first four centuries, voluntary charity funded the Christian church. During the next four centuries, pious laymen started to offer perpetual endowments, including tithes, to particular monasteries and churches, but retained control of the patronage of the resulting livings. With careful philological readings of contemporary primary sources Selden deconstructed the long-standing assertions that tithes had existed by the law of nature and that parish clergy had collected tithes by divine right during the first 800 years of Christianity. 
During the next 400 years, Selden explained, laymen began to dedicate tithes more frequently to particular churches or monasteries. The foundation and endowment of parish churches by laymen and the attachment to them of earlier gifts previously paid into a common diocesan fund created a parochial structure. During this era the clergy began to preach that tithes belonged by divine right to parish churches and to use this theory in an aggressive attempt to extend ecclesiastical power. Secular laws proclaimed by Charlemagne marked the first recorded attempt to create a legal right to tithes in western Europe. The four centuries from 1200 to 1600 witnessed the spread of enforced tithes over the whole of western Europe, the triumph in canon law of an argument for their parochial right, and the suppression of evidence for earlier, voluntary gifts in various repositories of ecclesiastical records. So successful was this clerical campaign for compulsory parochial tithes by divine right that secular laws began to enforce the collection of tithes within their jurisdictions. 
In Anglo-Saxon England parishes came into existence largely as foundations by laymen who endowed them, and the argument that tithes had always belonged by divine right to the parish priest was anachronistic nonsense. Listing many references to lay consecrations of property and income to the church found in early manuscripts, Selden concluded that before the reign of King John lay tithing was voluntary, and thus many of the so-called appropriated tithes traced their 'chief originall from these arbitrarie Consecrations' (pp. 290-91). This brilliant reading of manuscript sources creatively reinterpreted the meaning of parishes in the early English church and stressed the positive role of laymen in the endowment of the church. 
Selden also discovered that the general enforcement of divine-right tithes had spread across the face of western Europe as the result of a well-planned and executed programme of legal innovation. Starting in earnest about the year 1200, the enterprise reached a climax under Pope Innocent III and accompanied the climb of the papacy to the zenith of its political power in western Europe, including the England of King John. However, English common law, like the secular laws of other states in western Europe, came to enforce customary payments of cash in composition for crops and of fixed quantities other than a tenth; it also adjudicated any disputes over the rights of ownership of appropriated tithes. The aggressive clerical invasion of the property rights was eventually met by the statutes of the sixteenth century that controlled tithes and dissolved monasteries. As always for Selden, the law of God applied only as enforced through the laws of particular states. Underlying the occasionally flaming heat of the 'Historie of Tithes' stood a profoundly protestant version of Christianity which envisaged a church governed by the prince and parliaments, integrated into society, and enriched by the creative talents of laymen, as well as those of the clergy. 
A 'Review' at the end of the 'Historie of Tithes' provided a brief history of the Roman law to show how it could not rightly claim to have ruled even western Europe in an unbroken sequence and pictured William I, his barons, and those 'learned in the laws' (identified as 'the common Lawiers of that time, as 'Godric' and 'Alfwin'') gathering together as a parliament in the fourth year of the conquest to hear and confirm the 'former Laws of the Kingdome' (p. 482). This vivid image of the historical triumph of the king-in-parliament appeared just in time for Selden's political career of the following decade. King James and his favourite, the marquess of Buckingham, forced Selden to withdraw 'Historie of Tithes' from circulation, apologize to the privy council for the mistake of its publication, and endure in silence the attacks on it made by his critics. However, he would neither admit that it presented false evidence or interpretations nor retreat from the central thesis that the law of God found enforcement only in the laws of particular jurisdictions. 
In 1621 Selden received an opportunity to put his historical and constitutional ideas into action when employed as an expert legal historian by the House of Lords. This produced two concrete results, a draft roll of standing orders produced with Henry Elsyng, the clerk of parliament, and a lengthy report on the privileges of the Lords, including a section on the judicature, entitled 'The priviledges of the baronage in England' (Parl. Arch.). The latter used historical evidence to establish such 'speciall rights' as proxies, freedom from lawsuits during the sitting of parliament, and the power of judicature, and such 'private' privileges as trial by peers and giving evidence by a protestation upon honour instead of upon oath (fols. 2'v', 98'r'). Although the treatise vested judicature in the Lords, Selden was imprisoned, ironically, on suspicion of vesting it in the Commons. The intervention of Lancelot Andrewes, bishop of Winchester, and the newly appointed lord keeper, John Williams, dean of Westminster and bishop of Lincoln, obtained a fairly quick release. 
In 1621 Selden also acted as a legal consultant and a researcher for Francis Bacon, Viscount St Albans, gathering sources for the latter's history of Henry VII. His fullest statement on method appeared as a preface to Augustine Vincent's 'A Discoverie of Errours' (1622). Selden commended Vincent for his diligent reading not only of published work but also of 'the more abstruse parts of 'History', which ly hid either in privat 'Manuscripts', or else in the publique 'Records' of the Kingdome' (sig. A1'r'). Selden privileged those 'Acts of the State' preserved in the public records as the most extensive and reliable historical sources available. To sceptical critical analysis of sources he now added a quantitative imperative: the more contemporary and complete the sources, the more truthful the historical account. 
During the 1620s Selden became involved in an impressive number of scholarly enterprises. On 24 May 1621 he wrote to James Ussher, then bishop of Meath, that a new edition of 'Titles of Honour' was in the press. It probably drew upon a large number of studies, manuscripts, and printed public records. Selden's correspondence with Ussher from the 1620s dealt with an incredible range of scholarly topics, including the siting of churches in antiquity, the Samaritan 'Pentateuch' (especially interesting for its chronology in comparison with those contained in the Hebrew and Greek versions), and British historical materials; in addition, they exchanged books and manuscripts, including many from Cotton's library. Selden's knowledge of Anglo-Saxon had improved to the degree that Ussher could suggest, when returning Cotton's 'two Saxon Annales' in August or September 1625, that Selden would earn the gratitude of antiquaries if he produced a composite Anglo-Saxon chronicle, but this came to nothing. 
In 1623 Selden published a critical edition of the history 'Eadmeri monachi Cantuariensis, historia novorum... sub Guilielmis I et II et Henrico I Angliae regibus'. Dedicated to Bishop John Williams, it included an edition of the 'laws of William I' (these displayed a striking similarity to the 'Leges Edwardi Confessoris' printed by William Lambarde and provided evidence for a strong continuity across the potential break of the Norman conquest) and extracts from the Lichfield chronicle and the history of the pseudo-Ingulf, sources cited often in his early works. Selden saw Eadmer's text as an authentic contemporary voice that spoke vividly about the greedy exploitation of the revenues of the church by William II and the powerful political will of such churchmen as archbishops Lanfranc and Anselm. Since he had already singled out this period as one that had witnessed the powerful intrusion of popes and other clerics in secular affairs, he hardly accepted the theory of ecclesiastical independence from secular power supported by Eadmer. Five years later he published 'Marmora Arundeliana' (1628), an edition of the classical inscriptions in Greek from the marbles collected from Asia Minor by Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel, with an introduction and notes. It contained the text of a treaty and a major chronology of considerable importance to European classical scholars, as well as a philological discussion of the word ''nomos'' that explored the relationship of music, poetry, and law among the ancient Greeks. 
In 1623 Selden's old friend and patron Henry Grey succeeded to the earldom of Kent and engaged the lawyer as the manager of his estates. The following year Selden was returned as MP for Lancaster, perhaps through the help of the earl of Pembroke, the lord chamberlain and brother-in-law of the countess of Kent. He became an effective new member of the Commons, searching precedents for the actions of the house and serving on committees but speaking only occasionally. In 1626 he sat for Great Bedwyn, Wiltshire, most probably as a client of the earl of Hertford. Selden shared a number of goals with members of the Seymour network, including a strong dislike of the duke of Buckingham, support for constitutional monarchy, and a belief in reformed religion. He played a leading role in attacks made upon Buckingham, obtaining admission into the house for Sir Robert Howard, who lived openly with the countess of Purbeck (the wife of Buckingham's brother John), and working with Sir John Eliot, Sir Dudley Digges, and others on what became the attempted impeachment of the duke. Selden spoke forcefully, sat on the subcommittees that assembled the charges, dug up precedents for the procedures adopted, and was one of eight managers who presented the accusations against Buckingham to the Lords on 8 May. Actions against the duke failed with the dissolution of this parliament, but Selden helped to transform the transgressions of royal servants into a perceived threat to the ancient constitution. 
Failure to obtain funding in parliament forced the privy council to raise money, troops, and supplies by other means to continue the war against Spain and the empire, and extend it to France. When five knights imprisoned for refusing to lend money to the king sought bail through a writ of habeas corpus, Selden became one of the counsel for the defence. Most of his legal work involved property law; this was the only high-profile case with criminal implications that he ever handled, and one of only two of his cases for which copious evidence has survived. In this hearing with wide-ranging constitutional ramifications he approached his argument as an advocate but also as a historian. When Sir Robert Heath, the attorney-general, defended the royal prerogative to act without normal restraints during a time of crisis, Selden argued that the crown must follow recognized procedures, 'without which we have nothing', or else jeopardize the ancient liberties of freeborn Englishmen: 'no man can be justly imprisoned by either of them [the king or the privy council], without a cause of the commitment expressed in the return' ('State trials', 3.17). Using an expert contextual reading of 'Magna Carta' chapter 29, Selden argued that if 'due process of the law' meant 'according to the laws' in general, as suggested by attorney-general Heath, then 'the freeman shall have no privilege above the villain' an obviously preposterous position for people who lived in early thirteenth-century England (ibid., col. 18). Selden's humanist interpretation, however, did not obtain bail for his client, as the judges remanded the prisoners back to gaol, with the lord chief justice, Sir Nicholas Hyde, noting that the precedents cited in the case told against them. 
Discretionary imprisonment, the billeting of troops, imposition of martial law in England, and extra-parliamentary taxation or loans all became leading grievances when the next parliament assembled in March 1628. Selden sat for Ludgershall, Wiltshire, again as a client of the earl of Hertford. Named to fifty-seven committees and six subcommittees, he ranked among the top five committeemen in this session. In addition, his ninety-eight recorded speeches in the house and committee of the whole and twenty-six in the conference of 16 and 17 April helped to elevate him into a position of leadership. Drawing upon his wide learning Selden led the attack against discretionary imprisonment and martial law. His interpretation of the English constitution as a mixed monarchy from the very beginning helped to shape strongly felt grievances into resolutions and to collect them into a bill to uphold the traditional liberties of free Englishmen. However, Selden could not agree with the move made by Sir Edward Coke, supported by Sir Francis Seymour, to change from a bill to a petition of right on the grounds that it had less force, but he played a prominent, if somewhat diminished role in the debates which led to the passage of the petition. 
In the session of 1629 Selden retained his position of leadership, strongly attacking the printing of the petition of right with the king's first answer (the one unacceptable to the Lords and Commons), passionately defending the parliamentary privilege of John Rolle, whose goods were seized for his refusal to pay tonnage and poundage, gratuitously insulting Secretary Sir John Coke (the primary spokesman for the crown in the Commons), and, in general, helping to polarize differences between royal servants and their critics. On the last day of the session Selden not only supported a vote on the resolutions moved by Sir John Eliot, but commanded the speaker (as the servant of the house) to put the question on pain of being replaced. Ironically, these actions subverted Selden's own ideal, which depended upon the co-operative working together of the king, Lords, and Commons. They also helped to make King Charles out of love with parliaments. 
Shortly after dissolution Selden and eight other members of the Commons came under the careful scrutiny of the privy council. Questioned about his part in the events of the last day of the session, Selden lost his will to resist and provided less than truthful answers. On the night before the justices were to deliver their decision on bail King Charles moved the prisoners to the Tower, where they rested outside the jurisdiction of the king's bench. From 24 June 1629 until the summer of 1630 Selden suffered close imprisonment, although he soon got access to his books and papers and moved in and out of the Tower from 1631 onwards. Only an apology made to the king in 1634 brought a final release without bail. These years of enforced leisure allowed Selden to finish two scholarly projects and start new ones. 
A monument to the wide-ranging mastery of medieval continental and English sources and studies, the weighty second edition of 'Titles of Honor' (1631) drew its evidence widely. As well as providing a model for a true history based upon many primary sources, this edition also sought to establish a solid foundation for a new philosophy of politics that would emulate the revolution in astronomy brought about by 'Copernicus, Tycho, Galileus, Kepler' (sig. PP2'r'), although Selden's political advice remained more than a little obscured by the details of his analytical narrative. 
Attempting to chart the origin and development of the titles of monarchy, nobility, and gentility in western Europe from the end of the Roman empire to the present, this new edition dissolved the unitary feudal law interpretation espoused in the first edition into various national, provincial, or local feudal laws. Selden portrayed these jurisdictions as a series of ancient constitutions, each having its own 'state' or 'frame of government' and its own feudal customs. Only the titles of emperor and king received a fully comparative treatment, with those of duke, count, baron, and knight unfolding country by country as rulers carried out their own adaptation of northern European customs to Roman offices. The Gothic king Theodoric, whose chancellor Cassiodor was a Goth 'bred up in the learning of the Romans', marked a key transition in linking Roman titles and northern tenures (p. 302). Selden's astute awareness of variation over time and space combined with his sophisticated representation of fealty, homage, service, and investiture with land to verify the overall interpretation. 
Like their continental counterparts, the Anglo-Saxon kings of England shaped a new 'frame of government', using as their 'subordinate Titles of Temporall Honour' those 'of 'Etheling', 'Ealdorman', and 'Thane' or 'Thegn'' (p. 603). Selden's deepened understanding of Anglo-Saxon sources allowed him to provide a much more sophisticated analytic and chronological representation of these titles. Anglo-Saxon charters and 'Domesday Book' showed that the Saxons had established the feudal holding of land by military service, and the Normans had taken it over and reshaped it. Since twenty years could not create a custom, Selden argued, historians could trust such manuscripts as 'Domesday Book' as detailed guides to the military and fiscal obligations due from across the realm under the late Anglo-Saxon kings. Considerable evidence also showed how the highest officers in the land, ealdormen and earls, along with high-ranking churchmen and thegns, governed the realm through presiding over shire courts or witnessing royal charters. Occasionally the great men of the realm gathered together as a witenagemot or a micel synod 'which afterward was from the 'Romance' Dialect stiled a Parliament' (p. 613). These assemblies advised in matters of state and made and interpreted laws, exercising both deliberative and judicial power. Here lay the origins for the Norman gatherings of tenants-in-chief of the crown and for later parliaments. 
The Norman conquest brought few changes to patterns of landholding and governance, but replaced Saxon feudal thegns by Norman barons. Selden discussed at great length the feudal and military character of the early Norman baronage, the nature of the knight's fee as a grant of land designed to provide the service of a professional warrior, and the transformation of a baronage by tenure into one defined by receiving an individual summons to parliaments. These interpretations represented a major scholarly accomplishment, and they made the conquest of 1066 look like just one of many moments of innovation, one additional adjustment of northern customs to Latin offices, carried out through an assembly of notables. Indeed, the second edition of 'Titles of Honor' provided sophisticated historical support for Selden's interpretation of the mixed monarchy of England, not least by placing it in a plausible, equally well-supported context of European ancient constitutions. It portrayed the continual calling of parliaments as a necessary part of English governance. 
In the 1630s Charles I was looking for more acceptable advice, so Selden, encouraged by courtiers, presented a peace offering, 'Mare clausum' (1635), which defended British sovereignty over a wide expanse of sea. First written about 1619 and then revised to take account of the minimalist theory of natural law contained in Hugo Grotius's 'De jure belli ac pacis' (1625), it combined a lengthy, sophisticated theoretical discussion of law with a partisan and reasonably well-documented history of the exercise of maritime dominion. Book 1 argued: 'That the Sea, by the Law of Nature or Nations, is... capable of private Dominion or proprietie as well as Land', and book 2: 'That the King of 'Great Britain' is Lord of the Sea flowing about, as an inseparable and perpetual Appendant of the British Empire'. The structure reflected Selden's view of the link between theory and history, law and fact: the capability of dominion arose to a significant extent from the evidence of dominion exercised over the sea in the past (J. Selden, 'Of the Dominion, or, Ownership of the Sea', trans. M. Nedham, 1652, 2). 
In order to challenge the assumptions of those who had supported free trade on open waters, 'Mare clausum' started with definitions of 'sea' (which included the oceans and seas nearly surrounded by land) and 'dominion', and discussion of the nature of 'law' ('Jus'). The binding law of nations and the law of God as revealed in scripture, although 'reputed by men to bee unchangable', became enforceable only through ''Additions' or Inlargements', which included the interpretations of judges and commentators (p. 13). Positive laws (customs, statutes, contracts, or treaties) transformed the universal laws of God and nature into enforceable laws with concrete penalties. Most existing legal systems fit into the categories of ''Civil'' law (the laws of particular societies) or the ''Common Law of divers Nations'' (laws jointly accepted by more than one state), but some occupied a third category, the ''Law of som' or 'divers Nations, Civil' or 'Domestick'' (international law accepted as binding by one or more states; p. 14). The last of these opened a place for the exercise of dominion over the sea. 
Selden then turned to communal and private dominion. The parcelling of lands and goods derived not from the laws of God or nature, which were neutral on the subject, but from a covenant involving the 'consent of the whole bodie or universalitie of mankinde (by the mediation of something like a compact, which might binde their posteritie)' (p. 21). Even before they formed societies, occupiers could establish a preponderant use over a particular piece of land previously uninhabited. As abundant theory and practice demonstrated, explicit or implicit contracts turned the lands that they occupied into dominion, made it capable of allocation or inheritance, and established distinct local property laws. Dominion over the sea, however, had not remained uncontested. Through a careful examination of the practice of 'the more civilized and more eminent Nations of the past and present Age', whose laws and treaties showed that claims over adjoining seas 'hath been received into Custom, as a thing very usual, and agreeable to Law' (pp. 45, 53), Selden provided copious evidence to support the exercise of maritime dominion in general and of ancient and modern British dominion over the surrounding seas. These detailed discussions of ancient and medieval military and diplomatic affairs paid equal attention to the royal appointment of admirals and to parliamentary statutes and, while revealing fissures beneath the surface of the text, sugared the pill of mixed monarchy for Charles I with the sweetness of royal maritime sovereignty. Written in Latin for an international audience, 'Mare clausum' constituted a classic defence for the extreme position that states could legitimately claim and exercise extensive sovereignty over the high seas. 
Although relatively brief, Selden's two studies of ancient Jewish society demonstrated his new mastery of the 'Talmud' and provided the first taste of a passion for Jewish studies that dominated his scholarship for the last two decades of his life. On 4 August 1625 Selden wrote to Archbishop James Ussher asking about the differences between the Samaritan and Hebrew versions of the 'Torah'. On 2 November 1627 Ussher replied with corrections to Scaliger's Samaritan chronology and discussed the related problems that fascinated both scholars. Ussher knew that Selden read Arabic, Greek, and Hebrew and assumed that he also read Aramaic; another correspondent thought in 1634 that Selden was translating the 'Alcoran' (Bodl. Oxf., Selden MS, supra 108, fol. 52'r'). Instead, he had honed his skill in Aramaic and Hebrew and plunged deeply into a series of works based strongly upon the 'Torah', the 'Talmud', and Jewish commentaries. 
The extent of this shift appeared in Selden's dedication of the joint printing of 'De successionibus in bona defuncti' and 'De successione in pontificatum Ebraeorum' (1636) to Archbishop William Laud. In the parliamentary session of 1629 Selden had attacked Laud, then bishop of London, for licensing bad books and refusing to license attacks on Arminianism or popery. With the shift in Selden's research during the 1630s, Laud's library proved very useful and the two men formed a friendship. Laud sent Hebrew books to Selden to settle the question of their authorship and also helped to negotiate his reconciliation with King Charles. In the dedication of 1636, Selden assured ''Antistes'' Laud that he was not one of those Hebraists who deserted to the other side, like the extreme sabbatarians, but explored Jewish wisdom in order to improve Christianity. He praised Laud for his 'incomparable' gift of a voluminous quantity of oriental manuscripts to the library of Oxford (sig. A1'r'). However, Selden had not accepted the archbishop's tendency to identify the Christian church with its clergy and to assert clerical independence from any secular power below the monarch. Although admitting that both the Babylonian and Jerusalem 'Talmuds' contained fables and follies (especially about Jesus and the Virgin Mary), Selden gave them the sceptical, critical reading already practised on the sources used in his earlier histories. Carefully interpreted, the traditional wisdom, judicial decisions, and modes of scriptural exegesis that had accumulated from the days of Moses on Sinai to the diaspora and beyond provided the key for understanding the teachings and practices of the ancient Jews and early Christians. 
The potentially more explosive of these two treatises was that on priestly succession, for it dealt with the sensitive issue of the divine origin of priesthood in 1636, when William Prynne published anonymously in Amsterdam his attack upon the biblical origins of episcopacy, 'The Unbishoping of Timothy and Titus'. Selden noted how the customs and traditions of the Jews (like unwritten English common law) guided both the succession of the priests and their powers. Book 1 surveyed the history of the Jewish priesthood from Aaron to the destruction of the second temple, showing how high priests held sacred office through their lineage from Aaron. Book 2 explored the legal requirements of eligibility for ancient Jewish priesthood, and it also discussed priestly consecration, vestments, and sacrifices, and the differences between the first and second temples. Finally it portrayed priests as having authority in judgment and interpretation of law by virtue of their scholarly understanding of oral traditions, and the Great Sanhedrin as having the power to settle all such issues, including disputes over priestly succession. However, Selden did not fully define the membership of the Sanhedrin. Together these studies also carried into another historical setting his link between the binding laws of God and nature and the laws of particular societies, this time with the 'additions and enlargements' of the ancient Jews. 
During the 1630s Selden received recognition and expanded his social life into new circles, including the court. In November 1632 he was elected a bencher of the Inner Temple; he and Sir Edward Herbert were among representatives from the inns of court who staged the masque 'The Triumph of Peace' before the king and queen at the Banqueting House in February 1634 and again at the Merchant Taylors' Hall. As the court connections of the countess of Kent strengthened, Selden entered into a mentoring relationship with George Digby (the scholarly eldest son of the earl of Bristol), lending books, purchasing volumes, and enjoying his company. In February 1638 the courtier, connoisseur, and diplomat Sir Kenelm Digby wrote from Paris thanking Selden 'for the kind favour you did me in sending me your Mare Clausum and other workes' and reciprocated with a book in a fine French binding (Bodl. Oxf., Selden MS, supra 108, fol. 78'r'). Following the death of the earl of Kent in 1639 Selden took up permanent residence at White Friars, the home of the countess. There was clearly a widely circulating rumour that he married her, and the countess's description of herself in her will as 'late wife' rather than as 'widow' of Kent gives it some credence. John Aubrey asserted it as a truth, adding that Selden had had sexual relations with her during Kent's lifetime and with his knowledge; Selden inherited the countess's property after her death. 
In his weighty treatise 'De jure naturali et gentium, juxta disciplinam Ebrorum' (1640) Selden built upon both Grotius and rabbinic traditions, reducing the minimal moral duties of humans to seven laws imposed by God first upon Adam and later upon Noah and his descendants. He listed these as 'the prohibitions of idolatry and blasphemy, the injunction to establish a legal system, commandments against bloodshed, sexual sins, and theft, and a seventh law... added after the flood... forbidding anyone to eat flesh cut from a living animal' (Rosenblatt, 126). For an early seventeenth-century European they also provided the earliest possible starting point for discussion because these laws were 'given to the human race at its very creation' and 'revealed and made manifest, like principles or theorems in demonstrative matters, to every man whose mind was not depraved, who was not corrupted, and who intuited rightly and diligently enough' ('De jure naturali', 109, as translated in Sommerville, 440). By invoking divine sanction, Selden clearly abandoned the move by Grotius to use only basic principles based upon human relationships. 
Selden probably found the position of Grotius too vulnerable to sceptical subversion and used a story from Herodotus to argue 'that there were clearly no common principles of morality accessible to all men by the light of their natural reason' (Tuck, 'Philosophy and Government', 215). Earlier he had argued that each society limited the law of nature in its own way owing to particular context and to the diversity of opinion which arose from the weakness of human reason, and each had its unique 'nomos', the different 'state' or 'frame of government' that reflected and upheld its social arrangements. By 1640, however, unaided human reason and custom no longer fully satisfied Selden. The commands of God, continually upheld by an 'active intellect' through which the human mind perceived the truth, now provided a firmer foundation for natural law. Although most of Noah's descendants had to some extent lost sight of the original principles, the descendants of Schem and particularly the Jews remained especially open to the active intellect and best preserved them. This guaranteed that the rabbinic account of natural law stood closer to God's original commands than the fallible human traditions of other societies. The additions and enlargements of the laws of nature spelled out in the 'civil laws' of each society also stood rooted in another divine command: ''You must abide by contracts and forms of government agreed on by the citizens, and you must keep your word' or some such decree' ('De jure naturali', 107, as translated in Tuck, 'Philosophy and Government', 216-17). The honouring of 'contracts' and 'frames of government' remained fundamental to social and political life, as in the second edition of 'Titles of Honor' and 'Mare clausum'. Although the first book of 'De jure naturali' addressed general issues, the succeeding ones dealt with one (or two) of the Noachide laws, exhausting the meaning and implications of each with a plenitude of detail. Combining theory with historical evidence, Selden provided a divine sanction for the polity and laws of nations from the ancient Jews to early modern Europeans. This search for the expression of God's commands in human customs and jurisprudence characterized most of his future works. 
In the 1640s Selden served as a member of the Long Parliament (until excluded by Pride's Purge), acted as a lay member of the Westminster assembly, and continued extensive scholarly research and writing. His election as MP for Oxford University perhaps had the blessing of its chancellor, Laud, who tried to enlist Selden's help to relieve pressure for extensive religious reform by withdrawing the canons of 1640. Selden sat on fewer committees, spoke only infrequently in debates, and swayed the Commons far less often than in 1628-9. On 10 March 1641 he argued that since 'ancientlie Bishops in Saxon times had voices in making lawes' before voting for removal of clerical participation 'wee would give the clergie some other voices' ('The Journal of Sir Simonds D'Ewes', ed. W. Notestein, 1923, 468 and n. 10). Against his advice the house initiated a bill to remove the bishops from parliament. For Selden this represented a serious subversion of the English 'frame of government'. A few months later he also spoke and voted against the attainder of Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford. 
When Charles I began to gather supporters in the summer of 1642 the marquess of Hertford invited Selden to join him in royal service in York. In reply, Selden excused himself on grounds of illness, but also professed that his 'loyal and humble affections to his majestie and his service are and shall now be as great and as hearty as any mans' (Bodl. Oxf., Selden MS supra 123, fol. 159'r'). Ironically, his theory of mixed monarchy formed the basis for 'His Majesties Answer to the XIX Propositions' (1642). Selden collected printed material on the royal commissions of array and drafted a treatise debating whether such commissions were 'warrantable' by the common law and statute (Bodl. Oxf., Selden MS supra 124, fol. 1). An examination of the history of raising troops in England, especially 'knights service' concluded that 'the obligations that are made by homage and fealty are such as bind only in honor or conscience, but [subject] the party not to any punishment at the common law' (supra 124, 14-15). The military actions of royal servants had to be 'warranted by immemorial Custome or by act of Parlament, and not at all by arguments drawn simply from mischeif or convenience or inconvenience', or else they would violate the ancient 'frame of government' of England (supra 124, p. 18). Commissions of array had no foundation in custom or statute. Drawing upon many of his arguments from the debates over the militia in the session of 1628, he showed that mixed monarchy could defend the parliamentary as well as the royalist cause. 
Some of Selden's scholarship in the 1640s offered advice less hidden than most of his earlier works. His translation from Arabic into Latin of the early section of a history of the Christian church in Alexandria, 'Eutychii Aegyptii, patriarchae orthodoxorum Alexandrini' (1642), portrayed its author, Eutychius (877-940), as the Egyptian Bede, a reliable historian of his own people, and related how the evangelist Mark chose a shoemaker, Hananias, as the first patriarch of the city and established a council of twelve presbyters to choose and consecrate his successor from among their number. This ancient 'frame of government' for one of the earliest Christian churches was not unlike the modified episcopacy advocated by Archbishop Ussher and spoke to the arguments over divine-right episcopacy and presbyterianism that had started to rage openly in London in 1641. Eutychius charted the rise of bishops within the Alexandrine church, intruding themselves between the patriarch and the other clergy, and the loss by presbyters of their exclusive privilege of electing and ordaining the patriarch. In his commentary Selden used his understanding of ancient Jewish practices to shed light on the ecclesiastical offices mentioned in the 'New Testament' and other early Christian sources. The consecration of especially studious Jews as 'presbyters' and the laying on of hands that initiated the most learned of them into the Great Sanhedrin indicated that the early Christianity portrayed by Eutychius had Jewish roots. Another section of his commentary attempted to find a middle way through the equally contentious issue of extemporaneous versus fixed or liturgical prayer sparked off by attacks upon the 'Book of Common Prayer' in the early 1640s. Clearly he wanted the reforms of the present to incorporate the good practices of the past, a difficult position during an age of accelerated reformation. 
From July 1643 onwards Selden participated in the often heated debates of the Westminster assembly, appointed by parliament to reform the Church of England. The vast majority of members were ordained clergy who strongly desired reforms in ecclesiastical governance, worship, and discipline, and a codification of doctrine. Many found it difficult to deal with a layman who questioned their readings of scripture and displayed greater expertise on a variety of issues than any of the clergy. Selden's best-known and, for the Scots, most vexing contributions came during the debates over excommunication. Robert Baillie, one of the Scottish clerical commissioners, characterized him as 'the head of the Erastians; his glory is most in the Jewish learning; he avows everywhere that the Jewish State and Church were all one, and that so in England it must be, that the Parliament is the Church' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 2.266). This downplayed Selden's deep knowledge and use of British history, including that of the church, but accurately summarized his interpretation. On 4 January 1644, when a committee report suggested that pastors and teachers had 'the power to inquire and judge who are fit to be admitted to the sacraments, or be kept from them; and also who are to be excommunicated or absolved from that censure', Selden responded by suggesting: 'that, in this kingdom, ever since it was a kingdom, Christian excommunication hath ever been by a temporal power; as in the Pope's rule here, his own excommunication could not be brought in hither, but by permission of the secular power. ('Whole Works of... Lightfoot', 13.106)' In other debates he applied his rabbinic learning against compulsive readings of '1 Corinthians' 5: 4 and 'Matthew' 18: 15-17 favoured by the presbyterians. These clashes led to sharp rejoinders around Selden's table: 'presbiters have the greatest power of any Clergie in the World, and gull the Laytie the most' (Selden, 'Table Talk', 113). While unsuccessful in persuading a majority of the divines in the Westminster assembly, Selden and other lay delegates did persuade parliament to adopt more flexible policies on governance and excommunication than those supported by the presbyterians. 
Collected mostly in the 1640s by his clerical amanuensis, Richard Milward, and published posthumously in 1689 with a dedication to his executors, Selden's 'table talk' reflected his concerns from this decade. Its contents, arranged alphabetically in short sections, were devoted mainly to issues of religion, morality, and politics. That on translations of the 'Bible' demonstrated both his feeling of scholarly community and his common sense. In translating from French to English, he observed, one did not translate word for word but phrase by phrase: 'I say it is cold, not, it makes cold'; in the 'Bible', however, 'the Hebraisms are kept... which is well enough so long as scholars have to do with it; but when it comes among the common people, Lord, what gear do they make of it' (Selden, 'Table Talk', 6-7). He was not afraid to make fun of the clergy, but considered that the bishops had the same right to sit in the Lords as did the peerage, namely that of precedent. As in the common law, custom ruled. The section headed 'Jewes' summed up succinctly the basic interpretation put forward in his weighty Judaic studies: 'God att the first gave laws to all Mankind, but afterwards hee gave peculiar laws, to the Jewes which they only were to observe, Just as we have the Comon Law for all England, and yet ye have some Corporations, that besides that, have peculier lawes and priviledges to themselves. (ibid., 54)' This made the jurisprudence of the Jews look like the 'civil laws' of other societies, without the upholding power of the active intellect posited in 'De jure naturali'. Glimpses of Selden's sardonic wit appeared occasionally in his published works and between the lines of letters from his correspondents, but characterized much of the conversational tone recorded by Milward, as seen in his account of the 'person of quality' who arrived at his chambers 'and told me he had two devils in his head (I wondered what he meant)' (ibid., 46). 
During the 1640s Selden also received a number of rewards, made new friendships, and helped old friends. Parliament appointed him keeper of the records in the Tower in 1643 and named him one of the twelve commissioners for the Admiralty in 1644. In 1646 he was voted $5000 in compensation for his prosecution and imprisonment by the crown in 1629-31, but found it difficult to collect. He used his influence to save several libraries from pillage and disbursal, including the royal collection, that at Lambeth Palace, and that of Archbishop Ussher. He received wonderful letters of praise, such as that in 1647 from young Ralph Cudworth, the future Cambridge Platonist, accompanied by a 'pamphlet' on religion, a 'small expression of my great Respects to you' (Bodl. Oxf., Selden MS supra 108, fol. 1'r'). Other younger scholars, such as the very learned Dr Gerard Langbaine, provost of Queen's College, Oxford, sought Selden's protection from over-zealous visitors in 1648. Working in Westminster, he helped many caught up in the tribulations of the civil wars. 
Selden's Jewish studies flourished in the 1640s and 1650s, spurred on by contemporary debates. Building upon his earlier interest in chronology, he published 'De anno civili et calendario veteris ecclesiae seu reipublicae Judaicae, dissertatio' (1644). The reconciliation of the lunar and the solar years shaped the rituals and annual festivals of the Jews (and, through them, those of Christians), but Selden called it a 'civil' calendar because the application of the law of God in a workable manner was a human responsibility. The preface argued that Jewish traditions of interpretation could help Christians better to understand passages in the 'New Testament'. A dialogical approach shaped much of the text, with Selden detailing the 'Talmudic and Scripturalist' interpretations of chronology as it related to a wide range of activity. The latter belonged to the Karaites, who traced their heritage back to the Sadducees, but derived from Anan ben David, who lived in the middle of the eighth century; 'Selden may be regarded as the first modern western scholar, Jew or gentile, to analyse the practices of this Jewish sect' ('John Selden on Jewish Marriage law: the Uxor Hebraica', trans. J. R. Ziskind, 1991, 16). Instead of determining the new moon that marked the beginning of the month for the Jewish lunar calendar by mathematical calculation, the Karaites used visual observation. This could make the crucial difference of a day for the start of rituals. Although portraying the Karaites as having the deepest understanding of lunar time, Selden also saw Talmudic scholars as providing the foundations of the ordinary traditions of interpretation upon which even the Karaites had to rely. With their dialogical approach, great variety of voices and schools, and zeal for the word of God, Jewish scholars had become for Selden, perhaps ironically, the best model for Christians to move beyond their factional conflicts. 
Selden's 'Uxor Ebraica' (1646), written by the early 1640s, provided the scholarly basis for many of the interpretations in the controversial tract by John Milton, 'The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce' (1643). Selden's 622-page treatise exhaustively examined the nature of marriage and divorce as discussed in the 'Torah', the 'Talmud', and commentaries of a host of Jewish scholars. Book 1 opened by noting that while the 'civil laws' of other societies came from natural law (the Noachide laws), the 'civil law' of the Hebrews was 'partly Sacred Law' commanded in the 'Torah' 'and partly ancestral custom and sanctions added by those who were in charge of such matters' ('Uxor Ebraica', 33). It then discussed unions forbidden on the grounds of consanguinity and affinity, the Karaites, the marriages of high priests and kings, and the practice of polygamy (including that of Muslims). Book 2 dealt largely with betrothal, dowry, and marriage ceremonies among the Jews and gentiles, including the ancient Romans. After showing how Jewish and pagan customs of betrothal and marriage 'passed into Christianity', Selden turned to the practices of Greek and Latin Christians, and then to those in England, including the medieval ceremony of the Salisbury rite and the reformed one of the 'Book of Common Prayer'. This led to the conclusion that Christian and Jewish marriage customs, while 'not often exactly the same' were 'analogous and similar' (p. 284). 
Book 3 dealt with the nature of marriage and divorce. Jewish marriage involved mutual obligations between husband and wife, including the 'conjugal obligation' of regular sexual intercourse; these obligations provided a framework for judging its failure. Through careful philological comparison of key texts in 'New Testament' Greek with the Aramaic of the rabbinic schools' teachings on the Deuteronomic grounds for divorce, Selden finally concluded that while Jesus's teachings initially seemed within the school of Shammai, which permitted divorce only for fornication, they were actually not very far from the permissiveness of the school of Hillel which allowed it for any reasonable cause. Natural law allowed spouses to marry and divorce 'by mutual consent', and this position shaped the interpretations of Jewish rabbis, the early Christians, and Greek and Russian Christians. Only the highly restrictive teachings and canon laws of western Christians were portrayed as unusual and unprecedented. An open-minded reader, Selden concluded, would know what changes to make to the English law of divorce. Although less directly, this political advice advocated reforms not unlike those already proclaimed by Milton. 
In the 1640s Selden also revisited his earlier passion for the history of law in Europe, writing an introduction for his edition of 'Fleta' (1647), an early treatise on English law from the reign of Edward I. Though badly printed, as he himself appreciated, it spelt out with greater subtlety and detail the history of the Roman law after the collapse of the empire in the West and of its interaction with the English common law briefly sketched in the 'Review' at the end of the 'Historie of Tithes'. After providing an account of the usage and study of the Theodosian and Justinian codes in western and southern Europe from the fall of the Roman empire to the revival of learning in the twelfth century, Selden turned to Britain. The 'Anglo-Saxon invaders of England' used 'only their native Germanic customs' the 'laws of the Mercians, of the East Saxons and later of the Danes' ('Joannis Seldeni ad Fletam dissertatio', trans. D. Ogg, 1925, 105). As in other parts of Europe, the Roman law reappeared in Britain in the twelfth century when 'the two Codes were introduced into England together in order that the most complete manuals of the Roman law extant in Latin might be available' (ibid., 109). 
Under the early Normans the study of 'old English customs and laws as affecting public administration' by the learned monks of Abingdon helped to preserve them ('Joannis Seldeni ad Fletam dissertatio', trans. D. Ogg, 1925, 129). This remained the law of the land, although 'archbishops and bishops who had studied civil and canon law as well as English law were frequently appointed His Majesty's judges and exercised full jurisdiction' (ibid., 143). These clerics helped to spread knowledge of the Roman and canon laws, and encouraged lawyers to use 'the very words and maxims of the civil law' in their 'pleadings before the king's judges' (ibid., 149), partly explaining the familiarity and use of the Roman law 'by Bracton, Thornton and the author of 'Fleta' and in the Year Books of Edward II', but this expertise did not continue into the reign of Edward III (ibid., 159). Although many English lawyers and experts made use of Roman law 'in their studies, writings and debates' during the period from Stephen to Edward III, it did not become the law of the land, because of 'the unconcealed aversion which our ancestors had to' Roman law and 'the remarkable esteem in which the English or common law was held' (ibid., 161, 165). This history served both to introduce the reader to 'Fleta' (which Selden discussed at some length at the end of this essay) and, perhaps more importantly, to inoculate England against any universalist claims of Roman or civil lawyers, one of the aims of so many of his earlier histories. 
The last and most detailed of Selden's Judaic studies, 'De synedriis et praefecturis juridicis veterum Ebraeorum' (1650-55), dealt with the ruling assembly, the Great Sanhedrin, and other judicial bodies of the ancient Hebrews. The last volume appeared posthumously and unfinished; all three together extended to 1841 pages in the edition of 1655. Although Selden had begun to research this topic during the 1630s, the pressures and debates of the following decade added relevance to the project. With its portrayal of the integration of the sacred and secular in ancient Jewish society, 'De synedriis' may well have offered an indirect plea for England to return to a mixed government in which clergy sat in parliament. Jewish practices provided patterns not only for the early Christians, but for more recent reformers, as Selden had argued more than once in the Westminster assembly. The power of excommunication claimed by divine right by Roman Catholics, episcopalians, and presbyterians came under extended scrutiny in 'De synedriis' and was attributed to human invention. The overarching power that resided in the Great Sanhedrin in Jerusalem provided Selden with the key for understanding the allusive and tantalizing 'New Testament' texts upon which the Latin church had erected its claims for spiritual jurisdiction and its elaborate system of church courts. Containing both lawyers or teachers and priests learned in the law, the Great Sanhedrin handled both spiritual and secular questions and helped to maintain stability in ancient Jewish society. 
The first volume of 'De synedriis' dealt largely with the issue and history of excommunication. Among the ancient Jews and early Christians, it was exercised by magistrates, while priests, clergy, and lay teachers (rabbis) who dealt with spiritual matters did not exercise penal jurisdiction 'ex officio' but only in their capacity as men wise in the law invited or elected to the civil task of judgment. Among the Jews, sinners excommunicated for breaking the law continued to participate in the whole range of ritual activities, even teaching, unless they also had some ritual uncleanness. Among the early Christians, the image of the spiritual sword ('gladium spiritalem') did not represent some independent coercive jurisdiction, but acted as a metaphor for the duties of preaching, praying, teaching, and administering the sacraments (vol. 1, p. 271). Only under the emperor Constantine did Christian clergy briefly act as judges. 
The second volume concentrated upon the institutions of justice, where they derived their power, and who made up their membership, including the qualities of members of the Great Sanhedrin. It included a section on the qualifications of Jewish 'presbyters' and how they received their authority and ordination by human law, not divine right. The third volume dealt with the overarching power of the Great Sanhedrin, how it decided such unpriestly issues as war and peace, distinguished between prophets and pseudo-prophets, and supported and oversaw the high priest. With all its complexities and lengthy asides, this great work again showed that for Selden, political advice derived both from laws commanded by God and from the experience of humans in interpreting them. Jewish rabbis remained his most privileged interpreters and offered much wisdom to those Christians prepared to master their writings and style of exegesis. 
As he neared the end of his seventh decade Selden's precarious health declined. His long-time companion, the countess of Kent, died on 7 December 1651 and left him her property. Two years later he updated his will, appointing his 'beloved friends' Edward Heyward, John Vaughan, Matthew Hale, and Rowland Jewks the elder, as the heirs in trust of his lands and estate, and leaving only $100 each to the two sons of his sister, Mary, and her husband, John Bernard of Goring, Sussex, as country folk unused to riches; Aubrey thought he had at least one illegitimate daughter, but had considered such offspring unworthy heirs. Among many minor legatees were William Seymour, marquess of Hertford, 'Mr Grey Longueville', and Sir Thomas Cotton. Continuing to correspond with friends and scholars, Selden answered in October 1653 an enquiry from Archbishop Ussher about the identity of Gallio in the book of 'Acts', concluding -- after examining works by Caesar Baronius, Grotius, and Justus Lipsius -- that he may well have been Seneca's brother. By this time he was ill -- 'of a dropsey', according to Aubrey ('Brief Lives', 274). In November 1654 he conversed with Ussher and Langbaine, which supports Anthony Wood's repetition of Sir Matthew Hale's comment that he died 'a resolved serious Christian' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 1813-20, 3.376), rather than Aubrey's story that Thomas Hobbes persuaded Selden to turn away clergymen who came to pray with him. Following Selden's death at White Friars on 30 November, the aged archbishop of Armagh preached on 14 December at Selden's well-attended public funeral at the Temple Church; he was buried in the Temple Church on the same day. 
During a lifetime of scholarship, legal practice, and public service, Selden amassed an extensive collection of books and manuscripts. A story circulated that he had revoked an original intention to bequeath these to the Bodleian Library, Oxford, but this was false. By the terms of his will the library was to receive his collection of Greek and Oriental manuscripts, selected Latin manuscripts, and his remaining Talmudic and rabbinical books. Most of these were forwarded by his executors to the Bodleian in 1659, although in the interim some had been lost. Among the 8000 volumes which arrived safely, some had belonged to Jonson, Donne, and Cotton; they remain there today. Selden's greatest legacy, however, was not the expensive hat band studded with diamonds that he left to Hertford but his extensive European and Jewish studies and his advocacy of a mixed monarchy. His histories on European and British topics displayed a meticulous application of continental humanist methods and a masterful reading of English and continental sources and commentaries in imaginative, detailed narratives of great complexity. The meticulous results of his plunge into the complex realm of Jewish studies showed great respect for the integrity of rabbinic interpretations and an unparalleled understanding of Jewish texts, traditions, and history, all conveyed in subtle, empathetic studies that used the wisdom of the Jews to teach a Christian audience. How fitting for one praised by the earl of Clarendon for 'his good nature, charity, and delight in doing good' (Clarendon, 1.31) and noted by Wood as 'the glory of the English nation, as Hugo Grotius worthily stiles him' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 1813-20, 3.366). His contribution to scholarship was commemorated through the giving of his name to the Selden Society, founded to publish the significant documents of English legal history; volumes have appeared regularly since 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 25053


Selkirk, Alexander (1676-1721), mariner, castaway, and probable source of inspiration for the character Robinson Crusoe, was born in Lower Largo, Fife, the seventh son of John Selcraig, shoemaker, and Euphan Mackie. He received schooling in Largo. His wilful nature manifested itself at an early age in his determination to go to sea against his father's wishes. In August 1695 a summons by the kirk session for 'indecent carriage' in church precipitated his departure. He had left for sea by 27 August, before he could be dealt with, and he did not reappear in Largo until 1701. After his return from sea he fell foul of the parish authorities again, this time on account of his behaviour during a domestic dispute. His brother Andrew set down a can of salt water from which Alexander mistakenly drank. Incensed at the mirth this caused, Alexander lashed out at his brother and had to be restrained from taking a pistol to him. For this he was rebuked before the parish congregation. 
In May 1703, as Alexander Selkirk, he was appointed master of the privateer 'Cinque Ports' (Captain Charles Pickering, commander). The 'Cinque Ports' and her consort, the 'George', commanded by William Dampier, left Kinsale on 11 September bound for the South Sea. Pickering died on the coast of Brazil and was succeeded by Captain Thomas Stradling. Selkirk's seamanship is attested by his passage round the Horn in mid-February 1704, but his loyalty to Stradling is not so certain. At Juan Fernandez (Mas a Tierra), where the two vessels put in for refreshment, forty-two of the sixty or so men on board the 'Cinque Ports' mutinied. Selkirk may have been among them. An engagement with a French ship soon afterwards seemed to galvanize the crew, and both ships then proceeded along the mainland coast towards Callao in search of prizes. By the end of May disappointing pickings and Dampier's persistent indecision caused such friction between the two commanders that they decided to part company. Selkirk elected to remain with Stradling. 
The 'Cinque Ports' now cruised independently on the coast of Central and South America until August. During this time Selkirk grew resentful of Stradling. A hurried refit at Juan Fernandez in September convinced Selkirk that the vessel was unseaworthy and he declared he would leave the ship rather than sail in her. Disembarking with 'his Clothes and Bedding, with a Firelock, some Powder, Bullets, and Tobacco, a Hatchet, a Knife, a Kettle, a Bible, some practical Pieces, and his Mathematical Instruments and Books' (Rogers, 126), Selkirk bid the boat's crew a hearty farewell but the moment they pulled away from the shore he experienced an immediate change of heart. Stradling, who may have anticipated a volte-face, had taken it upon himself to supervise Selkirk's transfer personally, and he steadfastly refused Selkirk's pleas to be taken up again. 
For eight months or so Selkirk went about distracted 'and had much ado to bear up against melancholy, and the Terror of being left alone in such a desolate place' (Rogers, 126). However, the onset of winter forced him to build two huts, and faced with the challenge of survival he gradually reconciled himself to his predicament. He studied the 'Bible' and began to embark upon a routine of daily religious exercises which included singing psalms and reading the scriptures aloud to retain the use of his speech. To distinguish the sabbath he kept a calendar. He bred cats for company and they preserved him from the rats which gnawed at his feet and clothes as he slept. His chief amusement was to hunt goats, and after exhausting his powder he relied on fleetness of foot to capture them. He tamed the kids to ensure a continual source of food for his old age when he might not be able to overtake them. In accounting for the time he spent on the island, Selkirk stressed the importance of two incidents. The first occurred when he was out hunting. Having stalked a goat to an unfamiliar part of the island, he lunged to catch the animal and his momentum carried him over the edge of an unseen precipice. The fall knocked him unconscious for at least a day and when he recovered his senses he discovered the goat dead beneath him. Second, he was very nearly captured by Spaniards who arrived at the island in two vessels. Anxious to ascertain the vessels' nationality, Selkirk inadvertently showed himself to observers in the ships. A landing party was dispatched to apprehend him and several shots were fired in his direction. Selkirk's agility allowed him to hide in the branches of a tree, at the foot of which his pursuers made water. 
On 1 February 1709 two Bristol privateers, the 'Duke' and 'Duchess', touched at the island for water. The 'Duke' was commanded by Captain Woodes Rogers with Dampier on board as pilot. After dark a light was discerned ashore and the next day, sighting no ships, Rogers sent two boats to investigate. Towards evening the pinnace returned with 'a Man cloth'd in Goat-Skins, who look'd wilder than the first Owners of them [who] had so much forgot his Language for want of Use, that we could scarce understand him, for he seem'd to speak his words by halves' (Rogers, 125-9). Selkirk had been on the island for four years and four months. Dampier recommended Selkirk as having been the best man in the 'Cinque Ports' and Rogers duly appointed Selkirk to be mate in the 'Duke'. 
Both ships sailed on 13 February to scour the coast of Chile for prizes. On 26 March a prize taken near the Isle of Lobos was renamed the 'Increase' and Selkirk was appointed master. On 25 April, as part of the assault on Guayaquil, Selkirk formed part of a detachment under Lieutenant Connoly tasked with exploiting areas beyond the town. After the withdrawal from the town on 28 April Selkirk continued in command of the 'Increase', forming part of a screen to intercept vessels in transit between Panama and Lima. In the middle of September Rogers led his ships to the Galapagos for refitting before taking up stations off Cape St Lucas in November to await the arrival of the Manila galleon bound for Acapulco. By 20 December their quarry had yet to appear. Low on bread, and with worm penetrating their vessels' sheathing, the decision was taken to sail for the Ladrones [Mariana Islands]. As they were about to weigh anchor a sail was sighted, and on 22 December Rogers seized the richly laden 'Nuestra Senora de la Encarnacion'. 
On 10 January 1710 Rogers set out to cross the Pacific, a voyage of over 6000 miles. The 'Duke' was accompanied by the 'Duchess', and two prizes. The 'Nuestra Senora' had been renamed the 'Bachelor', and Selkirk was appointed master on board under Captain Thomas Dover. They reached Guam on 11 March and departed within ten days for Batavia where they arrived in late June. Here they shared out a quantity of booty, Selkirk acting as a commissioner in this transaction. His own share was eighty pieces of eight. After refitting at Horn Island, they sailed for the Cape of Good Hope where they stayed for over three months. On 6 April they sailed in a convoy of twenty-five Dutch and English ships, arriving off the Shetlands on 15 July. After a final delay at the Texel Selkirk arrived in the Thames on 14 October 1711. His extraordinary circumnavigation had taken over eight years, more than half of which had been spent in total isolation. 
Selkirk's conduct on the island won him universal admiration after the account of him given by Rogers in 'A Cruising Voyage Round the World' (1712). His rehabilitation in Britain, however, proved less successful. The records of the court of queen's bench contain a process against 'Alexander Selkirke' of the parish of St Stephen, Bristol, for an assault on Richard Nettle, shipwright, on 23 September 1713 (Hart, 246). At some indeterminate date Selkirk returned to Largo where he lived for a while the life of a recluse, constructing a cave in his father's garden for the purpose of meditation. He became infatuated with a girl named Sophia Bruce, with whom he seems to have eloped to London. They may even have married. In a will, drawn up and signed in Wapping on 13 January 1718, Selkirk referred to Sophia as 'his loveing and well beloved friend Sophia Bruce of Pellmell London Spinster', and appointed her executrix and heir ('Scots Magazine', 67, 1805, 673). These arrangements were concluded on the eve of Selkirk's return to sea. 
On 20 October 1720 Selkirk embarked in HMS 'Weymouth' as master's mate. On 12 December he married a widow named Frances Candis, in St Andrew's Church, Plymouth, signing a new will on the same day and leaving everything to his new bride. His address was given as Oarston (Oreston), Plymstock, Devon. By the end of March 1721 Selkirk was involved in operations against pirates and interlopers on the Guinea coast and it was here, during a period of unusually high mortality among the crew, that he probably contracted a fatal disease. The 'Weymouth''s log records Selkirk's death on 13 December 1721. Sophia Bruce's suit to prove Selkirk's first will in the prerogative court of Canterbury the following year led to a legal battle over the estate with Frances and her new husband. Sophia was unsuccessful, and failed to secure an injunction against her rival when the second will was proved on 5 December 1723. Sophia's fortunes eventually sank so low that she was forced to apply for alms from Revd Say, a dissenting minister of Westminster. 
A tablet in honour of Selkirk was placed near his lookout on Juan Fernandez by Commodore Powell and the officers of HMS 'Topaz' in 1866, and a bronze statue, erected in 1885, stands on the site of his former home in Largo. His sea chest, and a coconut shell cup, which may have been in use on the island, are preserved in the national museums of Scotland. The best evidence for the years Selkirk spent on Juan Fernandez is contained in Woodes Rogers's 'Cruising Voyage', of which a second edition was published in 1718. Selkirk's best memorial, however, is Daniel Defoe's immortal portrait of the castaway in 'Robinson Crusoe', which appeared the following year. There is some evidence that Defoe and Selkirk may have met, but stories that Defoe callously plundered Selkirk's journal for material, while telling its author it would never sell, are likely to be apocryphal. Sir Richard Steele's claim to have held frequent conversations with Selkirk in London is similarly unreliable. His moralizing account of Selkirk in 'The Englishman' appears to have been a fabrication based on details furnished by Rogers. Nevertheless Steele's report that Selkirk had told him 'I am now worth 800 Pounds, but shall never be so happy, as when I was not worth a Farthing', when they met in the street, aptly sums up what seems to have been true during Selkirk's last years. 


@@@@@


doc= 25054


Alexander Craig Sellar (1835-1890), advocate and politician. He was educated at Rugby School and graduated from Balliol College, Oxford, in 1859; he joined the Scottish bar in 1862. In June 1870 he married Gertrude Joanna, daughter of Octavius Smith of Ardtornish. He was appointed assistant commissioner to the education (Scotland) commission in 1864, and was legal secretary to the lord advocate of Scotland from 1870 to 1874. He was MP in the Liberal interest for the Haddington burghs from 1882 to 1885, before which he had been unsuccessful candidate for Devonport. He was an energetic party organizer but split from Gladstone over Ireland. In 1885 he was elected for the Partick division of Lanarkshire, whose electorate he regarded as somewhat turbulent, and was re-elected in 1886. He joined the Liberal Unionist Party in 1886 and was party whip from 1886 to 1888. He wrote on parliamentary reform, but his promising career was abbreviated by his early death, on 16 January 1890 at Parham Park, Pulborough, Sussex; his wife survived him. He was buried in Elgin Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 25055


Sellar, Patrick (1780-1851), sheep farmer and agent of highland clearances, was born on 5 December 1780 in Elgin, Moray, the only son of Thomas Sellar (1754-1817), solicitor, and his wife, Jean Plenderleath, daughter of the minister of college church in Edinburgh. His father, originally from Banffshire, practised successfully in Elgin, served the needs of local landowners, and entered their ranks when he bought the estate of Westfield in 1808. Patrick Sellar was educated at Edinburgh University for a legal career and he entered his father's business in 1803. His father joined a consortium for the reconstruction of harbour facilities at Burghead, in Moray, in 1805. Another partner was William Young, a local farmer and improvement entrepreneur. 
In 1809 Sellar and Young began to give advice to Lady Stafford (Elizabeth Leveson-Gower), who was already embarked upon ambitious plans for the improvement of her vast highland estates in Sutherland. In 1810 they were appointed to manage the estate; Sellar was mainly responsible for rent collection and removals. Their policies entailed the massive rearrangement of the population and the land use, emptying extensive inland areas for sheep farms and creating a new coastal economy of crofters. These plans required the eviction of many thousands of small tenants, who resented the changes. Sellar acquired first a large arable farm and then complicated his role by bidding successfully for a large new sheep farm in Strathnaver. 
Already responsible for removals in 1812, Sellar himself became the target of fierce hostility following particularly severe removals in Strathnaver in the middle of 1814. Over the following eighteen months various allegations emerged against him and he was eventually tried, in sensational circumstances, for acts of gross inhumanity, including culpable homicide, at Inverness in April 1816. He was alleged to have caused the deaths of several small tenants by setting fire to their houses in the course of the 1814 clearances. He was tried by a jury of landowners from outside Sutherland under Judge Pitmilly, and was completely exonerated. He routed his accusers and the removals were later completed under James Loch and Francis Suther. However, the controversy did not abate. 
Sellar's employers, who regarded him as undiplomatic and harsh in his dealings with the people of Sutherland, soon eased him out of the Sutherland management. Sellar remained as their most reliable, but also their most disputatious, tenant and one of the greatest sheep farmers in the highlands. His house in Morvich was the centre of his activities. He was widely respected as an agricultural adviser and an expert on sheep. He was influential in establishing wool and sheep markets in the northern highlands, and in the formation of the Sutherland Association of Farmers. In 1819 he married Anne, daughter of Thomas Craig of Barmuckty, Elgin; they had nine children. Members of his large family were successful in several fields of Victorian society, and they conducted business in England, Australia, and the United States. 
Between 1838 and 1844 Sellar bought the estates of Ardtornish and Acharn in Morvern in Argyll, paying $29,850 for 21,575 acres. He evicted 230 people and stocked the lands with Cheviot sheep from Sutherland. He thus established himself as a laird in his own right but, argumentative and combative by nature, he soon quarrelled with his new neighbours. His family played host at Morvern to Francis Palgrave, Alfred Tennyson, Herbert Spencer, Benjamin Jowett, and George Eliot. To the continuing fury of his family, his reputation and his memory were repeatedly sullied, especially by recurrent claims that he had been guilty of the charges unsuccessfully levelled against him in 1816. 
Sellar came to personify the entire process of the highland clearances. He was always severely critical of the old highland ways and thought the highlanders should emigrate for everybody's sake. He advocated the suppression of Gaelic and the compulsory teaching of English. He had an exceptionally sharp turn of phrase and a caustic intelligence. After a long illness he died on 20 October 1851 at Park Place, Elgin, and was buried in the churchyard of Elgin Cathedral on 1 November. 
The third son of Patrick and Anne Sellar was William Young Sellar, professor of Latin in Edinburgh University. Their seventh son was 


@@@@@


doc= 25056


Sellar, William Young (1825-1890), classical scholar, was born at Morvich, Sutherland, on 22 February 1825, the third son of the seven boys and two girls of Patrick Sellar (1780-1851), who was notorious as factor to the duke of Sutherland during the highland clearances, and his wife, Anne Craig. At the early age of seven he joined the youngest class in the Edinburgh Academy, then under its first headmaster, John Williams. At the age of fourteen he was dux, or head boy, of the school. From there he went to Glasgow University (1839-42), where Edmund Law Lushington was professor of Greek and William Ramsay (1806-1865) was professor of Latin. Under these teachers and friends Sellar advanced in classical learning. He gained a Snell exhibition and a Balliol scholarship, matriculating on 1 December 1842, and was a contemporary of his friends Matthew Arnold and Principal Shairp, and a pupil and friend of Benjamin Jowett. After taking a first class in 'literae humaniores', and graduating BA in 1847 (MA in 1850), Sellar was elected to a fellowship at Oriel in 1848, which he held until his marriage (1 June 1852) to Eleanor Mary ('b'. 1829), daughter of Alex Dennistoun, a Glasgow merchant and radical MP for Dunbartonshire (1835-7). 
After teaching for a short time in the University of Durham (1850-51) Sellar went to assist Professor Ramsay in the Latin chair at Glasgow (1851-3). From 1853 to 1859 he was assistant professor of Greek at St Andrews. From 1859 to 1863 he held the Greek chair in that university, where his nephew Andrew Lang was a pupil, and from 1863 until his death was professor of Latin in the University of Edinburgh. He took a keen interest in politics as a Liberal and then, opposing Irish home rule, a staunch unionist. Short-sightedness contributed to a rather distant manner. Sellar died at Kenbank, Dalry, Kirkcudbrightshire, on 12 October 1890, and was buried in the churchyard at Dalry. His widow and their children survived him. 
The least permanent, though perhaps the most important, part of Sellar's work was academic. A sound though not, in his own judgement, a brilliant, scholar, his appreciation of classical literature was keen and contagious. His modesty, humour, and generous sentiments aroused the affection of his pupils, many of whom had distinguished careers, while his learning secured their respect. He contributed the essays 'Lucretius' and 'Characteristics of Thucydides' to 'Oxford Essays' (1855, 1857). His other works were 'The Roman Poets of the Republic' (1863), 'The Roman Poets of the Augustan Age: Virgil' (1877), and 'Horace and the Elegiac Poets', edited by W. P. Ker (1892). These were all remarkable examples of sound and sensitive literary criticism. 


@@@@@


doc= 25057


Seller, Abednego (1646/7-1705), nonjuring Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was the son of Richard Seller, of Plymouth. He matriculated at Lincoln College, Oxford, on 26 April 1662, aged fifteen. He did not take a degree, possibly because of poverty, but was ordained deacon on 11 March 1665 by Bishop Seth Ward of Exeter. He married Mary Persons on 2 December 1668 at Abbotsham, near Bideford, Devon. On 22 December 1672 he was ordained priest by Bishop Anthony Sparrow in Exeter Cathedral. 
Seller's first publication appears to have been 'An Infallible Way to Contentment' (1679). On 29 March 1682 he was installed as rector of Combeinteignhead, Devon, following presentation by Thomas Grey, earl of Stamford. While in that post he wrote 'The Devout Communicant'. Published in 1686, it had reached its sixth edition by 1695 and it proved his most successful practical work, being republished with additions in 1704 as 'The Good Man's Preparation for Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament'. Several other tracts of an anti-papist character followed. At this time Seller was also helping William Cave with his 'Historia literaria' (1688). On 8 September 1686 Seller was installed vicar of St Charles, Plymouth. He did not appear at the bishop's visitation on 20 August 1689, but he still suffered deprivation for his failure to take the oaths to William and Mary. 
Seller's response to the dilemma faced by the Church of England following the revolution of 1688 was to publish 'The History of Passive Obedience' (1689). This argued against taking the oaths to the new monarchs, and brought forth refutations from divines such as Edward Stillingfleet. It was followed by 'How far the clergy and other members of the Church of England ought to communicate with the non-swearing bishops' (1690), published anonymously, in which Seller's answer was an emphatic assertion that obedience was still owed to the nonjuring bishops, who had been deprived both schismatically and unlawfully. George Smalridge, the future bishop, wrote in November 1696 that 'Seller had the reputation of a scholar, though not of a good man, before he was a non-juror' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 3.253). In that year Seller had published 'The Antiquities of Palmyra'. In January 1700 Narcissus Luttrell reported that a fire in Red Lion Square had burnt down Mr Knightley's house where Seller's library 'with a great number of choice and scarce manuscripts were consumed' (Luttrell, 4.605). 
Seller was resident in St Andrew's, Holborn, Middlesex, when he wrote his will on 9 July 1704. He left his manuscript of William of Malmesbury's 'De gestis pontificum' to the Bodleian Library; his Byzantine histories to Lincoln College; and a manuscript written by Lord Herbert to John Woodward, professor of physic at Gresham College. His other main concern was the maintenance and education of his two younger grandchildren, the daughters of his deceased daughter Margaret Bowen. The eldest granddaughter was to be placed with her uncle, Matthew Bowen. His wife received $20. In a codicil of 9 March 1705 he ordered 'all my papers, sermons, adversaria and manuscripts (except such manuscripts as are fairly transcribed from other copies) to be privately burnt'. His executors proved his will on 9 July 1705, and by the end of the month the manuscript promised to the Bodleian had arrived in Oxford. In October Thomas Hearne noted that a catalogue had revealed that Seller had owned 'a vast number' of books and almost 200 coins ('Remarks', 1.53-4). 


@@@@@


doc= 25058


Seller, John (bap. 1632, d. 1697), maker of navigational instruments and chart and map seller, was baptized in London at St Katharine by the Tower on 29 December 1632, the son of Henry Seller(s), a cordwainer. Further family circumstance remains untraced, except that an elder sister was baptized at the same church in 1629. Seller was apprenticed to Edward Lowe in 1644 and became a freeman of the Merchant Taylors' Company in 1654. He further became a brother of the Clockmakers' Company in 1667 and served as warden of that company in 1692. His trade was originally that of a compass maker and so he is described, with a note that he also sold navigational instruments, in Timothy Gadbury's 'The Young Sea-Mans Guide' (1659). 
Seller's career was dramatically interrupted by his arrest for high treason in 1662, accused of involvement in a plot led by Thomas Tonge. The trial at the Old Bailey on 11 December 1662 revealed no connection between Seller and the other defendants: he had almost certainly done no more than repeat a rumour about a cache of arms, but this was enough for the jury to convict him. Tonge and others, all of whom admitted some degree of complicity, were executed, but Seller, after imprisonment in Newgate and a succession of petitions, was eventually pardoned. It was perhaps this incident that first brought Seller to the notice of the authorities: if so, it was a notice that was eventually to prove advantageous. The trade in printed maritime atlases and charts had previously been wholly dominated by the Dutch. In terms of national mercantile aspiration this was clearly unsatisfactory -- as Seller himself put it in the dedication to 'The English Pilot' (1671), 'we must see no further than their books direct us' -- and when he proposed to produce English-printed maritime atlases he was soon given a royal licence, granted a virtual monopoly, and appointed hydrographer to the king in March 1671. 
In the event, Seller was forced, whether by financial constraint, by lack of source material, or by the size of the task, to use as the core of his atlases a quantity of disused Dutch printing plates, originally engraved some fifty years earlier and said to have been acquired as scrap metal. These he 'refreshed in several places and used them in his pretended new work' ('Tangier Papers of Samuel Pepys', 107). However that may be, Seller produced what he had promised, with the handsome first volume of 'The English Pilot' appearing in 1671, dedicated to the duke of York, to whom he had earlier addressed his pleas from prison. Further instalments soon followed and to these were added 'The Coasting Pilot' (1672) and the 'Atlas maritimus' (1675). The publications may not have had their anticipated success and when a further volume of 'The English Pilot', covering the Mediterranean, was published in 1677 it was with additional partners, two of whom, John Thornton and William Fisher, were soon to take over the whole project. 
Seller had meanwhile moved on to another enterprise no less ambitious, a new survey of the whole of England and Wales to be published in the form of a large-scale county atlas, the 'Atlas Anglicanus'. In association with John Oliver and the engraver Richard Palmer, Seller published fresh surveys of six counties between 1675 and 1681, as well as Oliver's map of London, but there the project ended. For the remainder of his career, Seller's output concentrated on less financially challenging material, in particular the production of miniature compendia and atlases of the type exemplified by the undated 'Atlas minimus' and the 'Atlas caelestis' (1680), the earliest British celestial atlas. 
Seller never abandoned his original career as an instrument maker and some idea of the breadth of his activity is given in a lengthy catalogue of instruments preserved in the British Library copy of the 'Atlas maritimus' (BL Maps C.8.d.5). In 1672 he successfully petitioned for a contract to supply the Chatham Dockyard with compasses and glasses. Aside from this practical work, to which must be added the occasional production of manuscript charts, Seller also taught on navigation, mathematics, surveying, gunnery, and fortification. He appears as a correspondent on the topic of magnetic variation in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of the Royal Society in 1667. He wrote several textbooks, including the popular 'Practical Navigation' (1669), outlining the mathematical basis of navigation through worked examples. Within the limits of contemporary practice his description of the various instruments and their use at sea is of exemplary clarity. He was further responsible for a large number of nautical almanacs, many relating to American waters. His other works include the very early set of London views, 'A Prospect of London' ('c'.1680). 
Seller operated throughout his documented career from premises at the Hermitage Stairs in Wapping, but for a number of years maintained additional retail premises in and about the Royal Exchange. Little is recorded of his private life. He is perhaps the John Seller granted licences for various Baptist meeting-houses in Kent in 1672, an identification made more likely by his connections with Chatham as well as his long professional association with the elder John Darby, a printer of known nonconformist affiliations. A court case over poor relief disbursed by Seller and not refunded reveals him to have been chapel-warden of Wapping Hamlet in 1688. 
Seller has long had his detractors: his contemporary Robert Morden referred to him as an 'upstart Hydrographer who never did, nor ever knew how to project or draw a map or sea-chart' ('An Introduction to Astronomy', 1702, pt 2, 32). Pepys, on the other hand, while aware of his limitations, still made use of Seller and understood the strategic importance of his activities: 'till Seller fell into it we had very few draughts, even of our own coasts, printed in England' (Pepys, 'Naval Minutes', 238). The extent to which he relied on earlier Dutch work has often been overstated and, by the only means perhaps available, he was successful in establishing a trade in London-printed charts, a trade further developed by Thornton and Fisher. It has perhaps been too little appreciated that he was also, by a line of descent through his apprentice Charles Price (1679?-1733), the founding figure of the school of map makers who came to dominate eighteenth-century British cartography, a group that included John Senex, Emanuel Bowen, Thomas Kitchin, and Thomas Jefferys. Judgement of Seller has likewise been prejudiced by the low survival rate of his work: not a single example of a large wall-map of the world is known to survive. Perhaps the best epitaph is the anagram of his name sometimes appended to his works, 'John Seller: Here's no ill'. 
Seller and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1711), baptized daughters Elizabeth (1655), Thomasin (1656), and Priscilla (1659). Their sons John and Jeremiah, apprenticed to Seller in 1681 and 1687 respectively, both briefly followed their father's career. Seller died of dropsy between 19 and 31 May 1697 and was buried at the church of St John-at-Wapping that month. His will noted an earlier advance of $500 to John junior and left the remainder of his estate, including his stock, to his widow and to Jeremiah, who subsequently formed a partnership with Charles Price. 


@@@@@


doc= 25059


Sellon, Baker John (1762-1835), serjeant-at-law, was born in London on 14 March 1762, the second son of William Sellon (died 1790), perpetual curate of St James's, Clerkenwell. He was admitted into Merchant Taylors' School on 2 November 1773, and entered St John's College, Oxford, on 11 June 1779. He graduated BCL on 24 October 1785. On 24 January 1788 he married Charlotte (died 1832), daughter of Rivers Dickinson of St John Street, Clerkenwell; they had a large family, of whom three daughters and one son survived infancy. Their second daughter, Maria Ann, married John James Hall, and their third daughter, Anne, married Sir Benjamin Collins Brodie. 
Sellon wished to become a clergyman, but, at his father's request, he studied law, and was called to the bar from the Inner Temple on 10 February 1792. While at the Inner Temple, Sellon published his 'Analysis of the practice of the courts of king's bench and common pleas, with some observations on the mode of passing fines and suffering recoveries' (1789). On being admitted to the bar, he worked on 'The Practice of the Courts of King's Bench and Common Pleas' (2 vols., 1792-6). He also wrote 'A Treatise on the Deity and the Trinity', which was published posthumously in 1847 and edited by W. Marsh. 
After practising for several years with distinction, Sellon was admitted a serjeant-at-law in the Easter term of 1798, and he later became leader of the Norfolk circuit. Increasing deafness, however, obliged him to refuse a judgeship, and finally to retire from the bar. In 1814, at his own request (he was apparently short of money), Henry Addington, Viscount Sidmouth, appointed him police magistrate at Union Hall; in January 1819 he was transferred to the Hatton Garden office. There he continued to act until his retirement in 1834. He died at his home in Hampstead, after a period of paralysis, on 19 August 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 25060


Sellon, (Priscilla) Lydia (1821-1876), founder of the Society of the Most Holy Trinity, was born on 21 March 1821 in Hampstead, Middlesex, but brought up at the family country house, Port-y-seal, in Grosmont, Monmouthshire. Her father, William Richard Baker Smith (1791-1860), son of Thomas Smith, receiver-general to the dean and chapter of St Paul's Cathedral, entered the Royal Navy in 1801 (lieutenant 1807), served in the Napoleonic wars, retired with the rank of commander, and on inheriting the property of his maternal aunt Sophia Sellon, assumed in January 1847 the name and arms of his mother's family. Priscilla Lydia Sellon, known as Lydia, was the third surviving child of his first wife, Priscilla Lydia White (died 13 May 1823), who died when Lydia was little more than two. She grew up in a large family as her father married again and had eleven more children. She was educated at home by a Scottish Presbyterian governess. A lively and spirited young woman, she was allowed an unusual amount of independence by her father. When, in 1848, she wanted to go and work in appalling conditions among the poor in Plymouth and Devonport in response to an appeal by the bishop of Exeter, Henry Phillpotts, he gave her his support. 
Lydia Sellon arrived in Devonport with only one helper, Catherine Chambers, the sister of a friend of her father, but quickly won the agreement of the bishop to start the Devonport Sisters of Mercy. For the rest of her life Miss Chambers self-effacingly devoted herself to assisting Miss Sellon, dealing with her correspondence and, as 'Mother Eldress', with the routine administration of the order. They wore plain black dresses with black wooden crosses. Theirs was not the first sisterhood in the Church of England. The Park Village Sisterhood in London, the Sisterhood of the Holy Cross, was founded in 1845, but it was absorbed into the Devonport sisterhood in 1856 and the united sisterhood took the name the Society of the Most Holy Trinity. Lydia Sellon was first known as the Lady Superior or simply Mother within the community. Later -- probably from 1852 when St Dunstan's Abbey, Plymouth, was built, largely at her own expense, as the society's main house -- she was known as the abbess and on occasion used a pastoral staff. 
From the beginning Lydia Sellon was advised and guided by Edward Bouverie Pusey whom she had probably met through the Chambers family. He was her spiritual director, spent much time in her company, and went overseas with her on more than one occasion. He heard the confessions of many of the sisters and was a generous benefactor of the community. So close was their relationship that it led to gossip, and her brother eventually published a formal denial of any engagement between them. Pusey was an enormous influence on her, but she undoubtedly influenced him too. It was, for example, she who introduced him to Joseph Leycester Lyne, later known as Father Ignatius, and persuaded Pusey to take an interest in him. One of the sisters said Lydia was like a mother to Pusey. Another, however, who left to become a Roman Catholic nun, alleged Pusey 'had an infatuation for Miss Sellon which was very little short of mania. The woman had laid a spell on him' (Gill, 155). 
Lydia Sellon's plans for the society were ambitious and invariably exceeded its resources. Within two years of its foundation she had established in and around Devonport an orphanage, a home for delinquent boys, two refuges for training girls for domestic service, an industrial school, six model lodging houses for poor families, five ragged schools, a soup kitchen, a home for old sailors, and a naval training school, as well as working among female emigrants. She later set up soup kitchens, almshouses, a nurses' home, and a convalescent hospital. One of her most imaginative projects was setting up a printing press to provide work for young women who might otherwise have been forced into prostitution. Mother Lydia had early seen the possibilities of a press as employment for women and had herself learned printing. The society's activities extended beyond Devonport and Plymouth. Houses were set up in London, Bristol, Manchester, Bradford-on-Avon, Norwich, Carnmenellis, and Ascot but some of the experiments were very short-lived. In 1864 Mother Lydia was able to realize a possibility for which she had made provision in the statutes of the society, that of the sisters' becoming involved in mission work abroad. A few were sent out to the Sandwich Islands to establish a school. In 1867 Mother Lydia herself made the arduous journey to Honolulu with three more sisters to choose a site for a permanent mission station. It was the first time any Anglican sisterhood had ventured into work overseas. 
All the early sisterhoods were viewed with suspicion and hostility, because they seemed to threaten the family and because mistakes were inevitably made, given that there was no tradition of the religious life in the Church of England to draw on. The very name stirred fears of 'popery'. The festivities for the laying of the foundation stone of St Dunstan's Abbey in 1850 were disrupted by a mob which pelted the sisters and clergy with potatoes and plates. The Society of the Most Holy Trinity drew more criticism than most, partly because of its association with Pusey and partly because of Mother Lydia's authoritarianism, exaggerated by gossip and rumour and by the allegations of one or two disaffected sisters and associates. Bishop Phillpotts was obliged to hold a public inquiry in February 1849 and, although he spoke warmly of Miss Sellon's work and character, in 1852 he withdrew from his role as visitor to the society. Bishop Blomfield of London tried to exclude her and the society from his diocese. Some of the clergy who might have been expected to support her, such as John Mason Neale, William John Butler, and Arthur Stanton, were in fact critical of her, especially of her independence of the parish clergy and her reputed ambition to become superior-general of all religious communities in England. 
Lydia Sellon undoubtedly asserted her authority over the sisters and it is probably true that there were no formal chapters or elections of novices in her lifetime. The oldest sister at Ascot Priory stated, 'We are a despotic monarchy without a Parliament' (Gill, 153). Nevertheless it was no small achievement to establish the sisterhood and to organize and direct its many works in the face of a barrage of criticism and in an atmosphere of such mistrust. In 1852 pamphlets were published for and against her. She refused to defend herself in print but her father, who never wavered in his support of her, published in 1852 'Miss Sellon and the Sisters of Mercy: a contradiction of the alleged acts of cruelty exercised by Miss Sellon', a full refutation of the allegations against her. A surprising tribute was paid to her by Wordsworth, who dedicated one of his last sonnets to her at the time of the bishop's public inquiry. 
Much of the society's work was unseen and done for people who could not make their gratitude public. The work which received most recognition was the sisters' heroic nursing. A few sisters were sent to work under Florence Nightingale during the Crimean War but they had already distinguished themselves during a serious outbreak of cholera in Plymouth in 1849 which lasted almost six months. Mother Lydia immediately volunteered the help of her sisters, stating that 'the proper place for Sisters of Mercy is amongst the sick and dying' (Liddon, 199). One of the local papers acknowledged 'Nothing can exceed the zeal and devotion of this lady and the other Sisters' (Williams, 52). Another cholera epidemic in the East End of London in 1866 prompted her to write to 'The Times' appealing for funds to establish an emergency hospital there. She took over an empty warehouse and staffed it with her own sisters and sisters from other communities. Father Ignatius and two of his Benedictine novices also helped. Mother Kate of St Saviour's Priory, Haggerston, met Mother Lydia at this time and described her as 'a most striking person, with commanding gestures, and a peculiarly imperative wave of a very well shaped white hand' (Warburton, 85). In 1870, when smallpox broke out in east London, Mother Lydia again sent sisters to help with nursing and the convalescent hospital at Ascot Priory came into its own. There were so many patients that some had to be accommodated in tents in the grounds. Mother Lydia was largely responsible for planning and directing everything although she was at the time threatened with blindness and so weak that she had to be carried about in a chair. 
Lydia Sellon's health seems never to have been very strong. She had a stroke in 1861 which partially paralysed her for a time, and another in 1872 which left her right arm permanently paralysed. A third stroke when she was staying at Osborne House, West Malvern, Worcestershire, made her unable to swallow. She died there on 20 November 1876. Her body was taken to Ascot Priory, near Bracknell, Berkshire, and on 29 November she was buried in the graveyard there. 


@@@@@


doc= 25061


Sellyng, Richard (d. 1467), poet, wrote a poem entitled 'Evidens to be ware and Gode Counsayle', followed by 'An Vocation til Oure Lady', which exist uniquely in BL, Harley MS 7333, folio 36a. 
These rhyme-royal poems Sellyng claims to have written 'when age was come' and he submits the work in a conclusion of six couplets to John Shirley 'for to amende where it is a-misse' (Baugh, 179-81). Shirley's introduction describes him as 'that honourable squier', and a Richard Sellyng, esquire, figures in the records of the period. He may be identified with the Richard Sellyng who before 1432 was resident in Baconsthorpe, Norfolk, with his wife, Joanna, the widow of Sir William Bardolf. This Richard Sellyng conveyed Bernham's manor and the manor of Drayton to Sir John Fastolf, and Fastolf speaks of him in the Paston letters. Sellyng is recorded as the executor of Joanna's will in 1435, and through her he acquired the castle and lordship of Sangatte near Calais; she may have died some years earlier, however, for by 1429-30 a Richard Sellyng was married to Alice, widow of Sir John Wiltshire. He was probably also the Richard Sellyng, esquire, who took military service at Calais between 1434 and 1436; if true, this may have been where he first met John Shirley. By the latter part of the decade Sellyng was probably in Kent, where he appears as the husband of a third wife, Elizabeth Brockhill, only daughter and heir of Thomas Brockhill, in 1438. The couple had one son, John, born 'c'.1441. Long 'broken with age and totally blind' ('CPR', '1452-61', 242), Sellyng died on 16 May 1467. An edition of 'Evidens to be ware' was published in 1940 by A. C. Baugh. 


@@@@@


doc= 25062


Selered (d. 746), a descendant of a brother of Saeberht; 


@@@@@


doc= 25063


Selbach (d. 730), a son of Ferchar Fota, began a twenty-three-year reign as overking. His brother Ainfcellach, Fiannamail's victim, is not heard of again until 719. After four violent ends to reigns in as many years, Selbach's reign seems like a period of stability; nevertheless, the annals record several armed conflicts, against members of the old royal family or against kinsmen of his own. In 701 he destroyed the Lorne fortress of Dunolly, and in 714 he rebuilt it. In 712 he besieged a place in the south of Kintyre, perhaps Dunaverty. In the autumn of 719 he fought against his brother Ainfcellach, last heard of in 698, who was killed in the battle. Soon after, in a battle at sea, Selbach was beaten by Dunchad Becc and the Cenel nGabrain. There were also battles against the Britons in 704, 711, and 717, in which Selbach is not actually named. 
In 723 Selbach adopted the clerical habit, and the overkingship of the Dal Riata, together with the kingship of Lorne, evidently passed to his son 


@@@@@


doc= 25064


Selwyn, Sir Charles Jasper (1813-1869), judge, was the fourth and youngest son of William Selwyn (1775-1855), legal writer, and his wife, Laetitia Frances, 'nee' Kynaston (died 1842). The brother of George Augustus Selwyn (1809-1878) and William Selwyn (1806-1875), he was born at Church Row, Hampstead, Middlesex, on 13 October 1813. He was educated at Ealing, at Eton College, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, of which he was successively scholar and fellow. He graduated BA (1836), MA (1839), and LLD (1862). He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 27 January 1840, practised chiefly before the master of the rolls, and amassed a large fortune. As a counsel he was not very brilliant, but he got up his cases with singular accuracy and was listened to with great attention by the court. He served as commissary to the University of Cambridge from 1855 to 1858, took silk on 7 April 1856, and in the same year was made a bencher of his inn. He entered parliament as member for Cambridge University in April 1859, and sat for that constituency until 1868. He was a staunch Conservative and a committed churchman, remarkable for polished elocution and a firm but conciliatory tone. He spoke on a variety of subjects, notably opposing the 'Ecclesiastical Commission Bill' on 6 June 1860. Selwyn became solicitor-general in Lord Derby's administration on 18 July 1867, and was knighted on 3 August. Disraeli appointed him a lord justice of appeal on 8 February 1868, and he was named a privy councillor on 28 March. As a judge, he proved himself considerate and patient. 
Selwyn was twice married: first, in 1856, to Hester, fifth daughter of J. G. Ravenshaw, chairman of the East India Company, and widow of Thomas Dowler MD; second, on 2 April 1869, to Catherine Rosalie, daughter of Colonel Godfrey T. Greene and widow of the Revd Henry Dupuis, vicar of Richmond. His two marriages produced a son and two daughters. Selwyn, in conjunction with L. F. Selwyn, wrote in 1847 'Annals of the Diocese of New Zealand'. He died at Pagoda House, Richmond, Surrey, on 11 August 1869, and was buried in Nunhead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25065


Selwyn, George Augustus (1719-1791), wit and politician, was born on 11 August 1719 and baptized at Chislehurst, Kent, on 25 August, the second son of the three children of John Selwyn (1688-1751) of Matson, near Gloucester, and Mary (1690/91-1777), daughter of General Thomas Farrington of Chislehurst. Selwyn's father was the son of William Selwyn, governor of Jamaica (1703-4), and served as the aide-de-camp to the duke of Marlborough, MP for Gloucester between 1734 and 1751 and as treasurer of Queen Caroline's pensions before his death on 6 November 1751. His mother, who also served the queen as a woman of the bedchamber, was described by Lord Hervey as 'a simple cunning woman... the only... about the Court who loved Sir Robert Walpole' (J. Hervey, 'Memoirs', ed. R. S. Sedgwick, 1952, 196). It was at her house at Cleveland Court, St James's, Westminster, that Walpole and his secretary of state, Viscount Townshend, had earlier come to blows in a contest satirized in act II, scene X of John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera'. Mary Selwyn died on 6 November 1777 aged eighty-six. 
In 1732 Selwyn entered Eton College, where his contemporaries included several lifelong friends, the politician Richard, second Baron Edgcumbe, the poet Thomas Gray, and the memoirist Horace Walpole. He matriculated at Hart Hall, Oxford, on 1 December 1739 but left the university to undertake a European tour during 1742-3 before returning to Oxford in late 1744 or early 1745. An offensive gesture in a tavern, which observers interpreted as mocking the holy communion, prompted the end of his university career soon after. By then, however, Selwyn's financial security was assured. Five years earlier he had received the first of several lucrative sinecures, the office of clerk of the irons and surveyor of the meltings of the mint, worth, together with his father's allowance, $220 per annum. The early death of his elder brother John, MP for Whitchurch, in June 1751 followed by that of his father in November led to Selwyn's inheritance of the family estate at Matson and a parliamentary interest which allowed him to nominate both members for Ludgershall, Wiltshire. From 1747 he himself occupied one of these seats until he took over as MP for Gloucester at the general election of 1754. For the next twenty-four years he offered, at a price, the Ludgershall seats to each incoming administration until his defeat at Gloucester in 1780 led to a return to his former constituency. Further income was obtained from the acquisition of three additional lifelong sinecures -- the posts of registrar of court of chancery in Barbados (from 1753), paymaster of the board of works (from 1755 until its abolition in 1782), and two years later the surveyor-generalship of crown lands. 
Selwyn's parliamentary performance proved remarkable only for its non-existence. During his forty-four years in the house he did not speak on a single occasion. At best a detached observer of parliamentary affairs, he was otherwise a sleeping partner, prone to slumber while in the chamber. As a result, his sporadic displays of political energy were used by more active members as an indication of the severity or urgency of a particular issue, notably the fate of Barbados during the American War of Independence. But as this example shows, self-interest was never far behind any cause for which Selwyn roused himself. His political companions included a number of individuals, among them James Hare, Charles James Fox, and the fifth earl of Carlisle, who also made up a social circle in which he proved far more lively. Selwyn himself declared that his only political master was the king, at whose disposal he claimed to lay his parliamentary interest, and whose lead he followed when, voting against Fox's 'East India Bill' in November 1783, he offered his one and only act of defiance against the ministry of the day. 
Selwyn came to life in London club society, in which he was a noted conversationalist, a dedicated gambler, and a celebrated humorist. Commenting during the last decade of Selwyn's life the memoirist Nathaniel Wraxall spoke of him possessing 'an infinite wit. He had indeed succeeded to Philip, earl of Chesterfield's reputation for 'bon-mots''. The key to Selwyn's success appears to have been the droll manner of his delivery. Horace Walpole remarked on the effective contrast between his 'demure' demeanour and biting witticisms (Walpole, 'Corr.', 35.170). For Wraxall the impact of his comments was 'greatly augmented by the listless and drowsy manner in which he uttered them, for he always seemed half asleep' (H. B. Wheatley, ed., 'Historical and Posthumous Memoirs of his Own Time by Sir Nathaniel William Wraxhall', 5 vols., 1884, 2.289). Certainly, lists of his most celebrated comments (see Jesse, 1.16-22), the majority of which have not stood the test of time, suggest that Selwyn's wit owed more to its performance than to its content. Rival wags rewarded his efforts with one further specious sinecure: receiver-general of waif and stray jokes. 
Less light-hearted was Selwyn's interest in executions, at which he was a regular attender. In 1757, for example, he went to Paris to watch the dismemberment of the would-be royal assassin Damiens. His fascination with the moment of death and the resultant corpse was widely commented on within his circle. 'The next time Mr Selwyn calls shew him up', commented Henry, first Baron Holland, on his deathbed: 'if I am alive I shall be delighted to see him, and if I am dead he will be delighted to see me' (Jesse, 1.5). After his own death, Selwyn's peculiar pastime was vigorously debated by his friends in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'; the biographer Philip Thicknesse, for instance, downplayed Selwyn's association with the macabre, which he attributed to gossip by Sir Charles Hanbury Williams and Lord Chesterfield ('GM', 299, 705). 
In later life Selwyn suffered from gout and dropsy, and he died from a 'violent urinary complaint' ('GM', 61.94-5) on 25 January 1791 at his Westminster home in Cleveland Court, St James's. Though unmarried, he was the adopted father of Maria Emily Fagnani, later Maria Emily Seymour-Conway, marchioness of Hertford (1770/71-1856) ['see under 'Conway, Francis Ingram-Seymour-, second marquess of Hertford], the daughter of the Marchesa Fagnani. Rumours circulated as to whether Selwyn was the child's natural father, though it is now widely accepted that the father was one of Selwyn's closest friends, the rakish William Douglas, fourth duke of Queensberry. Certainly contemporaries like Lady Louisa Stuart were sceptical as to Selwyn's ability to enter a relationship: 'George Selwyn in love, George Selwyn gallant, were thoughts that never entered any one's head' (Cannon, 3.421). As well as to Maria (known as Mie-Mie), who later married Francis, marquess of Hertford, Selwyn developed a fierce attachment to several other children, including offspring of the earls of Coventry and Carlisle. In his will he left $30,000 and a house in Piccadilly to his adopted daughter; other bequests of 100 guineas each went to his nephews, Charles Townshend and Ebrow Woodcock. Following his death Selwyn was praised and defended by friends like Walpole -- who wrote of the 'goodness of his heart and nature' (ibid.) -- while the Revd Dr John Warner complimented a 'Social wit which, never kindling strife, Blazed in the small sweet courtesies of life'. On reflection, however, theirs are views with which it is difficult to agree. Narcissistic, self-serving, indolent, and prone to once barbed and now flat commentaries, Selwyn was a man of his day whose reputation has, deservedly, dated and withered over time. 


@@@@@


doc= 25066


Selwyn, George Augustus (1809-1878), bishop of New Zealand and bishop of Lichfield, was born on 5 April 1809 at Church Row, Hampstead, Middlesex. He was the second of the four sons of William Selwyn (1775-1855), barrister, and Laetitia Frances Kynaston (died 1842), and brother of Sir Charles Jasper Selwyn (1813-1869) and of William Selwyn (1806-1875). He went when aged seven to Dr Nicholas's Preparatory School in Ealing, where J. H. Newman (the future cardinal) and his brother Francis were fellow pupils. Selwyn then went to Eton College, where he acquired a reputation both as a scholar and as an athlete, and in 1827 he proceeded as a scholar to St John's College, Cambridge. A rowing blue in 1829, he took his BA in 1831, coming second in the classical tripos, and his MA in 1834, and was elected a fellow of his college. 
After Cambridge, Selwyn taught at Eton while employed as private tutor to two sons of the earl of Powys. Ordained deacon in June 1833 he was briefly honorary curate at Boveney; ordained priest a year later, likewise on Trinity Sunday and at St George's, Hanover Square, London, he settled as curate to the vicar of Windsor, Isaac Gossett. He broke off his engagement to Anna, daughter of Eton's headmaster John Keate, and subsequently married Sarah Harriet (1809-1907), daughter of Sir John Richardson, on 25 June 1839. Of their four children, only the two eldest sons survived, William and John Richardson Selwyn. 
At Windsor Selwyn's practical talent for organizing church life and his preoccupation with church order began to show. Highly critical of whig plans for reforming the Church of England and taking his cue from W. E. Gladstone, he circulated privately in 1838 his pamphlet 'Are Cathedral Institutions Useless?' He argued against disendowment and for the revision of cathedral statutes based on his knowledge of Ely. He wanted the reinvigoration of cathedrals under episcopal leadership, in order to create diocesan centres for training ministers, teaching, providing for diocesan councils or synods, organizing missionary work, and assisting the poor. Reflecting the influence of the early Oxford Movement, these principles guided him subsequently in both New Zealand and Lichfield. 
At this time the need for more colonial bishoprics was acutely felt by church leaders concerned to combat the global spread of nonconformity and Roman Catholicism. With the establishment of British rule in 1840 and the likely rapid expansion of white settlement, New Zealand's requirement was rated most highly. Although his brother William refused the new diocese, George Selwyn accepted readily and was consecrated at Lambeth on 17 October 1841; he took his Cambridge DD degree the following week, and sailed from Plymouth on Boxing day. 
In New Zealand resources never permitted Selwyn to build the Norman-style cathedral which the Camden Society at Cambridge had advised him was appropriate to Maori understanding. But his foundation of St John's College, with its school 'to be conducted upon the plan ('mutatis mutandis') of Eton' and its provision for training clergy, first at Waimate and from 1844 at Auckland, gave expression for a decade to his wish for an active diocesan centre. Selwyn spent five years becoming familiar with New Zealand. An imposing, energetic man, he travelled extensively, appointed archdeacons to help him, and convened synods of his clergy in 1844 and 1847. At the latter gathering, he issued his primary charge defining the principal issues facing his diocese. 
Selwyn was convinced that missions should be proper church institutions under episcopal leadership, rather than societies of lay enthusiasts, and he supported the Tractarian ideal of the 'missionary bishop'. If this made his relationship with the Church Missionary Society (CMS) sometimes difficult, those problems were exacerbated by misunderstanding and difficulties of communication with England. He was soon in dispute with the society at home over questions of missionary placements and ordination. Locally he was drawn into a bitter wrangle with some CMS missionaries, which culminated in the society's dismissal of Henry Williams. Selwyn's part arose less from differences over authority than from his thoughtlessness, and from a concept of missionary work and desire for volunteers which led him to support Governor Grey's wish to reduce missionaries' private landholdings. 'The position of a Missionary in New Zealand requires his undivided attention to the natives... very little benefit has resulted from the combination of Agriculture with Missionary duties.... It is seldom that much good results in England from the union in the same person of the office of Clergyman and Landlord. (Evans, 38-9)' Selwyn's anti-Erastianism also showed itself in his persistent search both for the funds and for the endowments which would make the New Zealand church self-sufficient and for ways of increasing its powers of self-government. His discovery in 1854 that no legal obstacles prevented the holding of diocesan synods in colonial sees opened the way, in the absence of resistance from the imperial government, for colonial clergy and laity to meet and to regulate the affairs of their churches. Having seized the opportunity, Selwyn finally completed a draft constitution for the Church of New Zealand in 1857 and secured its adoption at the first general synod in 1859. Although he was opposed to disestablishment in Britain, by the late 1860s this movement in New Zealand had accomplished the final separation of church and state. Not only did other colonial churches follow this example, but support for Selwyn's practice from bishops in Australia, Canada, and South Africa contributed much to the subsequent development of the church both in England and throughout the Anglican communion. 
The same relentless activity characterized Selwyn's approach to the indigenous peoples of New Zealand and the western Pacific. Committed to a fundamental racial equality, Selwyn insisted on a liberal interpretation of the treaty of Waitangi, under which British authority had been acquired, and he was from the beginning a staunch defender of Maori rights, especially those of land sale and tenure. For this he was frequently attacked by settlers and their supporters in Britain such as Joseph Hume and J. A. Roebuck, especially from the time of the northern war of 1845-6. Nevertheless he constantly mediated in both inter-Maori disputes and conflicts between Maori and white settlers (Pakeha). Requiring all his clergy to learn Maori, as he had done on his first voyage from England, Selwyn was responsible for the revision of the Maori 'Bible' and prayer book. Although criticized by some for delaying the ordination of Maori converts, in consequence of his expectations of the same standards for them as for European candidates in matters of behaviour and scholarship, there is little ground for doubting his conviction of the urgent necessity for a native ministry. That ministry began to emerge early in the 1860s but, along with Selwyn's attempts to promote Maori welfare, rights, and education, it was scarcely strong enough to survive the impact of the wars of the 1860s. This left the church's work among the Maori in ruins, though in many places Selwyn's personal reputation was only enhanced by his unselfish assistance of the wars' victims. 
Selwyn's work with the Pacific islanders rested on the regular voyages he began in 1847. Exploiting an error in his letters patent, which extended his diocese as far as latitude 34 degree N, he systematically visited the islands and brought young islanders to St John's for schooling, returning them at regular intervals to instruct their own people. He gained support from the Australasian bishops' conference in 1850 for his oversight of the Melanesian mission, raised $10,000 as an endowment for a bishopric during his visit to Britain in 1854, and finally secured the consecration of his friend J. C. Patteson as bishop of Melanesia in 1861. There, as in New Zealand itself, persuading English church leaders and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG) of the need for the subdivision of his huge see went hand in hand with Selwyn's attempts to secure the leadership of the infant church in the hands of like-minded friends. His success was reflected in the appointment of bishops C. J. Abraham, Henry Harper, and Edmund Hobhouse. Towards nonconformists he was civil and co-operative -- for instance, in negotiating missionary spheres of activity with the presbyterians and the London Missionary Society. But his sympathy was limited by what he saw as their rejection of Anglicanism's comprehensiveness and the opportunity it offered for Christian unity. 
At the first Lambeth conference, summoned in September 1867 to address colonial issues, Selwyn played a leading role in asserting the freedom of colonial churches to link themselves voluntarily with the Church of England. While in Britain he was admitted honorary DCL by Oxford University and, mindful of his own insistence on the principle of clerical obedience to ecclesiastical superiors, he very reluctantly accepted episcopal appointment to the diocese of Lichfield. Enthroned on 9 January 1868 he returned to New Zealand for a brief farewell. 
At Lichfield the mark of the missionary bishop was soon made. The cathedral's statutes were revised and the laity further involved in diocesan affairs, and the theological college's work was expanded. Closer relations with the Canadian and American churches were fostered by Selwyn's visits in 1871 and 1874, and home missions as well as interest in overseas missionaries were greatly encouraged as a stimulus to the life of the whole church. With no more time for middle-class comforts or conventions than for finer points in theological debate, Selwyn was ever the active reformer and invigorator. He died on 11 April 1878 at the bishop's palace, Lichfield. For Gladstone, who attended his burial in the grounds of Lichfield Cathedral both as a lifelong friend and as godfather to his eldest son, he was 'one of the band of great Bishops' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 16 April 1878). Selwyn College, Cambridge, was erected by subscription in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 25067


Selwyn, John Richardson (1844-1898), bishop of Melanesia, the younger son of George Augustus Selwyn (1809-1878), first bishop of New Zealand, and Sarah Harriet (died 1907), daughter of Sir John Richardson, was born on 20 May 1844 at Te Waimate, in the Bay of Islands, New Zealand. He went to England in 1854, and was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge. A noted oarsman but a mediocre scholar, he graduated BA with a third class in the classical tripos in 1866; he proceeded MA in 1870. In 1867 he visited his father in New Zealand, intending to enter the legal profession after his return; but his father's example and the influence of Bishop John Coleridge Patteson decided him to seek ordination in the English church. He was ordained deacon on Trinity Sunday 1869 by his father, who was then bishop of Lichfield. His first curacy was at nearby Alrewas, where he remained for a year and a half. He then acted as curate-in-charge at St George's, Wolverhampton, where the vicar was absent, having quarrelled with his parishioners. Selwyn's tact and energy resulted in his becoming vicar of St George's, but on hearing of Bishop Patteson's death in 1871 he offered himself as a missionary to the Melanesian mission. He married Clara Long, 'nee' Innes, on 16 January 1872. In February 1873 they set sail for Melanesia, and reached Norfolk Island in October 1873. An attack of rheumatism 'en route' was Selwyn's first warning of the debilitating illness he would suffer in later life. 
Selwyn's demonstrated ability, family legacy, and education made him an obvious choice to succeed Bishop Patteson. On 18 February 1877 he was consecrated bishop of Melanesia at Nelson, New Zealand. In December 1877 his wife, who had rejoined him after a visit to England, died in childbirth, and in the next year he lost his father. Despite these blows Selwyn persevered in developing the Melanesian mission along the lines pioneered by his father. Well-educated young gentlemen of pronounced high-church principles formed the backbone of his missionary force. Close ties were maintained with Eton, Oxford, and Cambridge. The centrepiece of the mission was its college on Norfolk Island to which young Melanesian islanders were carried on the mission schooner, 'Southern Cross', for short periods of instruction. Although it was not Selwyn's express policy to encourage British territorial annexations in the south Pacific, his links to influential circles inevitably gave his mission a quasi-political character which differentiated it from other evangelical operations in the region. 
While visiting England, Selwyn made a second marriage, to Annie Catherine, 'nee' Mort, daughter of Thomas Sutcliffe Mort, merchant, on 11 August 1885, and they returned to his diocese. In 1889, however, his continuing rheumatic afflictions compelled him to return again to England, and he arrived home in 1890. Surgery on his right leg left him permanently disabled, which forced him to give up his work in Melanesia. After recovering his health he was asked to become master of Selwyn College, Cambridge, a position he held until his death at Cambridge on 12 February 1898. 
It was largely through Selwyn's influence that the home mission named Cambridge House was started in London. Selwyn was also unusually successful in encouraging Cambridge undergraduates to take up missionary work, both in England and overseas. 


@@@@@


doc= 25068


Selwyn, William (1775-1855), legal writer, was the second son of William Selwyn KC (died 1817), treasurer of Lincoln's Inn in 1793, and Frances Elizabeth, daughter of Dr John Dod of Woodford, Essex. George Augustus Selwyn, the wit, was his father's first cousin. William was educated at Eton College and St John's and Trinity colleges, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1797, being first chancellor's medallist in classics and senior optime in the mathematical tripos; he proceeded MA in 1800. He married, in 1801, Laetitia Frances (died 1842), youngest daughter of Thomas Kynaston of Witham, Essex. They had six children: William Selwyn (1806-1875); George Augustus Selwyn (1809-1878); Thomas Kynaston Selwyn (1812-1834) who, educated at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, was author of 'Eton in 1829-1830: a Diary of Boating and other Events, Written in Greek', edited with a memoir by Dr Edmond Warre (1903); Sir Charles Jasper Selwyn (1813-1869); Laetitia Frances Selwyn; and Frances Elizabeth Selwyn, who married George Peacock, dean of Ely. 
Selwyn was admitted a student at Lincoln's Inn in 1797, and called to the bar on 24 November 1807; he was elected treasurer in 1840. He joined the western circuit, was recorder of Portsmouth from 1819 to 1829, and took silk in Trinity vacation 1827. Soon after the marriage of Queen Victoria he was chosen to assist the prince consort in his legal studies. Selwyn was most noted for his famous 'Abridgment of the Law of Nisi prius' (3 vols., 1806-8), a clear and well-arranged summary of the principal topics of private law, which reached a thirteenth edition in 1869. He also collaborated with George Maule in 'Reports of Cases Argued and Determined in the Court of King's Bench' (2 vols., 1814). 
In later life Selwyn became a chronic valetudinarian, and lived in retirement at Pagoda House, Kew Road, Richmond, Surrey, an estate inherited from his father in 1817. He died on 25 July 1855 while on a visit to Tunbridge Wells, and was buried near there in the churchyard of Rusthall. 


@@@@@


doc= 25069


Selwyn, William (1806-1875), Church of England clergyman, eldest son of William Selwyn (1775-1855) and Laetitia Frances (died 1842), youngest daughter of Thomas Kynaston of Witham, Essex, was born on 19 February 1806. George Augustus Selwyn (1809-1878) and Sir Charles Jasper Selwyn (1813-1869) were his brothers. He was educated under Keate at Eton College from 1823 and entered St John's College, Cambridge, in October 1824. In the following three years in succession he gained Sir William Browne's medal for a Greek ode, and in 1826 carried off all the Browne medals. In the same year he was Craven scholar. He graduated in 1828 as sixth wrangler, and also senior classic and first chancellor's medallist. His subsequent degrees were MA in 1831, BD in 1850, and DD in 1864. 
In March 1829 Selwyn was made a fellow of St John's, and in the same year gained the Norrisian prize. He was ordained deacon by the bishop of Ely in 1829 and priest by the bishop of Rochester in 1831. In 1831 he was presented by the duke of Rutland to the rectory of Branstone, Leicestershire. He married on 22 August 1832 Juliana Elizabeth, eldest daughter of George Cooke of Carr House, Doncaster. In 1846 he exchanged Branstone for the vicarage of Melbourne, Cambridgeshire, in the gift of the dean and chapter of Ely. He held Melbourne until 1853. In 1833 he was made a canon residentiary of Ely, an office which he retained until his death. When his brother-in-law Dean Peacock died he was offered the deanery of Ely. He declined it as it would have involved the resignation of the Lady Margaret professorship to which he was elected in 1855, having beaten his chief competitor, Harold Browne, by the casting vote of the chairman. 'It is Harold the conqueror this time, not William,' was his remark to his opponent, under the impression that the election had gone the other way. He insisted on setting apart out of his own income the yearly sum of $700 for the better endowment of the Norrisian professorship during Harold Browne's tenure of it, and after that for furthering the study of theology in Cambridge. Selwyn lived to see the new divinity school erected with the funds thus raised. In 1857 he was appointed Ramsden preacher and in 1859 was chaplain-in-ordinary to the queen. He served on the committee to revise the Authorized Version of the 'Old Testament'. He was a fellow of the Royal Society from 1866, honorary joint curator of Lambeth Library from 1872, and president of the Cambridge Philosophical Society in 1867. 
Selwyn had a strong interest in church-state relations, taking legal action to try to prevent Irish disestablishment. His major concern was the position of the cathedral in the church. He questioned the centralizing tendency of the ecclesiastical commission, and its emphasis upon the parish, publishing a pamphlet in 1840 entitled 'An Attempt to investigate the True Principles of Cathedral Reform'. He believed in the capability of the church to reform itself through its councils, notably the chapter, when elevated to a role of bishops' council. In 1852 he was named a member of the cathedrals commission, and the report of 1854 was understood to be largely his work. He was also the moving cause of the rebuilding of his own college chapel, for which purpose funds had been accumulating under the bequest of a late master. 
In appearance Selwyn was tall and spare, having been a keen oarsman in his youth. In Michaelmas term 1866, when riding along the Trumpington Road, he was thrown from his horse, owing to the carelessness, it was said, of an undergraduate who was riding on the wrong side of the road. In a copy of Latin elegiacs, dated 20 November, which appeared in 'The Times' of 15 December 1866, the sufferer apostrophized the 'juvenum rapidissime' in lines of mingled humour and pathos. He never wholly recovered from the effects of the fall and died at Vine Cottage, Cambridge, on 24 April 1875, being buried at Ely on 29 April. He left a widow but no children. Selwyn published letters, speeches, sermons, and works on 'Old Testament' criticism. 


@@@@@


doc= 25070


Sempill, Francis, of Beltrees (c.1617-1682), poet and wit, the son of Robert Sempill of Beltrees, Lochwinnoch, Renfrewshire, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Sir Thomas Lyon of Auldbar, was the descendant of a family closely connected with the Stuart kings and with letters. He married his cousin Jean Campbell of Ardkinglas at Lochgoilhead, Argyll, on 3 April 1655, and succeeded his father at some time between 1660 (when Robert witnessed a baptism) and 1669, when Francis is found acting as laird of Beltrees. In 1677 he was appointed sheriff-depute of Renfrewshire, from which it may be deduced that, like his father, he had studied law. In the course of his duties he arrested a Walter Scott, 'a noted leader of conventicles and such-like disorders' (Wodrow, 2, appx, 8), and in the ensuing tumult was seriously wounded. 
Francis is believed to have inherited the Beltrees estate embarrassed, as a result of his father's participation in the civil war. In keeping with the family motto, 'In loyaltie', he supported the Stuarts enthusiastically but was increasingly forced to alienate land, his financial problems having been (in his own view) exacerbated by the indemnity granted to the whig rebels after the Bothwell Bridge rising (1679), which prevented him from being compensated for his part in suppressing the revolt. By 1678 the superiority of Beltrees was sold to Thomas Crawfurd of Cartsburn, and in 1680 Sempill and his wife resigned their liferent of the remaining lands of Thridpairt to their son Robert, who undertook to pay his father's debts of 800 merks and $800 Scots. This presumably cleared the embarrassments which had forced Francis to take refuge in the debtors' sanctuary of the palace of Holyrood, Edinburgh, whence he was rescued in 1680 by James, duke of Albany (later James VII and II), an episode celebrated in 'The Banishment of Poverty' (1680). 
Sempill's poems were not (as far as is known) published in his own lifetime, and most of those attributed to him appeared first as anonymous broadsheets. Family tradition credits him with an early talent for improvisation. Motherwell, in his introduction to 'The Harp of Renfrewshire' (1819), writes, 'It is to be regretted that the manuscripts of Francis Sempill are irretrievably lost. They fell into hands which knew not their value, and it is to be feared out of them they will never be recovered' (Motherwell, xx). Some loose sheets containing poems attributed to him were given to James Paterson, editor of 'The Poems of the Sempills of Beltrees' (1849), by H. G. Gardner, a descendant of the Beltrees family: it is presumably on the authority of these that Paterson ascribed to him 'The Blythsome Wedding' (also claimed on poor evidence for Sir William Scott of Thirlestane), 'A Discourse between Law and Conscience', an early version of 'Auld Lang Syne', 'She Raise and Loot Me In' (also attributed to Thomas D'Urfey), and 'Maggie Lauder', among others. 
James Johnson attributed the dissemination of Sempill's ballads in England to his friendship with one of Cromwell's officers in Glasgow, but the story, though charming, is unnecessary. Sempill, like other poets of his time, was writing in a pan-British culture in which songs and their settings moved easily across the border in both directions (it is noticeable that 'The Banishment of Poverty', probably the only poem of which his authorship has not been challenged, is set to an English tune, 'The Last Good Night'). The poems ascribed to him give evidence of wit, lightness of touch, and sense of rhythm. 
Sempill died suddenly in his house in Paisley on 12 March 1682. The only physical description we have of him is his reference in 'July the Nine-and-Twenty Day' to his own 'glied eye and crooked snout'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25071


Sempill, Hew, twelfth Lord Sempill (1688-1746), army officer, was born after 16 May 1688, probably at Castle Sempill, Renfrewshire, the fifth son of Francis Abercromby (1654-1703) of Fetterneir, Aberdeenshire, who was created Lord Glasfoord for life on 5 July 1685, and his wife, Anne, 'suo jure' Lady Sempill (died 1695), ninth holder of the title. The children of the marriage (five sons and a daughter) all carried their mother's surname. 
Sempill entered the army as an adjutant in the 26th regiment of foot (the Cameronians) on 1 December 1708. He was made an ensign in July 1709 and served at the battle of Malplaquet that year. He was promoted captain on 12 July 1712, and placed on half pay in 1713, but he returned to active service by a supplementary commission of 26 September 1715 as captain of a newly raised company in his old regiment. 
Sempill was promoted major on 5 April 1718 and in Manchester on 13 May 1718 he married Sarah (died 1749), coheir and daughter of Nathaniel Gaskell of Manchester. They had five sons and six daughters. Although he succeeded to the peerage on the death of his brother John, eleventh Lord Sempill, in February 1727 he remained in the army. After twenty-three years' service with the Cameronians he transferred to the 19th regiment of foot (the Green Howards) as lieutenant-colonel on 12 July 1731. Lord Sempill sold the estates of Eliotstoun and Castle Sempill in 1727 and in 1741 bought the estate of North Bar, also in Renfrewshire. 
On 14 January 1741 Sempill succeeded John Lindsay, twentieth earl of Crawford, as colonel of the Black Watch, then the 43rd foot. In 1743 the regiment, originally raised to keep watch in the highlands, received orders to proceed south to England; and when a rumour reached the soldiers in London that they were to be sent to the West Indies, they immediately began to return to Scotland, but were overtaken and compelled to turn back. Their destination was Flanders, and there, under Lord Sempill, they specially distinguished themselves in the defence of the town of Aeth when it was besieged by the French. 
On 25 April 1745 Sempill was appointed colonel of the 25th foot (the King's Own Scottish Borderers); he was present at Fontenoy later that summer. At the battle of Culloden on 16 April 1746 his regiment occupied a place in the second line on the left wing where it was heavily engaged in repulsing the charge of the Jacobite army. He was appointed governor of Barbados in 1746 but did not take office. 
Sempill died (following an operation on his arm) at Aberdeen on 25 November 1746, while in command of the troops stationed there. He was buried in West Church, Aberdeen, on 1 December. His eldest son, John (died 1782), succeeded to the peerage. 


@@@@@


doc= 25072


Sempill, Hugh (1596-1654), mathematician, born in Craigevar in Scotland, was a nephew of Colonel William Sempill, soldier of fortune and political agent. He entered the Society of Jesus and was assigned to Toledo in 1615. Later he moved to Madrid, where he became the rector of the Scots College. In 1635 he wrote a mathematics treatise or, rather, a reference book, for use in the Imperial College, Madrid, and dedicated it to Philip IV: 'De mathematicis disciplinis, libri duodecim ad Philippum IV, Hispaniarum et Indiarum regem catholicum'. The book was published in Antwerp; errata were corrected in 1640 for pages 148-9. This is possibly Sempill's most important work; it is divided into twelve chapters, the first two being the most interesting. In chapter one he discusses the position of pure mathematics in relation to science. He gives a short historical account, with references to contemporary mathematicians, and then contrasts the views of Aristotle (which he follows) with more contemporaneous authors who cast doubts on the possibility of fitting mathematics as a science into the cadre of knowledge. In the second chapter he discusses mathematics from the aspect of its various applications. In the remaining chapters he considers: geometry and arithmetic, which are dealt with briefly; optics; statics, in which a variety of mechanical topics including pyrotechnics and automata are considered; music; cosmography; geography, in which he includes a discussion on the Americas, using Spanish as well as Latin in the heading of a table concerning rents of metropolitan churches and cathedrals; hydrography, air, atmosphere, the sunset, meteorites, volcanoes, and comets; astronomy, in which a reference is made to Copernicus's astronomical observations; astrology, in which he discusses licit and illicit astrology, and reproduces the papal bull of Sixtus V refuting astrology; and, in the last chapter, the calendar. The book ends with a large index, of over sixty pages. This section of the book may be a preliminary version of a 'Dictionarium mathematicum' of his, which was never published. 
In 1642 Sempill published, in Madrid, 'Experientia mathematica de compositione numerorum, linearum, quadratorum, &c.', in which he discusses basic algebra. Madrid's National Library possesses four more of his works in manuscript: 'Historia de Regimine Philippi IV'; 'Parecer sobre el riego de los prados de Aranjuez y lugares vecinos en tiempos de Felipe IV'; 'Parecer sobre las senales que se vieron en el cielo, ano 1637'; and 'Discurso contra los ministros codiciosos'. Sempill's significance lay in the scope of his desire to promote the application of mathematics to science. He died in Madrid on 29 September 1654. 


@@@@@


doc= 25073


Sempill, Sir James (1566?-1626), courtier and religious controversialist, was the eldest son of John Sempill (died 1579) and his wife, Mary Livingston ['see under 'Queen's Maries (act. 1548-1567)], daughter of Alexander, fifth Lord Livingstone, and grandson of Robert Sempill, third Lord Sempill (c.1505-1573x6). Both John and Mary Sempill were favourites of Mary, queen of Scots, from whom they received on 9 May 1565 the lands of Auchtermuchty in Fife and various properties in Ayrshire. In 1577 John Sempill confessed to, and was convicted of, participation in the conspiracy to assassinate the regent, the earl of Morton, in January that year. He was sentenced to death but was reprieved and imprisoned in Edinburgh; he died on 25 April 1579, soon after his release. James Sempill was named after the future James VI and I, who, though an infant, was named as his godfather. The two children were educated together under George Buchanan. Half a century later Sempill recalled that James was: 'the king of my birth, the master of my service, the father of my name, framer of my nature, and the Gamaliel of my education, at whose feet (no, at whose elbow and from whose mouth) I confess I have suckt the best of whatsoever may be thought good in me. (Sempill, sig. A2'v')' After this privileged start he completed his education at the University of St Andrews. 
In 1594 Sempill married Geillis (died 1618), daughter of George Elphinstone of Blythswood. They had five daughters, of whom Marion, Geillis, and Isobel were alive in 1618, and three sons, Robert, George, and William. When King James visited Paisley Abbey in 1617 Sempill prepared an oration which William, then aged nine, delivered before him in the great hall of the earl of Abercorn. But the boy was dead by September 1618, and George too died young. Sempill assisted James VI in preparing for the press his 'Basilikon Doron' (1599), and was presented with one of the seven copies printed; this he showed to the presbyterian minister Andrew Melville, who disliked the views on church policy expressed there and saw to it that they were the subject of public discussion. In 1599 Sempill was resident in London as an agent of James VI; shortly after his return in February 1600 he was made knight bachelor, and in October 1601 he was sent on an embassy to France, travelling through England, and onwards by way of Dover. In February 1603 the king, in token of his services, presented him with 'a jewel of great beauty and value', which had belonged to Mary, queen of Scots ('Reg. PCS', 6.533-4). 
After his return from France Sempill seems to have been often at the court of King James in London. When Andrew Melville was imprisoned in 1606 he looked to Sempill as the man to effect his release. Melville remained in the Tower of London but his conditions improved. In 1610 he sought Sempill's advice as to how to further advance his case, revealing his intention to offer his services as tutor to the young Prince Henry, and confiding to his nephew James Melville that Sempill: 'takes a warm interest in my studies as well as in the welfare of my person, and what is more, I am persuaded that he takes a warm interest in the cause. The court does not contain a more religious man, one who unites greater modesty with greater genius, and a more matured judgment with more splendid accomplishments. In procuring for me a mitigation of my imprisonment, he has shewn, both by words and deeds, a constancy truly worthy of a Christian... thank him on my account; for he will not rest satisfied until he has effected my complete liberation. (McCrie, 410)' This may have overestimated Sempill's influence, but he was certainly a committed Calvinist. In 1618 he published at Middelburg 'Cassandra Scoticana to Cassander Anglicanus'. In 1619 he provided a defence of the divine ordination of tithes in 'Sacrilege Sacredly Handled', which included prefatory verses by Melville. The work, Sempill claimed, was twenty years old. Its publication was evidently occasioned by John Selden's 'History of Tithes', published in the same year, and Sempill countered the arguments of Selden and Joseph Scaliger. In 1622, at Melville's suggestion, he published a work against Tilenus, a former colleague of Melville at Sedan, who had become an Arminian. He translated from the Dutch a highly partisan anti-Catholic poem, 'The Pack-Mans Pater noster, or, A Dialogue betwixt a Chapman and a Priest' (1624). Sempill acquired property in Renfrewshire and Bute, and in Ireland, where he was granted the barony of Carbery, co. Cork, which passed to his eldest son. He died at his house at the Cross of Paisley in February 1626. 
Sir James's son 


@@@@@


doc= 25074


Sempill, Robert, third Lord Sempill (c.1505-1573x6), nobleman, was the elder son of William Sempill, second Lord Sempill (died 1552), and his first wife, Lady Margaret (died before February 1523), eldest daughter of Hugh Montgomery, first earl of Eglinton. The family lands formed the barony of Sempill in Renfrewshire, and in 1544, while Robert was still master of Sempill, his father granted him a charter of the office of sheriff of Renfrew. The following year he was rewarded with the bailiary of Paisley Abbey, after supporting its monks in a dispute with heretics. Captured by the English at the battle of Pinkie in 1547, he returned to Scotland on his release and became embroiled in a series of personal quarrels. He had a long-standing feud with the protestant Alexander Cunningham, fourth earl of Glencairn; on 9 April 1549 John Mure of Caldwell and several accomplices tried to assassinate him; and on 11 June that same year he killed William, Lord Crichton of Sanquhar, in the Edinburgh lodgings of James Hamilton, second earl of Arran, lord governor of Scotland and head of the house of Hamilton. Arrested and imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle, Sempill would have been executed, but managed to extricate himself because one of his daughters was the mistress of the influential John Hamilton, archbishop of St Andrews, Arran's half-brother. 
In the 1550s Sempill was a loyal supporter of Mary of Guise, queen dowager and from 1554 to 1560 regent of Scotland, in her struggle against the protestant lords of the congregation. By now feuding with Arran, Sempill attacked him in 1560, and as a result the lords of the west besieged and captured Castle Sempill. Sempill himself, however, had managed to escape to the safety of Dunbar Castle, which was garrisoned by the French force sent to help Mary of Guise. When Mary, queen of Scots, returned to Scotland in 1561 he gave her his support, and in the autumn of 1565 was one of the commanders of her army when she and her husband, Lord Darnley, rode against the rebellious earl of Moray and his forces in the chaseabout raid. 
Sempill was present at the baptism of Mary and Darnley's son, the future James VI, on 17 December 1566, and one of his own sons married Mary Livingston, one of the queen's four Maries. After the murder of Darnley in 1567, Sempill allied himself with the dead man's father, Matthew Stewart, thirteenth earl of Lennox, and saved the earl's life when he was the victim of an attack in Glasgow. Sempill's hatred of the Hamiltons provided a thread of continuity in his career which predisposed him to sympathize with Lennox, their hereditary enemy. As a conservative Roman Catholic he presumably disapproved of Mary's willingness to tolerate protestantism, and of her increasing involvement with the protestant James Hepburn, fourth earl of Bothwell, the man generally believed to be responsible for Darnley's death. On 12 April 1567 Sempill was a member of the assize which tried Bothwell for Darnley's murder, and on 15 June he commanded the vanguard of the army which opposed the queen at Carberry Hill. 
Sempill was one of the signatories of the act authorizing Mary's imprisonment at Lochleven, and when she escaped in 1568 he fought against her at the battle of Langside on 13 May. The following year, he and his old adversary Glencairn became lieutenants of the western parts, with instructions to crush all support for the queen, and in recognition of his efforts he received the gift of the abbey of Paisley. Still pursuing his feud with the earl of Arran, in 1570 he attacked and set fire to Arran's castle at Hamilton. Seized by some of the earl's men, he was imprisoned at Draffen and then in Argyll, but he was freed in 1571 and sat in parliament and on the privy council. On 2 July 1572 he was made lieutenant-general and justiciar of the sheriffdoms of Lanark and Renfrew. 
The following year Sempill became involved in an ecclesiastical dispute, when he tried to intrude Sir John Hamilton, a Roman Catholic priest, into the vicarage of Eastwood, and as a result he was both outlawed and excommunicated. He died between 1 August 1573 and 17 January 1576. With his first wife, Isabel, daughter of Sir William Hamilton of Sanquhar, he had four sons and two daughters, and with his second wife, Elizabeth Carlyle, he had another son. Sir William Sempill was probably his illegitimate son. His complicated career combined old-style personal feuding with public office, and his conservative support of the Roman Catholic church earned him the condemnation of John Knox, who called him 'a man sold under sin, an enemy to God' ('Works', 1.339). 


@@@@@


doc= 25075


Sempill, Robert (d. 1595?), poet and protestant controversialist, was active during the early years of James VI's reign. Sempill's birth date is unknown; his allusion (in 'Satirical Poems', no. 45) to 'Epistle 25' of Clement Marot (1495-1544) prompted the mistaken notion that he knew Marot personally, and was born 'c'.1530. Sempill's parentage is also unknown. Attempts to identify him with Robert, fourth Lord Sempill (1563-1611), who was a devout Catholic, are unconvincing. Sempill, styled in 1582 'burgess of Dumbartan, callit utherwys the makar' (register of deeds, NA Scot., 23, fol. 59), was probably not of noble birth. 
Sempill devised plays and other entertainments for the court, but no texts survive. On 17 January 1568 'a play was made by Robert Semple, and played befor the Lord Regent and divers uthers of the nobilitie' ('Diary of Robert Birrel', 14); the expenses for this were met, in part, by Edinburgh council. Between April 1567 and March 1573 the 'Accounts of the Treasurer', which record the expenses of the royal household, note various payments to Sempill for clothing and other unspecified services, possibly related to entertainments. On 20 September 1581 he was paid for producing 'a pastyme' for King James in Dumbarton. The man styled 'capitane Sempill' in March 1573 may possibly be the poet (McInnes, 340). Many details in Sempill's poetry suggest that he had military experience; he either witnessed or participated in the sieges of Leith and Edinburgh Castle, which he describes with vividness and accuracy ('Satirical Poems', nos. 39 and 43). 
Sempill is most famous for his satires and invectives, largely composed between 1567 and 1584, a time of great turbulence in Scotland. The poems vigorously support the reformers, and display hostility to Mary, queen of Scots. There is outrage at the St Bartholomew's day massacre (1572); a lament for the assassinated Regent Moray (1570); an attack on Archbishop Hamilton, executed in 1571; and a scurrilous but amusing lampoon, 'The Legend of the Bishop of St Andrew's Life' (1584). Several poems are signed openly; others hint at their authorship covertly, by an acrostic on the 'first letters of everie verse' ('Satirical Poems', no. 8), or punning references to Sempill's name, used as a symbol for the simple, plain-speaking man. Another favourite satirical persona is 'Maddie of the Caill mercat', who signifies the opinion of the ordinary citizen. Three bawdy poems on women are ascribed to Sempill in the Bannatyne manuscript (1568). Some critics have also attributed to him the comedy 'Philotus' and, more plausibly, the satirical work known as 'Rob Stene's Dream'. 
Sempill's poems circulated widely, both in manuscript and print; many were published as broadsides by the protestant printer Robert Lekprevik. English envoys sent several to their government in London (where they are preserved in the Public Record Office and the British Library). James Melvill, minister of Kilrenny, records that in 1570, as a child in Montrose, he much enjoyed Sempill's verses: from them he learned both of the state of the country, and also 'of the missours [measures] and cullors [rhetorical ornaments] of Scottes ryme' ('Autobiography and Diary', 22-3). Although dismissed by some critics as crude and bigoted, Sempill's poems are metrically varied and rhetorically accomplished. Their pungent, combative style owes much to the 'flyting' tradition of earlier Scottish poets, such as William Dunbar and Sir David Lindsay. 
On 9 June 1582 Sir Patrick Waus (Vans) was informed that Robert Sempill, 'the poyet' had been taken by 'men of weir' from Edinburgh to Dalkeith ('Correspondence of Sir Patrick Waus', 247). Other accounts of this violent incident indicate that Sempill was imprisoned for several months by James, earl of Arran, who, with Esme Stewart, duke of Lennox, had enormous influence over the young king. Sempill was variously accused of corresponding with Archibald, eighth earl of Angus, an extreme protestant, or of trafficking with the English in Berwick (Calderwood, 221; register of deeds, fols. 59 and 68'v'). Sempill survived this imprisonment, but the precise date of his death is uncertain. According to Thomas Dempster, an unreliable historian, he died in 1595 ('Historia ecclesiastica', 602-3). 


@@@@@


doc= 25076


Robert Sempill (d. 1660x69), poet, was educated at Glasgow University, where he matriculated in March 1613. He married Marie Lyon, daughter of Sir Thomas Lyon of Auldbar, and they had a son, Francis Sempill, and a daughter, Elizabeth. Sempill expanded his father's satire as 'A Pick-Tooth for the Pope, or, The Pack-Mans Pater noster' (1669), but his most notable work was the elegy 'The Life and Death of the Pyper of Kilbarchen, or, The Epitaph of Habbie Simpson', probably composed about 1640 but not published until about 1700. In this he pioneered the use of the verse form later dubbed the 'standard Habbie', which was used to such effect by Robert Burns. Sempill is also credited with the authorship of the epitaph on 'Sawny Briggs, nephew to Habbie Simson and brother to the Laird of Kilbarchan', and may have written other poems. He served as a royalist officer in the civil war. The Irish lands which his father had acquired were confiscated by the Cromwellian authorities, and though Robert was active in the Restoration, they were not returned. He died between September 1660 and June 1669. 


@@@@@


doc= 25077


Sempill, Sir William (1546-1633), soldier, was probably the illegitimate son of Robert Sempill, third Lord Sempill (c.1505-1573x6), nobleman. He spent most of his adult life in exile in Spain. Much of the information about his career comes from memorials that he gave to the Spanish government which deliberately shrouded or exaggerated his activities. Even his relationship to the Sempill family is unclear. He was certainly the uncle of Hugh Sempill (1596-1654), the mathematician. Sempill may have been brought up in his father's native county, Renfrewshire. 
Sempill began his career in the household of Mary, queen of Scots, and after her flight to England in 1568 offered his services to the Spanish government, apparently at her insistence. By 1573 he was well known in Spanish military circles but his petitions for military command probably met with rejection. He was an infantry captain fighting against Spain in the Low Countries by the early 1580s. On 25 March 1582 he took command of a Scottish company in Lier, a small but strategically important town between Antwerp and Brussels. He may have already decided to betray the Dutch when he took the commission. He was given a secret audience by Alexander Farnese, governor of the Low Countries, shortly before he did so. On the night of 1 August he joined Farnese's troops and led them into the town. With the element of surprise, it was quickly taken. Farnese rewarded Sempill with a grant of 1000 ducats and a gold chain. The capture of Lier was a small but significant step in the preparation for Farnese's brilliant successes in 1583-5, since it drove a wedge between Antwerp and Brussels. 
Sempill was sent to Spain by Farnese in 1582 with a strong recommendation to the government. In Madrid he busied himself as an adviser on British and Dutch affairs, beginning a torrent of memorials advising the government on how to conduct its wars in the north. In 1587 he argued against sending the Armada, urging Philip II to wage economic warfare rather than take the risks involved in sending his great fleet. The king would not change his mind but recognized the force of Sempill's personality and decided to send him to Scotland to secure the neutrality or support of James VI. 
Philip sent Sempill to the redoubtable Bernardino de Mendoza, ambassador in Paris and formerly ambassador in London, describing him as one of 'my Scottish servants' but warning that he needed to be closely supervised (Philip II to B. de Mendoza, 27 Nov 1587; 'CSP Spain', 1587-1603, no. 175, p. 171). Philip's senior adviser on foreign affairs, Juan de Idiaquez, confidently described Sempill as 'a man who may be trusted' (ibid., no. 194, p. 188). Sempill arrived in Paris at the beginning of December 1587 and impressed the ambassador with his 'zeal and steadfastness' (ibid., no. 259, p. 255). Mendoza sent him on to the Low Countries, where Farnese, now duke of Parma, recognized that Sempill could usefully serve a number of purposes. Most immediately he could provide an assessment of the numbers and strength of the Scottish Catholics. Parma hoped that, as a former servant of Mary, Sempill would be listened to when he urged the king to seek vengeance for his mother's blood. Parma also allowed himself to hope that Sempill would be able to raise a force of Catholic Scots to provide a diversion on the Anglo-Scottish frontier as he himself crossed the channel. Philip had the same expectation. 
Sempill sailed from Dunkirk with Archibald Douglas, eighth earl of Angus and fifth earl of Morton, on 16 April 1588. They landed at Leith four days later. Sempill soon found that James was much more committed to the presbyterians than he had believed and that there was no hope of winning him to the Spanish side. His activities were watched carefully by both Scottish and English governments and he was arrested. He was released, apparently through the intercession of Catholic friends, but was almost immediately rearrested and placed under house arrest in Edinburgh. Parma received reports that he had been executed. Perhaps his presence was an embarrassment to James; at all events, Sempill once again escaped with suspicious ease. He made an attempt to meet the Armada as it sailed north -- the only man, apparently, who voluntarily tried to board it as it headed off on its dreadful journey round the British Isles. Unsuccessful, he made his way back to the Low Countries, where he informed Parma that he had been waiting with a force of 2000 men in a suitable port for the Armada to arrive. No confirmation of this claim exists and it was probably significant that Parma refused to give Sempill further funding for his Scottish adventures. 
Parma once again dispatched Sempill to Spain, where he settled down on the south coast, advising government officers on how to uncover the contraband activities of northern seamen in Andalusian ports. In 1593 he married Maria (died 1646), daughter of Juan de Ledesma and his wife. The Ledesmas were an important family in the Spanish administration. Juan de Ledesma worked in the secretarial offices of the council of inquisition. The family had a reputation for bending the rules where profit was to be made and Sempill's marriage gave him good access to governmental circles. In 1597 he travelled to Madrid, where he urged the government to investigate rigorously the English, Irish, and French protestant captains who were trading in Spain under the guise of being Catholics, recommending that a few death penalties would bring a rapid end to such activities. The council of state acknowledged the seriousness of the problem and issued the first licences to search all English ships in order to find protestants trading as Catholics. Sempill himself was given authority to search ships along the entire southern coast and was assigned a salary, although he does not seem to have been given a formal position. A number of arrests were made on his authority. 
In 1598 Sempill's stock rose still further at court when his cousin Robert Sempill, fourth Lord Sempill, was appointed as James's ambassador in Madrid. The two men worked closely together. Sempill's work also brought him into contact with the agents of the duke of Lerma, favourite of Philip III from his accession in 1598, and the owner of lucrative trading concessions on the southern coast. Sempill had access now to the very highest circles of government. In deciding whom to investigate and whom to arrest, he also had the right to decide which captains should go free, and he seems to have discreetly helped some of his compatriots. Perhaps here he was seeking favour with James, who was now all but certain to become the next king of England. If so, Sempill was playing both sides, for in June 1601 he strongly urged Philip III and the council of state to prevent James from winning the English throne. This was advice that the belligerent young king wanted to hear. Encouraged, Sempill flooded the government with proposals; he advised marriage between the Stewarts and the house of Savoy; he urged Philip to wage economic warfare; and he argued that the Dutch should be stopped from trading with Spain. In 1602 he was commissioned to go to the Low Countries to find out what he could about the intrigues for the English succession; nothing came of it, perhaps because he was too well known, perhaps because memories of the promptness with which he had been apprehended in 1588 raised doubts about his effectiveness. In 1603 Lerma personally authorized payment of Sempill's expenses. 
With the coming of peace with England in 1604 Sempill's influence waned. He lived well enough in Madrid. In 1613 Philip gave him a house in recognition of his services to the crown; Sempill used it to endow a college for Catholic missionaries who were to be trained to return to Britain. The fall of Lerma in 1618 and the death of Philip in 1621 marked the end of his influence at court. He continued to bombard the government with projects -- his last extant letter to the government dates from 1629 -- but he was too closely associated with the Lerma regime to win favour under Gasparo de Guzman, count-duke of Olivares, and was ignored. He died on 1 March 1633. His wife survived him by thirteen years; it is not known whether they had any children. 


@@@@@


doc= 25078


Semple, David (1808-1878), antiquary, was born at Townhead, Paisley, on 21 August 1808. Educated in the local grammar school, he trained in a lawyer's office before settling in business on his own account in Paisley, and was considered an able conveyancer. He was long the agent for the Liberals of the burgh. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. He died at Paisley on 23 December 1878. 
Semple's chief works -- mainly dealing with local history -- are: 'Poll-Tax Rolls of Renfrewshire of 1695' (1862), 'St Mirin' (1872), and 'Barons and Barony of Renfrewshire' (1876). He also prepared a complete edition of Tannahill's 'Poems', with a memoir and notes (1870). 


@@@@@


doc= 25079


Semple, George (c.1700-1782), architect and engineer, claimed to have had modest origins -- 'my father... was a workman about the year 1675' (Semple, 79) -- and little formal education, but he seems to have been descended from a well-connected line of Ulster-Scottish clergymen. He served an apprenticeship as a bricklayer, and was admitted a freeman of Dublin in 1735. By 1743 -- when transacting property business in Armagh -- he was describing himself as an architect. He had at least two brothers: Edward (died 1787), who was apprenticed to him, became a plasterer and architect, while John (died 1784), also a plasterer, turned to brick and stone contracting. 
Semple must have been married by 1740, but his wife's name has not been traced. In 1754 he acquired a site on Queen Street in the Oxmantown area of Dublin, where he built a number of houses, including his own residence. Semple also built three houses on Capel Street: a pair for Dr Edward Leigh, constructed next to the old mansion of the Conolly family in 1751-2, and another for Arthur Newburgh. Leigh was treasurer of St Patrick's Cathedral, where Semple designed and erected the 103 foot steeple in 1749. In the same year Semple built Newbridge, a country house at Donabate, co. Dublin, for the archbishop of Dublin, Charles Cobbe. His other country houses included Ramsfort, co. Wexford, for Colonel Abel Ram (1751; des. 1798) and Headfort, co. Meath, for the first earl of Bective (from 1760), a property which could boast interiors completed by Robert Adam in the 1770s. He also designed and built St Patrick's Hospital, Dublin (1749-57), erected with a legacy of Dean Swift. 
Semple's best-known work was Essex Bridge (1753-5; replaced 1872-5) across the Liffey, which although visually similar to Labelye's Westminster Bridge (1739-50), was constructed by the coffer-dam method rather than the more usual caissons. The government awarded him $500 for his services after he lodged a petition in 1761. Semple described and illustrated the project in his expansive 'Treatise on Building in Water' (1776), which he later reissued in 1780 with an appended paper entitled 'Hibernia's free trade, or, A plan for the general improvement of Ireland'. Throughout his career Semple attempted to interest public authorities in unsolicited projects, some stillborn examples of which he published. His proposal for a replacement for Ormonde Bridge in Dublin in 1776 was grounded on necessity, but other schemes were grandiose and impractical, such as the realignment of the mouth of the Liffey (1755), which he submitted to the ballast office in 1762, his plans for a 'spacious and commodious harbour for the Downs in England', and a system of 120 foot wide roads running the length and breadth of Ireland. 
Semple died at Queen Street in April 1782. The principal beneficiaries of his estate were his daughter Elizabeth, widow of Thomas Keating, a member of a Clonmel brewing family, and her children. The architectural succession passed in time to John Semple's son John (1763-1840), who started out as a bricklayer and builder, and grandson John (1801-1882), who together as John Semple & Son were architects to the board of first fruits for the province of Dublin (1824-32), in which capacity they designed a number of quirky and inventive churches. John, a member of Dublin corporation, served as its unsalaried architect from 1823 to 1829, when he was succeeded by his son, who left office in 1832. 


@@@@@


doc= 25080


Semple, James George (1759-1815), adventurer, who also passed under the names Semple-Lisle, Maxwell, Harrod, and Grant, was born at Irvine, Ayrshire. He was the son of James Semple, formerly an exciseman, who eventually laid claim to the extinct title of Viscount Lisle. In 1776 he was serving in America, where he was taken prisoner, but was released in 1777 and returned to England. He then became involved with the novelist Mrs Eliza Gooch. Marrying a goddaughter of the notorious Elizabeth Chudleigh, duchess of Kingston, he accompanied the latter to the continent. There he claims to have accompanied Frederick the Great during his campaign of 1778, to have been introduced to the Empress Catherine of Russia, to have accompanied Prince Potyomkin to the Crimea, and to have designed a uniform for the Russian army. Upon returning to England in 1784 he was arrested for obtaining goods by false pretences, and on 2 September 1786 was sentenced to seven years' transportation. Released on condition of quitting England, he moved to Paris, where he passed himself off as a member of General Berruyer's staff, and as witnessing in that capacity the execution of Louis XVI. He returned to England in time to avoid arrest, and on 18 February 1795 was again sentenced to transportation, this time for defrauding tradesmen. Disappointed in his hopes of pardon, he stabbed himself in Newgate in December 1796, when about to be shipped for Botany Bay, and subsequently tried to starve himself to death. He recovered, and in 1797 was dispatched in the 'Lady Shore' bound for Australia. On 21 August 1797 a mutiny broke out, the captain having disregarded Semple's warning of impending riot. Semple, with several others, was allowed to leave the ship in a boat. He eventually landed in South America, and, after many adventures, reached Tangier, where he surrendered, and was sent back to England. He was committed to Tothill Fields prison, and at the time of publishing his autobiography, 'The Life of Major J. G. Semple-Lisle', in 1799, was still confined there. He was not re-transported, and in October 1804 was living in London, where he wrote to the government from his publisher's house in Piccadilly, offering his services as a spy. In June 1807 he appeared at Worship Street public office, charged with defrauding two females, but was acquitted on a technicality. In December 1814 he was found guilty at the Middlesex sessions of obtaining two pieces of bacon and some butter by fraudulent means, and was sentenced, for the third time in his life, to seven years' transportation. When the prince regent lifted this sentence passed on him he undertook to move to Morocco, and he died on his way there, at Lisbon on 18 November 1815 ('Hull Packet', 19 Dec 1815). 


@@@@@


doc= 25081


Semple, Robert (1777-1816), traveller and governor of the Hudson's Bay Company, the son of Robert Semple and Anne Greenlaw, was born at Boston, Massachusetts, on 26 February 1777. His parents were loyalists and returned to England about the time of the American War of Independence. He became a merchant for London firms and travelled widely, recording his impressions and adventures in short plain narratives which were well received. He was in Cape Colony in 1802, and published an account of his travels in 1803. In 1803 he was back in London, and on 26 June 1805 he left for a journey through Spain and Italy to Naples and thence to Smyrna and Constantinople, of which an account was published in 1807. In 1808 and 1809 he made a second journey in Portugal and Spain, eventually going to Gibraltar and Tangier; this he recorded in a book of 1809. That year he travelled in the West Indies and Brazil, and in a book of 1812 described Caracas, Venezuela, at the beginning of the rebellion against Spain. His adventurous journey in the rear of the allied armies from Hamburg by Berlin to Goteborg, in the course of which he was taken for an American spy by Lord Cathcart and arrested, was described in 1814. 
In 1815 Semple was appointed governor of the Hudson's Bay Company territories through the influence of Lord Selkirk, although it is not clear what recommended him for the post. After leaving England in June 1815 he arrived at the Red River settlement in November to find that it had been destroyed by the North West Company. Both companies were trying to destroy the supply lines of the other and win the support of the local metis (mixed-race) population. The cause of the Hudson's Bay Company was not helped by disagreement between Semple and Colin Robertson, an experienced Hudson's Bay Company man, which resulted in Robertson's leaving the area in June 1816. Without Robertson's advice, Semple misjudged an encounter on 19 June 1816 at Seven Oaks between himself and a party of Hudson's Bay Company men on the one hand and a party of metis traders on the other. Having realized too late the need for heavy arms, Semple and about twenty others of his party were killed in a skirmish. The North West Company was later shown to have rewarded some of those involved in the killings. The massacre demonstrated the need for firm action to halt the feud and ultimately led to the amalgamation of the two companies in 1821. Semple's death was due in large measure to his appointment to a post for which he was unqualified. 


@@@@@


doc= 25082


Senan mac Geirrcinn (fl. 6th cent.) of Inis Cathaig (Scattery Island, Iniscathy). In hagiography he is often linked with the sixth-century patron of Wales, David. So in 'Felire Oengusso' his feast day, like David's, is on 1 March. The Welsh link may reflect ancient connections between Munster and Wales, particularly Dyfed. Senan's most famous hagiographical deed was his defeat of the mythical river monster, called the Cathach, who gave his name to Inis Cathaig. The event is commemorated on 8 March in 'Felire Oengusso' and is celebrated in detail in his tenth- or eleventh-century Irish life preserved in the 'Book of Lismore'. There is also a metrical Latin life of the saint, but it is much later, and hardly predates the thirteenth century. In the earlier 'Vita tripartita', Patrick foretells Senan's sanctity. According to the Irish life he was the son of Gerrcenn who, unusually in terms of Irish convention, was a Corco Baiscinn peasant rather than a nobleman. His mother is named Coimgell. According to his life, Senan became a monk with the Osraige saint, Notail. Eventually, he defeated the Cathach to found a monastery on Scattery. The island had never before been inhabited and so, according to the hagiographers, was free of the stain of original sin. 


@@@@@


doc= 25083


Worcester, Senatus of (d. 1207), prior of Worcester and theologian, is of unknown birth; his unusual name and advanced theological training have been taken as evidence of foreign origin although his byname of Bravonius suggests rather that he was a native of the west of England. He was precentor at Worcester Abbey, a post that also included responsibility for the abbey library, by 1175, and chamberlain by 1186; he became prior in 1189, and remained so until 20 November 1196. His resignation, exactly a month after the consecration of John de Coutances as bishop of Worcester, may have been connected with the election of the new bishop, as he indicates in a letter to Walter of Rouen that he pushed it through quickly and discreetly (it took place in Stratford upon Avon rather than Worcester), in defiance of direct instructions from Canterbury, and immediately 'proclaimed at the crossroads of Ascalon' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. G.168, fol. 222'v'; letter 6). 
The description of Senatus in the Worcester annals as 'magister et theologus' does not indicate that he was a teacher, as has been suggested (although his style of writing suggests an academic bent); 'magister' indicates only his level of education, and may be linked with 'theologus' to indicate that he was a theologian of some repute, at least locally. Roger of Gloucester (died 1179), bishop of Worcester for much of Senatus's career, appointed him as his penitentiary or 'archipresbiterum' and consulted him on one of the major theological and pastoral problems of the day, regarding absolution and indulgences; Senatus's answer, which is of considerable sophistication, focuses on the distinction between the internal and the external forum. The post of penitentiary also included preaching, and Senatus is known to have sent a collection of twenty-two sermons to Bishop Roger, although they have not been identified in modern times. 
Senatus's other extant theological treatises in letter form are also works of some interest. His letter on the canonical hours to John Cumin, archbishop of Dublin, draws heavily on the work of Rupert of Deutz, while that on the canon of the mass to Master Alfred (possibly the prior of Cirencester) also appears to be an 'enarratio' (an interpretation), although its source has not been traced. Senatus's letter to Master William of Tonbridge, a teacher in Oxford who had links with Worcester, draws upon a wide range of scholars including Anselm of Lucca and John of Stella to criticize as theologically suspect the 'Sententiae' of Pierre de Poitiers, which William had been using as a textbook. Other extant works by Senatus include lives of two bishops of Worcester, St Oswald and St Wulfstan (the latter essentially an abbreviation of William of Malmesbury's version). The unfinished collection of seven of Senatus's letters in the Bodleian Library (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. G.168) was probably organized by the prior himself (following a tradition of letter collections of other Worcester priors), and gives some interesting information. In his second letter to Alfred, Senatus refers to the great 'Bible' sent to King Offa from Rome, and which was then kept at Worcester; a passage in this letter which has been taken to refer to another work by Senatus -- a concordance of the gospels -- is actually a (rather confusing) explanation of how to use Eusebius's tables of passages in the gospels. Other details can be gleaned from the two letters referring to Oxford: the letter to William of Tonbridge indicates that Pierre de Poitiers was being used in Oxford as early as the beginning of the thirteenth century, as William was an Oxford master, while Senatus's earlier letter to Clement, prior of Osney, describes Oxford as 'the city that lies close to you, in which there are many eloquent speakers and men who can weigh the words of the law' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. G.168, fol. 29'r'; letter 4) -- an interesting record of Oxford's reputation as an academic and legal centre at the end of the twelfth century. Senatus died in 1207, presumably at Worcester Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 25084


Senchan Torpeist (fl. 6th-7th cent.), Gaelic poet, is not commemorated by a contemporary annalistic reference. However, he is associated with Guaire Aidne (died 663), Ui Fhiachrach king of Connacht, and many historians have imagined that he might have had genuine links with that king's court. Furthermore, it has been argued that an early Leinster genealogical poem, ascribed to him, may be his work. The evidence for his career is otherwise non-existent. 
Despite this, Senchan is an important literary figure, alleged to have been chief poet of Ireland. He appears as the main protagonist in the various stories associated with the finding of the Irish epic, 'Tain bo Cuailnge' ('cattle-Raid of Cuailnge'). The earlier, possibly originally ninth-century, versions describe how Senchan, on his own initiative or on the insistence of Guaire, calls the poets of Ireland together to recite the 'Tain'. The poets only know scraps, however, for the 'Tain' has been exchanged for knowledge of the 'Culmen', an Irish name for the 'Etymologiae' of Isidore of Seville (570-636). In one version Senchan's son, Muirgein, makes an incantation at the grave of the dead pagan hero Fergus mac Roig. Fergus duly appears and recites the 'Tain', giving an eye-witness account. Another version describes how Senchan fasts against the dead saints, Brendan of Clonfert (died 577?) and Ciaran of Clonmacnoise (died 549?). Ciaran advises him, through a clerical proxy, to visit Fergus's grave and recite a poem there. Senchan does this, with the same result as in the first account. 
These stories proved popular and by the eleventh century had been considerably expanded to incorporate the relationship of Guaire to his uterine brother, the saintly hermit Marban. The poet-collector Senchan was transformed into the leader of a 'tromdam', 'a burdensome company', of poets, who make inroads into Guaire's legendary hospitality. Marban's revenge is to impel Senchan to seek the 'Tain' in reparation for his behaviour. This narrative reached its height with the late Middle Irish tale, 'Tromdam Guaire'. Senchan's retinue is described in loving detail and Marban's role is expanded, as is Senchan's quest for the 'Tain', which takes him to Scotland before he returns to Ireland. 
Senchan's trip to Scotland in 'Tromdam Guaire' may have been inspired by an anecdote related in the late ninth- or early tenth-century 'Cormac's glossary' under the word 'prull'. Here, Senchan visits the Isle of Man and, in the company of the spirit of poetry, brings back to Ireland a female poet, belonging to a minor branch of the Muscraige living among the Ui Fhidgeinte (modern co. Limerick). 
However, Senchan's other literary associations are with Guaire. In an anecdote, 'Mac Da Cherda and Cuimmine Fota', which may date from the ninth century, the holy fool Mac Da Cherda (died 645?) proves himself to be the true chief poet of Ireland. Furthermore, Cuimmine Fota (died 661?), the saint and abbot of Clonfert, defeats Senchan in a poetic duel. The former's gospel lessons overcome Senchan's poetic compositions. 
This, less than complimentary, view of Senchan seems to dominate the ninth-century 'Scela Cano meic Gartnain'. It is Senchan's jealousy of Guaire's hospitality to the young hero Cano mac Gartnain (died 688?) which causes Cano to depart Guaire's court. But Senchan's behaviour is not completely reprehensible. An episode in 'Scela Cano' describes how Senchan sends two poems to the high-king, Diarmait, son of Aed Slaine (died 665/668). He is insulted by the king, but, showing a forbearance much at odds with his picture in 'Tromdam Guaire', does not satirize him. He sends two more poems and is well rewarded by Diarmait. 
The evidence for Senchan's association with the 'Tain' is unhistorical and far too flimsy to treat seriously. The same can be said for the claim that Senchan compiled the earliest stratum of the genealogies. Clearly, the historical figure of Senchan attracted a series of legends. In these, Senchan is a representative of the poets. The narratives in which he appears emphasize the value of poets as tale-tellers or criticize the economic burden they place on the nobility. 


@@@@@


doc= 25085


Senex, John (bap. 1678, d. 1740), publisher and maker of maps and globes, was baptized on 24 November 1678 at Ludlow, Shropshire, the son of John Senex, gentleman, and his wife, Marie. The family does not appear to have been native to that county. In 1695 Senex was apprenticed to the London bookseller Robert Clavell. Commencing business on his own account in 1702, first from premises opposite the south portico of St Clement Danes, Strand, and then next to the Fleece tavern, Cornhill, between 1703 and 1706, Senex formed an early partnership with the map makers Jeremiah Seller and Charles Price, the successors of John Seller, a partnership also involving the manufacture and sale of navigational instruments. He continued in partnership with Price at Whites Alley, Coleman Street, from 1707 to 1710, and then moved to Fleet Street, where he remained for the rest of his life, first at premises at the Globe in Salisbury Court (initially in partnership with John Maxwell) and from 1721 at the same sign opposite the church of St Dunstan-in-the-West. 
One of Senex's earliest publications was the first edition in English of a major treatise by Edmond Halley, 'A Synopsis of the Astronomy of Comets' (1705), an auspicious beginning to a career that saw Senex develop into one of the most distinguished London scientific publishers of the period. Often working with William Taylor (died 1724) -- the original publisher of Daniel Defoe's 'Robinson Crusoe' (1719) -- his publications included original works, reprints of valuable earlier works (often handsomely illustrated), and translations of the leading European writers on mathematics, perspective, chemistry, optics, anatomy, and architecture. He published, 'inter alia', 'The Motion of Water and other Fluids' (1718), translated by John Theophilus Desaguliers from the work of Edme Mariotte; an augmented edition of Francis Hauksbee's 'Physico-Mechanical Experiments on Various Subjects' with the additional experiments demonstrating 'several surprizing phaenomena touching light and electricity' (1719); Sir Isaac Newton's 'Universal Arithmetic' (1720); Henry Wilson's 'Trigonometry Improv'd' (1720); 'A Treatise of Painting by Leonardo da Vinci' (1721); Giovanni Maria Lancisi's 'Anatomy Improv'd and Illustrated' (1723); Nicolas Bion's 'The Construction and Principal Uses of Mathematical Instruments' (1723), a work augmented by Edmund Stone and one that displays Senex's own neat style of engraving to particular advantage in his depictions of the various instruments; William Whiston's 'The Calculation of Solar Eclipses without Parallaxes' (1724); Edmund Stone's 'A New Mathematical Dictionary' (1726); George Shelvocke's 'A Voyage Round the World' (1726); and Thomas Wright's 'The Use of Globes' (1740). 
In tandem with bookselling, Senex was long concerned in the production of maps and atlases. Between 1707 and 1711 he worked with Price (and later Maxwell) on a large atlas series, issuing in 1707 broadside 'Proposals for a new sett of correct mapps' advertising the partners as 'Geographers to the Queen' and promising work that 'shall in correctness, and all other particulars, far exceed any yet done'. Senex and Price subsequently went their separate ways but Senex at length produced (with Maxwell) an augmented version of these maps as 'The English Atlas' (1714), the bulk of the work engraved by himself. His portable version of the road maps of John Ogilby, published as 'An Actual Survey of All the Principal Roads of England and Wales' in 1719, was a popular success, staying in print for many years, while his 'A New General Atlas' (1721) remains the most elegant English world atlas of the time. The 'Atlas maritimus & commercialis' (1728), a work to which Halley lent his assistance and the text for which is said to have been written by Defoe, featured maps drawn on a new 'globular' projection patented in 1721, which Senex had himself devised in association with John Harris and Henry Wilson. Individual maps of particular note included Halley's 'A description of the passage of the shadow of the moon over England' of 1715, the first printed solar eclipse map and one of the earliest scientific thematic maps. Senex produced special 'smoak'd glasses' for observing this eclipse ('Daily Courant', 9 April 1715) and later published similar material not only by Halley but also by Whiston and Wright. He was also involved in the production of some of the earliest large-scale county maps, including Richard Budgen's 'An actual survey of the county of Sussex' (1723) and his own 'A new map of the county of Surrey laid down from an actual survey' (1729-30). The latter, published in association with the surveyor Richard Cushee (an apprentice of Charles Price), was surveyed in part by a novel method of releasing a nightly ball of flame from the summit of Box Hill in the autumn of 1721 and taking bearings from rockets set off at staggered intervals from surrounding hills. His large map of the British Isles in nine sheets is known only in one surviving example (Newberry Library, Chicago). 
Above all Senex was esteemed for his globes. In 1706 Senex and Price announced a pair of 12 inch globes, the celestial one based on Halley's observations and showing nineteen new constellations 'never before printed on any globe' ('London Gazette', 6-9 May 1706). In 1708 the partners advertised similar 16 inch globes and by the time of his death Senex was providing a range, of international reputation, varying from 3 to 28 inches in diameter at prices from 10's'. to 25 guineas. One of his largest examples is depicted in the portrait by Richard Wilson of George III as a boy with his brother and their tutor. 
A man of broad and enquiring mind, whose name is found on the subscription lists of many of the principal technical works of the period, Senex numbered among his apprentices not only the map engravers Samuel Parker and Thomas Hutchinson, but also the encyclopaedist Ephraim Chambers. In 1728 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and read there on 4 May 1738 a paper concerning improvements to the utility of celestial globes. His wide circle of acquaintance and connection encompassed most of the leading men of science of the day, many of whom he published. His connection with Desaguliers extended not merely to publishing his works and translations but into the world of eighteenth-century freemasonry: when Desaguliers was deputy grand master of that organization Senex published (with John Hooke) James Anderson's 'The Constitutions of the Free-Masons' (1723), the earliest such compilation, the text revealing Senex at that time to have been a warden of one of the London lodges. 
In the same year Senex married Mary Wilcox at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 27 August. The only recorded child of the marriage, Elizabeth Maria ('b'. 1730), married in 1752 Fitz Foy of Duntish Court, and later Castle Hill, in Dorset. Senex died on 30 December 1740 and was buried in the new vault of St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, on 4 January 1741, remembered in a contemporary obituary as 'a sincere, worthy, honest man, and greatly valued by men of learning' ('Hooker's Weekly Miscellany', 3 Jan 1741). His will left his entire estate to his widow, who continued the business in Fleet Street until 1755. 


@@@@@


doc= 25086


Sengham, William (fl. 1252), Augustinian friar, is likely to have come from the village of Sengham in Norfolk. However, there is no contemporary evidence for his life and activities. Sengham is mentioned in John Bale's 'Scriptorum catalogus', but even this information was not obtained at first hand, being derived from the writings of the early fifteenth-century Carmelite Thomas Colby. According to Colby, William Sengham came from a humble social background and was educated in the arts as well as theology. Probably after the end of his formal training he went to northern Italy, where he joined the Johnbonites, one of several loosely organized groups of hermits who -- largely owing to the initiative of Cardinal Ricardo Annibaldi -- were merged into the order of hermit friars of St Augustine in 1256. According to Bale, Sengham had already returned to England in 1252, obeying the command of the Johnbonites' prior-general, Lanfranc, who wanted his order to extend into England. It is likely that Sengham was one of the first representatives of the Johnbonites, and later of the Augustinian friars, in England. A reference to 'Guilhelmus Sengham', one of those 'saints and doctors who extended the order into England in the thirteenth century' by Pamphilus (Pamphilus, 25'v'), who published a history of the Augustinian friars in Rome in 1581, may refer to Bale's work (published at Basel in 1557), but could equally be an independent corroboration. 
Sengham is credited with the authorship of four treatises whose titles are known ('De fide et legibus', 'De claustro animae', 'De professione novitiorum', and 'De tentationum remediis') but whose texts are lost. According to Roth, the author of the first treatise is unknown, and Sengham probably only wrote an index to the book. 


@@@@@


doc= 25087


Senhouse, Sir Humphrey Fleming (bap. 1781, d. 1841), naval officer, born in Barbados and baptized there on 6 June 1781, was the third son of Lieutenant William Senhouse RN (1741-1800), surveyor-general of Barbados and the Leeward Islands, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Samson Wood, speaker of the Barbados assembly. His grandfather Humphrey Senhouse of Netherhall, Cumberland, had married Mary, daughter and coheir of Sir George Fleming, bishop of Carlisle. 
Senhouse entered the navy in January 1797 on the 'Prince of Wales', flagship of Rear-Admiral Henry Harvey, in the West Indies. In November 1797 he was moved into the brig 'Requin', in which he first came to England towards the close of 1799. From March 1800 to April 1802 he served in the 'Fisgard' under Captain Thomas Byam Martin and Captain Michael Seymour. On 9 April 1802 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Galgo', and in May 1803 was appointed to the 'Conqueror' (Captain Thomas Louis). With Israel Pellew, who relieved Louis in April 1804, he served in the Mediterranean, in the voyage to the West Indies, and in the battle of Trafalgar, until January 1806. He then went out to the West Indies in the 'Elephant', was put on board the 'Northumberland', flagship of Sir Alexander Inglis Cochrane, and in September 1806 was appointed to command the 'Express' on the Spanish main and among the Leeward Islands until March 1808, when he joined the 'Belleisle' as flag lieutenant to Cochrane. In July of that year he was sent home by Cochrane with dispatches. On 26 January 1809 he rejoined the admiral, now in the 'Neptune', and served through the capture of Martinique. For this, on 7 March, he was promoted to the 'Wolverene', commanding it, and afterwards the 'Ringdove' and 'Superieure', in the West Indies until December. In 1810 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Vice-Admiral John Manley; they had two daughters. In 1810-12 he commanded the brig-sloop 'Recruit' (18 guns) at Gibraltar, Newfoundland, and Halifax, Nova Scotia; and in 1812-14 the 'Martin' (18 guns) on the Halifax station, serving with distinction in the Anglo-American War. 
On 12 October 1814 Senhouse was advanced to post rank, and from April to September 1815 commanded the 'Superb' (74 guns), on the coast of France, as flag captain to Sir Henry Hotham. He was again with Hotham in the Mediterranean, as flag captain in the 'St Vincent' (120 guns), which he commanded from 1831 to 1834. On 13 April 1832 he was made a KCH, and he was knighted again on 5 June 1834. In April 1839 he commissioned the 'Blenheim' (72 guns), which he took out to China; he died on the ship on 14 June 1841, of fever contracted by fatigue and exposure during the operations at Canton (Guangzhou). He was buried at Macau. Fifteen days after his death he was nominated a CB. 


@@@@@


doc= 25088


Senhouse, Richard (d. 1626), bishop of Carlisle, was born at Nether Hall (or Alneburgh Hall), Cumberland, the third surviving son of John Senhouse (died 1604) of Nether Hall, antiquary, and his wife, Anne Ponsonby (died 1606); he was the great-great-nephew of William Senhouse (died 1505), bishop of Carlisle from 1495 and of Durham from 1502. Senhouse matriculated pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, about 1592 and graduated BA in 1595. He was elected fellow of St John's and proceeded MA in 1598, was ordained deacon and priest at London on 4 October 1604, and proceeded BD in 1606. At Cambridge he was a famous preacher. 
The king presented Senhouse to the royal livings of Steeple Bumstead, Essex, in 1606, and Cheam, Surrey, in 1608. Senhouse served the duke of Bedford as chaplain, and composed verses on the death of Prince Henry. By 1616, the year he first appears among the preachers at court during Lent, he had been appointed chaplain to Prince Charles. He preached in the prophetic, anti-Catholic vein common to Prince Charles's other chaplains; John Gauden noted that his 'eloquent tongue and honest heart were capable to 'over-awe a Court'' (Gauden, 614). 
On 21 November 1621 Senhouse was presented by the king to the deanery of Gloucester, and he was installed by proxy on 13 December. Having proceeded DD in 1622, on 26 September 1624 he was made bishop of Carlisle; there he took up residence out of parliament time. Charles I chose Senhouse to preach his coronation sermon; only the peroration of allegories on 'the crown of life' ('Revelation' 2: 10) survives in a manuscript Latin translation. Senhouse fell from his horse and died, intestate, on 6 May 1626, and was buried on 7 May in Carlisle Cathedral; his funeral sermon was preached by Lancelot Davies. Four court sermons, probably Jacobean, were published in 1627. 


@@@@@


doc= 25089


Sever, William (d. 1505), bishop of Durham, was born at Shincliffe, near Durham, but was probably a member of the Cumbrian family of Senhouse of Seascale; Sever was one of a number of contemporary variants of that family name. Ordained subdeacon on 11 March 1468 he became a monk of the Benedictine abbey of St Mary, York, and it may have been from there (so it was later claimed) that he went to study in Oxford -- at either Gloucester or Durham College (both were Benedictine establishments). Elected abbot of St Mary's in April 1485, he was a leading subordinate of Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey, the king's lieutenant north of the Trent, who presided over a council that governed Yorkshire much as Richard III's council had done. From 1486 Sever was justice of the Forest of Galtres, and JP in each of the three Yorkshire ridings. Letters in the 'Plumpton Correspondence' show him receiving bills of complaint, examining witnesses, and advising arbitration, while in 1493 he and Sir Richard Cholmley settled a dispute between the weavers and cordwainers of York, disregarding the liberties of the city in the process. 
On 4 September 1495 Sever was provided to the see of Carlisle; the temporalities were restored on 11 December, and he was consecrated in 1496. His immediate predecessor at Carlisle, Richard Bell, had also been a monk before becoming a bishop; but whereas Bell, who had previously been prior of Durham, failed in his efforts to hold the priorate 'in commendam', Sever was able to remain abbot of St Mary's. Almost nothing is known of his episcopate, since his register does not survive, though he once arbitrated in a dispute involving one of his kinsmen. But in May 1496 he served on a commission appointed (unsuccessfully, at this time) to arrange for the marriage of the king's daughter Margaret with James IV, king of Scots, and for a treaty between the two realms, while in 1499 he was made a conservator of the Anglo-Scottish truce. In the latter year he came to play an important role in the extension of royal authority into northern England, being given special authority in the north in matters pertaining to the king's prerogative; appointed to be receiver and surveyor of wardships, marriages, and other rights belonging to the crown, he was expressly charged with the discovery of concealments. In this position Sever set a precedent for the establishment in 1508 of the office of surveyor of the king's prerogative. 
On 27 June 1502 Sever was translated to the far wealthier see of Durham; the temporalities were restored on 15 October, and he now resigned his abbacy of St Mary's. As bishop of Durham he continued to work in the king's interest -- in a letter to Sir Reginald Bray, dated 7 December 1502, he reports a dispute over a woman (perhaps a wardship), and promises to tell Bray 'what I mean herein for the king's advantage' (Pollard, 390-91). He died on an unknown day in 1505, and was buried in St Mary's Abbey at York. 


