@@@@@


doc= 25090


Senior, Nassau William (1790-1864), political economist, was probably born on 26 September 1790 at Compton Beauchamp, Berkshire, although one source has it that he was born on 23 September 1790 at Uffington, Berkshire. He was the eldest of ten children of John Raven Senior (1764-1824), son of a merchant trading overseas, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Henry Duke, solicitor-general of Barbados. Before entering Eton College in July 1803, Nassau was taught at home by his father (a graduate of Merton College, Oxford), who became vicar of Durnford, Wiltshire, in 1791. At the age of sixteen the boy went as a demy to Magdalen College, Oxford, where -- stung by failure at his first appearance in the schools -- he hired an outstanding coach, Richard Whately, only three years his senior, in whom he found a lifelong friend. After getting a first in classics in 1811, Senior became a probationary fellow of Magdalen in 1812. His ambitions were then focused on a career in the law. He had already entered Lincoln's Inn in November 1810 and in 1813 the award of the Oxford University Vinerian scholarship enabled him to dedicate himself to legal studies. As pupil to Edward Sugden, later lord chancellor, he became a certificated conveyancer and was introduced to an influential section of London society. In 1817 after Sugden had become master of chancery, Senior took over the thriving practice in which he had been trained. By the time he was called to the bar in 1819 he was already earning a comfortably rising income. In April 1821 he married Mary Charlotte Mair (1791-1883), daughter of John Mair of Iron Acton, Gloucestershire, and they set up their first London home at 32 Kensington Square. A few years later Senior built a larger house at 13 Hyde Park Gate. There they entertained a cosmopolitan variety of intellectually lively friends from 1827 until 1864. 
The first published evidence of Senior's interest in political economy was an article discussing a recent parliamentary report on the state of agriculture, in the 'Quarterly Review' of July 1821 (he had already written several reviews on legal or literary subjects for the journal). The article attracted favourable notice from leading economists such as Ricardo, who wrote to H. Trower expressing satisfaction at having 'got so good an ally for what I think the correct principles' ('Works and Correspondence', 9.120), and James Mill, who early in 1823 recommended Senior as a member of the recently formed Political Economy Club. For most of the next four decades Senior participated actively at the club's meetings, where current problems of economic theory and policy were regularly debated by prominent economists, bankers, businessmen, civil servants, and parliamentarians. By 1825 his credentials were sufficiently well attested for him to be appointed as the first incumbent of the Drummond chair of political economy at Oxford. It was during his 1825-30 tenure of the professorship that he won wide respect as a lucid exponent of what was still an infant discipline. Most of the lectures he then delivered were subsequently published as pamphlets, or embodied in his first book, 'Outline of the Science of Political Economy' (1836). He also provided an appendix defining 'Ambiguous terms in political economy' for Richard Whately's 'Elements of Logic' (1826). For several years he was an examiner in political economy at London University, which elected him to a fellowship in 1836. 
By the age of forty Senior had acquired an enviable reputation in London society as a successful lawyer and economist whose judgement was considered basically sound by leading members of the Political Economy Club. Accordingly, in 1830, when Lord Melbourne became secretary of state for home affairs, he invited Senior to prepare a report on the laws relating to strikes and trade combinations. Characteristically, Senior responded by first systematically ascertaining the facts. Aided by a colleague expert in the common law, he circulated questionnaires and examined witnesses before presenting a carefully argued opinion. His report lay unpublished in Home Office files until 1841, when he embodied extracts from it in a parliamentary 'Report on the Condition of the Handloom Weavers' (1841). Over thirty years later he reproduced it in full in the first volume of his 'Historical and Philosophical Essays' (posthumously published in 1865) -- on the grounds that the law affecting trade unions remained as defective as ever. 
Senior said in his introductory professorial lecture (1827) that his interest in political economy was largely motivated by humanitarian concern for the poor, and by a conviction that understanding the causes of poverty was an essential preliminary to relieving it. His earliest research in this area was provoked by Lord Howick's suggestion that he should examine the voluminous material published on the poor in Ireland. The most striking feature of his conclusions was that he advocated a positive economic role for government, going far beyond 'ad hoc' measures designed to relieve the worst social distress. He suggested, for example, that chronic poverty in Ireland called for government intervention to make capital available for productive investment in roads, railways, harbours, docks, and canals, as well as to encourage consolidation of farms into more efficient units of operation and to subsidize emigration. These were highly unorthodox views in the current climate of economic opinion. He also scandalized Anglican opinion by advocating the confiscation and transfer to the Roman Catholic church (to which the majority of Irish people belonged) of a substantial proportion of the income of the established episcopalian church -- a recommendation so heretical that it is said to have forced his resignation from the chair of political economy at King's College, London, in 1830. 
Senior continued to write on the Irish poverty problem, partly because frequent visits to his friend Whately (who was appointed archbishop of Dublin in 1831) kept his interest fresh and informed. However, in 1832 his attention was sharply focused on English poverty when he was appointed to the royal commission for inquiring into the administration and practical operation of the poor laws. In this case Senior's influence on the outcome was crucially important. Apart from Edwin Chadwick, he was the main driving force throughout the inquiry, from drafting the questionnaires circulated to all English parishes and identifying the relevant facts to be gathered by the twenty-six assistant (regional) commissioners for England and certain other countries (for purposes of international comparison), to writing the final report, published in 1834. Senior then acted as midwife to the 'Poor Law Amendment Act' by careful explication and justification of the commission's recommendations to the lord chancellor and other cabinet ministers, and by continuously advising on the details of the consequent legislation as the bill went through parliament. He refused both a knighthood and the sum of $500 as reward for his public services. Later he refused the offer of a Canadian governorship and the position of legal member of the Indian council. He also turned down a place on the new poor-law board. However, he accepted gratefully the appointment in 1836 as one of the twelve masters of chancery, a post that gave him an annual lifetime salary of $2500 for duties which were more ceremonial than intellectually demanding and allowed him leisure to offer further uncompensated services to successive governments. In 1836, for example, he was consulted by the then home secretary, Lord John Russell, on Irish poor law reform; in 1837 he published 'Letters on the Factory Act as it Affects the Cotton Manufacture', addressed to the president of the Board of Trade, and was appointed to another royal commission -- this time on the condition of the unemployed handweavers. Again the inquiry began with a painstaking assembly of facts by a team of assistant commissioners, and again the final report was largely Senior's work. It offered a comprehensive and sympathetic account of the handweavers' plight, but suggested no practical remedies and gave rise to no subsequent legislation. 
In 1847 Senior was re-elected to the Drummond chair for a second five-year stint, during which he planned to digest his many economic articles, lectures, pamphlets, letters of advice to ministers, and parliamentary reports into a single 'great book'. He did not complete this project, no doubt partly because he failed to be elected for a further professorial term. Perhaps he was unable to achieve a sufficiently coherent analytical view of the subject. It is notable, for example, that when he reviewed J. S. Mill's magisterial 'Principles of Political Economy' (1848) in the 'Edinburgh Review' (October 1848), Senior was devastatingly sceptical both about the validity of what he called the 'science of political economy' and about the practical utility for policy purposes of the associated 'art of political economy'. Perhaps the completion of his 'great book' was also hindered by the fact that he was constantly in demand as one of the most luminous and perceptive government advisers of his era; in 1857, for example, he was again appointed to a royal commission, this time on another of his favourite remedies for poverty -- popular education. 
On the other hand, it is evident that during the last two decades of his life Senior's interests broadened considerably and that he spent an increasing amount of time talking and listening to the many European intellectuals and statesmen with whom he had developed close and enduring friendships. He had (since the early 1830s) been accustomed to spend the legal vacations travelling, often with his wife and two children, in England, Ireland, Belgium, France, or Italy -- where they were entertained by a multitude of friends who had already stayed at 13 Hyde Park Gate. Senior's company was as much in demand as his advice, because he had the most sociable and outgoing of personalities, and a talent for attracting, as well as delivering, stimulating conversation and correspondence. Lord Overstone, for example, who had accompanied him on a tour of Lancashire cotton factories in 1837, referred to his 'very acute and intelligent mind united with other qualities which render him a very desirable travelling companion' (O'Brien, 222). His lifelong friendships with Alexis de Tocqueville and Comte Cavour began on their first visits to London (in 1833 and 1836), but it was not until Senior's 1848 visit to Paris that he began to write detailed reports of his interviews with prominent Europeans, and eventually to fill a series of journals with firsthand accounts of revolutionary events described by informed observers. He published selections from his interchanges with French statesmen (such as Thiers and Guizot) in the 'Fortnightly Review' and the 'Cornhill Magazine'; the most interesting of the conversations were subsequently edited by his daughter and published posthumously in book form. 
Nassau Senior retired from the professorship in 1862 and died at 13 Hyde Park Gate on 4 June 1864, after a short illness. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. He was survived by his wife and his two children: Mary Charlotte Mair (Minnie) Simpson (1825-1907), to whom he willed full jurisdiction over his manuscripts, books, and pamphlets, and Nassau John Senior (1822-1891), a lawyer. His daughter-in-law, Jane Elizabeth Senior (1828-1877), became the first woman to be appointed an inspector of workhouses and pauper schools. 


@@@@@


doc= 25091


Senlis, Simon (I) de, earl of Northampton and earl of Huntingdon (d. 1111x13), magnate, was the third son of Landri de Senlis, lord of Chantilly and Ermenonville, and a lady Ermengarde. The derivation St Liz ('de sancto Licio') appears to be an attempted etymology for Senlis ('Silva necta'). His elder brother Guy de Senlis (died 1124), a generous benefactor to Notre Dame de Senlis and St Martin des Champs, inherited the patrimony, his sons becoming prominent supporters of the Capetian kings, with three in succession holding the title of grand butler of France. Another brother, Hubert, became a canon of Notre Dame, Paris. Both the foundation charter of Sawtry Abbey, founded by his son Simon (II) de Senlis (d. 1153), and the late register of St Andrew's Priory, Northampton, believed Simon (I) to have come to England in 1066 and to have been patronized by William I; but his absence from 'Domesday Book' (1086) suggests that his arrival, or at least his endowment, took place under William Rufus. 
Little is known about the career of Simon de Senlis, and it is unknown whether he aided Rufus during the serious baronial insurrections of 1088 in favour of his brother Robert Curthose. Nevertheless, he was distinguished enough to receive in marriage Maud (or Matilda) (d. 1131) ['see under 'David I], daughter of Earl Waltheof and Countess Judith, niece of William the Conqueror, and was granted, probably in right of his wife, the earldoms of Northampton and Huntingdon, in or before 1090. The semi-legendary tract about the Countess Judith, 'De comitissa', written in the later years of Henry II's reign and incorporated into the account of the life and martyrdom of Waltheof compiled at Crowland 'c'.1219, records an implausible tradition that the king had initially wished to give the widowed Judith and her lands to Simon, son of Ranulf the Rich, who had come with his elder brother Garnier (in fact Simon (I)'s uncle) and forty knights. Refusing Simon on account of his lameness, however, Judith and her daughters fled from the king's anger into the Ely marshes. 
According to the 'De comitissa', Simon de Senlis made a successful pilgrimage to Jerusalem. This was almost certainly after the first crusade, for Suger notes that Simon was captured during William Rufus's Vexin campaign of 1098 against the Capetian heir-apparent, Louis, and subsequently ransomed. Earl Simon witnessed Henry I's charter of liberties issued at his coronation on 5 August 1100 and may have accompanied Henry on his campaign against Robert de Belleme's castle at Tickhill in 1102. He attests royal charters in England from 1100 to 1103, in 1106 and 1107, and in 1109 and 1110. 
At Northampton Earl Simon probably constructed the first castle and walled the considerable settlement that had expanded beyond the earlier defences. Although the earliest surviving fabric of the round church of the Holy Sepulchre in Northampton dates to the second quarter of the twelfth century, it is possible that its foundation was inspired by Simon's pilgrimage. Here he also founded the church of All Saints and the Cluniac priory of St Andrew (between 1093 and 1100) as a dependency of La Charite-sur-Loire. When Hugh of Leicester, steward of Countess Maud, established monks of La Charite at Preston Capes ('c'.1090) in emulation of his lord, Earl Simon granted them the endowments of the secular college at Daventry to which they subsequently moved (between 1107 and 1108). The earl also made grants to Lincoln Cathedral. 
Simon de Senlis embarked on a second journey east, but died at La Charite, 'the eldest daughter of Cluny', and was buried there in the great new priory church. It is possible that his body was subsequently moved to the priory of St Neots, which he had patronized. The date of his death is uncertain. He attests a grant of Henry I to Bath Abbey on 8 August 1111 at Bishop's Waltham, as the king was crossing to Normandy, and this may mark the earl's own outward voyage. By midsummer 1113, however, David of Scotland was recognized as earl of Huntingdon, marrying Simon's widow, Maud, although the earldom of Northampton reverted to the crown. 
Simon de Senlis had three known children: Simon (II), Waldef, who became abbot of Melrose (1148-59), and Matilda, who married Robert fitz Richard of Tonbridge. Countess Maud's younger sister Judith (or Alice) married Ralph de Tosny in 1103. 


@@@@@


doc= 25092


Senlis, Simon (II) de, earl of Northampton and earl of Huntingdon (d. 1153), magnate, was the elder son of Simon (I) de Senlis. His career was complicated by rivalry with the Scottish royal house over the honour of Huntingdon, the inheritance of his mother, Maud ['see under 'David I]. He was a minor when his father died between 1111 and 1113, and custody of the estate, with the rank of earl, passed to Maud's second husband, David, future king of Scots. Following Maud's death in 1131, by which date Senlis had reached his majority, King David remained in control, despite Senlis's demands for justice. King Stephen then recognized Henry, son of David and Maud, as earl of Huntingdon in 1136 and again in 1139; and although Senlis had probably held the honour and earldom during Henry's temporary forfeiture (January 1138-April 1139), it was only on the final collapse of Stephen's Scottish diplomacy in the summer of 1141 that his claims were fully realized. His comital standing remains a source of much confusion. The argument that in 1136 Northampton was 'detached from the earldom of Huntingdon and made a separate earldom for Simon' (Davis, 129) is difficult to accept. (Some modern authorities have even seen him as an earl of Northumberland -- he was never such.) His earliest known appearance as earl of Northampton occurs in 1138 or early in 1139; and the evidence suggests that 'Northampton' and 'Huntingdon' were alternative names for the same earldom, which normally, though not invariably, also embraced Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire. One of Stephen's foremost adherents, Senlis fought at the battle of Lincoln on 2 February 1141, and was a commander of the victorious royalist army at Winchester the following September. His comital authority extended over Northamptonshire, Huntingdonshire, and Bedfordshire, and within the first two shires he exercised regalian rights and assumed full responsibility for county government, clearly at Stephen's bidding. Jocelin of Furness's life of Abbot Waldef of Melrose, Senlis's younger brother, contains important information on his career and character. Henry of Huntingdon believed that he and Eustace, Stephen's eldest son, were the most uncompromising opponents of Henry Plantagenet in 1153, and that peace was possible only because of their sudden deaths. He was a major benefactor of numerous religious institutions, and founded a Cistercian abbey at Sawtry in 1146-7, as well as a Cluniac nunnery, Delapre Abbey. He married Isabella, or Elizabeth, daughter of Robert, earl of Leicester, and was Leicester's named ally in his famous treaty with the earl of Chester 'c'.1150. He and his wife, who as a widow married Gervase Paynel (died 1194) of Dudley, had a son and at least one daughter: Simon (III) de Senlis (died 1184), the last Senlis holder of the earldoms of Northampton and of Huntingdon, and Isabel, who married William Mauduit (died 1194) of Hanslope. Simon (II) de Senlis died in August 1153 in Northampton and was buried in St Andrew's Priory, Northampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 25093


Seppings, Sir Robert (1767-1840), naval architect, was born at Fakenham, the fourth child of Robert Seppings and his wife, Lydia, the daughter of John Milligen, a linen draper at Harleston. His father was a cattle salesman but was not very successful and the young Robert had to work as a messenger, carrying letters on a mule. Lydia's brother John Milligen, a retired naval captain living at Plymouth and childless, adopted Robert Seppings and also two daughters of his brother Thomas. One of these girls, Charlotte, later married Robert Seppings while the other married Sir Richard Dacres. 
In 1782 Seppings was accepted as a personal apprentice by John Henslow, the master shipwright at Plymouth. Because of his co-ordinating role, the master shipwright may be seen as the equivalent of today's general manager, and even to be accepted as apprentice by such a man was a mark of distinction. Seppings completed his apprenticeship in 1787 and, helped by wartime expansion, rose rapidly through the ranks of shipwright, quarterman, and foreman to become assistant master shipwright at Plymouth Dock in 1797. His former master, Henslow, was now the surveyor and, aware of Seppings's merit, may quite properly have influenced the rapid rise of his former pupil. 
Seppings became concerned over the time and manpower needed to lift a ship onto dock blocks for the examination of the keel area. He devised a block consisting of three wedges which could be removed in two-thirds of the time and with far fewer men. This invention was tried in the docking of the 'San Joseph' in September 1800 and adopted at Plymouth in 1801 and was so successful that the Navy Board awarded him a bonus of $1000, a very large sum equivalent to about four years' salary, while the Royal Society of Arts awarded him its gold medal in 1803. The Navy Board estimated that this improvement saved $11,000 over three years at Plymouth alone. 
Seppings was further encouraged by appointment as master shipwright at Chatham in 1804, aged thirty-seven, very young for such a senior post. In this post he set to work to devise a systematic series of changes to the structure of warships to overcome the main problems of traditional frame-built ships. These were excessive deflection in a seaway leading to early rot, shortage of long timbers, and the weakness of the bow and stern against raking gunfire. The first of these problems was the most serious and cost large sums of money in repair bills. 
The unequal forces of weight and buoyancy as the ship passed through waves would cause it to bend with the planks in the side sliding over each other, so that rectangular sections of the side changed in shape to lozenges. Seppings was later to describe this behaviour as like a five-bar gate without the diagonal. This deflection in shear -- known as 'breakage' -- disturbed the caulking and allowed sea water to seep in between the planks, which would rot quickly, further weakening the structure. Seppings's answer was to arrange diagonal frames on the sides of his ships, later further strengthened by packing the bottom solid with timbers, supporting the deck beams on continuous shelves rather than on individual knees, and arranging the deck planking on the diagonal. His scheme was developed and tried in stages. Some of his early ideas may have been used during the refit of the 36-gun frigate 'Glenmore' in 1800 but details are obscure. 
The Navy Board was, as usual, quick to act and in 1805 approved a limited use of Seppings's ideas for the repair of the 'Kent'. This was further developed the following year in repairs to two other ships and the full diagonal system was first fitted to the 'Tremendous' in 1810; in 1811 the 'Albion' incorporated the complete system. The speed with which these changes were adopted is impressive; the navy needed every ship at sea in wartime and time in dock was severely limited but the Navy Board, and presumably the Admiralty, saw Seppings's work as so important that it was worth accepting that ships were out of service for a longer time while they were strengthened. 
Measurements taken when 'Tremendous' floated out of dock showed that the breakage with Seppings's modifications was negligible. In November 1811 John Barrow, the progressive second secretary (senior permanent civil servant), called a meeting of eminent scientists to consider Seppings's work. This meeting led to Thomas Young being asked to carry out a mathematical study of the loading and strains on a ship in a seaway. His study used fluxions (as opposed to calculus) and was almost incomprehensible but generally supported Seppings. Details of the meeting reached Napoleon a few days later and he commissioned the French mathematician Dupin to study Seppings's scheme. Dupin's analysis was both more enthusiastic and clearer than that of Young. Not for the first time -- or the last -- engineering design was well ahead of theoretical explanation. 
Seppings presented a paper on his scheme to the Royal Society in 1814, as a result of which he was elected a fellow and later, in 1818, received their Copley medal. There was some hostility to Seppings on two grounds, the first being plagiarism. Other people had, indeed, tried diagonal stiffening but without success. Gabriel Snodgrass had been very successful in using diagonals to stiffen the ship in the transverse plane but did not expand his approach to the sides. Seppings himself said that the only external influence on his thinking was the design of the covered bridge over the Rhine at Schaffhausen. It was also alleged then, and has been alleged even recently, that Seppings's work was not 'scientific'. This is based on a fallacious equation between mathematics and science. Seppings's logical thought progression from loading by the sea to strains and hence to the alignment of structural members was truly scientific, confirmed as it was by measurement. There also seems to have been a contemporary belief that hydrodynamics was scientific while structural design was not. 
An even more convincing proof of Seppings's scheme was provided in 1817, when the old 74-gun ship 'Justicia' was used for trials before being broken up. A paper to the Royal Society showed that the breakage on undocking, measured with and without diagonals, was reduced by about a half by the stiffeners. It is interesting that in the original scheme the diagonals were in tension while those in 'Justicia' were in compression, and Seppings was to claim that his original method was superior. The problem with wood construction is the strength of joints, and for this reason a modern designer would probably use the diagonals in compression. However, Seppings's approach worked well. A further paper in 1820 showed how the diagonal system could be used in merchant ships. Few merchant ships seem to have been built in this style, the conspicuous exception being I. K. Brunel's 'Great Western': Brunel acknowledged Admiralty assistance in planning her structure. 
Seppings was rewarded for his work by appointment as surveyor in 1813, the mid-forties being a typical age for appointment to this creative post. By 1815 his system was standard practice; the 120-gun 'Howe' was probably the first new ship designed using Seppings's fully developed scheme. 
Seppings was concerned over the damage and casualties at Trafalgar during Nelson's end-on approach, as the weak beak bulkhead provided little protection from raking fire. When 'Namur' was razed in 1805 Seppings retained the heavy bow planking up to the upper gun deck and later developed this into the round bow which also became a standard feature, providing some protection against raking fire and permitting up to twelve guns to fire ahead. His round stern was less popular, mainly on aesthetic grounds, though there were a few practical problems such as the siting of the officers' 'heads'. He was knighted on 17 August 1819 on board the royal yacht 'Royal George', while under sail and with the royal standard flying. He was to receive gifts marking his achievements from the sovereigns of Russia, Denmark, and the Netherlands. 
The end of the war meant that few new ships were designed and Seppings had few opportunities to demonstrate his skills as a designer. The later two-deckers of the 'Canopus' class, such as 'Ganges', had Seppings's structure and are best seen as a new design. They were followed by the even bigger, 90-gun, ships of the 'Rodney' class, which had a long and successful life. They were seen as particularly good in head seas and rolled little. 'Nile' was fitted with engines in 1852-4 and later served as the famous training ship 'Conway' before being destroyed by fire in 1956. 
Seppings produced a modified version of his scheme using iron diagonals for frigates, as may be seen in the frigate 'Unicorn' at Dundee. This was further developed in the 1830s by Lang and Edye for use in ships of the line. As surveyor, Seppings established a model room at the Admiralty showing developments in design; many of the models from this collection survive in the Science Museum and National Maritime Museum. Seppings was a keen supporter of the Admiralty School of Naval Architecture (established in 1811), even though his own son failed the entry examination. 
It is sometimes argued that Seppings's ships were heavy, which may have been true when stiffening was added to an existing ship but should not have been the case in a new design, where the stronger ship should have been lighter. Seppings claimed that there was a considerable reduction in the number of trees required to build a ship when his methods were used, which must have equated to weight reduction. Perhaps more important, it was possible to build using shorter lengths of timber rather than the long pieces which were in short supply. 
In the early post-war years there were many 'experimental sailings' in which ships by different designers were raced against each other; identical ships achieved very different results. Great importance was attached at the time to the results, but analysis shows that the skill of the captain, not just in sailing but also in adjusting the trim and the rigging was all important. In 1832 a joint sailing competition was held with the French, who were particularly impressed with the way that 'Donegal', a French-built prize, was much faster after British modifications. 
One of the most successful captains in experimental sailings was Captain William Symonds, whose successes were achieved in ships of his own design. It should, however, be noted that Seppings's frigate 'Castor' was consistently fast during the late 1830s. As a result of his political contacts Symonds was appointed as surveyor to replace Seppings in 1832, the first amateur to hold that professional post. In 1836 the University of Oxford conferred the degree of DCL on Seppings. 
The vast increase in the size and gun power of wooden warships in the last decades from 1815 was only possible as a result of the introduction of diagonally framed ships. In 1819 the House of Commons finance committee drew attention to the savings from the greater durability of Seppings's ships. A final compliment came at the great naval exhibition of 1891, when the gallery showing progress in naval architecture was named the Seppings Gallery. 
After his retirement Seppings lived at Taunton until his death there on 25 September 1840; he was buried in St Mary's Church, Taunton, where there is a tablet to his memory in the chancel which briefly records his achievements. Lady Seppings died at Taunton in 1834. His eldest son, John Milligen Seppings, was for twenty years the inspector of shipping for the East India Company at Calcutta. Another son, Captain Edward Seppings, together with his wife and two children, was killed at Cawnpore during the Indian mutiny. 


@@@@@


doc= 25094


Seres, William (d. 1578x80), printer and bookseller, was possibly of alien origin, as he was listed as a 'stranger' in the parish of St Gregory in lay subsidies of 1564 and 1577 for the Castle Baynard ward in London. There is some confusion over the pronunciation of his name on account of the several forms in which it appears across extant records. It is often pronounced as one syllable, but as his patron William Cecil always spelt it Seress it is likely that it was pronounced with two syllables, like the name of the harvest goddess -- as indicated by the common variant spelling of his name Ceres. This is suggested also by the unusual spelling Searese, found in lay subsidies for 1577. The earliest books known to be published by Seres date to 1548, when he was in partnership with Anthony Scoloker (with whom he produced a number of reformist texts, including John Bale's 'A Brefe Chronycle') and also with John Day. His first imprint places him as a resident in Ely Rents in Holborn. Seres collaborated with Day on many works, among them Tyndale's 'New Testament' (1548), Edmund Becke's 'Bible' (1549), and Sir John Cheke's 'Hurt of Sedicion' (1549). In 1548 Day's and Seres's joint production of Luke Shepherd's poem 'John Bon and Mast Person' was said to have offended the Catholic aldermen of the city of London, and Day, if not Seres himself, appears to have been threatened with imprisonment. Seres also published some works with William Hill. He seems rarely to have worked alone and had many assigns, such as John Case, Nicholas Hill, William Powell, William Harford, William Copland, and Henry Denham. 
Seres was made free of the city of London as a member of the Stationers' Company by redemption on 18 September 1548. As he is known to have been Cecil's servant by late 1548, Seres's freedom may have been due to Cecil's influence. In February, Cecil and one of his Lincolnshire neighbours, Lawrence Eresby, had sought to acquire the premises of a former chantry in London, but in order for the sale to go through someone had to take possession of the property. This was done by Seres and Cecil's clerk, Roger Alford, in November. The building in question was known as Peter College, part of which was to become Stationers' Hall in 1554. Seres himself also took possession of part of the property, and for the next two years imprints describe him as dwelling at Peter College. The lay subsidies for 1549 list him as a resident in the parish, and a lease for the property was granted formally to him on Lady day 1549. Seres had evidently been married for some time, as this lease stated that he could not sell any part of the college to his wife or children, but that he could at any time purchase the fee simple during the next decade. By 1551 his premises were described in imprints as The Hedgehog. A 25-year lease was granted to him in 1556. 
On 11 March 1553 Cecil procured for Seres the patent to print all primers and psalters. However, on the accession of Mary a few months later the patent was revoked and, at some point during the reign, Seres was imprisoned. When in 1553, the duke of Northumberland's plots threatened to put Cecil himself in danger, the latter transferred some of his goods to Seres's household for safe keeping. Seres performed many further duties for Cecil during the rest of Mary's reign, principally that of rent collecting. During these years Roger Alford (Seres's earlier co-tenant) collected rents in Lincolnshire, where John Day (Seres's former printing partner) was housed on Cecil's land. Seres may have been aware of his former partner's surreptitious press there, and both men returned to London at approximately the same time in 1556 (Cecil paid Seres his discharge of $40 there on 29 September 1556, shortly after Day's return from Lincolnshire in July). Both Seres and Day worked as assigns for John Wayland (the printer of Marian primers), although it is not known how early this began: Seres is named as an assign for Wayland in 1559, but the erstwhile partners, having both been assisted by Cecil, probably returned to publishing at the same time upon their return to London. 
Following the accession of Elizabeth, Seres was granted on 3 July 1559 an enhanced privilege for life to print psalters and primers in both Latin and English, and on 2 October he brought a suit against Day for issuing 'a quartron of psalmes with notes... without lycense and contrary to the orders' (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 1.124). Day was fined 12's'. but received his own lucrative patent to print metrical psalms forty days later. In May 1560 the high commission ordered the Stationers' Company to punish anyone who infringed Seres's privilege, a sign of both the value of the privileges and Seres's own importance. In 1571 he received a further privilege for 'all manner of booke and bookes of private prayers primers psalters and psalmes bothe in greate volumes and small in Englishe or latine' for the lifetimes of both himself and his son William (Blayney, 25). However, the wide terms of this patent proved controversial. On 20 October 1578, in an attempt 'to avoid all contentions... and to thintente that a perfecte amitie and frindship... maie be had and contynued' (London, Stationers' Hall, Liber A, fol. 36), the company drew up an agreement between the two Sereses and a number of other members of the company (including John and Richard Day), clarifying precisely which rights belonged to which individuals. By this point, however, Seres the elder had already assigned his privilege to Henry Denham for an annual fee. Among Seres's publications after 1558 were translations by Arthur Golding -- 'The Eyght Bookes of Caius Julius Caesar Conteyning his Martiall Exploytes in Gallia' (1565) and 'The.xv. Bookes of P. Ovidus Naso, Entytuled Metamorphosis' (1567) -- as well as Thomas Blundeville's 'The Fower Chiefyst Offices Belongyng to Horsemanshippe' (1565-6) and Sir Geoffrey Fenton's 'Monophylo' (1572). 
Seres took an active role in the life of the Stationers' Company. Listed twenty-first in the company's charter of incorporation in 1557, and already a relatively senior member, he served as master no fewer than five times between 1570 and 1578. He died at some point between 9 December 1578, when he signed a company petition, and 18 January 1580, when he was noted as deceased by the company's governing body. The administration of his estate was granted to his widow, named as Agniti Seres, on 9 July 1580. After Seres's death, Denham and William Seres the younger signed a document whereby they handed John and Richard Day the sole rights for the printing of psalms; however, it was followed by a protracted dispute between Seres's widow and Denham. In 1582 Seres the younger petitioned Cecil for his assistance in protecting the 1571 patent against the infringements of John Wolfe and others: 'Wch priviledge... by the further helpe & goodnes of your honor was... graunted to hym [Seres the elder] & to me' (Blayney, 26). Seres the younger (who was elected to the livery of the Stationers' Company in 1578) carried on his father's business until 1603 but assigned much of the work to others. The Seres patent was incorporated into the Stationers' Company's joint-stock venture, the English stock, in 1603. 


@@@@@


doc= 25095


Sergeant, John (1623-1707), Roman Catholic controversialist and philosopher, was born on 2 February 1623 in Barrow upon Humber, Lincolnshire, the son of a respectable yeoman there, William Sergeant. After an early education under one Mr Rawson at school in the neighbouring village of Barton he was admitted as sizar to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1639. With his BA degree gained in 1643 and a recommendation from the master and fellows of his college he was appointed secretary to Thomas Morton, bishop of Durham. That employment introduced him to what he perceived as the devious misuse of texts and quotations in theological arguments; and with his protestant faith thereby undermined he was converted by George Gage to Catholicism. To avoid any danger from his erstwhile friends he was sent under the alias Holland (another being Smith) to the English College in Lisbon. A letter (in the Lisbon collection at Ushaw College) written apparently to his mother at this time refers apologetically to his abandonment of her after 'the great charges you had bestowed upon my education at Cambridge', but hints that 'some small allowance' would still be useful. He arrived at Lisbon on 4 November 1643 and after some eight months of devotional exercises was admitted as a student in June 1644. Finally ordained on 12 March 1649 he taught classics and theology, acted as procurator, and then as prefect of studies. Returning to England for some months in 1653 he successfully converted his parents and others to Catholicism and then resumed his academic duties in Lisbon until being sent to represent the college's interest at a meeting of the English chapter in London in 1655. He was appointed as secretary to that body on 19 December, and was to retain that laborious but influential post until ousted by John Leyburn as Rome's replacement late in 1667. 
It was while acting as secretary to the chapter that Sergeant made his enduring reputation as a Catholic controversialist, engaging in long-running debates on the rule of faith with such eminent protestant adversaries as John Bramhall, Jeremy Taylor, Henry Hammond, Meric Casaubon, John Tillotson, and Edward Stillingfleet. The best known of his numerous theological works (some of which appeared under the initials S. W.) were produced in this context. 'Schism Disarm'd' (1655) and 'Schism Dispatcht' (1657) were responses to Hammond -- an antagonist for whose diminished book sales and even for whose death these attacks were later held responsible; Bishop Richard Russell recalled reports of how the 'beardless' Catholic champion so battered Hammond's 'inflated ego that shame made him catch a fatal disease' (Sharratt, 175). In 'Sure-Footing in Christianity' (1665) and 'Faith Vindicated from Possibility of Falsehood' (1667), and later in his 'Six Catholick Letters' (1687, 1688), Sergeant continued with the vehemence of a convert to urge the superiority of an oral and practical Catholic tradition over protestant resort to the scriptures as a certain ground of faith. His self-confident belief in the validity of his own position and procedures led to charges of arrogance and incivility, and he provoked not only reasoned rejoinders but also personal abuse and threats. Even friendly assessors, while stressing moral excellence and the diverting nature of his conversation, conceded some warmth of temper and impetuosity, and in his autobiographical apologia entitled (when published in 1816) 'Literary life' (dated 1700), Sergeant himself recalled how he had been described as 'an ill natur'd, absurd fellow, in perpetuall squibbles with everyone', as well as 'a great Drunkard, seldom out of a Tavern, or Alehouse' (Sergeant, 55). Protestants even accused him of throwing fireballs to stoke up the great fire of London, and he describes how he exonerated himself only by pleading physical incapacity; having looked after friends during the previous year's plague he had become so sick that he survived only as 'a mere Skeleton, nothing but Skin and bones' (ibid., 64). Recovered from that condition by 1673 he was able to evade the arrest allegedly planned, after an anti-Catholic proclamation, by Tillotson and Stillingfleet by fleeing to France at an hour's notice. But while abroad he suffered attack from yet another quarter. His erstwhile friend Peter Talbot, the exiled archbishop of Dublin and a notorious trouble-maker, denounced him (under the pseudonym Lominus) as heretical in 'Blakloanae haeresis confutatio' (1675), and tried unsuccessfully to procure his censure by an assembly in Paris before approaching the authorities in Rome. 
For Talbot, Sergeant's sin was to be a Blackloist, or follower of Thomas White (alias Blacklo), under whose intellectual influence he had come in Lisbon. The perennially hostile and paranoid George Leyburn, too, recalled 'the great zeal he had shown at Lisbon towards Mr Blacklow's new notions of philosophy', and was convinced that it was through White's patronage that Sergeant had been appointed to his post as secretary of a chapter which consisted of 'a pack of Mr Blacloes friends' (G. Leyburn, 'Doctor Leyburn's Encyclical Answer', 1661, 86, 16). It was indeed widely accepted that Sergeant 'put himself entirely into the hands of White... to be trained and taught by him' (Warner, 230), and Russell described how, 'with White's demonstrations... always on his lips and White's books in his hands, he gloried in being his disciple' (Sharratt, 175). This is not to say that the two did not have disagreements. Having visited White for two months in Rotterdam, at the time of the printing of 'Statera morum' in 1660, Sergeant believed that even his mentor had gone too far towards encouraging moral laxity, and he published his own critical response as 'Statera appensa' in 1661. Nevertheless, Robert Pugh was justified in generally implicating Sergeant in White's machinations in his edited collection of letters published as 'Blacklo's Cabal' (1680); and since Blackloism implied not least the sacrifice of Jesuits in return for religious toleration, the Jesuit Pugh unsurprisingly described Sergeant there as one 'of evil reputation' (R. Pugh, 'Blacklo's Cabal', 1680, 'Epistle'). 
That reputation was confirmed when, following White's death in 1676, Sergeant not only continued to keep Blackloism alive, but was also, after his return to England in 1678, suspected of implication in the Popish Plot. It is this problematic episode which laid him open to charges of being at best temporarily deranged, at worst an informer against the Jesuits. By June 1679 he had withdrawn to Amsterdam with the intention, he claimed, of learning Hebrew. Two months later he was in Brussels, and then in October he returned to London to give information to the privy council ('The Informations of John Sergeant', 1681). He denied any personal knowledge of a plot, but his evidence seemed further to incriminate John Gavan, one of the priests already executed in the previous June. Following his deposition Sergeant himself was officially exonerated, licensed to live in the capital, and even granted a pension; but he paid a heavy personal and historiographical price, for he never overcame the suspicion and hostility of many fellow Catholics. 
Sergeant continued, however, to engage in both theological and philosophical controversy. At a time of sceptical inroads in both those areas he persisted with a typically Blackloist insistence on 'beating down scepticism' ('The Method to Science', 1696, preface) and establishing what he believed were secure intellectual foundations. His early interest in that matter is attested by a discussion on moral certainty which he had with John Wilkins, whom he met in Oxford during the protectorate; and that it remained of paramount concern is shown in the philosophical writings of his later years, including, most importantly, 'The Method to Science' and 'Solid Philosophy Asserted Against the Fancies of the Ideists' (1697). Fanciful ideists included such formidable proponents as Descartes and John Locke; but basing his own work on essentially Aristotelian foundations Sergeant utilized the earlier syntheses of Thomas White and Kenelm Digby to argue against those modern theorists and against any pragmatic replacement of certainty by probability as philosophy's goal. In this respect Sergeant can be seen as having tried to stem the tide of mainstream modern thought: his repudiation of compromise, his insistence on the need for absolute certainty, and his self-assured confidence in his own ability to attain it put him out of step with his contemporaries, and contributed further to his subsequent neglect; and despite being sometimes claimed as an intellectual precursor of Berkeley he has seldom appeared in histories of philosophy. His 'Method to Science' provoked a response from the Cartesian Antoine Le Grand, and Locke's heavily annotated copy of 'Solid Philosophy' survives, but Sergeant himself, while claiming that his critique had 'sunke Mr Locke's credit very much', disconsolately noted that 'he never reply'd one word' (Sergeant, 174). 
Sergeant's other late works include 'Ideae Cartesianae' (1698), a rejoinder to Le Grand; 'Raillery Defeated' (1699), another response to Talbot; 'Transnatural Philosophy' (1700), which warranted a second edition six years later; and his personal 'Account of the Chapter' (1706). Such writings, together with extremely acrimonious correspondence in which he was engaged only weeks before his death, confirm Dodd's judgement that in 1707 he died, as a surviving portrait (now at Ushaw College, Durham) shows him living, with pen still poised in hand. His reputation as a controversialist lived on: as late as 1714 a resolution was unanimously passed at the chapter of the English secular clergy that, for the sake of harmony, his provocative books 'containing sharp and severe reflections upon his brethren of the chapter... be suppressed and destroyed' (Gillow, 'Lit. biog. hist.', 3.619). But by then that 'troublesome spirit' (as Russell described him) had himself finally been laid to rest in St Pancras churchyard on 20 October 1707. 


@@@@@


doc= 25096


Sergison, Charles (1654-1732), naval administrator, was born in London. The exact date of his birth and the names of his parents are not known, but he had at least two siblings: an elder brother, Michael, and a sister, Sarah, later the wife of Thomas Gibson of Darlington, co. Durham. 
In July 1671 Sergison became a clerk at Chatham Dockyard. From 25 December 1675 he was a temporary clerk examining pursers' and victuallers' accounts under the Navy Board's chief clerk for victualling accounts, John Godwin. While employed in this work he married Anne Crawley ('b'. 1657) on 15 June 1676 at St Peter-le-Poer, London. She was a relation, possibly the daughter, of John Crawley, who too served as a Navy Board clerk from 1680 to 1717. 
On 26 March 1677 Sergison was promoted to fill the place previously held by Richard Gibson as one of two clerks serving the clerks of the acts, Thomas Hayter and James Sotherne. Sergison remained in this post until 1686, when James II and the Admiralty secretary Samuel Pepys began to make administrative initiatives to reverse the decline in fleet efficiency and to rectify the administrative backlog that had resulted from the naval retrenchment during the last years of Charles II's reign. As part of this, the Navy Board's traditional organization was temporarily set aside. Five special commissioners for current business were appointed for three years. These new commissioners appointed Sergison as their secretary at a salary of $300 and assigned him the duties of keeping their minutes and maintaining records. 
In August 1688 the commissioners reported their work complete, and in October the commission was dissolved, at which time many of the traditional offices of the Navy Board were revived, including that of clerk of the acts. On its revival Sergison at first retained the title of secretary, but in July 1689 he was named assistant clerk of the acts, while continuing to earn the same salary. In January 1690 James Sotherne, who had alone been clerk of the acts since 1679, left the Navy Board to become Admiralty secretary, and in his place Sergison was promoted. Sergison was the longest-serving of any clerk of the acts, holding office for more than twenty-nine years, from 6 February 1690 to 21 May 1719. For most of this period he held the office alone, though Samuel Atkins served jointly with him for four years from 11 February 1702 until Atkins's death in August 1706. 
Following William III's death Sergison's patent was renewed on 28 August 1702 as a joint appointment, and again as an individual appointment on 26 August 1706, 6 October 1707, and 16 November 1714. Throughout this period, which included the entire Nine Years' War (1688-97), the War of the Spanish Succession (1702-13), and the naval war with Spain in 1718-19, Sergison, as clerk of the acts, was fourth in seniority at the Navy Board (after the treasurer, controller, and surveyor of the navy) but the principal civil servant in charge of its daily business. In this he acted as its collective secretary, directly responsible for drawing up contracts and drafts of letters on such matters as finance, victualling, contracts, stores, dockyard management, sick and wounded, and ship maintenance and construction. All this took place at the board's office, located in a building erected after its smaller predecessor had burnt in 1673, but still at the angle between Seething Lane and Crutched Friars, Tower Hill. 
Sergison was granted arms in 1691, and in 1693 he bought the mortgage on a country house which he eventually purchased: Cuckfield Park, an Elizabethan structure originally built by the ironmaster Henry Bowyer in 1573 at the village of Cuckfield, Sussex. In later years Sergison enlarged Cuckfield Park by acquiring the nearby manors of Bentley Park (1697), Legh (1707), and Slaugham (1727). Throughout his career he appears to have been an extremely hard-working and diligent civil servant, who placed great emphasis on implementing modern administrative procedures. In addition to his work as clerk of the acts Sergison was elected MP for Shoreham in 1698 and retained that seat in the government's interest until defeated in 1702. 
Despite, or more likely because of, his diligent work Sergison did not enjoy good health. During 1699 Samuel Pepys, a previous clerk of the acts, mentioned him among several of his friends who were ill, naming Sergison as one who was having a distressingly difficult time. On 24 May 1699, in an audience with William III on the state of the navy, Sergison repeatedly requested retirement, as he believed his health required a country life. The king reportedly replied, 'I can not part with you; I have more need of you now than ever' (Merriman, 'Sergison Papers', 9). The king authorized him to go to the country temporarily, if his health required it, but not permanently. Sergison made similar requests in 1701, which probably led to Atkins's joint appointment, a request that Sergison repeated after Atkins's death, but to no avail. Having reached the age of sixty-five, Sergison finally retired to Cuckfield Park in 1719, where he lived until his death on 26 November 1732. He was buried in Cuckfield parish church. 
Typically for his time, Sergison took home with him on retirement the records of his office as well as a large collection of Navy Board ship models. His wife had died before him, and there were no children of the marriage; Sergison left Cuckfield Park and his naval collections to his elder brother's grandson. He also left a tenement in Leadenhall Street, London, named the King's Arms, and another in Chailey, Sussex, along with fifty cash bequests ranging from $10 to $5000, totalling nearly $28,000, to a wide range of relatives; to his household servants, who included at least one black servant; and to the poor of Cuckfield parish church, St Olave, Hart Street, London, and Christ's Hospital, London. Thomas Adley's wall monument to Sergison in the north aisle of Cuckfield parish church may well express Sergison's ideal of a civil servant. On it the figure of Truth is seated on a sarcophagus, holding a medallion portrait of Sergison, supported by a cherub. 


@@@@@


doc= 25097


Serle, Ambrose (1742-1812), colonial official and religious writer, was born on 30 August 1742 and may have been the Ambrose Serle baptized on 17 September 1742 at St Giles, Reading, son of Ambrose and Ann Serle. He entered the navy. In 1764, while living in or near London, Serle became a friend of William Romaine. Like Romaine he was an evangelical within the Church of England and other friends included John Thornton, John Newton, Augustus Toplady, and Legh Richmond. A series of letters from Romaine shows the deep affection and sympathy in religious matters which subsisted between him and Serle. 
When William Legge, second earl of Dartmouth, became secretary of state for the colonies in 1772, Serle was appointed one of his under-secretaries, and in January 1776 he was made clerk of reports. He went to America in 1774, accompanied the British army from 1776 to 1778, and during part of that time had control of the press in New York. Serle argued against the American War of Independence on religious grounds in his 'Americans Against Liberty' (1775); his correspondence is rich in information on American affairs. On returning from America in 1780 he settled at Heckfield, Hampshire. In 1795 Serle was a commissioner of the transport service and the care of prisoners of war; he was reappointed in 1803 and 1809. Serle was a prolific devotional writer, and most of his works went into several editions; Romaine circulated Serle's 'Horae solitariae' (1776) and 'Christian Remembrancer' (1787). He was married, probably to Martha Woodrooffe who married an Ambrose Serle at St Pancras Old Church on 29 October 1774. He died on 1 August 1812 and was buried in the churchyard at Broadwater, near Worthing. In his will he left over $20,000, in addition to his property, to his wife and the five children mentioned in the will. Another daughter, Jane (1780-1792), was Mrs Romaine's goddaughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 25098


Serlo (fl. late 10th cent.), monk, of St Augustine's, Canterbury, himself a shadowy figure of uncertain career, achievement, and reputation, is the most far-fetched of namesakes who have been associated with Serlo solely on the basis of his illusory literary output. 


@@@@@


doc= 25099


Bayeux, Serlo of (c.1050-1113x22), poet, was born about the middle of the eleventh century as the son of an unknown married priest, possibly at Bretteville-sur-Odon in Normandy. He should not be confused with his contemporary, Serlo, abbot of Gloucester (died 1104). The little that is known about Serlo of Bayeux's career comes primarily from his poems. He was a canon of Bayeux Cathedral who lost his paternal possessions on account of the fact that he was the son of a priest. Six of his eight known poems are concerned with his predicament as a priest's son, his fight to regain his lost property, and his appeal to Odo, bishop of Bayeux. They are (in chronological order): two invectives against anonymous knights, written probably before 1079 or 1080; two invectives against St Etienne at Caen (one to the monks and one to Abbot Gilbert) composed in 1079 or 1080; an encomium to his patron, Bishop Odo, written after 1087; and his sixth poem 'On the Defence of the Sons of Priests' dated to 1095 or 1096. A seventh poem is addressed to the English poet Muriel, a nun of Wilton, whose own work has not survived; it is one of a series of poems dedicated to her by Serlo, Baudri of Bourgueil, and Hildebert de Lavardin. Serlo's eighth poem is historically the most interesting, for it contains his eyewitness account of the English conquest of Bayeux by Henry I in 1105, which led to the defeat in the following year of the king's brother, Duke Robert Curthose, at Tinchebray. Apart from the horror and destruction inflicted by the Anglo-Norman assault, Serlo, as a ducal supporter, describes the city as having eleven churches (the cathedral being the largest), Bishop Odo's beautifully decorated court, and the house of the rich burgher Conan, as well as the precious chapter house and the ducal castle. The main occupation of the inhabitants was trade, a statement which leads Serlo to reproach his fellow citizens for crimes like robbery, false moneying, and oppressing widows and orphans. He ends his poem with an apostrophe to his new benefactor, an unidentified member of the ruling family who had given him a mantle. 
Serlo does not appear in the mortuary roll of Matilda, abbess of La Trinite at Caen, compiled in 1113, and was therefore probably still alive at that date. He had died by 1122, however, since his name appears in the mortuary roll of Vital, abbot of Savigny, compiled in that year. The position of his name there in third place, after Bishop Odo and the burgher Conan, indicates that he was a prominent inhabitant of Bayeux. 


@@@@@


doc= 25100


Serlo (d. 1147x9), abbot of Cirencester, also had connections in Gloucestershire, but should not be confused with the abbot of Gloucester of that name. He was the son of Sired the blacksmith and Leoflaed. He may have joined the monastic chapter at Salisbury Cathedral as a novice, and some time between 1111 and 1125 he became dean of the chapter. By 1125 he had moved to join the new Augustinian foundation at Merton in Surrey. Roger, bishop of Salisbury, had persuaded Henry I to grant Merton special privileges, and Serlo probably represented Roger's interests there. In 1129 Serlo and his mother sold the land which they owned in Gloucester to St Peter's Abbey with the agreement of Serlo's son, Bartholomew. The involvement of both mother and son in the sale raises the possibility that family land was being disposed of, and that Serlo may have had local connections in Gloucestershire. If so, it may have been a factor in his promotion to Cirencester. John of Worcester records that Cirencester College in Gloucestershire was refounded as an Augustinian abbey by Henry I in 1117, and Serlo was consecrated as the first abbot in 1131. The lands of the priest Regenbald, the chaplain of Edward the Confessor, were given by the king to the community in 1133. Bishop Roger of Salisbury may have played an important role in securing this gift for Cirencester, since he retained a life interest over the properties of Regenbald. Thanks to the patronage of the bishop of Salisbury, when Serlo died, on 30 January some time between 1147 and 1149, the community at Cirencester had a very secure endowment. It may be that Roger had also taken a personal interest in furthering the career of Serlo, who rose from being the son of an Anglo-Saxon blacksmith to become the ruler of one of the foremost centres of twelfth-century monasticism. 


@@@@@


doc= 25101


Serlo (b. c.1108, d. after 1206), Cistercian monk, a member successively of the communities of Fountains ('c'.1137) and Kirkstall (1147), where he probably died, appears only in Hugh of Kirkstall's history ('Narratio') of Fountains, written 'c'.1205/6-1226. Hugh was commissioned by John of York, abbot of Fountains (1203-11), and instructed to use the recollections of the near centenarian Serlo as the basis of his account. In the circumstances of its turbulent foundation in late 1132 from St Mary's, York, Fountains would seem, retrospectively, an English Citeaux, and the reformers at St Mary's the first Cistercians reborn. Serlo remarks in Hugh's 'Narratio' that he was an eyewitness of the events of 1132, knew the reformers by name and in person, came from their region, was related to some of them, and was brought up ('nutritus') with them: the word used suggests that he was an oblate at St Mary's. If so, he did not continue as a professed monk after the age of fifteen ('c'.1123): when he entered Fountains 'c'.1137 he twice remarks that he did so 'from the world'. Serlo did not identify his relatives, nor is there any indication elsewhere. This might suggest that they were humbler members of the reforming party, who did not achieve abbatial office, but 'died as monks'. This accords with what is not known about Serlo himself: he may have been in Archbishop Thurstan's party which catalytically visited St Mary's in October 1132, but he is not named then or later as a member of the archiepiscopal household -- he is not to be confused with the canon of York, Serlo, who was with Thurstan, and became one of the first important recruits to Fountains shortly before Serlo's own entry. He was not, as sometimes asserted, the brother of Abbot Ralph of Louth Park; he was not the author of poems on the battle of the Standard (1138) and the death of Somerled in an early Fountains manuscript; he is Gramaticus ('sic') only in a sixteenth-century note on the reverse of the sole surviving medieval fifteenth-century manuscript of the 'Narratio' which refers to John Bale's 'Scriptores' (1559). His recollection of early Fountains is slight, and his ghosted centenarian memoirs had been prefigured at Byland by those of Roger, second abbot of that house. 




@@@@@


doc= 25102


Sermon, William (bap. 1629, d. 1680), physician and inventor of medicines, was almost certainly the William, son of John Surman, who was baptized on 8 November 1629 at Eldersfield, Worcestershire. He had a brother John, and was a near relative of Edmund, son of Edmund and Jane Surman, baptized in 1644 at Naunton Beauchamp, Worcestershire, and of Edmund Sermon (died 'c'.1680), MA of St Mary's Hall, Oxford. 
Sermon apparently decided at the age of fourteen to study medicine, having observed (from behind a hedge, while out hare-shooting) a young woman giving birth alone in a wood. He served for many years in the parliamentary forces under George Monck, and after the Restoration established a fashionable practice in London. 
In 1661 Sermon was consulted by a patient suffering from dropsy; by the following year he had devised a pill which he successfully tried out on a friend. His pills must have contained aloes, as they were purgatives. In large doses (and strong men were recommended to take three at a time) they acted as emetics. To induce sweating he also offered a liquid medicine, presumably with an antimony base. Since the pills expelled all harmful humours and purified the blood, they were also reckoned to be effective against scurvy, venereal swellings, and jaundice. 
Once Sermon had -- by his own account -- achieved some noteworthy cures in London during the great plague, early in 1666 he was invited by the mayor to Bristol, when the plague erupted there. In three months Sermon claimed to have cured all those who had followed his directions. With a thriving practice he stayed in Bristol until June 1669, when he was summoned to New Hall, Essex, to treat his old commander, Monck, by then first duke of Albemarle, who was gravely ill with dropsy. Sermon restored him to health in twenty-eight days, with nineteen pills. Monck, as Sermon later unblushingly wrote, evacuated by stool no fewer than 12 gallons of water; the patient also took Sermon's liquid drink infused in wine. On Sermon's departure in July the grateful Monck gave him a glowing testimonial; he died six months later, but not, Sermon defiantly maintained, of dropsy. 
Sermon's career as a physician was now secure. A few weeks later Charles II requested the University of Cambridge to award him a doctorate of medicine. Sermon then moved to London and advertised his removal in the 'London Gazette', his address being East Harding Street, near Goldsmiths' Hall, Fetter Lane. Awarded his MD in 1670, and claiming to be physician-in-ordinary to the king, Sermon published his 'Advertisement' (1670) concerning his 'most famous and safe cathartique and diuretique Pills'; it ran to eleven editions by 1675. It was issued by the bookseller Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve, Little Britain, also the sole agent for the pills, which by 1672 had no fewer than seventy-eight retail outlets throughout Britain, twenty-four in London, one in Edinburgh, and one in Dublin. They sold at the high price of 4's'. for twenty pills, no reduction being given for quantity. 
In 1671 Sermon produced 'The Ladies Companion, or, The English Midwife'. Its frontispiece, drawn and engraved by William Sherwin, portrays the author at the age of forty-two as dark-eyed, bewigged, and in a doctor's gown, with a round face, and a slightly disdainful smile; the antiquary Anthony Wood called Sermon 'forward, vain and conceited'. Having declaimed in the preface about the 'black-mouth'd envy, that barks but cannot bite' excited by his successes, and having warned against worthless imitations of his pills, Sermon went on to cover obstetric subjects in plain and straightforward language. He demonstrated the empirical nature of medicine in his day by prescribing herbal remedies for various ailments, and stated that a woman was most likely to conceive a few days after menstruation ceased, particularly if she hung wild carrot seed over her left arm above the elbow. An interesting pregnancy test was to mix thoroughly equal quantities of white wine and the woman's urine; if the concoction resembled bean broth, she was with child. Sixteen rather imaginative copperplate illustrations showed the positions of full-term infants in the womb. 
Sermon's third work, 'A Friend to the Sick' (1673), narrated the most remarkable cures achieved by the pills. Prefaced by a sequence of laudatory verses by Payne Fisher, Edward Cocker, and William Winstanley, among others, it is of interest for being punctuated by a variety of rambling reminiscences. He was determined that what he called his great arcanum should not die with him, and he wrote out the formula on a large piece of parchment, sealed it, and entrusted it to his wife. She was the daughter of Thomas Saunders of Bristol, but nothing further is known about her, except that she died in her husband's lifetime without surviving children. On 15 October 1678 he married the twenty-year-old Edith Davis, of St Margaret's Lothbury; almost forty-nine, he gave his age as about forty-five. They had a son, George. Sermon died just over a year later: six days after making his will, he was buried at St Bride's, Fleet Street, on 9 January 1680. His wife was sole executor, but he referred affectionately to his first father-in-law, Thomas Saunders, asking him to oversee the will. Despite Sermon's efforts to ensure the survival of his pills, they vanished without trace, not being included in the list of patent medicines in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1748, 346-50). 


@@@@@


doc= 25103


Serres, Dominic (1722-1793), marine painter, was born at Auch in Gascony, France, and was educated at the famous Benedictine school at Douai. He is said to have been nephew of the archbishop of Rheims. His parents intended him for the church, but he ran away from his native town, and made his way on foot into Spain. He there shipped on board a vessel for South America as a common sailor, and eventually became master of a trading vessel to Havana, Cuba, where he was taken prisoner by a British frigate and brought to England in the 1750s. After his release he married and lived for a time in Northamptonshire before moving to London. There he met the gifted marine artist Charles Brooking and was much influenced by his work. He shows the same concern for light and shadow on the surface of the water and his drawing of waves is never stereotyped. 
In 1765 Serres became a member of the Incorporated Society of Artists, with which he exhibited for two years. On the establishment of the Royal Academy in 1768 he was chosen one of the foundation members, and was a constant contributor up to the time of his death ['see 'Founders of the Royal Academy of Arts]. Between 1761 and 1793 he exhibited eight works at the Society of Artists, twenty-one at the Free Society, and 105 at the Royal Academy. Redgrave noted that Serres spoke English with fluency, was a good Latin and Italian scholar, and also spoke Spanish and Portuguese. These accomplishments, together with his competence as a painter and his undoubted charm, secured him royal favour and numerous commissions. In 1784 his friend and neighbour Paul Sandby wrote: 'But Dom is grown a very great man, has been to Paris, dined with the King's architect and is going to paint the Grand Monarque' (Sandby, 167). In 1792 he succeeded Joseph Wilton as librarian to the academy. He was also appointed marine painter to George III, but he did not long hold these offices. 
Serres died on 6 November 1793, and was buried at St Marylebone Old Church. He had two sons, who followed his profession, John Thomas Serres and Dominic, and four daughters, two of whom were honorary exhibitors at the Royal Academy. A miniature portrait of the artist by Philip Jean (National Portrait Gallery, London) shows the artist in his sixties, seated at his easel and putting the finishing touches to a painting of ships. 
Forty-five paintings by Serres in the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, include a fine ship portrait 'HMS Royal George in the English Channel', numerous sea battles, and a series of eleven paintings illustrating the capture of Havana in 1762 based on information and sketches supplied by Lieutenant Durnsford, who served in the campaign. Engravings of the series were published by Durnsford during 1764-5. Other paintings and drawings are in the Royal Collection and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 25104


Serres, John Thomas (1759-1825), marine painter, was born in December 1759, the elder son of Dominic Serres (1722-1793), also a marine painter. Serres was trained by his father, a founding Royal Academician, and himself taught painting and marine draughtsmanship all his life. At the age of seventeen he was sufficiently accomplished to exhibit at the Royal Academy; his first teaching post was at the short-lived (1779-87) Maritime School in Paradise Row, Chelsea, London. Though it has not been established whether Serres was patronized by the second earl of Warwick, it is certain that Serres met a house painter in Warwick's employ, Robert Wilmot, whose artistically precocious daughter, Olivia, became his pupil, and with whom he fell in love ['see 'Serres, Olivia]. Serres made a continental expedition, to France (where he witnessed the fall of the Bastille in Paris in July 1789) and Italy where, perhaps through his father, he had been afforded certain introductions by Sir Joshua Reynolds. If the date 1790 on the most distinguished of Serres's paintings 'The Thames at Limehouse' (Royal Collection) is accepted, he returned to England before the end of that year. After some delay he married Olivia Wilmot (1772-1835) on 1 September 1791 at Barton on the Heath, Warwickshire, where her uncle was the incumbent. The bride's unstable temperament gave rise to some misgivings about the match among the families of both parties. 
On the death of his father in 1793 Serres succeeded him as marine painter to George III and to the duke of Clarence. His marriage was under strain but nevertheless produced various offspring, of which perhaps only two children, both daughters, survived infancy. As an official draughtsman to the Admiralty Serres was frequently absent from home, for as much as six months in 1800 when he was actually on sea service. He made 'drawings in the form of elevations' of the coasts of France and Spain, a selection of which were published in 'The Little Sea Torch' (1801) (Archibald, 197). He taught drawing at the Chelsea Naval School and in 1805 published, under joint authorship with his father, 'Liber nauticus, and Instructor in the Art of Marine Drawing', a work intended to assist his students which contained plates after his own work and that of his father. In his absence, his wife committed numerous infidelities, and several frauds, which included forging her husband's name on bank drafts to the extent that Serres became a declared bankrupt. In 1802 a separation was mutually agreed, trusteeship for the daughters being invested, 'inter alia', in Olivia's current lover. In 1804 Serres abducted one of the daughters, for which he was charged by the trustees with breaching the trust and consigned to prison. Olivia evidently pursued her artist's career, since in 1806, two years before Serres's release from prison, she was appointed landscape painter to the prince of Wales. 
On his release, Serres sought better fortune in Edinburgh, but his wife pursued him there and he was again committed. On release Serres ventured into theatre investment, becoming, in 1817, one of the proprietors of the Coburg Theatre and later its scenic director. This project lost him what money he had made during the closing years of the war. The collection of old master and contemporary drawings Serres had inherited from his father were dispersed at about this time. His financial adversities were further compounded by the refusal in 1822 of George IV (who as prince of Wales had patronized his wife) to continue the patronage his father had shown Serres. Though refused permission to act as the king's official draughtsman on his royal visit to Scotland in 1822, Serres nevertheless produced 'a set of large and well-crafted watercolours recording the event' (Deuchar, 482) (National Maritime Museum, London). Again imprisoned for debt, the artist was released on grounds of health in December 1825, but required to live within the rules of the king's bench. Serres died on 28 December 1825. 
Serres worked skilfully in various media but, while his accuracy in ship depiction was akin to that of his father, John Thomas Serres was inclined to overdramatize weather conditions, as in, for example, his painting of George III's yacht 'Royal Sovereign' (1804; National Maritime Museum, London). He is, however, more extensively represented at the National Maritime Museum than his father. Though his early triumph with 'The Thames at Limehouse' (which gained the approbation of George III) was perhaps unequalled by his later work, despite his disastrous marriage, Serres continued to produce work of sensitivity in its depiction of Thames-side life. 


@@@@@


doc= 25105


Lavinia Janetta Horton Ryves (1797-1871) was the elder daughter and eldest surviving child of Olivia and John Thomas Serres. Born in Liverpool in 1797, her childhood was disrupted by the disputes of her parents, and throughout her life she had divided loyalties. In 1822 she married the portrait painter Anthony Thomas Ryves (died 1873?), with whom she had six children before divorcing him for cruelty and misconduct, in 1841. Her father opposed the marriage, and cut her out of his will in favour of her younger sister, Britannia. Following her mother's death in 1835, she styled herself Princess Lavinia of Cumberland and duchess of Lancaster, and asserted the legitimacy of her mother's claims. Sir Gerald Noel again took up the case, forming a committee of supporters, and attempts were made in 1842 and 1844 to claim the $15,000 supposedly left to Mrs Serres by George III. The claim failed, the court of chancery maintaining again that it had no jurisdiction over royal wills. In 1858 she published 'An appeal for royalty: a letter to her most gracious majesty Queen Victoria from Lavinia, princess of Cumberland and duchess of Lancaster', in which were published all the documents in the case, including those relating to a supposed marriage between George III and Hannah Lightfoot. In 1861 she obtained a declaration of the validity of her parents' marriage under the 'Legitimacy Declaration Act', and in 1866 brought a further case (with her son, William Henry Ryves) seeking a declaration that the duke of Cumberland and Olive Wilmot were lawfully married, and that Olive (Olivia), later Mrs Serres, was their legitimate child. The attorney-general, Sir Roundell Palmer, opposed their petition, and the jury found unanimously that the documents were forgeries. Following the rejection of her claims, Lavinia Ryves published a pamphlet, 'Ryves v. the Attorney-General: was Justice Done?' in 1868. She died on 7 December 1871 at Haverstock Hill, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 25106


Serres, Olivia (1772-1835), royal impostor, was born in Warwick on 3 April 1772, daughter of Robert Wilmot, house painter, and his wife, Anna Maria Brunton. She was baptized on 15 April 1772 at St Nicholas's Church, Warwick. Her father having embezzled the county rates, her parents subsequently moved to London, and Olivia spent much of her youth in the house of her uncle, Dr James Wilmot, fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, and rector of Barton on the Heath, Warwickshire. In 1790, two men were hanged for burglary on her evidence. She married, on 1 September 1791, at Barton on the Heath, John Thomas Serres (1759-1825) who had been her drawing master in London and who in 1793 was appointed marine painter to the king. She was at this time under age, and the marriage was conducted by special licence, her father having sworn an affidavit to their relationship and consenting to the marriage. The marriage was unhappy, and the couple separated in 1802, having had two daughters and at least one son. 
Olivia Serres supported herself by painting and teaching, exhibiting landscapes at the Royal Academy between 1793 and 1808, and at the British Institution from 1806 to 1811; her work has been accounted competent. In 1806 she was appointed landscape painter to the prince of Wales, whom she subsequently plagued with an incoherent correspondence. During this period she also produced a number of romantic literary works, including a novel, 'St Julian' (1805), 'Flights of Fancy: Poems' (1806), and an opera, 'The Castle of Avola' (1805). She came into the public eye in 1813, when she published a memoir of her uncle, Dr Wilmot, who had died in 1807, under the title 'The Life of the Author of Junius's Letters, the Revd James Wilmot, DD', claiming that she had documents to prove that he was the anonymous author of the controversial letters of the 1770s. A lengthy and heated argument in the pages of the 'Gentleman's Magazine' ensued, which demonstrated the absurdity of Mrs Serres's assertions. The correspondence revealed a deep sense of paranoia: she wrote that 'I have, too, 'political enemies -- powerful ones', whose characters and transactions,... have subjected me to much secret oppression' ('GM', 1813, 414). In a pamphlet in 1817, she sought to re-establish the authenticity of her case, on the basis of the handwriting in the documents which were assumed by everyone else to be forged. 
In 1817, the imposture escalated. Olivia Serres made her first claim to being the daughter of Henry Frederick, duke of Cumberland, brother of George III. In a petition to the prince regent in 1818 she alleged that she was the daughter of the duke and a Mrs Payne, a sister of Dr Wilmot, and wife of a captain in the Royal Navy. Following the death of George III, her delusions of grandeur increased. Now she claimed to be the 'legitimate' daughter of the duke: she styled herself the Princess Olive of Cumberland, placed the royal arms on a coach she had hired, and dressed her servants in the royal livery. According to her fantasy, Dr Wilmot was married secretly to the Princess Poniatouski, sister of King Stanislaus of Poland, from which marriage a daughter was born. This daughter, who was brought up by Wilmot's sister, Mrs Payne, came to the attention of the duke of Cumberland who married her on 4 March 1767. Mrs Serres claimed to be the daughter of this marriage, and to have been substituted for a stillborn daughter of the Robert Wilmots, who were subsequently reputed to be her parents. She offered a large quantity of documents as corroborative evidence, including papers apparently written or witnessed by the earl of Warwick, who had died in 1816. 
In July 1821 Olivia Serres was arrested for debt, but she moved that the proceedings be stayed on grounds that as a member of the royal family she was exempt from arrest in civil cases. She had herself rechristened in September 1821 at Islington as Olive, daughter of the duke of Cumberland and his first wife, Olive, but the privilege was denied, on grounds that she had already put in bail. At this point she produced what purported to be an early will by George III, leaving $15,000 to 'Olive, the daughter of our brother of Cumberland', and in 1822 applied through the courts to see George III's will. This was also denied, on grounds that the courts had no jurisdiction over royal wills. 
Mrs Serres was not without supporters. The 'British Luminary' took up her cause, and the genealogist Henry Nugent Bell was said to have reported favourably on it. More importantly, Sir Gerald Noel presented a petition to parliament in 1823, and in June moved that it be referred to a select committee, which motion was seconded by the radical Joseph Hume. Sir Robert Peel refuted her claims on the floor of the house by proving that her documents were fabricated, and caused much mirth by pointing out that if her English claims were rejected, 'the lady had two strings to her bow', for she had also claimed to be a legitimate descendant of the kings of Poland ('GM', 1823, 637-8). The motion was rejected without a division. 
The estranged husband of Olivia Serres, John Thomas Serres, who had been cast out of royal favour on account of his wife's pretensions, died in poverty in the rules of the king's bench on 28 December 1825, and in his will repudiated any belief in Olivia's claims. She herself died in the rules of the king's bench, in Trinity Square, Southwark, on 21 November 1835 and was buried in St James's Church, Piccadilly, on 3 December, under the name of Olive Cumberland. In her will, which was sworn at under $20, she left 1's'. to each of 'my cousins of the Royal House of Guelph... to enable them to purchase a prayer for to teach them repentence for their past cruelties and injuries to myself, their legitimate and lawful cousin' (Pendered and Mallett, 266-7). In addition to the works published under her own name, she wrote much anonymously, and was probably responsible for the publication of the 'Secret History of the Court of England' which appeared under Lady Anne Hamilton's name in 1828. 




@@@@@


doc= 25107


Service, James (1823-1899), politician and businessman in Australia, was born on 27 November 1823 at Kilwinning, Ayrshire, the son of Robert Service (1794-1883), a sewing agent and lay preacher, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Niven. He was educated at Kilwinning and at Glasgow College and opened a school at Saltcoats, but had to abandon it when he contracted tuberculosis. In 1846 he joined the tea and coffee business of Thomas Corbett & Co. in Glasgow, and became a partner. About 1850 he married Marian Allan; they had two daughters, but the marriage broke down in the 1850s. 
Service emigrated to Victoria, Australia, in 1853. His parents soon followed and his father, a staunch 'moral force' Chartist, became prominent in the Churches of Christ and the temperance movement. James Service founded an importing house specializing in Robur tea, was a founder of the Commercial Bank of Australia in 1866 and chairman of directors from 1871 to 1881, and became an active chairman of the Alfred Hospital's board (1871-86). Soon known as a 'red-hot' Chartist, he gained political experience as chairman of the Emerald Hill 'model municipality'. He was elected to the legislative assembly in 1857 and joined William Nicholson's ministry as president of the board of land and works (27 October 1859 - 3 September 1860); supporting the populist land convention, he carried a radical bill designed to wipe out the 'social evil' of land monopoly. The legislative council returned it with some 250 amendments and, when Nicholson caved in, Service resigned from the ministry. He brought about provision for state aid to the Jewish religion, helped to force through the 'Common Schools Act' of 1862, and carried the (Sir Robert Richard) Torrens reform of land transfer. 
After two years in Europe, Service returned in 1865 but was not re-elected until 1874, when he became treasurer (31 July 1874-7 August 1875) in G. B. Kerferd's ministry. His bold budget, which attempted to systematize the tariff and introduce direct taxation, led to the ministry's downfall. In 1877 the radical protectionist Graham Berry came to power. After 'black Wednesday' -- 8 January 1878 -- when judges and civil servants were dismissed, Service soon became leader of the opposition and brought Berry down, but his scheme for reforming relations between the two houses was unpopular and his five months' premiership (5 March-3 August 1880) was unproductive. He resigned his seat and again set out on a long excursion to Europe. 
In the Victorian context, protectionists were usually called 'liberals' and free-traders 'conservatives'. Service was a free-trader who did not 'go conservative' and was prepared to compromise sensibly over the tariff: as he said of himself, in a speech in 1883, he was 'a liberal of the Gladstone stamp'. He had strong egalitarian sympathies and supported the rights of trade unions but stressed the mutual interests of the classes; he gave bonuses, pegged to the firm's profits, to his own employees. 
On his return from Europe Service formed a coalition with Berry (8 March 1883-18 February 1886). It was a triumph. He reformed the civil service and the railways, and abolished patronage; the public service board and the railways commission were established in 1883. As treasurer, he did not allow the boom to get out of control. Alfred Deakin revered Service as a model premier conducting a cabinet in which nothing was muddled. 
Service's main contribution was to encourage the Australian colonies onto the international stage and to originate a sustained campaign for federal union. He backed Queensland's attempt to annex New Guinea and used the French threat to annex the New Hebrides to force a federal 'convention' in November 1883. He won agreement to confederate and form a federal council, but New South Wales and South Australia refused to co-operate; the council was hamstrung from the start, though it continued to meet into the 1890s. Colonial Office officials saw Service as disloyal and ignorant, but modified their views after German annexation of north-eastern New Guinea and French occupation of the New Hebrides. Believing in the empire's civilizing mission and in Australia's destiny as a nation, however unwisely enthusiastic, Service was a harbinger of new imperial expansion and definition of Australian regional interests. His contribution to the federal movement has never been adequately recognized. 
On urgent medical advice, Service resigned the premiership in February 1886 and went overseas again. While away, he was a vigorous Victorian delegate to the 1887 colonial conference. He rejected the offer of a privy councillorship as he had earlier a knighthood. He joined the legislative council in 1888, but resisted all efforts to recall him to prominence. In 1889 he persuaded the Melbourne chamber of commerce to contribute $500 to the striking London dockers. At the Melbourne banquet to the intercolonial conference members in 1890 he made the famous reference to the tariff being 'the lion in the way' to federation, and was a leading conciliator during the major strikes of 1890-91. In his last years he devoted himself, chairman once again, to rescuing the Commercial Bank from its parlous condition. 
Service was a lean, sprightly, tallish man, balding with a full grey beard. Courteous and sociable, he bore few grudges and did not resort to personalities. He had no trace of snobbishness. His honesty was patent and, while adept at compromise, he was no trimmer. He was not an orator, but, as Deakin wrote, his 'strength lay in the lucidity of his thought and the singularity of his language, his skill in marshalling masses of facts or figures' ('Review of Reviews', Australasian edn, November 1892). He was highly cultivated and well read, reminding J. A. Froude of a philosopher or an Anglican bishop. He had been a sceptic since his youth but retained an interest in religious questions. Most extraordinary of all in Victorian Melbourne -- having separated from his wife, about 1860 he took another 'wife', Louisa Hoseason Forty, lived down the gossip, and won wide affection as a public figure. 
Service died in East St Kilda, Melbourne, on 12 April 1899 and was buried in Melbourne general cemetery on the 14th. He was survived by Louisa Forty and their daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 25108


Service, John (1833-1884), Church of Scotland minister and writer, was born at Campsie, Stirlingshire, on 26 February 1833, son of John Service, print engraver, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Clachar. Robert Dalglish MP, the owner of the calico works at which Service's father worked, took an interest in the development of the promising youngster who moved on from Campsie parish school to Glasgow University, where he studied for the ministry. While there he was much influenced by the astronomer John Pringle Nichol. Service worked as editor of the 'Dumbarton Herald' (1857), and from 1858 to 1862 he was sub-editor of Mackenzie's 'Imperial Dictionary of Universal Biography'. On 29 April 1859 he married Jessie, daughter of James Bayne, a Glasgow music teacher, with whom he had seven children. 
Licensed by the presbytery of Glasgow on 12 January 1861, Service was ordained as missionary in the parish of Hamilton, Lanarkshire, in 1862. After ten months his health broke down and he moved to Australia. He was on the point of returning to Scotland when he was persuaded instead to go to Tasmania, where he became minister of St John's Presbyterian Church, Hobart Town. He remained there from 1866 to 1869, before returning to Scotland in May 1870. He was briefly assistant to Charles Strong at Anderston, Glasgow, until he was presented to the parish of Inch, Wigtownshire, where he was admitted on 11 April 1872. Service drew on his Australian experiences in writing a novel, 'Lady Hetty' (1875), which initially appeared in 'Good Words' as 'Novantia'. He attracted attention through a volume of sermons, 'Salvation Here and Hereafter' (1877), which revealed him as a thoughtful churchman, unusually well attuned to changing popular beliefs. The attention thus aroused led to his translation to the charge of Hyndland, in the west end of Glasgow, to which he was admitted in December 1878. He had been recognized by Glasgow University in the previous year, with the degree of DD. In his time at Hyndland, Service confirmed his growing reputation: as his obituary stated 'Though he never attracted great crowds, there was not in all Scotland so fascinating a preacher for a cultured audience' ('Glasgow Herald', 17 March 1884). 
Service was not prominent in church courts or in any other public role but exerted influence through numerous articles in magazines and newspapers, particularly the 'Glasgow Herald'. He was a contributor to the controversial edition of 'Scotch Sermons' (1880), and wrote an essay on Robert Burns for T. H. Ward's 'English Poets'. Service died at his home, 6 Spring Gardens, Kelvinside, Glasgow, on 15 March 1884. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25109


Setchel, Sarah (1813-1894), watercolour painter, was born in London, and baptized on 4 June 1813 at St Paul's, Covent Garden, the younger of the two daughters of John Frederick Setchel (died 1846), bookseller in King Street, Covent Garden, and his wife, Mary. Her father collected art books, and wanted his daughters to become artists, but Sarah Setchel did not show any interest in drawing until after she left school, when she began copying in the British Museum and the National Gallery; she also took lessons in miniature painting on ivory from Louisa Sharpe. She exhibited six portraits at the Royal Academy between 1832 and 1845, and also exhibited fifteen pictures at the Society of British Artists in Suffolk Street until 1840. At first her subjects were usually children, but from 1834 she also included literary subjects, scenes from Shakespeare and Scott. Scenes of humble life and cottagers in particular appealed to her. 
In 1841 Sarah Setchel was elected a member of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, and in 1842 exhibited what came to be known as 'The Momentous Question', which established her reputation and led to many commissions. The subject matter was taken from George Crabbe's 'Tales of the Hall' (1819), and when it was first exhibited the painting appeared with a long quotation from Crabbe. Depicting a prison interior, with a girl visiting a young man under threat of death, it became very popular as an engraving by Samuel Bellin. Her next exhibit was a miniature of her father (exh. New Society of Painters in Water Colours, 1845); it was much admired by the art critic of 'The Athenaeum', who said that it placed her 'at the head of all lady miniature painters' ('The Athenaeum', 26 April 1845). 
However, Sarah Setchel's eyesight was deteriorating, and she began to paint and exhibit less. After the death of her father in 1846 she gave lessons in watercolour painting to Mary Ann Criddle, who also suffered from poor eyesight and had given up painting in oils. She exhibited a few times at the New Society of Painters in Water Colours between 1848 and 1856, and two of her literary paintings were engraved: 'And Ye shall Walk in Silk Attire' (exh. 1848), and 'The Heart's Resolve' (exh. 1850), from Crabbe's tale of 'Jessie and Colin' (engraved by Bellin). In 1860 Sarah Setchel went to Switzerland, where she consulted a German eye specialist in Graeforth, but her eyes continued to get worse. She moved to Sudbury, near Harrow, Middlesex, to live with her sister, and only exhibited two more paintings, in the 1866-8 winter exhibitions of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours; she resigned from the society in 1886. Sarah Setchel died unmarried on 9 January 1894 at 3 Lyon Villas, Sudbury. Two of her watercolours, one of which is 'The Momentous Question', are held in the Victoria and Albert Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 25110


Sir Alexander Seton (d. c.1348), who made a bond in 1308 with two other Bruce adherents to defend Robert I and the realm of Scotland, was nevertheless in English service from 1309 until 1314. Personal considerations, probably concerning the security of his Lothian lands, may have led to this inconsistency, but his defection to the Scottish side on the eve of Bannockburn, reputedly bringing crucial intelligence of the poor morale in the English camp, led to Seton's rapid rehabilitation. He became one of a small group of trusted counsellors at the heart of royal service, attending the king regularly and holding the position of steward of Robert I's household in 1317, and steward to the king's infant son David from August 1328. 
Seton was employed as an envoy in truce negotiations between 1317 and 1320, and his name appears on the declaration of Arbroath. He held Tranent, Myles, Elphinstone, and Falside in Haddingtonshire, in addition to land at Barns and the nearby east mill beside Haddington, these last being given by King Robert for services in Ireland as well as Scotland. As a further mark of favour, his lands of Seton were erected into a free barony, with the town of Seton achieving burghal status. By January 1328 he was governor of the town of Berwick, then a place of considerable military activity. His sons Alexander and William were killed fighting for David II in 1332-3, while during the siege of Berwick by Edward III in 1333, a third son, Thomas, was reputedly hanged on Edward's orders in sight of the town's garrison. After the battle of Halidon Hill in the same year, Seton accepted the need to maintain his position by working with the English victors, and attended Edward Balliol's parliament in 1334, but he was willing to swear allegiance to David II as soon as the Scottish side proved triumphant. Seton died 'c'.1348, having been predeceased by all his sons. 



@@@@@


doc= 25111


Seton, Alexander, first earl of Huntly (d. 1470), magnate, was the eldest son of 
More importantly, however, Seton also became involved in the negotiations to release James I from his long period of captivity in England. Knighted by 1419, he visited James while the king was with Henry V in France in 1422 and took part in talks held in England in 1423 and 1424. This not only brought him royal favour, it also brought him into contact with leading figures at court, among them William Crichton, who was to become chancellor of Scotland during the minority of James II. Seton never became a major political figure, but he remained on the fringes of the political scene both at the centre and in the north-east, a position that his eldest son was able to build on. In or about 1440 he left Scotland on pilgrimage, possibly carrying the heart of James I. He died on his journey between 31 August 1440 and 3 April 1441, probably in Rhodes, from where James's heart was returned to Scotland in 1444. 
The early successes of Seton's son were based on the relationship Seton had developed with William Crichton, chancellor from 1439. In 1438 the younger Alexander divorced his first wife, Egidia Hay (died 1441), in order to marry Crichton's elder daughter, Elizabeth (died 1479), disinheriting his own eldest son in the process. Even at this early stage the younger Seton's territorial ambitions were evident, since he forced Egidia to resign into his hands the liferent of her family estates. So desirable was the union with Elizabeth Crichton that Seton was prepared to obtain his divorce from Egidia fraudulently, denying that he had received a papal dispensation for the marriage in 1426 and concealing the offending document 'with malicious intent in his own house' (Seton, 277). This deception came to light only in 1441, after the death of Egidia Hay, when Seton asked for, and was given, absolution for his transgressions. With the benefit of Crichton's support Seton set about establishing the family in the north-east, the two men working together to frustrate the claims of Robert, Lord Erskine (died 1452), to the vacant earldom of Mar, effectively allowing Seton to step into the vacuum created. 
Seton was knighted in 1439 or 1440 and most probably promoted to earl of Huntly in June 1445, as part of the settlement between the warring Crichton and Douglas-Livingston factions. In 1446, however, he and his supporters were heavily defeated in battle at Arbroath, when the new earl travelled south to aid his Ogilvy allies in their struggle with the Lindsays over the office of justiciar of Arbroath Abbey. As a result he was forced to retire to Strathbogie and concentrate on consolidating his regional position. His re-emergence onto the political stage came with James II's personal entry into politics in 1449. The young king chose to use Huntly as his principal northern ally during the struggles with the earls of Douglas, Crawford, and Ross that dominated the 1450s. Huntly was granted the lordship of Badenoch and castle of Ruthven in 1451, but proved unable to stand against the MacDonalds at this stage; Ruthven was destroyed by Ross's men. In 1452 Huntly achieved greater success when he marched south to confront the earl of Crawford, defeating him at Brechin despite the loss of two of his own brothers. The victory was fundamental in securing James II's position, and the contemporary Auchinleck chronicle suggests that at the time Huntly was operating in an official capacity as royal lieutenant. The chronicle states that 'thair was with the erll of huntlie fer ma [men] than was with the erll of craufurd becaus he displayit the kingis banere and said it was the kingis actioun and he was his luftennend' (McGladdery, 173). For Huntly, however, the opportunity to avenge his defeat at the hands of the Lindsays in 1446 and further establish his regional dominance was possibly just as important as any desire to secure royal authority. 
Huntly's opportunism was again highlighted by his swift reaction to the final defeat of the Douglas faction at Arkinholm in 1455. Within seventeen days he had arranged the marriage of his teenage son and heir, George, to the widow of Archibald Douglas, earl of Moray (who fell in the battle), in an attempt to add that earldom to the family estates. On this occasion, though, James II reacted equally swiftly, proceeding to forfeit the earldom rather than allow the Setons to gain total dominance in the north-east. Huntly had some consolation when George was allowed to marry the king's sister Annabella after his divorce from the unfortunate countess of Moray. 
In or about 1457 Huntly changed the family name to Gordon to try to secure the succession of George, his eldest son by his second marriage. In 1460 he was present at the siege of Roxburgh when James II was killed by the bursting of one of his own cannon. He has been described as a councillor in the early minority government of James III, but if this is true he seems to have taken little interest in his duties, preferring to remain in the north-east. After 1465 he apparently played a much more limited role in the family's concerns, allowing his son George to direct affairs. He and his first wife, Egidia Hay, the daughter of Sir John Hay of Tullibody, whom he married in 1427, had a son, Sir Alexander Seton, ancestor of the Setons of Touch, Stirlingshire. His second marriage, to Elizabeth Crichton, produced four sons and at least four daughters: George Gordon, the eldest, succeeded him as the second earl of Huntly, and the second son, Sir Alexander Gordon of Midmar, was the ancestor of the Gordons of Midmar. Alexander Gordon, first earl of Huntly, died on 15 July 1470 at Huntly Castle and was buried in the cathedral church of Elgin. By the time of his death he had effectively established the Setons of Gordon as the most powerful family in the north of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 25112


Seton, Alexander (d. 1542), Dominican friar and evangelical reformer, was unusual among Scottish Dominicans in having noble parentage, being the son of Sir Alexander Seton of Touch and Tullibody and Elizabeth Erskine, daughter of Thomas, earl of Mar. He was not so unusual in his education, being recorded in the university rolls of St Andrews as becoming bachelor and licentiate in 1516 and 1518 respectively. He may also be identified with the 'Alexander de Scotia', who was given permission to study in Paris by the Dominican chapter-general in 1525. From 1530 to 1533 he was mainly in residence at St Andrews, acting as the prior of the Dominican convent there. Books survive which were in his use in the convent, some with his subscription. His next recorded appearance was in 1536, when he gave a series of Lenten sermons in St Andrews. In these he argued that it was not possible for man to satisfy for his sins and that redemption lay in faith alone. His teaching has been likened to that of John Macalpine (Maccabeus) with whom he was familiar. Once the series of sermons was over and Seton had left the town, another preacher denounced his teachings and his omissions, since he had not mentioned purgatory, pardons, pilgrimages, or prayers to saints, all of which were presumably counted by Seton as futile 'works'. The latter speedily returned, rang the church bell, and preached a sermon in his own defence. 
Even at this point there is no suggestion that Seton felt his beliefs were in sufficient conflict with the church for him to need to leave his order. Indeed, he signed, with his name, order, and house, a copy of the works of Origen in 1536, and so was presumably in the convent in St Andrews at that time. In his sermon in reply, however, he attacked the bishops of Scotland, especially for failing to preach, which he argued was essential to their office. This was a point to be raised in the provincial councils of the Scottish church in the years after Seton's death, but it was not an issue to which Archbishop James Beaton warmed. Calderwood's claims of Seton's popularity with the people may have a tint of exaggeration, but it does seem fairly certain that he was liked by the king and had an accustomed place as royal confessor at court. This post was more normally held by a Franciscan, however, and so it is not surprising that the archbishop stirred up the traditional rivalries between the orders, thereby making life so uncomfortable for Seton that he left Scotland. From Berwick he wrote a letter to James V which is a curious mixture of self-defence, bitter recrimination, and accusations that his enemies were blinding the king's judgement. 
Once in England, Seton became a trouble to the Henrician church authorities. By July 1539, when he was presented to the rectory of Fulbeck, Lincolnshire, he enjoyed the patronage of Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk, who obtained denization for him and whose chaplain he became. In November 1539 he was reported to have preached in London that 'faith only did justify and that works were not helping nor profitable to any man but only to declare and testify our faith' ('LP Henry VIII', Addenda, 1/2 no. 1463 (18)). At this moment he may have been hoping for Thomas Cromwell's support, but on 20 April following Cromwell dissociated himself from Seton, who nevertheless continued to receive support from Suffolk, or perhaps from the duke's evangelically minded wife, for in September 1542 he was presented to a second rectory in Lincolnshire. A sermon he delivered in St Antholin's, London, on 13 November 1541 led to his becoming embroiled in a dispute concerning free will and justification, although the charge that he had preached without episcopal licence may have seemed to the authorities just as serious an issue. His recantation on 18 December cannot have been brought about simply by the illness which caused his death late in 1542, in Suffolk's London house, for it seems that Seton had always had a strong regard for self-preservation. Despite his refusal to stand trial in Scotland and his recantation at Paul's Cross, he was remembered and revered by the reformers as a good preacher, and an account of his travails in 1541 was included by Foxe in the 'Acts and Monuments'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25113


Seton, Alexander, first earl of Dunfermline (1556-1622), lord chancellor of Scotland, was the fourth son of George Seton, fifth Lord Seton (c.1530-1586), and Isabel Hamilton (1529-1604), daughter of Sir William Hamilton of Sanquhar. 
Seton's fervently Catholic father destined him, as a younger son, for the church. Mary, queen of Scots, his godmother, gave him the temporalities of the priory of Pluscarden as a godchild's gift; he received the title of prior when aged nine. In 1571, when he was about fifteen, he became a student at the Jesuit-run German College in Rome, where he acquired an excellent classical education and an enthusiasm for books. According to his kinsman Alexander Seton, Viscount Kingston (died 1691), he was 'a great humanist in prose and poesie, Greek and Latine; well versed in the mathematics and great skill in architecture and herauldrie' (Maitland, 63). How long he stayed in Italy is not clear, but there is no evidence that he took holy orders. From Italy he went to France, where he studied law. During his absence he was deprived of Pluscarden for failure to conform to the established protestant church. 
By late 1580 Seton was back in Scotland, where the political climate had improved for him with the overthrow of the regime of the regent, James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton. In 1581 he recovered Pluscarden. He narrowly avoided serious trouble in 1583 when a Jesuit, William Holt, who had been staying at the family house at Seton, was seized as he was about to depart for France. Holt was carrying a letter from Seton to his old schoolmaster in Rome expressing the hope that the true faith might be restored. Seton underwent an interrogation, but avoided real unpleasantness when the ultra-protestant regime of the Ruthven raiders lost its grip on power in June 1583. 
When James VI began his personal rule in November 1585 with the overthrow of the regime of James Stewart, fourth earl of Arran, Seton was well positioned for a political career. He had acquired legal expertise, he had supported the coalition that overthrew Arran, and he and his family had been loyal supporters of Queen Mary and had suffered for it. James always set great store by men who, like Seton, had been loyal to his mother and then transferred that loyalty to himself. So in December 1585 Seton became a privy councillor, and on 27 January 1586 an extraordinary lord of session. He served on the committee of the articles in the parliament of 1587, which enacted the legislative programme drawn up by the king and his principal adviser, Sir John Maitland, later first Lord Thirlestane, and was rewarded when the lands of Pluscarden were exempted from the 'Act of Annexation of Kirk Lands to the Crown' which this parliament enacted. These lands, and those of Urquhart, were combined in a barony which he received in that year. 
In February 1588 Seton had to make a personal decision of great importance. The king named him an ordinary lord of session; his colleagues were suspicious about his religious views and insisted that he commit himself to the established church by taking communion and subscribing its confession of faith. He did so, and for the rest of his life conformed outwardly to the official church; he was what the English called a church papist. This was perfectly satisfactory to the king, who, like Queen Elizabeth, was not interested in making windows into men's souls. As long as Seton conformed outwardly, James was not concerned about his private beliefs. To two Scottish Jesuits who visited him clandestinely in 1605 Seton professed his loyalty to the ancient faith, but explained that the time for an attempt to restore it had not yet come. 'He is now all-powerful in Scotland, but he will attempt nothing until he sees a solid foundation of hope', they concluded. 'Meanwhile he takes his portion in this life, though at the risk of that which is eternal' (Forbes-Leith, 187). 
Seton's career continued to flourish despite the suspicions of the dominant presbyterian wing of the kirk, which were not allayed by his marriage in 1592, at the age of thirty-six, to Lilias Drummond (died 1601), the teenaged daughter of the third Lord Drummond, an unpolitical and conformist family. In 1593 Seton became president of the court of session and chairman of a committee to manage the property of Queen Anne, James's equally young wife, whose favourite lady-in-waiting, Jean Drummond, was Lilias's sister. Anne became his patron, and in 1596, in her capacity as lady of Dunfermline, conferred on him the office of hereditary bailie and justiciar of the regality of Dunfermline, which was worth about $20,000 Scots a year. Seton's committee was so successful in managing the queen's finances that in January 1596 James made it the nucleus of an eight-man group to manage the royal finances, which were in a chaotic state. The membership of this committee, dubbed the Octavians, was alarming to the kirk: they were, in the words of a contemporary, 'all almost either Papists known or inclining to Popery or malignancy' (Row, 163). Seton deepened the kirk's suspicions by speaking in favour of the return from exile of the Catholic George Gordon, sixth earl of Huntly. The result was a religious riot in Edinburgh in December 1596, directed principally at Seton, 'that Romanist president, a shaveling and a priest' (Calderwood, 5.548). The riot failed to intimidate James, but he concluded that the Octavians, particularly Seton, were more of a political liability than a fiscal asset. He in effect abolished the committee by transferring its power to its most impeccably protestant member, Lord Treasurer Blantyre. 
Seton did not lose the king's favour despite this set-back. On 4 March 1598 James made him a lord of parliament as Lord Fyvie, and in the same year forced his election as provost of Edinburgh, an office he held for ten years. Seton looked after the capital's interests so well that he became genuinely popular with its merchant elite. Among other things he publicly opposed a tax the king wanted to be levied in 1600 in order to raise an army to make good by force his claim to the English throne. Seton also mended his fences with the kirk by resisting the king's demand that the court of session reverse its decision upholding the claim of the Edinburgh minister Robert Bruce, whom the king disliked, to a pension out of the revenues of the abbey of Arbroath. If James overrode the court, said Seton, he and all the other judges would resign; James backed down. 
On 8 May 1601 Seton's young wife died, and on 27 October that year he married his stepniece Grizel Leslie, daughter of the master of Rothes, now married to Lilias's sister Catherine. The Leslies were an impeccably protestant family. Seton's remarriage made it possible for him to be appointed guardian to the future Charles I, who was born at Dunfermline on 19 November 1600; he held this position until the summer of 1604. When Grizel died on 6 September 1606 Seton married into another protestant family. His new wife, whom he married aged fifty-one on 30 November 1607, was Margaret Hay (1592-1659), aged fifteen, daughter of the seventh Lord Yester, whose son and heir was to marry one of Seton's daughters from his second marriage. Seton's fence-mending succeeded. The kirk became less suspicious, as did George Nicolson, the English agent in Edinburgh, who in 1599 described Seton as an 'honest councillor' ('CSP Scot.', '1597-1603', 542). 
The union of the crowns in 1603 gave Seton another chance at the real political power he wanted. He was the most highly placed man of law in the Scottish government; so in 1604 James made him the chief Scottish negotiator for the proposed Anglo-Scottish union. Seton suppressed his doubts about the union's desirability, conducted the negotiations with great skill, and made a valuable friend of the chief English commissioner, Sir Robert Cecil, the future earl of Salisbury. The union did not materialize, but Seton received his reward. On 13 December 1604 he became lord chancellor, an office he had coveted for a decade, and on 4 March 1605 earl of Dunfermline. He was now the highest-ranking official in the king's government, but real power eluded him owing to his mishandling of an act of defiance of the king on the part of a group of ministers in 1605. 
The principal item now on James's domestic agenda was the restoration of episcopal authority in the church. Dunfermline had reservations because of his fear of the political ambitions of James's principal ecclesiastical adviser, Archbishop John Spottiswoode, who, he knew, distrusted him as a dangerous concealed papist. When in 1605 the king postponed the annual meeting of the general assembly of the church for the third year in a row, some of the ministers, who believed that the king had no legal right unilaterally to prevent the meeting, resolved none the less to convene at the scheduled time and place. Dunfermline allowed them to do so, provided that they promptly dispersed, which they did. James was very angry at what he perceived as a violation of his instructions. Six of the ministers were found guilty of treason in January 1606 by a packed jury which, even so, had to be threatened with a charge of wilful error before it would vote to convict. 
After the trial Spottiswoode and the lord treasurer, George Home, earl of Dunbar, set out 'to procure the Chancellor his disgrace, as suspected to be an enemy to the estate of bishops' (Forbes, 406). The king was almost persuaded, but finally concluded that Dunfermline had acted mistakenly rather than disloyally. So Dunfermline stayed in office, but for the next five years Dunbar, not he, was James's principal adviser and agent in Scottish affairs. Dunfermline kept his position by loyally co-operating with Dunbar on a number of issues, notably the ending of free trade between England and Scotland in 1610, placing no obstacle in the way of Dunbar's high-handed reimposition of the authority of bishops in the church, and assuring the king of the wisdom of his policy and the efficiency of Dunbar in carrying it out, in a series of obsequious and flattering letters written in a prolix style, full of Latin tags and classical references, designed to appeal to his learned master. Dunbar's base was at court; in those matters with which he did not directly concern himself, highland policy for example, Dunfermline and his colleagues in Edinburgh were able to operate with considerable latitude. 
Dunbar's sudden death on 20 January 1611 came at precisely the right time for Dunfermline. He had carefully cultivated all the important individuals and groups in Scottish politics save the irreconcilable Spottiswoode. Paradoxically, his troubles over the abortive general assembly made the presbyterian wing of the church look more kindly on him. They disliked the archbishop even more than they did him, and after 1606 attacks on him as a papist were rare. The fact that the power of bishops in the church had been so recently re-established doomed Spottiswoode's hopes of succeeding to Dunbar's place with James; the king well knew that to give an ecclesiastic political power at this juncture would cause a severe aristocratic backlash. After Dunbar's confrontational regime a period of consolidation was needed, for which Dunfermline's conciliatory methods were ideally suited. So in 1611 Dunfermline succeeded Dunbar as the king's principal adviser and agent in Scottish affairs, and as keeper for life of the palace and park of Holyroodhouse; he remained in power until his death. 
Dunfermline's success was all the more remarkable in that he remained in Edinburgh, far from the king's court and the king's ear. His method was to create consensus in the privy council, which gradually filled with his former colleagues on the court of session, and to keep in touch with the king by letters sent either directly to him or to one of the Scots at court -- usually either John Murray, first earl of Annandale, the keeper of the privy purse, or Thomas Erskine, first earl of Kellie, the captain of the guard, whose eldest son married one of Dunfermline's daughters. If James issued an order that the councillors thought unwise, they normally delayed executing it until they could make their case to the king. As the lord treasurer, John Erskine, nineteenth earl of Mar, later put it to Charles I, 'A hundred times your worthy Father has sent down directions unto us which we have stayed, and he has given us thanks for it when we have informed him of the truth' ('Mar and Kellie MSS', 146). 
The first years of Dunfermline's administration saw the consolidation and extension of the changes made during the Dunbar regime. Dunfermline served as royal commissioner at the parliament of 1612, which ratified the restoration of the power of bishops in the church, which Dunbar had forced through the general assembly in 1610. Parliament also approved a tax to help pay for Princess Elizabeth's wedding. Dunbar's successful efforts to maintain order on the borders were continued by a commission of which Dunfermline's brother Sir William Seton was a prominent member. The most conspicuous victim was the lawless eighth Lord Maxwell, beheaded in 1612, an indication that noble blood would no longer protect a malefactor from the executioner's axe. An even more prominent victim of the law and order campaign was the king's cousin Patrick Stewart, earl of Orkney, who had been in ward in Edinburgh since 1609 on charges of oppression of his tenants. In 1612 parliament annexed the earldom to the crown. Dunfermline's government began to negotiate with the earl over the terms on which he would formally surrender his rights. Instead Orkney authorized his bastard son to raise a rebellion. It failed; father and son were both executed early in 1615, and the earldom remained in the hands of the crown. In the south-western highlands the law and order campaign was equally successful, though the king's decision to entrust the Campbells with the task of subduing the rebellious MacDonalds and MacGregors did not please Dunfermline, who feared the aggrandizement of this ambitious family. Though trouble spots remained, the pacification of the highlands was, on the whole, very successful. 
The welfare of the landed classes, and the maintenance of their local pre-eminence provided that they obeyed the king, was the guiding principle of Dunfermline's administration. He discouraged Archbishop Spottiswoode's effort to get rid of hereditary sheriffs. Dunbar's last parliament had authorized the creation of justices of the peace on the English model. Dunfermline implemented the statute very cautiously, and made no effort to limit the judicial rights of holders of regalities. The privy council looked after the interests of grain growers, sheep raisers, and mine owners; only in times of acute food shortage did the council adopt policies favouring the consumer rather than the aristocratic producer. Dunfermline made no effort to alter the archaic tax structure, and usually discouraged the voting of taxes. The peace and prosperity of these years made taxation less necessary in any event. 
Dunfermline was responsible for the logistics of King James's only visit to his native land, in 1617, and on the whole it went well. James's principal public purpose was to arrange for changes in the Scottish church to bring its practices closer to those of the Church of England. The upshot was the so-called five articles of Perth, which, to James's surprise and irritation, met with considerable resistance as being 'popish' in nature. They failed to secure adoption in a general assembly held after his departure, and were pushed through only with difficulty at the assembly held at Perth in 1618. Dunfermline bears some responsibility for all this. On account of the political problems he had had in the past owing to the widespread belief that he was a concealed papist, he had carefully avoided religious issues in his reports to the king, though it is unlikely that he was unaware of how unpopular the five articles would prove to be. The long-range consequences for the monarchy were serious. In the face of popular resistance James eventually drew back and did not insist on the enforcement of the articles. What the episode demonstrated was that the power of the crown, greatly enhanced though it was after 1603, nevertheless had its limits. 
James did not blame Dunfermline for the difficulties his religious policies encountered, and the chancellor's grip on power continued. The years following James's visit saw considerable governmental activity on behalf of various manufacturing interests: glass making, leather tanning, soap. In 1620 the war in central Europe began to affect Scotland. In 1621 parliament voted a large tax for the war, including, for the first time, a 5 per cent levy on annual rents, a significant broadening of the direct-tax base which remained in place after the short-lived British involvement in the war ended. It was Dunfermline's last major service to King James; he died on 16 June 1622 at home at Pinkie House, Musselburgh, aged sixty-six. On 9 July he was buried at Dalgety, Fife, where he had acquired a property in 1593; both Lilias and Grizel were buried there, and so in due course was his widow, who died on 30 December 1659. He left behind him cash and moveables worth about $44,000 Scots and over $11,000 Scots in debts owing to him, as well as his land. He died a rich man. 
Dunfermline's success as a consensus builder and a political moderate was remarkable. He even defused his potentially explosive religious stance. Calderwood in recording his death could write, 'Howsoever he was Popishly disposed in his religion, yet he condemned many abuses... in the kirk of Rome. He was a good justiciar, courteous and humane... but no good friend to the bishops' (Calderwood, 7.549). His political rival Archbishop Spottiswoode wrote that 'He exercised his place with great moderation, and above all things studied to maintain peace and quietness' ('History of the Church', 3.263). Dunfermline also left behind monuments to his aesthetic taste in his two notable houses, Fyvie Castle in Aberdeenshire, and Pinkie House in Musselburgh. His heir was his only surviving son Charles Seton, born of his third marriage in 1615. His portrait, painted in 1610, hangs in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25114


Seton, Alexander, first Viscount Kingston (1621-1691), nobleman and soldier, was born at Seton Palace, Haddingtonshire, the fourth but second surviving son of George Seton, third earl of Winton (1584-1650), and his first wife, Lady Anne Hay (died 1623x5), eldest daughter of Francis Hay, ninth earl of Erroll. On the visit of Charles I to Seton Palace in 1633, as a boy of twelve, he welcomed the king at the iron gate of Seton with a Latin oration and was knighted on the completion of his discourse. In 1636 he commenced a two-year period of study at the Jesuit college of La Fleche in France where he successfully defended his thesis and had it printed on satin and sent home to his father, to whom it was dedicated. Afterwards he made a tour through a great part of Italy, Spain, and France. He returned via England to Scotland in 1640, carrying with him letters of encouragement from Charles I to Catholic loyalists such as George Gordon, second marquess of Huntly, Robert Maxwell, first earl of Nithsdale, and his own father, the earl of Winton; he himself probably continued to embrace Catholicism. To avoid subscribing the solemn league and covenant, he went in 1643 to the Netherlands and on returning to Scotland some eight months later was excommunicated in Tranent church on 8 October 1644. 
Shortly thereafter Seton crossed to France, where he remained in attendance on the young Prince Charles for three years. Late in 1647 he returned to England and carried messages back from the king to his wife, Henrietta Maria, and to the prince. According to his continuation of Sir Richard Maitland's history of his family, published as 'History of the House of Seton' (1829), Seton carried word of the engagement to the queen at St Germain, telling her that a large Scottish army would invade England in the summer of 1648 and restore the king to his dignity. In August of that year he was a lieutenant-colonel of horse in the army of the engagement that was defeated by Oliver Cromwell at Preston. 
Three days after the coronation of Charles II at Scone on 1 January 1651, Seton was created, by patent dated at Perth, Viscount Kingston and Lord Craigiehall, possibly the new king's first creation. By this time he had married Jean, daughter of Sir Andrew Fletcher, who had been a gentleman of the privy chamber to Charles I; their eldest child, Jean (or Anne), was born in April 1651, and there followed Charles (1653-1682), George (1654-1678), Alexander (1655-1676), and Isobel (1656-1677). Viscountess Jean died in the later 1650s. Barbara (1659-1679) may have been the daughter of Kingston's second wife, Elizabeth (1635/6-1668), daughter of Sir Archibald Douglas of Whittingehame, Haddingtonshire; they had three other children, Archibald (1661-1714), James (1667-1743), and Elizabeth ('b'. 1668), before Viscountess Elizabeth also died. 
After the Restoration, Kingston held various military positions and commanded the militia troop of Haddingtonshire at the defeat of the covenanters on the Pentland Hills on 28 November 1666. He also served at his own expense under the duke of Monmouth, and played a part in the victory over the covenanters at Bothwell Bridge on 22 June 1679. On 28 July 1681 Kingston was one of the signatories to a declaration stating that it was unlawful under all circumstances to take up arms against the king, and that the national covenant and the solemn league and covenant were against the 'fundamental laws and liberties' of the kingdom ('Reg. PCS', 7.705). 
Kingston married again, first Elizabeth, daughter of John Hamilton, first Lord Belhaven, and then, on 3 August 1686, Lady Margaret (1651-1692), daughter of Archibald Douglas, styled earl of Angus (c.1609-1655), and sister of James Douglas, second marquess of Douglas, and Archibald Douglas, first earl of Forfar. There were no children from either marriage. Kingston died on 21 October 1691 and was buried in the family vault at Seton Palace. Most of his children having predeceased him, his sons Archibald and James became successively second and third Viscount Kingston. The latter was attainted in the aftermath of the 1715 Jacobite rising, and the title became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 25115


Seton, Sir Alexander, of Pitmedden, first baronet, Lord Pitmedden (1639?-1719), judge, was the younger son of Sir John Seton of Pitmedden, third baronet (died 1639), and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Samuel Johnston of Elphinstone. Following his father's death commanding a royalist detachment at the battle of the Bridge of Dee on 18 June 1639, Alexander and his older brother, James, were raised as wards of their father's kinsman the entrepreneurial George Seton, third earl of Winton. In 1650 Seton matriculated at Marischal College, Aberdeen, and graduated in 1654. On 10 December 1661 he was admitted as an advocate of the Scottish bar and was knighted by Charles II in 1664. When his brother died serving the Royal Navy in 1667, Seton inherited the estate of Pitmedden, where in 1675 he began designing the formal terraced garden, later known as the 'Great Garden of Pitmedden'. 
Following the demise of Sir Richard Maitland of Pittrichie, Seton was nominated an ordinary lord of the court of session on 31 October 1677 and took his seat as Lord Pitmedden on 13 November of that year. On the promotion of Lord President Falconer, he was subsequently admitted a lord of justiciary on 5 July 1682 and created baronet of Nova Scotia on 15 January 1684. Regarded as 'the touns deir frind Pitmedden', Seton represented the county of Aberdeen in the parliaments of 1681, 1685, and 1686 (Taylor, 4.320). Resolutely opposed to the attempts of James VII and II to secure the repeal of the test and penal laws, Pitmedden was, however, the only one of nine judges sitting in parliament who openly opposed the royal will. His consequent removal from office, by a royal letter dated 12 May 1686, and the dismissal of several other recalcitrant state officers were collectively judged to be 'warning shots... to terrify and divert other Members of Parliament from their opposition' ('Historical Notices', 2.723). Having retired into private life thereafter, he declined reappointment as a judge after the revolution, deeming it inconsistent with the oath of allegiance he had previously sworn to James. A Latin panegyric of his life was composed by William Black in 1690. 
As an appendix to the second edition of Sir George Mackenzie's 'Laws and Customs of Scotland in Matters Criminal', in 1699 Seton published 'A treatise of mutilation and demembration', examining how punishment for these crimes had evolved from strict adherence to the 'lex talionis' to the imposition of arbitrary pecuniary damages. He was also the author of the posthumously published 'Explication of the XXXIX chapter of the statutes of King William', which defended the legal right of minors to be exempt from actions against their property. In or before 1673 he married Margaret (died 1723), daughter of William Lauder, one of the clerks of session. They had five sons, including Sir William Seton, and five daughters. Following Seton's death in 1719, his extensive library of over 3000 titles was sold by auction in 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 25116


Seton, Alexander (1814-1852), army officer, was born at Mounie, Aberdeenshire, on 4 October 1814, the second but eldest surviving son among the five sons and three daughters of Alexander Seton (died 1850) of Mounie and his wife, Janet Skene, daughter of Skene Ogilvy, minister of Old Machar, Aberdeenshire. He was descended from Sir Alexander Seton, Lord Pitmedden. He was educated at home until the age of fifteen, and then studied mathematics and chemistry for some months under Ferdinando Foggi at Pisa. 
On 23 November 1832 Seton was gazetted second lieutenant in the 21st Royal North British Fusiliers, and the following year was sent with part of his regiment to Australia. He returned to Scotland on leave in 1838, and was promoted first lieutenant on 2 March. He rejoined his regiment in India, and received a company on 14 January 1842. Shortly after he exchanged into the 74th highlanders and was stationed at Chatham. There he studied for two years in the senior department of the Royal Military College, and in November 1847 received a first-class certificate. In 1849 he went to Ireland as assistant deputy quartermaster-general of the forces there. He held this post until 24 May 1850, when he was promoted major. Proficient in several languages, he was a studious officer, with literary and artistic interests. 
On 7 November 1851 Seton obtained the rank of lieutenant-colonel, and shortly afterwards was ordered to take command of the drafts destined for the Cape of Good Hope, where his regiment was engaged in the Cape Frontier War. He sailed in the steam troopship 'Birkenhead', headed for Algoa Bay, which on the morning of 26 February 1852 struck a rock off Danger Point, south of Cape Town, and foundered in little more than ten minutes. Out of 638 persons, 445 were lost, Seton himself being killed by the fall of part of the wreck. He died unmarried, and his property descended to his younger brother, David Seton (1817-1894). 
Survivors from the 'Birkenhead' described the remarkable coolness and discipline of the troops under Seton's command during the ship's last moments. The women and children were safely disembarked onto a cutter. 'I never saw an embarkation conducted with so little noise and confusion', a surviving officer reported (Addison, 20). Seton's order that the men on deck should stand fast while the disembarkation took place, and not risk swamping the cutter in a bid to save their own lives, was calmly obeyed. This enabled all the women and children to survive. The king of Prussia ordered that the official account of the sinking should be read out to each of his regiments, as an exemplary instance of military discipline. Although the troops' calmness in the face of death was widely applauded, no medal or promotion was awarded, and David Seton complained of the slowness of any form of official recognition. At the instigation of Queen Victoria a memorial was placed in the Royal Hospital, Chelsea, in 1859, 'to record the heroic constancy and unbroken discipline shown by Lieutenant-Colonel Seton, 74th Highlanders, and the troops embarked under his command' (ibid., 3). Their deed was also commemorated by Sir Francis Doyle in his poem 'The Loss of the Birkenhead' in 'Return of the Guards and other Poems' (1866). In 1892 a painting by the marine artist Thomas M. Hemy, reproduced as a print, represented the scene on the deck of the sinking ship, labelled by Rudyard Kipling as the 'Birkenhead drill'. School reading books recorded the 'Birkenhead' disembarkation as a heroic example of 'women and children first'. Layers of sensational embellishments and fictions were cut away in a detailed account prompted by the fiftieth anniversary of the sinking. But Seton's coolness, and the effectiveness of his orders in preserving the women and children's lives, were reaffirmed and seen not as evidence not only of military discipline but also of heroic and chivalric self-sacrifice. 


@@@@@


doc= 25117


Seton, Charles, second earl of Dunfermline (1615-1672), politician and army officer, was born in Scotland towards the end of 1615 (probably late in November), the son of Alexander Seton, first earl of Dunfermline (1556-1622), and his third wife, Margaret Hay (1592-1659), the sister of John Hay, first earl of Tweeddale. He succeeded his father on 16 June 1622. In 1633 his mother contracted herself in marriage to James Livingston, first earl of Callendar. Dunfermline was incorporated in St Salvator's College, St Andrews, in 1629. He married Lady Mary Douglas (died 'c'.1659), the third daughter of William Douglas, seventh earl of Morton, and his wife, Anne Keith, daughter of George Keith, Earl Marischal. Contracts for the marriage were dated 29 March, 2 April, and 9 November 1632. 
Dunfermline was a gentleman of the bedchamber of Charles I. He became an active supporter of the covenant, though he has been seen as one who from the beginning sought common ground with the king (C. Russell, 'The Fall of the British Monarchies, 1637-1642', 1991, 522). In May 1639 he led an infantry regiment in Fife in the army of Montrose which occupied the royalist burgh of Aberdeen. In June 1639 he was one of the leaders of the Scottish covenanting army which took up a position on Duns Law to bar the progress of Charles northwards, and on 6 June he presented a petition to the king in his camp that he would appoint commissioners to treat in regard of the matters in dispute. He was one of those who signed the articles of pacification, as well as a paper of submission to the king. In November he and John Campbell, earl of Loudoun, were sent to London to report to the king the proceedings of the assembly of the kirk and the parliament for ratification; but the king refused to receive them and forbade them to approach within 8 miles of the court. Dunfermline was also again sent to the king early in 1640, and on account of the discovery of the letter of the Scots to the king of France, was, with Loudoun and the other commissioners, detained for a time in custody. 
Dunfermline was colonel of a regiment raised in western Fife in the Scottish army which, under Alexander Leslie, crossed the Tweed in August 1640. Following the covenanter victory at Newburn and the capture of Newcastle, the earl was appointed Scottish governor of Durham. In October he was appointed one of the eight Scottish commissioners for the treaty of Ripon, and he was also one of the subcommittee appointed for the final conclusion of the treaty in London. While in London he received from the king a lease of the abbey of Dunfermline for fifty-seven years. In August 1641 the estates appointed him a commissioner to the English parliament during the king's trip north. In September he was nominated a member of the Scottish privy council, an appointment confirmed in November. In 1642, as a man who had been partly won over by the royal concessions of 1641, Dunfermline was appointed the king's commissioner to the general assembly of the kirk of Scotland, which met on 27 July. As the English parliament and king presented the general assembly with their rival declarations, Dunfermline conveyed the king's good intentions while urging it not to reply to parliament without royal permission, but 'his weeping could not obtain it' (D. Stevenson, 'The Scottish Revolution, 1637-1644: the Triumph of the Covenanters', 1973, 250). Afterwards Dunfermline went to England, presumably on state business; he returned to Scotland in mid-September. 
On 26 August 1643 the convention of estates nominated Dunfermline a colonel of Fife foot for the army being prepared to assist the English parliamentarians. The earl chose mercenaries as lieutenant-colonel and major. The regiment was raised from the presbyteries of Kirkcaldy and Dunfermline. Between January and July 1644 it served in the north-east of England, at the siege of York and at the battle of Marston Moor. In August it joined the forces besieging Newcastle. Dunfermline led his men in storming the town in October. Afterwards the regiment was divided, part remaining in England serving in garrisons and at the siege of Newark, while the remainder returned to Scotland to help suppress the royalists. 
In January 1646 Dunfermline was chosen as a member of the committee of estates. The estates named him to the committee with the army in England on 3 February; the earl attended it periodically from July to November. After the surrender of Charles to the Scots at Newark in May, he was sent, along with Argyll and others, to treat with him, and accompanied Argyll to London to lay the king's case before parliament. Simultaneously his loyalty to the king's opponents became suspect. In August suspicions connected him with the French ambassador in a plot on the king's behalf. In January 1647 fears about him deepened, and Leven, the lord general, forbade Dunfermline and one other colonel access to the king. 
On 4 May 1648 the estates named Dunfermline a colonel of horse in the engager army. Having supported the engagement for the attempted rescue of the king in 1648, he was debarred by the 'Act of Classes' from holding any office of public trust. He went to the continent in April 1649 and took part in the negotiations at Breda in connection with the recall of Charles II, whom he accompanied to Scotland in June 1650. In July he entertained the king at Dunfermline. When in October the king left Perth and joined the northern loyalists, Dunfermline was one of the commissioners sent to arrange matters with him. On 29 October he was on petition freed from the disabilities imposed on him by the 'Act of Classes', and permitted to take his seat in parliament, following public repentance in late November. Shortly afterwards he was appointed one of the committee of estates for managing the affairs of the army, and he was in frequent attendance on the king during his stay in Scotland. In the army raised for the invasion of England his regiment (raised after 9 January 1651, mainly from the presbytery of Dunfermline) formed part of the 2nd brigade of horse. The regiment subsequently served in the Worcester campaign. 
At the Restoration, Dunfermline was reinstated as a privy councillor on 13 February 1661 and sworn in on 22 September 1664. On 2 November 1667 he was appointed an extraordinary lord of session. He regularly attended the parliaments of the 1660s and served as a lord of the articles in 1669. In 1671 he was appointed lord privy seal. He died on or about 11 May 1672 at his home, Seton House, and was buried at Dalgety. He and his wife had had one daughter and three sons. The eldest son, Charles, was killed in a sea-fight with the Dutch shortly before his father's death; Alexander, the third earl, died in 1677; and James, the fourth and last earl, in 1689 commanded a troop of horse under Dundee at Killiecrankie, and, being forfaulted, went to France, where he died childless in 1699. 


@@@@@


doc= 25118


Seton, Sir Christopher (c.1278-1306), landowner, seems to have been of a family which took its name from Seton in Cleveland, North Riding of Yorkshire, and served the senior Brus family there until the male line failed in 1272. He was not related to the Setons of Lothian. His father, Sir John of Seton, died in 1299, before 7 July, when Christopher, said to be twenty-one, inherited Yorkshire lands and property in Cumberland bought by his father from a coheir of Richard Levington. Robert (V) de Brus (died 1295) also acquired an active interest in Cumberland through his second marriage, to Christina of Ireby, between 1270 and 1275, and Sir John, who was described as Brus's knight in 1285, had demised lands there to Robert and Christina; these reverted to Christopher on Christina's death in 1305. Sir John was with Robert (VI) de Brus (died 1304) in the king's service in Galloway in July 1296. Thus Seton had served Brus long before the marriage of Christopher to Christian Bruce (d. 1356), daughter of Robert (VI) de Brus and sister of Robert Bruce, a marriage which had taken place by 1305. A simple explanation may be found in Christopher's service under John de Botetourt in the garrison of Lochmaben at least from April 1303 to March 1304, when he could have been thrown into the lady's company. 
In February 1306 Seton faced a critical challenge. He and his younger brothers, Sir John Seton, who had served Edward I in Scotland in 1301, and Humphrey, were present at the murder of John Comyn in Dumfries after Robert Bruce had wounded him. The whole family was compromised and threw in its lot with Bruce, soon to be king. Christopher was left in charge of the Brus castle of Loch Doon, a modest stone octagon on a loch island in Ayrshire, while John was given command of Richard Siward's castle of Tibbers, which Bruce had seized; Christian stayed with her brother and was taken prisoner at Tain, Ross-shire, in 1306. Loch Doon and Tibbers held out even after that disastrous defeat. Loch Doon was besieged in early August and had fallen by the 16th, Tibbers perhaps a little later. Both brothers were quickly executed on Edward I's orders. Later Robert I endowed a chapel at Dumfries for Christopher's soul; evidently he was gibbeted there. He left no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 25119


George Seton, first Lord Seton (d. 1478), was a minor when he inherited, his lands and possessions, including a colliery at Tranent, being held in ward to the crown. He attained his majority by November 1437, and embarked on a career of court service which may have owed much to his family's Douglas connections during the minority of James II, possibly leading to his becoming a lord of parliament as early as 1445, although the style George, Lord Seton, indicating royal sanction, appears in official records only by 1451. In 1448 he travelled to France with the chancellor Lord Crichton, on an embassy to Flanders, France, and Burgundy to seek a foreign marriage for James II, and he returned to Flanders in 1449 or 1450 with Thomas Spens and other ambassadors, as part of a diplomatic mission connected with the downfall of the Livingston family. Notwithstanding the Setons' Douglas connections, political pragmatism seems to have determined George Seton's loyalty to the king, and he sat in parliament as Lord Seton on 14 June 1452, when James II sought to explain the murder of the eighth earl of Douglas to the three estates. He attended the king's council held at Dunfermline on 11 July 1458, and sat on the assize which condemned Robert, first Lord Boyd, and his son Thomas, earl of Arran, on 22 November 1469. He served as an ambassador to England in 1472-3. He died in 1478, and was buried at the church of the Black Friars in Edinburgh. He had married Margaret Stewart, daughter of John, earl of Buchan. They had a son, John, who died in 1476, having married Christian, daughter of John Lindsay, Lord Lindsay of the Byres ['see under 'Lindsay family of the Byres], with whom he had a son. 



@@@@@


doc= 25120


Seton, George, fourth Lord Seton (c.1508-1549), nobleman, was the second surviving son of George, third Lord Seton (died 1513), and Janet Hepburn (died 1558), eldest daughter of Patrick Hepburn, first earl of Bothwell. Seton's elder brother, also named George, died in infancy. He succeeded, aged about five years, to the family lands and titles on the death of his father at the battle of Flodden (9 September 1513), and was served heir in Seton, Wintoun, and Tranent in Haddingtonshire and in Winchburgh, Binning, Hartshead, and Clents in Linlithgowshire. 
On account of his youth Seton played little part in the turbulent politics of the minority of James V, and he entered public life only in 1526 when nominated a member of the 'pro judicibus' committee in parliament. In July 1528 he aligned with the king against Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus, and accompanied James from Stirling to Edinburgh as he moved against the earl. As a crown supporter he was named among the session of the lords of council convened by James on 6 July. In October 1528, together with other crown adherents in Haddingtonshire, Seton was charged with clearing Lothian of Angus and his supporters, and with ensuring that Angus's castle of Tantallon was isolated from supply in preparation for a royal siege. 
Seton's subsequent public career under James V was unspectacular, being characterized by consistent loyal service for which he received a steady flow of royal patronage. This included the erection of his Linlithgowshire properties into the free barony of West Niddrie in 1541 and the erection of his town of Tranent into a burgh of barony in 1542. Following James's death in December 1542 Seton was associated closely with the regime of the regent, James Hamilton, second earl of Arran. In January 1543 Arran entrusted him with the custody of Cardinal David Beaton, who was confined briefly in Seton Castle. Seton's importance in Arran's government was underlined in March 1543 when he was nominated to the privy council, and he supported the regent in his negotiations for the marriage of Queen Mary to Edward, prince of Wales, formalized in the treaty of Greenwich. Seton subsequently followed Arran into his association with Cardinal Beaton and the pro-French party, for which his lands and castle at Seton were burned during the earl of Hertford's invasion of Scotland in 1544. Despite this Seton remained firm in his adherence to the pro-French party, a stance possibly strengthened by Beaton's feuing to him of valuable church properties in Linlithgowshire, and on 26 June 1545 he signed a band confirming Scotland's alliance with France. 
Seton married twice. His first marriage, contracted on 10 April 1527, was to Elizabeth Hay, daughter of John, first Lord Hay of Yester, and his first wife, Elizabeth, eldest daughter of George Douglas, master of Angus. Their sons were George Seton, who succeeded as fifth Lord Seton, and John and James; and their daughters were Jean, Marion, Margaret, Beatrix, and Eleanor. Elizabeth Hay was dead before February 1539, when Seton was betrothed to Marie Pieris, a Frenchwoman in the retinue of Mary of Guise, second queen of James V. They had two sons, Robert and James, and a daughter, Mary Seton ['see under 'Queen's Maries (act. 1548-1567)], who in 1548 accompanied Queen Mary to France and served her as one of the four Marys. Seton died on 17 July 1549 at Culross in Perthshire and was buried there, but his remains were later reinterred in the choir of his family's collegiate church at Seton. Among contemporaries he had the reputation of an excellent falconer. Marie Pieris survived him, and married before October 1554, Pierre de Clovis, seigneur de Bryante; she died around 1576. 


@@@@@


doc= 25121


Seton, George, fifth Lord Seton (c.1530-1586), politician, was the eldest son of George Seton, fourth Lord Seton (c.1508-1549), and his first wife, Elizabeth (died in or before 1539), daughter of John Hay, Lord Hay of Yester. In 1542 he went to the University of Paris in the company of William Maitland of Lethington, whose family lived nearby. He was first served heir to his father on 19 May 1550, and by contract dated 2 August that year he married Isabel ('c'.1529-1604), daughter of Sir William Hamilton of Sanquhar, high treasurer and lord provost of Edinburgh. They had one daughter and five sons. 
Although all other evidence strongly suggests that Seton remained a staunch Catholic, Adam Wallace's arrest for heresy while at Seton's house at Winton in Haddingtonshire in 1550 and Seton's own exposure to the teachings of John Willock after the latter returned to Scotland from Emden in the autumn of 1558 may be the basis for John Knox's claim that Seton was an apostate. His personal connections at this time, however, all suggest a close attachment to the monarchy and the established religion. His aunt Katherine was prioress of the Dominican nunnery of St Catherine of Siena, on the outskirts of Edinburgh; his sister Marion was a maid of honour in the entourage of the regent, Mary of Guise; his stepmother, Marie Pieris, was a lady-in-waiting to the regent; his half-sister Mary Seton ['see under 'Queen's Maries] accompanied Queen Mary to France in 1548. He was one of the eight commissioners chosen by parliament on 17 December 1557 to conclude the agreement with France, for the marriage of Queen Mary to the dauphin in April the following year. 
In October 1557 Seton had been appointed lord provost of Edinburgh in succession to Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie. During his absence in France a number of presidents acted in his stead, including his friend Sir Richard Maitland of Lethington, father of William Maitland. Seton's reappointment as provost in October 1558 took place against a background of growing resentment among the burgh's merchants of the fiscal demands made by the regent. The next twelve months saw a series of conflicts between the town council and its provost, including the imprisonment of two bailies and the town clerk. These episodes seem to have been caused by a clash of personalities rather than religious differences, but by May 1559 they had come to a head with the prediction by the council of civil disorder and the counter-threat of Seton that he would impose order with his 'kin friends' ('Records of the Burgh of Edinburgh', 3.38). But the hard-line provost was accused by the council of abandoning his post when the burgh's two friaries were sacked in mid-June 1559. In the unfolding crisis Seton found it difficult to serve two masters -- the capital and the queen regent. When faced with the prospect of the town being sacked by the army of the lords of the congregation, the council, one-third of whom had protestant sympathies, adopted a policy marked by ambiguity and conciliation. Seton acted as the regent's agent when sent with the earl of Huntly on 29 July to negotiate a truce with the protestant lords. The regent's proposals included the offer of a religious referendum in the town, a prospect which neither the protestant minority nor the council, anxious to defend its liberties, welcomed. 
During the next two months, with Knox installed as protestant minister in the burgh church of St Giles but with the Catholic mass still being said elsewhere, and the forces of the congregation withdrawn, the council met frequently, but Seton attended only once. At the time of the next election, at Michaelmas 1559, the regent resorted to a leet imposing Seton and a loyalist set of office holders on the town. Three weeks later, shortly after they deposed Mary of Guise as regent, the protestant lords used this leet as a pretext for dismissing the Seton-led council and imposing one of their own, led by the protestant laird of Kilspindie. The Kilspindie council was in turn thrown out of office and the Seton regime restored when the congregation withdrew from the burgh on 6 November. But the strength of support for the regent was much depleted: one report of 10 November described only Seton, James Hepburn, earl of Bothwell, and Borthwick as unambiguously loyal. In the capital Seton found it difficult to restore normality after the damage caused by coup and counter-coup, although the mass was restored and St Giles's reconsecrated. The Seton council was again dismissed when an English army entered the town in April 1560; the regent retreated into Edinburgh Castle, and Seton joined the French troops defending the heavily fortified citadel of Leith. 
Shortly after the death of Mary of Guise on 11 June 1560 but before the conclusion of the treaty of Edinburgh on 6 July and the evacuation of French forces some nine days later, Seton left for France. He arrived in Paris on 3 July. On 1 October, however, he obtained a passport to return to Scotland, via England. It is likely that he was engaged on an unofficial mission on Queen Mary's behalf and that the explanation he offered Nicholas Throckmorton, English ambassador in Paris, that he wanted, despite the fact that he had been 'evilly used' in Scotland, to 'go home and live and die a good Scotchman' was spurious ('CSP for.', '1560-61', no. 666). In April 1561, at Joinville, the queen conferred pensions on three of his sons. 
Seton accompanied the queen on her return to Scotland in August 1561. He was quickly appointed to the privy council. Early in October 1561, in the face of a series of provocations from the hard-line protestant town council of Edinburgh, Mary tried to impose a leet of loyalists to replace Kilspindie as provost. Seton, still highly unpopular in the town, was on it. Given his previous record as provost, Knox's charge that Seton was 'a man most unworthy of any regiment' (Knox, 1.242) had some substance. In the event, a compromise was reached and Seton never again reached burgh office or was proposed for it by the queen. His future role lay rather in the royal court. 
Yet here, too, there were difficulties. Efforts were made to effect a reconciliation between Seton and his powerful East Lothian neighbour Bothwell: on 10 November 1561 in the presence of the queen they concluded a bond to end a long-running feud. This feud, the threats he had made to his fellow Edinburgh councillors in 1558-9, and a heated quarrel between Seton and William Maitland of Lethington on the High Street of Edinburgh in October 1564, which led Mary to conclude that he should leave the country for a time, together suggest that Seton had an uncontrollable temper. They give some credence to Knox's jibe that he was 'a man without God, without honesty and oftentimes without reason' (Knox, 1.192). 
None the less, Mary's first new year home was spent at Seton, and it is likely that it was then that the poem 'New year gift' of Alexander Scott, an elegant but ambiguous appeal for religious and other reform, was first performed. The close links between the queen and her volatile Catholic courtier were confirmed in 1563, when Seton was made master of the royal household. The appointment underlined the division within the royal administration between the household, which was French in tone, largely Catholic, and drawn mostly from families of middling rank, such as the Setons, and the privy council, the active part of which was solidly protestant and mostly of higher status. Yet Mary's court remains an intriguing enigma, and Seton's role in it unexplained. Certainly, the portrait which Seton commissioned about 1577, showing him elaborately dressed and wielding his staff of office, with his family coat of arms, complete with its royal or double tressure, and knight's armour prominently displayed, reveals an ambitious courtier, risen to prominence through royal service. Also revealing of the ambitions of this middling family was the elaborate 'armorial', a pictorial history of both the Seton and royal dynasties, and the family house at Seton itself, which was among the earliest private dwellings in Scotland to claim the status of a palace. 
In the crisis years of 1567-73 Seton was one of the queen's most committed supporters. Mary's and Bothwell's army spent the night at Seton House before the confrontation at Carberry on 15 June 1567, and Seton fled north with the disgraced Bothwell before abandoning him. He was involved in the intrigue for Mary's escape from Lochleven on 2 May 1568, welcoming her at the lochside and taking her to his house at Niddrie. He was captured at Langside on 13 May. Imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle, he gained his liberty early in 1570 on the defection of the keeper, Sir William Kirkcaldy, to the Marian cause. In August the queen's party sent him from Aberdeen on a major embassy to win continental support (accompanied by the refugee earl of Westmorland and countess of Northumberland). For the next two years he pursued wide-ranging negotiations with Mary herself, the duke of Alba in the Netherlands, Philip II, Catherine dei' Medici, and the English Catholic party. One of the conditions which he tried to impose on Alba was that no council of blood would be set up in Scotland, as it had been in the Netherlands. He rebuked Catherine in 1571 for siding with England and abandoning the Franco-Scottish alliance that had stood 'sen Charles Mannis dais' ('CSP Scot.', 3.592), but was himself eager for Spanish support and may well have been involved in the Ridolfi plot. He intrigued daringly with the Scottish troops in Dutch service in the hope of winning them over to Alba's side. He gained Spanish subsidies and endeavoured to persuade the queen's party that its best hopes lay with Spain. 
Although nominally forfeited in August 1571, Seton retained effective possession of Niddrie. However, during 1572 the king's party gained the upper hand in the civil wars. Seton was a diehard 'queen's man' who stayed aloof from the submission of most leading Marians on 23 February 1573 in the pacification of Perth, but he eventually submitted in April and even professed protestantism. Evidently, however, he intended to continue the struggle by other means. He kept in touch with Mary (who retained his sister Mary Seton in her service until 1583), and visited the continent from time to time on her behalf. In 1574 Seton's daughter Margaret married Lord Claud Hamilton, the leading supporter of the Catholic interest among the Hamilton family. Seton was in the minority who voted against the earl of Morton's restoration as regent in May 1578, and was discomfited by the Hamiltons' downfall in 1579. 
Seton's fortunes revived with Morton's overthrow. In February 1581 the new regime proposed sending him as an ambassador to England in February 1581, an appointment the English angrily rejected in view of his record. He sat on the assize that condemned Morton on 1 June. He was close to the royal favourite Esme Stewart, duke of Lennox (though not to his associate James Stewart, earl of Arran), and was briefly admiral of Scotland. He intrigued with the French ambassador against the Ruthven regime that overthrew Lennox in 1582. In January 1584, after the Ruthven lords' downfall, he was sent as Scottish ambassador to France, officially for the re-establishment there of the Scots guard; he hoped to have his son Sir John Seton (c.1553-1594) appointed to its command. He renewed his contacts with English Catholics on the way and assured Mary that he would use the mission to her best advantage, but his efforts achieved little. He was one of those captured at Stirling when the pro-English lords overthrew Arran on 2 November 1585. 
Seton died on 8 January 1586, aged about fifty-five. He was survived by his wife, Isabel, who died on 13 November 1604, aged about seventy-five. She, like him, was buried in Seton church. Their eldest son, George, master of Seton, had died in March 1562; their second son, Robert ('c'.1552-1603), succeeded as sixth Lord Seton, was a favourite of James VI, and became earl of Winton in 1600. Of the three younger sons, Sir John Seton became Lord Barns; Alexander was prior of Pluscardine and later earl of Dunfermline; and Sir William Seton of Kyllismore, sheriff of Edinburghshire and postmaster-general of Scotland. Like their father, each of the surviving sons profited through royal service. 


@@@@@


doc= 25122


Seton, George, third earl of Winton (1584-1650), nobleman and politician, was born in December 1584, the second son of Robert Seton, first earl of Winton (died 1603), and his wife, Lady Margaret (died 1624), daughter of Hugh Montgomerie, third earl of Eglinton. He was educated in France -- probably, following the tradition of his Roman Catholic family, at the Jesuit college of La Fleche. He returned to Scotland before 18 August 1602, since on that date he appeared with his elder brother Robert (died in or after 1636) before the Haddington presbytery and promised to be a 'diligent hearer of the Word'. Following the death of their father, George was from 1604 styled master of Winton, but, after Robert's confinement for insanity and resignation of the peerage, he succeeded as third earl on 12 May 1607. Four years later his younger brother Alexander (1588-1661) succeeded to the estates of their maternal grandfather, taking the name Alexander Montgomery, sixth earl of Eglinton. Winton married, on 26 April 1609, Lady Anne (died 1623x5), eldest daughter of Francis Hay, ninth earl of Erroll; they had four surviving children, George (1613-1648), Alexander Seton (1621-1691), Margaret, and Elizabeth. Anna died some time between May 1623 and February 1625, and in or before 1628 Winton married Elizabeth (died in or after 1664), daughter of John Maxwell, sixth Lord Herries, and his wife, Elizabeth Maxwell; they had twelve children, including Sir John Seton of Garleton and Sir Robert Seton (died 1671). 
Winton was sworn of the Scottish privy council on 30 July 1607, and attended thereafter about one in three meetings until the Scottish troubles commenced in 1638. He attended parliament in 1608. He was made justice general of St Andrews (south of the Forth) on 9 March 1608; he was appointed a justice of the peace for Haddingtonshire in 1612; he became a burgess of Glasgow on 11 July 1618; and he was appointed to the standing committee on manufactures on 17 July 1623. In 1620 he erected the additional residence of Winton Castle in the parish of Pencaitland, Haddingtonshire, an original and remarkably striking modification of Tudor architecture after Inigo Jones. He also extended and improved the principal residence at Seton Palace. In Cockenzie he built twelve saltpans and a great harbour, the latter of which was destroyed in a storm in 1635. During his lifetime he acquired lands in Longniddry, Athelstaneford, and Garleton, which he gave to his eldest son by his second marriage, John Seton of Garleton, who was created a baronet on 9 December 1664. 
Winton's involvement in local and national issues increased in the reign of Charles I. He was particularly active in the privy council between 1625 and 1630 where, for example, in the period 1629-30 he attended seventy-six out of 127 meetings. The high point occurred when he was made temporary president of the privy council from December 1625 to March 1626. He was made a commissioner of the exchequer on 8 March 1626 and in July of the same year was appointed to the commission for surrenders and teinds, a group established to oversee the king's controversial revocation scheme. His membership of other privy council committees included that for creating baronets in Nova Scotia, to investigate the office of high constable, and the debasement of the coinage. Winton was also appointed to the committee of council to prepare for Charles's coronation visit to Scotland in 1633, and was chosen one of the lords of the articles in the Coronation Parliament of that year. As he had done in 1617 during James VI and I's visit to Scotland, he twice entertained at his own expense Charles I and all of his court at Seton Palace. 
Winton was referred to in 1638 by John Maxwell, bishop of Ross, as 'popishly affected' ('Historical Works of Balfour', 2.263), and on the commencement of the first bishops' war in 1639 his estate was sequestrated after he left Scotland to wait on the king. For his support of Charles I he was forced to pay a fine of 36,000 merks in 1643 and had to pay a ransom of $40,000 Scots to the covenanters after his son Lord George Seton was captured on 13 September 1645 following the defeat of the marquess of Montrose at Philiphaugh. Despite this, he was a commissioner of war in Haddington in 1644 and 1646, and was appointed a commissioner for the accounts of Sir Adam Hepburn, treasurer of the army, on 11 November 1646. Two years later Winton fully supported the engagement intended to rescue Charles I from his imprisonment in England. During the mobilization, he was a colonel of horse and foot for the county of Haddington, and a commissioner of war in the counties of Haddington and Linlithgow. He also gave $1000 sterling in free gift for his equipage to James, duke of Hamilton, general of the Scottish army authorized by the Scottish parliament to invade England. When Charles II arrived in Scotland in 1650 Winton constantly attended the young king, but in November returned to his palace in Haddingtonshire to prepare for the coronation at Scone on 1 January 1651. However, he fell sick shortly after arriving home and died at Seton of a palsy on 15 December 1650, aged sixty-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 25123


Seton, George, fifth earl of Winton (b. before 1679, d. 1749), Jacobite army officer, was born at Seton, the first and only surviving son of George Seton, fourth earl of Winton (1642-1704), and Christian (died 1703), daughter of John Hepburn of Alderston. Raised in the Episcopal Church of Scotland, he succeeded to the title on the death of his father on 6 March 1704, but having gone abroad in June 1700 after a family quarrel did not return to Scotland until 1 November 1707. The issue of the succession was not a straightforward one as Seton had been born before the marriage of his parents. The marriage was established as lawful and Seton legitimated by the court of session in 1710. That declaration defeated any claim by the second Viscount Kingston, who had intruded himself into the Seton estates in 1705. 
Winton showed his family's traditional loyalty to the Stuarts when, in 1715, he raised a troop of 300 horse and on 11 October joined Viscount Kenmure at Moffat in support of the Jacobite rising. During the campaign he advised Kenmure to move to the west of Scotland with a view to opening communication with the forces of the earl of Mar. This advice was in contrast to that proffered by Northumberland supporters of the Pretender (James Stuart), who advised marching into England. Despite this advice, Winton was persuaded to take part in the march into England and was captured at Preston on 14 November 1715. He was taken to London together with William, earl of Nithsdale, Robert, earl of Carnwath, William, Viscount Kenmure, and William, Lord Nairne. They were impeached before parliament in January 1716, and when Winton replied to the articles of impeachment he alone pleaded not guilty. At his trial, which took place in Westminster Hall in March 1716, he was found guilty of high treason and condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, and his titles and lands to be forfeited. Three years later his estates would be sold to the York Buildings Company for $50,300. Winton's sentence came in spite of an able defence conducted by Sir Constantine Phipps, who 'advised him, as the only plea he had, to act the madman, and... he performed it to the life' (L. Inese to the duke of Mar, 3 Oct 1716, 'Stuart Papers', 3.15). The sentence of death was never carried out because, according to one account, Seton escaped from the Tower of London in a hamper (Seton, 1.272). From London he travelled to Calais, arriving on 18 September 1716. On joining the Pretender at Avignon in January 1717 he was granted a pension of 2000 livres a month, which was paid to him until his death. He moved to Rome and was admitted to the masonic lodge there on 16 August 1735. He became grand master in April 1736, holding office until the suppression of the lodge by Clement XII in August 1737. 
There is no evidence that Seton was ever married to Margaret Maclear (Seton, 2.1006-9), but they had a son, Charles, who was born in 1711 and died in 1781. Seton died, aged over seventy, in Rome on 19 December 1749, and was buried near the Porta del Popolo. 


@@@@@


doc= 25124


Seton, John (1508/9-1567), Roman Catholic priest and writer on logic, is of unknown origins and parentage. Although his tombstone in Rome recorded that he died in 1567 at the age of seventy, he himself testified in 1551 that he was forty-two years of age. This accords better with the fact that he graduated BA from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1528. He was elected a fellow of the college on Bishop Fisher's foundation shortly afterwards and commenced MA in 1532. He gained a high reputation as a tutor. After ordination he became a chaplain to Bishop Fisher, attending him in the Tower. In 1542 he was one of the college fellows who signed an appeal to the visitor against John Taylor, the master of the college and afterwards bishop of Lincoln. In 1544 Seton proceeded DTh and about that time became a domestic chaplain to another conservative clergyman, Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, the master of Trinity Hall, and chancellor of the university, who rewarded him with the rectory of Hinton Ampner, Hampshire. 
Under Edward VI, Seton's religious convictions brought him to greater prominence as the Catholic wing of the English church was increasingly threatened. In 1550 he attended Peter Martyr's disputation in Oxford, and the following year he testified at Gardiner's trial about the bishop's denial of papal authority and his acceptance of the royal supremacy. To illustrate this he recounted how Gardiner had ordered him to welcome two of the boy king's chaplains, the protestants Roger Tonge and Giles Ayer, as new canons of Winchester Cathedral. A dinner was held in their honour on 5 April 1548. Later that evening Seton, along with another of the bishop's chaplains, Thomas Watson, escorted the new canons to the inns where they were staying, 'and there made them good cheer'. This was, so he deposed, the first time in four years that he had taken a drink in any of Winchester's public houses! 
In return for his loyalty to Catholicism, Seton was presented by Queen Mary with a canonry of his own at Winchester in March 1554. On 14 April 1554 he incorporated DTh in Oxford after being sent by Gardiner, now lord chancellor, to take part in the disputation with Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer. He visited in prison the London radical priest John Bradford to try to persuade him to conform to the Marian church, and did the same, equally unsuccessfully, in 1558 with Thomas Benbridge. Seton suffered for his beliefs in the early years of Elizabeth's reign and he was deprived of his canonry in June 1559. His name was included in a 1561 list of 'papistical clergy': he was described as learned but settled in his papistry, and was ordered to go no further than 20 miles from London. After imprisonment and further persecution he fled to Rome. He was buried in the cemetery of the English College in Rome, where a memorial recorded that he died on 20 July 1567. 
As a Catholic polemicist Seton wrote a panegyric to celebrate Mary's coronation in 1553, as well as contributing Latin verses to Alban Langdale's 'Catholica confutatio Nic. Ridlei', published in Paris in 1556. However, he was most famous as a logician. His 'Dialectica' was first printed in 1545. Dedicated to Gardiner as chancellor of Cambridge, he claimed that his colleagues John Cheke and Thomas Watson persuaded him to publish what has been called 'virtually the last major document in the history of scholastic logic in England' (Howell, 50-60). Nevertheless it remained the standard textbook for over a century, especially after the publication of an annotated edition in 1572, which was last reprinted in 1639. Such was its popularity among students that it was said to have circulated in manuscript before it was published. Even the Bodleian Library's printed copy of 1577 was shared among friends, being inscribed, 'Sum liber francisci Tred: et amicorum' ('I am the book of Francis Tred: and friends'; Bodl. Oxf., 70 c. 79). 


@@@@@


doc= 25125


Seton, Sir John, Lord Barns (c.1553-1594), judge, was the third son of George Seton, fifth Lord Seton (c.1530-1586), and his wife, Isabel ('c'.1529-1604), daughter of Sir William Hamilton of Sanquhar. His father was a Catholic, and John Seton, despite acknowledging the government of James VI in April 1573, also continued to be associated with the Catholic interest and was excommunicated by the kirk. During the mid-1570s he visited the court of Philip II of Spain, where he was made a knight of the royal order of Santiago and a gentleman of the king's chamber. 
Seton returned to Scotland in 1579 and suffered imprisonment at the hands of the earl of Morton's government. On Morton's fall at the end of 1580, Seton found favour with King James. He was sent to complain to Elizabeth I about her interfering on Morton's behalf, but was refused entry into England. On 9 May 1581 he was formally appointed by James VI as 'principall maister of all his hienes horsis and stabillis, cure, reull and ordour thairof' for life (Donaldson, 45). He opposed the ultra-protestant Ruthven raid in 1582, and in 1583 was employed as an envoy to Spain; in December that year he was included in royal letters of protection. His father granted him a charter for the barony of Barns on 10 May 1583. 
In the late 1580s Seton's promotion was rapid: James VI made him on 3 January 1587 first master of the king's household, as well as admitting him on 27 January to membership of the privy council, and, in March of that year he was nominated ambassador to Spain. On 17 February 1588 he was appointed an extraordinary lord of session, with the title Lord Barns, replacing his brother Alexander Seton, afterwards first earl of Dunfermline. Sir John married Anne, youngest daughter of William, seventh Lord Forbes, on 10 September 1588, at the house of Lord Ogilvie, an occasion attended by a number of Catholic lords. He died on 25 May 1594. His son and heir, Sir John Seton, became a gentleman of the privy chamber to Charles I; he also left an illegitimate son, Hannibal. 


@@@@@


doc= 25126


Seton, Thomas (d. 1359/60), justice, probably came from one of the northern counties where the place name Seton or Seaton is common, and where much of his legal work was done. Though his origins and private life remain obscure, it is known that his wife was called Isabel and that they had a son called William. First recorded in 1340 as serving on an oyer and terminer commission investigating official misconduct in Cumberland and Westmorland, from Michaelmas term 1342 Seton appears as a serjeant-at-law in both the year-books and the records of the common bench. He held the office of king's serjeant from 1343 to 1345, and in June 1345 appeared before the king's council on behalf of the commonalty of the bishopric of Durham, asking for the remission of an eyre in return for a payment of 600 marks. A record from 1351 terms him Sir Thomas, but there is no firm evidence that he was knighted. 
He was appointed a justice of the king's bench at Easter 1354, but on 12 October of the following year was moved to the common bench (having, however, enjoyed the higher salary paid to justices of the latter court even while on the king's bench). He served on the common bench until Trinity 1359, and on 5 July 1357, he was made a justice of the king's bench again, 'for this turn'. Just before his death he was said to be a member of the king's secret council. Edward, the Black Prince, also employed him in a legal capacity as a serjeant-pleader, and also as a member of his council. Periodic evidence of this service appears between 1347 and 1358, and he received robes and 50's'. annually from the prince. 
Seton sat on scores of oyer and terminer commissions and commissions of the peace. Many of these commissions involved issues of public order in the northern counties (Yorkshire, Northumberland, and Cumberland), such as the conflict between the garrison and civil administration at Carlisle in 1345, an assault on the warden of the Scottish march in October 1351, and in the winter of 1352 trespasses in the towns of Kingston upon Hull and Beverley (where he and his associates quickly filled the gaol and then delivered the prisoners under separate commission). 
Seton evidently had enemies. While he was on his way to a council meeting in the exchequer in November 1357, a woman named Lucy, the wife of Robert Cokeside, loudly denounced him as a faithless traitor who deserved to be drawn and hanged. Seton secured her conviction and won damages of 100 marks. Yet only a few years later, in the summer of 1359, his enemies -- 'satellites of the devil' the court termed them ('CPR', '1358-61', 280) -- hired a chaplain, Thomas Nesebit, who gained entrance to Seton's dwelling on Fleet Street and then stuck a knife into his belly. Seton had died by May 1360, almost certainly as a consequence of this assault. 


@@@@@


doc= 25127


Seton, Sir William, of Pitmedden, second baronet (bap. 1673, d. 1744), politician and writer, was baptized on 6 March 1673, the eldest son of Alexander Seton of Pitmedden (1639?-1719), first baronet and lord of the court of session as Lord Pitmedden, and his wife, Margaret (died 1723), daughter of William Lauder, one of the clerks of session. Throughout the troubles of the seventeenth century the Setons had proved loyal to the Stuarts, though Lord Pitmedden had found himself unable to accept either James VII's policy of toleration or his subsequent deposition. Unlike his father, William embraced both toleration and the principles of the revolution of 1688, though without breaking definitively from his cavalier heritage. Exposure to his father's magnificent library (though this was sold on Lord Pitmedden's death) and to the precepts of an excellent tutor, William Smith, who in 1693 went on to become a regent at Marischal College, Aberdeen, may account for the erudition and political sophistication of Seton's later pamphleteering. 
In the early part of his political career Seton adopted a 'country' oppositionist stance, and won immediate notoriety as a reformist pamphleteer of dubious loyalty. His anonymous 'Memorial to the Members of Parliament of the Court Party' (1700) earned him imprisonment in the toll-booth of Edinburgh, and was burnt by the public hangman on 16 November 1700 for its 'high reflections' ('APS', 10.210-11) on the king's majesty, the proceedings of parliament, and the government of the church. Apologizing to the parliamentary committee which had authorized his detention, Seton denied any 'sinistruous or bad designe' (ibid., 10.214) and won a prompt release. The 'Memorial', written in the traumatic aftermath of the Darien fiasco, advocated various plans for the regeneration of Scotland, criticized the union of the crowns for failing Scotland's interests, and, imprudently, urged suspension of judgement on King William's Scottish church policy 'till we have the Honour of seeing him here' ('Memorial', 4). 
Of more substance was 'The Interest of Scotland in Three Essays' (1700, with a second edition in 1702), in which Seton set out a political programme whose central planks were to survive his later switch from oppositionist to placeman. Seton had already identified an incorporating union as the best solution to Scotland's ills, though his proposals for full integration of churches and laws as well as parliaments in 'The Interest of Scotland' went much further than the treaty of union which Seton would help negotiate in 1706. Seton also displayed a commitment to mixed government and to the values of civil liberty and the protection of property rights, which played central roles in his unionist vision of a Scotland liberated within a united Britain from its turbulent magnates. These 'whiggish' positions sat awkwardly with his cavalier connections. Yet Seton was a sceptical whig: his Commonwealth-style constitutionalism stood at some remove from uncritical Williamite cheerleading, and his advocacy of presbyterian church government was far from unequivocal. 
In 'The Interest of Scotland' Seton continued the distinctive eirenic ecclesiology associated in the north-east with the Aberdeen doctors. Unconvinced by claims made for the divine right status of any particular form of ecclesiastical polity, Seton wondered which would best conform to the post-revolution constitution. Identifying episcopal hierarchy as a pillar of absolute monarchy, Seton concluded that, were England and Scotland to unite, as he believed they should, their liberties would be best protected by an Erastian union of their churches under either superintendency or presbytery. 
The amphibious latitude which Seton displayed in both his politics and churchmanship bewildered his contemporaries as well as historians. In 1706 a Jacobite agent included Seton, elected to the Scottish parliament in 1702, in a list of the 'loyal and honest men' returned for Aberdeenshire (Macpherson, 2.17). On the other hand, Daniel Defoe pigeon-holed him as 'an honest whig' ('Letters', 179). Despite his whiggish political philosophy, Seton's parliamentary career, which included a spell as a commissioner for public accounts in 1703-4, suggests a continuing adherence to the Episcopalian-Jacobite values of his family and region. 
Seton endorsed the cavalier campaign for the toleration of Episcopalians in 'A continuation of a few brief and modest reflexions persuading a just indulgence to be granted to the episcopal clergy and people in Scotland' (1703). In July 1704 he moved a patriot overture in parliament that there be no nomination of a successor to the crown in that session; consideration should be given instead to rectification of Scotland's government. The suspicion of Jacobitism is reinforced by Seton's support at this stage for the programme of the duke of Hamilton. Nevertheless, Seton's position bears some affinity with the scheme of limitations espoused by Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun, a salutary reminder of the shared inspiration of Commonwealth politics which explains the surprisingly narrow gap between Seton's commitment to incorporating union and Fletcher's celebrated anti-unionist patriotism. After all, in 1700 Seton had perceived 'a necessity for Scotland, either to unite with England, or separate from it' (W. Seton, 'The Interest of Scotland', 1700, 110). But patriotic trouble-making in pre-union Scottish politics was also often the first step to being bought off with office, and Seton's own brand was not without its price. In November 1704 the earl of Seafield, a leading courtier, received this message: 'Pittmeden younger pretends a great keyndnes to your Lo., and sayes most serieouslie to me that if your Lo. will obtain him a pension of one houndreth pound per annum, he will be your servant and give you a sutable returne. He would have the first termes payment at Candlemas nixt. ('Correspondence', 382)' Nationalist historians have used this evidence of opportunism to discount the principled conviction behind Seton's subsequent activities to promote the union. Although his partisanship was weak and he enjoyed the rewards of office as a courtier, having become a collector of bishops' rents in 1705 (until 1714) and a commissioner for union in 1706, Seton was a long-standing supporter of incorporating union. He was described as a zealous supporter of union in Sir John Clerk of Penicuik's Latin history of the Union of 1707. Clerk also remarked that Seton was not renowned for eloquence, though he made a number of important parliamentary interventions in the Union debates. His speech of 2 November 1706 on the first article of union was published as a pamphlet, and his speech of 18 November on the third article is given at length in Defoe's 'History of the Union'. Seton also published 'Scotland's Great Advantages by an Union with England' (1706). Here Seton set out the easy choice facing Scotland between 'Union with Peace and Plenty, or Dis-Union with Slavery and Poverty' ('Advantages', 8), warned Jacobites not to aim at advancing 'the Interest of any Prince, to the disadvantage of their Country' (ibid., 9), and chided patriots for spouting empty rhetoric about the loss of Scottish nationhood: Scotland's 'Sovereignty and Independency' would be asserted to greater effect within the Union than for 'a long time' (ibid., 11). 
Seton sat in the British parliament in 1707-8, and sat on the equivalent commission between 1707 and 1717. However, his active political and literary career culminated in the Union. He was described by his friend William Nicolson, bishop of Carlisle, as 'an ingenious Gentleman' ('London Diaries', 451). He married Catherine (died 1749), daughter of Sir Thomas Burnett of Leys, and they had four sons and five daughters. Seton died in 1744. 


@@@@@


doc= 25128


Settle, Elkanah (1648-1724), playwright, was born on 1 February 1648 at Dunstable in Hertfordshire, the eldest of five children of Josias Settle (died 1666), a barber and innkeeper, and his wife, Sarah. 
Settle was educated in the Dunstable area, and then at Westminster School, where he was a king's scholar. His education seems to have been financed by his uncle, also called Elkanah Settle, who later left him his estate. In 1666 Settle's first published work appeared, a patriotic poem on the Second Anglo-Dutch War, entitled 'Mare clausum, or, A Ransack for the Dutch'. In the same year he left Westminster for Trinity College, Oxford, from where he matriculated on 13 July 1666. Shortly after he arrived in Oxford he began writing his first play, a heroic tragedy called 'Cambyses', on which he may have collaborated with a fellow undergraduate, William Butler Fyfe. The play was completed by December 1666, and was then accepted and performed by the Duke's Company managed by William Davenant, at its theatre in Lincoln's Inn Fields. It was a success, running for six days with a full house and earning Settle the patronage of Anne, duchess of Buccleuch and Monmouth, to whom the published version was subsequently dedicated. 
By the spring of 1667 Settle had left Oxford, without finishing his degree, and moved to London, where he became acquainted with the earl of Norwich, the earl of Rochester, and the earl of Mulgrave, probably through the influence of the duchess of Buccleuch and Monmouth. Within two years he had written another two plays, 'The Conquest of China' and 'The Empress of Morocco', and a poem on the fire of London. 'The Conquest of China' was not a great success, but 'The Empress of Morocco' was enthusiastically received, and marked both the high point of Settle's literary career and the source of his literary feud with John Dryden. The play, a heroic tragedy in rhyming couplets, was selected for presentation at the court in Whitehall, where it was performed several times, to great admiration, in late 1672 or early 1673. In this amateur production the characters were played by courtiers, and both the earl of Mulgrave and the earl of Rochester contributed prologues for the performances, which were spoken by Lady Elizabeth Howard. At this time Settle held a post at court, having been appointed steward in 1672, probably through the influence of Rochester and Mulgrave. The court performances of 'The Empress of Morocco' were followed on 3 July 1673 by the play's first public performance, by the Duke's Company, at Dorset Garden, where it was said to have run for a whole month. The play capitalized on the current fashion for bombastic rhymed drama set in exotic locations, and it was plotted around conflicts of love and honour in the royal house of Morocco. One of the chief attractions of the tragedy was undoubtedly its spectacular staging, and its elaborate palace scenes, fleets of ships, imprisoned princesses, and violent assassinations. The new playhouse at Dorset Garden was well suited to such a performance, having been recently equipped with the latest stage machinery and scenery. The King's Company, unable to compete with the visual splendour of the production, responded in December 1673 with 'The Empress of Morocco: a Farce', a burlesque of Settle's tragedy by Thomas Duffett. 

'The Empress of Morocco' was published in 1673, advertising Settle on its title-page as 'Servant to his Majesty'. The play was accompanied by an epistle dedicatory to the earl of Norwich, the prologues by Rochester and Mulgrave, and six engravings. It was this prestigious edition of the play that seems to have riled Settle's older contemporary John Dryden, who joined forces in 1674 with Thomas Shadwell and John Crowne to mount an attack on Settle and his work, entitled 'Notes and Observations on 'The Empress of Morocco''. The group as a whole seems to have been motivated by jealousy of the young playwright's position at the court, and Dryden in particular was angered by Settle's references in the dedication to the laureate's attempts to gain patronage from the court wits with his latest play, 'The Assignation' (1673). The collaborative 'Notes and Observations' took the form of a lengthy critique of Settle's tragedy, which attacked the author for his low birth and lack of learning, parodied the bombast of the play, and questioned its elevated poetic language. Settle responded in the same year with his own 'Notes and Observations on 'The Empress of Morocco' Revised' in which he defended his use of simile and metaphor, and applied the charges of bombast and high-flown language to Dryden's own recent heroic tragedy, 'The Conquest of Granada'. It was during this controversy that Settle married Mary Warner, on 28 February 1674, in the parish church of St Andrew, Holborn. His wife seems to have died not long afterwards, and left no children. 
Following the success of 'The Empress of Morocco', Settle put on a series of plays, including the early 'Conquest of China' and an adaptation of William Heminge's tragedy 'The Fatal Contract' (1653), which was renamed 'Love and Revenge'. But he was no longer the court favourite, as he acknowledged in the prologue to the later, and more successful, heroic drama 'Ibrahim', produced in 1676: '
Applause is grown a strange Coy Mrs. Now; 

Courted by All, and yet obtained by few. 
(prologue)' 
'Ibrahim' was a dramatization of Madeleine de Scudery's 'Ibrahim, or, The Illustrious Bassa', which had been translated by Henry Cogan in 1652. It was followed in the same year by another romance adaptation, 'Pastor fido, or, The Faithful Shepherd', a play based on Richard Fanshawe's 1648 translation of Battista Guarini's pastoral 'Il pastor fido'. Although Settle's play was again written in rhymed heroic verse, its epilogue announced its author's intention to abandon drama in rhyme, and in 1680 Settle's first venture in blank verse appeared, a tragedy called 'Fatal Love, or, The Forced Inconstancy', which was based on Achilles Tatius's Greek romance 'Leucippe and Clitiphon'. With its anti-Catholic satire on priests and nuns, 'Fatal Love' also marked the beginnings of the playwright's engagement with the politics of the exclusion crisis. 
Between 1679 and 1683 Settle devoted much of his energy to political propaganda, writing on behalf of the whig exclusionists. In addition to producing pamphlets and satires, he seems to have been engaged by the earl of Shaftesbury, on behalf of the emergent whig party, to devise and manage the performance of the whigs' popular anti-Catholic pope-burning pageants in the City of London. The pageant that he created in 1680 was said to have been the most lavish on record, costing $1000 to produce. In the same year Settle also wrote his virulently anti-Catholic play 'The Female Prelate', an attack on the hypocrisy and licentiousness of the Roman church, which was acted at the Theatre Royal in the autumn of 1680 and published almost immediately afterwards, with a dedication to the earl of Shaftesbury. During the same period, just before the third Exclusion Parliament of March 1681, Settle also wrote, possibly commissioned by Shaftesbury, a pamphlet entitled 'The Character of a Popish Successour, and what England may Expect from Such A One'. In it the playwright attempted to influence the outcome of the forthcoming parliament by demonstrating the need for legislation to avoid a Catholic succession, and he charged James, duke of York, with trying to alienate the affections of the English people from their king. The 'Character' provoked a number of replies from tory propagandists, to which Settle in turn responded later in 1681 with 'A Vindication of 'The Character of a Popish Successor''. 
Having established himself as a defender of whig arguments, Settle then went on to write a reply to John Dryden's attack on the whigs in his mock-biblical satire 'Absalom and Achitophel'. Settle's answer to the poem, entitled 'Absalom Senior, or, Achitophel Transpros'd', appeared anonymously in April 1682. It began with a lengthy attack on the pope, and then went on to satirize the duke of York as Absalom and the marquess of Halifax as Achitophel, and to eulogize the earl of Shaftesbury and the duke of Monmouth as Barzillai and Ithream. The poem ended with an ironic prophecy on the glories of James's future reign. Settle's commitment to the whigs also involved him in another literary feud at this time, with the playwright Thomas Otway. In his poem 'The Poet's Complaint of his Muse' (1680) Otway had satirized Rochester, Settle, and Shadwell, and Settle is said subsequently to have challenged Otway to a duel. 
Settle had consistently aligned himself with the whigs up until 1682. However, the earl of Shaftesbury's departure for the Netherlands, and the effective defeat of the exclusionist agenda at the end of 1682, brought about a shift in his political allegiances, and he began to write tory propaganda. In 1683 he published a pamphlet entitled 'A Narrative', in which he offered a series of explanations for his recantation. In the same piece he also exonerated the duke of York from any involvement in the plot, and attacked Titus Oates's 'Narrative of the Popish Plot', demonstrating that Oates's evidence was flawed and contradictory. Although Settle's political conversion was met with ridicule and scepticism by many of his contemporaries, he went on to publish a series of tory works, including 'A Panegyrick on the Loyal and Honourable Sir George Jefferies' (1683), 'Animadversions on the Last Speech and Confession of the Late William, Lord Russell' (also 1683), and 'An Heroick Poem on the Coronation of James II' (1685). He also entered James's army on Hounslow Heath, where he is unlikely to have seen any active service, and between August and October 1688 he took over the editing of the pro-government publication 'Publick Occurrences Truly Stated', formerly edited by Henry Care. He continued his support of James II right up until the invasion of William of Orange, publishing an attack on the Dutch, entitled 'Insignia Bataviae, or, The Dutch Trophies Display'd', in 1688. However, again he was supporting a losing side, and following the accession of William and Mary he changed allegiances, and published the Williamite Pindaric ode 'A View of the Times, with Britain's Address to the Prince of Orange' in 1689. 
Settle's first major work after the revolution was a tragedy, 'Distress'd Innocence, or, The Princess of Persia' (1691), on which he collaborated with Thomas Betterton and William Mountfort. In the preface to the play he declared his intention to leave political engagement for drama, and he went on to write a series of works that capitalized on the contemporary vogue for opera and semi-opera. In 1692 he produced 'The Fairy Queen: an Opera', based on Shakespeare's 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' and set to music by Henry Purcell, which was performed at the Queen's Theatre, where it met with an enthusiastic response. It was followed in 1695 by 'Philaster, or, Love Lies Bleeding', an adaptation of the tragicomedy 'Philaster' by Beaumont and Fletcher (published 1620). In 1697 he presented a comedy-opera, 'The World in the Moon', again complete with elaborate singing and dancing scenes, which was published with a dedication claiming that it was the most elaborate dramatic production ever performed on the English stage. In 1701 there was another highly extravagant visual display, in Settle's tragic opera 'The Virgin Prophetess, or, The Fate of Troy', a play set during the siege of Troy, which centred on the figure of Cassandra, and maximized its location with a series of spectacular scenes involving prospects of Troy in flames, and Helen leaping into the fire from the top of a turret. Following this opera Settle produced 'The City-Ramble, or, A Play-House Wedding' in 1711, a comedy in blank verse and prose, which combined elements of two plays by Beaumont and Fletcher, 'The Knight of the Burning Pestle' and 'The Coxcomb'. However, he seems to have abandoned operatic drama until 1718, when he produced 'The Lady's Triumph', a domestic comedy centring on an intrigue between the young bride of an old alderman and her suitor. 
At the same time as writing these works for the stage, in 1691 Settle took up a position as city poet, following the death of the previous incumbent, Matthew Taubman. His role in this capacity was to devise the annual pageants for the lord mayor's show, a task for which he was well qualified both through his experience in producing spectacular effects in the theatre, and in co-ordinating the pope-burning pageants of the exclusion crisis. It is uncertain for how long he held the post: he produced pageants in 1691-5, 1698-1702, and 1708, and though he wrote no pageants after 1708, he continued to be referred to as 'city poet' by contemporaries. He was also involved in the popular entertainments at Bartholomew fair. Printed attacks on Settle from 1683 onwards had associated him with the fair, but his first recorded presentation for the venue was 'The Siege of Troy', an adaptation of his earlier play 'The Virgin Prophetess' (1701). It was performed at Bartholomew fair in 1707 and at Southwark fair in 1715 and 1716, and the preface to later editions of the play asserts that Settle was employed by the show-woman Mrs Mynn during this time. He is also said to have acted at Mrs Mynn's booth at Bartholomew fair, reputedly dressing up in a costume of green leather to play the dragon in a droll entitled 'St George for England', a performance which earned him the mockery of many of his adversaries. 
In addition to these popular spectacles, from 1699 up until the time of his death, Settle produced an increasing number of commendatory poems. Most of them were written in rhymed heroic verse, and some reworked similar lines for a range of occasions. Many of the poems were funeral and marriage tributes, while others addressed contemporary affairs of state. Settle's verse was directed to both ends of the political spectrum, and his choice of subject matter does not seem to have been governed by any particular political allegiance. Thus under Anne's reign he both celebrated the future Hanoverian succession in 'Eusebia triumphans' (1702), and then in 1706 contributed to the tory outpouring on the Anglican 'Church in danger' campaign with a poem entitled 'Fears and Dangers, Fairly Display'd'. 
In 1718 Settle entered the Charterhouse, where he continued to write panegyrics, and is also said to have been working on a tragedy entitled 'The Expulsion of the Danes'. However, the play, which has now been lost, did not appear on the stage, owing to its author's death, at the Charterhouse, on 12 February 1724. The whereabouts of Settle's will and place of burial are not known. The notice of his death, which appeared in the 'True Briton' on 19 February 1724, describes the poet's appearance as a man 'of tall stature, red face, short black hair'. 
Elkanah Settle's literary reputation has been dominated by his contemporary opponents' attacks on him. In the second part of 'Absalom and Achitophel' (1682) Dryden described his writing as: '
free from all meaning, whether good or bad, 

And, in one word, heroically mad. 
(ll. 416-17)' while in Alexander Pope's 'Dunciad' he is satirized for his changes of political allegiance and for his performance in costume at Bartholomew fair, 'reduc'd at last to hiss in my own dragon' (A. Pope, 'The Dunciad', 1743, 3.286). Yet although these writers have presented an influential image of the writer as a talentless hack, it is clear that much of Settle's drama was very popular in its own time, as the quarrel with Dryden over the success of 'The Empress of Morocco' reveals. Settle was undoubtedly a central figure in the Restoration theatre, his talent for producing spectacular and elaborately staged plays being particularly well suited to the contemporary vogue for heroic and operatic drama. 


@@@@@


doc= 25129


Settle, Thomas (1555-1622), Church of England clergyman and separatist, was born to unknown parents. Nothing is known of his early life before he matriculated as a pensioner from Queens' College, Cambridge, at Michaelmas 1575. He left Cambridge about 1579 without a degree. On 1 March 1580 Edmund Freake, bishop of Norwich, ordained him to the ministry and instituted him rector of Westfield, Norfolk. He resigned Westfield on 7 October 1585. Even before that time, he seems to have been serving as curate to Robert Waller, vicar of Mildenhall, Suffolk. Mildenhall soon felt the force of Settle's godly zeal. To supplement his preaching and teaching he prepared 'A Catechisme' [1587] for the inhabitants, and annexed to it 'A fardle of Christian duties'. 
In 1584, however, Settle demonstrated his discontent with Archbishop Whitgift's religious policy. He signed a petition refusing subscription to the three articles, Whitgift's shibboleth of conformity, and began holding night-time conventicles in Mildenhall. Such activities did not go unnoticed. According to depositions taken on 22 April 1585 Waller and others accused Settle of not following the prayer book, and Settle stated that he disliked 'the order of the government of the church'. Furthermore, he characterized Archbishop Whitgift as 'a very enemy to the church and a Tirant and worse than ever [Bishop] Bonner was' (Lambeth Palace Library, carte antique et miscellanee XII, item 19, fols. 2'r' and 3'r'). 
During part of 1585 and early 1586 Settle evidently preached at Boxted, Suffolk. Then, in May 1586, he was summoned before Archbishop Whitgift. According to Settle's account, this interview was a stormy one. The archbishop accused him of several irregularities, such as failing to use the ring in marriage and the sign of the cross in baptism. Settle replied that he taught nothing but what was in the word of God and the best theologians. He also refused to sign the three articles. Enraged, Whitgift ordered that he be imprisoned in the Gatehouse. 
Settle next attracted the attention of George Carleton, a prominent Northamptonshire MP and puritan activist. After his release from gaol Settle went to Northamptonshire. There he became deeply involved in the presbyterian classis movement, and served as a delegate to its general conference in London during February 1589. His Northamptonshire sojourn ended in April 1589, when the privy council summoned both him and Carleton to appear as part of its Martin Marprelate investigation. By January 1590 Settle was once again confined in the Gatehouse. 
The collapse of the classis movement led Settle to espouse more radical opinions. By April 1590 he had stopped taking communion with the established church, and by April 1592 he had become a full-fledged separatist. Later, in September, he became a charter member of the newly organized London separatist congregation which had Francis Johnson as its pastor, and helped officiate at several of the congregation's illegal services. He was again arrested, imprisoned, and examined by the authorities in late 1592 and early 1593. A transcript of his 6 April 1593 interrogation shows him still defiant. 
However, quarrels among the separatists soon undermined Settle's zeal. Chief among these was the contention that broke out in early 1594 between Francis Johnson and his brother George over Francis's wife's dress and deportment. Settle at first opposed Francis, but later, because of Francis's subtle reasoning, he became confused and despondent. Eventually Settle agreed to conform. He was released from prison and travelled to Norfolk, where on 10 March 1596 he was licensed to preach and administer the sacraments at Barningham Winter and Matlaske. He was instituted to the livings of Barningham Winter and Matlaske on 2 May and 20 May 1601 respectively. A record of Settle's subscription to the three articles, dated 1 October 1600, survives at Lambeth Palace. 
Settle relinquished Barningham Winter on 3 November 1614, but retained Matlaske. He was buried there on 13 December 1622. References to a 'Mrs. Settle' from the early 1590s suggest that he was married, but conclusive evidence is lacking. 


@@@@@


doc= 25130


Sevenoak, William (d. in or after 1432), merchant and mayor of London, was the son, or foster son, of William Rumschedde of Sevenoaks in Kent. There is no evidence to substantiate the legend that Rumschedde rescued him from abandonment in infancy. It was not unusual for London apprentices to assume the name of their birthplace, and the legend seems to have grown up from Sevenoak's own concern for the poor of his native town. He became a freeman of London in 1394 after an apprenticeship to an ironmonger, but he was readmitted to citizenship as a grocer in 1397, almost certainly under pressure from the Grocers' Company because he was engaged in their trade. He paid the substantial fine of $10 to join the Grocers' livery, and this fact, combined with his remarkably swift commercial rise in a difficult period for trade, must mean that he was well endowed with capital. By 1401 he was advancing credit of $100 to a grocer, and three years later he owned a ship which attacked Prussian ships between England and Zeeland. His foreign trade was diverse and included shipments of cloth, wool, and salt to Flanders and Zeeland and imports of wine in return. In 1409 he transported wheat from Yorkshire to relieve the dearth in London, and he also invested widely in London property, including a quay by the Tower of London. Although he advanced $100 in 1417 -- one of the highest contributions -- towards Henry V's second expedition to France, he generally avoided government finance. 
Sevenoak was warden of the Grocers' Company in 1404-5 and gave $26 13's'. 4died towards the building of its hall. After serving as a warden of London Bridge in 1404, he was elected alderman in 1411, sheriff in 1412, and a member of the Commons for London in 1417. In that decade of economic distress his responsibility for collecting the taxes of his ward may well explain the outburst of a fellow grocer, Thomas Mayneld, who threatened Sevenoak with hanging if he did not 'conduct himself well and honestly' (Sharpe, 'Calendar of Letter-Books', I, 132). When Mayneld was sentenced for his behaviour Sevenoak successfully interceded with the mayor for him, but there was a rigorous side to his character: when he was mayor himself in 1418 he tried to suppress Christmas mummings in London. However his piety and integrity are evident from the permission he obtained to use a portable altar, and from his appointment as a trustee of Whittington's charity. In his own wills were many bequests to churches, chantries, and the poor, and he provided for the foundation of almshouses and a grammar school in Sevenoaks. There is no mention in his wills of a wife or children. He died in or after July 1432 and may have been buried at St Martin Ludgate, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 25131


Sever, Henry (d. 1471), college head, came from the diocese of Winchester, but his family background is obscure. First recorded in 1419, when he entered Merton as founder's kin, he was successively a bachelor fellow (admitted 'c'.1420) and fellow (1423-37). He had graduated BA by 1422; he subsequently became a master of arts and was awarded a doctorate in theology before 1438. In the meantime he had been ordained deacon and priest in 1430, and subsequently entered the service of the crown, being appointed a chaplain to the king in 1437. Two years earlier, on 12 May 1435, he had become a canon of the collegiate church of St Mary Magdalene at Bridgnorth, Shropshire, which was a royal peculiar, and he later held a number of other important benefices, many of them as the result of royal patronage; these included a canonry in St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, a prebend in St Paul's, London, where he eventually became chancellor, the deanery of Bridgnorth, and the wardenship of the king's free chapel in Tickhill Castle, Yorkshire. 
Sever plainly stood high in the king's favour, for on 11 October 1440, in his charter of incorporation, Henry VI appointed him to be the first provost of the new royal foundation of Eton College, a post he held until 1442. He may have left the king's service in some disfavour, however, for in the following year Oxford University, whose chancellor he had become about October 1442, asked Pope Eugenius IV ('r'. 1431-47) to write to Henry VI in terms that would advance Sever in the king's favour. The appeal may have been effective, for by 1448 Sever had become the king's almoner, a post he still held in 1454 -- when the king's stables were reduced in that year, Sever was given fifteen of the king's horses. 
Sever had been an unsuccessful candidate for the wardenship of Merton College in 1437, but he was elected to this position on 19 February 1456. His learned theological disputations were highly regarded by his Oxford contemporaries. He acted for the university to receive donations, especially books, for the library founded by Humphrey, duke of Gloucester (died 1447), and he himself built up a considerable working theological library, which between 1466 and 1468 he presented to Merton College. His gifts to the college have led to some authors describing Sever as Merton's 'second founder', inspired by the inscription on his memorial describing his role there 'ut fundator'. He undertook substantial building projects, including an extension to the warden's lodgings, completed in 1462 (demolished 1905-7), and in 1464-5 he completed the college's gatehouse. He died on 6 July 1471 in Oxford and was buried in the choir of Merton College chapel before the warden's stall; the monumental brass depicting him was later moved to the south side of the chapel, but was restored to its original position in the north transept in 1944. Sever's will, dated 4 July 1471, was proved on 27 July. His bequests to Merton included a moiety of a tenement in Fleet Street, London, a house in West Tilbury, Essex, and a silver jug with six goblets. 


@@@@@


doc= 25132


Severn, Joseph (1793-1879), painter, was born on 7 December 1793 at Hoxton, the eldest of the six children of James Severn, a musician whose family originally settled on the banks of the Severn River in Gloucestershire, and his wife, whose maiden name was Littel, and whose family were descended from Huguenots. Severn's parents were a study in contrast: his mother, whom Severn idolized all through his life, often calling her his 'angel mother' (Birkenhead, 2), had an even disposition, while his father was often irascible and demanding. His quick temper notwithstanding, it was reportedly his father who discovered and encouraged in his eldest and favourite son a talent for pictorial art after seeing a profile of himself drawn by the precocious five-year-old. When Joseph turned fourteen his father, in order to encourage further his talent and bolster his professional prospects, had him apprenticed to William Bond, an engraver who offered favourable terms for the apprenticeship. Although initially delighted with the prospect, when it became apparent to the novice that he was no longer progressing in his knowledge or artistic technique, Joseph became bored and resentful towards his master. Much to the consternation of his father, who argued for the worthiness of the engraver's profession, the maturing young Severn often complained bitterly about his situation and often threatened to quit. As Severn was nearing his majority, Bond, fearing the defection of his able apprentice, relented and allowed him more personal time. Severn enrolled in evening art classes at the Royal Academy Schools in 1813, where he later studied under Fuseli. Severn threw himself into his studies of art and literature and painted miniature portraits on the side for small commissions. 
It was towards the end of his bondage to Bond -- no later than the late summer or early autumn of 1816 -- that Severn was introduced to Keats, probably by William Haslam. Severn was welcomed into the Keats circle, attended the 'immortal dinner' at Benjamin Robert Haydon's in 1817, and in 1818 painted portraits of all three of the Keats brothers, as well as of Haslam and John Hamilton Reynolds. He was especially drawn to Keats and, though somewhat shy about it, and feeling his inferior, often sought his company. Keats encouraged Severn in his oil painting 'The Cave of Despair', which depicted a scene from Spenser's 'Faerie Queene' (book 1, canto 10). This was just his second attempt in the medium of oils, but Severn intended to enter the picture in the Royal Academy's student competition for the gold medal in painting, a prize that had not been awarded for over a decade because the submissions were poor. Though hampered in his efforts by miserable lodgings, and otherwise occupied with the miniatures he painted for money, Severn laboured long and hard and finally submitted his painting on 31 October 1819. To the astonishment of everyone, including himself, Severn won the prize on 10 December 1819. Besides the gold medal, the award brought with it not only excellent publicity in Severn's case for his budding business in miniatures but also entitlement to compete for the coveted travelling scholarship. But Severn's next decision, a momentous one, was to throw all of this into jeopardy -- or so it seemed. 
Severn had consoled Keats when he found out in the autumn of 1818 that Keats's brother Tom was dying of consumption (tuberculosis) and even offered to relieve Keats at Tom's bedside. After Tom's death on 1 December 1818, Severn and Keats spent more time together when Keats was in London. Keats's 'annus mirabilis' (beginning in autumn 1818) was also something of a breakthrough year for Severn. But in 1820 things took a turn for the worse. Severn's winning the Royal Academy prize not only brought no new commissions but also aroused such intense jealousy from his fellow students at the academy that Severn discontinued his art classes there. Then, in February 1820, Keats, whose health had been indifferent for some time, discovered the unmistakable sign of his having contracted tuberculosis. He resolved, on doctor's advice, to go to Italy in hopes of convalescing in the favourable climate. The only problem was, as Haslam explained to Severn, that no one could be found to go with Keats. George Keats was in America, Charles Brown was on a walking tour and could not be contacted, and everyone else, including Haslam, whose wife was pregnant, had other obligations. When, on 12 September 1820, Haslam asked Severn if he would go, Severn impulsively agreed to accompany Keats and hurriedly made arrangements to depart on the 'Maria Crowther' bound for Italy on 17 September. After hearing of his son's decision, Severn's father was so enraged that he knocked Joseph to the ground and attempted to bar him from leaving. Severn persisted in his resolution to accompany his friend, however, and it is solely from him, as a result, that there exists an account of Keats's last days. (It must be noted, though, that Severn was a notoriously unreliable source; the three separate 'reminiscences' that he wrote over the course of his life, as well as diary entries, letters, and testimonials related in the 1840s to Monckton Milnes, Keats's biographer, are often inconsistent and even contradictory.) 
The passage to Italy on the small 'Maria Crowther' was a trying one for the young men, as they had to endure five weeks of cramped quarters, poor provisions, a fellow passenger apparently dying of consumption, and stormy weather before they finally arrived on 21 October at the Bay of Naples, where they were forced to undergo a further debilitating ten-day quarantine. The pair left for Rome on 8 November and took up residence at 26 piazza di Spagna (now the Keats-Shelley House). The English physician Dr James Clark, whose services had been requested by Taylor and Hessey, Keats's publishers, had arranged for the rooms for the young men. It was there that Keats, faithfully attended by Severn, lived out the one hundred days remaining to him. 
Once in Rome, Keats began to feel a little better and encouraged Severn to take advantage of the respite by availing himself of the city's magnificent artworks, which Severn did with great relish. He also began to work on his entry for the academy's travelling scholarship. The terms of entry included that the work had to be on a historical subject, and so Severn decided to paint 'The Death of Alcibiades'. But Keats had another relapse in mid-December and Severn was forced to abandon his painting and attend to him day and night. Keats had another period of better health at the end of the year and into January, so that Severn actually wrote to Mrs Brawne in a letter postmarked 11 January 1821 that he hoped that Keats would be able to come back to England with him that spring. But that was wishful thinking, for it was also on this date that Severn made his famous deathbed sketch of Keats, and it became apparent within a few days' time that Keats was not going to recover. Severn's accounts of Keats's final days emphasize the great suffering of his friend until the very end was imminent, at which point, avers Severn, Keats seemed to find peace. Keats died in Severn's arms on 23 February 1821. James Clark saw to most of the details of Keats's funeral and burial in the protestant cemetery because Severn was too exhausted from his ordeal of helping Keats into 'easeful Death'. It was another two years before Severn had erected at his own expense Keats's headstone with the famous epitaph that Keats had requested him to have inscribed: 'Here lies one whose name was writ in water'. Severn meant to honour Keats's dying wish with respect to his epitaph, but unfortunately, in consultation with Brown, he ended up diluting the sublime simplicity of this statement with a clumsy explanatory preamble meant to soften its intended cynicism. 
While modern opinion is divided as to the purity of Severn's motives in accompanying Keats to Rome, Severn's contemporaries seemed convinced of his overall altruism in the matter, and Victorian sentiment inclined in this direction as well. Despite their argument about Christianity at Leigh Hunt's early in 1818, Shelley (whose funeral about a year and a half after Keats's Severn also attended) bestowed the highest praise on Severn in the preface to 'Adonais' (1821), concluding his notice of Severn's aid to Keats with the following: 'His conduct is a golden augury of the success of his future career -- may the unextinguished Spirit of his illustrious friend animate the creations of his pencil, and plead against Oblivion for his name'. Some later commentators of a more demythologizing propensity, however, suggest that Severn might have been from the outset more self-interested in accompanying Keats to Rome than he wished to appear to posterity. They suggest that Severn was a social climber who intended to augment his own prestige through his association with Keats as well as to make connections in the flourishing art scene in Rome. While it is true that Severn profited from his friendship with Keats and that he tended to exaggerate his own importance in the chronicle of this period, his faithful devotion to Keats in the last days of the poet's life is not to be doubted, nor is it much sullied by his later efforts at self-promotion. 
After Keats's death, Severn, who really had no prospects for income and who had become saddled with paying back the costs of Keats's final illness, including the cost of room furnishings, which authorities had burnt (fearing contagion), moved to less expensive quarters at 18 via di San Isodoro, not too far from the piazza di Spagna. There, still grieving for Keats, he reverted his attention to his painting for the Royal Academy fellowship, the deadline of which was fast approaching. By mid-March a steady stream of well-wishers who had heard of his selfless nursing of Keats began to pay him visits. Thus his association with Keats helped him into artistic and genteel coteries, and since a number of his visitors were in a position to help Severn with commissions for portraits and other work, his professional prospects rose as well. 
Severn finished 'The Death of Alcibiades' for all intents and purposes by the end of May 1821, put some finishing touches to it over the next few months, and sent it off to the Royal Academy in August. He experienced no little anxiety as the painting went missing for months, but it was finally discovered to have been mislaid at the Royal Academy itself. Severn, who had no competitors, was duly awarded the travelling pension of $130 p.a. for three years and also received $80 for his travelling expenses to Italy. 
In September 1821 Severn, who was rapidly becoming known in English circles in Rome both for his painting and his exuberant and winning personality, was introduced to Lady Westmorland, who became his patroness of sorts. It was through her that Severn met his future wife at the end of 1824. Elizabeth Montgomerie (died 1862), daughter of General Lord Archibald Montgomerie (died 1814), was the ward of Lady Westmorland, but was unhappy in that situation because of Lady Westmorland's tyrannical ways. Anticipating that Lady Westmorland would oppose their union, the two kept their growing intimacy secret from her and revealed their wedding plans only at the last minute. Joseph Severn and Elizabeth Montgomerie were married on 5 October 1828 in Florence, and though she did give the bride away, Lady Westmorland severed all relations with the couple thereafter. 
The first three years of marriage were clouded by a fraudulent lawsuit (it was eventually dismissed) that forced Severn to expend rather large sums of money. Although Severn had been industrious over the previous six years and had built up for himself a steady clientele for his pictures, and despite the fact that his wife had an allowance from her half-brother Lord Eglinton, the money just seemed to slip away, and so the couple were forced to delay their return to England. Children also began appearing on the scene. In summer 1829 Claudia, the first of six children, was born, followed by Walter Severn, Ann Mary ['see 'Newton, (Ann) Mary], and Henry Augustus. Although Severn was a highly respected and sought after artist in Rome, the family moved back to England in March 1841, ostensibly for the education of the children. They moved into an accommodating old house at 21 James Street at Buckingham Gate, and in the following August Elizabeth had twins -- Arthur and Eleanor. Three of the Severn children (Walter, Arthur, and Ann Mary) became artists, and eventually Ann Mary's reputation as a painter eclipsed her father's. 
Severn did not find it as easy to make a living in London. He entered a cartoon competition sponsored by Westminster Hall in 1843, but his was not selected to be one of those executed in fresco. He tried his hand at various other media (including decorative arts and magazine illustrations) and even thought about returning to his trade in miniatures, but they were out of vogue. So he turned to other projects. During the 1840s he helped Monckton Milnes (later Lord Houghton) on his biography of Keats and even tried his own hand at writing. He wrote essays -- one on Keats appeared in the 'Atlantic Monthly' -- short stories, a historical romance, and there is even supposedly a lost novel on Titian using Keats as the model for the artist-protagonist, but writing was not his forte. Although the Severn family managed to get by on Elizabeth's allowance despite the relative scarcity of new commissions of any type, it became apparent that they could no longer afford the house at Buckingham Gate and so they moved to a more affordable house off Belgrave Road. 
In 1860 Charles Thomas Newton, who married Severn's daughter Ann Mary in 1861, resigned the consulship at Rome, and, probably at his suggestion, Severn applied for the position. Despite being a sprightly sixty-seven, Severn was in legal terms too old for the position, but thanks to the support of William Gladstone, Lord Houghton, John Ruskin, and especially Baron von Bunsen, as well as the concealment as far as possible of his real age, he was elected to the post anyway. He assumed the consulate in 1861; his wife, who was to conclude the family's affairs in London and then follow Joseph to Rome, died in transit, at Marseilles, in April 1862. 
Despite the death of his wife, Severn was once again in his element in Rome. He revisited the grave of his poet friend and wrote that he was flooded with bittersweet memories every time he walked the steps of the piazza di Spagna. In his post as British consul he became something of a crusader against papal injustices, and despite his sometimes overestimating his own importance and straying into matters better left to ambassadorial compass, his overall goodwill often had a salutary effect in mediations on behalf of both English and Italians who had run afoul of papal law. Although Odo Russell, the unofficial British minister to the Vatican, characterized Severn soon after his arrival at Rome as a 'good natured goose, utterly unfit and unqualified for his post', some ten years later he wrote to Lord Granville that 'Patiently listened to, judiciously advised, kindly treated and carefully managed, Severn became a willing, useful and even energetic agent during the ten years we worked together in Rome' (Blakiston, 330). Severn resigned his consulship in 1872, receiving for his troubles a pension of $80 and a further $60 from the civil fund. He continued painting until almost the end of his life, often taking Keatsiana for his subjects, and though his fame as a painter has not stood the test of time, his many depictions of Keats and his circle continue to be widely viewed. In his later years he also planned, but never executed, a folio edition of Shelley's 'Adonais', to be illustrated by himself and his sons Walter and Arthur. He attended the unveiling of the memorial tablet on the Keats House in February 1879, and was there eulogized by Sir Vincent Eyre. 
Severn died in Rome of natural causes on 3 August 1879 and was buried the next day in the new protestant cemetery, but at the intercession of Sir Vincent Eyre, Lord Houghton, and others, his remains were exhumed two years later and fittingly reinterred beside those of Keats. Though many were the suggestions submitted for his epitaph (including ones by Rossetti and Tennyson) it was Lord Houghton's that was chosen; the inscription begins, 'To the Memory of Joseph Severn, Devoted Friend and Death-bed Companion of John Keats, Whom He Lived to See Numbered Among the Immortal Poets of England' (Birkenhead, 280). 


@@@@@


doc= 25133


Bovill, Sewal de (d. 1257), archbishop of York, is of unknown origins. He attended Oxford University where he was a contemporary of Edmund of Abingdon; he was described by Matthew Paris as the 'disciple in the schools, pupil and fellow scholar' of the future archbishop, whose canonization he was later to support (Paris, 5.691). Edmund, who was greatly attached to Sewal, is said to have foretold his friend's promotion and troubles. By 1244, when he was chancellor of the university, Bovill was a doctor of theology. In 1236 he was made canon and prebendary of York, a position he still held in 1241, and canon and prebendary of Southwell; he also obtained the prebend of Fenton about 1247. Between 1245 and 1248 he was archdeacon of York, after which he became dean of that cathedral, retaining this post until his advancement to the episcopate in 1256. On the death of Archbishop Walter de Gray in 1255 the canons elected him to the vacant see, but the king refused his consent on the ground that Bovill was of illegitimate birth. The chapter appealed to Rome on 1 October, and eventually the pope granted a dispensation removing the defect of birth, and confirmed the election. The king gave his assent on 4 May 1256, and Bovill was consecrated at York on 23 July by Walter de Cantilupe, bishop of Worcester. Shortly after Sewal's consecration, Adam Marsh sent him a long letter of advice urging him to take Bishop Grosseteste as his example. The pope claimed the right to appoint to the now vacant deanery, and in 1257 an Italian, Jordan, was installed by his authority. Bovill resisted the intrusion, and as a consequence was suspended from his office and excommunicated. The dispute was resolved (and the excommunication therefore lifted) by the provision of a pension for Jordan, and Godfrey of Ludham was appointed as dean. In March of that year Bovill was granted a licence to visit the shrine of St Edmund at Pontigny, and on 20 July 1257 he was one of the commissioners appointed to decide the dispute between Alexander of Scotland and his nobles. 
Bovill's rule as archbishop was troubled by his quarrel with the pope, whom on his deathbed he summoned to judgement. But his sufferings and resistance to papal intrusion won him great popularity. Matthew Paris describes him as, 'a humble and holy man well skilled in law and other sciences' (Paris, 5.516). However, despite assertions of John Bale (died 1563), his only surviving work is a verse repeated by one of his clerks to Matthew Paris. Sewal de Bovill died on 10 May 1257 and was buried in the south transept of York Minster, where his tomb is marked by a marble slab bearing a cross. 


@@@@@


doc= 25134


Sewall, Samuel (1652-1730), judge and diarist in America, was born on 28 March 1652 at Bishop Stoke, Hampshire, the second child of Henry Sewall ('c'.1615-1700) and Jane (1627-1701), daughter of Stephen and Alice ('nee' Archer) Dummer. The Sewall and Dummer families had earlier emigrated to Newbury, Massachusetts, in 1634-5 and 1638 respectively. Out of 'dislike to the English Hierarchy' Samuel's paternal grandfather had sent his only child ahead of him to New England, 'with Net Cattel and Provisions sutable for a new Plantation'. Henry and Jane were married in 1646, but the following winter, 'the Climat being not agreeable' to Jane's parents, the young couple returned with them to England (Thomas, xxix-xxx). Henry Sewall travelled to New England in 1659, two years after his father's death, to secure his estate. Although he had planned to return home to his pastorate at North Baddesley, Hampshire, the Restoration made it prudent for him to remain in Newbury and send for his wife and five children, who arrived in 1661. Jane bore three more children in Newbury. 
Samuel Sewall attended Romsey grammar school in Hampshire, and shortly after his arrival in Newbury became a student of Thomas Parker, who prepared him to enter Harvard College in 1667. Sewall graduated BA in 1671, became a resident fellow and tutor in 1673, and graduated MA in 1674; he was later an overseer of the college. On 28 February 1676 he married Hannah (1658-1717), the only living child of John Hull, the wealthy and influential merchant, silversmith, and mint-master of the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Now Sewall put aside any plans for the ministry, and began to learn 'the manner of the Merchants' (Thomas, 1.18). The couple lived in the Hulls' Boston home. Sewall became a member of the Third (South) Church in 1677, just before the birth of the first of his fourteen children, of whom only six lived to maturity. 
Sewall became a freeman of the colony in 1678, and the following year joined the ancient and honorable artillery company, receiving the rank of captain in 1701. He managed the Boston printing press from 1681 to 1684. With John Hull's death in 1683 Sewall took over his father-in-law's merchant business and property interests, and assumed many of his civic and political roles. At the end of 1683 he became a (non-resident) deputy to the general court from Westfield, and was elected to Hull's place as captain of the south company of militia, though he resigned the command on religious grounds in 1686 because of an order to put the cross in the militia's colours. Each year from 1684 to 1686 he was elected to the seat Hull left vacant on the court of assistants. 
Matters related to the abrogation of the Massachusetts Bay charter in 1684 and the establishment of the royal government in 1686 caused Sewall to travel to England in November 1688. The journal he kept during his year-long trip describes his attendance to his family's property interests, visits to relatives, sightseeing, and efforts to support Increase Mather, minister of Boston's Second (North) Church, in his appeals for the restoration of the colony's privileges. Thus Sewall was absent from New England during the revolt against Governor Edmund Andros, which was an extension of the revolution of 1688, and the provisional re-establishment of the old government in the spring of 1689. When Sewall returned, he resumed his place on the court of assistants. He was named to the governor's council under the new province charter of 1691, and re-elected annually until his retirement in 1725. In May 1692 he was appointed commissioner of oyer and terminer for the Salem witchcraft proceedings. In December that year, despite the disfavour into which the witchcraft court had fallen, Sewall was made a justice of the superior court of judicature, and he became chief justice in 1718, a position he retained until his resignation in 1728. Alone among the witchcraft judges Sewall publicly recanted, standing in the South Church on 14 January 1697, a fast day, while the minister read on his behalf a bill in which he assumed the 'Blame and Shame' for his part in the trials (Thomas, 1.366-7). From 1699 to his death he was a commissioner (and for much of the time secretary and treasurer) of the Company for the Propagation of the Gospel in New England and Parts Adjacent. His published writings include an anti-slavery tract, 'The Selling of Joseph: a Memorial' (1700), and other religious works and poetry. He was judge of probate for Suffolk County from 1715 to 1728, and held numerous municipal offices. 
The diary Sewall kept from December 1673 to October 1729 is a rich source of social history and his most enduring legacy. Sewall reveals himself to have been an affectionate and engaged father. The birth, illness, and death of his children moved him profoundly. He tells of his son Samuel's difficulties as a student and apprentice, and of his troubled marriage to Rebeckah, daughter of Governor Joseph Dudley; daughter Elizabeth's religious fears; daughter Hannah's life as an invalid; son Joseph's rise to the ministry of the South Church; daughter Mary's death in childbed; and daughter Judith's marriage to William Cooper, minister of the Brattle Street Church. Though Sewall was deeply religious and constant to puritan ways (he abhorred periwigs and Christmas-keeping), his diary entries extend far beyond spiritual soul-searching, providing a remarkable record of his everyday interactions with notable and ordinary New Englanders. He rode the arduous court circuit until he was seventy-six; watched with the sick and bore the dead to their graves; and took into his home several children, including an American Indian boy, whom he prepared for Harvard. 
Sewall's wife, Hannah, died on 19 October 1717. His often dispiriting pursuit of eligible widows thereafter is candidly documented in his diary. He married Abigail Woodmansey Tilley, 'nee' Melyen ('c'.1666-1720) on 29 October 1719, but she died within months. On 29 March 1722 he married Mary Gibbs, 'nee' Shrimpton (1667-1746), who survived him. Samuel Sewall died on 1 January 1730 and was buried in the Hull-Sewall tomb in Boston's Granary burying-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 25135


Seward, Anna (1742-1809), poet and correspondent, was born on 12 December 1742 in Eyam, Derbyshire, the first of two surviving children of Thomas Seward (1708-1790), rector of Eyam, Derbyshire, later canon residentiary of Lichfield, Staffordshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Hunter (died 1780), daughter of John Hunter, the headmaster of Lichfield grammar school whose most famous pupil was Samuel Johnson. Only one of Anna's siblings, Sarah (1744-1764), survived infancy, but she died in her twentieth year, just before she was to marry Joseph Porter, a merchant of Leghorn, the brother of Lucy Porter and the stepson of Samuel Johnson. 
Apart from her first seven years in Eyam, Anna Seward lived all her life in Lichfield, from the age of thirteen on, in the same house, the bishop's palace in the grounds of Lichfield Cathedral. According to Seward, her adolescent years in Lichfield were Edenic; the sisters wandered in the cathedral close or did needlework and read to each other in the open air. 
When Anna was fourteen, five-year-old Honora Sneyd, whose mother had just died, was adopted by the Seward family. Following the sudden death of Sarah in 1764, the friendship between Seward and Sneyd became intense; for the next six years, they had the daily pleasure of each other's company. Much to Seward's regret, in 1771, Honora Sneyd returned to her father's house after living for fourteen years with the Sewards. The beautiful and accomplished Honora Sneyd had several suitors, including Major John Andre and Thomas Day. In 1773 she became the second wife of Richard Lovell Edgeworth and the stepmother of four children, including Maria Edgeworth, but died young, of consumption, in 1780. Seward grieved the loss of Honora Sneyd throughout her life. Among the recurrent themes of Seward's best known poetry are Honora's beauty, the mutual joys of the Seward-Sneyd friendship, their alienation after Sneyd's marriage, and an enduring sense of loss. Seward's long-lived love for Sneyd and for her sister is inscribed on the very landscape of Lichfield in such poems as 'The Anniversary', 'Time Past', and 'Epistle to Miss Honora Sneyd... from the grave of a Suicide'. Judging by the satirical comments Seward makes on married couples and her praise of the achievements of unmarried women, she came to value highly the independence of the single life. During her twenties, however, she had several proposals and was courted by at least two suitors: Cornet Vyse of Lichfield and a Colonel Taylor. Vyse married one of Seward's intimate friends, whose early death is the subject of a Seward monody. The strange correspondence that took place between Seward and Colonel Taylor's wife in 1796 reveals that the colonel continued, for decades, to be infatuated with Seward much to the chagrin of Mrs Taylor and to the surprise of Seward. 
Although it is not known who dubbed Seward 'the Swan of Lichfield', her literary ambitions were stimulated by the early support of her father, who taught the precocious girl to read Shakespeare, Milton, and Pope at three, and to recite the first three books of 'Paradise Lost' by the time she was nine. Canon Seward himself achieved some literary reputation by publishing poetry, including 'The female right to literature' (1748) in Dodsley's 'Collection of Poems by Several Hands' (2.295-302); and by editing (with Lewis Theobald and Samuel Sympson) 'The Works of Beaumont and Fletcher', in ten volumes (1750). During the 1770s the Seward residence became the centre for an important local literary circle, which included Lichfield physician Erasmus Darwin and at times visitors such as Thomas Day and Richard Lovell Edgeworth. As an adolescent, Seward was encouraged to write by Dr Darwin whose own florid poetical style is said, unfortunately, to have influenced her own. Later, her budding talent was recognized at the poetical amusements organized by Lady Anna Miller at her Batheaston villa from 1775 to 1781. In 'Poem to the Memory of Lady Miller' (1782) Seward expresses her gratitude for Miller's 'gentle ordeal' by which verses were put into an Etruscan vase, and then read aloud by a gentleman to the gathering at Batheaston. The best verses, including some of Seward's earliest publications, were chosen as prize poems and collected in Batheaston's annual volume of poetry. 
Seward's vexed relationship with Lichfield's celebrated native son Samuel Johnson is well known. On a personal level, as a close friend of Lucy Porter, she resented Johnson's marriage to Tetty Porter (Lucy's mother) and blamed him for Tetty's impoverished life in a writer's garret in London, after he had lost her widow's portion. It added fuel to the fire that Lucy Porter herself adored her stepfather as a deity. While Johnson was alive, Seward feared the sting of his mocking wit, as shown, for example, in his cruel stories about her maternal grandfather, his schoolmaster, of whom Johnson claimed that he never taught the boys, but whipped and they learned. Johnson later joked that, because of Anna Seward's strong resemblance to her grandfather, he trembled at the very sight of her. Seward also took umbrage at Johnson's dismissal of Lichfield as a cultural backwater because she felt his contempt slighted the literary endeavours of her father and his circle. Anna Seward's chagrin at the success of Johnson was also grounded in her own sense of thwarted ambition, given that she was acutely aware that the youthful talents of both Garrick and the uncouth Johnson had been cultivated by the most accomplished citizen of Lichfield, Gilbert Walmesley, in the very house, the bishop's palace, in which Seward grew up. Yet, though she might inhabit the very room of their studies, as a girl, she could find no Walmesley to sponsor her high intellectual and literary ambitions. Despite everything, Seward's personal connections with Johnson were such that she was invited by Johnson himself to make visits to him while he was on his deathbed in Lichfield during the autumn of 1784. Only after his death did Seward venture to publish, along with her praise of Johnson's literary achievements, her objections to his social bullying, his gloomy misanthropy, and his depreciation of the poetic merits of Thomas Gray, Ossian, and Chatterton, and other poets, whom she admired. She wrote against the 'old literary Colossus' even though she knew she would be ridiculed as 'an unlearned female entering the lists of criticism against the mighty Johnson' ('Letters', 3.352). The letters she wrote, signing herself 'Benvolio', in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1786 and 1787 reveal that she became increasingly incensed by what she saw as the servile adulation granted to Johnson, especially by Boswell. For a brief time, in 1784, Boswell and Seward had been on very friendly terms. Their confidential correspondence indicates that he was in 'a flutter' over their conversations and desired to have 'a lock of that charming auburn hair I admired so much the delicious morning I was last with you' (Heiland, 386). Rejecting the 'voluptuous inclination' suggested in Boswell's request, Seward eventually sent him the lock of hair on her own terms of a chaste friendship (ibid., 387). After the publication of Boswell's 'Life of Johnson', however, an acrimonious public quarrel developed between Boswell and Seward, who argued that Boswell's idolatry of Johnson led him to suppress evidence of Johnson's despotic behaviour and its vicious effects, including Seward's minutes, which she obligingly supplied to Boswell at his request, detailing Johnson's public mortification of a young woman, Jane Harry, for converting to Quakerism. Seward's assessments of Johnson and her controversy with Boswell form only a small part of her accomplishments as a critic. To date, her extensive body of critical writings remains scattered in her letters, in her 'Memoirs of the Life of Dr. Darwin', and in various periodicals, waiting to be studied systematically and appreciated as an important and distinctive contribution to eighteenth-century criticism. 
Throughout her life, Seward's main occupations were managing the family household, keeping up a wide correspondence with both famous and ordinary people, and writing poetry and criticism, when time allowed. As the only surviving child of invalid parents, Seward decided that she was required to care first for her ailing mother, who died in 1780, and then for her beloved father, whose increasingly diminished capacities of body and mind required, she claimed, that she develop stationary habits and limited ambitions. When her father died in 1790, he left her an independent income of $400 annually, and by special dispensation of her episcopal landlord she was permitted to remain living in the bishop's palace until her death. It was during the 1780s, while caring for her father, that she began to win acclaim for her poetry. Her 'Elegy on Captain Cook' (1780), was very popular at the time, but when, in 1791, the Royal Society struck a medal to honour Cook, Seward was hurt that, while those who directed 'their attention to the moths, butterflies, and curry-combs of that voyage' were given medals, she whose poetry celebrated Cook's achievement was overlooked ('Letters', 3.59). Among Honora Sneyd's suitors, Seward had favoured John Andre, whose romantic and noble qualities are memorialized in 'Monody on Major Andre' (1781), a timely poem protesting at Andre's court martial and hanging at Tappan by the Americans who condemned him as a British spy after the plans for the fortress at West Point were delivered to him by Benedict Arnold. Seward's denunciation of George Washington for his part in the affair was so fierce that Washington sent an emissary to Seward with evidence demonstrating that his role was limited. In 1784 she published 'Louisa: a Poetical Novel, in Four Epistles', which experiments with a hybrid form she calls a 'poetical novel', and which she considered to be her best work. 'Louisa' went through four editions in 1784 and a fifth edition in 1785. Her 'Original Sonnets on Various Subjects; and Odes Paraphrased from Horace' (1799) collects poems dated from the 1770s to 1799, some of which had already been published in periodicals. In the preface she defends the sonnet form against contempt of Johnson and other critics as a 'highly valuable species of verse'; and later, in a long footnote, justifies her poetic 'translations' of Horace, though she knew little Latin, by claiming that a literal prose translation is not as true to the 'essence' of Horace as the 'freedom of unimitative numbers' (167-9n.). 
As the wit and good judgement of her letters show, Seward took the maintenance of her very large correspondence as a serious literary pursuit; she once quipped that an unanswered letter resembled 'an unexpiated sin' ('Letters', 4.30). Her circle of friends and correspondents included a variety of celebrated figures of the late eighteenth century of whom only a few can be mentioned. During the early 1780s poet William Hayley wrote to praise her 'Elegy on Captain Cook' and then visited Lichfield to pay her court, after which they became mutual admirers of each other's poetry. In 1788 Josiah Wedgewood wrote to enlist her pen against slavery, but she declined, claiming that Thomas Day and Hannah More had done a better job than she could do on the topic. In 1791, in a letter to Humphry Repton, whose theories on landscape improvement advocated turning England into a huge picturesque park, Seward recorded the practical achievements of her oldest friend, Mrs Mompesson whose lifelong industry and good taste led her to transform her ancestral estate into a highly desirable country retreat. In 1793 Seward found the sympathetic first-hand accounts of the French Revolution sent to her by her young friend Helen Maria Williams naive; according to Seward, revolutionary France was 'a whole nation of Macbeths!' (ibid., 3.339). In a letter of 1803 to Walter Scott she greeted him with a high compliment for a woman of her sensibilities -- 'You Salvator! You Claude!' -- which flattered his young ambitions and which eventually led to his visiting her in Lichfield (ibid., 6.91). 
Seward's friendship with Dr Erasmus Darwin started during her adolescence when he was her neighbour and endured in spite of the literary abuses of which she accuses him. In one case she asserts that verses she wrote in his garden in 1779 were reproduced as his own, with a few additional lines, as the Exordium of his 'Botanic Garden' (1791). This was done without the permission or knowledge of their author, even though the verses had already been published as her work in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (May 1783). In another case, Darwin wrote three poems and appended them to Francis Mundy's 'Needwood Forest' (1776); he signed his name to the best one, his son's name to the second, and, without her knowledge, Seward's name to the third and worst poem. When Seward confronted him, 'he laught it off in a manner peculiar to himself, and with which he carries all his points of despotism' ('Letters', 3.154). Such incidents did not deter Seward from publishing, in 1804, 'Memoirs of the Life of Dr. Darwin', a biography of Darwin's early life in Lichfield (from 1756 to 1781), that reveals her indulgent fondness for his idiosyncratic genius as a doctor, inventor, and writer. Her critical explication of Darwin's poetry and her comparisons of his work with that of other poets reveal not only her keen appreciation of Darwin's playful, voluptuous style, but also her own extensive knowledge of English poetry. At the same time, she uses the Darwin biography to write about her own life and to further her critical views. She reconstructs, in order to honour, the vibrant intellectual life of the Lichfield circle of which Darwin, her father and, eventually, Seward herself were the leading figures. In the interest of women's education, she defends Darwin's books on the sexual reproduction of plants against the charge that they are unfit reading for the fair sex: 'do not suppose that a virtuous girl, or young married woman, could be induced, by reading the Botanic Garden, to imitate the involuntary libertinism of a fungus or a flower' (ibid., 6.144-145). At times Seward is a vigorous critic of Darwin's errors, as when she censors his misrepresentation of the venerable Mary Delany in 'The Love of the Plants' (the second part of 'Botanic Garden', published in 1789), as a mere artificial flower maker. Although Darwin refused to change future editions, Seward's 'Memoirs of the Life of Dr Darwin' corrects the record by pointing out that Delany's ten folio volumes of paper cuttings of plants and flowers represent a brilliant achievement in art and science: 'She employed no material but paper, which she herself, from her knowledge of chemistry, was enabled to dye of all hues, and in every shade of each; no implement but her scissors, not once her pencil; yet never did painting present a more exact representation of flowers of every colour, size, and cultivation, from the simple hedge and field-flower. (Seward, 'Darwin', 315-16)' 

Over the course of her life Seward had many close friendships and dear correspondents, but she mentions four people as her deepest attachments: her sister, her father, Honora Sneyd, and finally John Saville, the vicar choral of Lichfield Cathedral, who had been a long-time friend of the Seward family. After her father's death in 1790, Saville, who was living, separate from his wife, in a small house in the cathedral close, became Seward's daily companion, her beloved 'Giovanni', with whom she shared many interests, ranging from their affection for her dog Sappho to their devotion to the music of Handel. After Saville's death in 1803, she paid his debts, supported his family, and had a monument built to his memory just outside the cathedral. During the last two decades of her life, Seward travelled regularly, looking for healthy retreats at Buxton, at Matlock, and in Wales, where she befriended the famous ladies of Llangollen, Lady Eleanor Butler and Sarah Ponsonby. The title poem of 'Llangollen Vale with other Poems' (1796) honours the home and garden of Butler and Ponsonby that attracted so many celebrities to the site; their intelligent labour had 'converted a cottage, in two acres and a half of turnip ground, to a fairy-palace, amid the bowers of Calypso' ('Letters', 4.99). 
According to her own account, Anna Seward had agreeable features, a clear animated complexion, and tolerably good manners. While still a young woman, she began to grow plump, and, in 1768, she fell and fractured her kneecap, causing an incurable limp that worsened as she aged. Yet, by all accounts, she remained a striking and majestic presence in Lichfield. She was a brilliant conversationalist, according to Edgeworth who met her in the 1770s; and throughout her life, she had a magnificent voice and gave pleasurable recitals of poetry and dramatic readings from Shakespeare's plays. Walter Scott, who met her late in her life, said that her 'great command of the literary anecdote' made her delightful company (Scott, xxiii). Over the years, Seward's body was assaulted by a multitude of rheumatic and other mysterious ailments. In 1794 she exacerbated her lung problems one evening when she read all the principal scenes in 'Macbeth' to company in Nottingham with so much energetic exertion that '[I] have never breathed freely since' ('Letters', 3.385). Increasing difficulties with her breathing led to an acute sensitivity to air quality, as her wry comments on the environment of Birmingham and other polluted places attest. Her two poems on Colebrook Dale, 'The lake, or, Modern improvement in landscape', as well as other poems present prescient criticisms of environmental degradation. Among their various themes, Seward's 'Letters' are a rare treasury of grim observations on health; she often mentions particular cases, besides her own, assessing which treatment would be effective, as for example, when she considers whether amputation is an appropriate treatment for breast cancer. During the severe winters of the mid-1790s, she suffered from whitlows; all her finger-nails, then all her toe-nails, fell off one by one 'imprisoning me to my chair or couch during a fortnight, at three different periods... so much for bodily egotism' (ibid., 4.164). No wonder, by 1796, blighted by disease, she considered middle age detestable, and resolved not to sit for a portrait again until, and if, she reached a venerable old age. Yet her appearance remained impressive even as late as 1807, when her intelligent face, melodious voice, and attractive auburn hair and eyes were noticed by Walter Scott. 
As her own health declined, Seward recognized her inability to finish projected collections of her poetry and letters, so she enlisted Scott as her literary executor. During her last days Seward was attended by women friends, as she had been all her life; her cousin Susan Seward and a Miss Fern read to her in the evenings as she lay dying of scorbutic fever. She died at her home on 25 March 1809 and was buried alone in the choir of Lichfield Cathedral on 2 April, and not, as she had requested, in the tomb either of her father or of John Saville. 
The year following her death, Scott edited a three-volume set of Seward's poems, which he prefaced with a short biography (1810), but he declined to edit her letters. From a bequest of twelve volumes of copies and parts of manuscript correspondence, dated from 1784 to 1809, the Edinburgh publisher Archibald Constable produced an expurgated edition of six volumes of Seward's letters in 1811. 


@@@@@


doc= 25136


Seward, Thomas (1708-1790), Church of England clergyman, was one of at least three sons of John Seward of Badsey, Worcestershire, steward of Lord Windsor, and his wife, Mary. He was admitted a foundation scholar of Westminster School in February 1719. He was elected by the school to scholarships at Christ Church, Oxford, and Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1727, but upon his rejection by both he became a pensioner of St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1731 and proceeded MA in 1734. 
Seward was ordained priest on 20 May 1732 at Rochester, and served as rector of Llan-maes, Glamorgan (1733-40). He was also a travelling tutor to Lord Charles Fitzroy, third son of the duke of Grafton, who died while on the tour in Italy in 1739. The duke of Grafton subsequently promised some preferment for Seward. He became rector of Eyam, Derbyshire, on 22 March 1740, and also of Kingsley, Staffordshire, on 2 April 1747 (having been presented by Lord and Lady Burlington); and on 30 April 1755 he was collated to the prebend of Pipa Parva in Lichfield Cathedral. In addition Seward was installed in the prebend of Lyme and Halstock in Salisbury Cathedral on 5 June 1755. 
Seward had become a resident of the cathedral close at Lichfield in 1754, and he was acquainted with Dr Johnson, whom he used to entertain on his visits to Lichfield. Boswell described him as 'a genteel, well-bred, dignified clergyman, who had lived much in the great world' (Ashmun, 188); and he was recalled by another as 'a lovely man, of fine person and frank communicative spirit' (ibid., 189). He had active literary interests and four of his poems were printed anonymously in Robert Dodsley's 'A Collection of Poems' (1748). Seward was the joint editor of an edition of the works of Beaumont and Fletcher which appeared in ten volumes in 1750. This did not meet with the later approbation of S. T. Coleridge, however, who wrote in his lectures on Shakespeare: 'Mr Seward! Mr Seward! You may be, and I trust you are, an angel, but you were an ass!' (Ashmun, 189). In 1779 Seward was portrayed as the canon in the novel 'Columella' by Richard Graves. 
Writing to Mrs Thrale in 1783 Dr Johnson commented that 'Seward called on me yesterday. He is going... to Paris and then to Flanders to contemplate the pictures of Claude Lorrain, and he asked me if that was not as good a way as any of spending time' ('Letters', ed. Piozzi, 2.263). Mrs Thrale replied, 'I see no harm in his resolution... though the manner of expressing it was likely to offend you: yet he is not a man whom anyone can reproach with neglect of duty; he does more good than almost any person of twice his fortune' (ibid., 2.265). He was indeed assiduous in the performance of his prebendal duties. 
Seward married Elizabeth (died 1780), daughter of the Revd John Hunter, headmaster of Lichfield grammar school, on 27 October 1741. They had a son and several daughters, but only Anna and Sarah survived infancy. Their eldest daughter, Anna Seward (1742-1809), 'the swan of Lichfield', was especially precocious, and her father declared that she could repeat passages from Milton's 'L'Allegro' before she was three. Anna's poetic talent was nurtured by the literary milieu in which she grew up. Erasmus Darwin, for example, was a friend of the family. After her mother's death in 1780 Anna devoted herself to the care of her father. 
In Boswell's 'Life of Johnson' (1791), Johnson described Seward as a man who not only had an ambition to be 'a fine talker', but was a 'valetudinarian', adding, 'I do not know a more disagreeable character than a valetudinarian' (Ashmun, 189). Anna Seward took issue with this view of her deceased father, and secured a more favourable notice of his life in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for October 1794. In her own obituary in that magazine it was said that 'Mr Seward had graceful manners, great hilarity of spirits, and active benevolence' (ibid., 190). However, some of the lack of appreciation of Seward by his contemporaries, like Johnson and Horace Walpole, probably sprang from a certain lightness of touch. He once said of two young men concerning his daughter: 'If she can be in danger from -- -- she must be infinitely more seducible to escape by any possible restraints parental prudence can impose' ('Letters of Anna Seward', 1.267). 
Thomas Seward died at the bishop's palace, Lichfield, on 4 March 1790 and was buried in the cathedral close. His daughter erected a monument in memory of her parent, in Lichfield Cathedral; the verses which formed part of the epitaph were composed by Sir Walter Scott. 


@@@@@


doc= 25137


Seward, William (1747-1799), anecdotist, the only son of eminent London brewer William Seward, was born in January 1747, probably in London. He began his schooling at a small seminary near Cripplegate, and in 1757 moved to Harrow School. For a time he attended Charterhouse School and matriculated at Oriel College, Oxford, on 4 June 1764 at the age of seventeen. On quitting university, Seward travelled on the continent, particularly in Italy, where he was inspired with a passionate interest in art and literature. 
Possessing considerable property but with no taste for business, on his father's death Seward sold his interest in the brewery to pursue a literary life. His conversation and cultured tastes gained him entry to London's foremost literary circles. He became a 'great favourite' of the Thrales at Streatham and was godfather to their daughter Cecilia ('Letters of Samuel Johnson', 3.35). In 1776 Seward introduced Charles Burney to the Thrales, and Fanny Burney later declared that she 'always retained a true esteem for him' ('Diary and Letters', 3.175). Seward was an intimate friend of Samuel Johnson, and became a member of the Essex Head Club founded by him in 1783. He was also a member of the Eumelean Club that met at the Blenheim tavern in Bond Street. Inspired by Johnson's highland tour of Scotland, Seward made a similar journey in 1777, travelling first to Edinburgh with letters of introduction from Johnson to James Boswell and James Beattie. He was among the friends who attended Johnson's funeral, and he assisted in the composition of his epitaph. He was elected FRS on 11 February 1779 -- which he once quipped stood for 'Fellow Remarkably Stupid' -- and FSA on 25 March 1779 ('Journals and Letters of Fanny Burney', 9.143). In June 1783 Seward's interest in art took him to Paris and Flanders, where he studied the pictures of Claude Lorrain. His wide circle of acquaintance in England included Tom Paine as well as the poet Anna Seward, who was no relation. 
In an effort to dispel his habitual ennui, Seward began collecting anecdotes of celebrated personalities in a commonplace book. He contributed many of these, along with literary discoveries and other articles, to periodicals including the 'European Magazine' and Cadell's 'Repository'. The 'Whitehall Evening Post' printed his series 'Reminiscentia'. His 'Drossiana' appeared in the 'European Magazine' beginning in October 1789 and later formed the basis for his five-volume 'Anecdotes of some Distinguished Persons' (1795-7), which passed into a fifth edition in 1804. This was followed in 1799 by two volumes of 'Biographiana'. These volumes were deservedly popular, and Seward was praised for his 'felicity... in hitting off the leading features of his subject' ('GM', 440). Seward's efforts as an anecdotist earned him the posthumous epithet of the 'publick bagman for scraps', from Thomas Mathias, in the 'Pursuits of Literature' (Mathias, dialogue 2, ll. 61-2). 
Among his close acquaintances, Seward had the 'Character of a Hypocondriack' ('Thraliana', 1.358). In August 1781 he made the 'western tour' in England and returned having consulted 'a doctor, apothecary, or chemist, belonging to every town at which he had stopped', adding that this was also his method of gathering information about a place and its surroundings ('Diary and Letters', 1.219). In 1788 Seward appears to have been temporarily confined in a strait-jacket as a result of insanity. Four years earlier Hester Thrale had written of being 'plagued... with a Visit from Seward, who I think is going out of his Senses by the oddity of his Behaviour' ('Thraliana', 1.595-6, n. 4). In his later years Seward habitually spent the winter in London and the summer in the country. Seward's portrait was painted by George Dance on 5 May 1793, and engraved by William Daniell. A second portrait of him, by J. G. Wood, was engraved by Holl, and published on 3 June 1799. Despite his declared intention never to marry, Hester Thrale alludes to his having proposed to her shortly after her husband's death in 1781. Having now grown very corpulent, Seward died of a dropsy at his lodgings in Dean Street, Soho, on 24 April 1799, and was buried in the family vault at Finchley on 1 May. 
Although Seward was said to be 'fond of his joke, and would sometimes indulge it at the expence of his good-nature', he was also praised for his liberality to writers and artists ('GM', 440). Fanny Burney, for whose 'Camilla' Seward helped raise subscriptions, wrote of him that 'his mind is all solid benevolence and worth'. She was struck by his 'singularities and affectation of affectation', but believed that this was 'mere quizziness' ('Diary and Letters', 3.175). He subscribed 10 guineas toward purchasing an annuity for Richard Porson, and Charles Burney recounted Seward's 'good natured plan' for lessening the debt of an insolvent bookseller ('Letters', ed. Ribeiro, 1.262). In an elegy to Seward's memory, Ann Hunter praised his 'kindly mild affections' and 'warm benevolence' (Hunter, 71). Hester Thrale succinctly observed of Seward's character that he was: 'beneficent tho' frigid, and amiable though he does not even wish to be beloved: yet his Moral & Literary Character inspire so much respect, and his perpetual ill Health so much Tenderness, that one loves him in spite both of one's self and him. ('Thraliana', 1.220-21)' 



@@@@@


doc= 25138


Seward, William Wenman (d. 1805/6), writer on Irish politics and topography, may have been born in Dublin. He entered King's Inns, Dublin, and was admitted as an attorney in May 1776. He practised in the Irish court of common pleas from an address in Prussia Street, Dublin, from 1781 until 1804. Briefly, in 1805, he shared premises at 151 James's Street. His death -- which probably occurred in Dublin -- was reported in 'Walker's Hibernian Magazine' for February 1806. 
Seward was the author of a pamphlet, 'The rights of the people asserted and the necessity of a more equal representation in parliament stated and proved' (1783), which extolled the Irish volunteer movement (to which he belonged) and advocated parliamentary reform in Ireland. His second publication, 'The Hibernian gazetteer; being a description of the... towns in Ireland alphabetically arranged' (1789), was a compilation of information on the towns and villages of Ireland derived from other published sources (among them the studies of certain Irish counties by Charles Smith). It was novel for its alphabetical arrangement of place names. Such was its success that Seward revised and expanded it into a quarto volume containing some 6000 entries: 'Topographia Hibernica, or, The topography of Ireland ancient and modern giving a complete view of the civil and ecclesiastical state of that kingdom' (1795; repr., 1797). The new work included entries on lakes, canals, harbours, caves, heaths, and so on, and, like its predecessor, was remarkable for its thoroughness and precision. An interleaved copy in the British Library has extensive manuscript notes by the author. Seward wrote his final work, a contemporary history entitled 'Collectanea politica, or, The political transactions of Ireland from the accession of his majesty King George the III' (3 vols., 1801-4), at a time of strong passions and prejudices in Ireland engendered by the rebellion of 1798. Largely a compilation of contemporary documents, it was remarkable for the author's unwillingness to be judgemental and was justifiably described by Seward as 'a plain and impartial narrative'. 
Nothing is known for certain of William Wenman Seward's lineage, but it seems likely that he belonged to the same family as John Seward, the Dublin mathematical instrument maker, who was born about 1701 and was still flourishing about 1750. He was presumably the father, or an uncle, of Thomas Seward, the attorney with whom he shared premises in 1805, whose name appeared in the Dublin directories from 1800 until 1846, and who acted as the duke of Devonshire's Irish law agent in 1816. He is not to be confused with William Seward (1747-1799) FRS. 


@@@@@


doc= 25139


Sewel, Willem (1653-1720), translator, lexicographer, and historian of Quakerism, was born in the Netherlands on 19 April 1653 at Angeliers Gracht, Amsterdam, probably the only child of Jakob Willemszoon Zewel (died 1658/9), a surgeon, and his wife, Judith ('c'.1631-1664), daughter of Conrad Zinspenning and his wife, Catherine. His paternal grandfather, William Sewel, was English. Sewel's parents, once prominent Mennonites, converted to Quakerism when he was four years old, and his birthplace became one of the earliest Quaker meeting places in Amsterdam. His mother became a notable Quaker minister and writer, and was probably the first Dutch female Quaker preacher. His early recollections of Quakerism in Amsterdam were to be incorporated in his later historical work. After his mother's death he lived with a maternal uncle and learnt Latin; there is no record of a formal education, and he was apprenticed to a weaver. In 1668 he made his only visit to England, lasting ten months: with other Dutch Friends he visited the Quaker leader Steven Crisp in prison in Ipswich and attended the funeral of Josiah Cole. On 19 February 1681 he married Jacomina (1661-1703), daughter of Willem and Jannitze Boekenoogen of Alkmar; they had three daughters and one son. 
Sewel's literary activities began at the end of his apprenticeship, by which time he had a working knowledge of English, French, German, and Latin. His translations, journalism, and editorial work for other authors were his main means of livelihood from the mid-1670s. He also did some teaching and acted from time to time as interpreter for visiting English Friends. He appears to have produced twenty-eight Dutch or Latin translations, of works in English, Flemish, French, German, Italian, and Latin; eight of these were Quaker publications. Apart from Quaker writings, Sewel translated works by Robert Boyle, Gilbert Burnett, William Congreve, Edmund Ludlow, Henry Sacheverell, William Sherlock, and Sir William Temple. He contributed to the Dutch translation of Sir Thomas Browne's collected works. He also edited a Dutch edition of his own mother's writings in 1684. Sewel's correspondence with William Penn shows him to have been a thoughtful and critical translator, willing to engage with the author on the content of the work. His translations and summaries of foreign news for 'De Amsterdamsche Courant' from 1690 was followed by contributions to the 'Nederlansche Courant', and from 1702 to 1705 to 'Tweemandelijke Uittreksels van alle eerst uytkomende Boeken' of Rotterdam and its successor, 'Boekzaal der Geleerde Wereld', which published his portrait in 1705. 
Sewel's importance today rests on his linguistic and historical work. His 'New Dictionary English and Dutch, [or,] Nieuw woordenboek der Nederduytsche en Engelsche taale', published in Amsterdam in 1691 (revised in 1708), represents the second most important English and Dutch dictionary to be published in the period. It emerged from his extensive experience as a translator, alongside guides to the English and Dutch languages, a tract defending his own spelling system, and a Dutch grammar. Sewel worked largely from an English-Latin dictionary, translating the Latin to Dutch, and from a Dutch-French dictionary, translating the French to English. The dictionary gained from Sewel's need in his translating work to include specialist terminology of a learned, legal, and ecclesiastical nature, where there might be no obvious Dutch equivalent words. The 1708 revised edition took about four years to prepare: the English-Dutch part was revised and supplemented on the basis of his recent translating work and the availability of a better English dictionary, while the Dutch-English part was more thoroughly revised. The revised dictionary remained the standard throughout the eighteenth century and formed the basis of John Holtrop's dictionary of 1789. 
Sewel was an active Friend, translating Quaker texts, engaging in defensive correspondence with anti-Quaker writers, and interpreting and participating in the general work of Dutch Friends. He began a correspondence in Latin with English Friends when he was twenty-three. In 1696 he declined an invitation from Penn to move to Bristol and take charge of a Friends' school there. His principal and enduring achievement for the Society of Friends was the substantial 'Histori van de opkomste, annwas, en voortgang der Christenen, bekend by den naam van Quakers', first published in Amsterdam in 1717 and then revised and translated by him as 'The History of the Rise, Increase and Progress of the Christian People called Quakers' (1722). Sewel had been much involved with supplying material to Gerard Croese for his 'Historia Quakeriana' (1695), but continued to collect on a wider scale for his own work. His correspondence with Croese makes clear his disappointment at the latter's numerous misinterpretations, and this may have been a catalyst for his own writing. 
Sewel based his work on notes compiled over a long period, on the published sources he collected, and on correspondence with English Friends. The London yearly meeting appears to have gathered historical material to assist him once the English version was in prospect. His history attempted to set down, more comprehensively than previous accounts, an accurate record of the history of the Friends, and his use of George Fox's 'Journal' may have had more influence in the eighteenth century than direct reading of the 'Journal'. Material was added to, removed from, and edited, in the English version of the 'History', taking account of the views of the meeting for sufferings in London and playing down Sewel's original accounts of some of the extreme or eccentric behaviour by occasional early Friends. Regularly reprinted, his 'History' remained a standard source until the early twentieth century, despite the publication of several other works in the intervening period. 
Sewel died on 13 March 1720, probably in Amsterdam. Records of efforts by other Friends to help his children suggest that his estate was modest. His books, including the printed sources for the 'History', were left by his son to Friends in Amsterdam. 


@@@@@


doc= 25140


Sewell, Anna (1820-1878), author, was born on 30 March 1820 at 26 Church Plain, Yarmouth, Norfolk, the elder of the two children of Isaac Sewell (1793-1878), draper, and his wife, Mary Sewell (1797-1884), writer, daughter of John Wright and his wife, Ann. Her parents were both from old Norfolk Quaker families and she was raised in the Quaker faith. Sewell's life began and ended in Norfolk but in between was slightly peripatetic. A move to London soon after her birth culminated in her father's business failure in 1822, the year Anna's brother, Philip, was born. Her father's succeeding positions, including travelling in Nottingham lace and many years in banking, contributed to further moves the family made. London homes in Dalston (1822-32) and Stoke Newington (1832-6) were followed by a period in Brighton (1837-45) and a series of homes in Sussex: in Lancing (1845-9), Haywards Heath (1849-53), and Graylingwell, near Chichester (1853-8). The Sewells moved to Abson, near Wick in Gloucestershire, in 1858 and to Bath in 1864. Sewell's last years (1867-78) were spent in the White House, Old Catton, near Norwich. 
Sewell was educated at home by her mother until she was about twelve, when she began attending a day school in Stoke Newington. She had an early interest in natural history and a talent for drawing, and her mother schooled her in independence, obedience, and self-denial. Her school education ended and what her mother called her 'life of constant frustration' (Mrs Bayly, 71) began when, aged about fourteen, she slipped and fell while running home from school in the rain, injuring both her ankles. Possibly mismanaged in its treatment, the injury to her ankles led to a lameness which, although varying in its severity, was permanent and meant that at times she could not walk outside or stand for very long. She also suffered from a debilitating invalidism which varied in its intensity but remained with her for life characterized at times by pains in her chest, loss of strength in her back, and a 'weakness' in her head leading to periods of 'enforced idleness' (Mrs Bayly, 245). Cures were sought, including hydropathic treatment, in England and abroad. 
Sewell never married or had children and, apart from periods at spas or visiting relatives on a family farm in Norfolk, she always lived with her parents. It was in Norfolk that she learned to ride and drive the horses upon which her lameness made her reliant. She and her mother were extremely close. Both were heavily involved in practical charity to help the poor and became involved with the temperance movement. Anna taught Sunday school as her health permitted and founded a working men's evening institute in Wick at which she and her mother taught. In her sixties, Mary Sewell achieved some literary fame on publication of a series of didactic ballads and prose works for workers and children. Anna read and edited her mother's work before publication and was regarded as 'a very severe critic' (Mrs Bayly, 248). Her niece described Anna as 'no mean artist'. 'Practical, critical, and far-seeing', with 'a very high moral standard', she was 'mercilessly honest' and 'quite fearless', skilled at driving horses and indignantly vocal when she saw cruelty to animals (M. Sewell, 2-5). 
Sewell was above all deeply religious. Retaining many Quaker-influenced beliefs throughout her life, she left the Quakers at the age of eighteen. After 1836, when physically able to, she joined her mother in attending, without joining, various protestant denominations. She suffered periods of religious doubt and at times struggled with her faith but those who knew her regarded her as a remarkably patient and uncomplaining sufferer whose physical pain was concealed under a face radiant with faith: 'in her presence one had a feeling of being on holy ground' (Mrs Bayly, 255-6). 
Sewell's only publication was 'Black Beauty', written intermittently from 1871 to 1877 at a time when her health further declined, and she was confined to the house and her sofa. In the early period of writing the novel she dictated to her mother from the sofa on which she lay; in 1876 she was able to write in pencil on slips of paper which her mother transcribed. The novel was sold to her mother's publishers, Jarrold & Sons, for an outright payment of $40 and published as 'Black Beauty: his grooms and companions; the autobiography of a horse, ''Translated from the Original Equine, by Anna Sewell''', on 24 November 1877 when Anna was fifty-seven. Now a children's classic, the novel was originally written for those who worked with horses, 'its special aim', Sewell wrote, 'being to induce kindness, sympathy, and an understanding treatment of horses' (Mrs Bayly, 272). It has been seen as instrumental in leading to the abolition of the bearing-rein. 
Anna Sewell has been neglected by history. In ironic contrast, her only book has achieved phenomenal success. Pirated in America in 1890, its sales broke publishing records. It is said to be 'the sixth best seller in the English language' (Chitty in Wells and Grimshaw, x). Sewell lived just long enough to know of her novel's early success. She died at the White House of hepatitis or phthisis on 25 April 1878 just five months after its publication. She was buried on 30 April 1878 in the Quaker burial-ground in Lammas near Norwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 25141


Sewell, George (bap. 1687, d. 1726), author and physician, the eldest son of John Sewell, treasurer and chapter clerk to the dean and canons of Windsor, was baptized on 2 June 1687 at St George's Chapel, Windsor. He was educated at Eton College, being admitted as a king's scholar on 7 August 1699. Reminiscences of his schooldays were included in his poem 'The Favourite, a Simile'. He was admitted to Peterhouse, Cambridge, on 25 June 1706, where he graduated BA in 1709. For a time he studied medicine under Hermann Boerhaave at the University of Leiden, and about July 1725 he took the degree of MD at Edinburgh University. Sewell practised at first in London for some years, but without success. He then moved to Hampstead, where he met with better fortune, until competition ruined his practice. Necessity forced him to become a booksellers' hack, publishing numerous poems, translations, and political and other pamphlets. 
As a young man Sewell inclined to toryism, and was a bitter critic of Bishop Burnet, whom he attacked in five pamphlets published between 1713 and 1715. He also wrote two pro-tory essays, in which he criticized the arguments of Sir Richard Steele. However, by 1718 he had attached himself to the cause of Sir Robert Walpole. 
Sewell's best-known production remains his markedly anti-Spanish play the 'Tragedy of Sir Walter Raleigh' (1719), first performed at the Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre and later revived at Drury Lane in 1789. A man 'of amiable disposition', and possessing 'a very considerable genius' (Cibber, 4.191), Sewell contrived to link his name with some of the most distinguished writers of this period, including Joseph Addison, Matthew Prior, John Phillips, and Alexander Pope, adding a seventh volume to the latter's 1725 edition of Shakespeare. It was perhaps as a result of this unsolicited contribution that Pope, in the first edition of his 'Epistle to Dr. Arbuthnot', wrote of 'Sanguine Sew -- '. Sewell revived his former interest in medicine with an account of Archibald Pitcairne (whose 'medical dissertation' he translated in 1717), which was posthumously attached to George Cheyne's 'History of himself' (1743). Sewell died of consumption at Hampstead, in great poverty, on 8 February 1726 and was given a pauper's funeral on 12 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 25142


Sewell, Henry (1807-1879), lawyer and premier of New Zealand, was born at Newport, Isle of Wight, on 7 September 1807, the fourth son of Thomas Sewell (1775-1842), a leading solicitor of Newport, and his wife, Jane (1773/4-1848), the youngest daughter of John Edwards, a curate of Newport. His brothers were Richard Clarke Sewell, James Edwards Sewell, and William Sewell, and his sister was Elizabeth Missing Sewell. Henry was educated at Hyde Abbey School, near Winchester. He qualified as a solicitor and joined the family firm in 1826. His father died in 1842, leaving an estate encumbered with large debts. Rather than declare insolvency, the family undertook to repay the creditors, a task which took thirty years and overshadowed Sewell's career. 
This crisis was followed by the death on 28 July 1844 of Sewell's first wife, Lucinda Marianne, the eldest daughter of General William Nedham of Mount Olive, Jamaica, and Widcombe, Bath, whom he had married on 15 May 1834. Their six children were brought up by Sewell's sister, and Sewell himself moved to London, where he joined the Canterbury Association, which was planning a Church of England colony in New Zealand. He became salaried deputy chairman in 1851 and two years later was sent out to New Zealand to wind up the association's affairs, having on 23 January 1850 married Elizabeth (1819-1880), the second daughter of Captain Edward Kittoe RN of Deal. Sewell arrived in February 1853 with Edward Gibbon Wakefield, and settled at Lyttelton. His successful disposal of the association's liabilities and assets included the creation of a substantial land endowment for the diocese of Christchurch. 
Sewell lived in New Zealand for seventeen years, in three periods -- 1853-6, 1859-66, and 1870-76. He was a prominent figure in the first generation of colonial politicians, among whom he had the reputation of a lettered wit and an independent man of business. He represented Lyttelton on the Canterbury provincial council in 1855-6. He was a member of the house of representatives (1854-6, 1860, 1865-6) and sat in the nominated legislative council (1861-5 and 1870-73). 
Sewell served in eight different ministries, starting with the 'mixed ministry' of officials and politicians under James Edward FitzGerald (14 June - 2 August 1854). When responsible government began he became the first premier (18 April - 20 May 1856), but could not retain a majority in the house. As treasurer, he was virtually deputy premier in the first stable ministry, led by Edward Stafford (2 June - 4 November 1856). Later he was negotiator on behalf of the colony in Australia and England (1857-9). 
After returning to New Zealand in February 1859 Sewell soon left the ministry. Having written a pamphlet in 1846 advocating a system of land transfer by simple registration of title, he was a suitable appointee as first registrar-general of lands in 1861. In 1863 he inaugurated the first land registry under the Torrens system of land transfer. He served as attorney-general in three ministries between 1861 and 1865. After another four-year break in England, he was briefly minister of justice in 1870-71 and colonial secretary for a month in 1872. 
Sewell finally left New Zealand in 1876 because of his wife's health and went to Romford, Essex, where his eldest son was curate. He later moved to 4 Salisbury Villas, Station Road, Cambridge, where he died on 14 May 1879. He was buried at Waresley, Huntingdonshire, where his wife's brother-in-law was vicar; Elizabeth was later buried beside her husband. Sewell recouped his finances in New Zealand by some modest suburban land dealings, but he was not really a colonist. Nor was he a successful politician. Contemporaries remarked on his 'dodgy lawyer-like way' and his ability to argue a case rather than enunciate a policy. He was a drafter of memoranda and back-up man rather than leader. He wrote ten pamphlets on legal, ecclesiastical, political and race-relations topics; his 'Journal', written first as a newsletter to family and associates (and copied out by Elizabeth), provides the fullest private account of persons and places in early Canterbury and the beginnings of self-government in New Zealand. 


@@@@@


doc= 25143


Sewell, Jonathan (bap. 1766, d. 1839), jurist in Canada, the son of Jonathan Sewall (1728-1796), the last British attorney-general of Massachusetts, and Esther Quincy, was baptized on 6 June 1766 at Cambridge, Massachusetts. He moved to England in 1775 with his loyalist parents, and was educated at Bristol grammar school and Brasenose College, Oxford. In 1785 he emigrated to New Brunswick and studied law, then in 1789 went to Quebec, where he was called to the bar on 30 October 1789. In 1793 he became solicitor-general, and in 1795 attorney-general and advocate-general. On 24 September 1796 he married Henrietta, known as Harriet, the daughter of William Smith, former chief justice of New York and Lower Canada. They had sixteen children, of whom twelve survived infancy. In 1797 Sewell entered the house of assembly as member for William Henry, for which he sat through three parliaments, until in 1808 he became chief justice of Lower Canada, an office he filled for thirty years. Shortly afterwards he was named speaker of the legislative council and president of the executive council. He resigned from the second in 1830 but held the speakership until his death. 
As attorney-general Sewell prosecuted David McLane, an American undercover agent working for revolutionary France, on a charge of high treason (1797). While building a persuasive case, he was also a party to dubious transactions which ensured that the accused would be convicted and serve as a dramatic example. McLane was hanged, disembowelled, and beheaded before a huge throng of spectators in Quebec City. 
Like most of the tiny English elite in the 1790s and early 1800s, Sewell was an alarmist who assumed that, if France invaded, the French-speaking Canadian majority would rise in supportive rebellion, with English heads targeted for local 'Jacobin' pikes. One political conclusion Sewell and others drew was the imperative need to anglify the Canadians, a viewpoint dropped during the Anglo-American War of 1812-14, when he realized the United States, not faraway France, had become the major external threat to the colony. Sewell's previous attempts at anglification had embittered relations between the Canadians and the English. 
Sir James Henry Craig (1748-1812), governor from 1807 to 1811, quickly absorbed the garrison mentality of the English minority and acted on it in 1810 by imprisoning, without bail or trial, three leaders of the constitutionally liberal opposition 'parti canadien'. These men -- members of the provincial parliament and editors of their party's strident newspaper, 'Le Canadien' -- were charged with 'treasonable practices', the meaning of which was unknown on both sides of the Atlantic. With others of the executive council Sewell had advised Craig to do this, on the grounds that the three were in league with Napoleon through his ambassador to Washington. Sewell presided at a habeas corpus hearing of one prisoner, refusing the writ on the debatable basis that no parliamentary privilege existed. The British attorney-general later concluded the arrests had been illegal, as there was no proof whatever of treasonable practices. 
One of Sewell's earliest acts as chief justice produced a remarkable episode in Canadian history. In 1809 he issued rules of practice for the Quebec king's bench and another set for the provincial court of appeals. In 1814 they were attacked by the assembly, under the leadership of James Stuart (1780-1853), as a usurpation of the law-making authority of the legislature and as affecting the liberty of the subject. Sewell was impeached for subverting the constitution and charged with malicious influence over the governor, leading to various specified acts which covered the whole range of conflict between the house and the government under Craig, including the incarceration of the 'parti canadien' leaders. James Monk, chief justice of Montreal, was joined in the indictment, but only for issuing his own rules of practice. Like Sewell's they followed Westminster precedents very closely. Sewell defended himself in England, where the colonial secretary, Lord Bathurst, dismissed the political charges as a matter of constitutional principle, the governor alone being responsible for executive decisions. This undermined the 'parti canadien''s notion of a local ministry accountable in cases of serious misbehaviour to the assembly. The privy council found nothing wrong with the various rules of practice. 
From 1793 Sewell exercised considerable influence over virtually every governor, reaching the pinnacle twice as 'prime minister': under Craig and Lord Dalhousie (1820-28). He successfully advised the latter to take a hard line -- to the point of rejecting the assembly's choice of speaker (1827) -- in the prolonged dispute over control of public appropriations. Not surprisingly the chief justice exploited his position to gain lucrative government patronage for himself and his family. 
In the legislative council Sewell pursued an extreme tory line, for instance initiating the legally questionable imprisonment for libel of two 'patriote' newspaper editors for attacking the upper house. He was also one of the pioneers of cultural development, and was a founder (1824) and later president (1830-31) of the Quebec Literary and Historical Society. He gave the first paper in 1824, 'An essay on the juridical history of France, so far as it relates to the law of the province of Lower-Canada'. His other notable publications dealt in constitutional issues: expounding parliamentary procedure (1792) and advocating federation of the British North American colonies (1814, 1824). 
Sewell died on 11 November 1839 and was buried four days later from the Anglican cathedral in Quebec City. He was survived by his wife. His judgments, particularly on French civil law, were remarkable for clarity, articulation of general principle, and profound scholarship. His main shortcoming as a judge was to find that law which suited the political interests of the executive. He was awarded an honorary LLD by Harvard University in 1832. At the end of the twentieth century he is recognized by Canadian legal historians as one of Canada's most accomplished jurists. 


@@@@@


doc= 25144


Sewell, Mary (1797-1884), writer and poet, was born on 6 April 1797 at Sutton in Suffolk, the third of the seven children of John Wright ('c'.1770-1854), farmer, and his wife, Ann ('c'.1772-1856), daughter of John Holmes, farmer, of Tivetshall in Norfolk. Her parents were both from Norfolk Quaker families and her upbringing was based on Quaker principles. Before she was two, the family moved to a farm at Felthorpe in Norfolk where she spent most of her childhood. When she was twelve the farm was sold and the family moved to Yarmouth where her father entered business with a shipowner. Early education at a dame-school was followed by tuition at home under a series of governesses. At fourteen her formal education was completed by a year at a Quaker boarding-school in Tottenham. She read poetry avidly, particularly Scott, Southey, Moore, and Byron. As a result of her father's financial ruin in 1817, she became a governess at a school in Essex; it was, she wrote, 'a great descent in the social scale' (Mrs Bayly, 48). 
On 15 June 1819 Mary Wright married Isaac Sewell (1793-1878), whose parents were elders in the Friends' meeting at Yarmouth. The couple settled in a small house at 26 Church Plain, Yarmouth, where their first child, Anna Sewell (1820-1878), was born. Shortly after Anna's birth they moved to London where business difficulties resulted in Isaac's financial failure. In 1822, after the birth of their son Philip, they moved to Dalston, and Isaac became a commercial traveller selling Nottingham lace. Sewell taught her children at home: subjects including natural history and science, as well as values such as independence, obedience, faith in God, and charity. To purchase books for their education, she wrote and sold her first work, 'Walks with Mamma', a book written in words of one syllable. In 1832 the family moved to Stoke Newington where both children attended school and Anna was lamed by a fall. Over the following years Mary sought unsuccessfully for a cure for her daughter and nursed her during the periods of invalidism which recurred throughout Anna's life. Mother and daughter were always extremely close, savouring 'the never-ceasing joy of each other's lives' (E. B. Bayly, xxii). 
Deeply religious, Sewell experienced a spiritual crisis in her late thirties that resulted in her leaving the Quakers and being baptized. Over the following years she experimented with various protestant denominations. In later life she wrote: 'If I ever joined any religious body again... it would be the Friends -- though I've left them' (Mrs Bayly, 84). 
In 1836 the Sewell family moved to Brighton, where Isaac took a post as a bank manager. His future positions led to a series of homes in Sussex: in Lancing (1845-9), Haywards Heath (1849-53), and Graylingwell, near Chichester (1853-8). 1858 saw a move to Abson, near Wick in Gloucestershire, where Sewell's writing career began. Her writing was inextricably connected to the practical and active charity work she did throughout her life. Known for being plain-spoken and having 'a profound appreciation... of the miseries of others' (Mrs Bayly, 169), she visited the poor and was concerned with the plight of working women and with the moral education of children. She was involved in the anti-slavery movement, mothers' meetings, prison visiting, and the temperance movement. Together with Anna she founded a Working Men's Evening Institute in Wick at which they both taught. 
It was not until Sewell's sixtieth year that she began writing for the public: 'I have a knack of a rough sort of rhyming that serves my purpose', she wrote (Mrs Bayly, 136). Her literary works, aimed at children and the working classes, were didactic, and often used pathos to teach faith in God, good behaviour, appreciation of nature, kindness, and temperance. In 1858 'Homely Ballads for the Working Man's Fireside', a collection of verse written in simple language, appeared. 'The Children of Summerbrook' (1859), a story in verse for children, followed and in 1861 'Stories in Verse for the Street and Lane' was published. Her best-seller 'Mother's Last Words' (1860), recounting two young boys' obedience to their mother's dying words, 'had a sale unprecedented in the history of ballads' (Mrs Bayly, 146). 'Our Father's Care' (1861), a poem about a young watercress girl, was, like other examples of her verse, read aloud at Sunday schools, in prisons, hospitals, and on ships. Her prose works included 'Patience Hart's First Experience in Service' (1862), the story of a virtuous servant girl written in the form of letters to her mother, and 'Thy Poor Brother' (1863) a work advising on poor visiting. Well-known during her writing career, her work has since been neglected, its didacticism and rhyming having fallen out of fashion. 
In 1864 Sewell moved to Bath and in 1867, after her daughter-in-law's death, to Old Catton near Norwich to be near her son and his seven children. When approaching eighty she nursed her daughter through her final, painful seven-year illness which confined her to her sofa, during which time Mary transcribed and took dictation of Anna's only novel, the enduring classic 'Black Beauty'. Her husband, increasingly feeble, also at this time became mentally ill. In 1878 her daughter, then her husband, died. Sewell remained active and involved in charity work until her own death from senile decay and congestion of the lungs on 10 June 1884 at her home, the White House, Old Catton. She was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Lammas near Norwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 25145


Sewell, Richard Clarke (bap. 1803, d. 1864), lawyer, was the eldest son of Thomas Sewell (1775-1842), a solicitor, of Newport, Isle of Wight, and his wife, Jane Edwards (1773/4-1848). Among his eleven siblings were James Edwards Sewell, warden of New College, Oxford, Henry Sewell, first premier of New Zealand, William Sewell, a Church of England clergyman, and the novelist Elizabeth Missing Sewell. He was baptized at Newport on 6 February 1803, and entered Winchester College in 1818. He matriculated from Magdalen College, Oxford, on 26 July 1821, was a demy of his college from 1821 until 1837, and a fellow from 1837 to 1856. He served as senior dean of arts in 1838, as bursar in 1840, and was vice-president and praelector of natural philosophy in 1842. He graduated with a second class in 'literae humaniores', BA 1826, and proceeded MA 1829, and DCL 1840. He was awarded the Newdigate prize for poetry in 1825. On 25 June 1830 he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple, became known as a special pleader, and took business on the western circuit and at the Hampshire sessions. 
Tragedy overtook the family in 1842 when Sewell's father died, leaving large debts which the family undertook to clear. This may have influenced Sewell's decision to go to Australia towards the end of 1855. On 7 February 1856 he was admitted to the Victorian bar, where he gained considerable eminence, chiefly in criminal cases, including his leading the prosecution of one of the murderers of John Price, the notorious inspector-general of prisons, in April 1857. From May to August 1856 he edited the 'Victorian Law Times and Legal Observer', and from February 1857 he was reader in law at the new University of Melbourne, but the demands of his practice forced him to resign in July. 
Sewell published extensively in Britain and Australia. His writings were mainly on legal subjects, but, like his brother William, he was also interested in the rights and constitutional position of the Anglican church, on which he published a work in 1848. For the English Historical Society, Sewell edited 'Gesta Stephani' (1846). Making available this invaluable source on the reign of King Stephen was helpful, but the source itself was incomplete until missing parts were discovered in the latter half of the twentieth century, which discovery made earlier editions redundant. 
Sewell died unmarried on 7 November 1864 in Melbourne and was buried the following day in Melbourne general cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25146


Sewell, Sir Thomas (c.1710-1784), judge, was the son of Thomas Sewell of West Ham, Essex, but nothing else is known of his background or origins. He was admitted a member of the Middle Temple on 6 June 1729 and called to the bar on 24 May 1734. He practised at the chancery bar where he worked hard and acquired 'a considerable practice' (Foss, 'Judges', 366), apparently receiving numerous briefs from dissenters. He took silk after twenty years' practice, being appointed on 4 April 1754, and was elected a bencher of the Middle Temple on 3 May of the same year. He was appointed Lent reader of his inn in 1762, and treasurer in 1765. 
Having established himself in legal practice, Sewell embarked on an unremarkable political career. He unsuccessfully contested Wallingford, encouraged by Henry Pelham, in the general election of 1754, and subsequently sought the duke of Newcastle's nomination at Seaford (June 1755), Dover (April 1756), and Okehampton (October 1758), all without success. On 29 December 1758 he finally procured Newcastle's interest at Harwich, which he represented until the dissolution of March 1761 -- Newcastle subsequently assigned the seat to John Roberts. In spite of Newcastle's support, Sewell was badly defeated at Exeter in the general election of 1761, but he was returned on the government interest for Winchelsea at a by-election on 4 December 1761. He remained MP for Winchelsea until his defeat in 1768 and did not stand for parliament thereafter. Sewell 'made no mark in the House' (Namier, 422), rarely taking part in debates and confining his infrequent observations mostly to technical points. In December 1761 he was considered for the solicitor-generalship, but in the end Newcastle recommended Fletcher Norton. 
Sewell's foray into politics was not at the expense of his legal practice. As a king's counsel he was 'in full business' (Namier, 422) at the chancery bar and reputed to be earning $3000 or $4000 per annum. 
Sewell's elevation to the bench was unsolicited and unexpected. Sir Thomas Clarke, master of the rolls, died in November 1764, and Fletcher Norton (then attorney-general) was expected to succeed him. However, the lord chancellor, Robert Henley, first earl of Northington, vetoed the appointment and he and William Murray, Baron Mansfield, offered the mastership of the rolls to Sewell. The offer 'surprised every one exceedingly, and I am told no one more than Sewell himself, who had never applied for it, and who had no idea that he was in the contemplation of the Government' (W. G. Hamilton to John Calcraft, 'Correspondence of William Pitt, earl of Chatham', ed. W. S. Taylor and J. H. Pringle, 1838-40, 2.298n.). Despite the considerable drop in salary (the master of the rolls received $2500 a year) Sewell accepted the offer, partly, perhaps, because his very considerable chancery practice was beginning to tax his constitution. He was knighted on 30 November 1764, appointed master of the rolls on 4 December, and sworn of the privy council on 12 December. 
Sewell was offered the Irish lord chancellorship in 1767, but he refused the offer and went on to preside over the rolls court for more than nineteen years. Although the master of the rolls was at the time the inferior equity judge, Sewell enjoyed greater influence than might ordinarily have been afforded by his office. During the chancellorship of Henry, second Earl Bathurst, that 'obviously inadequate' (Holdsworth, 'Eng. law', 12.314) judge 'leaned constantly' (Campbell, 7.132) on Sewell, whose assistance and influence were nowhere more clearly acknowledged than in 'Palmer v. Mure' (1773). In that case, Lord Bathurst said, 'at first I differed in opinion with his Honour [Sewell], but he hath now convinced me... and I am first to thank him for the great pains he hath taken upon the occasion.' Sewell did not enjoy such a degree of influence over Lord Chancellor Thurlow, but the latter often handed over heavy, important cases to be dealt with by his deputy, thereby once more allowing to Sewell greater influence than he might otherwise have been expected to enjoy. 
The eighteenth-century equity judge might not have been expected to encounter many 'causes celebres' in the execution of his office, but Sewell was involved in the well-publicized case of 'Tothill v. Pitt' (1766). The elder Pitt was bequeathed a considerable amount of real and personal property by Sir William Pynsent and Sewell, at first instance, applying well established principles, held that the bequest was valid. Six years later his decision was reversed by the lords commissioners of the great seal, the reversal causing a 'burst of surprise' and attracting 'particular... censure' (Campbell, 130). Sewell's ruling was subsequently affirmed by the House of Lords. 
Sewell's tenure of the mastership of the rolls was undoubtedly a success. Holdsworth described him as 'a very capable judge' and 'very experienced' (Holdsworth, 'Eng. law', 12.314, 327), and Campbell considered him 'a very eminent Equity judge' (Campbell, 7.130). Despite their great age, a number of his decisions are still good law, perhaps the greatest testament to judicial ability. Probably the most important of these is his judgment in 'Fletcher v. Ashburner' (1779), still considered the 'locus classicus' of the equitable doctrine of conversion. 
Sewell was twice married. His first wife, whom he married at All Hallows, London Wall, on 8 April 1740, was Catherine, daughter of Thomas Heath of Stansted Mountfitchet, sometime MP for Harwich. They had four sons and three daughters, the third of whom, Frances Maria, was the mother of the novelist Matthew Gregory ('Monk') Lewis. Catherine Sewell died on 17 January 1769 and on 20 March 1773 Sewell married his second wife Mary Elizabeth ('bap'. 16 Nov 1743), daughter of Dr Humphrey Sibthorp (1713?-1797), professor of botany at Oxford, and sister of John Sibthorp. They had one daughter, who died in infancy. 
In his later years on the bench, Sewell suffered a good deal from ill health, perhaps exacerbated by the heavy workload deputed to him by Thurlow. He made numerous offers of resignation, but his terms were always too high to be acceptable. Sewell died in office on 6 March 1784, and was buried in the Rolls Chapel. He was succeeded by Lloyd Kenyon (afterwards lord chief justice and first Baron Kenyon). Sewell died intestate, and his eldest son Thomas Bailey Heath Sewell (died 1803) succeeded to his estate, including his country residence at Ottershaw Park, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 25147


Sewell, William (1781/2-1853), veterinary surgeon, was born of Quaker parents, possibly William and Elizabeth Sewell, resident in Essex. He was possibly baptized on 10 February 1782. He was apprenticed at about sixteen years of age to Edward Coleman (1764?-1839), the second professor of the London Veterinary College, and at Coleman's request Sewell was appointed his assistant at the college on obtaining his diploma in 1799. According to the college minute books, Sewell was appointed assistant surgeon on 6 March 1799, but it is recorded in the register of pupils held by the college that he did not pass his examination until 30 March 1799. This contradicts J. B. Simonds, who states that it was not until after Sewell had passed his examination, on 30 March, that Professor Coleman applied to the college governors to appoint Sewell as his assistant surgeon. In 1803 Sewell became assistant professor at the college. 
Sewell first came into prominence in connection with his supposed discovery in 1803 of a canal pervading the medulla spinalis, which he demonstrated in the horse, ox, sheep, hog, and dog. His opinions on this point were erroneous, but he has been credited with being on the brink of the great discoveries made many years subsequently by Sir Charles Bell. In July 1805 Sewell was appointed veterinary surgeon to the London and Westminster light horse volunteers; he maintained this role until 1850. In 1815 he made a tour of France, visiting the veterinary establishments at Lyons and Paris; in 1816 he made a similar tour of inspection through Germany by way of Vienna, Prague, Berlin, and Hanover. A report of this tour was submitted to the governors of the London Veterinary College in 1818; however, it was described by William Hunting, at a later date, as reading like an auctioneer's catalogue and containing not one single observation of value. 
Also in 1818 an extremely important discovery, or rather rediscovery, that of neurotomy, was published in a paper presented by Sewell to the governors of the London Veterinary College. In 1823 a fuller and more detailed account was published in the 'Elementary Lectures on the Veterinary Art' by William Percivall, who attributed to Sewell the chief credit for the discovery. However, in an article in the 'Veterinary Record' for 31 March 1894, the author indicates that William Moorcroft had anticipated a cure for lameness in horses some years before Sewell presented his paper. Sewell also practised a new method of treating splints, considering the use of the firing iron as barbarous and cruel. In addition he claimed to have discovered a cure for glanders, in the use of sulphate of copper; this was looked upon with considerable distrust by his colleagues. He similarly incurred the displeasure of certain of his fellow veterinarians for having reported to the Royal College of Physicians rather than to the veterinary profession his finding of a case of vesicular calculus in the horse; details of an operation for lithotomy; and illustrations of glanders. Sir Frederick Smith records that Sewell was a 'very reserved man, unsociable, of few words, hesitating, unpopular with the students and unpopular with the profession'. Criticism of Sewell's teaching abilities is discussed at length in articles in 'The Farrier and Naturalist' in 1828-9. 
In 1828 the London Veterinary Medical Society was formed, and shortly after its formation Sewell became president, a post he occupied for several years. In 1836 there was some dissension among the members of the society and it was disbanded. It was later reformed as the Veterinary Medical Society. Edward Coleman became its patron, and Sewell its president. On the death of Coleman in 1839, Sewell was appointed to succeed him as principal of the Royal Veterinary College and he delivered his inaugural lecture on 18 November. Considerable disapproval was, however, shown at his decision to lecture on cattle pathology, a subject in which he was not considered to be sufficiently qualified, his speciality being rather that of surgery (however in 1842 J. B. Simonds was appointed to lecture on the diseases of cattle, sheep, and pigs). In 1840, during the prevalence of an epidemic of what was later named foot-and-mouth disease, the Royal Agricultural Society of England issued a circular to its members detailing full particulars as to the treatment of the disease according to the method recommended by Sewell. He was subsequently attacked by his colleagues, who claimed that his circular had spoilt their practice. In 1841 Sewell reported to the Royal Agricultural Society on the epidemic. 
Coleman's death placed Sewell in many respects at the head of his profession, and his position received further recognition in 1852 by his election as third president of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, which had received its royal charter in 1844. Sewell wrote two essays for the Veterinary Medical Association and presented two case histories to the Royal College of Physicians, and he made a few contributions to the veterinary and medical periodicals of the time. He also completed a report of his visit to the principal veterinary schools on the continent. Both his skill as an operator and his efficiency as a lecturer have been disputed, but he appears nevertheless to have achieved, eventually, a considerable success in both, and under his direction the Royal Veterinary College began to expand and improve its teaching facilities. Sewell was also instrumental in the fight for the royal charter for the profession and by 1852 had bridged the gap between veterinary education and veterinary practice. 
Sewell married late in life; his wife, Mary 'nee' Wilkinson (1783/4-1841), died not long after his appointment as principal of the Royal Veterinary College. Towards the end of his life, owing to his advanced age and occasional illness, Sewell confined his attention to the administration of the college, the actual duties of lecturing falling chiefly on younger men such as William Spooner and J. B. Simonds. Sewell died in London at the college on 8 June 1853 at the age of seventy-one, and was buried at Highgate cemetery. He left no family. 


@@@@@


doc= 25148


Sewell, William (1804-1874), clergyman and author, was born on 23 January 1804 and baptized on 13 January 1807 at Newport, Isle of Wight. He was the second son of Thomas Sewell (1775-1842), a prominent solicitor of Newport, variously recorder of the borough, twice its mayor, steward and deputy governor of the island, and of his wife and also first cousin, Jane (1773/4-1848), youngest daughter of the Revd John Edwards, curate of Newport. William Sewell had five brothers and six sisters, among them his elder brother Richard Clarke Sewell (bap. 1803, d. 1864), a legal writer, and his younger siblings Henry Sewell (1807-1879), first premier of New Zealand, the Revd Dr James Edwards Sewell (1810-1903), warden of New College, Oxford, from 1860 until 1903, and the novelist Elizabeth Missing Sewell (1815-1906). William Sewell attended Winchester College as a commoner from 1819 to 1822, and on 4 November 1822 matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, where he held a postmastership until 1827. He took first-class honours in 'literae humaniores', graduating BA on 2 June 1827, MA on 2 July 1829, and subsequently BD on 17 June 1841, and DD on 20 May 1857. 
On 30 June 1827 Sewell was elected Petrean fellow of Exeter College, Oxford, winning the chancellor's prize for the English essay in 1828 and for the Latin essay in 1829. Ordained deacon by the bishop of Bristol in 1831 and priest by the bishop of Winchester in 1832, he served as curate at Whippingham, 3 miles from his home on the Isle of Wight, before his appointment on 10 July 1831 as perpetual curate of St Nicholas in Carisbrooke Castle, a moderate sinecure which he retained until his death. He returned to Oxford in 1831 as tutor at Exeter College, where he remained until 1853, serving as librarian from 1833, sub-rector and divinity reader from 1835, and dean from 1839. In 1832-3 he was an examiner in the classical schools, and from 1836 to 1841 Whyte's professor of moral philosophy, his exposition of Platonism doing much to break down the dominance of the Aristotelian tradition in the Oxford school. His professorial lectures were revised and published as 'Christian Morals' and 'Christian Politics', both of which appeared in 'The Englishman's Library' series in 1840, while 'An Introduction to the Dialogues of Plato', based on articles in the 'British Critic' and the 'Quarterly Review', appeared in 1841. Sewell also established a moral philosophy club which met in its members' college rooms. 
Sewell's steadfast high-churchmanship brought him into natural sympathy with the emerging Oxford Movement. The subscription controversy of 1834 provoked his earliest polemical writing, in pamphlets such as 'The Attack upon the University of Oxford, in a Letter to Earl Grey' (1834), 'Thoughts on the Admission of Dissenters to the University of Oxford' (1834), and his 'Postscript to Thoughts on Subscription' (1835), while a prominent article of 1839 in the 'Quarterly Review' on 'Oxford theology' warmly commended the writers of the 'Tracts for the Times'. Sewell always steered an independent line, however, due partly to his idiosyncratic character, partly to his 'fearing the creation of a party' (W. Sewell, 'A Letter to the Rev. E. B. Pusey, D.D.', 1841, 10), but principally to his vehement anti-Catholicism. He therefore abhorred Newman's 'Tract 90' of 1841, explaining his position in a succession of pronouncements such as the published letter to Pusey, a notable article in the 'Quarterly Review' (March 1842), 'The divines of the seventeenth century', and sermons such as 'The Duty of Young Men in Times of Controversy' (1843), intended to counter tractarianism's Romeward direction. Sewell's anxiety at this trend was memorialized in the well-known pun on his name, Suillus (the Latin diminutive for 'sus', a pig), 'because he would not go the whole hog' (Stride, 'Exeter College', 159), attributed variously to Sydney Smith, Sewell's Exeter contemporary J. B. Morris, and (Sewell's own suspect) Richard Whately. 
'Sewell of Exeter' gained the highest reputation as a tutor in these years (A. Quiller-Couch, 'Reminiscences of Oxford by Oxford Men', 351), and if his lectures were considered too discursive and eclectic for the purist, his intellectual range, trenchant opinions, and sheer unpredictability, made them magnetic to a broader undergraduate audience. It was therefore widely reported, and even interpreted as an expression of the university's official censure, when on 27 February 1849 Sewell, finding that an undergraduate had brought a copy of J. A. Froude's 'The Nemesis of Faith' into a lecture, flung the book into the fire in Exeter hall. Despite his fixity of views Sewell was almost single-handedly responsible for improving the college's then unintellectual tone. His devoted pedagogy was the personification of his wider arguments for university reform, expressed in such satirical material as his anonymous 'The University Commission, or, Lord John Russell's Postbag', which appeared in four instalments in 1850, and published sermons such as his 'Collegiate Reform' of 1853. Sewell took the typically singular position that Oxford's colleges should reform themselves by throwing open their closed scholarships and fellowships, but that the government had no right to intervene if they did not, the 'University Reform Act' (1854) therefore representing a defeat for his vision. He was, moreover, one of the earliest advocates of what came to be known as university extension; his public paper to the vice-chancellor, 'Suggestions for the Extension of the University' (1850) urged a federation of local professoriates giving instruction under the direct authority of Oxford and Cambridge, though the proposal foundered on its cost and university extension was ultimately felt rather through the system of local examinations. 
The most important expression of Sewell's educational vision, however, was his conviction of the need to establish schools which could serve as nurseries of sound religion, a project begun in Ireland, where the church seemed most obviously in danger. Lord Adare, an Irish landowner and MP, and an active high-church layman, visited Sewell in Oxford in the spring of 1839, and after Sewell had twice visited Ireland in 1840 he collaborated with Adare's friend, near neighbour, and brother-in-law, the MP for co. Limerick William Monsell, and James Henthorn Todd, Adare's former tutor at Trinity College, Dublin, in order to found St Columba's College, which was opened on 25 April 1843 at Stackallan, co. Meath, before settling at Rathfarnham, near Dublin, in 1849. The college was intended to promote high-church principles and to aid the conversion of Irish Catholics through the use of the Irish language, and to furnish the gentry of Ireland with a school on the model of Winchester or Eton, though its Anglican proselytism and teaching of Irish did not survive the 1840s. Sewell initially contemplated serving as warden of St Columba's, but was deterred by worries over family responsibilities arising from his father's illness and then death in 1842, and his immersion in university politics. In December 1845 Sewell, Adare, and Monsell resigned as governors, and a new constitution was put in place; Sewell severed all ties with the college in support of its first warden, the Revd R. C. Singleton, who resigned in June 1846 in protest at the relaxation of rules requiring observance of the fasts of the church. 
The principle on which Sewell apparently quit St Columba's, his albeit ephemeral association with tractarianism, and the later secession of Adare and Monsell to Rome, aroused some suspicion of his activities, though undaunted he immediately embarked on an analogous initiative on returning to England. He published his account of the experience, 'Journal of a Residence at the College of St Columba, in Ireland', in the spring of 1847, in order to prepare the way for St Peter's College (now Radley College) at Radley, just outside Oxford, which opened on 18 August 1847. Its motto, 'Sicut serpentes, Sicut columbae', underlined the continuities of approach, Sewell's churchmanship reflected in the school's observation of the fasts of the church and of full morning and evening service in the chapel. Singleton followed Sewell to Radley and served as its first warden, though he came to resent Sewell's constant interference in its affairs and resigned in 1851. Amid falling pupil numbers and deepening debt, Sewell himself served as warden between 1853 and 1861, assisted by his brother Robert. Sewell's hopeless disregard for financial matters only exacerbated Radley's plight, and its debts of $40,000 were paid off only when, after his desperate 'Appeal for the Permanent Security and Foundation of St Peter's College, Radley' (1861), the merchant John Gellibrand Hubbard, later Lord Addington, MP for the City of London, lent that sum to the college and improved management was put in place, Sewell leaving the school. Although Arnold of Rugby was the pioneer of the reform of public schools, Sewell was the first to give this development a high-church direction, and was unusual in his insistence on the collegiate rather than authoritarian model. 
Sewell served as preacher at Whitehall in 1850, and select preacher at Oxford in 1852. In addition to numerous published single sermons he issued a number of collections, such as 'Sermons on the Application of Christianity to the Human Heart' (1831), 'Parochial Sermons on Particular Occasions' (1832), 'Sermons Addressed to Young Men' (1835), and 'The Character of Pilate and the Spirit of the Age' (1850). A miscellany of Sewell's school sermons appeared as 'A Year's Sermons to Boys, Preached in the Chapel of St Peter's College, Radley' (1854), with a second volume of 'Sermons to Boys' appearing in 1859, and a collection of 'Sermons Preached in the Chapel of St Peter's College, Radley' in 1864. If these collections are repetitive and unremarkable, Sewell's classical scholarship, which included 'Hora philologica, or Conjectures on the Structure of the Greek Language' (1830), and translations of 'The Georgics' (1846), 'The Agamemnon' (1846), and 'The Odes and Epodes of Horace' (1850), was mostly derided by contemporaries. 
Sewell came to far wider public notice, albeit anonymously, as a prolific reviewer for the 'Quarterly Review', contributing fifteen articles between February 1837 and September 1845 before his diversions in Ireland. Sewell's range and vigour were especially suited to periodical writing, though his articles were pungent rather than original: the 'Review''s editor J. G. Lockhart remarked of his pieces that 'They tell one nothing, they mean nothing, they are nothing, but they go down like bottled velvet' (James, 53). Equally noteworthy was Sewell's activity in the rapidly expanding field of religious fiction. His anonymous 'Hawkstone: a Tale of and for England in 184 -- ' (2 vols., 1845), which ran through numerous editions, is chiefly remembered for the wildly sensationalist tone of its emphasis on the church's lost social functions, its hostility to manufacturing and the commercial spirit, and its hysterical anti-Jesuitism. Sewell also anonymously issued 'Uncle Peter's Fairy Tales' (1844), 'Uncle Peter's Tale for the Nineteenth Century' (1868), and 'The Giant: a Fairy Tale' (1870). Having introduced his sister Elizabeth to Keble and Newman among others, Sewell encouraged her to start writing in order both to promulgate church principles and to alleviate the heavy family debts left by their father. Her 'Amy Herbert' (2 vols., 1844) and 'Gertrude' (2 vols., 1846) duly embodied high-church views, while 'Laneton Parsonage: a Tale for Children' (3 vols., 1846-9) was intended to encourage the use of the catechism, and was followed by the anti-secessionist 'Margaret Percival' (2 vols., 1847), her voluminous early novels appearing without attribution but as 'edited by' her brother. Sewell himself also issued a volume of poetry, 'A Clergyman's Recreation, or, Sacred Thoughts, in Verse' (1831), written mostly during his curacy at Whippingham and inspired by Keble's 'Christian Year'. 
Sewell's health, as well as his finances, had been broken by his years as warden of Radley, and after his resignation in 1861, with his fellowship at Exeter sequestrated, he moved about for several years, principally between Bonchurch on the Isle of Wight, where three of his sisters had opened a school, and London. He later travelled throughout Germany, Belgium, and Luxembourg, before in 1866 taking up residence at Deutz, on the Rhine opposite Cologne, where he worked on new translations of the 'Iliad' and the 'Odyssey', and a new metrical version of the 'Psalms', which were left unpublished at his death, though 'The Microscope of the New Testament', the principal fruit of these years, appeared posthumously in 1878 edited by Sewell's friend the Revd W. J. Crichton. In 1870 Sewell was driven home by the Franco-Prussian War, and spent his last four years chiefly on the Isle of Wight. He died peacefully at the residence of his nephew the Revd Arthur Sewell, at Litchford Hall, near Manchester, on 14 November 1874, and was buried in St Andrew's churchyard, Blackley, Manchester. There is a window inscribed to his memory in the chapel at Exeter College, Oxford. 
The very diversity of his interests has left posterity with little sense of Sewell's considerable contemporary reputation. At his death contemporaries agreed that he had dissipated his intellectual energies over too wide a range of subjects. Thomas Mozley reflected that 'Had he thought a little more he might have written to more purpose; and had he tried for less he might have obtained more' (T. Mozley, 'Reminiscences', 1882, 2.23-4). Garrulous and opinionated, he was perhaps easier company as an author or lecturer than in person. 


@@@@@


doc= 25149


Seaxburh (d. 674?), queen of the Gewisse, was the wife of Cenwalh, king of the Gewisse, and has the distinction of being the only woman to appear in an Anglo-Saxon regnal list. Her reign is said to have begun in 672 after the death of her husband and to have lasted a year, though she may actually have ruled slightly longer than twelve months, as the next reign recorded in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' is entered under 674. However, Bede characterizes the period after Cenwalh's death as a confused time when 'subkings took upon themselves the government of the kingdom' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 4.12) and the chronicle compilers may have tidied up what was in reality a much more complex situation. In other cases where Anglo-Saxon widows are known to have exercised royal power they did so on behalf and in the name of their sons. Such regnal information that exists implies that Seaxburh ruled in her own right and it is not impossible that she was herself a descendant of the West Saxon royal house. On the other hand, the form of her name could suggest that she belonged to the East Saxon royal line, many of whose members bore names compounded with 'Seax', which does not seem to have been a name element favoured by descendants of Cerdic. 


@@@@@


doc= 25150


Seaxburh (b. in or before 655, d. c.700), queen of Kent, consort of King Eorcenberht, and abbess of Ely, is described by Bede in his 'Historia ecclesiastica' as the eldest daughter of Anna, king of the East Angles (d. 654?), wife of King Eorcenberht of Kent, and mother of Eorcengota (who subsequently became a saintly inmate of the Gaulish abbey of Faremoutiers-en-Brie) and also of King Hlothhere of Kent. The same writer notes that Seaxburh succeeded her sister AEthelthryth as abbess of Ely and that she arranged for the translation and enshrinement of AEthelthryth's undecayed body sixteen years after her death, in a white marble coffin from the ruined Roman site of Grantchester. Given Bede's proximity in time to Seaxburh's life and his knowledge of the history of Ely, his information can be accepted as reliable. More difficult to evaluate is the information provided by a series of related hagiographical texts, concerned with Kentish royal saints and St Mildrith in particular, and ranging in date from possibly as early as the eighth century to the end of the eleventh, with derivative texts from later centuries. Certain of these texts describe Seaxburh as the mother not only of Eorcengota and Hlothhere, but also of King Ecgberht and of Eormenhild, who is said to have been the wife of King Wulfhere of Mercia. It is not possible to corroborate this information but it is not implausible. The fullest account of Seaxburh is to be found in one of this series of texts, which is preserved in fragmentary form in London, Lambeth Palace, MS 427, fol. 211. According to this, Seaxburh and her daughter Eormenhild became nuns at Milton Regis, Kent, of which the Isle of Sheppey was a dependency. At this latter place Seaxburh built a monastery, presumably Minster in Sheppey, which took her thirty years to construct. She had been acting as regent for her son King Hlothhere, also for thirty years, and at the end of this term she is said to have bought his share of the district from him for the use of Minster in Sheppey (although it is not entirely clear what is meant by this), and to have obtained a blessing from Rome for the inmates of it. This text cannot be earlier than the viking period, since it alludes to viking attacks as prophesied by Seaxburh, and it may be as late as the eleventh century. Its information is therefore not especially trustworthy, and its character is markedly hagiographical. It was taken up by hagiographers at Ely, who seem to have drawn on it in the twelfth century to compose a Latin life of Seaxburh, in which the son on whose behalf she held the kingdom of Kent is named as Egbert (that is, Ecgberht) and not Hlothhere. Eormenhild is said to have become abbess of Ely in her turn; she is also said to have received the veil at Minster in Sheppey from Archbishop Theodore. The only firm dates which can be assigned to Seaxburh's life are 680, or possibly 679, when she succeeded AEthelthryth as abbess and 695 or 696 when she translated the latter's remains. Her husband Eorcenberht was king from 640 to 664 and her marriage to him cannot have been later than 'c'.650 if it is true that Ecgberht, who succeeded him, was her son. The year of her death is unknown, but as she was the eldest daughter of a father who died in 654 a date of 'c'.700 is not implausible. Seaxburh became an important saint at Ely, although of lesser importance than AEthelthryth. According to the twelfth-century 'Liber Eliensis', which may not be reliable on this point, her remains were translated to a new tomb at Ely by Bishop AEthelwold. It is certain that they were translated into the new abbey church there in 1106. Her feast day was 6 July; the feast of her translation was 17 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 25151


Sexby, Edward (c.1616-1658), parliamentarian army officer and conspirator, described speculatively as the son of Marcus Sexby, alias Saxbie, of London, gentleman, was probably born about 1616, if the identification is correct, for in 1632, one Edward Sexby was apprenticed to Edward Price of the Grocers' Company, London. Sexby would later claim that his origins lay in Suffolk, but this is not inconsistent with his father's being a Londoner by the time Edward himself embarked on professional life. 
Sexby entered Oliver Cromwell's double regiment of 'Ironsides' in 1643. At the foundation of the New Model Army Sexby was a trooper in the horse regiment of Lord General Thomas Fairfax. He went on to be 'the most radical of the original agitators' (Woolrych, 41), although doubt has been cast on the claim that he was a close associate of John Lilburne. On 30 April 1647 Sexby was interrogated at the bar of the House of Commons for his part in drafting, circulating, and presenting to the commander-in-chief an 'Apologie of the Common Soldiers', a key text in the radicalization of the parliamentary army, the first manifesto drawn up by the elective representatives of the ordinary soldiery. That summer, Sexby helped organize and maintain the solidarity of the army, acquiring with money provided by the senior officers, a printing press for the army and also acting as treasurer, reimbursing the expenses of the agitators of the regiments as they moved around the country and came to meetings of the general council of the army. He may have had a hand in seizing the king at Holdenby House. He was certainly among the twelve sent by Fairfax to lay charges against the eleven members on 16 July 1647. When the counsels of the military began to fracture in the autumn, Sexby performed the function of intermediary between the general council of officers and agitators and the overlapping organization comprising the so-called 'new agents', the radical cavalrymen who sought a republican constitution and the introduction of a very wide franchise indeed. It has been strongly argued that Sexby was at least part author of 'The Case of the Armie Truly Stated', the manifesto of the new agents. 
At those sessions of the Putney debates inspired by 'The Case', and by the 'Agreement of the People', Sexby vigorously opposed the actions of his superiors in seeking to negotiate a peace with the king. Against those such as Henry Ireton who insisted that political enfranchisement depended on having a material stake in the life of the nation, Sexby championed the rights of ordinary soldiers to have a say in the future settlement of England irrespective of property ownership, and insisted that manhood suffrage 'was the ground that wee tooke uppe armes', a view for which he was roundly rebuked by Cromwell among others (Woolrych, 238-9). Although it has been argued that Sexby was instrumental in forestalling the even more radical agenda at Putney, represented by the 'Agreement of the People', at the close of the momentous debates in November 1647 he openly avowed his anti-monarchical loyalties. He signed the 'Copy of a Letter Sent by the Agents of Severall Regiments', which was printed and distributed around 11 or 12 November 1647, calling on the regiments of the army to disobey the order for three separate rendezvous, and to join together to resist the grandees of the general command. However, his own regiment had evidently ceased heeding him, and took no part in the fleeting insurrection which happened at Ware. 
Sexby appears to have left the army at the close of 1647, but he happened to be at the battle of Preston and was entrusted with a dispatch to the speaker of the House of Commons from Cromwell announcing the parliamentary victory there. MPs rewarded this service with a gift to Sexby of $100. In February 1649 Sexby 'acted promptly', and apparently without any direct order from either parliament or council of state, in seizing the Scottish commissioners in England as they were about to take ship for home after roundly condemning the execution of Charles I. Sexby was briefly engaged thereafter in searching the posts at Dover and occasionally apprehending individuals suspected of threatening the security of the Commonwealth. 
While John Lilburne and his associates languished in prison for their excoriating attacks on the tyranny of the free state, and Sexby's former radical cohort in the ranks of the army launched the mutiny which came to grief at Burford, the agitator Sexby himself became a prized trophy of the new regime, taking up a commission as a captain of foot and governor of Portland Castle. In June 1650 he was commissioned first as lieutenant-colonel, then as colonel, to command a regiment raised originally for service in Ireland, but subsequently diverted to Scotland. Sexby and his regiment headed north late in 1651. Certain 'miscarriages' dogged their progress, principally caused by the indiscipline of the men, brought on by a lack of pay. The regiment took part at the siege of Tantallon Castle in February 1651. In the following June Sexby was charged by a court martial with a host of irregularities, including false musters and the execution of a soldier contrary to justice. Given his attitude in 1647, it is ironic that Sexby was eventually cashiered from his command for withholding the pay of several Portland soldiers who had refused to serve under him when he was originally bound for Ireland. 
A few months after the loss of his commission, Sexby was chosen by the council of state as an unofficial envoy to the Frondeurs, with a view to fanning the flames of revolt in south-west France. Based at Bordeaux, his activities were regarded with grave suspicion by many among the supporters of the prince of Conde. However, Sexby was able to commend to the republican Ormee faction some of those radical ideas which he had effectively abandoned when he entered the service of the English Commonwealth. In the spring of 1653 he even had a hand in drawing up a manifesto entitled 'L'Accord du peuple', a hastily edited version of the English Levellers' 'Agreement of the People', rather inappropriately applied to French conditions, as well as another text designed to appeal more specifically to the sensibilities of the Huguenots of rural Guyenne. This 'Manifeste' called for land reform, religious toleration, and the establishment of godly government modelled on the puritan regime in England. This enthused some of the French rebels sufficiently to send a deputation to Westminster on an ill-fated quest for formal English assistance in their struggle with Cardinal Mazarin and the young Louis XIV. But the revolt was finally crushed in August 1653, and Sexby himself fled back to England, where he continued to sponsor Anglo-Huguenot amity. It was rumoured in the following spring that he was to command a combined force of English troops and Irish levies in an invasion of Guyenne. 
Meanwhile, Sexby spent much time and energy seeking to recoup his losses in the service of the state. After a year of lobbying for the settlement of his debts, a personal appeal to Cromwell eventually obtained a protectoral ordinance for payment of $1000 out of excise receipts. The betrayal of Sexby's once passionate belief in the sovereignty of the people would appear to have been complete. However, Sexby was by no means at peace with the new order in England, where the interests of protestant France were increasingly spurned in the quest for an alliance with Louis XIV. Sexby now threw in his lot with the enemies of the protectorate. Feared for his continued associations within the ranks of the army, steps were taken to arrest him in February 1655. But the party sent to apprehend him at Portland were themselves arrested by the mayor of the town and governor of the castle, on the grounds that 'they were attempting to deprive an Englishman of his liberty without being able to show a warrant' (Gardiner, 3.270). Sexby escaped to Flanders. 
At Antwerp, Sexby made contact with royalists to whom he asserted that, if proper security were given for popular liberties, he would be happy to see Charles II restored. He also obtained an interview with the governor of the Spanish Netherlands, Count Fuensaldanha, soliciting military and financial assistance for a rising in England. In June the count sent Sexby to Spain to make his proposals before the council of state at Madrid, and the Englishman returned in December with supplies of money and conditional promises of support. Father Peter Talbot, who acted as interpreter in Sexby's dealings with Fuensaldanha, communicated his proposals to Charles II, urging the king to come to an agreement with Spain, and to utilize Sexby and his party. A year later, Sexby was still trying to raise an insurrection in England under Spanish auspices. The royalists were to assist, but he stipulated 'that no mention be made of the king before such time as Cromwell be destroyed, and till then the royalists that shall take arms shall speak of nothing but the liberty of the country, according to the declaration whereof I have spoken with the king of England's ministers' (Ogle and others, 3.315). Cromwell revealed details of the plot in dramatic fashion at the opening of his second parliament. An essential component was to have been the lord protector's assassination, to which end Sexby and his fellow conspirators demonstrated remarkable ingenuity. But all their plans failed, and in January 1657 an attempt to set fire to Whitehall led to the arrest of Miles Sindercombe. A few months later, about May 1657, there arrived in England copies of an apology for tyrannicide, entitled 'Killing Noe Murder', published by Sexby in Holland, evidently with the assistance of Silius Titus, under the name of Sexby's former fellow agitator William Allen. Sexby argued that Cromwell was a tyrant on a par with Caligula and Nero. However stable, his reign was an abrogation of law which constituted the enslavement of the English people and threatened the outright corruption of English society. In such circumstances the private citizen was perfectly within his rights in seeking to exact the punishment for which responsibility ought normally to rest with God and the magistrate. Tyranny being the suspension of the normal course of law, tyrannicide could not be regarded as an act of murder. In June 1657 Sexby himself crossed back over to England to promote fresh conspiracies against the Cromwellian regime. On 24 July, as he was embarking for Flanders, dressed 'in a mean habit disguised as a countryman', he was arrested ('DNB'). It was during imprisonment in the Tower that he confessed his authorship of 'Killing Noe Murder', although after the Restoration it would be attributed wholly to Titus. Sick in body, and evidently in mind also, Sexby died in the Tower on 13 January 1658 and according to 'Mercurius Politicus' was interred in the burial-ground near the Tower chapel two days later. He would appear to have left a wife, of whom nothing is known other than that she visited him during his incarceration. 


@@@@@


doc= 25152


Seaxred (d. in or after 617) and 


@@@@@


doc= 25153


Seyer, Samuel (1757-1831), antiquary and Church of England clergyman, was born in Bristol, the son of the Revd Samuel Seyer (1719?-1776) and his wife, Ann (died 1809). His father was master of Bristol grammar school and in 1764 became rector of St Michael's, Bristol. Seyer entered Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1772, and graduated BA in 1776 and MA in 1780. He was ordained in 1780 and became curate of Westbury-on-Trym in south Gloucestershire. On 18 April 1781 he married Elizabeth Turner (died 1819), of Wraxall, Somerset. He became master of the Royal Fort School in Bristol in 1790, where he acquired a reputation for harsh discipline. From 1790 to 1813 he lived in the gatehouse of the Royal Fort, with his wife and their two daughters, Sybilla and Mary. In 1813 he became perpetual curate of Holy Trinity, Horfield, near Bristol. By this time he had already purchased several small properties in Bristol, among them an inn called the Blue Bell, and had invested in various Bristol companies including Bristol Dock Company, Bristol and Clifton Oil Gas Company, and the New Crown Fire Office. A surviving notebook also contains references to financial dealings in Jamaica. In 1813 he purchased a large house in the recently built Berkeley Square, Clifton, where he lived for the rest of his life. He purchased the advowson of Filton in south Gloucestershire in 1824 and became rector there, resigning the living of Horfield in 1825. His wife, Elizabeth, died in 1819 and was buried at nearby Shirehampton where their unmarried daughter, Mary, lived. The elder daughter, Sybilla, had married the Revd Abel London and lived at Totteridge, Hertfordshire. 
Throughout his life Seyer devoted himself to the study of Bristol history, following the example of his friend William Barrett, the Bristol surgeon, whose 'History and Antiquities of Bristol' was published in 1789. Seyer's work is distinguished by his detailed study of the available documentary sources. In 1812 he published 'Charters and Letters Patent Granted to the Town and City of Bristol', which provides an English translation of the Latin originals. Bristol city councillors, fearing that the publication of their records would provoke a challenge to some of their privileges and town dues, refused to grant him access to the charters in Bristol and he was obliged to work from transcripts in the Bodleian Library. 
In 1821 and 1823 Seyer published the two volumes of his 'Memoirs, Historical and Topographical, of Bristol and its Neighbourhood', with illustrations by Edward Blore. For this work Seyer was allowed unrestricted access to the city records, and throughout the two volumes he based his statements firmly on original sources which he quoted accurately and at length. This was by far the most detailed and reliable history of Bristol which had been published, and it remains a rich source of reliable information. In addition to his historical publications he also published 'The Principles of Christianity' (1796), 'The Syntax of Latin Verbs' (1798), 'Observations on the Causes of Clerical Non-Residence' (1808), 'A Treatise on the Modern Use of the Latin Language' (1808), and occasional sermons. Seyer died at his home on 25 August 1831 and was buried beside his wife at Shirehampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 25154


Seymour, Anna Maria (c.1692-1723), actress, is first recorded as playing Clara in Thomas Shadwell's 'The Scowrers' on 22 August 1717, at Drury Lane. Most of her later appearances were with the Lincoln's Inn Fields company, which also included Anthony Boheme ['see below'], whom she married on 18 May 1723. According to John Doran, Boheme 'took her off the stage', robbing the company of their 'best actress... to Ryan's great regret as she acted admirably up to him' (Doran, 374). The 'British Journal' (13 April 1723), referring to the marriage, described her as 'that celebrated actress'. She played Queen Elizabeth to Lacy Ryan's Richard in 'Richard III' and Gertrude to his Hamlet. In fact she appeared as many times, if not more, with James Quin, playing, among other roles, Desdemona to his Othello, Lady Macbeth to his Macbeth, and Mrs Sullen to his Sullen (in George Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem'). In the space of six years between her debut at Lincoln's Inn Fields (11 October 1718), as Oriana in James Shirley's 'The Traytor', and her final appearance there, she appeared more than 150 times. By 1720 she was well on the way to becoming an established member of the company. Thomas Davies cites her appearance as Mrs Page in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' as 'the first play at Lincoln's Inn Fields to fix the attention of the public' (Davies, 1.139), and she continued to play this role throughout her career at the theatre. On this first occasion Boheme appeared as Slender; later he took the part of Shallow. 
Mrs Seymour played on a number of occasions with her future husband, notably as the eponymous heroine in Elijah Fenton's 'Mariamne', which Doran describes as 'her one great creation' (Doran, 374). Her final appearance at Lincoln's Inn Fields, on 7 June 1723, was in this role. Boheme was Herod to her Mariamne, and an anonymous picture in the Bodleian Library, according to Highfill, shows them together in the play, although, if the date of the painting is 1726, it cannot show Anna Boheme as Mariamne. Other parts she acted with Boheme include Arpasia in Nicholas Rowe's 'Tamerlane', Cordelia, Cressida, Elvira in Joseph Addison's 'Cato', with Boheme this time playing Manuel, Isabella to his Angelo in 'Measure for Measure', Tamara, Lady Macbeth, Jocasta (a role she also acted in Jane Robe's short-lived 'The Fatal Legacy'), and Roxanne in Nathaniel Lee's 'The Rival Queens'. However, her appearances were by no means all with Boheme: among other roles were Cynthia in a 'new drest' revival of William Congreve's 'The Double Dealer', Lady Touchwood in the same play, and Laetitia in his 'The Old Bachelor'; Lady Brute in Vanbrugh's 'The Provok'd Wife', Imoinda in Thomas Southerne's 'Oroonoko', Lady Macduff, Queen Isabel in 'Richard II', Sylvia in Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer', and Aramante in a revival of 'The Spanish Curate', by Beaumont and Fletcher, with Boheme in the part of Bartolus. Like her husband-to-be, she created only a few new roles: Lady Meanwell in a new one-act farce, 'The Chimera, or, An Hue or Cry to Change Alley' by Thomas Odell (January 1721); Isabella in 'The Fair Captive' by Eliza Heywood (March 1721); and Sabrina in 'Hibernia Freed' by William Phillips (February 1722). 
Anna Seymour's marriage to Boheme was short-lived, for she died less than two months later in Norwich, perhaps on tour with her husband, on 10 July 1723. A report in the 'Daily Journal' of 13 July carried the news of her death: 'that celebrated Actress Mrs Seymour... of a Fever the 10th Instant' (Avery, 2.730). It may be that she was already ill at the time of her marriage, for she was indisposed and unable to play Mrs Page in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' on 21 March 1723, although she had recovered by 25 March and made a number of other appearances at the theatre before her final one (6 June 1723) as Mariamne. 
Little is known about the early life of 
Boheme turned principally to tragic roles on joining the Lincoln's Inn Fields company. Many of these were Shakespearian, including King Lear, Shylock in 'The Jew of Venice' (a version of 'The Merchant of Venice'), Ulysses in 'Troilus and Cressida', Cassius in 'Julius Caesar', Brabantio in 'Othello', Titus Andronicus, and Macbeth. Among other major established roles were Oedipus, Alexander in 'The Rival Queens', Theseus in Edmund Smith's 'Phaedra and Hippolytus', Priuli in Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd', and Tamerlane. However, he seems to have created only a few roles: Lord Gracebank in 'The Chimera', Holly in 'The Fair Captive', Omar in John Sturmy's 'Sesostris', and O'Brien in 'Hibernia Freed'. 
After the death of Anna Seymour, Boheme married another actress from the company. Even less is known about her than his first wife, and only two appearances are recorded for her. His final performance appears to have been as Alvarez in Vanbrugh's 'The Mistake', on 26 October 1731. Boheme died in early January 1732. The 'Daily Journal' of Monday 11 January 1732 reported that he had been interred at Greenwich the previous night: 'The Pall was supported by Mr Quin, Mr [Lacy] Ryan and 4 other Comedians'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25155


Seymour, Aaron Crossley Hobart (1789-1870), hymn writer, was born on 19 December 1789 in co. Limerick, the son of John Crossley Seymour, vicar of Caherelly in the diocese of Cashel, and his wife, the eldest daughter of Edward Wight, rector of Meelick, co. Limerick, a member of an old Surrey family. His younger brother was Michael Hobart Seymour. Aaron received most of his education at home, and was drawn in early life into the religious group formed by Selina Hastings, countess of Huntingdon, whose biography he afterwards wrote (1839). His first work was 'Vital Christianity, exhibited in a series of letters on the most important subjects of religion, addressed to young persons' (1810; 2nd edn, 1819). This work, written during an illness, contained most of his hymns; a few of these compositions, including 'Jesus, immortal king, arise', came into general use. In 1816 Seymour published a memoir of Charlotte Brooke, prefixed to an edition of her 'Reliques of Ancient Irish Poetry'. He lived in Naples from 1839 until 1847, and subsequently retired to Bristol, where he died at his home, 11 Berkeley Square, on 22 October 1870. He left at least one daughter. Seymour took a deep interest in hymnology, and assisted Joseph Miller in preparing his 'Singers and Songs of the Church' (1869). 


@@@@@


doc= 25156


Algernon Seymour, seventh duke of Somerset (1684-1750), was born on 11 and baptized on 26 November 1684. For most of his life he was known as the earl of Hertford. Nothing is known of his early education beyond the fact that he undertook the grand tour in 1703 in the company of John Colebatch of Trinity College, Cambridge. Hertford returned in 1706 after narrowly escaping pirates in the channel. He was MP for Marlborough in 1705-8 and for Northumberland in 1708-22 on his father's interest. Frequently absent on campaign until the later years of the War of the Spanish Succession, he voted for 'No peace without Spain' in 1711 and against the expulsion of Richard Steele in 1714. His most significant parliamentary moment came on 24 June 1714 when he proposed a bounty of $100,000 for the apprehension of James Stuart, the Pretender, should he set foot in the British Isles. Hertford was also lord lieutenant of Sussex from 1706 and governor of Tynemouth Castle from 1710 until his death. He was most distinguished as a military man, serving as a volunteer at Oudenarde in 1708, aide de camp to Marlborough at Malplaquet in 1709, and colonel of the fifteenth regiment of foot from 23 October of that year. He saw active service in this capacity during the campaigns of 1710, 1711, and 1712. 


@@@@@


doc= 25157


Seymour, Katherine, countess of Hertford (1540?-1568), noblewoman and royal kinswoman, was the second of three daughters of Henry Grey, duke of Suffolk (1517-1554), and Frances Brandon (1517-1559). Frances was the second child and elder daughter of Henry VIII's sister Mary Tudor and Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk, and the granddaughter of Henry VII. Katherine's parents inherited the Suffolk title in October 1551. During childhood Lady Katherine lived mainly at Bradgate Hall in Leicestershire, where she was educated by Thomas Aylmer. Unlike Jane Dudley (nee Grey), Katherine did not make any impression on Roger Ascham when he visited Bradgate in the summer of 1550, and it is usually assumed from this that she was a far less serious scholar than her elder sister. 
The Suffolk family moved to Southwark in late 1550 or 1551. On 21 May 1553, as part of Suffolk's plan to put Lady Jane on the throne, Katherine was either married, or betrothed, to Henry Herbert (d. 1601), the eldest son of William Herbert, first earl of Pembroke, an ally of the duke of Northumberland. The ceremony took place at the duke's palace, Durham Place, on the same day that Jane married his son. Apparently the marriage was not consummated and Pembroke had it dissolved after Mary I's accession. In 1554, after her father's execution and mother's remarriage, Katherine was placed in the care of Anne, the dowager duchess of Somerset. Despite her father's and sister's treason, Katherine spent time at Mary's court and was treated as a princess of the blood. Although protestant, she outwardly conformed. 
Soon after Elizabeth's accession Katherine was appointed maid of honour. On her mother's death in November 1559 she and her younger sister Lady Mary Keys (1545?-1578) inherited land in Lincolnshire and Warwickshire, but her stepfather, Adrian Stokes, was to enjoy the income from them during his lifetime. She also became heir presumptive according to Henry VIII's will, and consequently attracted the attention of foreign princes and ambitious Englishmen. In August 1559 and March 1560 rumours reached the government that Philip II was planning to persuade her to slip abroad and marry his son. In September 1560 the Scottish council was considering seeking her hand for the earl of Arran. Pembroke, meanwhile, wanted to re-establish her marriage with his son. 
Katherine, however, wanted to marry Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford (1539?-1621), the eldest son of Protector Somerset and his wife, Anne. Katherine's mother had agreed to the match in March 1559 and promised to use her influence with the queen and privy council to obtain their consent. This was crucial because an act of 1536 had made it treason for a person of royal blood to marry without the monarch's approval. Frances, however, died before interceding on the young couple's behalf. Fearful that the queen's permission would not be forthcoming, Katherine and Hertford, abetted by his sister Jane Seymour, decided to risk a clandestine marriage. In November or December 1560 the couple were secretly married at Hertford's house, with only Jane and an unidentified clergyman as witnesses. The marriage was immediately consummated in Hertford's bedchamber. In May 1561 Hertford was sent to France to further his education, but by then Katherine was pregnant. Alone and desperate, she confessed her plight in August to Lord Robert Dudley and Elizabeth St Loe, then a gentlewoman of the privy chamber. Dudley immediately informed the queen. Scenting a plot, Elizabeth ordered Katherine to the Tower and summoned Hertford back from Paris. Both were interrogated closely and separately. Although they differed on points of detail, they agreed on the essentials, but the minister could not be found, while Jane Seymour had died the previous March. In the third week of September 1561 Katherine gave birth to a son, Edward Seymour, Viscount Beauchamp ['see under 'Seymour, Edward (1539?-1621)], who was baptized within the Tower. On 31 January 1562 an ecclesiastical high commission headed by Archbishop Parker was appointed to judge the legitimacy of the marriage. With no witnesses or documentary evidence to support its validity, and probably under pressure from the queen, the commission declared on 12 May 1562 that there had been no marriage and that Edward was consequently illegitimate. Meanwhile, Katherine and Hertford were left in the Tower. The lieutenant, Sir Edward Warner, feeling sorry for the couple, disobeyed orders and allowed them secret conjugal visits. As a result, Katherine conceived again and gave birth to a second son, Thomas, in February 1563. For this affront, Hertford was fined $15,000. 
For the rest of her life Katherine remained in custody, never to see Hertford again; they could only exchange letters and books. Because of plague in London, she was removed in August 1563 to the house of her uncle, Lord John Grey, at Pyrgo in Essex, where she was kept under strict house arrest. During this time, she and Grey frequently petitioned Dudley and William Cecil to secure her pardon from the queen. Grey described Katherine as 'penitent and soroful', anorexic, and a suicide risk. On his death in November 1564 she was transferred to the custody of Sir William Petre of Ingatestone, Essex. In May 1566 Sir John Wentworth of Horkesley and Gosfield took over her charge until his death. From October 1567 she remained in the custody of Owen Hopton of Cockfield Hall, Yoxford, in Suffolk, who in 1570 became lieutenant of the Tower. Hertford paid for her expenses (66's'. 8died per week for her diet, 26's'. 8died for his sons, and 6's'. 8died for each of her seventeen attendants). Elizabeth assigned to her the rents of the college of Astley in Warwickshire in 1567 to supplement her meagre income. 
Katherine was kept in close custody for so long because of the debates on the succession. In early 1563 the MP John Hales wrote a manuscript tract defending her claim to the succession, and also sent Robert Beale abroad to obtain foreign legal opinion that the Hertford marriage was legal. Hales's tract was widely circulated, and news of his activities reached the queen in April 1564. She was incensed, and Hales was sent first to the Fleet and then the Tower. Others came under suspicion, including Lord John Grey, Lord Keeper Bacon, and Hertford's stepfather. Hales's intervention provoked a pamphlet war over the succession issue, which came to a head in the 1566 parliament, where Elizabeth was petitioned unsuccessfully to name her successor. The same year the play 'Gorboduc', written by Thomas Norton and Thomas Sackville, which had originally been performed before the queen on 18 January 1562, was reissued. Some historians believe that it was calling for the parliamentary settlement of the succession on the Suffolk line. Elizabeth, however, was unsympathetic to the claim of Katherine, preferring that of Mary Stewart. 
Katherine died on 27 January 1568, perhaps of anorexia, and was buried at Yoxford on 21 February. Her grandson reinterred her remains in the Seymour family tomb at Salisbury Cathedral (the date of death on the monument is incorrect). Her death scene was idealized in a manuscript entitled 'A breefe discowrse of the manner and order of [her] departinge'. In 1572 Thomas Churchyarde wrote a narrative poem based on the discourse, and John Philip also composed a panegyric in verse of her marriage life and death. For years afterwards many argued that her marriage was legal and her sons were consequently heirs to the throne. The union was finally declared legitimate in 1606. 


@@@@@


doc= 25158


Seymour, Charles, sixth duke of Somerset (1662-1748), politician and courtier, known as the Proud Duke, was born on 13 August 1662 at Preshute, Wiltshire, the sixth and second surviving son of Charles Seymour, second Baron Seymour of Trowbridge ('c'.1621-1665), and his second wife, Elizabeth ('bap'. 1635, died 1691), daughter of William Alington, first Baron Alington of Killard, Ireland. Charles the younger was the only surviving brother and heir of Francis Seymour, fifth duke of Somerset (1658-1678). The fifth duke died, unmarried, on 20 April 1678 after being shot by a Genoese nobleman, Horatio Botti, in revenge for Somerset's allegedly insulting behaviour towards his wife. 
Little is known of the sixth duke's early life. Styled Lord Charles Seymour from 1675 to 1678, he is said to have been educated at Harrow School and Trinity College, Cambridge, but he does not appear in the admissions register of the latter. After a bout of smallpox in spring 1679 he travelled abroad with his tutor, Alexander de Resigade, in October of that year, returning in May 1681. On 30 May 1682 he married the twice-widowed Lady Elizabeth Thynne, 'nee' Percy (1667-1722) ['see 'Seymour, Elizabeth, duchess of Somerset], the greatest heiress in England. From this point, as the possessor of a vast estate (worth perhaps $20,000-$30,000 by the first decade of the eighteenth century) and the second dukedom in the kingdom, he began to receive a steady stream of honours and responsibilities. In November 1682 he became lord lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire, in July 1683 of Somerset. He was nominated knight of the Garter on 10 January 1684 and installed in April. As second duke of the realm he played a prominent part in court ceremonial. At the funeral of Charles II he was second mourner; he would fulfil a similar function at those of William III and Prince George of Denmark as well. In addition he carried the orb at the coronations of Queen Anne, George I, and George II, and was sent to greet the titular king of Spain, Archduke Charles of Austria, in December 1703. 
James II named Somerset a gentleman of the bedchamber in May 1685 and colonel of the Queen's regiment of dragoons in August. As lord lieutenant of Somerset he took an active, but not a distinguished, part in the suppression of the duke of Monmouth's rising that year. As commander of the militia of that county he proved a difficult colleague for his fellow lieutenants and other high-ranking military personnel, in part owing to the ridiculous pride of birth which would be his hallmark. However, in summer 1687 he displayed a courage which has been less often noted by historians. When James II requested him, as gentleman of the bedchamber in waiting, to introduce the newly arrived papal nuncio, he refused on the ground that any contact with the Holy See was, in law, treasonous. Upon the sovereign offering him a pardon he refused; when James asked him if he did not know that the king was above the law, Somerset replied that 'whatever the king might be, he himself was not above the law' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.188). This staunch refusal led to the forfeiture of all his posts. 
At the revolution of 1688 Somerset abandoned James II and joined the forces of the prince of Orange, but in parliament he voted against the concept that James II, in his flight, had abdicated, for a regency, and against the offer of the crown to William and Mary in January and February 1689. On the other hand, he voted for reversing the judgment in Titus Oates's case. The king stayed with him at Marlborough on his return from Ireland in September 1690 and dined with him at Petworth on his way to Portsmouth in February 1693. Somerset became associated with the opposition when, in 1692, he resisted pressure from the king and queen and accepted Princess Anne's appeal for the loan of Syon House after she and her husband, Prince George, had been expelled from the court. For most of the reign he was classified as a tory and refused to join the Association of 1689. He did join that of 1696, but voted against Sir John Fenwick's attainder and supported the impeachments of the whig ministers. On the other hand he is listed as against the place bill of January 1693. Towards the end of the reign, after Anne had made her own peace with William, he seems to have gravitated towards the court. William III dined with him at Northumberland House in May 1699 and visited him on his return from Portsmouth in May 1700. He was named a lord justice and a privy councillor on 28 June 1701 and lord president of the council and a lord commissioner of the Board of Trade on 20 January 1702. 
At the accession of Queen Anne she rewarded Somerset's loyalty in the last reign by making him master of the horse on 20 July 1702; the duchess became a lady of the bedchamber. Somerset was a conscientious and effective master of the horse, which was, during this reign, a cabinet position. He used this place, and his extensive electoral interest, to try to increase his political importance. At the beginning of the reign he was one of the few supporters, in a predominantly tory cabinet, of John Churchill, duke of Marlborough, and a more aggressive land strategy in the War of the Spanish Succession. But Somerset's support was problematic for the ministry because of his reputation for ridiculous pride, prickliness, and indiscretion. Early in the reign he was rumoured to have leaked secrets from cabinet meetings and in 1704 his partisan role as committee chair during the investigation of the 'Scotch plot' led Daniel Finch, earl of Nottingham, secretary of state, to demand his dismissal in April. Instead, Anne purged her cabinet of Nottingham and a number of his fellow tories. 
In parliament Somerset was a fairly assiduous attender and, while in office, a frequent appointee to committees and a representative for conferences between the houses. His voting record in Anne's reign was consistently whig, beginning with his votes against the occasional conformity bills of 1703. In 1706 Somerset was a commissioner for the Union and he was sometimes used by the queen to represent her wishes on crucial parliamentary votes, most notably in the case of the abortive attack on Abigail Masham early in 1710. From mid-reign Somerset grew increasingly demanding of Marlborough and Godolphin, presuming on his relationship with the queen and his vast electoral interest to ask numerous favours and especially military posts for his son, Algernon Seymour, styled earl of Hertford ['see below'], and assorted political allies. Some of these individuals were men of real merit, for example James Stanhope, Thomas Meredith, and Hertford himself. However, the duumvirs found the task of placating Somerset increasingly tedious and the Somersets began to use their influence with the queen to make even more demands. In winter 1707-8 Robert Harley, planning to supplant Godolphin as treasurer, attempted to woo Somerset and other great whig court magnates such as John Holles, duke of Newcastle. In the event, Harley failed: at a cabinet meeting on 8 February 1708, which Marlborough and Godolphin boycotted, Harley tried to carry on as principal minister; it was Somerset who stood up, pointed dramatically at the secretary and said that he did not see how business could be conducted without the queen's treasurer and captain-general. This action, supported by the dukes of Devonshire and Newcastle and the earls of Pembroke and Cowper, made clear to Anne that a Harley ministry was premature. 
Following this incident the duke and duchess of Somerset, along with a number of other moderate whig peers, began to feel neglected by a ministry increasingly dominated by the junto. As early as December 1708 the duke is reported to have fallen out with the whigs. By the summer of 1709 the Somersets were cultivating Anne behind the Marlboroughs' backs and, possibly, beginning to make common cause with Harley. The first outward sign of a break with the Churchill circle took place over the Sacheverell trial in March 1710: Somerset played an ambiguous part, absenting himself from the vote on the clergyman's guilt, then voting for a light sentence. By June at the latest Somerset was intriguing with Harley and with Charles Talbot, duke of Shrewsbury, to bring down the ministry. Somerset's goal seems to have been to preside himself over a more moderate whig ministry. These intrigues culminated on 8 August with the dismissal of Lord Treasurer Godolphin. By mid-August, as it became clear that the queen would dissolve the predominantly whig parliament and that a tory ministry was in the offing, Somerset began to fall out with Harley. Despite being named keeper of the new park at Hampton Court in October 1710, the duke withdrew from court, became reconciled to the whigs, used his electoral influence for them in the subsequent election, and began sapping operations against the Harley ministry. A brief attempt to resume his seat in the cabinet was scuttled on 12 August 1711 when Henry St John, secretary of state, refused to sit with him. Somerset played an important role in convincing some peers of the queen's support for 'No peace without Spain' in December 1711, and was 'louder than any in the house for the clause against Peace' (J. Swift, 'Journal to Stella', ed. H. Williams, 1948, 433) when, in fact, she supported the treaty. Anne seems to have retained some regard for him until December 1711 when he attempted to deceive her over his opposition vote on the question of whether the duke of Hamilton could take his seat in the House of Lords under his British peerage as duke of Brandon. On 19 January 1712 Somerset was removed as master of the horse. There ensued several days of tense negotiations as the queen and a small circle of court whigs sought to get the duke's permission for the duchess to remain in her post as groom of the stole and thus near the queen. This was eventually granted. Subsequently Somerset was a consistent whig, voting against the French commercial treaty in June 1713 and the 'Schism Bill' in the spring of 1714. 
The famous story that on 30 July 1714, during the queen's last illness, Somerset, along with John Campbell, second duke of Argyll, played a crucial role in securing the Hanoverian succession is doubtful. That is, while Somerset and Argyll did rejoin the privy council on that day, they almost certainly did so after the queen had already been persuaded to give the treasurer's staff to the impeccably Hanoverian Shrewsbury. At the accession of George I, Somerset was restored to the mastership of the horse, but he resigned it angrily in October 1715 over the treatment of his son-in-law, Sir William Wyndham, following the Jacobite rising. Somerset had offered to be surety for Wyndham if the latter were allowed to go free, but the cabinet nevertheless voted to place him under arrest. Thenceforward the duke played little active role in public affairs. He is listed as voting for the acquittal of the earl of Oxford (formerly Robert Harley) in 1717 and in 1740-41 as having given his proxy for various motions in support of the removal of Sir Robert Walpole. 
In November 1722 the duchess of Somerset died. For a time the duke pursued, with an ardour that belied his years, his late wife's old nemesis, Sarah, duchess of Marlborough. While this resulted in a softening of the duchess of Marlborough's attitude to Somerset -- and therefore of his portrayal in her 'Conduct of the Dowager Duchess of Marlborough' -- it did not result in a marriage. Instead, on 4 February 1726 Somerset married Charlotte, the third daughter of his former antagonist Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham and seventh earl of Winchilsea, and Ann, daughter of Christopher, Viscount Hatton of Gretton. She spent much of their marriage nursing him through a variety of ailments. He died on 2 December 1748 at his principal seat, Petworth House, Sussex. He was buried on 26 December at Salisbury Cathedral. The second duchess died on 21 January 1773 and was buried at Chiswick, Middlesex. 
The sixth duke of Somerset was characterized by Macaulay as 'a man in whom the pride of birth and rank amounted almost to a disease' (Macaulay, 'History of England', ed. C. H. Firth, 1914, 2.918), a view borne out by much contemporary testimony. According to Philip Yorke, first earl of Hardwicke, 'This noble lord was so humoursome, proud, and capricious, that he was rather a ministry spoiler than a ministry maker' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 6.15n.). William Legge, first earl of Dartmouth, wrote: 'He was a man of vast pride, and having had a very low education, shewed it in a very indecent manner' (ibid., 14n.). William, first Earl Cowper, thought him 'a False mean-spirited Knave, at the same time he was a pretender to the greatest Courage and Steddiness' ('The Private Diary of William, First Earl Cowper', 1833, 50, 16 Dec 1710). There exist numerous anecdotes, most difficult to confirm, of his pride and imperious manner: that he would only communicate with his servants through hand gestures; that he ordered them to clear the roads for his carriage lest he be viewed by the commonalty; that once, when his second wife struck him playfully with her fan, he remarked, coldly, 'Madam, my first wife was a Percy, and she never took such a liberty' (Craik, 4.351). It is said that he always required one of his daughters to stand as a sentry in his presence while taking his afternoon nap; upon awakening one afternoon to find that his daughter, Charlotte, had taken the liberty of sitting, he vowed to reduce her share of his will. He is supposed to have added a codicil reducing her portion by $20,000, although if this is so it had been excised by the time of his death. 
On the other hand, Somerset was clearly not without courage, having stood up to both James II and William III, first in opposition to Catholicism, second in defence of Princess Anne. Later he defied Anne's own wishes in his opposition to Harley in 1708, and those of George I in support of his son-in-law in 1715. He was an able master of the horse and managed to be present and play an important role at a number of dramatic moments in British history. Nor was he without taste or an appreciation for scholarship: he was a patron of artists and has been credited with suggesting the 'Kit-Cat' series to Sir Godfrey Kneller and Jacob Tonson, and with beautifying Petworth House. He was chancellor of the University of Cambridge from March 1689 until his death. He was also created DCL at Oxford during the court's progress to Bath in the late summer of 1702. Appropriately, given his position as master of the horse, he was an avid sportsman and his horses won several important cups at Newmarket and elsewhere during the reign of Queen Anne. 
Somerset and his first duchess had at least four sons and three daughters. Their eldest son, Charles Seymour, known by courtesy as earl of Hertford, was baptized by 22 March 1683 but died and was buried by the following 26 August. Their second but first surviving son, 
Under George I Hertford was gentleman of the bedchamber to the prince of Wales from September 1714 until his resignation in December 1717 and captain of the second troop of Horse Guards from February 1715 to 1740. In parliament he generally supported the ministry: in 1716 he moved for the impeachment of the rebel, William Gordon, sixth Viscount Kenmure, and in 1719 he voted for the 'Peerage Bill'. On his mother's death in 1722 he was summoned to the House of Lords as Baron Percy on the erroneous assumption that the ancient barony of that name had been vested in her. There he supported Walpole. Subsequently he was promoted brigadier-general in 1727; major-general in 1735; lieutenant-general in 1739; and general in 1747. He was governor of Minorca, September 1737-March 1742; governor of Guernsey, March 1742 until his death; and colonel of the Horse Guards regiment from 1740 until his death, with a brief interval in early 1742 when he lost the regiment on the fall of Walpole. Hertford was also president of the Society of Antiquaries from 1724 to 1749. Unlike his father, from whom he was estranged for most of his later life, Hertford seems to have been well regarded by contemporaries, as both a soldier and a patron; Horace Walpole thought him 'as good a man as lives' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 18.522). 
Hertford married, soon after 1 March 1715, Frances (1699-1754) ['see 'Seymour, Frances, duchess of Somerset], daughter and coheir of Henry Thynne, son of Thomas Thynne, first Viscount Weymouth. Their only son, George Seymour, Viscount Beauchamp, was born on 11 September 1725 and died unmarried in Bologna, Papal States, of smallpox on 11 September 1744. He was buried on 6 July 1745 in Westminster Abbey. On 2-3 October 1749, just over nine months after his father's death, the seventh duke was created Baron Warkworth and earl of Northumberland, and Baron Cockermouth and earl of Egremont, each pair of titles being intended for different branches of his family. He died on 7 February 1750 at Percy Lodge, Iver, Buckinghamshire, and was buried on 24 February in Westminster Abbey. His widow died on 7 July 1754 at Percy Lodge and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 20 July. They were survived by a daughter, Elizabeth (1716-1776) ['see 'Percy, Elizabeth], whose husband, Sir Hugh Smithson, fourth baronet ('bap'. 1712, died 1786) ['see 'Percy, Hugh], succeeded his father-in-law as earl of Northumberland and Baron Warkworth in 1750 and was created duke of Northumberland in 1766. 
The sixth duke and his first duchess had two further sons, Percy, MP for Cockermouth in 1718-21, who died unmarried in 1721; and Charles, who died in 1711. Their three daughters included Elizabeth (died 1734), who married Henry O'Brien, eighth earl of Thomond, and Catherine (died 1731), who married Sir William Wyndham, baronet. Their son, Sir Charles Wyndham, succeeded his uncle the seventh duke as earl of Egremont and Baron Cockermouth. Finally, Anne (died 1722), married Peregrine Osborne, third duke of Leeds. Somerset and his second wife had two daughters, Frances (1728-1760), married to John Manners, marquess of Granby, the military commander and politician, and Charlotte (1730-1805), who married Heneage Finch, Lord Guernsey, who became third earl of Aylesford in 1757. 


@@@@@


doc= 25159


Seymour, Edward, duke of Somerset (c.1500-1552), soldier and royal servant, was the eldest surviving son of Sir John Seymour (1473/4-1536), landowner and courtier, of Wolf Hall, Wiltshire, and his wife, Margery (died 1550), eldest daughter of Sir Henry Wentworth of Nettlestead, Suffolk. 
Edward Seymour was descended on both sides from ancient families, each having links with the Percys and Cliffords. His father served Henry VII and Henry VIII as a soldier and was sheriff of Wiltshire and of Somerset and Dorset a total of six times between 1498 and 1527. Of his ten children four predeceased him. The others included Thomas Seymour; Jane, who became Henry VIII's third wife; Elizabeth, who married successively Sir Anthony Ughtred, Gregory, son of Thomas Cromwell, and John Paulet, second marquess of Winchester; and Dorothy, who married Sir Clement Smith, an important exchequer official. The course of his early life suggests that Edward was born about 1500, probably at Wolf Hall, Wiltshire. He is said to have been educated at both Oxford and Cambridge, although there is little evidence to suggest that he was a learned man. 
Edward Seymour married twice. Before 1518 he married Katherine (died in or before 1535?), daughter and coheir of Sir William Fillol, a landowner in Dorset and Essex. They had two sons: John was MP for Wootton Bassett in Wiltshire in 1547 and died on 19 December 1552, being buried at the Savoy Hospital, London. Edward (1529-1593), who was knighted at the battle of Pinkie in September 1547, was restored in blood by act of parliament of 29 March 1554 and settled at Berry Pomeroy, Devon. Reports that Katherine was repudiated by her husband because of misconduct, and that the paternity of her eldest son was suspect, circulated during the seventeenth century. 
Seymour married his second wife, Anne ('c'.1510-1587), before 9 March 1535. Anne Seymour was the daughter of Sir Edward Stanhope of Rampton, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Bourchier; she was a descendant through her mother of Edward III. Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, addressed to her an ode, 'On a lady who refused to dance with him'. Contemporaries often criticized her arrogance, but she none the less wrote a moving letter in defence of her husband in October 1549 during his fall from power. She later married Francis Newdegate of Hanworth, Middlesex, one of her first husband's stewards, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. Anne and Edward had four sons and six daughters: their eldest surviving son, Edward Seymour (1539?-1621), became earl of Hertford, while Henry ('b'. 1540) was appointed admiral of the squadron of the narrow seas; he kept close watch on the duke of Parma off the coast of the Netherlands, and played an important part in the battle off Gravelines in 1588. Among their daughters were Anne, Margaret, and Jane. Anne (1538-1587) ['see 'Dudley, Anne, 'under' Seymour, Lady Jane] was married first to John Dudley, earl of Warwick, eldest son of John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, and second to Sir Edward Unton. Jane Seymour (1541-1561) was accused of plotting to marry Edward VI, became a maid of honour to Queen Elizabeth, and died unmarried. Lady Margaret Seymour (b. 1540) ['see under 'Seymour, Lady Jane], like her siblings, received a humanist education and probably died young. 
Edward Seymour was introduced to court by his father. In 1514 he was a page of honour to Henry VIII's sister, Mary, when she married Louis XII of France. On 15 July 1517 he was associated with his father in a grant of the constableship of Bristol Castle. He probably attended Charles V when the emperor visited England in 1522, since Eustache Chapuys, the imperial ambassador, later mentioned him as having been in Charles's service. In August 1523 he accompanied the invasion of France led by Charles Brandon, first duke of Suffolk, and was subsequently present at the capture of Bray, Roye, and Montdidier. He was knighted by Suffolk at Roye on 1 November. In the following year he became an esquire of the king's household. On 12 January 1525 he was made a JP for Wiltshire, and in the same year became master of the horse to the duke of Richmond, Henry VIII's illegitimate son. In July 1527 he accompanied Cardinal Thomas Wolsey on his embassy to France, and in 1528 was granted lands of monasteries dissolved for the benefit of Wolsey's colleges. On 5 March 1529 he was made steward of the manors of Henstridge, Somerset, and Charlton, Wiltshire. 
On 12 September 1531 Seymour was appointed an esquire of the body to Henry VIII with an annuity of 50 marks. Increasingly in favour with the king, in 1532 Seymour and his father accompanied Henry and Anne Boleyn to Boulogne to meet Francois I. In the following year he quarrelled with Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, and was supported by the latter's stepson, John Dudley, later duke of Northumberland, over lands in Somerset. In October 1535 Henry VIII and Queen Anne visited Seymour at his Hampshire manor of Elvetham, during that year's royal progress. He was made a gentleman of the privy chamber on 3 March 1536, and a few days later, he, his wife, and his sister Jane were installed in the palace at Greenwich in an apartment which the king could reach through a private passage. 
Henry VIII married Jane Seymour on 30 May 1536. A week later, on 5 June, her eldest brother Edward -- now the king's brother-in-law -- was created Viscount Beauchamp of Hache, Somerset. His further advancement at court was a direct consequence of his new position in the royal family. On 7 July he was made governor and captain of Jersey, and in August chancellor of north Wales. He was admitted to the council on 22 May 1537; in the same month he was among the commissioners who tried barons Darcy and Hussey for their role in the Pilgrimage of Grace, having been called upon to provide 200 men to suppress the rebellion in the previous year. On 15 October he carried Princess Elizabeth at Prince Edward's baptism, and three days later was created earl of Hertford. While the death of his sister, Queen Jane, initially diminished his influence at court, and he was subsequently described as 'of small power', albeit 'young and wise' ('LP Henry VIII', 13/2, no. 732), nevertheless he remained prominent, particularly in military affairs, for the remainder of Henry's reign. 
In 1538 Hertford served on commissions for the treason trials of Henry Courtenay, marquess of Exeter, Henry Pole, Baron Montagu, Sir Geoffrey Pole, and others, and in March 1539 he was sent to provide for the defence of Calais and Guines. In August the king and Thomas Cromwell spent four days with Hertford at Wolf Hall, inherited from his father in 1536. He met Anne of Cleves, Henry's fourth wife, at Calais in December and returned with her to London. Writing to Cromwell he exclaimed that nothing since the birth of Prince Edward had pleased him so much as this marriage. 
Hertford not only survived the fall of Cromwell in 1540, but grew steadily more influential during the latter years of Henry VIII. He was elected a knight of the Garter on 9 January 1541, and during the king's progress to the north, between July and November, he managed affairs in London, along with Archbishop Cranmer and Baron Audley. In November he and Cranmer received the charges against Queen Catherine Howard that led to her trial and execution. In September 1542 Hertford was appointed warden of the Scottish marches, but he served there for only a few weeks, resuming attendance on the king in December 1542. Further promotion followed, lord high admiral on 28 December, and lord great chamberlain on 16 February 1543. In April he was closely involved in the prosecution of Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, who was convicted for eating meat during Lent and breaking windows while carousing through the streets of London. During that year the king again visited Hertford at Wolf Hall. 
In December 1543 after prolonged indecision the Scottish government broke with England and allied with France. Consequently Hertford was appointed lieutenant-general in the north, embarking from Berwick for Leith in March 1544. Offered the keys to Edinburgh if he would allow all who so desired to leave with their personal property he demanded unconditional surrender on the grounds that the Scots had been faithless to past agreements. When the Scots refused the English soldiers pillaged the city for two days without resistance, and then seized ships at Leith which they loaded with plunder. The operation achieved no lasting result, however, except that it increased Scottish dependence on France and created greater animosity toward England. 
Following his Scottish campaign Hertford was appointed lieutenant of the kingdom under Queen Katherine Parr, who was regent while Henry VIII led an army into France. But on 13 August 1544 he joined the king, and was present at the capture of Boulogne on 14 September. Hertford is said to have secured the capture of the town by bribing the French commander. After the war Hertford was active as a diplomat at Calais and Brussels. The negotiations with France and the emperor, Charles V, broke down, however, and fighting resumed. Hertford surveyed the fortifications of Guines in January 1545 and took command of Boulogne when the French attempted to recapture it. With a force of 4000 foot and 700 horse he took a French army of 14,000 by surprise on 5 February, driving the enemy away in a victory which secured Boulogne for England. 
Reversals in Scotland led to the reassignment of Hertford to the north. On 2 May 1545 he was again appointed lieutenant-general, being charged with organizing a new invasion, with the intention of compelling the Scots into union with England through the marriage of the infant Mary, queen of Scots, to Prince Edward. He proposed delaying operations until August because of a lack of soldiers and supplies, and throughout the summer remained near Newcastle to protect the country from an attack from either France or Scotland. He advanced into Scotland on 6 September and proceeded toward Kelso and Jedburgh. Meeting little opposition, in a campaign of systematic devastation later known as the 'rough wooing', the English army burnt castles, monasteries, and villages along its route. He left Scotland in October to attend parliament and apply himself to government business, and remained in and around London until March 1546, when he resumed command of forces defending Boulogne. The next month he began peace negotiations with France which culminated on 7 June in the treaty of Camp, allowing England to occupy Boulogne until 1554 when the French would buy it back. Moving to and fro between London and the continent Hertford was back in England in October where he strengthened his position at court by forging close ties with John Dudley, now Viscount Lisle, who had served with him in Scotland and France, and with Sir William Paget, the king's secretary. 
In the last months of Henry VIII's reign the political map was suddenly redrawn by the fall of Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk, and his son, the earl of Surrey. Relations between Hertford and Surrey had been strained since at least 1537, when the two men almost came to blows at court. In June 1546 Norfolk sought an alliance with the Seymours by offering to marry his daughter, Mary, duchess of Richmond, to Thomas Seymour, but Surrey was apparently able to persuade his sister to decline, so ensuring that the Seymours and the Howards failed to make a dynastic alliance. Late in 1546 Henry VIII heard reports that Surrey had displayed heraldic decorations that suggested royal ambitions as well as claiming royal blood, and talked of his father's appointment as regent for Prince Edward. These indiscretions provided a pretext for an attack on the powerful Howard family. Hertford and other leading councillors, supported by the king, claimed that the Howards' actions were treasonous, and Surrey, after trial at the Guildhall, was executed, but Norfolk, though attainted by parliament, was saved by Henry VIII's own death. 
The fall of the Howards greatly strengthened Hertford's position, though later, as lord protector, he declined to use his authority to order Norfolk's execution, and the aged duke lived on into the reign of Mary. The conflict between Hertford and the Howards involved personal, political, and religious issues. A. F. Pollard and other scholars saw a conflict primarily between the religious conservatism of Norfolk and the reformist programme associated with Hertford, while M. L. Bush argued more persuasively that until the death of Henry VIII Hertford's association with protestants was shadowy and provided no clear evidence of his own beliefs. 
The accession of Hertford's nephew, Edward VI, on 28 January 1547 brought his uncle to the pinnacle of his career. Since events at the end of the reign of Henry VIII left Hertford in a position that no other leader could challenge, the controversial events leading to his appointment as lord protector must be seen from the perspective of the recent past. Hertford and Henry's secretary, Sir William Paget, were with the king at his death and agreed to keep the news secret for a short time. They had possession of the king's will (Seymour was given it by Henry), only parts of which were immediately made public, and Seymour hastened to the town of Hertford to escort the new king back to London. 
The will of Henry VIII named his son as heir to the throne and appointed a body of sixteen executors who were to govern collectively until the king reached the age of eighteen. The fact that the will was signed with the dry stamp did not affect its legality. Since the king may have regarded his will as provisional it was reasonable for the executors to reject the notion of collective or collegiate government contained in it, and to give the new government what they saw as a more workable form. To this end the executors, with King Edward's assent, on 1 February appointed Hertford to two further offices, those of lord protector of the realm and governor of the king's person. He was also high steward of England for the coronation, lord treasurer, and earl marshal. These positions gave Hertford more power than had been exercised by any subject since the beginning of the Tudor era. In addition he was advanced within the peerage to become duke of Somerset on 17 February, on the grounds that the late king had so wished to strengthen the nobility. 
Although Somerset's authority as protector initially required him to govern with the advice and consent of the executors, a patent dated 12 March 1547 empowered him to do anything that a governor of the king's person or protector of the realm ought to do. A second patent of 24 December 1547, though it made Somerset's protectorate dependent on the king's pleasure rather than limiting it as earlier, to Edward's minority, added to his powers in other respects, making it easier for him to bypass the council and govern through a small group of personal advisers, who included Paget, Sir Thomas Smith, William Cecil, and John Hales. 
The magnitude of Somerset's power, especially his use of the royal 'we', offended some members of the council, but their opposition was swiftly dealt with through the dismissal of Thomas Wriothesley, first earl of Southampton, as lord chancellor on 6 March 1547. Authoritarian tendencies may likewise be seen in Somerset's use of royal proclamations, on a scale which exceeded that of Henry VIII's reign. Paget became alarmed, and from 1548 sent Somerset a revealing series of letters in which he boldly admonished the protector to alter his policies and reminded him of an earlier promise to follow his advice in all political affairs. But perhaps the greatest challenge to Somerset's position came from his brother Thomas, who had been advanced to the peerage as Baron Seymour of Sudeley. 
Thomas Seymour felt that as Edward VI's uncle he should have a larger role in government and demanded promotion as the king's governor. When Somerset refused Thomas began a series of rash initiatives to undermine his brother that ultimately led to his own execution. He courted and married Katherine, the queen dowager, only four months after the death of Henry VIII. Following her death in childbirth he turned his attention to Princess Elizabeth, then fourteen. He also worked to gain personal influence over the king and drew a group of similarly disaffected nobles and gentry to his side. These actions, as well as rumours of a plot to kidnap Edward and Elizabeth, led to Thomas's arrest in January 1549; he was condemned for treason by a parliamentary act of attainder and executed with his brother's reluctant consent on 20 March 1549. Few would deny that Thomas Seymour was an ambitious and irresponsible man, but Somerset's willingness to sanction the execution of his own brother in order to protect his authority irreparably damaged his reputation. 
As lord protector Somerset pursued a cautious but consistent programme of religious reform, one that transformed the Henrician church into one that can be described as protestant or evangelical. Archbishop Thomas Cranmer provided the religious leadership, but Somerset and his political allies determined the pace at which the reform programme proceeded. During Somerset's protectorate English became the language of religious services, first in the order of communion (1548) and later in the first 'Book of Common Prayer' (1549). The reformed services not only introduced new liturgies that offended traditionalists but also incorporated a reformed theology that moved the Church of England closer to continental beliefs and practices. In 1547 parliament repealed the conservative Henrician 'Act of Six Articles', and in January 1549 passed an 'Act of Uniformity' that sought to maintain religious unity through the use of a new English prayer book. Another act of 1549 permitted priests to marry but emphasized unequivocally the superiority of celibacy. Further measures required the complete destruction of religious images, whitewashing of churches, and dissolution of remaining chantries, one of the largest architectural changes of the century. The iconoclasm which resulted in areas where these policies were zealously enforced was greatly resented. 
Although the leading evangelicals enthusiastically regarded Somerset as one of their own after 1547, his personal beliefs are not easily defined, and it has been suggested that they were not exactly mirrored in the religious policies of his protectorate. None the less there is evidence that by the late 1540s he favoured reducing the power of bishops while increasing lay participation in religious reform, believed in the superiority of scripture and salvation by faith alone, and regarded images as idolatrous. Such views were fully consistent with an evangelical outlook, as was his close association with three leading protestant reformers, William Turner, Thomas Becon, and John Hooper. Thus Turner, who served Somerset for more than three years as his physician, wrote in opposition to altars, vestments, and organs. Becon, the protector's chaplain, proclaimed the characteristically protestant doctrine that good works were a distinct sign of grace, while Hooper, consecrated as bishop of Gloucester in 1551, was an intimate of Somerset's family who played a major role in the Edwardian reformation, and even challenged the leadership of Archbishop Cranmer, especially over vestments. Somerset also developed a warm relationship with John Calvin, Pietro Martire Vermigli (Peter Martyr), and the Flemish Calvinist Valerand Poullain, who established a community of Flemish weavers on the duke's newly acquired estate in Glastonbury. 
Further evidence of Somerset's personal religion may be found in his own devotional writings, which include two translations from Calvin published in 1550, 'An Epistle both of Godly Consolacion and also of Advertisement' (a letter sent by the Swiss reformer to Somerset himself following the 1549 risings) and 'A Spyrytuall and moost Precyouse Pearle'. His contacts with Geneva suggest that Somerset was moving towards an increasingly radical reformism, just as the prayers he composed in the Tower of London before his death attest to the straightforward religious belief which directed his actions: '
Fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. 

Put thy trust in the Lord with all thine heart. 

Be not wise in thine own conceit, but fear the Lord and flee from evil. 
(BL, Stowe MS 1066)' As lord protector Somerset's patronage of protestant writers was recognized by contemporaries like Roger Ascham, who praised him as the supreme patron of letters. Somerset was the successor to Thomas Cromwell in sponsoring Richard Grafton, Edward Whitechurch, William Gray of Reading, and Miles Coverdale, but he 'extended his patronage on a far more sweeping scale' (King, 106). Although no writings were dedicated to him during the reign of Henry VIII, Somerset received twenty-five dedications under Edward VI, and members of his immediate family received twelve more. After his death in 1552 John Foxe, Thomas Becon, and Robert Crowley remembered affectionately his committed support for the protestant cause. 
Somerset's programme of religious reformation was accompanied by bold measures of political, social, and agrarian reform, in areas which included the treason law, inflation of prices, depopulation, social injustice, and university education. Unfortunately the good intentions of commonwealth reformers associated with Somerset often led to bad results. Legislation in 1547 abolished all the treasons and felonies created under Henry VIII and did away with existing legislation against heresy. Two witnesses were required for proof of treason instead of only one. Although the measure received support in, and was in part redrafted by, the House of Commons, its passage contributed to Somerset's reputation for what later historians perceived as his liberalism, even though it brought back treason by words and the offence of concealment of treasons. 
Because of the overriding demands of war in Scotland, Somerset's government rejected an early end to the debasement of the coinage as a remedy for price inflation, and turned its attention to illegal enclosure. In a policy intended to reduce depopulation and rural poverty, and at the same time to increase grain production by discouraging sheep grazing, on 1 June 1548 a royal proclamation announced the appointment of commissions to collect evidence and enforce existing legislation restricting enclosures. But the commission achieved little, leading to the issuing of another, on Somerset's authority, on 11 April 1549. It had greater powers than its predecessor, but was likewise ineffective thanks to the widespread opposition of gentry landowners. Other attempts to deal with agrarian problems through parliament faced similarly strong opposition, though the government successfully passed a novel tax on sheep and woollen cloth in 1549. A projected reform of the universities collapsed, however, in the face of opposition and changing political priorities. University visitors appointed by Somerset, who became chancellor of Cambridge in 1547, wished to reform the curriculum in order to place greater emphasis on humanistic studies and to promote the study of civil law in place of that of canon law, abandoned in 1535. Neither end was achieved. 
Other measures embodied no worthy motive and did not promote the best interests of the Tudor commonwealth. Thus in 1547 there was harsh legislation against vagabonds, themselves largely a by-product of agrarian poverty and enclosure, which called for branding with hot irons and enslavement; however, the act was never enforced and was repealed in the next session of parliament. The transfer of crown wealth to private hands and the extensive appropriations of episcopal lands which Somerset's government permitted are also difficult to defend. In two years about $20,000 of the crown's annual income was transferred to private hands, about 40 per cent of it in the form of outright gifts. The wealth of the church was also substantially diminished, strikingly so in some cases: the income of the see of Lincoln was reduced by $1300 out of nearly $2000, that of Bath and Wells by $1450 out of $1850. In these two cases the principal beneficiary was Somerset himself, who acquired four large manors and several smaller ones from Lincoln, and seven manors from Bath and Wells, to add to the site (acquired under Henry VIII) of Somerset House in London, which was built on property that had once belonged to the bishops of Worcester and of Coventry and Lichfield. 
An aggressive foreign policy along lines inherited from Henry VIII ran parallel to Somerset's domestic programme. When Henry died the country was preparing for a new attack on Scotland, and Somerset made the defeat of Scotland his highest priority. His ultimate policy was to reassert England's claim of suzerainty and unite the crowns of the two kingdoms by enforcing the marriage of Edward VI to Mary Stewart. His vision of a greater Britain required English domination of the northern kingdom. A gifted soldier, who had learned from his experience of war on the continent, and particularly from recent developments in fortifications, Somerset intended to achieve these objectives by defeating the Scots in the field and then garrisoning the country at strategic points to guarantee compliance. In a break with past military policies Somerset wanted to create an English pale in Scotland, and then to win the loyalty of the Scottish population within the pale and to introduce the reformed religion there. To this end his military campaign was accompanied by an aggressive one of propaganda. 
Leading an army of about 19,000 men into Scotland, Somerset won a notable victory over a larger Scottish force at Pinkie, 9 miles east of Edinburgh, on 10 September 1547. But his efforts to garrison the country provoked intervention by France, historically Scotland's ally against England. In June 1548 a French army landed at Leith, attacked English positions, and garrisoned positions sought by the English. At the same time renewed fighting broke out on the continent, where England was committed to the defence of Calais and Boulogne. Although Somerset received praise for defeating the Scots at Pinkie he was also criticized for failing to enforce a naval blockade that would have prevented the French landing, and for inadequate recruitment at home that led to the employment of continental mercenaries instead. Hiring the latter contributed to the most disastrous aspect of Somerset's Scottish policy: its great cost forced his government to supplement insufficient parliamentary appropriations with debasement of the coinage, sale of crown lands, including former chantry and college property, and substantial borrowing. In the end he was forced to withdraw English troops, evacuate many of the garrisons, and consider abandoning his ambitious objectives, leaving nothing except massive debts to show for his great effort. 
Although England and France remained formally at peace until August 1549, the French exerted pressure on the English not only in Scotland but also around the recently captured town of Boulogne. By creating a diversion at Boulogne in August 1548 the French made the English position in Scotland more difficult. The construction of a mole extending into the harbour of Boulogne constituted a provocation that caused the French artillery to bombard the town, an action which Somerset countered by threatening to hand Boulogne over to Charles V. But English efforts to secure support from the emperor against France failed when Charles refused to include Boulogne in an alliance that also protected Calais. French attacks on Boulogne continued into spring and summer 1549, leading to the capture of most of the outforts protecting the town, but then strong English resistance forced the French army to settle down 'to the dreary and slow process of siege' (Jordan, 'Young King', 304). Although Somerset was angry about substantial losses and the failure of the commanders, reinforcements were not forthcoming because of the rebellions at home. But it was only in 1550, after his fall from power, that a diplomatic agreement reflecting England's inability to continue the war returned Boulogne to France. 
The greatest test of Somerset's capacity for leadership came from a series of popular rebellions and riots that began in Cornwall in 1548 and spread through more than half the counties of England the next year. Somerset was faced by nothing less than the most extensive English risings of the sixteenth century. The western rising affected Cornwall, Devon, and Somerset, where conservative Henrician clergy with support from the gentry and commons resisted Somerset's religious programme. The new vernacular liturgy contained in the 'Book of Common Prayer' was the most evident grievance of the Cornish rebels, but the other religious changes of recent years and opposition to enclosures were also important. Revolt began in Cornwall in April 1548 when the clergy and commoners resisted the removal of religious images from parish churches and killed a government official, while in Somerset weavers and other commoners pulled down hedges and fences. When the mayor and leaders of Exeter refused to ally with the rebels of Devon in June 1549 that city was besieged. Pacification required a substantial military force, but Somerset responded only after delays that frustrated other councillors, especially John, Baron Russell, who assumed command of the army sent to relieve Exeter in July. But not until the middle of August was the western rising crushed. 
Meanwhile in East Anglia agrarian rebels formed camps in July 1549 to protest against landlords who had defied Somerset's efforts to restrict enclosures of common land and misused their control of local government. Robert Kett, a prosperous Wymondham tanner, emerged as the most able rebel leader. The rising in East Anglia reached its high-water mark on 22 July when Kett's men occupied Norwich, England's second largest city, with the support of some of the urban population. Somerset's response to this and the other disturbances can arguably be called populist. In a series of letters he expressed sympathy for the rebels, offered them pardons, and even undertook to recall parliament early so that their grievances could be discussed. He also set up a new enclosure commission (8 July 1549). Such policies infuriated his colleagues, however, and eventually the protector dispatched a small force commanded by William Parr, marquess of Northampton, to Norwich to assert the king's authority, but it failed to pacify the rebels and came to grief in the city streets. Later a larger army commanded by John Dudley, now earl of Warwick, reoccupied Norwich and then crushed Kett's supporters at Dussindale on 27 August, killing at least 2000 rebels. 
The outbreak of the rebellions brought Somerset's social programme, especially the enclosures commission, into question. His reluctance to employ force and refusal to assume military leadership merely made matters worse. When peace was restored most of the nobility and gentry had lost confidence in his leadership. Somerset did not at first appreciate this, and in a proclamation issued on 30 September commanded all soldiers to proceed to their appointed commands and to avoid London. On 5 October, however, he issued a letter over the king's signature commanding all subjects to arm themselves and proceed to Hampton Court to defend the king, and followed this up with appeals to Russell and Sir William Herbert for military assistance, and by moving the king from Hampton Court to the fortified castle of Windsor on 6 October. But at the same time his opponents within the council, including Warwick, Southampton, Baron St John (Paulet), Rich, and Northampton, met in London to demand his removal as lord protector, and in this they eventually procured the support of the mayor and aldermen of London. Faced with overwhelming opposition among the ruling elite, and unwilling to endanger king and country in a civil war, Somerset surrendered himself on the 11th, his protectorate was dissolved on the 13th and he was lodged in the Tower of London the next day. Interrogated by his former colleagues he confessed to charges against him contained in twenty-nine articles and threw himself on the mercy of the council. On 14 January 1550 his deposition as lord protector was confirmed by act of parliament, and he was also deprived of all his other positions, of his annuities, and of lands to the value of $2000 a year. 
The end of Somerset's protectorate was the consequence of the disastrous and costly war with Scotland and France, opposition to his domestic reforms, growing factionalism among nobility and gentry opposed to his authoritarian leadership, and fear that his populist policies would lead to further disorder among the commons. In December 1549 religious conservatives led by Thomas Wriothesley, earl of Southampton, attempted to exploit the charges against Somerset to execute the former protector and discredit Warwick, with the intention of themselves taking control of government. But Warwick faced down the conspiracy and tightened his grip on the council and royal household, and by February felt secure enough to permit Somerset's release from the Tower on the 6th and his pardon on the 8th. For about six weeks the duke and his wife lived under virtual house arrest. Somerset dined with King Edward at Greenwich on 8 April and was readmitted to the council on the 10th. He was restored as a gentleman of the king's chamber on 14 May having resumed attendance at the council on 24 April, when he was given precedence over all other members. Three days later all his property, except those estates which had already been regranted, was restored. There is also evidence of a rapprochement between Somerset and Warwick, for on 3 June the former's eldest daughter, Anne, married John Dudley, Viscount Lisle, Warwick's eldest son, at Sheen in the presence of the king. 
A few days later Somerset led a delegation of councillors to attempt to win the conformity of his old adversary, Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, who was imprisoned in the Tower for opposition to the Edwardian religious reforms. But despite Gardiner's willingness to accept the 'Book of Common Prayer' and articles endorsing the Reformation, the council made further demands that he refused. Later, on 18 October 1550, Somerset suffered a public slight when the council refused to go into mourning on the death of his mother. He was made lord lieutenant of Berkshire and Hampshire on 10 May 1551 and in August took an armed force to Wokingham to pacify commoners who had organized a conspiracy to destroy the local gentry; several offenders were subsequently executed. 
Somerset made an exchange of lands with the king in June 1550 whereby he obtained the remaining property of the former abbey of Glastonbury. On this land he helped a group of Flemish protestant refugees establish a community for the manufacture of cloth. Each household was provided with 5 acres of land for the maintenance of two cows along with tools and material for cloth production. Then in 1551 thirty-four more families and ten widows arrived in Glastonbury, together with news that a further ten families were going to join them. Somerset's imprisonment in October 1551 ended involvement in the scheme, but the council accepted responsibility for his commitments to the Glastonbury community. 
Early in 1551 rumours began to circulate suggesting that Somerset was becoming restless with his position and wished to regain the power he had lost in 1549. In February 1551 he was said to have quarrelled with Warwick, and about the same time the earl of Shrewsbury was sounded out concerning his feelings about the rival peers. Behind these reports may have lain the activities of lesser men who hoped to profit if Somerset was restored as protector. Thus Richard Whalley, the duke's chamberlain, began to canvas support for his master, while Sir Ralph Vane, another supporter, picked a quarrel with Warwick over pasture rights. There was also talk of Somerset's allying himself with religious conservatives among the peerage in order to advance himself. He may have seen problems ahead in July 1551, when he wrote to Sir John Thynne asking him to bring the necessary books and documents to Syon in Middlesex so that he could prepare his will. 
In fact it is likely that Somerset had abandoned serious ambitions of regaining power by summer 1551 because he knew that he lacked a strong political following. Nevertheless Warwick (now duke of Northumberland) regarded him as a threat to effective government and was prepared to believe the allegations of Sir Thomas Palmer that Somerset planned to invite Northumberland and the marquess of Northampton to a banquet where he would cut off their heads, seize the Tower, and raise the people of London. After dining with the king on 16 October, Somerset was arrested on a charge of high treason and sent to the Tower. His wife was arrested two days later. 
The trial of Somerset is among the most controversial episodes of his career. His continuing popularity almost certainly explains why the council ordered householders in London to see to their potentially riotous apprentices before the trial began. Tried by his peers on 1 December 1551 with William Paulet, marquess of Winchester presiding as high steward, Somerset pleaded not guilty to all charges against him. He skilfully conducted his own defence and was acquitted of treason but found guilty of felony under the terms of a recent statute (3 & 4 Edward VI c. 5) against bringing together men for a riot. Historians sympathetic to Somerset argue that the indictment was largely fictitious, that the trial was packed with his enemies, and that Northumberland's subtle intrigue was responsible for his conviction. Other historians, however, have noted that Northumberland agreed that the charge of treason should be dropped and that the evidence suggests that Somerset was engaged in a conspiracy against his enemies. 
When the trial concluded many Londoners thought Somerset had either been acquitted of all the charges or that his life would be spared despite his conviction for felony. The Christmas holiday celebrations gave him a temporary respite, but the new year ended any hopes that his life would be spared. On 19 January the king and the council decided to proceed with the execution. Somerset prepared himself for death with prayer and 'Bible' reading and on the night before his death wrote a simple but moving prayer on the pocket calendar that he took to the Tower in which he placed his trust in God and repudiated the conceits of the world. 
Somerset was brought to Tower Hill at 8 a.m. on 22 January 1552 and beheaded. As the execution risked causing disorder, householders were ordered to remain in their houses until 10, and the king's guard and a thousand men from the city's trained bands attended to guarantee security. Large crowds gathered none the less. On the scaffold Somerset denied that he had ever offended the king in word or deed and proclaimed that he had always been faithful to his country. He admitted, however, that he was condemned to die by the law of the land and exhorted those present to follow the reformed religion that he had promoted. A rumour that he would be pardoned for a moment excited the large crowd assembled for the execution, an incident that provides further evidence of the sympathy Somerset enjoyed among the common people. He was buried in the north aisle of the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula in the Tower, between two queens, Anne Boleyn and Catherine Howard. 
Four of Somerset's closest supporters, Sir Thomas Arundell, Sir Miles Partridge, Sir Michael Stanhope, and Sir Ralph Vane, were executed on 26 February. But most of his former associates escaped with their lives, although they suffered financial losses and political disgrace. Sir Thomas Smith had already retired to a quiet life as provost of Eton College, while Sir William Cecil, one of the two principal secretaries, shrewdly looked after his own interests and entered the service of Northumberland. The king's response to the death of his uncle is unclear. In his chronicle Edward VI recorded no emotion or remorse at the death of his closest surviving relative, but according to the early seventeenth-century biography of Edward by Sir John Hayward, the king wept for his uncle and said that his trial had been unfair. The duchess of Somerset, who was sent to the Tower on 18 October 1551 taking with her personal possessions for a long stay, was not released until the accession of Mary in 1553. 
Like other politicians favoured by Henry VIII, Edward Seymour received large grants of land from that king. As protector he was in a position to reward both himself and his friends, and he did so generously. At his father's death he had inherited estates worth about $275 per annum, and also had lands worth some $170 from his first marriage. By the mid-1540s he had increased his estates, mostly through grants and purchases, to about $1700, and enjoyed an income of some $2500 from all sources. Then in the early years of Edward VI's reign he acquired lands worth $3000 more (including those he obtained under Henry VIII's will), and also augmented his income with a further $2000 from his various offices, not including an annuity of 8000 marks to maintain his estate as protector. With a total annual income of around $12,800 Somerset was the crown's wealthiest subject under Edward VI, but, as he was a duke, lord protector, and the king's maternal uncle, his economic status was hardly inconsistent with his position in the political and social hierarchy. 
Somerset's acquisitions of lands were largely concentrated in the south of England, and especially in Somerset and Wiltshire. During the reign of Henry VIII he augmented his family estates in those counties with manors formerly belonging to Wolsey in Yorkshire, former monastic property in Hampshire and Somerset, additional manors in Wiltshire and Somerset, the Carthusian priory at Sheen, Surrey, and property belonging to the Howards. After 1547 he acquired episcopal lands formerly held by the bishops of Bath and Wells and of Winchester. He also acquired London property, notably Somerset House in the Strand in 1539/40 which he began building shortly after the death of Henry VIII. The church of St Mary-le-Strand as well as two former episcopal inns were demolished to make room for the new construction. Building materials were obtained by the demolition of the former priory of St John of Jerusalem at Clerkenwell and of part of the cloister on the north side of St Paul's Cathedral and the charnel house there. The burial-ground near the latter was opened and hundreds of human bones were removed and dumped in Finsbury field. Between 1548 and 1551 Somerset spent over $15,000 on Somerset House and Syon House. 
Somerset House was the first major Italianate classical building project in early modern England. Its designer is unknown, but Robert Lawes, clerk of works, and Sir John Thynne helped with the initial planning. One of the principal craftsmen was William Cure, who had worked at Nonsuch for Henry VIII. Somerset House was a two-storey building constructed round a quadrangle which was entered from the Strand through a three-storeyed gateway. At either end of the front were bay windows crowned with ornamental attics. This Renaissance palace was completed only after the death of Somerset. He built the hall and provided an ornamental screen, but the arcaded terrace was added under James I. After the duke's death the house passed to Princess Elizabeth, who, following her accession, allowed his son to occupy part of it. Somerset House was demolished in 1776. 
Somerset also began to build a majestic country mansion to replace Wolf Hall at the end of 1548. The site chosen was about 3 miles east of Wolf Hall, between Wilton and Great Bedwyn on Bedwyn Brail. Two million bricks and a considerable quantity of Wilton stone were brought to the site, but when his protectorship ended construction stopped. Fine houses and a huge income from landed estates and office-holding permitted Somerset to live in great luxury. At the height of his power he maintained 167 domestic servants, and during three and a half years from 1548 to 1551 he is estimated to have spent a minimum of $14,325 maintaining himself and his household. During that period the expenses of his steward, kitchen, and stable were $1291, $2621, and $427 respectively, while tradesmen's bills amounted to a total of $1445. 
By an act of parliament in 1540 Somerset's estates were entailed upon the issue of his second marriage in preference to that of his first. As he was convicted of felony rather than treason his property was not seized until an act of attainder passed on 12 April 1552 declared his dignities forfeited. Edward Seymour, Somerset's eldest surviving son from his second marriage, having been corrupted in blood by his father's attainder, was restored by act of parliament under Mary and was created Baron Beauchamp and earl of Hertford on 13 January 1559 by Elizabeth. Somerset's titles remained in this branch of the family until 1750, when Sir Edward Seymour, bt, a descendant of Somerset and his first wife, succeeded to his ancestor's dukedom. 
Somerset remains controversial. Zealous contemporary clerical reformers praised him as a champion of protestantism, but Sir William Paget, who knew Somerset well, and Sir John Hayward, the early seventeenth-century biographer of Edward VI, criticized him severely for political failures. From its publication in 1631 until the end of the nineteenth century Hayward's critical biography was the most authoritative work on Somerset and the politics of the reign of Edward VI, and it clearly damaged the duke's reputation. The debate on his character and political career continued into the twentieth century. In 1900 A. F. Pollard portrayed Somerset as a liberal who believed in constitutional freedom, a view he supported by reference to the letters of Paget, even though the latter considered the duke's populism extremely dangerous and a threat to social stability. Pollard's Somerset was a committed protestant and a friend of the poor and oppressed despite his personal acquisitiveness. 
Although Pollard was not the last historian to reaffirm the views of Tudor clerical leaders praising Somerset's support of religious reform, in the late twentieth century historians became more critical, emphasizing Somerset's arrogance, his aggressive and costly policy of conquest in Scotland, and his political incompetence as protector. W. K. Jordan (1968-70) recognized the complexity of his character and praised his magnanimity and moderation in religion, as well as drawing attention to his political faults, whereas M. L. Bush (1975), in a largely hostile study, concluded that 'Somerset's political behaviour was directed not by ideals, but by 'idees fixes'' (Bush, 5). But more recently still Diarmaid MacCulloch (1999) offered guarded praise for Somerset's concern for the poor who shared his religious enthusiasm. 
Somerset, like all leaders of his generation, served his political apprenticeship under Henry VIII, a king who governed with a firm hand. The accession of the nine-year-old Edward VI created challenges for which nobody was prepared. Somerset provided strong leadership that carried England in directions pursued long after his death. Thanks to his religious policies the country developed along protestant lines even though the Church of England was not firmly established until the reign of Elizabeth. His assertive policies toward Scotland -- however prejudicial to the northern kingdom -- ultimately foreshadowed the 'Act of Union' of 1707. If his rhetorical favour towards the agrarian poor was not matched by his own behaviour, he was hardly the last politician to promise more than he could deliver and open himself to charges of hypocrisy. The absence of royal leadership during the reign of Edward VI forced Somerset to assume responsibilities for which he lacked experience, and might have led to political conflict with disastrous and long-lasting effects. Not the least of his contributions to the structure of authority was his declining to fight for his own place within it in October 1549. It is in deference to such restraint, as well as for the policies he pursued, that it can be concluded that England's surviving the troubled era of Somerset unscathed constitutes one of his enduring achievements. 


@@@@@


doc= 25160


Edward Seymour, Viscount Beauchamp (1561-1612), the elder son and heir of Edward Seymour and Katherine Grey, was born in the Tower on 24 September 1561, the date written by his father in a 'Bible' now at Longleat, and baptized two days later. Despite his official illegitimacy he was always given the courtesy title of Lord Beauchamp and owed his importance to inheriting the Suffolk claim to the royal succession. 


@@@@@


doc= 25161


Seymour, Edward, first earl of Hertford (1539?-1621), courtier, was the heir of Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset (c.1500-1552), Edward VI's protector, and Anne ('c'.1510-1587), daughter of Sir Edward Stanhope. Somerset had had two sons from an earlier marriage, but his wife, Katherine, was repudiated some time before 1535 and their children disinherited by act of parliament 32 Henry VIII before being restored by 5 and 6 Edward VI. Edward was probably the son born on 22 May 1539 and baptized in the chapel of Beauchamp Place with the dukes of Suffolk and Norfolk as his godfathers. He was educated with Prince Edward, knighted at his coronation on 20 February 1547, and styled earl of Hertford from 1547 until 1552. On 7 April 1550 he was briefly sent as a hostage to France. In 1551 his father and the marquess of Dorset planned a match between him and Lady Jane Grey. 
Somerset's attainder and execution for felony initially did not affect his son's title or estates, but in April 1552 parliament passed a statute declaring forfeit all the Seymour lands and titles. He was made a ward of the crown and granted a few of his father's estates by letters patent of the king, but relied for financial support on his father's former secretary Sir John Thynne. Under Mary his mother was released from the Tower and given custody of her sons. He was a witness to Northumberland's execution, and restored to the blood by an act of parliament. Two months after Elizabeth's accession, on 13 January 1559, she restored to him the lands inherited by his father and created him Baron Beauchamp and earl of Hertford of the second creation. 
Some time in November or December 1560 Hertford secretly married Lady Katherine Grey (1540?-1568) ['see 'Seymour, Katherine], the queen's cousin, who was heir to the throne according to Henry VIII's will. Soon afterwards, in May 1561, he was sent to France possibly on a minor diplomatic mission and was intended to go from there to Italy as the companion of Thomas Cecil. Although some questions were asked about his suitability to act as a good influence on Cecil, Sir Nicholas Throckmorton (the English ambassador) spoke well of him and it was also said that he had made a good impression on the king of Navarre. On 12 August, however, he was recalled to England because his wife, now heavily pregnant, had confessed their secret marriage to Robert Dudley. On 5 September 1561 Hertford was placed in the Tower, where both he and Katherine were interrogated closely and separately. Later that month a son, Edward ['see below'], was born. Thanks to the leniency of the warder, a second son was conceived and born in the Tower in February 1562. In May an ecclesiastical commission found the marriage invalid and Hertford was fined $15,000 in Star Chamber for deflowering a virgin of the royal blood, breaking his prison, and repeating the fornication. At the same time he was expected to defray Katherine's expenses. Rents from his lands were diverted to the lord treasurer as part of the fine in 1564-5, but not thereafter. In June 1568 Elizabeth agreed to take $200 a year until $10,000 was paid. 
On the outbreak of plague in August 1563 Hertford was removed from the Tower and placed in the custody of his mother and stepfather, Francis Newdigate, at Hanworth, Middlesex. On several occasions Anne petitioned William Cecil and Robert Dudley on behalf of her son, but the queen refused to show leniency as she was extremely sensitive about the succession question and possibly suspected a plot against her. Though undoubtedly incorrect about there being political motives behind the marriage, her suspicions seemed confirmed when John Hales wrote a pamphlet defending it and Katherine's right to the succession. As Newdigate was implicated in Hales's activities, Hertford was removed from his care. After a short return to the Tower he was placed in the house of Sir John Mason. 
After the death of his wife on 27 January 1568 Hertford slowly shook off royal displeasure. He left Mason's custody late in 1568, but was still confined in various country houses until 1571, when he was allowed to attend court. On 2 February 1571 he was admitted to Gray's Inn, and on 30 August 1571 created MA at Cambridge. During 1571 Elizabeth released him from $10,000 of his fine. By October 1572 she had remitted a further $1000 and in December 1577 $1000 more. In 1579 he had only $1813 4's'. 81/2died to pay. He spent much time at court, and was one of the magnates attending the queen during the ceremony of the king's evil in May 1582, hearing the trial of the earl of Essex, and receiving Marshal Biron, the French ambassador, in 1601. Yet, despite his rehabilitation, Hertford secured few rewards or important posts under Elizabeth. In 1578 he appeared on the commission of the peace for Wiltshire and the following year he was joint commissioner of musters. In 1588 he was one of seventeen men ordered to be at court with his personal forces. In 1592 he was appointed a commissioner to take oaths from the JPs of Northumberland, Hampshire, and Wiltshire. At last in 1601 he was appointed lord lieutenant of Wiltshire, Somerset, and Bristol. 
While at Elizabeth's court Hertford met Frances Howard, daughter of Lord William Howard of Effingham, sister of the lord admiral, and maid of honour to the queen. By 1575 the two were on intimate terms. John Dee referred to her as the countess of Hertford in 1578, and Hertford's elder son addressed her as mother in 1582. In fact Elizabeth did not consent to their marriage until 1585. The countess died on 14 May 1598 leaving no issue. Three years later Hertford married Frances Prannell ['see 'Stuart, Frances (1578-1639)], the widowed daughter of Thomas, Viscount Howard of Bindon. The marriage was performed clandestinely without banns or licence and not in the parish church. They had no children, and she outlived him to die on 8 October 1639 after a third marriage, to Ludovick Stuart, second duke of Lennox and duke of Richmond. 
Hertford never fully accepted the verdict of the ecclesiastical court that his first marriage was invalid, and his elder son, Edward, used the courtesy title Lord Beauchamp. Hertford proved an authoritarian father, closely supervising his sons' studies even after they had reached the age of twenty. When he learned in December 1581 that Beauchamp had exchanged vows and a ring with a kinswoman, Honora Rogers (her brother was married to Hertford's sister), he personally intervened to break off the relationship. In August 1585 he even arranged to have his son seized and brought to one of his houses in order to keep him away from Honora. The queen and council, however, took the part of Beauchamp, and Hertford had to accept the marriage as valid. 
In 1589 Hertford's second son, Thomas, tried to secure a notarial instrument declaring himself legitimate, and in 1592 he initiated a legal appeal against the sentence that his parents' marriage had been invalid. Details of these proceedings, which were supported by his father, came to light in October 1595 just when the queen and her ministers were growing concerned about the publication of Robert Persons's book dealing with the English succession. The queen therefore acted speedily, and Hertford was sent to the Tower in November 1595, remaining there until 3 January 1596. Thereafter he was careful to avoid any suggestion that he might have an interest in the succession. Thus in 1601, when Arabella Stuart sent a servant to Hertford with a proposition of marriage between herself and his elder grandson, the sixteen-year-old William Seymour, Hertford immediately informed Robert Cecil. On Elizabeth's death Cecil was suspicious that Hertford might promote the candidature of his son, but Hertford immediately declared his recognition of James I. 
James I showed greater favour to Hertford. In June 1603 he was made 'custos rotulorum' of Wiltshire. On 19 April 1605 the earl was sent to Brussels as ambassador-extraordinary to ratify the 1604 Anglo-Spanish treaty. In July 1605 and June 1611 he was granted lands. From June 1612 until March 1619 he was high steward of the revenues to Queen Anne. After he began legal proceedings in 1607 to have his elder son declared legitimate, the king agreed in 1608 to give Beauchamp and his heirs the right to inherit the title earl of Hertford on the present earl's death. James, however, would not overturn the bastardy judgment. 
The secret marriage of Arabella to Hertford's grandson William in 1611 initially aroused royal suspicions against the earl and he was summoned to court. His willingness, however, to upbraid his grandson soon earned him the council's approval. Despite his anger at the marriage, he allowed William $200 a year, while he remained in Paris. On the occasion of William's second marriage, to the daughter of the earl of Essex in January 1618, Hertford was said to have settled $3000 on his grandson, his heir since Beauchamp's death in 1612. 
Both monarchs honoured the earl of Hertford with royal visits. In 1591 Elizabeth stayed with him and Frances at his Hampshire mansion, Elvetham, during which time he put on an elaborate entertainment. Three surviving texts of the Elvetham entertainment have survived, as well as a woodcut illustration. James I visited him at his Wiltshire house, Tottenham Lodge, in 1603 and again in 1617 and 1620. Hertford acted as a patron of the musician John Daniel and possibly the poet Samuel Daniel. In addition, he had a company of players, which toured the provinces between 1582 and 1606 and performed before the queen at court on twelfth night 1592. It is on record that he employed Cornelius Ketel to paint a portrait of the queen in 1579, but no picture by that artist can now be identified. Hertford was also interested in military matters; he wrote a book on his father's victorious expedition to Scotland and was the recipient of a letter detailing a campaign in the Netherlands (1582). His entry-books as lord lieutenant were almost exclusively devoted to military matters. His parliamentary patronage was confined to the seats of Great Bedwyn and Marlborough. 
Hertford was evidently a quarrelsome man. In addition to his argument with his son, he fell out with his brother Henry on his mother's death in 1587. In 1601 he became involved in a dispute between his sister Mary and her father-in-law, Sir Richard Rogers, about her jointure. He also came into conflict with his half-brother and nephew when a bill settling the Seymour lands came into the Commons first in 1601 and then in April 1604. He was involved in many lawsuits over land, including cases against lords Morley and Wentworth, Henry Knyvett, Henry Middlemore, and the dean and canons of Windsor. He found himself at odds with many gentry families in Somerset and Wiltshire, who tried to obstruct him in his work as lord lieutenant. In May 1606 Sir Henry Poole, the MP for Cricklade, attacked him in the Commons over allowances for the office of muster-master, and accused him of favouritism, bullying, and general high-handedness as lord lieutenant. His relationship with his third wife was often strained, and in one letter she implied that he was domineering and obstinate. Sir John Thynne, perhaps his oldest friend, accused him of ingratitude in 1579 for failing to promote a match and grant him some property. 
Hertford enjoyed good health. He outlived his sons and grandson Edward, and remained active until his death, despite falling off his horse aged eighty-three. In March 1621 he fell in a palsy, and on 6 April he died at Netley in Hampshire. He was buried in Salisbury Cathedral. His career was not very illustrious for a man of his birth and talents, but his first marriage put paid to his chances of preferment with the queen. Thereafter his political importance lay in the closeness of his sons to the succession and concerns that he would exploit his connections to place one of them on the throne on Elizabeth's death. In this respect, memories of his father's seizure of power in 1547 probably influenced political judgement about him. 


Beauchamp spent his childhood with his mother and his paternal grandmother, Anne, dowager duchess of Somerset, a formidable woman. He was educated by private tutor at Hanworth, Middlesex. On 22 December 1576 he matriculated from Magdalen College, Oxford, and spent some time studying there, but from correspondence in the Longleat collection it appears he was a poor student and he certainly did not graduate. Some time in 1581 he exchanged vows and a ring with Honora Rogers, the daughter of Sir Richard Rogers of Bryanstone, Dorset, who had been living in his grandmother's household. Cowed by Hertford's fury on learning of the relationship, Beauchamp promised to marry his father's choice and asked Honora to return his tokens and letters. But in September 1582 he admitted that he was legally married to her, and appealed to Walsingham for permission to be with his wife. In March 1584 he was still trying to cohabit with Honora. On his way to London in August 1585 to plead his case before the queen, he was seized at Reading and taken to one of his father's houses. He was in such a distressed state that he threatened to take his own life if he were not set free. Both father and son then petitioned the queen and council, who took the part of Beauchamp. Evidently the family soon became reconciled, as in 1587 Beauchamp and his wife received a legacy from his grandmother, who had earlier been furious at the match. From the marriage three sons were born: Edward (1587-1618), William Seymour (1587-1660), and Francis Seymour (1590?-1664). 
Beauchamp showed no interest in the succession and consequently did not arouse the suspicions of Elizabeth. No proceedings were taken against him in 1595 when his father appealed against the decision of the invalidity of his first marriage, nor in June 1596 when his brother was implicated in some treasonous activities of Sir John Smith in Essex. James VI, on the other hand, did have anxieties that Beauchamp's following would press his claim to the throne on Elizabeth's death. In 1603, however, only a few insignificant men spoke out for Beauchamp's title while the council ignored it. Various accounts of Elizabeth's death report her rejection of Beauchamp as her successor with the words 'I will have no Rascall to succeed me, as who should succeed me but a King?' (BL, Harley MS 7042, fol. 237'r'). 
Soon after James I's accession a judicial appeal for Beauchamp's legitimacy was considered but apparently rejected. In 1607 Hertford again began legal proceedings to have his son declared legitimate, this time with more success. Although James would not overturn the original decision about his parents' marriage, Beauchamp was granted in 1608 the right to inherit the title earl of Hertford on the present earl's death. In fact, Beauchamp predeceased his father. He died on 13 July 1612 at Wick, Wiltshire, and was buried at Bedwyn Magna; later he was removed to a tomb in Salisbury Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 25162


Seymour, Sir Edward, fourth baronet (1633-1708), speaker of the House of Commons, was the eldest son of Sir Edward Seymour, third baronet (1610-1688), politician, of Berry Pomeroy in Devon, and Anne, daughter of Sir John Portman, first baronet. Seymour's father was the royalist governor of Dartmouth in 1643-5 and a direct descendant of Edward Seymour, Protector Somerset. Little is known of Seymour's early life until he entered parliament in 1661 at a by-election for Hindon, close to the family's Wiltshire estate at Maiden Bradley. However, it may be assumed that the Seymours shared the privations of other sequestered royalists. Resentment at such early experiences, exacerbated by an almost pathological pride in ancestry, may have been responsible for the abrasiveness and arrogance that were features of Seymour's personality. Not even his family were spared. During the negotiations for his first marriage he quarrelled violently with his uncle Henry, causing his father to complain bitterly of Edward's 'pride and undutifulness' (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 3.412). On 7 December 1661 he married Margaret, daughter and coheir of the London merchant Sir William Wale. 
Seymour took to the House of Commons like a duck to water, and was soon speaking regularly in support of the court. Sometimes his bold and aggressive style led him into indiscretion, and on one occasion he 'affronted the Speaker most peremptorily' (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 3.413), but it was useful politically. Although he had served briefly as a gentleman of the privy chamber at the Restoration, his first significant office was as a subcommissioner for prizes in London during the Second Anglo-Dutch War. He also involved himself in various trading companies, in particular the Royal Fishing Company, and the Royal Adventurers into Africa. His aspirations were far from satisfied, however, and by 1665 he had shifted over to opposition. Two years later he was sufficiently prominent to be selected to open the debate on the earl of Clarendon's impeachment and to carry the impeachment up to the Lords. 
By this time Seymour may be identified as a client of George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, and in this context should be read his arguments in favour of toleration in 1668, and his opposition in the following year to the 'Conventicles Bill', which he likened to the Spanish Inquisition. The parliamentary diarist John Milward observed cynically that in these speeches Seymour 'drives at an interest more than at religion' ('Diary of John Milward', 221), and certainly this liberal interlude sits oddly with Seymour's cavalier background and later reputation as a staunch high-churchman. It may also be significant that he was not prepared to suffer long for these beliefs. A punitive dismissal from the commission of the peace served to concentrate his mind and in November 1670, allegedly on the advice of the duchess of York, he turned his coat: in Marvell's words, Seymour and others 'took their leave of their former party and fell to head the King's business' ('Poems and Letters of Andrew Marvell', ed. H. M. Margoliouth, 2 vols., 1952, 2.305). 
As a ministerial spokesman in the Commons, Seymour proved a great success: busy, ingenious at procedural manipulation, a good manager, and forceful orator. By 1672 he had received a place on the Navy Board, and the following year he was considered as a potential candidate for the speakership. Although he had broken with Buckingham, shades of his former patron's influence may be detected in his vehement enmity towards France, and perhaps in his defence of the declaration of indulgence in parliament in 1673, although this latter intervention also did him no harm at court and may have helped his advance to the chair in February of that year. Seymour was in some respects an unusual choice as speaker, because of his lack of legal training (a deficiency of which he was acutely conscious himself), although on the credit side he had served as chairman of the important committees of supply and ways and means. As far as the court was concerned, he was an ideal choice. Bishop Burnet described him as: 'the most assuming Speaker that ever sat in the chair. He knew the House and every man in it so well that by looking about he could tell the fate of every question. So if anything was put when the court party were not well gathered together, he would have held the House from doing anything by wilful mistaking or mis-stating the question. ('Bishop Burnet's History', 2.80)' In April 1673 Seymour was sworn a privy councillor, and was then made treasurer of the navy, at a salary of $3800. If rumour is to be believed, the money was badly needed; he is said to have told the king that were it not for the allowance of $1500 per session he would not have been able to take the speakership. 
Seymour soon became a 'bete noire' of the opposition, and as early as the autumn of 1673 an attempt was made to remove him from the chair because, it was said, his frequent visits to brothels and gaming-houses lowered the reputation of parliament. On one occasion, old friendships were remembered: he was accused of partiality towards Buckingham when his former patron appeared before the Commons in January 1674. Otherwise he proved a strong speaker, unconstrained by constitutional niceties when a firm hand was required. His high-handedness and ignorance of the law exposed him to criticism; on the other hand, members seem to have appreciated that his powerful personality lent authority to the office. During the winter of 1677-8 his arrogance led him into dangerous territory. Four times he adjourned the house by the king's command without putting the question, and in April 1678, to avoid a formal censure, he had to feign a diplomatic illness. When he eventually returned to the chair, however, he showed that he had lost none of his self-confidence, as his interventions strained the speaker's authority to new heights. 
By this time Seymour's relations with Lord Treasurer Danby had deteriorated badly. The disclosure of the Popish Plot coincided with the final rupture. Even though in private Seymour did not believe in the veracity of the plot, he none the less acted as though he did, speaking strongly against popery and being the first to recommend limitations on a Catholic monarch. After the election of the first Exclusion Parliament in February 1679, to which he had been returned as knight of the shire for Devon, Seymour was in a difficult position, but his attacks on popery in the preceding session made him popular, despite the enmity which Lord Shaftesbury, his former ally in the Buckingham faction, entertained for him. Thus he was twice elected speaker against a court nominee, only for Charles II to reject him; and it was only in his absence that an alternative candidate was finally accepted by the Commons. 
Returned to the ranks of ordinary members, Seymour at first proceeded with caution, taking a moderate line on the plot. His popularity proved short-lived, the more so after he had voted against the first 'Exclusion Bill'. However, this step restored him to favour at court, and especially with the duke of York. For someone as proud as Seymour of the part played by his family in promoting the Reformation in England, and with a long record of opposition to popery, it must have been galling to be accused of sympathy for the Catholic cause. Nevertheless, in November 1680, he made a powerful speech against the second 'Exclusion Bill', raising the spectre of another civil war which would entail the destruction of English liberties. So effective was his intervention that opposition members manufactured an impeachment against him for alleged malversation of naval funds. Seymour justified himself in a long speech in which he recalled the several occasions on which he had defended the privileges of the house, even resisting royal commands, and had refused a bribe. Such was the level of animosity against him that the motion for impeachment passed, only for the snap dissolution to put a stop to proceedings. 
Seymour did not stand for election to the Oxford parliament but attended its meetings as a royal adviser. He was now at the brief zenith of his political power, directing appointments and dismissals (and prompting Dryden to write 'Absalom and Achitophel'). His hauteur became unbearable, and when he quarrelled openly with Lord Halifax he finally overstepped the mark. He was removed from office, essentially on personal grounds although some historians have suggested, charitably, that his subsequent withdrawal from public affairs was also prompted by dislike of the shift in royal policy towards France, and a suspicion of Catholic influence at court. Whether or not it was of his own volition, he did not participate in the 'Stuart revenge' of 1681-5, and when he was returned to James II's parliament he denounced royal policy towards the boroughs, warned against the standing army and its Catholic officers, and even referred to the dangers of introducing the 'papist religion and unconstitutional government' (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 3.418). His first wife having died, on 11 August 1685 Seymour married Letitia (died 1729), daughter of Sir Francis Popham of Littlecote, Wiltshire. They had six sons and one daughter. 
In 1687 Seymour was dismissed from his local offices, though remaining a privy councillor. He played no part in the opposition to James II in the country, but when the prince of Orange landed he responded quickly, joining William at Exeter, and drafting the local association in support of the Orangist cause and in defence of the protestant religion, the liberty of the subject, and the rule of law. His example was decisive in rallying west-country tories, and the prince made him governor of Exeter. But Seymour could not remain remote from the centre of events and hurried to London. He was especially concerned at the favour being shown to nonconformists, a revealing contrast to his previous public utterances, and further evidence, perhaps, that his political standpoint on religious questions was essentially opportunist. Certainly he was no exemplar of Anglican piety. But he was convinced that churchmen constituted 'the most considerable and most substantial body of the nation', and if the church were not supported 'we should run into a commonwealth and all would be ruined' ('Correspondence of Henry Hyde', 2.238). Thus reasons of principle, avoiding a recurrence of the upheavals of the 1640s, combined with an awareness of the political advantages to be gained by espousing the interest of the majority of the political nation, determined him to seek his following among tory squires. Moreover, despite the assistance he had given William, he found himself out of favour, possibly because of Danby's influence. Thus he voted in the Convention against the motion that the throne was vacant, and declared his unhappiness at the constitutional implications of the revolution, even if prepared to accept the new regime on pragmatic grounds. Tactlessly, he also gave vent to his natural dislike of the Dutch, in complaints at the behaviour of William's troops in the west country, and complained ceaselessly of mismanagements in the prosecution of the war. This oppositionist stance was continued into the 1690 parliament, in which Seymour appeared as one of the leading 'country tories', pressing inquiries into estimates and expenditure, and missing no opportunity to strike at his personal enemies, Danby and Halifax. With his former colleague from the 'country' opposition in James II's parliament, Sir Christopher Musgrave, he developed a tory critique of the conduct of the war, as benefiting only the Dutch at England's expense, and argued for a greater concentration on naval operations. He also began to make overtures to discontented whigs, like Paul Foley and Robert Harley, in order to develop a combined 'country' opposition. 
At this point Seymour found himself badly in need of friends, of any political complexion: his accounts as treasurer of the navy remained unaudited, and he was also vulnerable because of incidental contacts with Jacobite conspirators like Lord Preston. So when he received overtures from a more sympathetic tory minister, Lord Nottingham, he responded positively (whether from fear of exposure or hope of gain), shifting around to a more moderate position. As a result, in the spring of 1692 he was reappointed to the privy council, from which he had been excluded in 1689, and was made a lord of the treasury. He then promptly reversed his former positions on a whole variety of issues -- accounts, expenditure, war strategy, naval administration -- though remaining consistent on one subject: trade, and in particular his involvement with the affairs of the East India Company. He was a close friend of the interloping merchant Thomas Coulson, whom he brought into parliament for the Devon borough of Totnes. 
Seymour's identification with the court did not last long, for the rise to power of the whig junto made it necessary for him to rebuild former friendships and to restore his credit both with high-church back-benchers and 'country' whigs. The crisis came in 1694 when his critical speeches on naval failures provoked the chancellor of the exchequer, Charles Montagu, to a savage response, which for once rendered Seymour speechless. Soon afterwards Seymour was dismissed from the treasury. In opposition once more, he did not find it easy to re-establish his former position. Younger men like Foley and Harley were coming to the fore. Seymour's integrity had been compromised by his several voltes-face, and more harm was to come to his reputation as his misplaced confidence as an oracle of parliamentary procedure drew him into blunders, and investigations into parliamentary corruption over East Indian affairs threatened to implicate him. He even lost his seat at Exeter in 1695 and was obliged to fall back on the less 'popular' constituency of Totnes. 
Seymour's response to these setbacks was to re-emphasize his own tory credentials, opposing the association of 1696 and the attainder of the Jacobite Sir John Fenwick, and exploiting tory xenophobia by further attacks on the Dutch and on Huguenot refugees. His aversion to government was completed by the foundation of the new East India Company in 1697, which left his own connections out in the cold, and he identified firmly with the old company in its struggle to recover its position. At the same time he was also emphasizing his Devonian roots, showing himself to be a strenuous advocate of local commercial and manufacturing interests. He promoted bills to restrict the export of Irish woollen goods, to benefit the Devon and Somerset cloth industries. His intention was to establish himself as the leader of the high tories in the Commons, with a strong local power base. So while Harley and Foley made the running in the 'new country party' opposition, Seymour settled into a subordinate position at the head of a 'western empire' of tories. 
The limits to Seymour's parliamentary influence were clearly seen in 1698, when his vanity persuaded him to stand once again for the speakership, only to be disappointed. He recovered some ground through the virulence of his attacks on the junto ministers, especially over corruption (a charge from which he was himself not entirely safe). But it was Harley rather than Seymour to whom the king turned in the winter of 1700-01 to manage the Commons for the new tory ministry. Although due deference was paid to Seymour he was given no office, and in the 1701 parliament inevitably became restive. Denouncing the old ministry by exposing the secret partition treaty reinforced his position as a tory hero, but embarrassed the king. Indeed, Seymour overplayed his hand to such an extent that, despite his support for the 'Act of Settlement', and for a generous settlement of the civil list, William not only refused to restore him to office but turned against the tories as a party. 
It was only after the accession of Queen Anne that Seymour was restored to power, as comptroller of the household in the Godolphin-Marlborough administration. However, his self-appointed role as leader of the tory interest in the Commons now determined his political stance and he was much less flexible in old age than he had been even in the early 1690s. He never entirely accepted the strategic imperatives imposed by Marlborough, hankering after a 'blue-water' policy of naval rather than land warfare. Worse still, he indulged himself in a display of the full spectrum of tory prejudices, ranting against foreign army officers, union with Scotland, and especially the practice of occasional conformity by which dissenters evaded the requirements of the 'Test and Corporation Acts'. The dismissal of Lord Rochester in 1703, and the consequent reconstruction of the ministry, left Seymour and Nottingham isolated, and when Nottingham departed in 1704 Seymour inevitably followed. 
Dismissal from office signalled the end of Seymour's political career. He began to admit the weaknesses of age, and talk of handing the torch to younger men. Reports of decrepitude were briefly disproved at the beginning of the 1705 parliament when he made a number of vigorous speeches, but by late 1706 he had convinced himself, and his physician, that he was dying. Ironically, it was at this point he finally succeeded in clearing his debts as treasurer of the navy. In the event, he survived until 18 February 1708, when he died at Maiden Bradley. He was buried at Maiden Bradley. 
Of Seymour's two sons from his first marriage, the elder, Edward, succeeded him in the baronetcy; the younger, William, enjoyed a military career. The eldest son of Seymour's second marriage, Popham Seymour-Conway, succeeded to the considerable estates of his mother's cousin the earl of Conway, in Ireland and England, but was killed in a duel in 1699, so the fortune passed to the next brother, Francis, who assumed the name Conway and was created Baron Conway in 1703. He was the father of the first marquess of Hertford. 


@@@@@


doc= 25163


Seymour, Edward Adolphus, eleventh duke of Somerset (1775-1855), scholar, born on 24 February 1775 at Monkton Farleigh in Wiltshire, was the third, but eldest surviving, son of Webb Seymour, tenth duke (1718-1793), and his wife, Anna Maria (died 1802), daughter and heir of John Bonnell of Stanton Harcourt in Oxfordshire. He was educated at Eton College and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 31 January 1792. He succeeded to the peerage in 1793, was created MA at Oxford on 2 July 1794, and was made honorary DCL in 1810. From an early age he devoted himself to science and mathematics, displaying genuine aptitude for both studies. He published two mathematical treatises, on the relative properties of circles and ellipses, in 1842 and 1850. He was equally well versed in historical and antiquarian knowledge, and Patrick Fraser Tytler, the historian, valued his judgement in these matters highly. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1797, of the Society of Antiquaries in 1816, and of the Linnean Society in 1820. He was president of the latter society from 1834 to 1837. He was also a member of the Royal Asiatic Society, was president of the Royal Institution for some years, and from 1801 to 1838 was president of the Royal Literary Fund. On 19 April 1837 he was made a knight of the Garter. He was considered an excellent landlord, and, unlike most large landowners, supported the repeal of the corn laws. In the period of agricultural depression which followed he showed his confidence in the measure by making large purchases of land. 
Somerset was twice married: first, on 24 June 1800, to Charlotte ('b'. 6 April 1772), second daughter of Archibald Hamilton, ninth duke of Hamilton; she died on 10 June 1827, leaving three surviving sons (who all succeeded in turn to the title), and four daughters. The eldest son, Edward ['see 'St Maur, Edward Adolphus, twelfth duke of Somerset], would become first lord of the Admiralty. Charlotte was noted for the extremes of her economy. The duke married, second, on 28 July 1836, Margaret (died 1880), eldest daughter of Sir Michael Shaw-Stewart of Blackhall, Renfrewshire. Somerset died on 15 August 1855 at his London home, Somerset House, Park Lane, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25164


St Maur, Edward Adolphus, twelfth duke of Somerset (1804-1885), politician and author, was born in London on 20 December 1804. He was the eldest son of Edward Adolphus Seymour, eleventh duke of Somerset (1775-1855), and his first wife, Charlotte, daughter of the duke of Hamilton, and was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, matriculating on 11 October 1823, but leaving the university without a degree. He then travelled abroad, visiting Russia among other countries. He married, on 10 June 1830, Jane Georgiana, the youngest of the three daughters of Thomas Sheridan (son of R. B. Sheridan) and his wife, Caroline Henrietta, 'nee' Callender. Lord Seymour, as he was commonly called, fought a duel in 1835 with Sir Colquhoun Grant, who challenged him because he would not deny having been privy to the elopement of Sir Colquhoun's only daughter and heir with Lady Seymour's brother, also called R. B. Sheridan. After shots had been exchanged without injury to either combatant, Seymour stated his ignorance of the transaction. His wife had helped her brother to obtain the hand of the heiress, and she did so without informing her husband. In August 1839 Lady Seymour presided as 'Queen of Beauty' over the tournament at Eglinton Castle. She had 'large deep blue or violet eyes, black hair, perfect features, and a complexion of lilies and roses' ('Songs, Poems and verses'). 
Seymour entered the Commons as MP for Okehampton in 1830, and from 1834 to 1855 was MP for Totnes, sitting as a whig. In 1835 he was appointed a lord of the Treasury in Melbourne's administration. In 1839 he was promoted to be secretary to the Board of Control, and in 1840 he carried through the house a bill, which received the royal assent, for establishing a board of superintendence for railways. He was under-secretary for the Home department for two months in 1841. He voted for the repeal of the corn laws. Lord John Russell appointed him first commissioner of works in 1851, with a seat in the cabinet, but he was out of office for several years following Russell's resignation in 1852. During the campaign in the Crimea he served on the committee to inquire into the state of the army. He relinquished his seat at Totnes in August 1855 when he succeeded to his father's peerage and took his seat in the House of Lords, as duke of Somerset. In Palmerston's government of 1859, Somerset was appointed first lord of the Admiralty. Although not personally popular, Somerset was an efficient administrator, and initially had some success, backed by Palmerston, in maintaining spending on the navy. He played an important part in the development of a programme of construction of iron clad ships, and from 1859 until 1862 he had public support. The rise of the economy movement in the Liberal Party led, however, to much criticism of the Admiralty as both expensive and inefficient, and from 1863 spending on the navy began to decline. After leaving office in 1866, Somerset defended his record anonymously in 'The Naval Expenditure from 1860 to 1866, and its Results' (1866). He was created a knight of the Garter on 21 May 1862, and Earl St Maur of Berry Pomeroy on 17 June 1863, at which time he took the surname St Maur. He declined to join Gladstone's 1868 government; by 1872 Lord Granville thought him 'leader of a very formidable cave in the Lords'. He criticized government policy on the ballot and the 'Alabama' affair, but voted for Irish disestablishment, and the abolition of army purchase. 
Somerset's two sons died early, in 1865 and 1869, blighting his later life. Gladstone considered offering him the Indian governor-generalship but thought 'the recollection of his son's death might be an impediment' (though he also thought Somerset in 1872 'wonderfully strong and wiry'). In his grief Somerset worked on historical Christianity, and turned to theism, publishing 'Christian Theology and Modern Scepticism' (1872). His wife died on 14 December 1884; he died on 28 November 1885 at Stover Lodge, near Newton Abbot, and was buried at Gerrards Cross. The dukedom devolved to the twelfth duke's younger brother, Archibald Henry Algernon (1810-1891). Somerset's first child, 


@@@@@


doc= 25165


Seymour, Edward James (1796-1866), physician, third son of William Seymour of 65 Margaret Street, Cavendish Square, London, and his wife, Thyphena Letithoea, eldest daughter of Daniel Foulston of London, was born on 30 March 1796, and baptized at the church of St Nicholas, Lower Tooting. His father, a member of a family settled in Lincolnshire in the middle of the seventeenth century, was a solicitor, who lived in Brighton for thirty years and who also practised as a magistrate and deputy lieutenant for Sussex, and chairman of the quarter sessions. Edward Seymour received his education at Richmond School, Surrey, and at Jesus College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in January 1816, MA in 1819, and MD in 1826. He received a licence 'ad practicandum' from his university in 1822. He also studied medicine in London, Edinburgh, and Paris; he was admitted an inceptor candidate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1823, a candidate in 1826, and a fellow in 1827. At the college he subsequently held the posts of Goulstonian lecturer in 1829, censor in 1830, Croonian lecturer in 1831, and 'consiliarius' in 1836. On 4 September 1817 Seymour married Maria Searancke of Clapton, London, and they had a family of six sons and four daughters. The eldest son, Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Frederick Seymour CB, of the 84th regiment, was acting adjutant-general at the siege of Lucknow. 
The first years of Seymour's career were spent in Italy, mainly at Florence, where he had a large income and made some influential friends who were of use to him on his return to Britain. In 1823 he settled again in England, and established himself at 23 George Street, Hanover Square, London, soon acquiring a high-class practice. On 28 November 1828 he was elected physician to St George's Hospital; he held the post until 1847, and rose to be senior physician. Seymour had an aptitude for bedside teaching. Shortly after settling in London he became physician to the hospital ship 'Dreadnought' at Greenwich, and he subsequently became consulting physician to the Royal Naval Hospital. He was also physician to the duke of Sussex. From 1 September 1831 to 1839 Seymour was a metropolitan commissioner in lunacy; he came to devote much of his attention to cases of insanity, and was one of the first to use opium freely in the treatment of the insane. In 1859 he published a letter, which he addressed to the earl of Shaftesbury, 'On the laws which regulate private lunatic asylums, with a comparative view of the process 'de lunatico inquirendo' in England and the law of France'. The letter contains a few observations on the causes of insanity and on the improvement in the treatment of mental diseases during the preceding twenty-five years. On 17 June 1841 Seymour was elected a fellow of the Royal Society; he was also a fellow of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, and a member of the Royal Medical Society and the Wernerian Society of Edinburgh, and of the Imperial and Royal Academy of Science of Siena. 
Seymour was an accomplished man outside the range of his professional practice. His main works were 'Diseases of the Ovaria' (with a volume of plates, 1830); 'Observations on the Medical Treatment of Insanity' (1832); and 'Thoughts on the Treatment of Several Severe Diseases of the Human Body' (1847). Seymour suffered from poor health and financial misfortune in his later years and died at his residence, 13 Charles Street, Berkeley Square, London, on 16 April 1866, from organic disease of the stomach and liver. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 25166


Seymour, Francis, first Baron Seymour of Trowbridge (1590?-1664), politician, was the third son of Edward Seymour, Viscount Beauchamp (1561-1612) ['see under 'Seymour, Edward (1539?-1621)] and of Honora Rogers. He was a younger brother of William Seymour, first marquess of Hertford and later duke of Somerset. He was born about 1590 and knighted by James I at Royston on 23 October 1613. About 1620 Seymour married Frances Prynne. They had at least one son, Charles (1621?-1665), but Frances died in childbirth on 6 September 1626. Seymour sat in all the parliaments of the 1620s except that of 1626, representing Wiltshire every time apart from 1624 when he was MP for Marlborough. Throughout this period he was one of Buckingham's most vociferous critics. He was deeply opposed to the Spanish war and thought it parliament's duty to protect the localities from exorbitant financial burdens. His hostility to Buckingham caused him to be pricked as a sheriff in February 1626 in order to exclude him from parliament, and then to be removed from the commission of the peace the following July. Seymour was also passionately committed to defending the rule of law against incursions from the royal prerogative, a stance which led him to refuse the forced loan and to support the petition of right. By contrast, Seymour did not get deeply involved in the protests against Arminianism, and his sympathy for puritan 'godliness' appears to have been limited. 
This concern for his locality and attachment to the rule of law continued to motivate Seymour's actions during Charles I's personal rule. In 1634 he led the opposition of Wiltshire justices against a royal commission for reforming the clothing industry, claiming that this was against the dignity of the office of a justice of the peace. He also became a prominent campaigner against ship money and in May 1639 was summoned before the privy council. He told the board that: 'he had against his conscience, and upon the importunity of his friends, paid that money twice, but now his conscience would suffer him no more to do a thing (as he thought) so contrary to law and to the liberty of the subject. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 16, fols. 125'v'-126'r')' The same wish to defend legal propriety and the 'liberty of the subject' informed Seymour's speeches in the Short and Long parliaments, and ironically helps to explain his subsequent decision to join the king. On 16 April 1640 he denounced those 'who tell [the king] his prerogative is above all laws', and called the ship-money sheriffs 'as grievous a plague as the task masters of Egypt' (Cope, 142-3). The following November he praised parliament as 'the great physician of the commonwealth' which would remedy the problem of 'ill counsel' ('Journal', ed. Notestein, 7). As before, Seymour's primary concern was with constitutional and legal propriety; he wished to preserve episcopacy and opposed root-and-branch reform. On 19 February 1641 he was elevated to the Lords as Baron Seymour of Trowbridge, and in May voted against Strafford's attainder. By the summer of 1641 he had become convinced that the king's leading critics now posed a greater threat to the rule of law and the liberty of the subject than did Charles I. In January 1642 John Coke described him as one of the king's 'chief counsellors' (BL, Add. MS 64922, fol. 88'r'), and the following March, Seymour protested against the militia ordinance. On 18 March he was granted leave to visit his Wiltshire estates and early in April he joined the king at York. He offered to raise twenty horse to support the king's cause, and in August went into Wiltshire to implement the commission of array. 
During the first civil war Seymour combined active service in the royalist armies with a strong commitment to peace negotiations. He was appointed chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster in April 1644, and was one of the royalist commissioners at the treaty of Uxbridge. He was at Oxford when it surrendered in June 1646; he begged to compound under the Oxford articles, and his fine was set at $3725. He was one of the peers whom Charles summoned to Hampton Court in October 1647 to advise him, but thereafter he seems to have withdrawn completely from public life. He steered clear of royalist conspiracy and, when Seymour requested exemption from the decimation tax, Cromwell personally intervened to ensure this. Throughout the interregnum Seymour lived in retirement, convinced that the monarchy would eventually be restored, and in a private book of meditations and prayers he hoped that his fellow royalists would rejoice that they were 'counted worthy to suffer in a good cause' (BL, Egerton MS 71, fols. 4'v'-5'r'). At the Restoration, Seymour was sworn a privy councillor and reappointed chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. He died on 12 July 1664 and was buried in the chancel of Bedwyn Magna church in Wiltshire. Seymour's second wife, Catherine Lee, whom he had married about 1636, lived on until 1701. 


@@@@@


doc= 25167


Conway, Francis Ingram-Seymour-, second marquess of Hertford (1743-1822), politician, was born Francis Seymour-Conway on 12 February 1743 in London, the eldest son of Francis Seymour-Conway, first marquess of Hertford (1718-1794), courtier, and Lady Isabella Fitzroy (1726-1782), youngest daughter of Charles Fitzroy, second duke of Grafton. Known by the courtesy title of Viscount Beauchamp, he was educated at Eton College (1754-9), before he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 2 February 1760; he took his MA on 15 June 1762. Beauchamp then travelled on the grand tour with his tutor, the antiquary Walter Bowman, during 1764 and 1765. The early stages of his political career were determined by his father's ability to obtain preferments through government service which were then passed on to his children. While his father was lord lieutenant of Ireland Beauchamp was made a privy councillor for Ireland (1765) and he acted as chief secretary to his father (1765-6) before his appointment as constable of Dublin Castle (1766-1822). He also represented Lisburn in the Irish House of Commons from 1761 to 1768. 
Beauchamp entered the British House of Commons in 1766 as member for Lostwithiel and during the Chatham government he followed the political line set by his uncle General Henry Seymour Conway. He was considered to be primarily interested in politics as a means of augmenting his family's parliamentary power base and income, and his success in taking over the borough of Orford, which he represented from 1768 until his inheritance of his father's title in 1794, was a move towards the achievement of these aims; for Orford, despite its proximity to the family's estate at Sudbourne, had previously been a Treasury borough. Beauchamp spoke regularly in the House of Commons between 1774 and 1788 and he was credited 'if not with eloquence, at least with knowledge of the subject' ('Memoirs of... Wraxall', 4.137). During the American War of Independence he was a reliable supporter of Lord North's administration and he held minor ministerial office as a lord of the Treasury (1774-80), a cofferer of the household (1780-82), and a privy councillor for Great Britain from 1780. However he never attained the post of secretary at war to which he aspired. His chief parliamentary enthusiasms and causes were focused on Ireland, where he expressed consistent and strong support for the repeal of the penal laws against Roman Catholics, and upheld religious toleration. While a strong supporter of the political links between Britain and Ireland, he argued against the formal political and commercial union of the two countries and any act of compulsion directed against the Irish parliament. His views are best summarized in a pamphlet, 'A Letter to the First Company of Belfast Volunteers', published in 1782. In the later part of his career in the Commons he was generally associated with the Foxite opposition against Pitt, but in 1793 he spoke in favour of the 'Aliens Bill' and seconded Pitt's address to the king, which paved the way for the abandonment of neutrality in favour of war with revolutionary France. Later in the same year he was employed as an informal roving ambassador to the king of Prussia and to other German courts, and he was given a minor military mission in the same area of Europe in the following year. In the course of these missions he clashed with Lord Malmesbury, the official emissary to Prussia, and no permanent position was forthcoming; but in 1794 he in any case succeeded to the marquessate and an income of over $70,000 per annum, drawn largely from his Irish estates. He subsequently acquired the lease of Manchester (later Hertford) House in 1797, which became his principal London residence, and it remained within the Hertford family until the establishment of the Wallace Collection. On taking his seat in the House of Lords he took no part in debates on political subjects. 
On 4 February 1768 Hertford had married Alicia Elizabeth Windsor (1749-1772), second daughter and coheir of Herbert Windsor, first Viscount Windsor, and Alice Clavering. His second wife, whom he married on 20 May 1776, was Isabella Anne Ingram Shepheard (1760-1834), eldest daughter and coheir of Charles Ingram, ninth and last Viscount Irwin or Irvine (died 1778), and his wife, Frances ['see 'Ingram, Frances, Viscountess Irwin (1734?-1807)]. On the death of his mother-in-law on 20 November 1807, Hertford and his wife inserted the name Ingram before Seymour in recognition of the large fortune that they had simultaneously inherited. At about the same time the marchioness became an intimate friend (but not mistress) of the prince of Wales, the future prince regent and George IV, a role she continued to play until 1820, and in which she exercised some influence, not merely in securing patronage for her husband and son, but also in promoting tory and anti-Catholic measures. 
On Pitt's return to government in 1804 Hertford was appointed master of the horse (1804-6) and he was compensated with the Order of the Garter when he was displaced in the Grenville administration. His wife's influence at court helped to secure him the position of lord chamberlain of the household (1812-21), but his career did not culminate in elevation to the much coveted dukedom, which was refused by Lord Liverpool in 1822, just before Hertford's death. Hertford's aspirations for the advancement of himself and his family followed closely the pattern set by his father, but although he was well informed on most political subjects, he displayed no pronounced political talents and relied on his wealth, connections, and parliamentary influence to gain access to the corridors of power. His taste in English portraitists is still visible in some items by Downman, Romney, and Reynolds, now in the Wallace Collection. He died on 17 June 1822 at Hertford House, Manchester Square, London, and was buried in the family vault in Ragley, Warwickshire, on 28 June. 
Hertford's only surviving son from his second marriage was 


@@@@@


doc= 25168


Seymour, Sir Francis, first baronet (1813-1890), army officer, eldest son of Henry Augustus Seymour (1771-1847) of Lisnabrun, co. Down, and his wife, Margaret (died 31 Aug 1867), daughter of the Revd William Williams of Cromlech, Anglesey, was born at Lisnabrun on 2 August 1813, and was commissioned as ensign in the 19th regiment on 2 May 1834. He became lieutenant on 16 June 1837. In 1839, at the request of the king of the Belgians, he accompanied Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha in Italy. In 1840, after Albert's marriage, he was appointed groom-in-waiting to him, and continued in that office until Albert's death. 
Seymour was promoted captain on 4 September 1840, and on 21 January 1842 he exchanged into the Scots Fusilier Guards, and obtained his company on 28 June 1850. He went with the 1st battalion to the Crimea in 1854, and was present at Alma, Balaklava, and Inkerman. At the latter he took command of the battalion, and was wounded. He was later wounded again, by a fragment of a shell which struck the back of his head during the siege of Sevastopol, when he was field officer in command in the trenches of the right attack. He was made brevet colonel on 28 November 1854 and CB on 2 January 1857. He received the Legion d'honneur (fourth class) and Mejidiye (fourth class). 
Seymour was promoted major in his regiment on 14 June 1858, and lieutenant-colonel on 13 February 1863; he went on half pay on 10 July 1863, and on 25 November 1864 became major-general. He commanded the troops in Malta from 1 January 1872 to 5 April 1874. He was made lieutenant-general on 23 May 1873, colonel of the 11th (North Devon) regiment on 7 February 1874, KCB on 29 May 1875, general on 1 October 1877, and GCB on 24 May 1881. On 1 July 1881 he was retired. 
After Prince Albert's death in December 1861, Seymour was appointed groom-in-waiting to the queen. On 7 October 1869 he was made a baronet, and in February 1876 he became master of ceremonies and an extra groom-in-waiting. He was a knight grand cross of the Saxe-Ernestine order. 
Seymour married, on 25 August 1869, Agnes Austin, eldest daughter of the Revd H. D. Wickham, rector of Horsington, Somerset, and they had one son and three daughters. He died at Kensington Palace on 10 July 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 25169


Seymour, Frederick Beauchamp Paget, Baron Alcester (1821-1895), naval officer, was born in London on 12 April 1821. He was the son of Colonel Sir Horace Beauchamp Seymour and his first wife, Elizabeth Malet, 'nee' Palk (died 1827), daughter of Sir Lawrence Palk, bt; his grandfather was Lord Hugh Seymour, and his uncle Sir George Francis Seymour. He received his early education at Eton College, and entered the navy in January 1834. He passed his examination in 1840; served as a mate in the 'Britannia', flagship of Sir John Acworth Ommanney, in the Mediterranean, and was promoted lieutenant on 7 March 1842. He was then appointed to the frigate 'Thalia' (Captain George Hope) in the Pacific; and from 1844 to 1847 was flag-lieutenant to his uncle, Sir George Seymour, commander-in-chief in the Pacific. On 5 June 1847 he was promoted commander. In 1852 he served as a volunteer on the staff of General Godwin in Burma, and was four times gazetted for distinguished conduct. In May 1853 he commissioned the 'Brisk' for the North America and West Indies station, from where he was recalled early in 1854 and sent to the White Sea in the squadron under Commodore Sir Erasmus Ommanney. In May 1855 he was appointed to the floating battery 'Meteor', which he took out to the Crimea, and brought back to Portsmouth in the early summer of 1856. In July 1857 he commissioned the 'Pelorus', which he commanded for nearly six years on the Australian station. Between January and April 1858 the 'Pelorus' provided a naval brigade in Burma, playing a vital role in preventing the spread of the mutiny from India. From 1860 to 1861 he commanded the naval brigade in New Zealand during the war there, for which he was made a CB on 16 July 1861. 
From 1868 to 1870 Seymour was private secretary to the first lord of the Admiralty, Hugh Childers, and helped to keep the troubled Admiralty board from complete collapse. On 1 April 1870 he was promoted rear-admiral. From December 1870 to May 1872 he commanded the flying squadron, and from 1872 to 1874 was a lord of the Admiralty. From 1874 to 1877 he commanded the Channel Fleet; he was made a vice-admiral on 31 December 1876 and a KCB on 2 June 1877. In 1876 he agreed to a compact with Geoffrey Phipps Hornby and Astley Cooper Key: all three would refuse to accept the post of senior naval lord without securing certain specific reforms of the Admiralty. In 1879 Key took the post, without securing those reforms. 
From 1880 to 1883 Seymour was commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, and so, in 1880, commanded the European squadron sent to the Albanian coast following Turkish refusal to cede Dulcigno to Montenegro. On the dispersal of the fleet after the Porte had yielded, Seymour received the thanks of the government and was made a GCB, on 24 May 1881. In the following year he commanded at the bombardment of the Alexandria fortifications (11 July), and afterwards in the operations on the coast of Egypt. For this he was made Baron Alcester of Alcester in the county of Warwickshire, and received a parliamentary grant of $25,000, the freedom of the City of London, and a sword of honour. From March 1883 to June 1885 he was again a lord of the Admiralty, and on 12 April 1886 was retired. 
During the following years Seymour lived principally in London, where his genial nature made him a favourite in society, while his attention to his dress and appearance gained him the name of the 'Ocean Swell'. Latterly his eyesight failed and his health deteriorated. He died at 3 Hanover Terrace, Regent's Park, London, on 30 March 1895, and was buried at Brookwood cemetery, near Woking on 3 April. He was unmarried, and at his death the title became extinct. 
After an early career dominated by operations on shore, Seymour matured into an able and active flag officer, both afloat and at the Admiralty. He commanded, at Alexandria, the only battle fleet action between 1855 and 1914. He accepted his peerage, the first conferred for naval service afloat since 1856, on behalf of the service, rather than as a personal reward, and contributed to the efforts made in several quarters to raise the prestige of the service. He was one of the leading flag officers of his generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 25170


Seymour, Sir George Francis (1787-1870), naval officer, the eldest son of Vice-Admiral Lord Hugh Seymour (1759-1801) and his wife, Anne Horatia (died 1801), the daughter of James Waldegrave, second Earl Waldegrave, was born on 17 September 1787. He entered the navy in October 1797 on board the yacht 'Princess Augusta' with Captain Edward Riou, and from March 1798 to September 1801 was with his father in the 'Sanspareil' and the 'Prince of Wales' in the channel and the West Indies. In 1802-3 he was in the 'Endymion', mostly on the home station, with Captain John Larmour, and afterwards with the Hon. Charles Paget. Towards the end of 1803 he was sent out to the 'Victory', Nelson's flagship in the Mediterranean, and in February 1804 was transferred to the 'Madras' as acting lieutenant. A few weeks later he was moved into the 'Donegal' with Sir Richard John Strachan, then from early 1805 with Pulteney Malcolm. On 12 October 1804 Seymour was confirmed lieutenant, and, continuing in the 'Donegal', took part in the chase of the allied fleet to the West Indies and back and in the capture of the Spanish ship 'El Rayo' immediately after the battle of Trafalgar. 
Early in 1806 Seymour joined the 'Northumberland', the flagship of Sir Alexander Inglis Cochrane, in the West Indies, and on 6 February took part in the battle of Santo Domingo, where he was severely wounded in the jaw by grapeshot. He had already been promoted commander on 22 January 1806, and on 9 February was appointed to the sloop 'Kingfisher', in which, on 14 May, he was in company with Lord Cochrane in the 'Pallas', and was able to rescue him from a dangerous position in the entrance of the Basque Roads. On 29 July 1806 he was posted to command the 'Aurora' in the Mediterranean, from which, in February 1808, he was moved to the 'Pallas' on the home station. In April 1809 she was attached to the fleet with Lord Gambier off the Basque Roads, and on the 12th Seymour made a gallant effort to support Cochrane in his attempt to destroy the French ships. Afterwards, at the court martial on Lord Gambier, he supported Cochrane's assertion that the whole might have been destroyed. 
In September 1809 Seymour was appointed to the frigate 'Manilla' (36 guns), which was lost off the Texel in January 1812 during his temporary absence. In February 1811 he married Georgiana Mary (died 1878), the daughter of Admiral Sir George Cranfield Berkeley; they had four daughters and three sons. In June 1812 he was assigned to the 'Fortunee', and from January 1813 to September 1814 he commanded the 'Leonidas' in the West Indies. On 4 June 1815 he was nominated a CB, and on 28 May 1816 was awarded a pension of $250 for his wound received in the battle of Santo Domingo. From 1818 to 1841 he was sergeant-at-arms to the House of Lords. In 1827 he commanded the 'Briton' for a few months on particular service. He was naval aide-de-camp to William IV from August to November 1830, and from that time until the king's death was master of the robes. In 1831 he was made a KCH and on 9 December 1834 GCH. He was promoted rear-admiral on 23 November 1841. 
From September 1841 to May 1844 Seymour was one of the lords of the Admiralty, where he repeatedly quarrelled with the senior naval lord, Sir George Cockburn, on the direction of policy. As a result he was appointed commander-in-chief in the Pacific, where 'the tact, ability, and decision' he showed during the strained relations with France over the 'Pritchard affair' and the negotiations with the United States about the fisheries, were formally recognized by the government. He arrived home in 1848. 
On 27 March 1850 Seymour was made vice-admiral and on 7 April 1852 a KCB. From January 1851 to November 1853 he was commander-in-chief on the North America and West Indies station. In late 1853 he was considered for the command of the Baltic fleet, then being prepared, but arrangements to bring him home foundered on the refusal of his nominated successor to take the post. By the time he reached England, in March 1854, the Baltic fleet had been given to Sir Charles Napier, and Seymour served from January 1856 to March 1859 as commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. On 14 May 1857 he was promoted to the rank of admiral. He was nominated a GCB on 18 May 1860, rear-admiral of the United Kingdom in April 1863, vice-admiral in September 1865, and admiral of the fleet on 30 November 1866. He died of bronchitis at his London residence, 115 Eaton Square, on 20 January 1870. Seymour was an intelligent and resourceful officer, successful in all his commands. Although he was a tory, and a personal favourite of William IV, his marriage brought him into contact with the whig naval aristocracy. He impressed Lord Haddington during his time at the Admiralty by his willingness to stand up to the formidable Cockburn. 
His eldest son, Francis George Hugh Seymour (1812-1884), in August 1870 succeeded his second cousin as fifth marquess of Hertford. He was appointed groom of the robes in 1833, was lord chamberlain from 1874 to 1879, and died at Ragley on 25 January 1884 from injuries caused by a fall from his horse. 


@@@@@


doc= 25171


Seymour, Sir George Hamilton (1797-1880), diplomatist, eldest son of Lord George Seymour (1763-1848) (seventh son of Francis Seymour Conway, first marquess of Hertford) and Isabella, daughter of the Hon. and Revd George Hamilton (1718-1787), canon of Windsor and third son of the seventh earl of Abercorn, was born at Harrow on 21 September 1797. He was intended at first for the navy but was then sent to Eton College and, in March 1813, appointed gentleman usher in daily waiting on George III. He became a postmaster (award holder) at Merton College, Oxford, and graduated BA in 1818, proceeding MA in 1823. He had already, in March 1817, been appointed an attache to the British legation at The Hague. From then on his whole career was spent in diplomacy. In December 1819 he became assistant precis writer to the foreign secretary, Lord Castlereagh, precis writer in January 1821, and Castlereagh's private secretary in January 1822. He was with Castlereagh shortly before the latter's suicide in August 1822. In October 1822 he was attached to the duke of Wellington's special mission to Verona. He became secretary of legation at Frankfurt am Main on 18 August 1823 and was transferred on 6 September 1826 to Stuttgart, on 28 December 1827 to Berlin, and on 30 July 1829 to Constantinople. 
On 13 November 1830 Seymour was appointed minister-resident at Florence. In 1831 he was sent on an (unsuccessful) special mission to Rome, where Britain had no regular representation at this time, to try to persuade the pope to take a conciliatory line towards the rebels of 1830-31 and guarantee certain civil rights. On 21 July 1831 he married Gertrude Brand (died 1883), third daughter of the twenty-first Lord Dacre; they had four sons and three daughters. On 27 November 1835 he was appointed envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to the Belgian court, where he took part in the negotiations by which the independence of Belgium was finally secured. On 10 December 1846 he was moved to Lisbon in the same capacity, and he represented the British government through the greater part of the period of insurrection, when the British power supported the Portuguese crown. 
In 1850 Seymour gave evidence to the select committee on official salaries and gained some notoriety when he replied to a question, 'Certainly I consider that giving dinners is an essential part of diplomacy... I have no idea of a man being a good diplomat who does not give good dinners' ('Select committee', 15.426). The same year Palmerston wished to send him to Berlin, but Queen Victoria wanted Berlin for Lord Bloomfield and in April 1851 Seymour went to St Petersburg instead. He is best known for the 'Seymour conversations' with the tsar in January-February 1853. The tsar, encouraged by the formation of the Aberdeen coalition in Britain, reopened the question of contingency planning if the Ottoman empire should collapse, which he had discussed with Lord Aberdeen and the then prime minister, Sir Robert Peel, when he visited London in 1844. The conversations were subsequently leaked in the 'St Petersburg Gazette' and 'The Times' and contributed to the British belief that the tsar was actively plotting the dissolution of the Ottoman empire. Seymour was recalled in February 1854, just before the outbreak of the Crimean War. He was pensioned in October 1854 but was recalled to go as envoy-extraordinary to Vienna in November 1855 to participate in the international discussions which led eventually to the end of the Crimean War and the treaty of Paris of 1856. He finally retired in April 1858. 
Seymour was made GCH on 16 March 1836 and GCB on 28 January 1847, and was sworn of the privy council on 21 November 1855. He died on 2 February 1880 at his home, 10 Grosvenor Crescent, London, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25172


Seymour, Henry (bap. 1612, d. 1687), courtier, was baptized on 13 August 1612, the second of the five sons of Sir Edward Seymour, second baronet ('c'.1580-1659), of Berry Pomeroy, Devon, and his wife, Dorothy (died 1643), daughter of Sir Henry Killigrew of Laroch, Cornwall. He was in his youth page of honour to Queen Henrietta Maria, and became a groom of the bedchamber to Prince Charles in May 1638. On the outbreak of the civil war he joined the royalist forces under his kinsman William Seymour, marquess of Hertford, and in September 1642 was the bearer of the challenge from him to the earl of Bedford. He carried the message from Prince Charles to the earl of Warwick in August 1648 summoning him to surrender the parliament's fleet. On 28 January 1649 he delivered the prince's last letter to his father, and received the king's final message to his son and his letter of farewell to Henrietta Maria. In October 1649, as 'a person unbyassed with any faction, and in whose discretion and integrity the king had great confidence' (Carte, 1.337), he was sent by Charles II from Jersey to the marquess of Ormond in Ireland to assess the military situation there. He accompanied Charles to Scotland in 1650, was voted away from the king's person by the Scottish committee, and left for France after the defeat at Dunbar, and the collapse of a plan for a royalist rising by the marquess of Huntly in October. In December 1650 Charles commissioned him to go in search of his brother James, who was then in Brussels, and endeavour to persuade him to return to Paris and follow his mother's advice. In 1651 Seymour was in Paris, and in the following years he undertook several hazardous missions to and from the king and his supporters in England, collecting and distributing money -- including the sum of $215 'for redeeming your majesty's seal' (Macray, 2.361) -- and transmitting advice and instructions. In October 1652 he had to defend himself before the council of state against the allegation that he was employed by the king. He went back and forth between Paris and the English royalists in 1653 and 1654, and in June 1654 he was arrested and sent to the Tower in the aftermath of the Gerard plot. He was arrested again, 'on suspicion of plotting to stir up forces against Government' ('CSP dom.', '1655', 204, 588), in June 1655. Freed from the Tower on bail in April 1656, he was rearrested in October, and having petitioned for release in February 1657 he finally obtained it 'upon hard terms' (Macray, 3.303) at the end of May. 
At the general election of 1660 Seymour was elected an MP for East Looe, in Cornwall, which he represented until 1681. In the Convention he was instrumental in securing the exemption of Colonel Matthew Tomlinson from the list of those who were to be denied the benefit of the 'Act of Indemnity and Oblivion', testifying that in the course of his last interview with Charles I the king had 'signified to him his pleasure, that the colonel should receive favour on account of his civil carriage to him, during his confinement' ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 2.286). In the Cavalier Parliament he was generally reckoned to be a supporter, as he was a dependant, of the court. He was not a conspicuously active member, but he seems to have been a mettlesome one. He was narrowly prevented from fighting a duel with Lord St John in 1665; and in 1669 he fought and wounded Roger Vaughan MP. In addition to his post as groom of the bedchamber, which he retained until Charles II's death, he was comptroller of customs in the port of London (1660-69), and clerk of the hanaper (1661-87). He was also granted a number of leases -- to the value, it was, most improbably, alleged, of $40,000 (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 4, appx, xxiv) -- in the duchy of Cornwall. In 1666 he took up residence at Langley, in Langley Marish, Buckinghamshire, which estate he bought from the trustees of Sir William Parsons in 1669, and where he lived until his death. He married first, about 1661, Elizabeth (died 1671), daughter of Sir Joseph Killigrew, and widow of William Bassett of Claverton, Somerset; she died in 1671. His second marriage, about 1672, was to Ursula, daughter of Sir Robert Austen, first baronet, of Bexley, Kent, and widow of George Stowell, of Cothelstone, Somerset; they had a daughter and a son, Henry, who was created a baronet at seven years of age (4 July 1681) in consideration of his father's services to his sovereign. Seymour died at Langley on 9 March 1687 and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 25173


Seymour, Henry (1729-1805), politician, was born in London, the son of Francis Seymour ('bap'. 1697, died 1761), MP for Sherborne, and brother of Edward, the eighth duke of Somerset, and Elizabeth Montagu (died 1761), daughter of Alexander Popham of Littlecote, Wiltshire, and widow of Viscount Hinchinbrook. On 24 July 1753 he married Lady Caroline Cowper (died 1773), only daughter of William, the second Earl Cowper. The marriage produced two daughters: Caroline, who married William Danby, the bibliophile and mineralogist, and Georgina, who married Comte Louis de Durfort. Besides his father's estate at Sherborne, Seymour inherited an uncle's property at Knoyle, and also owned Northbrook Lodge, Devon, and Redland Court, near Bristol. He became a groom of the bedchamber to George III, was elected MP for Totnes at a by-election in 1763, and represented Huntingdon (1768-74) and Evesham (1774-80). He spoke on 29 February 1776 in support of Charles James Fox's motion for an inquiry into the miscarriages of the American War of Independence. A widower in June 1773, he married in 1775 Louise Therese (died 1821), widow of Comte Guillaume de Panthou; they had one son, Henry (1776-1849), who in 1835 became high sheriff of Dorset. 
In 1778 Seymour settled in Paris, obtained letters of domicile to protect his property from forfeiture, and purchased a country house at Prunay, between Versailles and St Germain. He became the neighbour, and may have already been the lover, of Madame Du Barry ('nee' Becu) (1743-1793), whose letters he kept, together with a lock of her hair. The letters, about forty in total, are undated, but were probably written in 1780, shortly before a separation from his wife. Seymour also fathered an illegitimate daughter, Henriette Felicite, who was born in France and became the mother of Sir Roger Tichborne, later impersonated by Arthur Orton in the famous Tichborne claimant case. In 1788 Seymour published an anonymous French translation of William Mason's 'English Garden', with views of Prunay. His papers, apparently left behind him on his hasty departure from France in August 1792, were sold in Paris a century later. His heirs later obtained compensation for his losses out of the fund for indemnifying British subjects. Seymour remained in England until his death in 1805. 


@@@@@


doc= 25174


Seymour, Lord Henry (1805-1859), patron of the turf, was officially the younger son of Francis Charles Seymour-Conway, third marquess of Hertford (1777-1842), and his wife, Maria Emily Seymour-Conway, nee Fagnani (1770/71-1856) ['see under 'Conway, Francis Ingram-Seymour-, second marquess of Hertford], the French adopted daughter of George Augustus Selwyn (1719-1791). It has been suggested that his true father was Count Casimir de Montrond (1768-1843). Lord Henry was born in Paris on 18 January 1805, after the detention of his father, then styled Lord Yarmouth, on landing in France just after the rupture of the peace of Amiens. Lord Yarmouth was released in 1806 through Fox's intercession with Talleyrand, but his wife remained in France, where Lord Henry lived for the rest of his life. 
Lord Henry was a member of the Paris-based English Jockey Club and Pigeon-Shooting Club, founded in 1825 by Thomas Byron. In 1833 the club formed two new but coterminous bodies, the Jockey Club and a society for the encouragement of horse breeding in France. Lord Henry was the first president of the new organizations. He imported British horses, trainers, and jockeys, and won the 'prix du' 'Jockey Club' four times, but he quit the turf suddenly in 1842. 
A prominent member of the aristocratic society of Paris, Lord Henry was noted for his eccentricities and crude practical jokes, such as giving his friends exploding cigars and powerful purges. In 1856 he inherited his mother's large fortune. He died in Paris, unmarried, on 16 August 1859, and was buried in his mother's vault at the Pere Lachaise cemetery in Paris. He bequeathed money for the support of four favourite horses, which were never again to be saddled, and left the residue of his property, about $36,000 a year, to Paris hospitals. 


@@@@@


doc= 25175


Seymour, Lord Hugh (1759-1801), naval officer, was born on 29 April 1759 in London, fifth son of Francis Seymour Conway, first marquess of Hertford (1718-1794), and his wife, Lady Isabella, 'nee' Fitzroy (1726-1782), daughter of the duke of Grafton. He used the surname Seymour Conway until his father's death in 1794. He was educated at Bracken's academy, Greenwich, in the late 1760s and appears to have entered the navy as captain's servant in the yacht 'William and Mary' on 1 April 1770. He was discharged from her on 31 March 1771, and from 21 April he served for over two years as midshipman in the 'Pearl', commanded by a relation, Captain John Leveson Gower. After spending time on various other ships he joined the 'Alarm' on 18 March 1774, and apart from a short spell in the 'Trident' served in her until he passed for lieutenant on 11 July 1776; thereupon he was made lieutenant in the same ship, a position he held until 18 June 1778 when he was appointed commander to the xebec 'Minorca' in the Mediterranean. He was promoted captain on 8 February 1779 to the 'Porcupine', and then successively to the 'Diana', 'Ambuscade', and 'Latona', mostly in the channel, though the 'Latona' was with Richard Howe's fleet at the relief of Gibraltar. 
After the peace Seymour Conway with his younger brother George and John Willett Payne took a house in Conduit Street, London where, leading an irregular and convivial life, he became intimate with the prince of Wales. From this fate he was in great measure rescued by his marriage on 3 April 1785 to Lady Anne Horatia Waldegrave (died 1801), daughter of the duchess of Gloucester by her first marriage, to James Waldegrave, second Earl Waldegrave, though he remained on friendly terms with the prince. During the Spanish armament of 1790 he commanded the 'Canada', and while in her received an accidental blow on the head from the lead, as soundings were being taken, so for a time had to live quietly in the country. By February 1793 he was able to resume active service, and was appointed to the 'Leviathan', in which he accompanied Lord Hood to the Mediterranean. After the occupation of Toulon he was sent home with dispatches, but he returned at once and resumed command of the 'Leviathan', which was shortly afterwards sent home to join the fleet under Lord Howe. He had thus a distinguished part in the actions of 28 and 29 May and 1 June 1794. 
Early in 1795 Seymour was moved into the 'Sanspareil', and on his promotion to flag rank (1 June 1795) he hoisted his flag on the same ship, in which he took part in the battle off Lorient on 23 June. On 7 March 1795 he was appointed a lord of the Admiralty, and he remained so until 10 September 1798. Although at sea much of the time, there is evidence that he did take some share in the board's work, particularly during the winter. On 14 February 1799 he became a vice-admiral, and he commanded a detached squadron off Brest that summer. He was appointed commander-in-chief at Jamaica on 9 May 1800 and arrived there in August. His command was uneventful, but he was attacked by yellow fever; he went to sea for his health in the 'Tisiphone', but worsened and died at sea off Jamaica on 11 September 1801. His body was sent home in the schooner 'Sting', his wife having died at Clifton, Bristol, shortly before. His loss was much regretted, and he was described even by Lord St Vincent as 'an excellent officer' ('Later Correspondence of George III', 2453). It is clear that Seymour went to sea from choice and he is said to have been responsible for an improved method of fitting topmasts and for the addition of epaulettes to officers' uniforms (Dillon). He was among the most handsome men of his day, standing over 6 feet tall, had great presence, and was courteous to all. In his will he left most of his money to his wife and then to his children, of whom there were seven: four daughters and three sons; the eldest son, Sir George Seymour, followed him into the navy. He owned a farm at Hambledon, Hampshire, and an estate at Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire, and his father left him an estate on the island of St John. 


@@@@@


doc= 25176


Seymour, James (1702?-1752), painter and draughtsman, was born probably in London, the only son of James Seymour (1658?-1739). The elder Seymour (often styled Colonel, perhaps a militia rank) was described in his obituary in the 'Universal Spectator' (27 January 1739) as 'formerly an eminent Banker in Fleet Street, and reckon'd to have understood Diamonds as well as most Men in England'; but the only known evidence of his commercial activities is that he supplied plate for racing trophies, and was involved in organizing race meetings at Guildford. Of greater importance for his son's career was that the elder Seymour was (in the same obituarist's words), 'a compleat Master of the Pen and Pencil' (some heads by him are in the collection of the British Museum and the Huntington Art Gallery, San Marino, California). He collected pictures and 'curiosities', and knew many artists and connoisseurs; he was steward of the Virtuosi of St Luke in 1702, and a subscriber to Kneller's academy in Great Queen Street in 1711. 
The younger James Seymour chiefly drew and painted horses, at race meetings and hunts, in stables and riding schools. Few details of his life are recorded, apart from the fact that he attended the academy in St Martin's Lane when it opened in 1720 under the directorship of Louis Cheron and John Vanderbank, paying an extra subscription of 10 guineas in October 1720. His character and career were described by the prudish George Vertue: 'Jimmy Seymor... from his infancy had a genius to drawing of Horses -- this he pursued with great Spirit, set out with all sorts & of modish extravagances. the darling of his Father run thro some thousands -- livd gay high and loosely -- horse raceing gameing women &c. country houses never studied enough to colour or paint well, but his necessityes -- obliged him. to work or starve... (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.86)' Vertue's account of Seymour's prodigal career is difficult to reconcile with his prolific output. A large number of finished oils and numerous lively and spontaneous sketches in pen and ink and pencil are known (the latter well represented in the collections of the British Museum, London, and the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut). Seymour's paintings of horses lack that anatomical knowledge which Stubbs was to bring to the art. His originality lay rather in his ability to enliven the conventional horse portrait by conveying, sometimes humorously, some sense of the personality of a horse, and of its accompanying groom or dog. In his most ambitious work, 'A Kill at Ashdown Park' (1743; Tate collection), this liveliness animates a scene in which some weaknesses of perspective and composition are obvious. One of Seymour's finest paintings, 'Peter Delme's Hounds on the Hampshire Downs' (1738; Paul Mellon Gift, Virginia Museum of Fine Arts), commissioned by the banker Peter Delme, gains from greater simplicity, as a small group of riders and hounds set off across the Hampshire downs in a palpably early morning atmosphere. Some of Seymour's finest works were painted for John Jolliffe MP, of Petersfield, Hampshire (priv. coll.). 
Seymour's best-known painting, endlessly copied, was 'The Chaise Match Run on Newmarket Heath on Wednesday 29th of August 1750'. The event was an improbable wager (the original painting is probably the picture in the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Paul Mellon Gift). Seymour's painting was engraved by Charles Grignion, published soon after the event, and often pirated. Numerous engravings after Seymour helped to popularize sporting art; these include Seymour's 'Twelve Prints of Hunters and Running Horses, Taken in Various Actions', mezzotint ('c'.1750), a series of thirty-four racehorse portraits, engraved in mezzotint with rococo borders, published 1741-54, and 'Twelve prints, representing managing and training horses, with coursing, shooting, setting, etc.' (n.d.). 
Seymour appears to have been a friend and/or associate of John Vanderbank, whose profligacy Vertue similarly deplored; some of their drawings of 'haute ecole' exercises in riding schools may well have been made sitting side by side. Vertue stated that Seymour's extravagances caused his father's bankruptcy, and that the latter part of the artist's life 'was spent in the lowest circumstances & in debt' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.86). Seymour died, unmarried, on 30 June 1752 at lodgings in Blackman Street, Southwark. 


@@@@@


doc= 25177


Seymour, Sir Michael, first baronet (1768-1834), naval officer, second son of the Revd John Seymour (died 1795), one of a younger branch of the family of the dukes of Somerset which settled in Ireland in the time of Elizabeth I, was born at Glebe House, Pallas, co. Limerick, on 8 November 1768. His mother, Griselda, daughter and coheir of William Hobart of High Mount, co. Cork, was related to the family of the earls of Buckinghamshire. Seymour entered the navy in November 1780 on the sloop 'Merlin' with Captain James Luttrell, whom he followed in March 1781 to the 'Portland', in April 1782 to the 'Mediator', and in April 1783 to the 'Ganges'. When Luttrell retired in September 1783, Seymour was moved into the 'Europa', going to Jamaica with the flag of Vice-Admiral James Gambier. He was transferred to the 'Antelope', and afterwards to the 'Janus' (Captain John Pakenham), and in September 1785 he returned to England in the 'Ariel', in bad health. In June 1786 he joined the 'Pegase', guardship at Portsmouth; and in June 1787 the 'Magnificent', with Captain George Cranfield Berkeley, an intimate friend of Luttrell. On Luttrell's death in December 1788, Berkeley brought Seymour's name before the duchess of Gloucester, but it was not until 28 October 1790 that Seymour was promoted lieutenant of the 'Magnificent'. In October 1791 the 'Magnificent' was paid off, and he spent the next eighteen months with his family in Ireland. In March 1793 he was appointed to the 'Marlborough', then commissioned by Berkeley, and was in her at the battle of 1 June 1794, when he was severely wounded. One of his arms had to be amputated above the elbow, and he was obliged to go on shore to recover. In February 1795 he joined Berkeley in the 'Formidable', moving in June to the 'Commerce de Marseilles', and in August to the 'Prince'. On 20 August he was promoted commander. In June 1796 he was appointed to the 'Fly', from which in August he was moved to the sloop 'Spitfire', employed for the next four years in the channel and on the north coast of France. He took many prizes -- privateers and armed vessels, as well as small vessels trying to carry on the coasting trade. On 20 January 1789 he married Jane Hawker (died 12 March 1852), daughter of Captain James Hawker; they had a large family, which included Michael Seymour (1802-1887). 
On 11 August 1800 Seymour was promoted captain. During the following years he was appointed to the temporary command of many different ships without being able to get a ship of his own. It was not until June 1806 that he was appointed to the frigate 'Amethyst' (36 guns), attached to the Channel Fleet but principally cruising independently off the coast of France, with which, during his long service in the 'Spitfire', he had become well acquainted. On the evening of 10 November 1808, off the Ile de Groix, he fell in with the French frigate 'Thetis' which had sailed that afternoon from Lorient with a detachment of troops on board for Martinique. Shortly after 9 p.m. he brought her to action, and for three hours there occurred one of the most stubborn and well-contested fights of the war. A few minutes after midnight, being reduced to a wreck and having 236 killed or wounded out of 436 on board, the 'Thetis' surrendered. The 'Amethyst' lost 70 killed or wounded out of 261; her rigging was cut to pieces, her mizzen-mast fallen, and her mainmast and foremasts were badly damaged. As soon as the two ships were made safe, the 'Amethyst' returned to Plymouth, accompanied by her prize in tow of the 'Shannon'. Seymour was presented with the gold medal; by the Patriotic Fund with $100 for a sword or a piece of plate; and by the corporations of Limerick and Cork with the freedom of the cities. The first lieutenant of the 'Amethyst' and one of the midshipmen nominated by Seymour were promoted, and other officers were appointed to higher rates. 
On 8 February 1809 Seymour, still in the 'Amethyst', sailed again, and early on 6 April, off the Ile d'Ouessant, fell in with, engaged, and captured the French frigate 'Niemen', which lost 120 men killed and wounded. On his return to England, Seymour was created a baronet on 31 May 1809. During the summer the 'Amethyst' was attached to the fleet on the coast of the Netherlands, part of the time with the flag of Sir Richard John Strachan on board; and in October Seymour was appointed to the 'Niemen', the officers and crew of the 'Amethyst' being at the same time turned over to her. In her he continued on similar service until May 1812, when he was appointed to the 'Hannibal' (74 guns); he commanded her in the channel for the next two years, capturing the French frigate 'Sultane' on 26 March 1814. 
In September the 'Hannibal' was paid off, and Seymour settled down for the next few years near Kingsbridge in Devon. On 3 January 1815 he was nominated a KCB, and in December of that year the pension for the loss of his arm was increased to $300 a year. In September 1818 he was appointed to the 'Northumberland', guardship at Sheerness; and in August 1819 to the 'Prince Regent', one of the royal yachts, from which, in 1825, he was moved to the 'Royal George', the king's own yacht. During this time he lived principally on shore at Blendworth House, which he had bought, close to Portsmouth. While there he read a great deal and gardened. 
In January 1829 Seymour accepted the appointment of commissioner at Portsmouth, a form of semi-active retirement for noted but poor flag officers, which was by custom tenable for life. In 1832 the Admiralty abolished the Navy Board and, with it, the commissionerships at the dockyards. Seymour was offered the choice of holding his office for two more years and then retiring, or of returning to the active list, taking his flag, and going out to South America as commander-in-chief. He chose the latter, his commission as rear-admiral being dated 27 June 1832. With his flag in the 'Spartiate' he sailed in February 1833 for Rio de Janiero, where the duties of the station compelled him to remain. In April 1834 he had a severe attack of 'low fever', and on his partial recovery he was landed. On shore, however, he made no satisfactory progress, and he died on 9 July 1834. He was buried in the English cemetery at Rio de Janiero, and a monument to his memory was erected there. 
Seymour was a brave and active captain. Although he was not particularly well-connected, especially within the navy, his career brought him to the attention of the prince regent, who supported him after 1815. His relatively slow promotion and inability to find a ship as a captain between 1800 and 1806 were especially revealing. His final command was almost certainly taken to further the career of his son Michael. 


@@@@@


doc= 25178


Seymour, Sir Michael (1802-1887), naval officer, third son of Rear-Admiral Sir Michael Seymour, first baronet (1768-1834), and his wife, Jane Hawker (died 1852), was born on 3 December 1802. He entered the navy in December 1813 on board the 'Hannibal', with his father, but when she was paid off he was sent back to school, and in March 1816 was entered at the Royal Naval College at Portsmouth. On passing out from the college he was appointed in October 1818 to the 'Rochefort', which was going out to the Mediterranean with the flag of Sir Thomas Francis Fremantle. In her, and afterwards in the 'Ganymede', with Captain Robert Cavendish Spencer, he continued until he was promoted lieutenant on 12 September 1822. In July 1823 he joined the 'Sybille' (Captain Samuel John Brooke Pechell), and was present at the demonstration against Algiers in 1824. On 6 December 1824 he was promoted commander, and in August 1825 was appointed to the brig 'Chameleon' in the channel, and was made captain on 5 August 1826. In January 1827 he was appointed to the 'Menai' for the South American station, which then included both the east and west coasts of South America and all the eastern Pacific. In September 1827 he was moved into the 'Volage', in which he returned to England in the spring of 1829. On 22 June 1829 he married his first cousin Dora 
(or Dorothea; 1807-1875)
, daughter of Sir William Knighton. They had a son, Michael Francis Knighton (1841-1909), and three daughters. 
In 1832 Seymour's father, who had been appointed to command the South American station, wished to have him as his flag captain. This the Admiralty refused, but in June 1833 he was appointed to the 'Challenger', in which he joined his father at Rio. He was afterwards sent round to the Peruvian coast, but returned to Rio on the news of his father's death. Later, on his way back to the Pacific, the 'Challenger', by an abnormal and previously unknown reversal of the current, was wrecked at Mocquilla Point, near Leubu, on the coast of Chile, on 19 May 1835. The men landed and were rescued after spending seven weeks shipwrecked. Seymour was court-martialled but acquitted of all blame and highly commended for his conduct following the wreck. In 1841 he commanded the 'Britannia' as flag captain to Sir John Acworth Ommanney, and then the 'Powerful', which he paid off early in 1842. 
From 1845 to 1848 Seymour commanded the 'Vindictive' as flag captain to Sir Francis William Austen on the North America and West Indies station. In 1849 he made a prolonged tour in France, visiting the dockyards, arsenals, and engineering works, on which he reported to the Admiralty. In December 1850 he was appointed superintendent of Sheerness Dockyard, from which, in September 1851, he was transferred to Devonport, with the rank of commodore of the first class. In 1854, when war with Russia was imminent, he was appointed captain of the fleet ordered to the Baltic under the command of Sir Charles Napier. In this capacity Seymour had the unenviable responsibility of preparing the equipment and training the ships of the hastily assembled fleet. His reluctance to take the post reflected the obvious difficulties of the task. In addition, Seymour was expected to smooth relations between the irascible Napier, his subordinates, and later his French allies. At the same time he was requested to keep up a correspondence with the first lord, Sir James Graham, and Admiral Sir Maurice Berkeley, the senior naval lord. Promoted rear-admiral on 27 May 1854, Seymour remained in post until the end of the campaign, though he could not prevent a major quarrel developing between Napier and Graham, or the breakdown of relations between the admiral and some of his senior captains. In 1855 Seymour was appointed second in command in the Baltic to Rear-Admiral Sir Richard Dundas, and demonstrated his ability as a combat commander in detached positions. During the campaign he was blinded in one eye when one of the sea mines that had been picked up off Kronstadt exploded while he was examining it. 
In the spring of 1856 Seymour went out overland to take command of the China station. Early in October he received news of the seizure of the British coaster 'Arrow' by the Chinese authorities at Canton (Guangzhou). The governor of Hong Kong, Sir John Bowring, requested Seymour to bring pressure to bear on the Chinese viceroy. Accordingly Seymour seized the forts that covered the approaches to Canton, and, as the Chinese were obstinate, occupied the Bogue (Humen) forts. Troops were sent out from Britain, and Lord Elgin arrived with full powers to negotiate. However, the troops were ordered instead to India to suppress the mutiny and Lord Elgin followed them to Calcutta. Meantime the Chinese junk fleet was destroyed after a sharp action in the Fatshan (Foshan) Creek on 1 June 1857; on the arrival of other troops and the return of Lord Elgin, as the Chinese viceroy still refused all concessions, Seymour pushed up the river, and, after a clever feint, attacked and captured Canton with very little loss on 28-9 December 1857. The viceroy was captured and sent, a prisoner, to Calcutta. As the Chinese government at Peking (Beijing) refused to negotiate, Lord Elgin considered it necessary to move the scene of action to the north. At the end of April 1858 Seymour, in his flagship, the 'Calcutta', arrived in the Gulf of Pecheli (Beizhili), and, on the request of Elgin, took the forts at the mouth of the Peiho (Beihe) on 20 May, and forced the passage up the river as far as Tientsin (Tianjin), where on 26 June the treaty of Tientsin was signed, in which the Chinese government conceded the demands of the British minister. This campaign reflected the lessons of the Baltic campaigns that, with the proper equipment, coastal forts could be successfully engaged from the sea. 
Seymour afterwards escorted Lord Elgin to Japan, returned to Hong Kong, and reached England early in the following summer, at the end of his term of three years. The success of his operations in the Second Opium War was largely due to his foresight and attention to detail, though Lord Elgin publicly accused him of prevarication and delay in moving up to the Peiho and undertaking active operations. The charges were refuted by the Admiralty, and appeared absurd in the light of the failure of Sir James Hope's attack on the same forts in 1859. Seymour was made a GCB on 20 May 1859, and shortly afterwards was presented by the China merchants with a handsome service of plate. On 9 August 1859 he was returned to parliament as Liberal member for Devonport; he resigned his seat in February 1863. In January 1860 the duke of Somerset wanted Seymour to become senior naval lord, but the necessary reshuffling of seats could not be accomplished. 
On 1 November 1860 Seymour was promoted vice-admiral, and on 5 March 1864 admiral. From March 1863 to March 1866 he was commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. In 1870 he was put on the retired list, and in 1875 was nominated to the then honorary office of vice-admiral of the United Kingdom. He died at his home, Cadlington House, near Horndean, Hampshire, on 23 February 1887. Seymour was a talented, professional officer who combined nautical accomplishments and diplomatic skill with success in operational command. His early promotion to captain's rank, at a time of very slow movement on the Navy List, was entirely due to the influence of his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 25179


Seymour, Michael Hobart (1800-1874), anti-Catholic polemicist, was born on 29 September 1800 at Limerick, the sixth son of John Crossley Seymour (died 1831), vicar of Caherelly, and Catherine, eldest daughter and coheir of the Revd Edward Wight, rector of Meelick in co. Limerick. He claimed to be the lineal descendant of Sir Henry Seymour, brother of Henry VIII's wife Jane Seymour. Aaron Crossley Hobart Seymour was his brother. In 1823 he graduated BA from Trinity College, Dublin, and proceeded MA in 1832. He was ordained deacon in 1823 and priest in 1824. He served as a clergyman in Ireland, and also as secretary to the Irish Protestant Association, tirelessly campaigning against the dogmas and practices of the Roman Catholic church. He left Ireland, where he had become unpopular, for England about 1834. In London he was for several years evening lecturer at St George the Martyr, Southwark, and afternoon lecturer at St Ann Blackfriars while also acting as travelling secretary for the Reformation Society. In January 1844 Seymour married, at Walcot church, Bath, Maria, only daughter of General Thomas of the East India Company and widow of Baron Brownmill, physician to Louis XVIII. They had no children. For the next thirty years of his life he made Bath his permanent place of residence and ceased to hold any post in the church. 
In September 1844 Seymour and his wife took a long journey to Rome, which he described in his controversial 'A Pilgrimage to Rome' (1848) and 'Mornings among the Jesuits at Rome: being notes of conversations held with certain Jesuits in that city' (1849). The first book was criticized in 'A Brief Review by A. M.' (1849) and the second in 'The Rambler' (4, 1849, 144-9). Seymour had a rhetorical way of marshalling his facts, and his deductions could not always be relied upon. He followed up his attack in 'Evenings with the Romanists: with an introductory chapter on the moral results of the Romish system' (1854), which was republished in New York and Philadelphia in 1855 and translated into Spanish, finding a large circulation in Mexico. Seymour frequently contributed anti-Catholic pieces to newspapers, and continued to publish pamphlets and lectures against the church of Rome. A lecture on nunneries, published in 1852, involved him in a controversy with Cardinal Nicholas Wiseman, who published a reply. Seymour also brought out a popular new edition of Foxe's 'Acts and Monuments of the Church' (that is, the book of martyrs) in 1838, which purported to be 'carefully revised, corrected, and condensed'; this was widely circulated and often reprinted during the Victorian period. 
Seymour died at his home, 27 Marlborough Buildings, Bath, on 19 June 1874, and was buried at Locksbrook cemetery, Bath, on 25 June; his wife survived him. He was remembered for his fluency of speech and quick humour as well as for his polemical writings. 


@@@@@


doc= 25180


Seymour, Robert (1798-1836), illustrator and caricaturist, was born in Somerset, the second son of Henry Seymour and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Bishop (died 1827). The family moved to London, where Henry Seymour worked as a cabinet-maker for a Mr Seddon. He died during a return visit to Somerset, leaving his wife, two sons, and a daughter in very poor circumstances. Robert was apprenticed in London to a Mr Vaughan as a pattern-drawer in Duke Street, Smithfield, but his ambition was to be a professional painter. He was a frequent visitor to the house of an uncle, Thomas Holmes, in Hoxton, where he met the painter Joseph Severn. In 1822 Seymour's painting depicting a scene taken from Tasso's 'Jerusalem Delivered' with over 100 figures was exhibited at the Royal Academy. Another was rejected, and although Seymour continued to paint in oils, he turned to illustration for his livelihood. 
In the next five years Seymour produced designs for a wide range of subjects including poetry, melodramas, children's stories, and topographical and scientific works. Among the books which can be identified are William Robinson's 'The History of Enfield' (2 vols., 1823); 'Public Characters of All Nations' (3 vols., 1823); 'Le diable Boiteux' (1824); and Mary Sherwood's 'My Uncle Timothy' (1825). A steady supply of work enabled him to live comfortably with sufficient time to enjoy his library, fishing and shooting expeditions, and visits to a gymnasium with Lacey the publisher and George Cruikshank. 
In 1827 Seymour's mother died, and he married his cousin Jane Holmes, who later gave birth to a son, Robert, and a daughter, Jane. The same year the publishers Knight and Lacey became bankrupt, owing Seymour a considerable amount of money. Without their regular employment, he now had the opportunity to experiment with the etching process, and was fortunate to have his work accepted by the printseller Thomas McLean. He began producing caricatures in the style of George Cruikshank, signed with the pseudonym Shortshanks, which was quickly discarded when Cruikshank objected to it. Seymour's first etched book illustrations appeared the same year in 'Vagaries in Quest of the Wild and Wonderful' by Piers Shafton Grafton (Mr Becke), and Herbert Trevelyan's 'Snatches from Oblivion'. These were rather weak efforts, but his abilities developed rapidly, and by the time that works such as 'The March of Intellect' (1829) and 'The Heiress' (1830) were published, the humorous scenes are well observed and executed with much greater assurance. 
Having mastered the art of etching, Seymour turned to lithography, and by 1830 he was using the process for separate prints and book illustrations. In the same year he was invited by Thomas McLean to take over production of the 'Looking Glass', a caricature magazine that had been started in 1830, etched throughout by William Heath. Seymour provided four large lithographed sheets of illustrations every month until his death. Subjects are usually drawn several to a page, reflecting the social behaviour and political events of the time, with some fine full-page designs such as 'W.A.R.: a Masque', similar in style to John Doyle's caricatures. Two sketchbooks containing preparatory drawings for this publication, fine views of Windsor and Eton, figure studies, portraits, and other subjects are now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 
Seymour, who by this time was in the first rank of British comic artists, continued to provide drawings for wood-engraved illustrations in books and periodicals, in spite of his misgivings about this medium. In 1831 he began work for a new magazine, 'Figaro in London', producing nearly 300 small drawings to accompany the text of Gilbert A Beckett, often, as was customary at the time, having to work up something humorous from a dull political topic suggested by the editor. The partnership lasted until 1834, when A Beckett suffered a heavy financial loss and refused to pay Seymour money owed to him. Despite Seymour's conciliatory attempt to resolve the matter, A Beckett attacked him publicly in the pages of 'Figaro in London'. Seymour resigned, and returned to the paper only after Henry Mayhew had been appointed to replace the former editor. 
Independently Seymour launched a new series of lithographs titled 'Sketches by Seymour' between 1834 and 1836, devoted largely to the misadventures of cockney sportsmen. Although the designs are poor compared with his other work of this period, the prints were enormously popular, and were reissued several times during the following fifty years. Charles Baudelaire, the French poet, wrote, 'As with the rest of the English, we find in Seymour a violence, a love of the excessive, and a simple, ultra-brutal and direct manner of stating his subject; when it comes to caricature, the English are extremists' (Baudelaire, 188). Seymour is seen at his best in the twenty-four fine but relatively unknown etched plates made in 1835 to illustrate Thomas K. Hervey's 'The Book of Christmas' and the twelve plates in 'The Squib Annual' for 1836. 
Another project was to have been a series of etchings by Seymour depicting the activities of a sporting club. After seeing the first four plates, Edward Chapman, of Chapman and Hall, agreed that the work should be issued in monthly parts with descriptive text, for which he suggested the young Charles Dickens. The first part of the new work, 'The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club' appeared, but before the second was completed Dickens had asked Seymour to provide a new plate for 'The Stroller's Tale'. He did so, but was clearly unhappy about the way that his illustrations were now subordinate to the text. Before the second part had been completed, on 20 April 1836, Seymour shot himself with a fowling piece in the summer house to the rear of his home in Liverpool Road, Islington. His obituaries at the time suggest that the feud with A Beckett, the problems with Dickens over 'The Stroller's Tale', overwork, and illness were to blame, but in his last note he wrote, 'Best and dearest of wives -- for such you have been to me -- blame, I charge you, no one.' Contradictory claims and statements about the origin of 'Pickwick Papers' were made long after Seymour's death, but Pickwickian figures can be seen in earlier works such as 'The Heiress' and 'The Book of Christmas'. In his introduction to Jane Seymour's book on the subject, the Dickens scholar F. G. Kitton states: 'It is probably fair to surmise that had not her husband communicated to Edward Chapman his idea of publishing a series of Cockney Sporting Sketches, 'Pickwick' would never have been written' (J. Seymour, introduction). 


@@@@@


doc= 25181


Seymour, Thomas, Baron Seymour of Sudeley (b. in or before 1509, d. 1549), nobleman, was the fourth of six sons of Sir John Seymour (1473/4-1536), landowner and courtier, of Wolf Hall, Wiltshire, and his wife, Margery (died 1550), daughter of Sir Henry Wentworth of Nettlestead, Suffolk. His elder brothers included Edward Seymour (c.1500-1552), later duke of Somerset and lord protector, and Sir Henry Seymour ('b'. in or before 1503, died 1578) of Marwell in Hampshire, and one of his four sisters was Jane (1508/9-1537), third wife of Henry VIII (1491-1547). Sir John Seymour was a minor but reasonably prosperous gentleman with property in Wiltshire and Somerset. 
By 1530 Thomas Seymour was in service to the leading courtier Sir Francis Bryan ('b'. in or before 1492, died 1550). He rose to prominence on Henry's marriage to Jane on 30 May 1536; he became a gentleman of the privy chamber by 2 October and was named joint master steward of Chirk and Holt in Denbighshire and of other manors and castles in the Welsh marches the following year. On 18 October 1537, six days after Jane gave birth to Edward, prince of Wales (1537-1553), Seymour was knighted. Further reward came with grants of former monastic land in Essex, Hampshire, and Berkshire in March 1538. Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk, was keen for an alliance with the Seymour family and on 14 July suggested to the king that his daughter Mary Fitzroy, duchess of Richmond, marry Seymour. Henry approached Seymour, who preferred Sir Thomas Cromwell to have 'the mayning of the matter' ('LP Henry VIII', 13/1, no. 1375). Seymour was involved in diplomatic missions to Francois I in 1538 and to Ferdinand in Vienna in summer 1542, witnessing campaigning against the Turks in Hungary. With Dr Nicholas Wotton he was sent as resident ambassador to Mary of Hungary, regent of the Low Countries, on 30 April 1543 with a 'diet' of $1 6's'. 8died per day. However, he was recalled in mid-July. 
Seymour played a more prominent role in social occasions at court, participating in tournaments at Whitehall Palace on 1, 3, and 5 May 1540. In summer 1543 he was marshal of the English army in the Low Countries, serving under Sir John Wallop. This military experience may explain his appointment as master of the ordnance for life on 18 April 1544, a striking mark of royal favour, and he took part in the capture of Boulogne on 14 September. In October of that year he was appointed an admiral of the fleet, and he was much involved in naval action in 1545. On 29 November he was rewarded with Hampton Place outside Temple Bar, which he renamed Seymour Place. He was returned as knight of the shire for Wiltshire in 1545, possibly through the influence of Edward Seymour (now earl of Hertford), but his activities in the House of Commons are unrecorded. Various other local offices, rewards, and commissions followed. By the end of Henry's reign Seymour's annual income was an impressive $458 6's'. 8died In June 1546 Norfolk again asked Henry to arrange marriage between Seymour and his daughter, but Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, was bitterly opposed to the match, saying it was beneath his sister. Seymour himself would have preferred to marry Katherine (1512-1548), the second child and elder daughter of Sir Thomas Parr of Kendal, Westmorland, and his wife, Maud, and widow of John Neville, third Baron Latimer. He courted Katherine briefly early in 1543 before she caught the king's eye. On 23 January 1547, five days before the king's death, Seymour was sworn of the privy council, possibly despite Henry's objections. Henry named Seymour one of the assistants to the executors of his will and left him $200. According to the principal secretary, Sir William Paget, Henry wished Seymour to be ennobled. He was duly created Baron Seymour of Sudeley on 16 February, with an additional grant of lands valued at $500 per annum, nominated a knight of the Garter the next day, and installed on 23 May. 
At the beginning of Edward VI's reign Hertford seized power and had himself promoted duke of Somerset and installed as lord protector and governor of the king's person. Although he had been ennobled and appointed lord high admiral on 17 February (and relinquished the office of master of the ordnance on 26 March in return), Seymour was dissatisfied with his place in the new regime and embarked on a series of intrigues that ultimately cost him his life. He was incensed that his brother should be both lord protector and governor: those functions should, he claimed, be divided and he should have one. He confessed that he had searched through chronicles for precedents and found them in the minority of Henry VI. So discontent was he that during the Scottish military campaign in autumn 1547, despite his office of lord admiral, he stayed in London while his brother went north to fight. Somerset won a great victory at the battle of Pinkie on 10 September, but then left the borders very hastily without pursuing his military advantage because 'il apprit, par un courier qu'on lui depecha expres, que l'amiral son frere formait a la cour un puissant parti contre lui, et qu'il avait pris des mesures secretes avec le roi meme; pour lui enlever la charge de gouverneur de ce jeune prince' (Abbe de Verdot, 1.129-31). It was probably then that Seymour got the king to write a letter in support of his marriage to Katherine, and possibly prepared a letter to be presented in parliament, which he hoped Edward would sign, stating that Seymour should be governor. Generally Somerset succeeded in keeping his brother away from the king, but Seymour exploited his contacts with John Fowler, one of the grooms of the privy chamber, and the royal tutor Sir John Cheke. On several occasions Seymour gave $5 and $10, and as much as $40, to Fowler and Cheke to give to the king. Seymour had told the king, 'ye are a beggarly king ye have no monie to play or to geve' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1729, fol. 9'r'). He described how Edward moaned, 'my Unkel off Sumerset deylyth very hardly with me and kepyth me so strayt that I cane not have mony at my wylle but my lord Admyral both sendes me mony and gyves me mony' (Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, Cecil MS 150, fol. 112'r'). Seymour was clearly trying to use the king's understandable desire for more spending money to insinuate himself into his favour. If Seymour and Edward had lived longer, such a relationship might have had significant consequences. 
Meanwhile Seymour quickly and secretly married Henry's widow, Katherine, probably in May or June. This action openly defied Somerset and the privy council. It was pointed out that had Katherine soon become pregnant, there would have been uncertainty about whether the child was Seymour's or Henry's. The marriage led to friction between the Seymour brothers and their wives, not least over ceremonial precedence, and over Katherine's jewels. Even before Katherine's death on 5 September 1548, shortly after giving birth to Mary Seymour (1548-1550), Seymour had been flirting with Princess Elizabeth, who was resident in their household at Chelsea and Hanworth in Middlesex. Elizabeth's governess and closest servant, Katherine Astley, testified how: 'He wold com many mornyngs into the said Lady Elizabeths chamber... And if she were up, he wold bid her good Morrow, and ax how she did, and strike hir upon the bak, or on the buttocks familiarly... And if she were in hir bed he wold put open the curteyns, and bid hir good morrow, and make as though he wold come at hir: And she wold go further in the bed, so that he could not com at hir; And one mornyng he strove to have kissed hir in hir Bed. (Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, Cecil MS 150, fol. 85'r')' 'One tyme', according to Astley, 'the [dowager] Quene, suspecting the often accesse of the Admirall to the Lady Elizabeth's Grace, cam sodenly upon them, wher they were all alone, (he having her in his Armes)' (Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, Cecil MS 150, fol. 80'v'). After Katherine's death Seymour was clearly interested in proposing to Elizabeth; the tone of Astley's testimony suggests that Elizabeth herself was far from reluctant, though aware of the political sensitivities. 
Seymour tried to recruit several noblemen to support his various causes, often speaking with them on their way to or from parliament. Henry Grey, third marquess of Dorset, was won over by Seymour's promise to marry his daughter, Lady Jane Grey, to the king. Thomas Wriothesley, first earl of Southampton, testified how on their way to dinner during parliament, 'after a litle comen talk', Seymour said to him, referring to Southampton's surrender of the office of lord chancellor in early 1547, 'ha my lord of Southampton, you were well handeled touching yor office. Why shuld you not have it again?' (TNA: PRO, SP 10/6/15). He also attempted to assemble a group of associates and servants in the Commons. In autumn 1547 he threatened to disrupt the parliament. He was accused of saying, 'I have herd spekyng of a black parlament and they usse me as they doo begyn by goddes preshios soule I wyll make the blakiste parleament that ever was in England' (TNA: PRO, SP 10/6/7). 
Seymour was very much aware of the need to build local support. To Dorset he said that he should not trust the gentlemen of the county too much 'for they have sumwhat to loose'. Instead: 'I wold rather advise you to make muche of the head yeomen and frankelyns of the cuntreye, specially those that be the ringleaders, for they be the men that be best hable to perswade the multitude and may best bring the number and therefore I wold wishe you to make muche of them, and to goo to their houses, nowe to oon and nowe to an other, caryeng with you a flagon or two of wyne, and a pasty of veneson, and to use a familiaritie with them, for so shall you cause them to love you, and be assured to have them at your commaundemente.' 'This maner (I may tel you)', Seymour continued, 'I entende to use miself' (TNA: PRO, SP 10/6/7). His 'conception of local power was competitive' (Bernard, 222). He advised Dorset 'to kepe my house in Warwikeshire... because that war a cuntrey full of men, but chiefly to match with my lorde of Warwike [John Dudley, earl of Warwick], so as he should not be hable to matche with me there' (TNA: PRO, SP 10/6/7). Sir William Sharington, the under-treasurer of the Bristol mint, testified how Seymour: 'Hathe divers tymes caused me to loke with him uppon a cart of England in the loking wherof he wold many tymes shewe me howe strong he was, what nombres of men he was able to make, how farre his landes and dominions did stretche, And howe his said landes lay betwene his house of Brouham and the Holtehe. (TNA: PRO, SP 10/6/13)' Dorset said that Seymour 'used sondry tymes to shewe me as we rodde togithers the cowntrees rounde about sayeng all these which dwell in thes parties be my frendes'. 'And so he did vaunt... that he had as great a nombre of gentlemen that loved hym, as eny noble man in England... And further said that he thought that he had more gentlemen that louved hym than the Lord Protector had and upon that he said he was happye that hath freends in this world what so ever shuld chaunce' (Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, Cecil MS 150, fol. 93'v'). Such evidence was echoed in the charges against him: 'he ment to have matched and sett one Noble man against such an other Noble man, as he thought he cowlde never compasse and wynne to assent to his factyon and false conspiracye' ('Statutes of the Realm', 11 vols., 1810-28, 3.63). 
More significantly still, Seymour was fortifying Holt, at a strategic crossing point on the River Dee that commanded access from north to south Wales. He was also trying to secure more money. He was accused of maintaining pirates and taking a share of their spoil. Seymour asked Sharington, who had been coining testoons for himself and was possibly hoping to be protected from the consequences by high-placed friends, whether he could coin money for him. A later French account hinted that what Seymour planned to do was to kidnap the young king and marry Elizabeth, bringing them to Holt. Significantly, when in custody Seymour denied 'that ever I went about to take the kyng from my lord my brother by force; I never ment it, nor thought it' (Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, Cecil MS 150, fol. 99'v'). Yet Fowler testified how Seymour had once come to St James's Palace at nine o'clock in the morning and voiced his surprise that there were so few people there: 'a man might stele away the king now for there cam more with me than is in all the howse besides' (TNA: PRO, SP 10/6/10). If Seymour was indeed plotting to kidnap Edward and Elizabeth, to marry the princess, and to have himself made lord protector in place of his brother, it is not surprising that he was arrested and tried once his plans were discovered. 
Seymour was arrested on 17 January 1549. Examined on 25 January, he wrote an abject submission to Somerset on 27 January. Many were interrogated. Some members of the privy council were clearly turning this information into articles against Seymour. He was examined on 18 February; the privy council discussed the matter on 22 February; Seymour was examined again on 23 February, but refused to answer unless his accusers stood before him, and would not even subscribe the answers he had earlier begun to make. On 24 February the privy councillors reported to Edward, Somerset 'declaring how sorowfull a case this was unto hym', but regarding his duty to the king greater than that to his brother. They sent once again to Seymour, who would answer no more than three of the articles. On 25 February a bill of attainder was introduced into parliament, unopposed in the House of Lords (Somerset was allowed for natural pity's sake to be absent), but 'very much debated and argued' in the Commons, in which lawyers declared that Seymour's offences 'were in the compasse of High Treason'. On 5 March the bill was passed, the Commons 'being marvailous full almost to the number of iiiic persons, not x or xii at the most giving their nays tharunto' ('APC', '1547-50', 246-7, 256-8, 260). Seymour was beheaded on Tower Hill on 20 March and buried in the Tower, presumably in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula. It was not any fratricidal bitterness or any factional stirring but quite simply what was found out about his activities and ambitions during the investigations in January and February 1549 that sealed his fate. He had done and said quite enough to have provoked not only his brother but also all his fellow privy councillors. To the end Seymour continued his plotting, for which he was denounced in a sermon by Hugh Latimer. He had allegedly sent papers to Princess Mary and Elizabeth, urging them to conspire against Somerset. These papers had been found in his shoe, sewn between the soles. He had 'made his pen of the aglet of a poynte that he plucked from his hosse'. Latimer declaimed how Seymour 'died very dangerously, irksomely, horribly... He was a man the farthest from the fear of God that I knew or heard of in England' ('Sermons of Hugh Latimer, Sometime Bishop of Worcester, Martyr, 1555', ed. G. E. Corrie, Parker Society, 22, 1844, 161-5). 
Seymour tried to do too much too quickly, and there was as much rhetoric as action. He won insufficient support among his fellow privy councillors: even if Dorset, William Parr, marquess of Northampton, Henry Manners, second earl of Rutland, and Southampton were keener than they allowed themselves to appear in their depositions, Seymour never gained any wholehearted commitment. He hardly had any coherent political programme, even if he agreed with his wife's criticism of the distribution of crown lands, or attacked Somerset's Scottish invasion of 1547 for risking the loss of a great number of men and for costing 'a great summ of Money in vayn', or suggested that Somerset would give up Calais to the French, or declared generally that 'he mislyked the procedinges of the lord Protector and counsayle' and sought 'the alteracion of the state and ordre of the Realme' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1729, fol. 9'r'; Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, Cecil MS 150, fol. 60'v'). Yet, if he had delayed his plots until autumn 1549, he might have gathered more support after the continuing military difficulties and the serious popular rebellions of the summer. Seymour's precipitate approach and consequent failure was as much a matter of temperament. William Wightman, his servant, testified how 'if he had oones conceyved opynion by his owne perswasions, neyther Lawyer nor other could tourne him' (Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, Cecil MS 150, fol. 60'v'). His fiery nature and his soaring ambition told against him, however attractive and charming his personality was. 'This day', said Elizabeth on hearing of his execution, 'died a man with much wit, and very litle judgment' (E. Dent, 'Annals of Winchecombe and Sudeley', 1877, 193). 


@@@@@


doc= 25182


Seymour, William, first marquess of Hertford and second duke of Somerset (1587-1660), politician and royalist army officer, was born on 1 September 1587, the second but eldest surviving son of Edward Seymour, Lord Beauchamp (1561-1612) ['see under 'Seymour, Edward, first earl of Hertford], and his wife, Honora Rogers. He matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, on 16 April 1605 and graduated BA on 9 December 1607. He was later created MA (31 August 1636) and DM (12 August 1645). 
For much of the early Stuart period Seymour's relations with the royal court were somewhat strained. His illicit marriage on 22 June 1610 to James I's cousin Lady Arabella Stuart (1575-1615) incurred the king's intense displeasure on the grounds that the two parties were cousins, and both had a (remote) claim to the throne. As a result they were imprisoned in the following month, Lady Arabella at Lambeth and Seymour in the Tower. Through the efforts of Lady Arabella's aunt the countess of Shrewsbury they both succeeded in escaping on 3-4 June 1611. However, Lady Arabella was recaptured and confined to the Tower until she died on 27 September 1615, while Seymour, who had managed to flee across the channel, remained in exile until January 1616. His appointment to the Order of the Bath the following November heralded his rehabilitation at court, but the memory of this scandal seemed to dog him, and his offices and honours remained meagre thereafter. 
Seymour was elected MP for Marlborough in December 1620, but succeeded his grandfather as second earl of Hertford in the following April. In 1624, although the prince of Wales helped restore him temporarily to favour, Hertford attended the Lords only once, and there is no record that he spoke. He was granted leave of absence from the 1625 parliament, and attended none of its sittings. In 1626, however, he served as chairman of the Lords' committee for privileges which defended the earls of Arundel and Bristol against Charles I's attempts to exclude them. Throughout the 1628 parliament Hertford consistently opposed Buckingham's efforts to introduce a saving clause into the petition of right, and became widely perceived as one of the duke's enemies. 
This political alignment may have owed something to Hertford's second marriage, in April 1618, to Lady Frances Devereux (1599-1674), sister of Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex. Hertford was very friendly with his brother-in-law, another peer marginalized from the court, and in July 1629 wrote warmly to Essex of 'two soe nearly linked in frendship and alliance as wee are' (BL, Add. MS 46188, fol. 114'r'). During the 1630s Essex regularly visited Hertford's Wiltshire houses, supported him in a duel in May 1636, and leased part of Essex House to him for ninety-nine years in return for $1100. Throughout Charles I's personal rule Hertford remained detached from the court: Clarendon later wrote that he: 'had always undergone hard measure from the Court, where he received no countenance, and had no design of making advantage from it. For though he was a man of very good parts, and conversant in books both in Latin and Greek languages, and of a clear courage... he was so wholly given up to a country life, where he lived in splendour, that he had an aversion, even an unaptness, for business. (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.528-9)' Few offices came his way: only belatedly, on 23 March 1639, was he appointed lord lieutenant of Somerset, and then solely because the earl of Pembroke was otherwise engaged in the first of Charles's campaigns against the Scottish covenanters. 
In August 1640 Hertford, like Essex, was among the signatories of the twelve peers' petition urging the king to recall parliament. During the first half of 1641 Charles I sought a rapprochement with several of the twelve peers, and as part of this process Hertford was created a privy councillor (19 February), elevated to the rank of marquess (3 June), and appointed governor to the prince of Wales (10 August). According to Clarendon, from this point onwards Hertford rallied to 'the support and defence of the King's power and dignity, notwithstanding all his allies and those with whom he had the greatest familiarity and friendship were of the opposite party', and he accepted the position of governor to the prince of Wales out of 'pure zeal and affection for the Crown, and the conscience that in this conjuncture his submission might advance the King's service' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.563-4). Hertford absented himself from the crucial vote on Strafford's attainder on 7 May, and in December he presented a petition from Somerset to the Lords in defence of episcopacy and the prayer book. As civil war approached, his role as governor to the prince of Wales became politically more sensitive, and on 14 January 1642 the two houses of parliament ordered him to ensure that the prince 'bee not carried out of the kingdome' ('JHL', 4.513). He politely declined to give such an undertaking, and also refused to accept the lord lieutenancy of Somerset under the terms of the militia ordinance. In April he joined the king at York, together with the prince of Wales and the duke of York, and ignored parliamentary orders to return. 
Hertford's refusal to be cowed by the houses reflected his growing political stature by the early 1640s, and he remained prominent in royalist counsels throughout the years of civil war. Like a number of other constitutional royalists, including his younger brother Francis Seymour, his allegiance to the king was not necessarily inconsistent with his earlier history of constitutional 'opposition', notably to the 'saving clause' in the petition of right. The common denominator of both was a consistent commitment to the rule of law and constitutional propriety. Hertford sought to defend these ideals against whoever appeared to pose the greatest threat to them, be it Charles and Buckingham in the later 1620s or the crown's leading parliamentary critics by 1641-2. As the civil war approached, Hertford came to regard the crown as the lesser of two evils, but during the years that followed he pursued a negotiated settlement and avoided the more hardline strand of royalism. 
On 2 August 1642 Hertford was appointed one of the commissioners of array for Somerset, and also lieutenant-general of the south-west and of south Wales. During September, concerted parliamentarian resistance in Somerset obliged him to withdraw his forces into south Wales, where he raised some 2000 men. From there he joined the king at Oxford in January 1643, and then, with Prince Maurice, advanced into Somerset, taking Taunton, Bridgwater, and Dunster Castle. He linked up with Sir Ralph Hopton at Chard on 4 June and they defeated Sir William Waller's forces at Lansdown on 5 July. Hertford then joined up with Prince Rupert to take Bristol on 26 July. 
After this successful campaign, growing disputes between Hertford and princes Rupert and Maurice led the king to recall the marquess to Oxford, where he was appointed groom of the stole in January 1644. Hertford occupied rooms in Christ Church, and on 31 October 1643 he was elected chancellor of Oxford University, an office which he held until the visitation of the university by parliamentarian commissioners in the summer of 1647. Throughout the civil wars, Hertford was committed to seeking an accommodation between the king and the houses, and he remained in informal contact with his brother-in-law Essex. For example, during the summer of 1644, shortly before the parliamentarian surrender of Lostwithiel, the king's message to Essex was conveyed by Hertford's son Lord Beauchamp, who was also Essex's nephew. Similarly, Essex's refusal to negotiate without the houses' express permission was related by John Richard, one of Hertford's clients. Hertford was one of the royalist commissioners at the treaty of Uxbridge (January-February 1645), and the following May he was among the commissioners entrusted with the city and university of Oxford during the king's absence on campaign. In December, Hertford, along with the earls of Dorset, Southampton, and Lindsey, again urged Charles to resume negotiations, but the king retorted that he would defend his crown 'with his sword, if those of his friends failed him' ('The Diplomatic Correspondence of Jean de Montereul', ed. J. G. Fotheringham, 2 vols., Scottish RS, 29-30, 1898-9, 1.70-71). In late April 1646 Hertford and several other royalist peers made a final abortive attempt to reach agreement with the parliamentary army at Woodstock, and on 20 June he was among the signatories of the Oxford articles of surrender. 
The following autumn, Hertford begged to compound under the Oxford articles at the rate of one-tenth, or the value of two years' income from his estates. His composition fine was set at $12,603 6's'. 9died on 21 November 1646, but was subsequently reduced to $8345 in January 1648 because part of his estate was held only for life; there is, however, no firm evidence that the fine was ever paid. In October 1647 Hertford was one of a small circle of royalist peers whom the king summoned to Hampton Court to advise him, and in the autumn of the following year he served as one of the king's commissioners at the treaty of Newport. As late as 12 January 1649 Hertford joined with Richmond, Dorset, 'and divers others of the King's party' in sending 'to the Councell of the Army to engage both their persons and estates that the King shall performe whatsoever he yeilds unto' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 34, fol. 74'r'). But this initiative came to nothing, and its failure opened the way to the king's trial, which began on 20 January. Along with Richmond, Southampton, and Lindsey, Hertford remained with Charles during his trial, and on 8 February these four peers acted as pallbearers at the king's funeral at Windsor. 
Hertford owned extensive lands, especially in Somerset and Wiltshire, and his importance as a territorial magnate helps to explain why the council of state kept him under close observation during the early years of the interregnum. In July 1650 he was ordered to remain at his seat at Netley, while the following year he was instructed to move to another house in Wiltshire. He was also told to prevent the resort of 'many dangerous and disaffected persons' to his house, and to 'give security for his acting nothing prejudiciall to the Commonwealth' (TNA: PRO, SP 25/65, p. 108; SP 25/96, pp. 48-9). Although Hertford himself avoided direct involvement in royalist conspiracy, his eldest son, Lord Beauchamp, took command of the western association, formed in May 1650, and developed an extensive network throughout western England. However, the association was soon infiltrated by government agents, and in April 1651 Beauchamp was imprisoned in the Tower. Hertford, who was the great-grandson of Edward VI's protector Somerset, observed wryly that it seemed the Tower was: 'a place entailed upon our famylie, for wee have now helde it five generations, yeat toe speake the truth I like not the place soe well but that I coulde be very well contented the entayle should be cutt off and settled upon some other familie that better deserves it. ('Rutland MSS', 2.47)' Beauchamp was released in September 1651, but within two years his health failed, and he died in March 1654 to the great distress not only of his family but also of the exiled royalist court. 
Although Hertford had some contact with John Penruddock, he kept his distance from the rising of March 1655, and Major-General Desborough found that the marquess had 'little stomach to meddle' in royalist conspiracy (A. A. Locke, 'The Seymour Family', 1911, 138). Hertford's desire to live quietly and avoid an open confrontation with the regime was further evident in his readiness to pay $515 towards the decimation tax in May 1656; Cromwell reciprocated by granting him a personal exemption. Hertford nevertheless wished to keep the lord protector at arm's length. When Cromwell invited him to dinner, and sought 'his advice what to do', Hertford replied frankly: 'Our young Master, that is abroad, that is, my Master, and the Master of us all, restore him to his crownes, and by doing this, you may have what you please.' Cromwell responded that 'hee had gone so farre, that the young gentleman could not forgive'. Hertford's secretary recorded that they then parted 'and the Marquis had never any prejudice hereby so long as Cromwel lived' (BL, Add. MS 32093, fol. 348'r'-348'v'). 
From the mid-1650s onwards Hertford lived more and more quietly. By 1652 his total debts probably stood at about $19,000, and he was twice reported to have gone abroad in 1656-7 in order to escape his creditors. His wife increasingly took over the management of the Seymour estates, taking policy decisions and corresponding with stewards. Hertford was nevertheless an active patron of distressed clergy during the interregnum and a number of ministers received regular payments from the marquess and his wife. He remained deeply reluctant to join in any royalist activism, convinced that a premature insurrection would only jeopardize the Stuart restoration which he always believed would eventually occur. 
Hertford's prognosis proved correct, and on 26 May 1660 he was among the peers who welcomed Charles II at Dover. The same day he was restored to his office as chancellor of Oxford University, and the following day he was appointed a knight of the Garter. On 13 September he was restored to the dukedom of Somerset by a private act of parliament (House of Lords RO, 12 Chas. II, Original Act 10). In giving his assent, Charles declared that this was an honour 'of an extraordinary nature... for an extraordinary person, who hath merited as much of the King my father and myself as a subject can do' ('JHL', 11.173). By this time, however, his health was declining and he died at Essex House on 24 October 1660. He was buried on 1 November at Bedwyn Magna church in Wiltshire. His widow lived on until 24 April 1674 and was buried, also at Bedwyn Magna, on 7 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 25183


Seymour, William Digby (1822-1895), judge, third son of Charles Seymour, vicar of Kilronan, co. Roscommon, and his wife, Beata, daughter of Fergus Langley of Lich Finn, co. Tipperary, was born in co. Galway, Ireland, on 22 September 1822. He was educated at Edgeworthstown School and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he matriculated on 12 October 1838. He graduated BA in 1844 and LLD in 1872. He entered the Inner Temple on 2 May 1843 but transferred to the Middle Temple on 14 November 1845. He was called to the bar there on 12 June 1846, and practised on the northern circuit. On 1 September 1847 he married Emily, second daughter of Joseph John Wright, solicitor, of Sunderland. 
Through the influence of his father-in-law Seymour was returned to parliament as one of the members for Sunderland in 1852, and his support of the Liberal Party was rewarded with the recordership of Newcastle in December 1854. On returning to his constituency for re-election he was defeated. In the meantime he had become connected with various commercial undertakings, notably with the Waller Goldmining Company, of which he was chairman in 1852. These undertakings were unsuccessful and in 1858 he had to make an arrangement with his creditors. In 1859 he was called before the benchers of the Middle Temple to answer charges affecting his character as a barrister in connection with some commercial transactions, and on 23 February was censured by the benchers ('The Times', 22, 24, 25 Feb 1859 and 4 April 1859). Seymour disputed the fairness of the decision, but he would not publish the evidence, and he was excluded from the bar mess of the northern circuit. None the less, he won nominal damages for libel against the 'Law Magazine' for giving a statement of the case with comments. 
In May 1859 Seymour was returned for Southampton, securing Conservative support by a pledge not to vote against Derby's government. His failure to observe this promise was commented on by the 'Morning Herald', and Seymour sought to institute a criminal prosecution of that paper, which was refused by Lord Campbell. He claimed to favour an extension of the franchise, provided that this was accompanied by the protection of the ballot, and was opposed to all special religious endowments. Seymour was named a queen's counsel in the county palatine of Lancaster in August 1860, and on 19 February 1861 a queen's counsel for England by Lord Campbell. In the same year he was employed by the government to draw up the 'Admiralty Reform Act'. 
Seymour's views grew gradually more Conservative; he unsuccessfully contested Hull in 1857, Southampton in 1865, Nottingham in 1869 and 1870, Stockton in 1880, and South Shields in 1885. Through the influence of his political friends in August 1889 he became judge of the county court circuit no. 1, with his chief court at Newcastle upon Tyne. He held that appointment until his death at Tynemouth, Northumberland, on 16 March 1895. 
Seymour published two works on land investment in Ireland as well as texts on shipping law and a translation of the Hebrew psalter. 


@@@@@


doc= 25184


Francis Charles Seymour-Conway, third marquess of Hertford (1777-1842), courtier, who was born on 11 March 1777, and was educated at Christ Church, Oxford, and also at St Mary Hall there, from which he graduated in 1796. Between 1797 and his accession to the title -- until when he was known as Lord Yarmouth -- he represented Orford, Lisburn, co. Antrim, and Camelford, all seats controlled by the Hertford interest. On 18 May 1798 he married, in defiance of his parents, Maria Emily Fagnani [


@@@@@


doc= 25185


Shackleton, Abraham (1696-1771), schoolmaster, was born on 27 October 1696 into a family of yeoman farmers, at Shackleton House, Harden, near Bingley, Yorkshire, the youngest of the six children of Richard Shackleton (1643-1705) and his wife, Sarah Brigg (1658-1703) of Keighley. His father, the first of the family to become a Friend, had suffered three years' imprisonment at York Castle for non-attendance at church, and the family home, Shackleton House, became a registered Quaker meeting-house in the year that Abraham was born. 
Abraham's parents both died before he was nine, and at the age of twenty he sold his share of the family inheritance to his brother Roger (1691-1766) and took to studying Latin, duly becoming a good prose stylist. He then taught at David Hall's school at Skipton, Yorkshire, and on 7 October 1725 he married Margaret Wilkinson (1688-1768) of Knowlbank, a first cousin of his employer. In 1720 he moved to Ireland and became tutor to the children of two Quaker landowners, John Duckett of Duckett's Grove, co. Carlow, and William Cooper of nearby Cooper's Hill, Queen's county. With their encouragement he established, in 1726, a boarding-school for boys in the tree-lined, Quaker village of Ballitore, co. Kildare. The school was multi-denominational and took both native Irish and Anglo-Irish pupils alike, with a sprinkling from France, Scandinavia, and further afield. He was an extremely diligent and careful teacher, strong on fatherly oversight, and always set a good example of uprightness, temperance, and humility. Because of him Quakerism came to be better understood in Ireland and the Quakers admired. His most famous pupil was the statesman and philosopher Edmund Burke. 
Shackleton retired in 1756, having educated over 500 boys in 30 years, and occupied himself with farming and occasional religious journeys, such as travelling around Ireland with Joseph Oxley in 1762 and to the yearly meeting of Friends in London in 1769 (when he also visited Burke at Beaconsfield). He died on 24 June 1771 at Ballitore, where he was interred in the Quaker burial-ground. Burke said of him that 'He was indeed a man of singular piety, rectitude and virtue and he had, along with these qualities, a native elegance of manners which nothing but genuine good nature and unaffected simplicity of heart can give' (Leadbeater, 'Memoirs and Letters', 98). He left one son, Richard ['see below'], and one daughter, Elizabeth Raynor. 


Shackleton greatly relished meeting such men as George Crabbe and Joshua Reynolds in Burke's circle; however, he kept his own worldly ambitions firmly under control. He lived a quiet, virtuous life, became a Quaker elder, and although not a minister he promoted Friends' principles in the school by his example, and through his correspondence greatly encouraged those who were in the ministry. He was a warm, compassionate man who practised daily spiritual retirement, seeking salvation through self-denial and humility. Burke said of him that 'No life was better... [or] more happily spent than his' (Leadbeater, 'Papers', 1.201). He was twice married: his first wife, whom he married on 2 April 1749, was Elizabeth Fuller (1726-1754), with whom he had four children and lived at Fuller's Court in Ballitore. She died on 19 May 1754 and on 17 October in the following year he married Elizabeth Carleton (1726-1804). They first lived at the school, then at Griesebank, and finally at The Retreat, in Ballitore. 
In 1767 Shackleton inherited a small estate, with a farm, which was successfully operated by his wife, and a mill, which he rented. In 1779 he was succeeded as master of Ballitore School by his eldest son, Abraham Shackleton (1752-1818), and thereafter he travelled frequently in Quaker service in Ireland and in England; there he often spent the summer months, attending London yearly meeting and visiting such friends as Burke and the industrialist Abiah Darby, for whom he wrote the poem 'On Travelling to Coalbrook Dale in the Night-Time', in both Latin and English versions, in 1783. With his second wife he had four children, including the writer Mary Leadbeater (1758-1826), in whose 'Poems' (1808) appear seven short compositions by her father. He was a round-faced man, whose portrait, commissioned by Burke, was painted in 1766 by Richard Sisson. He died of a fever, on 28 August 1792, while visiting Mountmellick, Queen's county, and was buried on 30 August in the Quaker burial-ground, Ballitore. 


@@@@@


doc= 25186


Shackleton, John (d. 1767), portrait painter, of whose parents nothing is known, is mainly known as principal painter-in-ordinary to George II, a position to which he was appointed on 7 March 1749 as successor to William Kent (1684-1748). He kept the appointment under George III, and continued to be paid for portraits of the king and queen up until 1765-6, although it was Allan Ramsay (1713-1784) who painted the official portraits during this period. Prior to his appointment Shackleton had painted a number of portraits, for example of William Windham (1717-1761) (Felbrigg Hall, Norfolk), and of John Bristowe, steward to the first duke of Newcastle (Reitlinger Museum of Fine Art, Maidenhead). On 25 October 1742 when he was living in the parish of St George's, Hanover Square, London, he married Mary Ann Regnier. In 1755 he was one of the original committee who drew up the first proposal for a royal academy of London, and on 8 March 1758 he was elected a member of the young Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce. He exhibited at the Free Society of Artists from 1763 to 1766. Shackleton died in London on 14 or 16 March 1767. In his will, dated 8 March 1767, Shackleton left property to his 'dear friend Mrs Sarah Rice', 'two marble heads said to be done by Bernini to my intimate friend Mr Robt [D?]ossie of Wardour Street, Soho', and 'a half-length picture of a Lady by Vandyke and a small landscape by Gaspar Poussin to John Bristow Esqr Keeper of His Majesties Lions in the Tower' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/928, sig. 150). A number of portraits of George II by Shackleton and his studio are in collections in Britain, for example one dated 1755 in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh; a picture in the Foundling Hospital, London, which was given by the artist in May 1758, upon which he was elected a governor and guardian of the hospital; a painting in the British Museum, London, which was commissioned by the museum in 1759; two examples in the Royal Collection; and others in Fishmongers' Hall, London, and Maidenhead Museum. Engravings after his paintings are in the British Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 25187


Richard Shackleton (1726-1792), schoolmaster and poet, was born at Ballitore on 9 December 1726. He studied Hebrew and the classics, and became one of the leading Quaker scholars of his day. Educated at his father's school and Trinity College, Dublin, he subsequently taught at Ballitore School and was its master from 1756 to 1779. His cheerful, affectionate disposition opened his way with all ranks, and he became a lifelong friend of Edmund Burke, his contemporary at school and university. Sixty-four letters from Burke to him are printed in 'The Leadbeater Papers' in a correspondence characterized by wit and by philosophical and moral discussion. 


@@@@@


doc= 25188


Shacklock, Richard (d. before 1588), religious controversialist, was possibly from the Shacklock family of Mostyn, near Manchester, but exact details of his birth and parentage are unknown. He matriculated as a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1552, took his BA in 1555/6, and was placed eighth in the class list, becoming a fellow of his college in 1555 and proceeding MA in 1559. He soon after abandoned his fellowship, doubtless because he could not swear the oath of supremacy of Queen Elizabeth I. He retired to Louvain in the Spanish Netherlands and took up the study of the civil law at the university there. In the first two decades of Elizabeth's reign a number of Catholic works of controversial theology were published by the 'Louvainists' and then smuggled into England, where they were often rebutted by books written by academics of the established church. Shacklock contributed two such books, in the form of translations from Latin into English of books by continental theologians. The first, published in 1565, was composed by Stanislaus Hosius, bishop of Worms, and was translated as 'The Hatchet of Heresies'. The second also appeared in 1565 and was the work of Hieronimus Osorius, a Portuguese bishop, dedicated to Queen Elizabeth I; Shacklock translated it as 'A Pearle for a Prynce'. In the original introductory material which he provided to these two books, Shacklock expressed his loyalty to Queen Elizabeth while opposing her religious settlement. In addition, Shacklock wrote a manuscript Latin epitaph on the life of the last Catholic bishop of Chester, Cuthbert Scot, who died in 1564 in Louvain, which was answered by the protestant author Thomas Drant. Shacklock seems to have spent the rest of his life in exile, probably in the Netherlands, and is reported to have died by 1588. 


@@@@@


doc= 25189


Shadrach, Azariah (1774-1844), Independent minister and writer, was born on 24 June 1774 at Garndeifo-fach in the parish of Llanfair Nant-y-gof, near Fishguard, Pembrokeshire, the fifth son of Henry and Ann Shadrach, natives of the neighbouring parish of Nevern. When he was seven, the family moved to Burton, Pembrokeshire, but three years later, Shadrach moved to live with an aunt at Moylgrove. Influenced by the Revd John Phillips, he joined the Independents. He had little formal education but he was later employed as a farm servant by the Revd John Richards, a local Independent minister, and was granted access to his employer's books after his day's work. He decided to enter the Independent ministry and began preaching at his master's church, Rhos-y-Caerau. As a probationary minister, he toured both south and north Wales between 1796 and 1798. While in north Wales, he was persuaded by George Lewis of Llanuwchllyn to undertake the duties of schoolmaster at Hirnant, near Llanfyllin, and then at Pennal and Derwen-las, near Machynlleth. In 1802 he went to Trefriw, near Llanrwst, and by the end of the year had been ordained pastor of the Independent church at Llanrwst, at a salary of $5 a year. Here he was largely instrumental in suppressing the wakes or 'mabsantau', which still flourished in the district. While at Llanrwst, he married Margaret Morris ('c'.1776-1813), on 16 April 1805, with whom he had four children. 
In November 1806 Shadrach moved to Cardiganshire, where he had charge of the churches of Tal-y-bont and Llanbadarn Fawr. He began to preach regularly at Aberystwyth in 1816 and, on 30 May 1819, he established an Independent church in the town. Shadrach gave up his ministerial work at Tal-y-bont and Llanbadarn Fawr and concentrated his efforts on the new church at Aberystwyth. He worked tirelessly to collect funds for the erection of Zion Chapel at Penmaes-glas, Aberystwyth in 1821, travelling widely across England and Wales. The chapel remained the meeting-place of the Independents until 1878 when the cause moved to Baker Street. 
Shadrach was the author of no fewer than twenty-seven works, all, with one exception, written in Welsh. Some of them ran into several editions, and it is estimated that 60,000 copies of his various books were sold altogether. They were mostly sketches of sermons he had previously delivered. Owing to his liberal use of allegory he was styled, the 'Bunyan of Wales'. Perhaps his best work was 'A Looking Glass: neu ddrych y gwrthgiliwr' (1807), which was translated into English by Edward S. Byam, under the title 'The backslider's mirror: a popular Welsh treatise, translated from the ancient British language' (1845). 
From 1830 Shadrach's son Eliakim was joint pastor with him at Zion, but he left for Dursley, in Gloucestershire in 1834. In August 1835, Shadrach himself resigned his charge, but he continued to preach for some years. He died on 12 January 1844 at Aberystwyth, and was buried there on 18 January in St Michael's churchyard. 


